@@@@@


doc= 18225


Martindell, Sir Gabriel (1754/5-1831), army officer in the East India Company, was probably born in India, the son of John Martindale (died 1769), an officer in the Bengal army, and his wife, Lettice. Contemporary records suggest that he changed his name to Martindell. He may have grown up in part in Britain, as John, son of John and Lettice Martindale, probably Gabriel's brother, was baptized at St Peter's, Worcester, on 17 April 1757, and an obituary in the 'Asiatic Journal' later reported that Gabriel travelled to India as a country cadet in the East India Company service in 1772. He certainly became a cadet in the company's Bengal army at a very young age, attached to the 'select picket' while awaiting the commission that was awarded him in 1776. In November 1798, having spent much of his service in Bengal European regiments, he was given command of the newly raised 2nd battalion 13th native infantry which became known as Martdeel-ki-paltan ('Martindell's battalion'). He served with distinction in the Second Anglo-Maratha War, taking command in turbulent Bundelkhand and driving out the Pindaris (irregular bands of marauders). He defeated Raja Ram Singh on 2 July 1804, and took Jaipur by storm on 28 July. Martindell earned the 'approbation and applause' of the governor-general for his success, and more especially for capturing the fort of Ajaigarh in 1809 (BL OIOC, F/4/325). 
However, Martindell's unsuccessful attack on the hill fort of Kalinjar in Bundelkhand in 1812 entailed heavy casualties, and his failure to fulfil orders when leading a force into Rewah in 1813 led to his resigning his command in March 1814 and to a posting to Cawnpore. These reverses seem to have drained him of self-confidence and drive. Lord Moira, governor-general and commander-in-chief, appointed Martindell to command the 2nd field division of the Bengal army in the Anglo-Nepal War of 1814-16. He did so mainly because of 'the difficulty of finding any other unemployed officer of rank sufficient to exercise so large a command', but also in 'the hope that the occurrences attending his command in Rewa... would stimulate him to exert himself' ('Papers Respecting the Nepaul War', 737). Martindell assumed his command in the Sirmur hills on 19 December 1814, finding morale low following the death of his predecessor, Major-General Robert Gillespie, who had been killed while leading a reckless and unsupported charge at Kalanga, near Dehra Dun. Martindell delayed and dithered, to the frustration of his officers and his commander-in-chief. His incompetence brought disaster, causing William Fraser, the governor-general's political agent, to write to his brother Alexander 'I cannot tell you how much General [Martindell's] management is scorned and reviled by the army for indecision, want of promptness, energy and enterprise' (Fraser MSS, National Register of Archives for Scotland 2696, xxxiv, 254). Martindell's eventual offer to resign was overtaken by the victory of Major-General David Ochterlony at Malaun which brought the first campaign of the war to an end. Both officers were made KCB in April 1815. 
Martindell was sent with a strong force in 1816 to quell a rising in Cuttack in Orissa, and in 1818 commanded a column in the Third Anglo-Maratha War. From 1820 he commanded the 1st division Bengal field army until 1824 when he was made divisional commander Cawnpore. In September 1824, at Chunar, Bishop Reginald Heber met Martindell, whom he described as 'a fine, mild, unaffected old officer' (Heber, 1.173). Seniority having long been the paramount consideration for promotion in the Bengal army, Martindell was made lieutenant-general in 1825. In 1827 he was given command of the fortress of Buxar where, still serving, he died on 2 January 1831, aged seventy-six. He was buried in Buxar cemetery. 
Martindell may have married in 1777, though further details are obscure. The application for letters of administration following his death described him as a bachelor. However, he is known to have had at least seventeen children, presumably with one or more Indian mistresses, who probably included Mary Umdah ('c'.1781-1831), described as 'a native Christian' (NAM, V. C. P. Hodson's card index). In the later years of his life his family lived at his house in Cawnpore, originally built for Lord Moira. Of his seven sons known to have reached adulthood, John (1781-1852), Charles (1785-1846), William (1787-1849), and Robert (1796-1835) were commissioned as local lieutenants in the Bengal cavalry; John, Robert, Henry (1783-1840), and Gabriel William ('c'.1812-1855) also had administrative careers in India, while James (1791-1830) was a landowner in Cawnpore. Two of his four daughters, Mary and Jane, were at school when their father died; another, Harriet (1796-1826), married one of Martindell's aides-de-camp, John Stuart Rotton, and had five children. His youngest child was Alexander (1828-1829). Henry Martindell had inscribed on his father's tomb in Buxar cemetery, 'He was an affectionate father, a kind friend, and his charities knew no bounds.' ('List of old inscriptions') The inventory of his estate suggests that he lived in comfort in his old age, even if he was not possessed of a large fortune. 


@@@@@


doc= 18226


Martine, George (1635-1712), historian, was born in Fife on 5 August 1635, the eldest son of James Martine (1614-1684), minister successively of Cults (1636), Auchtermuchty (1641), and Ballingry (1669), all in Fife, and his wife, Janet Robertson (1615/16-1644). His grandfather was Dr George Martine, principal of St Salvator's College, St Andrews. About 1663 Martine became secretary to Archbishop James Sharp of St Andrews. In this capacity he accompanied Sharp on his frequent travels between St Andrews, Edinburgh, and London, keeping a detailed memorandum book listing all the archbishop's travelling expenses, as well as household expenditure and charitable bequests. In August 1666 he became commissary clerk of St Andrews, remaining so for the next twenty-four years. He married, on 30 June 1668, Catherine, daughter of James Winchester of Kinglassie, Fife; they had several children. Martine also acquired the lands of Clermont that year, and is sometimes called Martine of Clermont. 
Martine is best known for his 'Reliquiae divi Andreae, or, The State of the Venerable... See of St Andrews', written in 1683 but not published until 1797. Robert Wodrow's contention that he was prevented from publishing it by the revolution of 1688 is very plausible considering the episcopalian bias of the work at a date when presbyterianism had been officially established. In any case, Martine was a Jacobite: his refusal to take the assurance of loyalty to King William and Queen Mary cost him his St Andrews clerkship in 1690. This may explain why, although in 1702 he was considered by some to be 'the greatest antiquary now in Scotland' (Wodrow, 1.xxxiv) he passed the last years of his life in comparative obscurity. He died on 26 August 1712. 


@@@@@


doc= 18227


Martine, George (1700-1741), physician, was born at Claremont, St Andrews, Fife, the son of James Martine (died 1725), owner of the Claremont estate, and his wife, Margaret McGill. He matriculated at the University of St Andrews in 1713/14, and paid fees for his bachelorship in 1716. Having decided on a medical career, in 1720 he studied under Alexander Monro 'primus', who taught medicine outside the University of Edinburgh prior to the foundation of the faculty of medicine there. He then moved to the University of Leiden, in the Low Countries, and matriculated in 1721 to study under Hermann Boerhaave. On his return in 1722 he obtained his degree of MD at St Andrews on testimonials signed by six eminent British physicians. He practised as a physician in St Andrews until late 1725. In that year he and William Graeme MD opened a medical school in the basement of the Surgeons' Hall, Edinburgh, where he taught the theory and Graeme the practice of medicine. The school was not a success, and Martine returned to St Andrews before 1728. 
On his father's death Martine inherited Claremont, which he sold in 1732, though he remained at St Andrews until 1739. In his early years Martine had published several articles, in the form of letters or essays, dealing with the blood and organs of the human body, and by this time had developed an interest in the temperature of the circulating blood and animal heat generally. The difficulties of measuring temperature led him to investigate the unsatisfactory business of thermometer manufacture and the impossibility of comparing observations that had been made with a variety of instruments graduated to individual scales. Some of these referred to a single point, often the freezing point of water, and calculated higher points from the expanded volume of thermometric fluid (oil, mercury, or spirits of wine). He spent some of the latter part of 1739 in Paris, doubtless investigating the work of Reaumur and Delisle on this topic, from where he wrote to Cromwell Mortimer, secretary of the Royal Society. Martine came out strongly in favour of graduating thermometers with reference to two fixed points, one being the boiling point of water -- with due attention to barometric pressure -- the other being the melting point of ice. He also urged the adoption of mercury, as spirits of wine came in many strengths and could not be brought to the boiling point of water, while oil tended to adhere to the inside of the tube. 
In December 1739 Martine was appointed physician to Lord Cathcart, commander-in-chief on the expedition to the West Indies. He spent the early part of 1740 in London, where his essays on thermometry were read to the Royal Society. He presented to the society copies of his books published in 1740, 'De similibus animalibus et animalium calore' and 'Essays Medical and Philosophical'. In the latter, two medical essays, 'On the period and crises of diseases' and 'On the specific operation of cathartic medicine', were followed by a discourse on the history of thermometers and the evolution of their various scales, a comparison of the best-known reproducible scales, and an essay on the heating and cooling of matter, in which Martine challenged the conventional view that denser fluids heated more slowly by showing that a mercury thermometer responded faster than one containing spirit. The final long essay dealt with the degrees of heat and cold found in nature, ranging from the body heat of man and beast, and of fish and insects, to the heat of the sun and planets, the highest and lowest recorded temperatures of the atmosphere, the melting and boiling points of a variety of metals and minerals, and the temperatures of flame and fire. The 'Essays... on Thermometers' went through several editions; that of 1792 contained additions and Joseph Black's tables, to serve the students to whom Black had recommended the book. After his death Martine's work was also translated into French. 
Martine was elected an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh early in 1740. He had sailed to the West Indies by the time that he was proposed for membership to the Royal Society on 15 May; he was elected on 11 December. He died of a fever at Cartagena, in what is now Colombia, some time before April 1741. 


@@@@@


doc= 18228


Martineau, Harriet (1802-1876), writer and journalist, was born in Norwich on 12 June 1802, the sixth of eight children of Thomas Martineau (1764-1826), a cloth manufacturer descended from an old Huguenot family, and his wife, Elizabeth (1770/71-1848), the eldest daughter of Robert Rankin, a sugar refiner in Newcastle upon Tyne. 
Thomas Martineau was a gentle, unassertive man; Elizabeth Martineau was a highly intelligent, largely self-educated woman of considerable force of character. Harriet Martineau's childhood was, according to her own account, a difficult one, marked by digestive and other physical disorders and by more than usual fears and isolation. She admits in her autobiography to having been a difficult child: the degree of blame she places on her mother for her unhappiness may have been unfair, but her younger brother, James Martineau (1805-1900), also noted (in his autobiographical memoranda) Elizabeth Martineau's reserved and formidable aspect. 
Harriet Martineau had deficient senses of taste and smell, and her progressive deafness had become virtually total by the age of twenty, adding to her sense of isolation. From about 1830 she regularly used an ear trumpet, which was an enduring, and sometimes daunting, feature in contemporaries' recollections of her. Many disliked it, among them Sydney Smith (1771-1845), though with his booming voice he scarcely needed it, while Nathaniel Hawthorne (1804-1864) recalled it 'as an organ of intelligence and sympathy... a sensitive part of her, like the feelers of some insects'. 
Harriet Martineau was taught largely at home, but for two years from 1813 to 1815 she attended an excellent school headed by the Revd Isaac Perry (1777-1837), who had left the Congregationalists for the Unitarians in 1812; he was, she recalled, 'made to be a girls' schoolmaster' ('Autobiography'). For fifteen months in 1818-19 she was a boarder in a small school in Bristol run by an aunt. While living in Bristol she also received religious instruction from the Revd Lant Carpenter (1780-1840), minister at Lewin's Mead Chapel, who made a powerful impression on her, though she was very dismissive of him in her autobiography. 
Surviving correspondence from the early 1820s reveals a high-spirited and happy family. The Martineaus attended the Octagon Chapel in Norwich, one of the leading Unitarian congregations in the country. Company in the town was plentiful and lively: having long since abandoned the old Calvinist traditions of the dissenters, the Martineaus played cards and danced, and there were long visits to relatives elsewhere. But the letters also record the high seriousness of discussions of political and religious questions. As a child, Harriet Martineau had found consolation in religious reading and fancies, and serious study of her Unitarian inheritance underlay the main preoccupations of her early writing. In 1822 her first published essay, comparing Anna Laetitia Barbauld and Hannah More as devotional writers, appeared in the Unitarian 'Monthly Repository' (17, 1822, 593-6, 746-50). 'Devotional Exercises' followed two years later, reflecting her enchantment with romantic poetry and importantly qualifying the usual perception of Unitarians as chilly rationalists. In 1831 she gained denomination-wide fame by winning all three prizes in a contest for the best essays aimed at converting Roman Catholics, Jews, and Muslims to Unitarianism. 
By inheritance a political radical and dedicated dissenter, Harriet Martineau consistently criticized the Church of England, particularly for what she considered the craven submission of its clergy to creeds and hierarchical authority. No one was more insistent on the obligation to speak out, or even to suffer martyrdom, on matters of principle. Especially significant was her early and lasting commitment to necessarianism, the philosophical determinism then dominant among Unitarian ministers and many educated laymen. Derived from David Hartley (1705-1757) through Joseph Priestley (1733-1805), the most important figure in the emergence of Unitarianism from presbyterianism, necessarianism denied free will, arguing that every seemingly voluntary act was inexorably determined by prior motives formed by association from external impressions. But external impressions could be controlled and so motives could be changed, opening broad opportunities for education, reform of social arrangements, and the discipline of experience to bring behaviour into conformity with divine law. Moreover, to Unitarians, Jesus was not a god but a perfect man, whose death on the cross was an example of self-sacrifice, not a substitutionary atonement. Thus, under providence and God's foreknowledge, every human being could win salvation, alone or with the help of the truly enlightened. Harriet Martineau elaborated this world-view in a series of articles in the 'Repository' at the end of the 1820s, when that journal was edited by W. J. Fox. Although she eventually withdrew from Unitarianism, she never forsook necessarianism. 
The growing sense of mission conveyed in the above description of Martineau (it is Fox's) and her early development as philosopher and writer were set in a time of much personal and family trouble, from which her literary work offered a welcome deliverance. Her beloved elder brother Thomas ('b'. 1795) died of tuberculosis in 1824; her father's business suffered badly in the economic collapse of 1825, and he died the next year. In May 1827 came the death of her fiance, John Hugh Worthington ('b'. 1804), a young minister at Cross Street Chapel, Manchester, who had been a college friend of James Martineau. The brief attachment had been doubtful from the first, as Worthington's ardent hopes came up against her reluctance, compounded of uncertainty about his health, worries about the prospect of marriage, and family pressures. A manifest sense of relief is conveyed in her oddly detached letters at the time of his death and in the celebration of single life recorded in her autobiography, although she delighted in children and was always happy in a domestic circle. 
The failure of the family firm in 1829 threw Harriet Martineau on her own resources. Rejecting the alternative of governessing, she determined to live by her pen rather than her needle, although needlework remained an enjoyable recreation throughout her life. Up to that point her work for Fox had been unremunerated, but he now began to pay her $15 a year. She wrote for other publishers as well. 'Traditions of Palestine, or, Times of the Saviour' (1829) attracted notice on both sides of the Atlantic and foreshadowed her later interest in the Near East. Of her apprentice tales, 'The Rioters' (1827), which dealt with machine breaking, and 'The Turn Out' (1829), on wages and strikes, were more immediately prophetic. 
At about the time of these modest successes, Martineau had encountered 'Conversations on Political Economy' (1816) by Jane Marcet (1769-1858), an event that soon led to a bold new project. In 1831, with Fox's strong encouragement and with his brother Charles as the not particularly generous publisher, she began work on 'Illustrations of Political Economy', a series of twenty-three tales in twenty-five parts published monthly from February 1832. Based on rapid study of economic principles, particularly in the works of James Mill and T. R. Malthus, and with a generally effective if sometimes forced and wooden narrative style, the tales made her famous almost overnight. A failure in so far as they were intended to make the working classes think rightly about economic laws, the stories reinforced middle-class convictions and were welcomed accordingly, while reviews ranged from enthusiastic to extremely hostile, according to the reviewers' political prejudices. She was quickly invited to write four additional volumes, 'Poor Laws and Paupers Illustrated' (1833), and a further five tales, 'Illustrations of Taxation' (1834), to improve prospects for reform in those areas under the whig government. 
John Stuart Mill commented acutely that Martineau reduced political economy to an absurdity by simply carrying it out logically to all its consequences ('Monthly Repository', 2nd ser., 8, 1834, 321), and she has remained famous as an advocate of the most doctrinaire version of the science. It is true that she remained loyal to the central tenets of free trade and non-intervention, and, ever the manufacturer's daughter, she continued to think that social problems were more likely to arise from the rapid growth of towns than from factory evils. But, though she never favoured trade unions, her later visit to America persuaded her of the virtues of the Rappite and Shaker communities, and she came to look benevolently on association, particularly consumers' co-operatives, as one solution to economic ills. In 1855 she wrote an article that argued so severely against government-required fencing of dangerous machinery that the 'Westminster Review' rejected it, and it was published as a pamphlet by the National Association of Factory Occupiers. But a few years later she supported the new round of factory legislation, and thought that if the market did not solve pressing social problems then the state must intervene. 
In late 1832 Martineau moved to London to enjoy the celebrity she had earned, living first in lodgings in Conduit Street and then in a small house taken by her mother in Fludyer Street, near Downing Street, Westminster, but now vanished from the map. In an article in the 'London and Westminster Review' (32, 1839, 261-81) in April 1839 she wrote critically about the phenomenon of literary lionizing, and further recollections appear, delightfully, in her autobiography. She was well connected by family ties to radical London, but W. J. Fox was her main point of entry to intellectual circles. She came to know most of the prominent political figures in the reform era, among whom Lord Durham was a hero to her, while Lord Brougham she found by turns fascinating and untrustworthy. 
Of average height, with a plain face, grey-green eyes, and brown hair, Harriet Martineau had a pleasant voice and manner and could converse confidently, even boldly, on almost any subject: Sydney Smith once deplored a sleep-destroying dream in which he was chained to a rock, and was being talked to death by Harriet Martineau and Macaulay. Some years later, Hawthorne described her as 'a large, robust (one might almost say bouncing) elderly woman', with a face 'so kind, cheerful and intelligent... that she is pleasanter to look at than most beauties'. Her talking still struck him as remarkable, 'like the babbling of a brook' ('English Notebooks', ed. R. Stewart, 1941, 77). She approved of none of the portraits of her until that by George Richmond in 1849; the drawing was so good, she reported, that people agreed there was nothing to say about it: 'It is just me' (H. Martineau to L. Hunt, 24 Jan 1851, BL, Add. MS 38 111, fols. 1-6). 
Harriet Martineau had been frequently prostrated by her active London life and by constant writing to deadline, so when the series were drawing to completion, the need for a change determined a new and fateful step: she would observe the creation of a new society in the United States. Accompanied by Louisa Jeffrey, a young Unitarian woman she had met in London, she sailed for America on 9 August 1834. From New York she travelled through western Massachusetts to Albany and on to Niagara, then to a personal shrine in Northumberland, Pennsylvania, where Priestley had lived his last years and was buried. After extended stays in Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, and Charleston, she travelled across the south to the Mississippi, sailed to Kentucky, where she saw Mammoth cave, and stayed for three weeks in Lexington before ten days in Cincinnati and a return up the Ohio and through Virginia to New York. Without her companion, she toured New England in the autumn of 1835, spent the winter in Boston, and headed west, again to Niagara and on to Detroit and Chicago, returning on the Great Lakes to Cleveland and thence to New York, where she sailed for England on 1 August 1836. 
The rigours of the journey were compensated for by the intense but critical interest Harriet Martineau took in what she saw. Her way was smoothed in most cities by Unitarian connections and made rougher by the reputation that preceded her. She made no secret of her sympathy with the whig party against the Jacksonian Democrats, and her already vocal opposition to slavery was strengthened by seeing the institution in practice. In Boston she aligned herself with the most radical wing of the abolitionists, led by William Lloyd Garrison, and in those circles made one of the closest friendships in her life, with Maria Weston Chapman, her literary executor and first biographer. No cause, in a life devoted to causes, so preoccupied her as opposition to slavery, not only in America but in the world at large. 
Back in London, Martineau published 'Society in America' (1837), a two-volume analysis that, other than Alexis, comte de Tocqueville's, contemporaneous 'Democracy in America' (1835; trans. 1835-40), may be regarded as the best book among the vast outpouring of travel writing on the great transatlantic experiment. She had originally intended the title to promise an explicit discussion of theory and practice, and, partisan and personal though the book is, the acute observation and the high level of generalization transcend a mere travel account to make it a historical document in its own right and a pioneering work of sociological analysis. The next year 'Retrospect of Western Travel' offered a more conventional, though delightful and revealing, record of the journey. She received $900 for the first book, $600 for the second. Also in 1838 her contribution to a series of guides on various subjects by different hands returned to the analytical level to discuss principles of social observation: this remarkable little book was called 'How to Observe: Morals and Manners'. 
Like most writers Martineau was expected to turn her hand to a novel. 'Deerbrook' (1839) was her sole large-scale effort in the form, although the sympathetic portrayal of Toussaint l'Ouverture and the Haitian revolution in 'The Hour and the Man' (1840) evoked much admiration, and the four long tales making up 'The Playfellow' (1842) remained in print for over a century to enforce their stern lesson of willingness to suffer for the right. 'Deerbrook' had a similar moral aim. Although the novel offers in Mrs Rowland a splendid, eventually humbled, villain, the plot turns on an unfortunate marital choice, forcing the leading male character, an apothecary, to choose between duty and emotion. At times it justifies Thomas Carlyle's description of it as 'very ligneous, very trivial-didactic' ('Collected Letters of Thomas and Jane Welsh Carlyle', ed. C. R. Sanders and K. J. Fielding, 15 vols., 1970-87, 11.87); undoubtedly over-long and occasionally extravagant in its rhetoric, it fairly soon fell into neglect. It has recently evoked new interest, partly for the psychological insights it offers into its author, and partly as a sympathetic portrayal of a hero from the middle ranks of society, a point very important to her, at the very height of the craze for 'silver fork' novels. 
These major books of Martineau's second London period were surrounded by an array of journalism in the leading reviews and by efforts to advance a number of causes in addition to anti-slavery, notably the legal and economic advancement of women. Here, again, was a campaign that drew new force from her stay in Boston, and the famous Seneca Falls meeting in 1840, usually seen as the fountainhead of modern feminism, found her among its most enthusiastic endorsers. She was never in entire sympathy with the campaign for the political rights of women -- for example, she is very severe in her autobiography about Mary Wollstonecraft -- giving priority to women's claims in the labour market and to female education in schools and in the home. She approached the latter subject with genuine originality in a series of essays collected in 1849 as 'Household Education'. 
In 1838 Harriet Martineau began to suffer acute physical symptoms and the next year collapsed during a visit to Venice. The problem was a prolapsed uterus almost certainly caused by an ovarian cyst. She moved to Newcastle to be near her doctor, her brother-in-law T. M. Greenhow (1791-1881), and eventually took up residence in rented rooms in Tynemouth, where after 1842 she was largely confined to her couch. Despite the debility and frequent suffering, she led an active philanthropic and literary life and entertained a stream of visitors. The experience was turned to account in 'Life in the Sickroom' (1844), an inspirational and instructive volume for other sufferers that evoked much admiration and almost equal hostility. 
Writing to Jeanie Walsh in January 1843, Jane Carlyle, a difficult friend, deplored what she saw as 'a dreadful state of 'self-consciousness' of late' in Martineau ('Collected Letters of Thomas and Jane Welsh Carlyle', ed. C. R. Sanders and K. J. Fielding, 16.34-5). This was soon to be evident from her book, and could be seen already in two ostensibly principled actions that annoyed or alienated many old friends. One was a much publicized refusal to accept a civil-list pension offered to help in circumstances inevitably reduced by illness (her income for 1842 was $120). She had once before refused such assistance, at the time of the political economy tales, and was to do so again when W. E. Gladstone made an offer in 1873, although she accepted the proceeds from a private campaign organized by her close friend the younger Erasmus Darwin (1804-1881). The other was to demand the return of her letters, on pain of being denied all future correspondence. Some friends reluctantly complied (her brother James first made shorthand abstracts, now transcribed in the library at Harris Manchester College, Oxford), but others refused and were (mostly) cut off. She forbade publication of her letters, arguing that, as 'written speech', they were entitled to the same protection. 
None of these passages, however, matched the stir created by the cure which Martineau insisted was a result of mesmerism. For some years she had been interested in phrenological and mesmeric phenomena, which seemed to suggest the imminent discovery of new laws of thought, and as the craze mounted to its height in the early 1840s the urging of friends found her a willing subject. Even Dr Greenhow persuaded himself that, given her susceptibilities, it might have some good effect. At the hands of several practitioners, including her own personal maid, the symptoms of her illness disappeared. She published an account of the cure in six letters to 'The Athenaeum' in November and December 1844 and so became one of the most celebrated medical cases of the century. She regarded Greenhow's defensive pamphlet, 'Medical Report of the Case of Miss H -- M -- ' (1845), which described his treatment of her condition and her symptoms in detail -- 'not even written in Latin' ('Autobiography') -- as an act of treachery that warranted her refusal to see him again. 
Whatever the medical and psychological explanation, Martineau was able to resume an astonishingly strenuous life. Its high point was her extensive tour of Egypt and the Near East in 1846-7. Like 'Society in America' the resulting book, 'Eastern Life: Present and Past' (1848), combined a travel account with acute observation and important reflections. While sharing the emotion evoked in so many of her travelling contemporaries by the sights and historical resonance of the Holy Land, she was confirmed in her growing sense of the historicity of the Christian dispensation and of its present irrelevance. In 1851 she published an exchange of letters with a mesmeric adviser who had become a close friend, Henry George Atkinson, under the title 'Letters on the Laws of Man's Nature and Development'. The bulk of the book is Atkinson's, with promptings from Harriet Martineau, but she associated herself fully with the result, not only underlining her faith in mesmerism but proclaiming a rejection of all religion. Again a publication brought notoriety and broken friendships. 
The most traumatic of these breaks was no doubt inevitable, but its timing and its occasion could scarcely have been worse. Many years before, in 1824, Martineau had gone on a walking tour of the Scottish highlands with her brother James, then a ministerial student. The main subject of their long conversations was, in her recollection (which he substantially confirms), the doctrine of necessity, which he had recently suggested might offer an answer to some of her metaphysical concerns. From the early 1830s, however, he began to move away from their shared philosophy. Rediscovering free will and convinced that religion was an essential human need that carried conviction not because of external evidences but because the soul commanded it, he rose to prominence as the leader of the 'new school' of Unitarianism, as against the 'old school' descended from Priestley. Harriet had observed this growing estrangement with genuine puzzlement, tinged with the old affection. In May 1851 James Martineau published a very hostile review of the Atkinson letters in the 'Prospective Review' (7, 1851, 224-62), which he edited with three friends; he later insisted disingenuously that the book had fallen to him in the ordinary editorial rota. It was a terrible blow to Harriet. Characteristically, James could not quite understand his sister's feelings and tried on a few occasions to effect a reconciliation, but to no avail. In the mid-1860s, when he was a leading candidate for the chair of philosophy at University College, London, she was a willing conspirator in the campaign led by the psychologist Alexander Bain to deny him the professorship, on the grounds that appointing a minister to so crucial a post in an avowedly secular foundation was wrong. 
Whatever the personal cost of her new direction, Martineau never looked back. In her autobiography, written in 1855, she is forthright about her unbelief and the emancipatory process by which she arrived at it; less appealingly, she voices contempt for nearly all the Unitarians who had nurtured her early intellectual development and mediated the mental structures which she never abandoned. In 1859 she welcomed Charles Darwin's 'On the Origin of Species' with almost unmeasured warmth, regretting only that he occasionally mentioned a creator or a first cause, a prudential reticence that she feared would allow believers to cling to outworn prejudices. 
In 1851 Martineau had acquainted herself with the 'Cours de philosophie positive' by the French philosopher Auguste Comte, whose system charted the evolution of the sciences from the superstitious through the metaphysical to the positive stage, in which law, rather than supernatural influences or abstract systems, became the basis for understanding. The roots of this positive philosophy lay in the teachings of the comte de Saint-Simon. In the W. J. Fox circle in 1831 Harriet Martineau had been impressed by the Saint-Simonian missionaries then visiting London, whose diverging course from the master competed with Comte's system, which was in some ways more extravagant. At times in her writings of the 1830s she seemed almost to anticipate the law of three stages. Martineau's translation and abridgement of the 'Cours' appeared in 1853 as 'The Positive Philosophy of Auguste Comte', by which vehicle the English-speaking world was first introduced to Comte's text. Martineau never accepted many aspects of Comte's philosophy: she rejected the theocratic structure of the later positive polity and powerfully dissented from his subordination of women. But to the end of her life, she continued to uphold him as a guide to the right mode of thought for the nineteenth century. Although this can be seen as a natural evolution from her Priestleyanism and her early essays on the art of thinking, she regarded it as a fundamental departure. 
In 1845 Harriet Martineau settled in the Lake District and in 1846 moved into a charming house, The Knoll, which was built for her in Ambleside. There she maintained a happy and industrious household, with the usual succession of well-known callers and extended, welcome visits from young nieces and nephews. She supervised a 2 acre farm -- writing a book on the subject, of course -- and continued to engage in extensive charitable effort. Mrs Chapman gives her income for one unspecified year in the 1850s as around $800, of which about half was from current and past work, and most of the rest from investments; in 1871, after retirement, her income was $470, mostly from investments (M. W. Chapman, 'Memorials', in 'Autobiography', and Weston MSS, Boston Public Library). In both years she appears to have laid out about a third of her income in good works. 
Martineau knew the famous local residents, including William Wordsworth; she was an intimate in the household headed by Mary Arnold, the widow of Thomas and mother of Matthew, and corresponded with many literary and political figures elsewhere. In addition to the major books, she continued to turn out periodical writing of a quality that led George Eliot to say, in admiring an article on the great German historian B. G. Niebuhr (1776-1831), that she was 'the only English woman that possesses thoroughly the art of writing' (G. Eliot to Mr and Mrs C. Bray and S. S. Hennell, 2 June 1852, 'George Eliot Letters', ed. G. S. Haight, 2, 1954, 32). 
In 1852 Martineau began writing leading articles for the 'Daily News' in London, a connection established when the editor, Frederick Knight Hunt, published her letters from Ireland, and thereupon suggested that she contribute two or three leaders a week, a schedule made possible by improved rail and postal services, which ensured that an article posted in the evening in Ambleside would be on the editor's desk in London the following morning. By the time she retired in 1866, she had written more than 1600, along with occasional letters and non-editorial pieces, among them a brilliant set of portraits of leading Victorians later collected as 'Biographical Sketches' (1869). 
It was a natural metier. The Martineau household in Norwich had been highly engaged politically, and she had herself been deeply impressed in the 1820s by George Canning's prediction that the world would soon see a great war of opinion that would set right against might -- a conflict she was led to see in every war that broke out for the remainder of her life. A principled reformer and an astute observer of national and international affairs, she was also a brilliant contemporary historian. In 1848 she accepted an invitation from the publisher Charles Knight to write a history of her times, a project Knight himself had begun but had had to abandon. The 'History of the Thirty Years' Peace', covering the years 1815-45, appeared in 1849-50; later editions carried it back to 1800 and down to 1850. Annalistic in construction and opinionated in tone, the book has an acuteness and immediacy that support its claim to being, perhaps, her masterpiece. The tone of her editorial writing is confident, the style impeccable, the range astonishing. Old enthusiasms are there -- anti-slavery, education, the condition of women, political economy (somewhat modified) and free trade, ecclesiastical and clerical malignity. New interests to which she returned repeatedly included Ireland and India, the reforms proposed by Florence Nightingale, and the deterioration of politics: she profoundly distrusted Palmerston, Gladstone, and Disraeli, and placed her confidence in men of secondary rank such as Sidney Herbert and George William Frederick Howard, Lord Morpeth, later seventh earl of Carlisle. Above all, she was the paper's expert on America, a subject which the outbreak of the civil war in 1861 gave her ample opportunity to exploit. 
Nor did the 'Daily News' exhaust Martineau's capacities. In the early 1850s she wrote for 'Household Words' and the 'Westminster Review'; in 1858 she transferred her allegiance to the 'Edinburgh Review', of which her cousin Henry Reeve (1813-1895) had become editor three years earlier. In 1861 she became European correspondent of a New York abolitionist paper, the 'Anti-Slavery Standard', a post she used to scold as much as to encourage the Americans into courses of which she approved. After her retirement in 1866 she could still re-enter the lists: in 1868 she used a review of a book on the Salem witchcraft episode in colonial New England to denounce the spiritualist circles much talked of in that decade, which she regarded as utterly unscientific ('Edinburgh Review', 128, 1868, 1-47). The next year, in a succession of addresses and open letters (printed in Chapman's 'Memorials', appended to Martineau's 'Autobiography'), she gave her firm support to the campaign of Josephine Butler to repeal the 'Contagious Diseases Acts'. 
In 1855 Harriet Martineau had been once more stricken with illness, caused, she believed, by heart disease -- a not inaccurate, but insufficient, diagnosis. She died on 27 June 1876 at The Knoll, Ambleside. The attending physician gave as the cause of death fatty degeneration of the heart and an ovarian tumour; the tumour, which the autopsy showed to be of enormous size, had grown, severely compressing and distending the internal organs and producing the symptoms that reduced her to invalidism in the last twenty years of her life. She remained mentally alert and an excellent correspondent almost to the moment of death. Her investments brought some ease to her old age, as did the generosity of the many admiring friends who came to share the hospitality at The Knoll. She was buried on 1 July in the family plot in the general cemetery, Key Hill, Birmingham. Her personal estate was valued for probate at under $10,000. 
When, in 1855, she expected death to strike at any moment, Martineau wrote her autobiography in the space of three months, having it stereotyped so that it would be published unchanged when her death occurred; she also wrote and filed with the 'Daily News' the character sketch the paper ran as an obituary on 29 June 1876. If these moves suggest (correctly) that she was concerned about how the world saw her, she was not concerned that the image be uniformly favourable. Indeed, when the autobiography was published in 1877, the frequent tone of asperity, added to candid judgements as severe on herself as on others, seriously undercut her reputation. She has never lacked admirers, but a major upsurge in interest happened in the 1960s, in part because she was rediscovered by feminist scholars. Extensive and newly available manuscript collections, no longer subject to her prohibition against publication, have revealed her as a magnificent correspondent. The autobiography, too, is now generally recognized as one of the best self-studies of the century. 
One must regret that two of Martineau's greatest contemporaries, George Eliot and Matthew Arnold, who knew her well, never wrote the appreciations each had once expressed the wish to do. Both would have found much in her life and work to object to: most contemporaries did. Certainly, no one who ever met her forgot her. She could be charming, affectionate, and immensely generous, but she was also judgemental and could be difficult in personal relationships, as a trail of broken friendships shows, not in that perhaps very different from many contemporaries in an age that prized individuality and even eccentricity. 
In the end it is Harriet Martineau's work that counts, in itself and as a striking example of what a single woman could accomplish in unpropitious times. She herself said, in the 'Daily News' obituary, that she worked well only within a limited range and had no originality of mind. But the limits were pretty widely extended, and the combination of talents and interests argue an originality in the whole that the parts might lack. Above all, she was a person of singular faithfulness, whatever small digressions may have appeared along the way, to a philosophical position and a political commitment that projected the assumptions of the 1820s and 1830s, with no small effect, into the more complex world of the late Victorians. 


@@@@@


doc= 18229


Martineau, James (1805-1900), Unitarian minister, was born in Magdalen Street, Norwich, on 21 April 1805, the seventh child of a middle-class merchant family. His father, Thomas (1764-1826), a cloth manufacturer, was a descendant of the surgeon Gaston Martineau, a Huguenot, who had settled in Norwich after the revocation of the edict of Nantes; his mother, Elizabeth Rankin (1770/71-1848), was the eldest daughter of the grocer and sugar refiner Robert Rankin of Newcastle upon Tyne. James's earliest memory at the age of four was of travelling to Newcastle to visit his grandfather, a monotonous journey in a post-chaise that lasted four days which was only lighted by the inspiring view of Durham Cathedral. 
The house in which Martineau was born and brought up still stands in Magdalen Street, Norwich: although the ground floor, at the time of writing, is used as a second-hand shop, with a little imagination one can picture how this spacious building must have been in the opening years of the nineteenth century. A steady stream of visitors called, and intense discussions took place round the fireside in the evenings, especially on a Sunday, when Thomas Madge (1786-1870), the Unitarian minister, would call. The whole family worshipped at the nearby Octagon Chapel, and it was on this fellowship that its social and cultural life was centred. Built by the English presbyterian Dr John Taylor, the chapel had been founded on non-sectarian lines; however, by the early years of the nineteenth century it had moved, like most English presbyterian congregations, towards Unitarianism. 
Martineau's home had its own invigorating atmosphere. There were eight children, and the older children played their part in the formal education of the younger: Thomas, the eldest, taught Latin, while Elizabeth taught French, and Henry writing and arithmetic. All this activity took place with the enthusiastic support of their parents, who knew the importance of discerning encouragement in education: Martineau later said of his father that he was always ready to strain every nerve to advance the education of his children. From 1815 to 1819 he was a day pupil at the public grammar school in the cathedral close, then under the headmastership of Edward Valpy (1754-1836). There were some 230 pupils in the school, several of whom later rose to prominence in civil and military life, including James Brooke, the raja of Sarawak, George Borrow, the writer, and Edward Rigby and John Dalrymple, who became eminent in the field of medicine. However, his schooldays were not happy as he suffered bullying; his intellectual impulses were frustrated, too, as the ethos of the school was centred on classics and grammar, while his interest lay in the direction of mathematics and science. His unhappiness came to an end through the intervention of his sister, Harriet Martineau, who returned to Norwich full of enthusiasm for the classes of Dr Lant Carpenter (1780-1840) that she had attended in Bristol. Thomas Martineau provided the 100 guineas a year to meet the fees and enrolled James in Carpenter's school. 
Carpenter carried his wide range of interests with him into the classroom: he was a man of the world who read the daily papers to the pupils around the dinner table and kept them in touch with the parliamentary debates. He encouraged his pupils to start their own debating society and to care for the poor from their own funds. He laid great stress on moral and religious education, and introduced his pupils to contemporary biblical criticism. The school curriculum at Bristol included lessons in science, history, geography, and in the 'Greek Testament', as well as in classics and mathematics. This curriculum widened Martineau's horizons and gave him a foundation which enabled him to cope with the scientific revolution of the nineteenth century. Even more important than the subject matter and the patterns of thought developed at Bristol was the immediate influence of the man: Lant Carpenter was both a deeply religious man and a profound thinker, and his spirit stayed with Martineau for the rest of his life. 
On the completion of Martineau's schooling in the autumn of 1821 the family took a holiday in the Lake District, staying with friends near Cockermouth. The view of the distant mountains with their sunny knolls and dark hollows filled James with wonder. It awakened within him a love of mountaineering and, like many others of his time, he found a new world in the beauty of nature. At the end of the holiday he travelled to Derby to begin his training with James Fox at his engineering works. Although Fox was a kind and practical man, he was unable to give Martineau a satisfactory theoretical and mathematical grounding for his mechanical interests. This disappointment, combined with the death of his cousin Henry Turner, the young minister of High Pavement Church, Nottingham, and his courtship of Helen Higginson (1804-1877), daughter of the Unitarian minister Edward Higginson and his wife, Sarah ('nee' Marshall), channelled Martineau's aspirations in the direction of the ministry. In 1822, against the advice of his father (who had warned him he would face poverty but nevertheless found the money to support him), he entered Manchester College, York, to train for the ministry. 
The members of the Manchester College staff, Charles Wellbeloved (1769-1858), John Kenrick (1788-1877), and William Turner (1788-1853), were all competent men. It was the admirable teaching of Turner, in particular, which gave fresh impetus to Martineau's mathematical studies and enabled him to achieve his ambition of reading Newton's 'Principia'. Martineau also greatly admired the principal, Charles Wellbeloved, and from him received not only the principles of sound biblical criticism but also an overriding view of the catholicity of the church. John Kenrick had just returned from studying with F. D. Schleiermacher, the father of modern German theology, in Berlin, and shared with his pupils the results of his recently gained knowledge; he and Martineau became lifelong friends. In addition to his studies Martineau joined a college missionary society, which went regularly to visit the village of Welburn, almost at the gates of Castle Howard. The small congregation to which they preached so increased that the students decided to build a chapel: Martineau was appointed the architect and on one visit to oversee the building work he met Sydney Smith, the local incumbent and a famous wit, observing the rising walls. In order to deflect Smith's good-natured grumbling Martineau pointed out that without a chapel the people for whom it was meant would go nowhere; Smith replied, 'So long as you only gather and tame my refractory parishioners, I shall look upon you as my curates, to get people ready for me' (Martineau, 'Biographical memoranda'). 
While Martineau was still a student his father died, leaving the family with great financial burdens; through the generosity of the college James was awarded a bursary which enabled him to complete his five years' study at York. In 1827 the illness of Lant Carpenter and his consequent absence from the school resulted in Mrs Carpenter inviting Martineau to Bristol to take charge of the fourteen pupils. He undertook this post for one year, and it provided him with two important opportunities. The first came through the good offices of Dr James C. Pritchard, who introduced Martineau to a private philosophical society. He looked back on the evening meetings of the society as one of the most precious passages of his life, when he heard able local men discuss the newest questions of the time and the greatest questions of all time. This society broadened his outlook and prepared him for the part he was later to play in the famous Metaphysical Society, and for his defence of theism against those who propounded a purely mechanical evolutionary theory. The second opportunity was that of hearing the great Baptist preacher Robert Hall (1764-1831) on Thursday evenings at Broadmead Chapel. His style of preaching, which captivated Martineau, influenced the congregation not by addressing them, but rather by thinking aloud before them. Martineau subsequently adopted a similar form of preaching himself, composing thoughtful meditations, and kept to it in spite of later persuasions by Francis Newman (1805-1897) to change and become a more popular preacher. 
In the summer of 1828, after one year in Bristol, Martineau accepted the post of junior minister of Eustace Street Presbyterian meeting-house, Dublin, with the Revd Joseph Hutton (1765-1856), grandfather of Richard Holt Hutton (1826-1897), as his colleague. At the end of that year, on 18 December, he married Helen Higginson, and settled down to his teaching and ministerial work with the hope of a long and fruitful stay in Dublin. In the event his ministry lasted under four years, owing to his refusal to accept any part of the 'regium donum', the annual grant bestowed by parliament on presbyterian ministers. During his Dublin years he published 'A Collection of Hymns for Christian Worship' (1831), containing 273 hymns, five of which were by his sister Harriet. Martineau drew his hymns from a wider spiritual tradition than had many previous compilers of Unitarian and non-subscribing presbyterian hymnbooks, with the hymns of Isaac Watts and Bishop Reginald Heber well represented. His residence in Dublin coincided with Daniel O'Connell's political agitation, and although Martineau was ministering to a protestant congregation he made several friends among the Catholic population, including the old Irish patriot Hamilton Rowan (1751-1834), in whose home he was often a guest. His sympathy with the Roman Catholic population caused him some difficulty: he signed a petition for Catholic emancipation, only to be told that ministers should not meddle in politics by a member of his congregation who, nevertheless, thought it was Martineau's duty to sign on the other side. 
In the summer of 1832 the Martineaus left their first home, said farewell to their friends, stood in silence together in the French churchyard by the little grave of their first-born child, a daughter, Helen Elizabeth, and then crossed the sea with their surviving son and daughter to enter upon the most formative and productive period of Martineau's life. 
On his arrival in Liverpool, Martineau took up the position of minister of Paradise Street Chapel in June 1832. It was here that he formed a close association with J. H. Thom (1808-1894), Charles Wicksteed (1810-1885) of Liverpool, and John James Tayler (1797-1869) of Manchester. They were aided by Joseph Blanco White (1775-1841), the turbulent Spanish Roman Catholic priest who became an Anglican and member of the Oriel College senior common room before being introduced by Thom into Liverpool Unitarian circles. For several years, while editing the 'Prospective Review', the four friends met once a month at Tayler's home, dining, spending the evening together, and often staying overnight. These were memorable occasions for all of them, and they interacted to stimulate and promote one another's thoughts. 
In 1836 Martineau published a remarkable little book under the title 'The Rationale of Religious Inquiry', which went into four editions and was republished after his death under the title 'What is Christianity?' The impact of this book was extensive. It was read and reviewed in America, and in England it was seen as an important attempt to examine Christianity philosophically. In the preface Martineau maintained that religion and philosophy had traditionally occupied different spheres with little or no contact between them, except in the field of natural religion. Martineau published this volume in the hope of providing an improved philosophical method for investigating Christianity, namely, that religious truth must not be contrary to reason. Martineau was not advocating that the Christian faith must lie within the limits of reason, but rather that, although it goes beyond what reason can prove, it does not go against reason. He expressed this in the phrase, 'A divine right, therefore, to dictate a perfectly unreasonable faith cannot exist.' In the development of Martineau's religious thought there were two movements taking place at this time: one was towards a more critical approach to the scriptures and religious tradition, while the other was towards a religion based on feeling which emphasized worship and devotion to Christ. Both these elements can be found within 'The Rationale', although the critical element dominates. The Wesleyan Conference meeting the following year was urged to make special appointments to Liverpool to refute the brilliant Martineau. 
The Liverpool controversy of 1839 and the removal of Manchester College from York back to Manchester had a profound effect on Martineau's thought. The Liverpool controversy was occasioned by the Revd Fielding Ould and twelve other Anglican clergymen inviting, by poster and in the press, the Unitarians of the city to attend a series of lectures in which the errors of their beliefs would be exposed. On the Unitarian side Martineau, together with John Hamilton, Thom, and Henry Giles, accepted the invitation and issued a reciprocal invitation to the Anglicans of Liverpool to hear a reply to each lecture. Martineau gave five of these replies; his papers were well-argued and closely reasoned treatises, containing many of the ideas which came to fruition in his later works. At the end of the controversy Blanco White declared that the Unitarians were the outright winners. The controversy caused Martineau to set down systematically his developing views on a wide variety of theological issues. His lectures show that he had abandoned the idea of revelation as a body of truth, the authenticity of which was assured by miracles, and had replaced it by the view that revelation had to be received by the individual soul, and that its appeal was not to external authorities but to the conscience and the affections. Miracles were still important, but they were performed not to guarantee truth, which could be verified internally, but as a compassionate act of Christ in response to human need. By the close of the Liverpool controversy Martineau had taken his first tentative steps against philosophical necessity, which was one of Joseph Priestley's favourite doctrines. 
The removal of Manchester College from York back to Manchester in 1840 provided an opportunity to enlarge the institution: Martineau was appointed professor of mental and moral philosophy and logic, while at the same time he continued his ministerial duties in Liverpool. The preparation of the lectures for his new appointment caused him finally to break away from the influences of Priestly in regard to his biblical and philosophical thought. In his new post he enjoyed close friendships with his colleagues John James Tayler and Francis Newman, the gifted brother of John Henry Newman. During his remaining seventeen years in Liverpool, Martineau wrote some forty-five major articles and contributed to several journals, as well as producing his outstanding hymnbook 'Hymns for the Christian Church and Home' (1840) and his fine collection of sermons 'Endeavours after the Christian Life' (1843). The former, which drew from a wide variety of Christian spirituality, exerted a powerful influence on English Unitarianism, becoming the most widely used hymnbook in the movement. The latter had a powerful influence outside English Unitarianism: avidly read by Anglicans such as John William Colenso and F. W. Robertson, its ideas and images were often reproduced in their sermons. Also during his ministry at Liverpool, Martineau started his classes for young ladies. Among those to benefit from his teaching were the Winkworth sisters, Catherine (1827-1878) and Suzanna (1820-1884), and Anna Swanwick (1813-1899), who felt grateful for the rest of her life to Martineau for his assistance and guidance in her youth; their friendship continued over the following sixty-five years. 
During the 1840s Martineau began to feel that the Paradise Street church building -- conducive to eighteenth-century rationalism -- was inappropriate for his new theological emphasis. Like the members of the Oxford Movement, he too had been affected by romanticism. Hope Street Church was accordingly built in 1848 to rehouse the congregation: Thomas Barry and William Brown designed a beautiful Victorian-Gothic building, with statues, stained-glass windows, chair pews, and a high altar that was never used but which helped to create an atmosphere of medieval gloom, conducive to Martineau's etherial voice and aesthetic sermons. 
While Hope Street Church was being built Martineau took his family for a prolonged stay in Germany, and spent several months studying in Berlin, reading the works of Plato and Hegel, as well as observing the great democratic revolutions. He also attended several lecture courses, including those of Professor Trendelenburgh, the well-known German theologian. He likened the German experience to passing through a second education. From that time onwards he read German theological journals and kept abreast of German scholarship. He later said that in Berlin he found only one professor who thoroughly understood Hegel, but sadly no one could understand that professor. He returned to Liverpool in 1849, and preached the 'hauntingly beautiful' sermon 'Watchnight Lamps' at the opening of the new church. 
The year 1851 saw the end of Martineau's long and happy relationship with his sister Harriet. The two had always been close to each other; as children they had enjoyed each other's company and as young people they had undertaken walking tours together in Scotland. It was James who had originally encouraged Harriet to start writing articles. Early in 1851 Harriet and her friend Henry George Atkinson published 'Letters on the Laws of Man's Nature and Development'; in May, in the 'Prospective Review', James savaged the book, the main criticism being that it propounded atheism, not in the sense of a denial of a first cause, but the denial that the first cause was God as the intending and governing mind. This hurtful review destroyed the close relationship between James and Harriet, and although they occasionally met they never again corresponded with each other. In his 'Biographical memoranda' James devoted several pages to vindicating his position, but even he admitted that the consequences of the review caused an 'epoch' in his life. 
In 1853 Manchester College faced a financial crisis, and after a long and bitter struggle it was decided to move the college to London which, it was argued, would provide better scientific and literary opportunities for students and staff. Martineau retained his post within the college, and for the next four years commuted to London to deliver his lectures. In 1857 John James Tayler was appointed principal of the college and Martineau appointed a full-time tutor. For one and a half years he devoted himself solely to his academic work, but with the death of Edward Tagart in 1858 he combined his post with that of joint minister of Little Portland Chapel. The removal of the college to London was also the occasion of the appointment of James's eldest son, Russell Martineau (1831-1898), to Manchester College as lecturer in Hebrew on the recommendation of the German theologian H. G. A. Ewald. Russell was promoted to professor in 1866, but had to retire only a few years later owing to his epilepsy. 
It was during James Martineau's London years that he entered into his major controversies. He disliked confrontation and often felt himself badly equipped for it; but he was drawn into controversy, and even seemed to attract it and create it. In 1862 he engaged in a major debate with Herbert Spencer on agnosticism, following the publication of Spencer's 'First Principles'. In October of that year Martineau wrote an article for the 'National Review' under the title 'Science, nescience and faith', which was chiefly a criticism of Spencer's work and one of the best apologies of the nineteenth century for the theistic position. 
In the spring of 1866 the chair of philosophy of mind and logic at University College, London, became vacant; Martineau's name was put forward and his candidature received the recommendation of the senate. However, the preference of the senate was overturned by the college council through a coalition of those who wanted no minister of religion to be appointed and those who wanted only a minister of the Church of England. The episode caused Augustus De Morgan (1806-1871) to resign his chair of mathematics at University College; he later wrote to Martineau: 'I came here on the understanding that a man in office may have any theology provided he sticks to his own subject in his class; if the stipulation is to be that a man shall have no theology, I am just as much disqualified as you; and the College instead of respecting conscience, snubs conscience. (Martineau, 'Biographical memoranda')' Croom Robertson, who was appointed to the chair, went on to exert a powerful influence on philosophy in England, while Martineau returned to Manchester College, of which institution he became principal in 1869, and from where he launched his assaults on the materialism of John Tyndall. 
In 1867 Martineau and J. J. Tayler hosted a meeting in the library of Manchester College to launch the Free Christian Union, a society aimed at promoting Christian unity between liberal Christian churches and individuals. The union called on those who loved God and their fellow men to a common action and a search for divine truth, based on religious sympathies rather than theological agreement. Its members included Henry Sidgwick, the Cambridge philosopher, and Kegan Paul, the vicar of Sturminster Marshall; Tayler had also persuaded Ananase Coquerel of the French Protestant church to be actively involved. At the end of the first year the movement gained considerable momentum, but with Tayler's death in 1869 was removed the one person who had the ability to hold the enterprise together. 
In the year following the formation of the Free Christian Union, Martineau was involved in the foundation of the Metaphysical Society. The original plan drawn up by Dean Arthur Penrhyn Stanley, Archbishop Manning, and James Knowles was to form a society of believers to discuss questions of theology and to refute agnostics. When Martineau was approached to join, he said that he had no wish to belong to a society of 'gnostics to put down agnostics'. At his insistence the plan was enlarged to form a society comprehending all schools of thought, theological and scientific. Its membership included John Tyndall, Thomas Huxley, and Alfred Tennyson. In this influential society he formed many friendships. 
The nineteenth-century debate on science and religion is often portrayed by the famous confrontation between Thomas Huxley and Samuel Wilberforce which took place in the University Museum in Oxford. Although this encounter captured the public imagination, it can be argued that the major battle of the conflict between science and religion was not centred on Huxley and Wilberforce but on the debate of 1872 between James Martineau and Professor John Tyndall. Martineau's campaign was largely defensive and concentrated on two fundamental issues: he argued against matter being self-sufficient, able to create and construct out of its own necessity, and thus removing the need for God, and he vigorously opposed religion relinquishing to science the intellectual sphere and thus being confined to the emotional realm of human nature. It was Martineau's defence of religion against the claims of some scientists that caused Owen Chadwick to remark that there came a time after Darwin when even orthodox churchmen came to look upon Martineau as a champion of faith. 
Martineau retired from Manchester College in 1885 and over the following eight years wrote several important books, including 'The Seat of Authority in Religion' (1890), 'Types of Ethical Theory' (1895), and 'A Study of Religion' (1888). However, some of his work was already appearing dated by the time it came out in print; this was in part due to the fact that he was writing up and publishing his four-year cycle of lectures. His major contribution was not his many articles on science and religion, nor his ethical or theological writing, but his devotional writing. His two volumes of sermons, 'Endeavours after the Christian Life' (1840) and 'Hours of Thought on Sacred Things' (1876-9), still convey many splendid insights into the human condition and contain ideas and imagery that will continue to speak to other generations as vividly as they did to his own. His prayers also have a lasting quality. He both edited and wrote large sections of 'Common Prayer for Christian Worship' (1862); and here for the first time, it has been suggested by Horton Davies, nonconformity produced a liturgical editor of rare genius. His 'Home Prayers' (1892) contain deeply devotional and beautiful expressions of the Christian faith; these prayers have often been reprinted in other anthologies, sometimes without acknowledgement. 
Martineau was too broad-minded to belong to any school. Eclectic by nature, he gathered ideas from any source that appealed to his own intellectual and emotional character. His philosophical theology was shaped more by his personality and the movements of the age than by specific adherence to one particular school of thought. He in himself was a record of nineteenth-century theology; born only three years after the death of Kant and living on into the twentieth century, he engaged or commented on almost every theological personality or movement of the age, as can be seen from his volumes of collected 'Essays, Reviews and Addresses' (1890-91). Although a lifelong Unitarian, he rarely felt at home in Unitarianism and indeed disliked the name being applied to a church or a movement, believing that it should be kept to describe individual belief. Had he been an Anglican his influence would have been greater, but the Church of England was too narrow for him: Stopford Brooke once asked Dean Stanley if the Church of England would broaden sufficiently to allow James Martineau to be made archbishop of Canterbury. During the course of his long life Martineau often changed his mind. But this tall, wiry theologian, who enjoyed mountaineering and who had little small talk, was large-hearted and would give unstintingly of his time and effort to everyone who sought his help. James Martineau died at 35 Gordon Square, London, on 11 January 1900 and was buried in Highgate cemetery. Of his eight children, four daughters, including Edith Martineau, and one son survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 18230


Martineau, Robert Braithwaite (1826-1869), genre and portrait painter, was born on 19 January 1826 in Guilford Street, London, the fifth son of eight children of Philip Martineau (1791-1860), solicitor and taxing master to the court of chancery, and his wife, Elizabeth Frances (died 1875), daughter of Dr Robert Batty of Fairlight Lodge, Hastings. The family was descended from Gaston Martineau, a French Huguenot refugee and surgeon, who fled to England following the revocation of the edict of Nantes in 1685, settling in Norwich. Martineau's mother was an accomplished watercolour painter; several volumes describing her European travels with her brother were published, illustrated with engravings from their sketches. 
Martineau was educated at University College School, London, and followed his two older brothers into the law. He was articled to a firm of solicitors from 1842 to 1846 but decided to pursue an artistic career. He studied first at Cary's drawing school, and in 1848, at the age of twenty-two, entered the Royal Academy Schools, where he was awarded a silver medal for drawing. About 1851 he asked William Holman Hunt, a member of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, if he could become his pupil. Hunt agreed, after warning him of the difficulties of making a living from art and being assured that: 'To him [Martineau] the lucrativeness of the pursuit was not at first a vital question, which removed the scruples I had against anyone native born needing to live by his profession from becoming a painter in this country' (Hunt, 1.301-2). It is clear that Martineau had a sufficient private income to support himself, and only when he married at the age of thirty-nine did he need to earn a living from his art. His wife, whom he married in 1865, was Maria ('b'. 1840), eldest daughter of Henry Wheeler of Bolingbroke House, Wandsworth, London. They had three children, the youngest of whom, Helen (1868-1950), was the author of several articles on her father's work, and bequeathed most of the works in her possession to public collections on her death. 
In 1852 Martineau exhibited for the first time at the Royal Academy, showing an illustration of a scene from Charles Dickens's 'The Old Curiosity Shop' entitled 'Kit's Writing Lesson' (Tate collection), painted in Holman Hunt's studio. Martineau exhibited ten further works at the Royal Academy before his early death in 1869. These works included illustrations from literature such as 'Katherine and Petruchio' (exh. RA, 1855; Ashmolean Museum, Oxford) from Shakespeare's 'The Taming of the Shrew', and 'Picciola' (exh. RA, 1856; Tate collection) from Saintine's novel of 1837; genre scenes such as 'The Last Chapter' (exh. RA, 1863; City of Birmingham Art Gallery), showing a young woman finishing her novel by firelight, and 'The Allies' (exh. RA, 1861; Johannesburg Art Gallery); and portraits such as 'Bertie, Son of Hubert Martineau', the artist's nephew (exh. RA, 1867; priv. coll.) and 'Portrait of Master Toke' (exh. RA, 1862). 
However, the work for which Martineau is best-known is 'The Last Day in the Old Home' (Tate collection) which was shown in the British picture galleries at the International Exhibition in South Kensington in 1862. These galleries were arranged as a major retrospective of British art from the time of Hogarth and 'The Last Day in the Old Home' was, according to the artist William Bell Scott, one of the two 'most popular of all the thousands of works... shown in the International Exhibition' (Minto, 2.48) -- the other was Ford Madox Brown's 'The Last of England'. Its subject, an old and titled family brought to financial ruin by the gambling habits of the husband, was hugely popular with Victorian audiences who loved piecing together the narrative from the ample visual clues in such 'incident pictures'. 
Martineau and Holman Hunt remained close friends, sometimes sharing studios or lodgings. Martineau was part of a lively artistic circle which included Hunt, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Arthur Hughes, George Price Boyce, Edward Burne-Jones (whose wife, Georgiana, credits him with advising them that the Grange in Fulham, the Burne-Jones' home for thirty years, was available to let), Ford Madox Brown (Martineau modelled for the gentleman on horseback in Brown's 'Work'), and Val Prinsep. He regularly attended the artistic and social gatherings at the Prinseps' home, Little Holland House in Kensington, as well as at Rossetti's house in Chelsea. William Michael Rossetti described him as 'a very sensible person, not given to much talk, and with a mind rather steady going than lively, highly trusty and well principled, and worthy of the utmost regard' (Rossetti, 'Reminiscences', 2.158), and in a private letter he was described as a man 'of whom nothing but good is thought and said by all who know him' (A. J. Lewis to A. Wheeler, 13 Sept 1864, priv. coll.). He was a founder member and treasurer of the short-lived Hogarth Club (1858-61), where 'The Last Day in the Old Home' was shown privately before the International Exhibition, and a member of the Cosmopolitan Club on Charles Street, where an exhibition of his paintings and drawings was held shortly after his death in 1869. In addition to his talents as a painter, he had a natural gift for music and composed several small studies. He also had a wonderful sense of humour and fun, as is evident from his private correspondence. 
Martineau's pictures were purchased by some of the foremost patrons of the day, including James Leathart, Thomas Fairbairn, and Kirkman Hodgson. He was working on a large canvas, 'Christians and Christians' (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), possibly for Fairbairn, at the time of his early death. Martineau died at Lancaster Lodge, Campden Hill, London, on 13 February 1869 from heart disease brought on by earlier bouts of rheumatic fever. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 
Appreciation of Martineau's work has fallen and risen with the popularity of Victorian painting. 'The Last Day in the Old Home', so universally popular in 1862 that, according to an article in 1899, it 'made a triumphant progress through the country after the close of the Great Exhibition' ('Cornhill Magazine', 6 Jan-June 1899, 183), was by 1951 described as 'no more than a painstaking inventory of a Victorian drawing room' (C. A. Bertram, 'A Century of British Painting', 1951, 35). In the 1990s this painting is again appreciated for the insights it gives into Victorian social values, and the realistic manner in which it is painted. 


@@@@@


doc= 18231


Martineau, Russell (1831-1898), Hebraist and librarian, was born on 18 January 1831 in Dublin, the eldest son of James Martineau (1805-1900), Unitarian minister, and Helen (1804-1877), eldest daughter of Edward Higginson. He was educated at home and in Germany before entering University College, London, where he gained a BA degree in 1850 and an MA in classics in 1854. However, his London affiliation was punctuated by studies at the universities of Berlin (whence his family had temporarily moved) and Gottingen, where he studied under Heinrich Ewald. He continued his studies during the years 1854-7, when he was employed as a private family tutor. By the time that he was appointed to the staff of the British Museum Library and to a lectureship in Hebrew at Manchester New College, London, in 1857, his linguistic accomplishments included Sanskrit, Arabic, and Persian, in addition to the classical languages and German. 
It was typical of Martineau's all-round abilities that, though he was not employed in the British Museum in any area in which he had previously specialized, he none the less made a significant contribution to the work of the library; this was recognized by successive promotions until he reached the rank of assistant keeper in 1884. He retired from this post in 1896 in accordance with civil-service superannuation rules. At the library he specialized in early printed books: he collected first editions of Luther's works for the museum, contributed significantly to the scheme for cataloguing the library, and completed the heading ''Bible'' in the catalogue. 
Martineau's appointment to Manchester New College was on the recommendation of Heinrich Ewald, who was the colossus of German 'Old Testament' scholarship at that time, and Martineau was promoted to full professor in 1866, resigning from the college in 1874. Because Manchester New College had a strong, though not exclusive, unitarian tradition, Martineau was able to teach the results of critical scholarship freely, and there was probably no other lecture room at that time in Britain where students were kept so well informed of the latest results of critical research. His lecture notes indicate a strong dependence upon Ewald's moderately critical position, though the researches of Bishop J. W. Colenso, which called into question the historical accuracy of some 'Old Testament' narratives and which proposed radical theories of the authorship of biblical books, were carefully assessed. Martineau was a presenter of critical scholarship rather than an original contributor to it, and his importance in the development of critical scholarship in Britain lay in his translation work. He took responsibility for the English translation of the first two volumes of Ewald's 'History of Israel' (1867) and advised on the translation of later volumes, as the initiator and financial supporter of the project, Charlotte Lupton, wished to remain anonymous. In 1877 he published 'Mythology among the Hebrews', a translation of a work by Ignaz Goldziher. He also worked on the textual criticism of the 'Song of Solomon', on which he published two books, in 1892 and 1896, reprinted from articles in the 'American Journal of Philology'. 
Martineau appears to have had a complex, almost contradictory character. On the one hand there is abundant evidence of his wide interests and talents, for, in addition to the accomplishments already mentioned, Martineau was an expert conchologist, an enthusiastic botanist, and a considerable musician, in which latter capacity he helped to edit and compose new tunes for his father's 'Hymns of Praise and Prayer' (1876). He also contributed to James Murray's 'New English Dictionary' and published notes on the pronunciation of English vowels in the seventeenth century. Yet he seems to have had few social graces and few friends. As a teacher he did not appreciate the limitations of his students and was more effective in informal situations than in the lecture hall. Increasingly bad health, which interrupted his normal work, left its mark upon his appearance, and he developed a speech impediment that hindered him from expressing his thoughts fluently. A tendency to epilepsy is mentioned. At the same time those who came to know him well appreciated his humour, warm-heartedness, and loyalty. Martineau married Frances ('b'. 1836/7), daughter of Edward Bailey, an ironmonger, on 26 March 1861, and they enjoyed a relationship of mutual support and deep affection. There were no children. Martineau's latter years were marked by declining health and he died at Glen View, Sidmouth, Devon on 14 December 1898. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 18232


Martyn, Benjamin (1698-1763), writer and government official, born on 8 September 1698, was the eldest son of Richard Martyn (1667-1715?), commissioner of stamp duties and linen draper of London, and nephew of Edward Martyn, professor of rhetoric at Gresham College, and of Henry Martin, the economist. Their forebears were of Aldbourne, Wiltshire. Benjamin was educated at the Charterhouse School (1709-14), and bound apprentice to his father on 10 July 1714. Soon afterwards the father went to Buenos Aires as agent for the South Sea Company, and died there; his 'Relation' of the voyage thither and expedition to Potosi was published in London in 1716. Benjamin became an examiner of the outport books in the London custom house, probably by favour of his uncle Henry, who was inspector-general of the exports and imports. 
Martyn wrote a tragedy, 'Timoleon', which was rejected by the Drury Lane management until resubmitted 'with a Command which they durst not disobey' ('Daily Journal', 29 Jan 1730). Martyn's play was disparaged in 'Remarks on Timoleon' by Philomusas, and ridiculed in James Miller's 'Harlequin-Horace' and John Lloyd's 'The Play; a Satire', but ran successfully for fourteen nights in January and February 1730, and was revived occasionally later. Such fame as it had was owing to a ghost scene which echoes 'Hamlet' and 'Macbeth'. The printed play was dedicated to George II. 
The patron who helped Martyn in the staging and dedication of 'Timoleon' has not been identified, but it was Alderman George Heathcote, a wealthy West India merchant and opposition whig MP, who recommended him in July 1732 for the post of secretary to the board of trustees for establishing the colony of Georgia in America, describing him as 'a very ingenious young man' who 'has some employment under the Government, and is a sober young man, who out of his little maintains his mother and sisters' ('Egmont Diary', 1.286). Martyn acted gratis at first, but was receiving $50 a half-year by the end of 1733 and $75 by 1737; he also kept his examinership, worth $100 p.a., in the custom house. In 1734 he displeased some of the Georgia trustees by inviting the suspected deist Thomas Rundle (1688-1743) to preach before them: it was also said that Martyn had 'too little regard to the religious part' of the council's designs in Georgia, and that he was politicking on his own account (ibid., 2.23-4, 41, 44); but Martyn retained his position. 
As well as conducting official correspondence Martyn publicized Georgia in pamphlets, the most substantial of which are 'A New and Accurate Account of... Georgia' (1732) (sometimes wrongly attributed to James Oglethorpe, the prime mover of the Georgia project), 'Reasons for Establishing the Colony of Georgia' (1733), 'An Impartial Enquiry into the State and Utility of... Georgia' (1741), and 'An Account Showing the Progress of... Georgia' (1742). This last was a vindication of the Oglethorpe administration against a hostile pamphlet by colonial malcontents, though Martyn knew far less about Georgia than his opponents did. Martyn is perhaps the seated figure with pen and paper in hand in the centre foreground of Willem Verelst's conversation piece 'The Common Council of Georgia Receiving the Indian Chiefs' (painted in London in 1734-5, now in the H. F. Dupont Museum, Winterthur, Delaware, USA). On 20 December 1752 Martyn was recommended for the profitable post of agent for Georgia. 
In May 1736 Martyn was a committee member of the Society for the Encouragement of Learning, as was his friend Thomas Birch (1705-1766): their correspondence, 1737-62, is in British Library Add. MS 4313. According to his tombstone Martyn was 'the first promoter' of the Shakespeare monument in Westminster Abbey. Other contemporary references to this project (such as periodicals and George Vertue's notebooks) do not mention Martyn, but he wrote a special prologue for a performance of Shakespeare's 'Julius Caesar' at Drury Lane on 28 April 1738 to raise money for the monument. 
At some time in the 1730s the fourth earl of Shaftesbury, one of the Georgia trustees, commissioned Martyn to write a life of the first earl from family papers. The work, unfinished at Martyn's death in 1763, was revised in turn by Gregory Sharpe and Andrew Kippis and printed privately about 1790 (nearly twenty years after the fourth earl's death). The fifth earl disapproved, so most of this impression was destroyed, but a copy which escaped was edited and published in 1836 by George Wingrove Cooke. 
In the last decade of his life Martyn suffered from gout; he died unmarried at Eltham, Kent, on 25 October 1763, and was buried in Lewisham churchyard on 31 October. By his will, proved on 27 October 1763, he bequeathed nearly $4000 to relatives; works of art in his New Bond Street lodgings (collected during tours on the continent) were bequeathed to friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 18233


Martyn, Francis (1782-1838), Roman Catholic priest, born in Norfolk in February 1782, was sent to Sedgley Park School, near Wolverhampton, at the age of eight, and in 1796 proceeded to St Mary's College, Oscott. Because the English seminaries on the continent had closed as a result of the French Revolution he remained at Oscott to study for the priesthood; when ordained by Bishop Milner in December 1805 he was the first Roman Catholic priest since the Reformation to have received his entire training in England. After being stationed for a short time at Brailes, Warwickshire, and Louth, Lincolnshire, he was appointed in 1807 to the mission at Bloxwich, Staffordshire, which became the base for his pioneer missionary work in Walsall and West Bromwich. In 1831 he was transferred to Wolverhampton. Martyn's ministry in the Black Country was publicized in the 'Orthodox Journal' of W. E. Andrews, and he was a frequent contributor to that journal. He died at Walsall on 18 July 1838, and was buried there at St Mary's Mount. The Revd George Spencer, the missioner at the church Martyn had founded at West Bromwich, preached the funeral sermon, which was printed at Birmingham in 1838, with a memoir by the Revd Robert Richmond. 


@@@@@


doc= 18234


Martyn, Henry (1781-1812), missionary and translator, was born on 18 February 1781 in Truro, Cornwall, the third of the four children of John Martyn, a clerk in a merchant's office. His mother, his father's second wife, about whom little is known, died when he was two. The family's exact economic and social status remains uncertain, but Henry, delicate from childhood, was prepared for one of the professions through a sound classical education at Truro grammar school between 1788 and 1797, followed by university education at St John's College, Cambridge. By 1801, when he graduated as senior wrangler and winner of several prizes, he had proved his intellectual strengths, particularly in mathematics and Latin. In 1802, when he was elected a fellow at St John's, he seemed set for an academic or legal career. 
The turning point in Martyn's life, which confirmed a missionary vocation already encouraged by the evangelical piety of his Cornwall home and the influence in particular of his younger sister, was occasioned by contact with Charles Simeon, the strongly evangelical vicar of Holy Trinity, Cambridge. Simeon's reports of the recent impact in Bengal of the first Baptist missionary to India, William Carey, and Martyn's own reading about new opportunities for overseas missionary work recently opened up by the evangelical revival and colonial expansion, stimulated his interest in overseas evangelism. After ordination as deacon in 1803, at Ely Cathedral, he nevertheless remained for a further two years in the Cambridge evangelical circle, working as Simeon's curate at Holy Trinity, with responsibility for a rural congregation. He took his MA degree in 1804, followed by a BD in 1806. Hopes of a full missionary posting to India had meanwhile been dashed when responsibility for an unmarried sister, following the loss of family property, obliged Martyn to accept the better-paid post of chaplain in the East India Company's rapidly expanding Bengal presidency. While awaiting departure he returned briefly to Cornwall, where his love for a local woman, Lydia Grenfell, six years his senior and also strongly evangelical, was revived. Failure to overcome his grief at her refusal to accompany him to India, though they were to maintain a close correspondence, was one of the factors responsible for his intermittent depressions. 
Martyn reached Calcutta in early 1806 but found the British capital's dominance by worldly Europeans uncongenial to his evangelical temperament. He was posted for the next four years to military cantonments on the middle Ganges: first at Dinapore, near Patna, in Bihar, from 1806 to 1809; and second, until 1810, at Cawnpore, a busy trading city. Employed to serve the British community's ecclesiastical needs, he was prohibited by the Company's 'neutrality' pledge from engaging in evangelistic activity among Indians; however, he managed to open some schools. There were scarcely any converts in this region during his lifetime, though an influential early Indian Muslim convert to Christianity, the Revd 'Abd al-Masih, later attributed his subsequent baptism, soon after Martyn's departure, to overhearing by chance a sermon given by the chaplain. In spite of the prohibition of direct preaching in the bazaars, the presence in Calcutta and at a neighbouring cantonment of some likeminded 'pious chaplains', notably David Brown and Daniel Corrie, who were also in communication with the Simeonites in Cambridge, provided an evangelical network which proved supportive to Martyn's self-deprecating temperament. Led by Brown they planned for the future evangelization of the region. By mutual agreement Martyn abandoned the study of Sanskrit, which was in any case less congenial to him, to concentrate on learning Arabic, Persian, and also Hindustani (Urdu), the principal vernacular of north India, which, with the help of a leading orientalist scholar, John Gilchrist, he had already begun in England. Assisted by local munshis (translators), Martyn put his outstanding linguistic skills to immediate use in translating the 'Bible' into these three languages, for distribution in the Arabic script among the Muslims of India and the Middle East. However, suffering from a recurrence of tuberculosis, which made preaching increasingly painful, and despairing of conversions in north India, he decided that Arabia and Persia would provide a more congenial environment, free of colonial restraints, to improve his translations of the 'Bible' into the languages of the Islamic world. Having obtained leave to travel via Calcutta and Bombay, he left north India in October 1810. 
Martyn was proved correct, for the revised Persian manuscript of the 'New Testament' was rapidly completed in 1811-12 in Shiraz, where he also engaged local scholars and Sufis in discussions about the nature and proofs of religious truth. He compiled two tracts in Persian in reply to the evidences for Islam, particularly from miracles, proposed by these scholars, and a third work entitled 'On the vanity of the Sofee system and on the truth of the religion of Moses and Jesus'. Yet despite the seemingly more receptive atmosphere, resistance to conversion was just as strong as in India, leading within a few months to Martyn's departure. Apart from his anxiety to complete further revisions of the scriptures and to ensure their publication in the Arab world as well as in India and Persia, Martyn's by now frenetic journey westward was impelled by hopes of a further meeting with Lydia Grenfell. However, on 16 October 1812 he died a lonely death from tuberculosis at Tokat in Anatolia, 'en route' for Constantinople. He was thirty-one. He was buried in an Armenian graveyard; his grave monument is now in Tokat Museum. 
In his efforts 'to burn himself out for God', Martyn set himself goals which were unrealistic. His evangelical certainties distorted his perceptions of Islam, whose beliefs and practices he denigrated, like most missionaries of his generation. Some contemporaries thought that he was temperamentally, as well as physically, unsuited to the role of itinerant missionary. Nevertheless, Martyn's long-term influence has been very significant. His Urdu 'New Testament', usually regarded as his greatest contribution to evangelical objectives, was published in Bengal in 1814. The British ambassador to Persia, Sir Gore Ousley, who sympathized with Martyn's aims, presented his Persian 'New Testament' to the shah of Persia and also sent it to St Petersburg where it was printed in 1815. The manuscript of the Arabic 'New Testament', which was with Martyn at his death, was forwarded to Charles Simeon in Cambridge, who ensured its publication in Calcutta in 1816. The 'New Testament' was thus made available to missionary societies in the languages known to Muslims immediately after the easing in 1813 of the East India Company's embargo on evangelical activity. The impact was most direct in India, where re-editions of Martyn's 'Bible' translations were published repeatedly, with various revisions, until the late nineteenth century. 
In addition, Martyn's 'Persian tracts', generated in discussion with scholars in Shiraz, eventually came to missionary attention through their inclusion in Professor Samuel Lee's 'Controversial Tracts on Christianity and Mohammedanism' (1824). These tracts, which emphasized a rational, evidential approach to apologetics, dictated by Martyn's Persian discussants rather than by his own preference for the 'word' of the 'New Testament', seemed increasingly inappropriate in the high evangelical age, whose missionaries sought exclusively biblical tests for truth. Some influential Indian missionaries of the mid-nineteenth century, including Karl Pfander in Agra, and John Wilson in Bombay, acknowledged their debts to his apologetic writings, but other critics in India ridiculed his seriousness. Martyn's private journals, in which he recorded a deep conviction of his spiritual unworthiness, suggest a despondent personality. In contrast his evangelical friends, notably the children's novelist Mrs Sherwood, stressed his cheerfulness, and some company officials who disapproved of his evangelical objectives nevertheless valued his company for his conversational powers and good humour. In Anglican evangelical tradition he is remembered as 'saint and scholar: the first modern missionary to the Mohammedans' (the sub-title of George Smith's biography of 1892), a perception which underlies more recent biographies. Further critical evaluation is awaited of his contribution to Biblical translation and of his relations with Muslims. 


@@@@@


doc= 18235


Martyn, John (1699-1768), botanist, was born on 12 September 1699 in Queen Street in the City of London, the son of Thomas Martyn (died 1743), a merchant trading with Hamburg, and Katherine Weedon, who died the year after her son's birth. He was sent to a private school in the City of London, where he evidently received an excellent classical education, and left at sixteen to work in his father's counting-house off Cheapside. By then, however, botany had developed into a strong competing interest and he began to turn his sights to a more congenial career in medicine. He owed this change of direction to his acquaintance with John Wilmer (1697-1769), a young apothecary with a fondness for plant-hunting and entomology, whom he met in 1718, and through whom he presently gained introductions to several leading figures in botanico-medical circles. 
A particularly fruitful contact proved to be Patrick Blair, then in Lincolnshire struggling to rebuild his medical fortunes after being imprisoned because of his involvement in the Jacobite rebellion. Cut off from fellow spirits there, Blair entered into a correspondence with Martyn, which was to last several years, discussing with him a possible natural system of classifying plants based on their cotyledons and stimulating him to extend his collecting to birds and their eggs. After Blair's death in 1728 Martyn saw his 'Pharmaco-botanologia' through the press. 'The Compleat Herbal' (1716-30), a translation of the Latin edition of Tournefort's 'Elemens de botanique' attributed to Martyn, may have been started by Blair. 
Martyn was a devotee of Tournefort's writings and, having acquired and translated his 'History of Plants Growing about Paris' in 1720, conceived the idea of producing a London equivalent. To that end he made many excursions into the surrounding countryside, attended the 'herbarizings' of the Society of Apothecaries, and began to put together a 'hortus siccus'. Within a year he had taken the further step of forming a botanical society, the earliest one known in Britain to have been formally constituted. Taking on the secretaryship himself, he recruited as president Dillenius, just then a newcomer from Germany; the other members, of whom there were scarcely ever more than twenty, were medical students in the main. For the next six years the society met each Saturday evening in the Rainbow Coffee House on Watling Street and, as one surviving minute book attests, listened to papers on a good spread of topics. Many finds of rarities reported by its members were later published in Martyn's eventual version of Tournefort's book, which by the time it appeared in 1732 had assumed the character of a national flora and was tantamount to a supplement to the standard handbook of the period, Dillenius's edition of Ray's 'Synopsis'. 
Early in the society's existence Martyn delivered a series of lectures to it expounding current botanical terminology. These he subsequently published and, after the society's demise, worked up into a more general botanical course which he offered on a commercial basis. This led to an invitation in 1727 to repeat the lectures for the benefit of the medical students at Cambridge. The occupant of the university's chair of botany, Richard Bradley, though skilled in the applied and experimental aspects of the subject, was ill-equipped to provide the standard fare of contemporary medical teaching and the students were apparently desperate. Martyn, who was recommended by Hans Sloane and William Sherard, made the most of this opportunity and honour by hastily producing at his own expense an updated version of Ray's Cambridgeshire flora and distributing free copies to those attending his course. An interleaved copy of this rare octavo volume, 'Methodus plantarum circa Cantabrigiam nascentium', copiously annotated by him, survives in the university's department of plant sciences. 
This taste of academia evidently heightened Martyn's ambitions. That same year he secured election to the Royal Society and set up in practice, apparently as an apothecary, in St Helen's, in the heart of the City of London, augmenting his income by lecturing on botany and materia medica. The first part of what was to be his boldest and most sumptuous venture, 'Historia plantarum rariorum', followed in 1728. Noteworthy for some of the earliest examples of colour printing from a single plate, the work of Elisha Kirkall, it drew extensively on drawings by the Dutch flower painter Jacob van Huysum for its illustrations, and on the expertise of Philip Miller for its horticultural notes. Like all too many such productions, though, it failed to attract sufficient support and, after four further parts, had to be discontinued in 1737. 
A further setback to Martyn's ambitions was an unsuccessful bid to become second secretary of the Royal Society, on the death of William Rutty in 1730. That same year his ready pen found a further, if surprising, outlet in a new satirical weekly, the 'Grub-Street Journal'. Its proclaimed policy was 'to restrain the enormities of our worse brethren, proceeding from their want of integrity and knowledge'. Joint editor at first for a year and then an occasional contributor, Martyn sheltered behind pseudonyms to hold up to ridicule a variety of leading learned figures. Prominent among these was the hapless Bradley, who had published his Cambridge lectures on materia medica and, because of his misuse of the word in one of those, became a thinly disguised 'Professor Hecatomb'. 
This sniping at Bradley had a deeper motive: Martyn coveted his chair, which, although it had no endowment, carried prestige and could be expected to advance a medical career. On Sloane's advice Martyn resolved to arm himself with a university degree. To that end he returned to Cambridge in 1730 and, in the steps of his great-grandfather, entered Emmanuel College as a fellow-commoner. After keeping five terms, however, the calls of his London practice and, in 1732, marriage to Eulalia, daughter of John King DD, rector of Chelsea and prebendary of York, put paid to his intention of graduating. In consideration of his earlier lecturing services Martyn nevertheless felt that he was owed the professorship of botany, and on Bradley's death in 1732 canvassed energetically to succeed him. After countering a baseless rumour that he was a nonjuror, he secured election in February 1733. He began well, taking his students out on field excursions, but after three years the lengthy absences from his London practice told afresh and, on the pretext of the lack of a botanic garden to enable him to illustrate his teaching, he turned into the stereotype of an eighteenth-century absentee professor and had no more to do with Cambridge for almost thirty years, resigning only in 1762 on the election of his son Thomas Martyn in his place. 
Martyn became disillusioned, and his botanical activity diminished after his university debacle. However, his correspondence with Linnaeus, initiated by his receipt from the Swedish naturalist about 1737 of a copy of his recently published 'Flora Lapponica', was noteworthy. Always a keen Latinist, Martyn devoted his later years to producing an edition of Virgil, with a translation and natural history notes. Of this, he published the 'Georgicks' in 1741 and the 'Bucolicks' in 1749, but of the 'Aeneids' he left only fragmentary material, which was seen into print after his death. 
In 1730 Martyn left the City of London on account of an asthmatic condition and went to live and practise in the more salubrious environment of Chelsea, where the Physic Garden was conveniently close. His first wife, with whom he had three sons and five daughters, died in 1749. The next year he married Mary Anne, daughter of Claude Fonnereau, a London merchant; they had one son. Two years later he retired from practice and moved out to Hill House, a farm on Streatham Common. Persistent attacks of gout, however, undermined his enjoyment of that rural existence and eventually he retreated back to Chelsea, where he died on 29 January 1768. He was buried in the churchyard of what is now Chelsea Old Church. 
'Mus. Martyn', as Martyn's herbarium is still known, was presented to Cambridge University along with his botanical library and collection of materia medica when his son succeeded to the chair, but much of it was subsequently lost through poor curation. The surviving portion contains some type specimens and incorporates one or two small collections of historic interest made by botanist contemporaries. A genus of tropical American plants, 'Martynia', was named by his friend William Houstoun in his honour. The later recognition of a new family, Martyniaceae (unicorn plants), has resulted in his being commemorated at that higher level as well. 


@@@@@


doc= 18236


Martyn, Richard (d. 1483), bishop of St David's, is first recorded in 1448, when he supplicated as bachelor of canon law, at Oxford; he had incepted in canon law by 1478. He served as chaplain to John Tiptoft, earl of Worcester (died 1470), from 1458 until at least 1464. He subsequently passed into the service of the crown, and the archdeaconry of London in 1469, and prebends in St Paul's, London, and St Stephen's Chapel, Westminster, both in 1471, may have been among his early rewards. 
Among the complaints against Edward IV in 1469 was the king's inability to command the regular services of a body of lords. The deficiency was made up by the appointment of professional men retained by annuities, while the title of counsellor was extended to more than a score of doctors of law. Martyn, who had become a chancery clerk, was prominent among these. In May 1471 he arranged the funeral of Henry VI at Chertsey Abbey, and in February 1472 was appointed one of the tutors and counsellors of Edward, prince of Wales. He served as a master of chancery from 1472 to 1478, and was a member of the king's council and royal chaplain by 1478. 
Martyn was also a diplomat, closely associated with Edward IV's tortuous foreign policy. He was one of the commissioners to treat for peace with Scotland in August 1471, and to treat with the ambassadors of Burgundy about the handing over of Henry Tudor, earl of Richmond, in March 1472. In 1475, during Edward IV's invasion of France, Martyn was employed in unsuccessful negotiations with Duke Charles of Burgundy, failing to persuade the duke to raise the siege of Neuss and come to Edward's aid. In March 1477 he treated with King Ferdinand of Aragon ('r'. 1479-1516) for the marriage of the latter's daughter, Isabella, to Edward, prince of Wales, and requested Ferdinand and his wife, Isabella of Castile ('r'. 1474-1516), to send an embassy to England. Thereafter he acted as an intermediary between Edward IV and Louis XI of France ('r'. 1461-83). In 1480 he was one of a large embassy sent to treat with Louis for the pension he had agreed to pay Edward in 1475. At a secret meeting the dispute between Louis XI and the Flemings was discussed, and also Edward's wish to arbitrate between Louis and the emperor's son, Maximilian of Austria. While this was going on Edward, presumably without Martyn's knowledge, was negotiating a marriage between the prince of Wales and Anne, daughter of the duke of Brittany, which was intended as a prelude to the invasion of France. 
Martyn had more success applying Edward's domestic policies after 1471, being associated with the king's collection of revenues. The 'benevolences' by which Edward sought to raise money for his invasion of France of 1475 raised $22,000, and a letter survives commissioning Richard Martyn 'our counsellor to go to London t'exite and induce by all reason that you can or may make to us good and loving grants' (BL, Harley MS 980, art. 23). Martyn was also involved in Edward IV's efforts to enforce law and order in his second reign, and was appointed to a number of commissions of the peace in Gloucestershire, Herefordshire, Shropshire, and Worcestershire between February 1473 and May 1474, along with Richard, duke of Gloucester, Anthony Woodville, Lord Rivers, and George, duke of Clarence. He was appointed chancellor of Ireland in February 1478, but may not have taken up office. 
Martyn was closely identified with the advance of the Woodvilles in Wales at the expense of the Herberts. He was appointed chancellor of the earldom of March for life in 1471, and on 26 February 1482 was nominated by the king for the bishopric of St David's. Papal provision followed on 26 April, and the temporalities were restored on 1 July. During his brief episcopate Martyn seems to have had little to do with his diocese, which he claimed to have found impoverished and heavily in debt. By 1478 he had become archdeacon of Hereford, and he was allowed to keep this and other benefices, to the value of 300 florins, nominally to allow him to repair dilapidated buildings at St David's. But there is no evidence that he actually financed any works. He died in 1483, probably on 25 March, and perhaps in London, since he was buried not in his own cathedral but in St Paul's Cathedral, by the crucifix near the north door. He endowed a yearly exhibition for the choristers to sing before this crucifix. His obit was observed in Christ Church Cathedral priory, Canterbury, to which he left his mitre and crozier. 


@@@@@


doc= 18237


Martin, Thomas (1520/21-1592/3), civil lawyer and polemicist, the son of John Martin of Cerne, Dorset, was educated at Winchester (admitted 1533, aged twelve) and New College, Oxford, of which he became a fellow in 1540, and subsequently ('c'.1550) at Bourges University in France. Martin's engagement in anti-evangelical polemic in the reign of Mary I created the opportunity for protestant propagandists such as John Ponet and John Bale to blacken his reputation, and it is to them that allegations of Martin's scandalous lifestyle, academic improprieties, and vacillating views on such controversial issues as clerical celibacy at Bourges can be traced. At the accession of Queen Mary he returned to England from studies in Paris and entered the service of the new lord chancellor, Stephen Gardiner, for whom he became an active administrator, first as an official in the archdeaconry of Berkshire and subsequently as chancellor of the diocese of Winchester. Although Martin originally sat in the parliament of 1553 as MP for the borough of Saltash, Cornwall, Gardiner's patronage ensured that he was subsequently returned as member for the Wiltshire borough of Hindon. After Gardiner's death in 1555, the warden of Winchester, John White, helped him secure the Wiltshire seat of Ludgershall. He also enjoyed an active diplomatic career, narrowly failing to become ambassador to France in 1556, but none the less engaging in negotiations with Philip II over the projected marriage of Princess Elizabeth and over trading relations between the Merchant Adventurers and the Netherlands. It was, however, Martin's rapid advancement in the law that most distinguished his career. Having graduated DCL at Oxford in 1555, he became master of requests by 1556, and master in chancery by 1557. He held the protonotaryship of chancery (1557-60), but lost the office at the accession of Elizabeth despite his willingness to swear the oath of supremacy. 
Martin's enthusiasm for Marian policy found particular expression in his 'Traictise Declarying... that the Pretensed Marriage of Priests... is No Mariage' (published in May 1554), a defence of the regime's reintroduction of clerical celibacy in which Gardiner himself probably also had a hand. Although Ponet, one of the great apologists for clerical marriage, replied from exile, Martin's work proved sufficiently popular for Robert Caley to seek a monopoly of printing it in 1558, although when Ponet's response was posthumously published in 1566 Martin declined to prolong the exchange. 
Martin's career in royal service reached its apogee in September 1555, when he was entrusted by the council with the prosecution of heretics, ultimately serving alongside Bishop Brooks of Gloucester and his fellow civil lawyers John Story and David Lewis as royal proctor at the trial of Archbishop Thomas Cranmer. Accounts of the trial reveal the shrewdness of Martin's opening address on the relationship between the secular and ecclesiastical power, a strategy that exposed one of Cranmer's points of weakness. He was equally ruthless in pressing the archbishop on whether all oaths, good or bad, ought to be obeyed; on his changing belief on the eucharist; and on the history of the supreme headship of the church, issues over which he succeeded in flustering the otherwise dignified Cranmer. That Martin provided the real teeth of the prosecution is implied both by Cranmer's choice of him as a conduit for a letter of appeal to the queen (subsequently published in Emden in 1556) and by her consultation of him as to whether she should even read it. Such zeal in the Catholic cause rendered him obnoxious to the protestant party, and accounts for his disappearance from public office under Elizabeth. Although he remained a Catholic, Martin none the less continued to work as a civil lawyer into the 1590s, being frequently involved in appeals from the prerogative court of Canterbury and the courts of admiralty and arches. 
Martin was twice married; first, by January 1555, to Mary, daughter of John Roys of London, with whom he had two sons and one daughter; and second, some time after 1565, to Margery, widow of William Denton of Southwark, with whom he had one daughter. His estates in Steeple Mordern, Cambridgeshire, Fenstanton, Huntingdonshire, and London were subject to litigation in requests shortly before his death. He was still alive in March 1592. Thomas, his son and the executor of his will (proved 7 August 1593), subsequently sued his stepmother and half-sister in chancery to obtain the administration of his estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 18238


Martyn, Thomas (fl. 1779-1811), natural history illustrator and pamphleteer, was said to be a native of Coventry, Warwickshire (Nichols, 8.432). Martyn developed a talent for coloured depictions of insects and shells. He purchased shells brought back from Cook's third voyage, although, as he wrote to Henry Seymer on 9 December 1780, 'I have purchased, amounting to 400 gns, more than 2 thirds of the whole brought home, Nevertheless I do not abound either in the variety of the new or many duplicates of the known ones that are valuable' (Dance, 100). He sold many of the shells, but the paucity of new species led him to modify his original plan to figure two different shells on each plate. Martyn sought to impose order on his subject: his 'Universal Conchologist' bore the subtitle 'A new systematic arrangement by the author'. It had 160 hand-coloured plates, the whole being published in four folio volumes between 1784 and 1787, making it the greatest of all books on shells. 
Since Martyn's illustrations were hand-coloured he needed the assistance of professional artists, but, finding that miniaturists were unwilling to interrupt their normal work to paint shells, he decided to recruit his own workforce and train boys to paint in a uniform style. His first boy joined him about 1779; others followed, and eventually he had ten young men at work in his 'academy' at 10 Great Marlborough Street, Westminster. In the first three and a half years over 6000 paintings were produced; at the end of that time Martyn saw that the standard had greatly improved, and decided to scrap the earlier plates and copies and begin again. This cost him dear, in time and money, but the splendour of the 'Conchologist' brought him rewards in the form of gold medals from Pope Pius VI, the German Emperor Ferdinand, and the king of Naples, and flattering letters from lesser dignitaries. 
Turning thereafter to insects, Martyn produced his 'English Entomologist' (1792), followed by 'Aranei, or, A Natural History of Spiders' (1793), a quarto in two parts. It included much of Eleazar Albin's well-known work on English spiders, Martyn having purchased Albin's drawings at the sale of the dowager duchess of Portland's museum. 'Psyche: Figures of Non-Lepidopterous Insects' (1797) was probably produced privately and only about ten sets of its thirty-two stipple engravings are known to have been published. His only venture into botany, 'Figures of Plants' (1795), consisted of forty-three coloured plates without text or captions. 
Martyn reacted to the balloon flights of Lunardi and Blanchard in 1784 by issuing a pamphlet, 'Hints of important uses to be derived from aerostatic globes. With a print of an aerostatic globe... originally designed in 1783' (1784). The design of his 'globe' and its undercarriage was utterly impractical, the proposed uses being to elevate military signals in wartime and to serve as bases to explore the upper atmosphere. Military matters seem to have held some fascination for Martyn. In 1804 he published 'A Dive into Buonaparte's Councils on his Projected Invasion of Old England', in which he advised the duke of York, as commander-in-chief of the king's forces, on the enemy's probable invasion tactics. He also offered advice on how to keep the British troops in good heart, by the provision of good food and clothing, and medals for the brave. The preface states that the duke had recommended Martyn's son for a commission in the royal army or reserve. In patriotic mood, Martyn's 'Great Britain's Jubilee Monitor' (1810) was merely a verbose and flattering expression of royalist sentiments. Nothing is known of his wife and family, nor of the circumstances of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 18239


Martyn, Thomas (1735-1825), botanist, was born at Cambridge on 23 September 1735, the eldest surviving child of three sons and five daughters born to John Martyn (1699-1768), professor of botany at the University of Cambridge, and his first wife, Eulalia (1703-1749), daughter of John King DD, rector of Chelsea. He was raised at his grandfather's house in Church Lane, Chelsea, and later recalled his visits during this time to the aged Sir Hans Sloane, bearing copies of his father's publications. From the age of five and a half until he was seventeen Martyn was educated under the Revd Rothery at Paradise Row, Chelsea, from where he entered Emmanuel College, Cambridge, as a pensioner in 1752. At Cambridge, Martyn studied classics under Richard Hurd; he gained two scholarships and an exhibition, but was held back by his dislike of mathematics and graduated fifth senior optime in 1756. 
Martyn was always a keen student of botany, but although brought up by his father on the works of John Ray, he absorbed the works of Linnaeus on their first appearance, and was a convert and early proponent of Linnaean views. As fellowships at Emmanuel were temporarily suspended, Martyn was elected fellow at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, and ordained deacon in 1758, when he also proceeded MA, and priest in the following year. From 1760 to 1774 he acted as tutor of his college. 
Following his father's resignation in 1762 Martyn was elected university professor of botany, a post he held for sixty-three years, though he only lectured until 1796, botany not being a very popular subject. When Dr Richard Walker gave the site of the Austin friary for a botanical garden, Martyn became the first reader in botany under this endowment. In 1763 he gave his first course of lectures, based on the Linnaean system which was now gaining public and academic recognition. In the same year he published his first work, 'Plantae Cantabrigienses', and spent the long vacation in the Netherlands, Flanders, and Paris. In 1766 he graduated BD, and in 1770 he stood in when the garden's curator Charles Miller went to the East Indies. 
In 1773 Martyn and his fellow tutor John Lettice, having bought the Italian original of 'The Antiquities of Herculanaeum' for $50 and laboured for five years on a translation, began publication; they issued only the first part, with fifty plates, before being stopped by objections from the Neapolitan court. Martyn resigned his fellowship to marry, on 9 December 1773, Martha Elliston (died 1829), sister of Dr William Elliston, master of Sidney Sussex College. They had one child, John King Martyn. Martyn was presented by the bishop to the sequestration of Foxton and went to live at Triplow, near Cambridge, where he took pupils until 1776. At the beginning of 1774 his pupil John Borlase Warren presented him to the rectory of Ludgershall, Buckinghamshire, and in 1776 to the vicarage of Little Marlow, which became his headquarters until 1784. 
In 1778 Martyn accompanied his pupil and ward, Edward Hartopp, of Little Dalby Hall, Leicestershire, for a two years' tour on the continent, taking with him his wife and infant son. After settling for some time at Vandoeuvres, near Geneva, they went as far south as Naples, and returned to England by Venice, Tyrol, Cologne, and Brussels. Martyn kept a journal, part of which he afterwards published, and made a large collection of minerals to illustrate lectures on general natural history, with which he now found it expedient to supplement those on botany. 
In 1784 Martyn went to London for his son's education, and, having purchased the Charlotte Street Chapel, Pimlico, from Dr Dodd, resigned the rectory of Ludgershall, in which he was succeeded by his half-brother, Claudius. At this time he produced his most popular work, 'Letters on the Elements of Botany' (8 edns), a translation and continuation of the original work by Jean-Jacques Rousseau. He also began his most considerable undertaking, his edition of Philip Miller's 'Gardener's Dictionary', a new work on the Linnaean system, which he undertook in 1785 for White and Rivington for 1000 guineas, expecting to complete it in eleven years. It was not, however, published as a whole until 1807. He was elected FRS in 1786, and fellow of the Linnean Society in 1788, and afterwards acted as vice-president of the latter society. 
Martyn contributed twenty letters to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1783-1800, principally on natural history, especially botany. In 1784 he entered into a polite exchange of seven letters on trees with Thomas Holt White in that periodical, in which he continued to espouse the Linnaean system of botanical nomenclature. In 1791, at the request of Sir J. B. Warren, he became secretary to the Society for the Improvement of Naval Architecture, which lasted until 1796. In 1793, after thirty years' work, his professorship at Cambridge was made a royal one, and he was given a pension of $100 per annum. 
In 1798 Martyn moved to Pertenhall rectory, Bedfordshire, the home of his cousin, the Revd John King, who in 1800 resigned the living to the professor's son and only child, John King Martyn, fellow and mathematical lecturer of Sidney Sussex College, who in turn, in 1804, resigned it to his father. Martyn passed the remainder of his life in Pertenhall. He continued to preach until he was eighty-two, when his biographer, George Cornelius Gorham, became his curate. Martyn died at Pertenhall on 3 June 1825, and was buried in the chancel of his church, where a marble slab was placed to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 18240


Martyn, William (bap. 1562, d. 1617), lawyer and historian, was baptized at St Petrock's, Exeter, on 19 September 1562, the eldest son of Nicholas Martyn (died 1599) of Exeter and his first wife, Mary (died 1576), daughter of Lennard Yeo of Hatherleigh. After having been sent to the grammar school at Exeter, Martyn matriculated at Broadgates Hall (afterwards Pembroke College), Oxford, in the autumn of 1581. He was admitted to the Middle Temple on 1 May 1582, and was called to the bar in 1589. 
Martyn married at St Petrock's, on 28 November 1585, Susan, daughter of Thomas Prestwood of Exeter, with whom he had three sons, Nicholas (died 1654), William, and Edward, and one daughter, Susanna. He represented Exeter in the 1597-8 parliament, and was its recorder from 1607 until his death. Susan Martyn died in January 1606, and Martyn then married Jane, daughter of Henry Huishe of Sands in Sidbury, Devon. 
Martyn was the author of a work of morality (directed towards his son Nicholas) entitled 'Youth's Instruction' (1612). He then turned to medieval history in 'The historie, and lives, of the kings of England from William the Conqueror unto the end of the raigne of Henrie the Eight' (1615), containing preliminary verses from his three sons and his son-in-law and an appendix of 'succession of dukes and earles' and other particulars. A second edition appeared in 1628, which was illustrated with portraits of the kings by R. Elstrack, most of which were sold by 'Compton Holland over against the Exchange'. An enlarged third edition appeared in 1638 with lengthier lives of Edward VI, Mary I, and Elizabeth I. This was written by 'B. R., Master of arts' who lifted his accounts nearly verbatim from William Camden's 'Annales' and Francis Godwin's 'Annales' of Edward and Mary. 
Martyn's history reaches no further back than the Norman conquest, like many of his contemporary historians. Unlike Francis Bacon, Camden, John Hayward, and Samuel Daniel, however, his history is suffused by moral rather than political judgements (of the same flavour as his 'Youth's Instruction') which make it appear sententious. The sermonizing character of many of his verdicts on particular kings, especially the Scottish Stuarts, may have offended James I, who only a year earlier had caused Sir Walter Ralegh's 'History of the World' to be called in. On 25 February 1615, barely a month after Martyn had dated the preface to his book, he was arrested and taken before the council. It fell to Bacon, a future historian himself and then attorney-general, to charge Martyn with having written a history with offensive passages. He was soon released, after apologizing, and returned to Exeter. Fuller's remark that the king forgot the offence seems correct since subsequent issues of the book were unaltered. 
But the incident proved too much for Martyn, and he died at Exeter, having never recovered his 'former cheerfulnesse' (Fuller, 1.306; Wood, 2.199), on 7 April 1617. He was buried on 12 April in St Petrock's Church. By his will, drawn up on 18 September 1610 and amended on the day of his death, he expressed assurance of salvation 'by a lively faith in Christ Jesus my Saviour and Redeemer' and made provision for his wife and children, who survived him, from various properties in Devon (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/130, sig. 81). 


@@@@@


doc= 18241


Marvell, Andrew (c.1584-1641), Church of England clergyman, was born at Meldreth in south-west Cambridgeshire, one of the two sons of Andrew Marvell (died 1628), yeoman, and his wife, Johanne (died 1615). The family, which had long been settled in the area, farmed some 50 acres of land in the village. Marvell was admitted in 1601 to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and elected scholar in 1604, graduating BA in 1605 and proceeding MA in 1608. After entering the diaconate at York in March 1607 he was in November licensed by the bishop of Ely to serve as curate and schoolmaster at Melbourne, adjacent to his birthplace. By January 1609 his signature as curate appears in the register of burials at Flamborough in the East Riding, and he was ordained priest in York Minster on 30 May (Trinity Sunday). 
At Cherry Burton near Beverley, on 22 October 1612, Marvell married Anne Pease (died 1638), whose precise parentage remains unknown though the surname was a local one. On 23 April 1614 he was formally inducted as rector of Winestead in Holderness, a parish to the east of Kingston upon Hull, where all his five children were baptized. Of his two sons only Andrew Marvell (1621-1678), the poet, reached manhood; John ('b'. 1623) died on 20 September 1624, ten days before the corporation of Hull appointed Marvell lecturer at Holy Trinity Church. Shortly afterwards he obtained the mastership of the Charterhouse Hospital, outside the north walls, which became his home. There he was joined in 1626 by his father and his brother Edward and family, perhaps fleeing the plague or Charles I's forced loan. In due course his daughters became the wives of Hull townsmen, Anne ('b'. 1615) marrying James Blaydes in 1633, Mary ('b'. 1617) marrying Edmund Popple in 1636, and Elizabeth ('b'. 1618) marrying Robert More by 1642. 
During Marvell's stewardship of the Charterhouse the number of almspeople was increased, the fabric and chapel were extensively repaired, and annual accounts faithfully rendered. Otherwise, according to his son, he 'lived with some measure of reputation, both for Piety and Learning: and he was moreover a Conformist to the established Rites of the Church of 'England', though I confess none of the most over-running or eager in them' (Marvell, 'Rehearsal', pt 2, 128). It is true that early on he fell out with the vicar of Hull about preaching, and as late as 1639 was ordered by the diocese to read, in hood and surplice, more of the prayer book liturgy before his weekly lecture. Yet some autograph complaints against local separatists (manuscript in Hull Local History Library) and notes on the necessity of observing church ritual (BL, Harley MS 6356, fols. 197'r'-197'v') indicate only a moderate puritanism. 
Thomas Fuller's anecdotal account derives from a son-in-law of Marvell. It portrays him as 'most 'facetious' in his 'discourse', yet 'grave' in his 'carriage'; a most excellent preacher, who, like a good husband, never 'broached' what he had new 'brewed', but preached what he had pre-studied some competent time before' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 159). Several of his sermons survive in manuscript. Besides those still preserved in Hull, 'Israel and England parallel'd' (London, Inner Temple Library) was dedicated in 1627 to Anne Sadleir of Standon, Hertfordshire, sister of his traditional benefactor Bridget Skinner of Thornton Curtis, Lincolnshire. A copy of the address which, although himself recently under quarantine from the plague, he delivered at the funeral of John Ramsden, mayor of Hull, on 8 December 1637 survives in BL, Harley MS 6356, fols. 153-62. He corresponded on theological matters with brother ministers (for example BL, Lansdowne MS 891, fol. 118), sometimes acrimoniously, while Fuller mentions that his 'excellent comment upon Saint 'Peter' is daily desired and expected'. 
Marvell's first wife died in 1638 and was buried at Holy Trinity on 28 April. On 27 November of the same year he married, at Norton in Derbyshire, Lucy (1592-1664), widow of William Harris, by birth a member of the Alured family who were Marvell's neighbours at the Charterhouse; he was her third husband. The merchants and civic authorities of Hull continued to show their appreciation of his services by gifts and bequests until his death by drowning on 23 January 1641, in a ''Barrow-boat'' that became ''sand-warpt'' while crossing the Humber. His sole contemporary memorial is an anonymous verse-elegy jotted into the parish register of Pickering, North Riding of Yorkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 18242


Marvell, Andrew (1621-1678), poet and politician, was born on 31 March 1621, 'being Easter-even', in the rectory at Winestead, in the Holderness region of the East Riding of Yorkshire, and baptized in the church of St German there on 5 April. He was the fourth child and elder son of the Revd Andrew Marvell (c.1584-1641) and his first wife, Anne Pease (died 1638). In September 1624 the family moved to Kingston upon Hull, one of the most important trading centres in the north of England. Marvell's boyhood was passed in the master's house of the Charterhouse hospital, a small community of alms-people, which, with its chapel and gardens, stood in a rural suburb half a mile north of the walls. Of his schooldays he later recalled the Latin scansion 'that we learn'd at [the] Grammar-School' ('Mr. Smirke', 1676, 6) at the heart of the seaport. 
On 13 December 1633, three months before his thirteenth birthday, Marvell matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge. If entry to the university at such an early age suggests precocity it may also explain why he graduated after five years instead of the normal three. As a sub-sizar, the lowest rank of student, he carried out day-to-day tasks for seniors for an annual allowance of 6's'. 8died, with a further 4died each week for food. The scholarship to which he was elected in April 1638 more than doubled his income, and further funds would have come from the 'dry' chorister's place that he appears to have held from 1640 to 1642 (BL, Add. MS 5846, fol. 133'v'). Although this post, which his contemporary Abraham Cowley also enjoyed, did not carry any duty of singing, Marvell's love of music is apparent throughout his poetry. His only known compositions at this time are some Greek verses and a Latin reworking of an ode of Horace that he wrote, in anticipation of the birth in March 1637 of Princess Anne, for the university's congratulatory ''Sunwdia''. After subscribing for his BA degree on 27 February 1639, the young puritan fell under the influence of Catholic proselytizers. As his earliest editor puts it, some ''Jesuits'... seeing in him a Genius beyond his Years' enticed him from the university, but after 'some Months his Father found him in a 'Bookseller's' shop in 'London', and prevailed with him to return' ('Works', ed. Cooke, 1.5). 
At home in Hull, the death of Marvell's mother in April 1638 had been followed in November by his father's marriage to Lucy Harris, and his drowning on the Humber in January 1641. The Revd Andrew died intestate, but, on 23 July, Jane Grey, the remarried widow of his brother Edward (died 1631), made over to young Andrew 471/2 acres of copyhold land that the Marvells had long farmed in Meldreth, Cambridgeshire (LMA, H1/ST/E79/24, m.37). These he at once mortgaged to his brothers-in-law Edmund Popple and James Blaydes for $260, repayable in two instalments by the eve of his majority; nine years later they were still unredeemed. At the same time he paid a fine of $3 to retain the house and 21/2 acres which can be identified with the property traditionally known as the Marvells and nowadays as Meldreth Court. The sudden inheritance and his release from paternal control freed Marvell to turn his back on academic life. On 24 September 1641 an entry in the college conclusion book warned that he and four other graduates 'in regard that some of them are reported to be maryed and the other looke not after their dayes nor Acts... shalbe out of their places unles thei show just cause... for the contrary in 3 months'. 
Early in 1642 Marvell was in London, taking the protestation oath on 17 February as a resident of Cowcross Street in the fashionable area of Clerkenwell, not far from the inns of court. In the same month he witnessed three deeds transferring lands in Yorkshire from Sir William Savile of Thornhill to Thomas, first Viscount Savile. At some unknown date, possibly following the outbreak of serious hostilities in August, he left England and in doing so escaped the first civil war entirely. Much later he was to pass over his failure to engage himself with the paradox that 'the Cause was too good to have been fought for' ('Rehearsal Transpros'd', 135). All that is known of the extent of his itinerary comes from Milton's remark that he had passed four years in Holland, France, Italy, and Spain 'to very good purpose, as I beleeve & the gaining of those 4 languages' (Milton to J. Bradshaw, 21 Feb 1653, TNA: PRO, SP 18/33/75). While a later allusion to his 'Fencing-master in 'Spain'' ('Poems', 2.324) suggests that he had lived in some style, his own resources would hardly have sufficed for such a prolonged stay. The likeliest explanation is suggested by a later report of his having been employed as governor to a young nobleman on his travels. A fixed point is provided by his brilliant if cruel lampoon 'Fleckno, an English priest at Rome', which belongs to Lent 1646. Richard Flecknoe was a literary protege of the second duke of Buckingham and his brother Lord Francis Villiers, former contemporaries of Marvell at Trinity who in the previous autumn had taken a house in Rome. 
Marvell was back in England at the latest by 12 November 1647, when he sold the Meldreth house, apparently for $80, attending the transfer in person. Although the deed describes him as 'of Kingstone super Hull Gentleman', some poems that he wrote over the next three years imply close contact with literary circles in London. 'An elegy upon the death of my Lord Francis Villiers', who had met his death in July 1648 during a brief royalist uprising, represents Marvell's first independent, though anonymous, venture into print. Commendatory verses 'To his noble friend Mr. Richard Lovelace', published in the 'Lucasta' of May 1649, were followed in June by a lament on the death of the nineteen-year-old Henry, Lord Hastings, written for Richard Brome's commemorative 'Lachrymae musarum'. But his pronounced royalism had changed by June 1650, when he wrote 'An Horatian Ode upon Cromwell's Return from Ireland', one of the greatest political poems in English. While reflecting sympathetically on Charles I's conduct at execution, it hails Cromwell as the dominant figure in the new republic. Critics and historians have debated at length the precise extent of Marvell's conversion to the parliamentarian cause, especially since 'Tom May's Death', written in November, denounces a former royalist poet for turning 'Chronicler to 'Spartacus'' (ll. 73-4). What probably provoked this outburst was the grant of a state funeral to May while his rival Davenant, whose poetry Marvell admired, lay under threat of death. The safest reading of his politics in the 1650s is probably that he was prepared to accept any government that would operate within a constitutional framework, and that his admiration of Cromwell was conditional on his remaining 'still in the 'Republick's' hand'. 
Composition of the 'Horatian ode' coincided with the resignation of Thomas, third Lord Fairfax, from supreme command of the parliamentary forces, largely in opposition to the Scottish campaign, which the poem welcomes. On Fairfax's withdrawal to his native Yorkshire, Marvell was employed as tutor in languages to his twelve-year-old daughter Mary. It says much about his character and religious temper that her devoutly Presbyterian parents and formidable grandmother Lady Vere found him, in Milton's phrase, 'of an approved conversation' (TNA: PRO, SP 18/33/75). By the winter he was praising his pupil in some English verses prefaced to the translation of James Primrose's 'Popular Errors' (1651) by the Hull physician Robert Witty. 
Marvell's new surroundings proved both congenial and conducive to poetry. The family domain stretched eastward from Fairfax's birthplace at Denton, above the River Wharfe, to his town house on Bishophill in York, taking in the country retreats of Bilbrough and the former nunnery of Nun Appleton, his favourite seat. All are celebrated in a series of English and Latin verses dedicated to the employer who had left the world of action for a life of rural contemplation. The longest of these, 'Upon Appleton House', stands out among contemporary estate and topographical poems by sharp perception of the natural setting, and startling images. The mower sequence of poems, which sets the 'wild and fragrant Innocence' of fields above the 'enforc'd' culture of gardens, has also been ascribed to this interlude, though 'The Garden' itself, with its Latin counterpart, may date from an altogether later period. That Marvell was still writing lyric verse after the Restoration is confirmed by the graceful epitaph 'Enough: and leave the rest to fame' (March 1672). 
By the winter of 1652-3 Marvell was back in London, where in mid-February the prospect of a career at the centre of public life presented itself by the death of Rudolph Weckherlin, assistant to the blind Milton in the Latin secretaryship to the council of state. On 21 February Milton wrote to President Bradshaw recommending Marvell in strong terms both as 'a scholler & well read in the Latin and Greeke authors' and as 'a man whom both by report, & the converse I have had with him, [is] of singular desert for the State to make use of' (TNA: PRO, SP 18/33/75). Soon after, Marvell marked an English naval victory with 'The Character of Holland', in which he calls on personal experience to satirize Dutch manners, and proclaims the new regime at home as the 'Darling of Heaven'. Despite failing to obtain the government post he was taken up by Cromwell himself as governor to his protege William Dutton, nephew and heir of Cromwell's wealthy friend John Dutton of Sherborne in Gloucestershire. As prospective husband for Cromwell's youngest daughter, Frances, it was essential that the youth be brought up in sound religious doctrines. On 28 July, Marvell wrote to his employer of their reception in the house of the puritan John Oxenbridge, vicar of Windsor and fellow of Eton College. The friendship that he developed with their hosts is confirmed by the Latin epitaph for Oxenbridge's wife, while the hymn of religious exile 'Bermudas' has been traced to recollections of the Oxenbridges' retreat there from Laudian persecution. A year later Marvell was promising to study a presentation copy of Milton's 'Defensio secunda' 'even to the getting of it by Heart' ('Poems', 2.306). 
Two important poems that Marvell wrote at this time extol Cromwell and promote his political aims. In December 'The First Anniversary of the Government under O. C.' drew on musical and biblical analogies to celebrate the political harmony created by a protector who declines to be king. It was issued anonymously by a government printer in mid-January 1655. Some months later Marvell sent a long verse-letter in Latin to Nathaniel Ingelo, a fellow of the college who had gone as choirmaster to Bulstrode Whitelocke's embassy to Kristina of Sweden. Its overtly political message was reinforced by the message of the well-known Latin tetrastich that Marvell composed to accompany the gift of Cromwell's portrait to the queen. 
Late in the same year Samuel Hartlib in London jotted down some information sent by John Worthington, an occasional visitor to Eton, about: 'one Marvel of 40. 'years' of age who hath spent all his time in travelling abroad with Noblemens so'n'nes and is skilled in several Languages, who is now again to goe with one's so'n'ne of 8. thous'and' a 'year' who is fitter to be a Secretary of State &c. (Sheffield University Library, H50/29/5/50A)' By the following January, Marvell and his charge had passed through Paris and reached Saumur in the Loire valley, a leading centre of protestantism favoured by the well-to-do of several nations for the education of their sons. On 15 August a royalist visitor, James Scudamore, reported that he had seen virtually no Englishmen of note but 'Mr Dutton called by the french Le Genre [that is, 'Gendre', son-in-law] du Protecteur whose Governour is one Mervill a notable English Italo-Machavillian' (BL, Add. MS 15858, fol. 135). Marvell seems to have been promoting republican writings there; he is evidently the learned friend whom twelve months later Milton mentioned to Oldenburg as having sent back word of local interest in the 'Defensio'. In all likelihood the death of Dutton's uncle early in 1657 brought to an end three and a half years of close fellowship. 
Nothing certain is known of Marvell's activities for most of this year. The verses on Blake's victory at Santa Cruz in April, separately printed in 1674 and incorporated in the posthumous 'Miscellaneous Poems' (1681), do not seem to be his (see Duncan-Jones). But on 2 September he finally entered the civil service as Latin secretary in the office of John Thurloe, secretary to the council of state and head of the government's intelligence service. His salary was $200 per year and his duties included writing letters to heads of state, translating foreign documents, acting as interpreter, and occasionally even receiving foreign envoys. After the Restoration he was to deny having had 'the remotest relation to publick matters' until taking up this post, 'which I consider'd to be the most innocent and inoffensive... of any in that usurped and irregular Government' and which he claimed to have discharged 'without disobliging any one person' ('Rehearsal Transpros'd', 203). In November he wrote two lyrics to be sung at the festivities in Whitehall for the wedding of Viscount Fauconberg and Mary, third daughter of the music-loving protector; they include a tactful glance at the marriage of Frances Cromwell to Lord Rich one week earlier. Ten months later Cromwell was dead, and Marvell and Milton were granted six yards of mourning to walk in procession with Dryden, Hartlib, and Peter Sterry at his state funeral. 'A Poem upon the Death of O. C.', besides conveying the writer's sense of awe and personal loss, dwells on the human side of a great public figure. Although it was scheduled for publication in January 1659 along with elegies by Dryden and Sprat, its place was taken by a reprint of Waller's elegy. 
Under the new protector, Richard Cromwell, Marvell not only retained his civil service post but was returned in January 1659 as one of the two MPs for Hull. In the Commons he voted with the majority against the opposition until the fall of the protectorate in May, when the restoration of the Rump saw him unseated by his predecessor, the younger Harry Vane. The regicide Thomas Scott now replaced Thurloe as Marvell's superior in the civil service and by July Marvell had been granted lodgings in Whitehall; when the council was dissolved in October his salary was $86 in arrear. That winter he may have spoken at the Rota, the political club founded by his 'intimate friend' the republican James Harrington. Marvell was returned at the elections of 2 April 1660 to the Convention Parliament that recalled the Stuarts, coming a distant second to his partner in defeating Hull's republicans. There he was not entirely allowed to forget his recent affiliations: in July he was ordered to help in replying to a letter of congratulation on the Restoration, and in December was rebuked when he offered a complaint on the treatment of Milton, whom he had defended while his life was at stake during the indemnity debates. Unlike his friend he was not implacably opposed to monarchy, and had moreover been encouraged by Charles's promise of 'a liberty to tender consciences' at Breda. Marvell's own religious position has never been clearly defined. While more than sympathetic to dissent, and bitterly opposed both to Catholicism and episcopacy, he seems himself to have been a conforming Anglican. But a failed attempt in November to bring in a bill for a modified episcopacy, on which he acted as teller for the ayes, was an early indication of how little headway comprehension was to make in the Restoration settlement. 
Marvell's continued exertions on Hull's behalf after the December dissolution were rewarded by re-election in April 1661. In the Cavalier or Pensionary Parliament he retained his seat for all but the sixteenth and last session, receiving from the borough a salary of 6's'. 8died per day while the house sat, besides expenses and occasional barrels of ale. He proved an able and attentive constituency member, his zeal reflected in the self-mocking description of how '
The portly 'burgess', through the Weather hot, 

Does for his Corporation sweat and trot 
('Last Instructions', ll. 831-2)' and in the newsletters that he addressed to 'my very worthy friends'. Almost 300 of these, written between November 1660 and his death, still survive, though there are considerable gaps in the series. In the general dearth of parliamentary reportage at this period they provide a useful firsthand account of public business. Though more impersonal than might be wished -- in October 1675 he remarked that 'I am naturally and now more by my Age inclined to keep my thoughts private' ('Poems', 2.166) -- they do not lack an occasional dry wit. In the Commons he proved by the standards of the day moderately active, attending regularly when not absent abroad and acting as teller in eight divisions. He was named to 120 committees, though evidence of his work there is largely confined to examination of an informant in December 1666 as to the causes of the great fire. Records survive of his speaking on fourteen occasions only, and as late as 1677 he was apologizing for lack of practice (Grey, 4.330). His effectiveness as a politician was doubtless hampered by the fact that he 'had not a generall acquaintance' ('Brief Lives', 2.54). Cooke alleges affiliations with two leading opposition figures, Prince Rupert, whose 'Tutor' in political matters he was said to be, and William Cavendish, later first duke of Devonshire ('Works', ed. Cooke, 1.10-11). His natural loyalties lay with the country party, that: '

'Gross' of 'English Gentry', nobly born, 

Of clear 'Estates', and to no Faction sworn 
('Last Instructions', ll. 285-306)' but his tendency to act according to his own lights made him difficult to manage. Moreover his behaviour in the house could be unruly; in March 1662 he was forced to apologize for having provoked Thomas Clifford into striking him. 
The extent of Marvell's involvement in Hull's affairs is also witnessed by sixty-nine surviving letters to the Trinity House there, two-thirds of which relate to a plan for a lighthouse at Spurn Head. On 8 May 1662 he advised the wardens that 'by the interest of some persons too potent for me to refuse... I am obliged to go beyond sea' ('Poems', 2.250). Promoting this unstated errand was a former member of Cromwell's bodyguard, Charles Howard, newly created earl of Carlisle, whose brother-in-law Sir George Downing was playing host to Marvell at The Hague by 24 May. When an extension of his stay over the following winter led Lord Bellasis, the royalist steward of Hull, to urge his replacement in parliament, he abandoned his 'private concernments' and was back in his seat by 2 April. But on 20 July, one week before the house rose, he wrote again of an immediate departure, with leave from the house and 'his Majestyes good liking', as secretary to Carlisle's embassy to the northern powers (ibid., 2.254). The main purpose was to secure the restoration of privileges revoked from English merchants at Archangel by Tsar Alexis following the execution of Charles I. An account that was published later by Marvell's assistant Guy de Miege describes how, after landing at Archangel in August, they were delayed for three months at Vologda before taking sledge to Moscow. Exception taken to a Latin form of address used by Marvell of Alexis at an audience in February 1664 drew from him a learned but ultimately unsuccessful defence. In June the embassy, with some bitterness at Carlisle's returning the tsar's gifts, left for audiences with the kings of Sweden (14 September) and Denmark (30 October) in an equally unproductive attempt to secure backing for war with the Dutch. Near Hamburg, in December, Marvell threatened an unco-operative waggoner with his pistol and had to be rescued from a 'barbarous rout', sparking off a general skirmish (Miege, 430-31). After an almost continuous absence of two and a half years he returned to the house a month before it rose in March 1665. 
On 4 March 1665 Charles declared war on the Dutch. The progress of the long campaign was followed in a series of satirical poems that took their rise from Waller's panegyric 'Instructions to a Painter' on the duke of York's leadership in the battle off Lowestoft in June 1665. Recent editorial opinion inclines to Marvell as the author of the 'Second' and 'Third Advice' (April and October 1666), as he was of the later and more ambitious 'Last Instructions to a Painter' (September 1667). From his seat in parliament he was well placed to observe political developments, while his maritime expertise was to be acknowledged by his election in May 1674 as an elder brother of the Deptford Trinity House, of which in the year of his death he rose to be younger warden. In 'Last Instructions' the debates of October 1666 on a measure to impose a general excise are made the occasion for a mock-heroic catalogue of members (ll. 121-334); a section describing the progress of Dutch warships unopposed up the Thames almost to the heart of the capital (ll. 523-760) leads to an attack on administrative failures. Marvell derides attempts to shuffle the blame onto the navy commissioner Peter Pett (ll. 765-90), whom he defended in the house also, being named (17 October) to the committee to consider the conduct of the war and the sale of Dunkirk. 
During Marvell's absence abroad the predominantly Anglican and loyalist parliament had repealed the 'Triennial Act' and passed a law against conventicles, thus concluding the series of measures that became known as the Clarendon code. Whatever his views on the administration, and despite having given voice to popular suspicions of misappropriation in 'Clarindon's house-warming' (July), Marvell now argued against shaming the chancellor in a vote to the king and opposed precipitate action to impeach him on the ground of his 'not being likely to ride away post' (Grey, 1.14). In November his call for substantiation of Clarendon's alleged remark regarding Charles's unfitness to govern drew his fellow poets Denham to testify to it and Waller to call for its retention in the articles (ibid., 1.36-7). 
In February 1668 Marvell attacked the new chief minister, Arlington, 'somewhat transportedly', for buying his place and title, but when asked to elaborate said that the matter 'was so plain, it needed it not' (Grey, 1.70). Arlington was instrumental in the same month in concluding with the Netherlands and Sweden a triple alliance for consolidation of protestant liberties, but any hopes that it raised in Marvell were dispelled over the next two years by the increasingly pro-French policies of king and government. Marvell's private letters testify to a growing fear of civil and religious absolutism, and his anger at the treatment of protestant dissenters. On 21 March 1670 he sent his nephew William Popple a bleak account of affairs ('Poems', 2.315), deploring recent enlargements of royal authority, particularly in the establishment of a Scottish militia and in the renewal of the bill against nonconformist conventicles, which he had opposed in the house, and now described as 'the Quintessence of arbitrary Malice'. Altogether, he concluded, no king since the conquest was 'so absolutely powerful at Home', and the diminution of Stuart powers now became one of his main concerns. His disillusion with Charles sought expression in satirical ballads, the jocular manner of 'The King's Vows' (early 1670) eventually giving way to the darker tone of 'Upon his Majesty's being Made Free of the City' (December 1674). 'The Loyal Scott' (1669/70) redeploys the Douglas episode from 'Last Instructions' as part of a bitter attack on Episcopal opposition to union with Scotland. 
A year later, when the prorogation of parliament threatened his livelihood, Marvell entertained hopes of some unspecified 'honest fair Employment into 'Ireland'' ('Poems', 2.323). A report of 1671 appears to link him, in a faction formed against Ormond by Buckingham, with Thomas Blood, whose attempt on the crown jewels in May gave Marvell the cue for a sharp epigram on clerical cruelty. Despite his manifest patriotism and his complaining that summer of how we 'truckle to 'France' in all Things' (ibid., 2.325), he drafted five Latin distichs in response to Colbert's prize competition for an inscription for the pediment of the Louvre. By Christmas he was at Winchendon, a seat of the prominent dissenter Philip, fourth Lord Wharton, acting as moderator in the search for a bride for his eldest son. They shared an interest in poetry, and in April 1667, 'having nothing of mine own to deserve your acceptance', he had sent Wharton Simon Ford's Latin and English verses on the great fire. 
In the following autumn there appeared the first part of the work by which Marvell was best-known in his own time and for long after: 'The Rehearsal Transpros'd'. Its target was Samuel Parker, later bishop of Oxford, whom Marvell had first met in Milton's house in 1662-3, before the zealous young dissenter had conformed, risen in the church, and turned on his former fellows. By 1670 Parker was upholding the power of the civil authority over religious externals in 'A Discourse of Ecclesiastical Polity', but it was the attack on toleration of nonconformity that he prefaced to Bramhall's 'Vindication' (September 1672) that finally provoked Marvell to respond. The title of his anonymously published reply, and the name Bayes which he uses to mock his opponent, derive from Buckingham's satirical play 'The Rehearsal', where the protagonist -- a caricature of Dryden to which Marvell was to return in his prefatory verses to the second edition of 'Paradise Lost' -- defines his practice of turning prose into verse as 'transversing'. 
Marvell's tract pursues no coherent line of argument but is framed in what Wood called 'the then, but newly, refin'd art of sportive and jeering bufoonery' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.231). Ill-advised innuendos about the love life of 'Mr Bayes' were repaid with interest by the writers of five printed replies and a scurrilous verse-lampoon entitled 'A love letter to the author of the RT' who accused Marvell of sodomy and impotence, alleging that he had been surgically castrated. A second issue was allowed to pass by the censor, L'Estrange, with only slight changes, after the king read it and let it be known that 'Parker has done him wrong, and this man has done him Right' (Leics. RO, Finch MSS, DG7, box 4985) over the recent declaration of religious indulgence (March 1672). The forced withdrawal of this hasty measure twelve months later aided Parker in his long 'Reproof', to which Marvell replied with a second part (1673), issued under his own name. This defiantly quotes on its title-page a threat made against his life if he should publish any further 'Lie or Libel' against his opponent. The verdict of contemporaries was that the 'victory lay on Marvell's side' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.231), and a generation later Swift, hailing him as an innovative genius, remarked that 'we still read 'Marvel's' Answer to 'Parker' with Pleasure' ('Apology' to 'Tale of a Tub', 1710). 
In March 1672 Charles II joined Louis XIV in a third war against the Dutch. Marvell, who was ultimately to play a part in framing the parliamentary address for peace, seems to have been active in a Dutch fifth column headed by Peter Du Moulin and including John Ayloff. Spies of Secretary Williamson reported a brief conference early in 1674 between William of Orange and a member of parliament, 'a thicke short man... much like Mervell' who went under the name of Mr George, and, in June, giving his codename as Mr Thomas, alleged that a difference of opinion with his fellows had led to his retiring into the country (Hayley, 57-8, 62-3). If so, his place of retreat may have been the Highgate property, known much later as Marvell's Cottage, where in the next summer he resolved to 'sequester my self one whole day' ('Poems', 2.341). In a clever and libellous mock speech ('Poems on Affairs of State', 1704, vol. 3) composed perhaps as early as the following February, he anticipated Charles's inevitable plea for supply at the reassembly of parliament on 13 April. Its exposure of the king's wayward inclinations is matched in a series of related verse-satires comprising 'The statue in Stocks-Market' (after October 1674), 'The Statue at Charing Cross' (July 1675), and 'A Dialogue between the Two Horses' (late 1675), the attribution of which to Marvell has sometimes been disputed. During the same session he acted as teller for the yeas in a failed bill to prevent MPs accepting public offices, a device much used by Lord Treasurer Danby to buy off opposition, as satirized that year in 'The Chequer Inn'. It was no small part of the emerging Marvell legend that the alleged royal bribe offered to him in his modest lodging in Maiden Lane by Danby himself should have been firmly rejected ('Works', ed. Cooke, 1.11-14). Before the house rose he was named to the committee on the bill to disable Catholics from sitting in parliament and appointed a commissioner for recusancy in his native Yorkshire. 
During the fifteen-month prorogation that followed, Marvell took it on himself to defend the views of an Anglican dignitary while continuing his attack on episcopacy. Herbert Croft, bishop of Hereford, had argued in 'The Naked Truth' (1675) for an accommodation with the nonconformists and had been taken to task by Francis Turner in 'Animadversions' (1676), written in an attempt at bantering humour. Marvell's 'Mr. Smirke, or, The Divine in Mode' (May 1676), published under the pseudonym Andreas Rivetus junior -- the borrowed identity makes a convenient anagram of 'res nuda veritas' ('naked truth') -- mocks Turner in the character of Lady Bigot's 'pretty spruce' chaplain in George Etherege's 'Man of Mode'. Croft had drawn on precedents from the primitive church; Marvell followed him in 'A Short Historical Essay, Concerning General Councils', which he appended to the tract, and in which he explored the origins of disputes between rival sects in the third century, concluding that 'the true and single cause then was the Bishops' ('Mr. Smirke', 71). Government attempts at prosecution failed, though Nathaniel Ponder suffered a brief imprisonment for publishing the work without licence. On 27 March 1677 Marvell made his longest recorded speech (Grey, 4.321-5), opposing a bill for educating royal children in the protestant faith that had been inspired by the prospect of the duke of York's succession to the throne. Faced with a difficult choice, he concluded that whether the bill would 'prevent Popery, or not' it would 'secure the promotions of the Bishops'. Two days later a friendly tussle with Sir Philip Harcourt was drawn to the attention of the house by the speaker and debated; despite an initial smart rejoinder Marvell submitted himself to censure. 
In September, Marvell wrote 'an excellent epitaph', now lost, on James Harrington, but suppressed it because it 'would have given offence' ('Brief Lives', 1.293), perhaps because of his increasing apprehension of personal danger. Early in the previous year had occurred the collapse of a banking partnership set up by a group of London merchants that included two of his distant relatives, Edward Nelthorpe and Richard Thompson. After commissions of bankruptcy were issued against them they went into hiding in July 1677 in a house in St Giles-in-the-Fields that Marvell had taken for the purpose. An appeal for their discovery was published in the 'London Gazette' for 28-31 January 1678, and Marvell himself was named to a committee to consider their case. Not content with harbouring fugitives, he risked prosecution with a work written largely in the autumn and given the finishing touches in December 1677. 'An Account of the Growth of Popery and Arbitrary Government' marks Marvell's final abandonment of any hopes that he had in Charles II. It opens with the bold contention that 'There has now for diverse Years, a design been carried on, to change the Lawfull Government of 'England' into an Absolute Tyrrany, and to convert the established Protestant Religion into down-right Popery.' The stages of this alleged conspiracy are traced from the triple alliance to Charles's adjournment of parliament in July 1677, the declaration of indulgence is presented as a Catholic subterfuge, and the heroes are Buckingham, Wharton, and the two other lords committed in February 1677 for questioning the legality of the recent prorogation. The tract, timed to appear before the next session of parliament in April 1678, alarmed the government, which in the 'Gazette' for 21 February - 5 March offered $50 for the discovery of author and publisher. Marvell himself told Popple in June that 'great Rewards have been offered in private', but affected to make light of the matter ('Poems', 2.357). L'Estrange replied from a tory perspective in 'An Account of the Growth of Knavery' (1678), and much later a hostile critique and scurrilous personal attack appeared in Parker's posthumous 'History of his Own Time' (1727, 335-49). 
For his last published work Marvell intervened in a theological dispute between two nonconformist ministers. 'Remarks upon a Late Disingenuous Discourse', issued anonymously under an imprimatur dated 17 April 1678, defends views on a question framed by Robert Boyle that had been expressed in John Howe's 'Reconcileableness of God's Prescience' against the Calvinist interpretation offered by Thomas Danson in 'De causa dei'. Following a visit to Hull in July 'about the Towns affaires' Marvell contracted the tertian ague which brought about his end on 16 August 1678, in the rented property on the north side of Great Russell Street, a few yards to the west of the present British Museum. A professional report alleged medical incompetence, and concluded that an ounce of quinine might have saved him. Two days later he was buried under a window in the south aisle of the old church of St Giles-in-the-Fields. 
No will was found, and, though Marvell is said to have owned a house in Hull, Thompson's mention of a 'small paternal estate' remains unverified ('Works', ed. Thompson, 3.480). But a surprising light was thrown on Marvell's last years by a series of chancery suits now initiated by the third member of the failed banking partnership. John Farrington, desperate to release hidden assets, searched the Maiden Lane lodgings soon after in the vain hope of recovering a bond for $500 formerly made out to Marvell by Nelthorpe, who himself died one month later. During his search he is said to have removed 'trunks bonds bills & other goods', leaving only 'a few Books & papers of a small value' (Tupper, 374 n. 42). Then, having secured the administration of Nelthorpe's affairs, he enlisted Marvell's eldest sister, Anne Blaydes, to forestall any similar attempt on the poet's estate. But in September 1680 Marvell's housekeeper, Mary Palmer, laid claim to be his widow and by the following March had been granted administration jointly with her lawyer, one of his creditors. In February 1682 Farrington challenged the marriage on the grounds that it was unsuspected even by Marvell's close friends, and that the widow of a poor tennis-court keeper -- one Thomas Palmer -- was no fit match for a learned man and an MP. In reply (7 April) she asserted that the ceremony had taken place 'on or about' 13 May 1667 at Holy Trinity, Little Minories, as 'by the Register Book... may appeare'; moreover, 'the difference in their Conditions... might be (as this Defendt believes it was) One reason why the said Mr Marvell was pleased to have the Marriage kept private' (Tupper, 380). Holy Trinity was one of only two London churches that were licensed to celebrate clandestine marriages, the number there rising from over 500 in 1661 to almost 1000 in 1677. Attempts were periodically made to suppress them, and early in 1678 Marvell and his colleagues had to swear that they had not stolen the engrossed bill to abolish this popular practice ('Poems', 2.219). Although the relevant Holy Trinity register is now missing, there is no reason to doubt that it would have been available to the court authorities of the time. It may be significant that in the year of their marriage a bookseller of the same name as Mary's son, Thomas Palmer, who traded in Westminster Hall, was pilloried for selling 'Directions to a Painter' ('CSP dom.', '1665-6', 159), and again in March 1671 for 'Advice to a Painter' ('Poems', 1.376). 
After Marvell's death a collection of his 'Miscellaneous Poems' was issued in 1681 by Robert Boulter, one of the original publishers of 'Paradise Lost', who that summer was to be arrested for predicting the imminent fall of the monarchy. The prefatory note, dated 15 October 1680 and signed 'Mary Marvell', describes them as being 'Printed according to the exact Copies of my late dear Husband, under his own Hand-Writing'. It served to authenticate the contents for a general readership, to whom Marvell's poetic talents were known, if at all, from his commendatory verses to the second edition (1674) of Milton's epic, and perhaps from some satires. The folio volume includes religio-philosophical dialogues; verses on the pleasures (both sensuous and spiritual) of the retired life in pastoral surroundings; poems that depict innocence on the verge of sexual maturity; love lyrics, from the classic persuasion of 'To his Coy Mistress' to the dark complaint of 'The Unfortunate Lover'; and some Latin epigrams and epitaphs. Almost the only public response to such late-appearing metaphysical poems is Wood's grudging statement that the volume was 'cried up as excellent' by those of the author's own persuasion (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.232). 
Failure of nerve during a temporary crisis in whig fortunes had led to excision of the three Cromwell pieces before sale from almost all known copies of the work. It is scarcely surprising therefore that the collection did not include any of the political satires that were to be claimed for Marvell in anthologies printed after the revolution of 1688, from 'A Collection of the Newest... Poems... Against Popery' (1689) to successive editions of 'Poems on Affairs of State' (1697-1704). Definitive authentication, hampered by lack of demonstrably authorial texts and a marked disparity in style from Marvell's other poems, is further hindered by the tendency for a topical genre or subject to attract a number of writers. But to judge from the commonly accepted pieces, Parker's sneering allusion to Marvell's 'proper trade of Lampoons and Ballads' ('Reproof', 526) was not wholly undeserved, for though they address serious issues, they do so chiefly through burlesque and ridicule. Marvell himself told Aubrey that the earl of Rochester was 'the only man in England that had the true veine of Satyre' ('Brief Lives', 2.54, 304). 
Aubrey, who knew Marvell personally in the 1670s, praised him as 'an excellent poet in Latin or English: for Latin verses there was no man would come into competition with him', recalling that he 'kept bottles of wine at his lodgeings... to refresh his spirits, and exalt his Muse'. Yet he was: 'in his conversation very modest and of very few words. Though he loved wine he would never drink hard in company: and was wont to say, 'that he would not play the good-fellow in any mans company in whose hands he would not trust his life.'
' In appearance he was 'of a middling stature, pretty strong sett, roundish faced, cherry cheek't, hazell eie, browne haire' ('Brief Lives', 2.53), a description borne out in the oil portrait, executed about 1655-60 by an unidentified artist, that was presented by Marvell's grandnephew Robert Nettleton in 1764 to the British Museum and is now in the National Portrait Gallery. A line engraving of a related type, but with image reversed, appears as frontispiece to 'Miscellaneous Poems', and a smaller version was executed by John Clark for Cooke's edition of 1726. Another oil, in Hull City Art Gallery, which belonged to Ralph Thoresby and later to Thomas Hollis, bears an inscription that gives the sitter's age as forty-two; it was engraved by Cipriani for Hollis (1760) and by Basire for Thompson's edition (1776). Vertue attributed to Lely a now unlocated portrait that belonged before 1726 to the Hon. Maurice Ashley, Marvell's nephew by marriage (BL, Add. MS 23070, fol. 22'v'). 
In September 1678 Hull voted $50 for Marvell's funeral expenses and 'to perpetuate his memory by a Grave-stone' (Tupper, 373-4 n. 42), but the rector is said to have objected. Mary was buried in St Giles's on 24 November 1687, under the surname of her first husband. In the next year Popple wrote an epitaph, of which a slightly altered version was placed on a tablet set up in the new church in 1764 by Nettleton. Verse elegies survive by John Ayloffe ('Poems on Affairs of State', 1697, 160-61) and two anonymous admirers (ibid., 122-3, and Davies). Marvell's posthumous reputation as a proto-whig defender of constitutional liberties and a 'sincere and daring Patriot' encouraged Thomas Cooke in 1726 to reprint the lyrics alongside the satires in a collection grandly entitled 'The Works of Andrew Marvell Esq.' A brief biography was prefixed, and some private letters were supplied by 'the Ladys his Nieces' (vol. 1, p. x), daughters of William Popple. Fifty years later the same spirit led Captain Edward Thompson, a native of Hull, to publish a luxurious folio edition to which Burke and Wilkes subscribed, and Thomas Hollis and T. J. Mathias contributed material. Here the expurgated Cromwell poems were first brought to public notice. 
Over the next hundred years Marvell's poetry was increasingly praised by poets and anthologists in Britain and America, earning pride of place in Alexander Grosart's comprehensive edition of the 'Complete Works' in 1872. T. S. Eliot's influential essay for the Hull tercentenary volume of 1921 pointed the way to a major critical reassessment that was facilitated by H. M. Margoliouth's 1927 Oxford edition of the 'Poems and Letters' and Pierre Legouis's biographical and critical study of 1928, 'Andre Marvell'. Since then the ambiguity of Marvell's poetry and the elusiveness of his personality have helped to make him of all seventeenth-century lyrists the subject of the most extensive exegesis. 


@@@@@


doc= 18243


Marvin, Charles Thomas (1854-1890), writer on Russia, was born on 10 June 1854 at Plumstead, Kent, the son of Charles Woodward Marvin, draughtsman, and his wife, Catherine Martha, 'nee' Law. He was employed in a warehouse in Watling Street, London, in 1868. At the age of sixteen he went to Russia to join his father, who was assistant manager of an engineering works on the Neva. He remained there until 1875, and acquired a good knowledge of the language. For eighteen months he was the correspondent of 'The Globe and Traveller' at St Petersburg. Returning to London in 1875 Marvin passed the civil service examination, and in January 1876 was appointed a temporary writer in the custom house. He was also transferred for a short time to the Inland Revenue department, and to the Post Office. 
On 16 July 1877 Marvin entered the Foreign Office, and here, although only a writer, he was, on 29 May 1878, entrusted to make a copy of a secret treaty with Russia, the 'Project de memorandum'. The same evening he supplied 'The Globe and Traveller', from memory, with a summary of the document. On 1 June Lord Salisbury, in the House of Lords, claimed that this summary was 'wholly unworthy of their lordships' confidence'. On 14 June 'The Globe and Traveller' printed the complete text of the treaty from Marvin's extremely retentive memory. On 26 June he was arrested, but discharged on 16 July as he had not committed an illegal act. In 1878 he published 'Our public offices, embodying an account of the disclosure of the Anglo-Russian agreement, and the unrevealed secret treaty of 31 May, 1878'. During the Russo-Turkish War in 1878 he contributed to twenty publications. He married, on 5 June 1879, Mary Ann Georgina, daughter of George Woodward Marvin, captain in the Royal Horse Artillery. 
Marvin published prolifically during the 1880s. In 1880 his first book on the Russo-Indian question, 'The Eye-Witnesses' Account of the Disastrous Campaign Against the Akhal Tekke Turcomans', appeared; it was adopted by the Russian government for military libraries, and commended by General Skobelev. In 1881 he printed 'Merv the Queen of the World and the Scourge of the Man-Stealing Turcomans', in which he predicted that the next Russian advance would be pushed to Panjdeh. In 1882 he was sent to Russia by Joseph Cowen, the radical politician and journalist, to interview the leading generals and statesmen on the Russo-Indian question. On his return he wrote 'The Russian advance towards India: conversations with Skobeleff, Ignatieff, and other Russian generals and statesmen on the central Asian question'. The following year he travelled to the Caucasus, and published in 1884 an account of his exploration of the Russian oil-producing districts, under the title 'The Region of the Eternal Fire'. The most popular of his works was, however, 'The Russians at the Gates of Herat' (1885), a book of 200 pages, written and published within a week, which sold 65,000 copies. 
Marvin died at Grosvenor House, Heavitree Road, Plumstead Common, Kent, on 4 December 1890, and was buried in Plumstead new cemetery on 10 December. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 18244


Marwood, William (bap. 1818, d. 1883), public executioner, was baptized at Goulceby, Horncastle, Lincolnshire, on 8 November 1818, the son of William Marwood, cordwainer, and his wife, Elizabeth, and followed his father into the shoemaking trade. He was married, first, to Jessie (1805/6-1867), and was a master cordwainer at Bolingbroke, Lincolnshire, before opening in 1855 the shop at Church Lane, Horncastle, where he made and sold shoes. He was also a Methodist preacher in Horncastle. Shortly after the death of his first wife he married, on 13 October 1867, Ellen Andrews (1822/3-1883), a widow, the daughter of John Langdale, hatter. They lived at Foundry Street, Horncastle. Neither marriage produced children. 
Becoming interested in executions, Marwood suggested that, for reasons of humanity, criminals ought not to be choked to death. By carefully ascertaining a criminal's weight, and by employing a proportionate length of rope, he showed that the descent of the body into the pit beneath the scaffold would instantaneously dislocate the vertebrae, and thus cause immediate death. He became a pupil of the executioner William Calcraft and obtained his first engagement as a hangman at Lincoln in 1871; his 'longdrop' system worked with success on that and many subsequent occasions. The sheriffs of London and Middlesex appointed him to succeed Calcraft (of whom Marwood said 'He hanged them -- I executed them') in June 1874, at an annual retainer of $20 and a fee of $10 per execution; as was usual, he was also entitled to the hanging rope and the clothes of his victims. Among the more celebrated criminals whom he put to death were Charles Peace, Percy Lefroy Mapleton, Dr Lamson, Kate Webster, and Henry Wainwright; he also hanged the Phoenix Park murderers in Dublin. Gustave Dore drew Marwood while he was hanging Wainwright on 21 December 1875; it was entitled 'L'execution a Londres'. 
Marwood outlined his methods in a letter reprinted in the 'St Stephen's Review' of 3 November 1883; a pamphlet by D. D. D. of 1883 described a visit to Marwood at Horncastle, concluding that Marwood took great pride in his work, which he regarded as a surgeon might view an operation, and aimed to give value for money to his employers. A 'respectable-looking' man with broad shoulders, short legs, dark curly hair, and side-whiskers, he was said also to have a 'cruel mouth' and one eye half closed. He died of pneumonia and jaundice on 4 September 1883 at Horncastle; he was buried there in the Trinity churchyard two days later. His wife died shortly afterwards. There was brisk competition for the purchase of his effects, his travelling bag fetching $3 and one of his ropes $4 10's'. A wax effigy of Marwood in the act of hanging Charles Peace (with a piece of the original rope) joined Madame Tussaud's chamber of horrors. 


@@@@@


doc= 18245


Mary I (1516-1558), queen of England and Ireland, was born at Greenwich Palace on Monday 18 February 1516. Although she was not the male heir desired by her parents, Henry VIII (1491-1547) and his first wife, Katherine of Aragon (1485-1536), her birth and early survival offered hope that a healthy son would follow. Henry's desire for a male heir dominated Mary's first twenty years. The fear of anarchy caused by a disputed succession was never far from the minds of contemporaries who could well remember the Lancastrian-Yorkist conflicts. The recent troubles over succession, the relative novelty of the Tudor dynasty, contemporary opinion about the nature of women, diplomatic considerations, and the law, directed Henry's actions in regard to his daughter. In spite of elements in her education working to a contrary effect, conventional, conservative attitudes about women affected Mary's entire life. 
Henry and Katherine celebrated Mary's baptism with the pomp and solemnity befitting a royal princess on 20 February in the church of the Observant friars adjoining Greenwich Palace. The important nobility attended: the countess of Surrey carried her to the font assisted by the dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk, while Catherine Courtenay, countess of Devon and daughter of Edward IV, Margaret Pole, countess of Salisbury and daughter of George, duke of Clarence, and the duchess of Norfolk served as her godmothers; the godfather was Cardinal Thomas Wolsey. 
Henry and Katherine gave Mary unusually close attention during her early years because she was the only survivor of Katherine's many pregnancies and because the pretty and precocious child obviously delighted both parents. The women in charge of the infant's household changed frequently in the early years, as Margaret Bryan replaced the first governess, Elizabeth Denton, only to be replaced by a woman of higher social status, the countess of Salisbury, in 1519. Since the countess of Salisbury was too closely connected with the third duke of Buckingham, executed in 1521, Henry wanted the dowager countess of Oxford to take over governance of the household, but when the latter's health prevented such service, he appointed Sir Philip Calthorpe as chamberlain and his wife, Jane, as governess at $40 per year. By 1525 the countess of Salisbury had returned to her post and remained a powerful influence on Mary. From the beginning Catherine, wife of Leonard Pole, served as Mary's nurse; Richard Sydnour, dean of Totnes, filled the office of treasurer, while Henry Rowle became her chaplain and clerk of the closet. One gentlewoman (Alice Baker), four rockers, and a laundress completed the first household. By her third year Mary's household had expanded to include six gentlemen, nine valets, three grooms, one yeoman of the chamber, and twelve grooms of the household, as well as Beatrice ap Rice, the laundress who served Mary for the rest of her life. In these early years no expense was spared: the cost of Mary's household, estimated at $1400, amounted to about 18 per cent of the outlay of the whole royal household. 
The proud parents enjoyed displaying their attractive and gifted child to foreign ambassadors who commented on her pleasing appearance, good health, and precocious behaviour. In February 1518 Sebastian Giustinian, the Venetian ambassador, reported the famous occasion at court when Henry carried the two-year-old Mary in his arms and she, recognizing Friar Dionisio Memo, the organist of St Mark's, Venice, called out 'priest' until he played for her. The incident, which charmed the ambassador, was later interpreted as a harbinger of her staunch Catholicism, but was in fact no more than the action of a happy, confident child. 
While Mary was not the desired male heir, she was still a valuable asset in the dynastic marriage and diplomatic power game that Henry played with the Valois and Habsburgs. Henry and Wolsey used the two-year-old child to seal the new alliance with France and general European peace embodied in the treaty of London of 1518. Mary's espousal to the infant Francois, dauphin of France (1518-1536), took place with great ceremony and celebration at Greenwich on 5 October 1518. Dressed in cloth of gold with a heavily jewelled cap on her head, she received a diamond ring from the dauphin's proxy. However, as the treaty of London began to unravel in the following three years, and as Charles V came into his own as Holy Roman emperor, Henry used Mary to seal a new alliance. The unpublished treaty of Bruges (1521) provided for the future marriage of Mary and Charles, a man sixteen years her senior. The emperor's six-week visit to England in 1522 afforded him some opportunity to observe his six-year-old cousin. At one court occasion Mary demonstrated her social skills by dancing for him. In spite of this successful trip, Henry and Wolsey, wishing in 1524 to neutralize Scotland, now entertained a proposed alliance which included Mary's marriage to the youthful James V. Although no betrothal resulted, this marriage prospect remained a valuable negotiating tool for a year, until Charles V changed the whole European diplomatic configuration by capturing the French king, Francois I, at Pavia. 
When Charles subsequently announced he would marry Isabella, the daughter of the king of Portugal, the English and French responded with a proposed universal peace reinforced by Mary's marriage to either Francois I or his second son, Henri, duc d'Orleans. Many problems arose during subsequent negotiations in 1527, not the least of them Henry's refusal to allow Mary to leave the realm because she was only eleven. To impress the French envoys Mary again demonstrated her skills in language, music, and dancing, but her small stature made them hesitate about the viability of an immediate marriage. They found her 'admirable by reason of her great and uncommon mental endowments; but so thin, sparse, and small as to render it impossible for her to be married for the next three years' ('CSP Venice', '1527-33', 105). 
While all these diplomatic manoeuvres and marriage negotiations provided Henry with a chance to present Mary at elaborate court occasions and gave her high expectations for her future life as a royal consort, they barely interfered with the course of her young life, which revolved around her household. The early records do not show who first taught her to read and write English and Latin, or the other skills compatible with her station such as playing the lute and virginals, singing, dancing, and riding. However, when in 1525 Henry ordered the establishment of a household for her at Ludlow, the schoolmaster he appointed was a noted scholar, Richard Fetherston, who was executed in 1540 for denying the royal supremacy. In 1526 Henry ordered her council to consult on Mary's health and 'virtuous education' at least once a month ('LP Henry VIII', 4/1, no. 2331). As she matured, music played an increasing role in her life and she developed her skill on the lute, virginals, and spinet with the aid of Philip Van Wilder and Paston. However, it was Queen Katherine, who had received a humanist education from her mother, Isabella of Castile, who really took an active interest in her daughter's training and intellectual development. At certain points Katherine herself probably instructed her daughter in Latin, and when they were separated in 1525, she asked to see Mary's Latin exercises. The queen's well-known interest in education inspired Thomas Linacre to write a Latin grammar, 'Rudimenta grammatices', for Mary's use in 1523, and the princess's French tutor Giles Duwes to produce a similar work for that language. 
The celebrated Spanish humanist Juan Luis Vives came to England at Katherine's invitation in 1523, and she commissioned him to write a treatise on the general education of women, 'De institutione feminae Christianae', and an outline of studies for Mary, 'De ratione studii puerilis'. Vives delivered a mixed message, for while he advocated the education of women, an advanced idea at that time, he still saw women as the inferior sex. The list of acceptable reading included scripture, the church fathers, but only a few pagan classics, and no medieval romances, because he believed women could be led astray all too easily. Nevertheless, in 'De ratione studii' Vives recommended that Mary read the dialogues of Plato, works that endow women with the same virtues as men and develop a notion of women as guardians or governors. More's 'Utopia' and Erasmus's 'Institutio Christiani principis' rounded out her educational programme. Thus while Mary received an exceptional humanist education for a woman of her era, marriage negotiations and court appearances reinforced the conventional belief that her true destiny was to be a royal wife and mother, not a ruler in her own right. 
During these early years Mary remained a loved, confident child, but the cloud of the succession gradually overshadowed her life. While it is difficult to date Henry VIII's decision to set Katherine aside, he undoubtedly turned to other women. A year after Katherine's last failed pregnancy in 1518, Henry's mistress Elizabeth Blount gave birth to a healthy boy whom Henry immediately recognized as Henry Fitzroy, but even his elevation to the dukedom of Richmond in 1525 could not solve the question of succession. Katherine's forceful objections to Henry's favourable treatment of his illegitimate son may have forced him to send Mary to govern Wales, the traditional role for the legitimate heir to the throne. Although some contemporaries referred to her as princess of Wales, there is no evidence that Henry formally invested Mary with the office. Nevertheless her father had enhanced her position as heir to the throne while she learned more about her future royal duties, even if these were largely ceremonial. 
Her nineteen-month sojourn at Ludlow and other places in the marches initially insulated Mary from court gossip as Anne Boleyn, who refused to be just another royal mistress, captured Henry's heart. By the time Mary returned to court in 1527, her parents' relationship had altered, and Anne threatened Mary's own status. If the situation at court had not penetrated Mary's consciousness earlier, the increasing tension at court could hardly have escaped the notice of this precocious teenager when she visited her parents on several occasions during the stressful period leading to Katherine's banishment in 1531. While Henry found himself caught between two powerful women, Mary sided with her mother from the beginning and found a rationale for maintaining her devotion to both parents by viewing Anne as a Jezebel, the creator of all her distress. Indeed, Henry saw Mary less and less, as Anne did her best to keep father and daughter apart until she could secure her own position by marrying the king and producing the all-important male heir. At this juncture the psychological toll on Mary began to manifest itself in various physical ailments. After a week's visit with Katherine in May 1531, she could not keep food down for three weeks, and after she was forbidden to see her mother in July, reports of her various illnesses increased. As the separation of mother and daughter continued, Mary's health deteriorated to the point that Henry sent his own physician to her and moved Mary closer to her mother so that Katherine's physician could attend her, but even then she was never allowed the comfort of seeing her mother. 
What Mary endured psychologically and physically before Katherine's banishment from court in 1531 was trivial compared with what followed Henry's marriage to Anne and the birth of their daughter Elizabeth on 7 September 1533. While Henry had risked his throne for yet another girl, he could still hope for a male heir; but Mary, who defied her father and fought the succession of humiliations that followed, risked all with little hope for the future. She had acquired a firm identity as a princess from her early years at court, and when denied that status she acted every inch the Tudor. From the outset she refused to relinquish the dignity of princess, of which she was deprived after Henry announced his marriage to Anne in April 1533. Her very serious illness that summer demonstrated the personal cost of defying her father. After Elizabeth's birth, the council again ordered Mary to stop calling herself princess. She continued to refuse her demotion to the status of 'lady'. Henry, enraged by what he repeatedly called her Spanish stubbornness, failed to recognize that she was as obstinate as he. In December, intent on being obeyed at any cost, Henry sent the duke of Norfolk to Newhall to break up Mary's household and transfer her to Hatfield, where the hated Boleyns had charge of Princess Elizabeth. Mary stoutly defended the validity of her title to Norfolk, but complied after drafting a written protest to her father. 
At Hatfield the situation was intolerable not only because she had been deprived of all but two servants, but also because Lady Shelton, Anne's aunt who governed the household, had been given permission to treat her harshly, even beat her, if she continued to resist the king's commands. Henry tried to increase the pressure when he visited Hatfield in early 1534, making his seeing Mary conditional on her renunciation of her title. Mary again resisted, but counting correctly on her father's love, the eighteen-year-old dramatically presented herself 'on a terrace at the top of the house' on her knees with her hands joined ('LP Henry VIII', 7, no. 83). Henry acknowledged her and his train followed suit. Nevertheless, although Mary could still exploit her father's affection, she could not alter the course of events caused by Henry's marriage to Anne. The 'Succession Act' of March 1534 formally declared Mary illegitimate, elevated Anne's children as the king's heirs, and demanded an oath to that succession. While there is no evidence that either Katherine or Mary was asked to swear the oath at this stage, they were formally presented with the statute and their answer requested, so both courted danger by further defiance. 
No matter the psychological or physical cost to herself, Mary maintained her principles as long as possible, showing remarkable courage in the face of tremendous pressure as she refused to swear the oath of supremacy and continued to defend her title and precedence over Elizabeth. Caught between her mother's advice to obey Henry while maintaining her titles, and her father's use of isolation to break her resolve, she learned the art of resistance. Although Mary occasionally glimpsed the support that she and her mother commanded when she was moved from one residence to another, Henry increasingly deprived her of friendly visitors and consolation. The danger to Mary increased as she was gradually separated from her mother, friends, and trusted servants until the emperor's ambassador, Eustache Chapuys, became her only adviser and intercessor at court. Even his access was curtailed. In the absence of decisive action from Charles V, Chapuys urged caution and painted a graphic picture of the dangers of resistance. 
Such a situation required considerable political wisdom on the part of an isolated young woman and Mary did her best to play on court sympathies when she could. At one time she forced Elizabeth's servants to remove her from a litter, and another time she arrived at Greenwich before her sister. But, when rumours circulated in 1535 that Anne meant to have Mary murdered, an emotionally exhausted Mary begged Chapuys to arrange her escape to the continent. Before any viable escape plan could be developed she fell ill at Greenwich. She was seriously ill at least twice more that year, and court physicians acknowledged the emotional component of her physical problems when they attributed her state to grief and despair. The effect of these events on Mary's further development as an adult is impossible to calculate. She had learned valuable lessons of resistance, but this education did not provide her with the critical skills she would later need to be an astute political leader. 
The year 1536 began with the most painful events of Mary's young life, but ended with a reversal of fortune. Her mother's death on 7 January 1536 was an incalculable loss and Mary's grief was profound. Katherine's death exposed Mary to even greater danger, but by April Anne Boleyn's life was at risk and her execution on 19 May opened the way for Mary's reconciliation with her father. Henry demanded a very high price for that reconciliation: nothing less than complete submission, the destruction of Mary's conscience and will. She held out for as long as possible, telling Henry she would submit to him 'in all things next to God', and playing on her gender and Henry's affection asked her father to consider that 'I am but a woman, and your child' ('LP Henry VIII', 10, no. 1022). Finally Cromwell and Henry convinced Chapuys, and through him Mary, that she either had to accept the invalidity of her mother's marriage and the supremacy or she would follow others to the scaffold. Deprived of her mother's support, faced with the arrest of her friends at court (Sir Anthony Browne, Sir Francis Bryan, and Lady Hussey), and under the cruel pressure exerted by her father, Mary capitulated on 22 June. About two weeks later Henry and his new queen, Jane Seymour, visited her at Hunsdon. The subsequent re-establishment of Mary's household and new talk of her marriage prospects signalled her rehabilitation. While her household was not as large and grand as before, some of her loyal servants were restored to her side. As the year drew to a close Mary spent more time at court. Her relationship with Queen Jane was amicable, and as she became reacquainted with her father she probably acquired a better understanding of him. He did nothing, however, to alter the 'Succession Act' and nothing could erase her memories and psychological scars. 
Mary reacted with relief to the birth of Prince Edward in autumn 1537. As the long-desired male heir naturally occupied the centre of attention, Mary happily accepted the decline in her political importance. She served as godmother at Edward's baptism, and then settled into a life as a member of the royal family. Her privy purse expenses show she now moved freely about the countryside and court. Jane the fool, music, minstrels, greyhounds, betting on card games, and purchases of jewellery became a normal part of her entertainment. While fewer illnesses were reported, her childhood health never returned. From her rehabilitation in 1536 until the end of Henry's reign marriage proposals and negotiations continued. Some proposals were serious adjuncts to Valois-Habsburg diplomacy, while some were court rumours about a woman whose unwed status was somewhat anomalous. 
Henry's refusal to legitimate Mary or to determine her place in the succession until 1543 precluded any serious negotiations. No one dared advance any internal candidate for her hand, and in 1542 Mary described herself as the 'unhappiest woman in Christendom', indicating her understanding of her rightful destiny as a royal consort ('LP Henry VIII', 17, no. 371). 
Even though Mary now lived a life more in keeping with her status as the king's unmarried daughter, danger and sadness were never far away. Jane Seymour's death represented another blow as Mary entered her twenties. Her relations with the king's third wife had always been good and Mary's grief prevented the full performance of her duties as chief mourner at the late queen's obsequies. Then late in 1538 Mary's closeness to the Pole family proved risky. Goaded by his dislike of Cardinal Reginald Pole, Henry attacked the whole family, including the countess of Salisbury, who had contributed so much to Mary's happy childhood years and who had staunchly supported Mary and her mother in the Boleyn era. Cromwell ominously warned Mary not to allow strangers in her household. Henry's marriage to Anne of Cleves was too brief to alter Mary's circumstances, but after Henry married Katherine Howard in 1540, Mary frequently resided on the queen's side of court, even though the two women were not particularly friendly. When Katherine was arrested and her household dissolved late in 1541, Henry dispatched Mary to Prince Edward's household. She had another serious illness in May 1542 with a strange fever and heart palpitations, but by Christmas she was back at court 'with a great number of ladies' and there she remained for a number of months ('LP Henry VIII', 17, no. 1212). One of those ladies, a new addition to Mary's household, Katherine Parr, attracted Henry's attention, and in the following July of 1543 Mary with only seventeen others witnessed Henry's last marriage ceremony. 
The next three years were the most tranquil and enjoyable of Mary's adult life. Her portrait, painted by Master John in 1544, shows a sombre but serene woman who is still young and attractive. She and Katherine became close and for the remainder of her father's reign Mary seems to have been based at court. Separated in age by only four years, the two women enjoyed a love of fashion, and having both received humanist educations, they shared intellectual interests as well. When Katherine commissioned a new translation of Erasmus's 'Paraphrases on the New Testament', Mary worked on the 'Book of St John' until illness forced her to turn it over to Francis Mallet, who had recently left Katherine's employ to become one of Mary's chaplains. Friendship and a shared interest in humanist studies also bridged the gap between their divergent religious views. Mary had accepted her father's ecclesiastical settlement in 1536, but her attachment to the Catholic faith, while strong, was a conventional one tempered by humanist criticism. She practised her faith privately and although she gave alms generously, she had never indulged in public exercises of piety such as the visitation of shrines and pilgrimage sites. Her open, even frivolous, enjoyment of court life attracted her young brother's critical comment in a letter to Katherine. He asked that Mary 'attend no longer to foreign dances and merriments' because it was not becoming a 'Christian princess' ('LP Henry VIII', 21/1, no. 802). Although this comment was probably only a schoolboy's exercise, it foreshadowed the more sombre life that awaited Mary when her brother became king. 
When Henry VIII died, on 28 January 1547, the men at court kept Mary and Katherine in the dark as the new king's uncle, Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford but soon to be duke of Somerset, and his allies took political control. Mary's relationship with the Seymours had been cordial, and even though the Habsburgs considered Mary the only legitimate heir, Somerset had little fear on that score because Mary genuinely loved her brother, and since 1537 had expressed her relief that there was a male heir to the throne. She continued to live in the dowager queen's household until April 1547, and only gradually learned that Henry's will had reaffirmed her place in the order of succession and endowed her with substantial estates in East Anglia. She was given some of her own favourite residences such as Hunsdon and Newhall, as well as substantial properties recently forfeited by the Howards, along with that family's politically important affinity in East Anglia. Mary was now able to develop her own following for the first time, and she used the opportunity to sustain resistance to further religious change. As Edward's government shifted its focus from the Henrician concentration on papal power, purgatory, and relics to central theological ideas like the nature of the mass, Mary increasingly defended her father's settlement and made her religious observance more obvious. Throughout Edward's reign she held fast to the position that her father's religious settlement should stand until her brother reached his majority and in so doing she became the focus of hope for religious conservatives. 
Mary initially protested against religious change in autumn 1547 when she wrote to Somerset about the first set of royal injunctions. Somerset boldly reminded her that she had seen the light about papal authority in 1536, and suggested that she needed further instruction now. Mary responded with silence until 1549, when the 'Act of Uniformity' drew a line which she refused to cross and prompted her to resist Somerset's religious policy. By having mass celebrated with great ceremony at Kenninghall, Mary not only signalled her opposition to religious legislation during Edward's minority but also defied his authority as king. The council advised her to conform. Mary, however, answered 'I have offended no law unless it be a late law of your own making for altering of matters of religion, which in my conscience, is not worthy to have the name of law' ('Acts and Monuments', 6.7). The council, naturally disturbed by this attitude toward the king and parliament, summoned three of Mary's household servants, Robert Rochester, Sir Francis Englefield, and her chaplain John Hopton, in an effort to influence her. Mary's assertion of conscience was similar to her claims in 1536, but in this case Mary was no longer a mere girl of twenty, she was a 33-year-old landed magnate with a following of her own and the support of Charles V, who promptly asked the council to provide a written statement of her exemption from the 'Act of Uniformity'. A public dispensation such as Charles desired was out of the question during the rebellious summer of 1549, so the council offered a compromise: Mary could hear mass privately until the king came of age. This compromise on the eucharist failed to work, because Mary persisted in ignoring the difference between public and private affairs, and in any case the political situation changed in the autumn of 1549. 
In September and October 1549 John Dudley, earl of Warwick, skilfully allied with conservative councillors and others to oust Somerset. Although there is evidence that Mary was approached about the possibility of a regency, she played no part in this political coup, and Warwick, having secured his position, turned on the conservatives. He then promoted further religious change, setting the stage for a showdown with Mary. By providing mass in the 'very public privacy' of her household for anyone who came, the princess was clearly abusing the council's spirit of compromise (Loades, 'Mary Tudor', 152). Consequently by spring 1550 Mary's position resembled that in her stand-off with Henry VIII. As before she had three relatively distasteful alternatives: she could submit to the king and council, press Edward for a foreign marriage, or flee the realm. She decided to flee and urged Van der Delft, the imperial ambassador, to devise an escape plan. On 30 June 1550 two imperial ships appeared off Maldon ready to spirit Mary out of England. Following her reportedly hysterical last-minute indecision, given a farcical colouring in the account by Jehan Dubois, the ambassador's secretary, Robert Rochester, her comptroller, persuaded Mary to stay by citing the dangers involved and arguing that she would forfeit any right to the throne if she left. Her hesitancy not only reflected her awareness of the substantial risk involved, but also shows her responding to conflicting advice from the Spanish and her trusted household officer, foreshadowing a situation that recurred during her reign. In 1550 Mary listened to her household men and made the right decision. 
In December 1550 the uneasy truce over Mary's nonconformity collapsed. As the council and the princess exchanged letters about who could attend her services, their disagreement intensified. In January 1551 Edward intervened, asserting his authority as king: 'in our state it shall malcontent us to permit you, so great a subject, not to keep our laws' ('Acts and Monuments', 6.11-12). Even if Warwick instigated the January letter, as has been claimed, Edward was now old enough to understand his rights as king and his growing evangelicalism made him eager to bring his sister around to the true faith. The council now insisted that only a few personal servants could hear mass with her. In March 1551 Edward summoned his sister to court. Mary's entry into London accompanied by 130 supporters each holding a rosary leaves no doubt that she knew how to make a theatrical demonstration of her religious conservatism when she chose to do so. At the meeting with her brother and the council she stressed her faith and conscience while Edward emphasized her disobedience. The council added to the pressure on her by having Sir Anthony Browne arrested for hearing mass at Newhall and ordering Rochester to appear before the council, but nothing was resolved. 
As the council came to view Mary as the focus of opposition to change by religious conservatives at home and Charles V abroad, it determined to eliminate mass in Mary's household no matter how private. On 14 August 1551 the council ordered Rochester, Englefield, and Edward Waldegrave to convey the decision over their strenuous objection to Mary. When Mary refused to comply, the council responded by imprisoning her servants for contempt and sending Lord Chancellor Rich, Sir Anthony Wingfield, and Sir William Petre to deliver the order to Mary again. She treated their authority with contempt, saying they should show more favour to her for her father's sake who 'for the most part made [you] of nothing'. When the councillors conveyed Edward's desire to replace Rochester, Mary replied she was 'old enough to appoint her own officers'; and, even though she was doing her own accounts, 'her mother and father had not brought her up with baking and brewing' ('CSP dom.', '1547-53', no. 534). It was a performance worthy of her heritage and it worked, for a new truce followed, albeit a fragile one. Although Mary's servants remained in custody until May 1552, and although the ban on the mass continued, no attempt was made to enforce it. Mary made a state visit to court in June 1552 without apparent reference to her continued defiance. 
In autumn 1552 parliament passed another 'Act of Uniformity', one even more objectionable to religious conservatives, but within months Edward's health began to fail. In February 1553 he was too ill to see Mary for several days when she came to court and he never recovered from this pulmonary infection. Warwick (created duke of Northumberland in October 1551) began to make overtures to Mary, suggesting a recognition of her position as heir to the throne. However, that attitude changed some time in April after parliament had ended. Fearing the destruction of true religion, Northumberland and Edward decided to alter the succession. Mary's well-known attachment to the old religion was probably consistent with the outlook of most of her future subjects and therefore no reason to exclude her, but her well-established habit of relying on Charles V for guidance was more alarming to the current political leaders. Consequently Edward and Northumberland produced a 'Devise for the succession' which excluded both Mary and Elizabeth in favour of the male heirs of Henry VIII's younger sister, Mary, even though no such heirs existed at the time. Then, after Henry's great-niece Lady Jane Grey had married Northumberland's youngest son, Guildford, the document was altered to vest the succession in Jane and her male heirs. As Edward continued to decline physically, Northumberland took the lead in bullying councillors and judges into approving the altered succession. While some hesitated to sign and some called for a parliamentary confirmation of the alteration, most of the judges and councillors signed the letters patent and swore to uphold Jane's succession. Meanwhile the government did its best to conceal first Edward's critical condition and then his death on 6 July 1553. 
Edward's death precipitated a succession crisis which called on all Mary's powers of resistance. Although she was the legal heir to the throne according to the 'Act of Succession' of 1543, she appeared isolated at first, and with Northumberland in power in London, her cause seemed hopeless. Yet within two weeks the powerful councillors who had supported Jane were proclaiming Mary as queen amid bonfires and great rejoicing. This reversal in fortune occurred because Mary had been warned that Edward's death was imminent, the Catholic gentlemen of her household were ready and able to rally their co-religionists in East Anglia, and the provincial gentry of Norfolk and Suffolk, as well as of Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, and the Thames valley, supported her. Mary fled to Kenninghall in Norfolk via Sir John Huddleston's manor at Sawston and the countess of Bath's estate at Hengrave near Bury St Edmunds. Both the earl of Bath and Huddleston joined Mary while others rallied the conservative gentry of Norfolk and Suffolk. Men like Sir Henry Bedingfield arrived with troops or money as soon as they heard the news, and as she moved to the more secure fortress at Framlingham, Suffolk, local magnates like Sir Thomas Cornwallis, who had hesitated at first, also joined her forces. 
Although Edward's 'Devise' had mentioned the danger that his half-sisters might marry a foreigner who would take over the government, he nevertheless named Jane to succeed him, and she, although protestant, was certain to be dominated by her father-in-law Northumberland, a relatively new member of the nobility. As the days went by and prominent men rallied to Mary's side, through respect either for her legitimacy or for her religious conservatism, her support surprised those at the centre of politics. The Spanish ambassadors, the council, and especially Northumberland all seriously miscalculated the shrewdness and boldness of Mary's household officers, her own willingness to take a stand, and her popularity with the provincial aristocracy as well as the common people. When Northumberland left London with troops to capture Mary, the increasingly nervous councillors in the Tower began to divide, and on 19 July a substantial number led by the earls of Shrewsbury, Bedford, Pembroke, and Arundel proclaimed Mary as queen in London to general rejoicing with 'everie strett full of bon-fyres' ('Diary of Henry Machyn', 37). The plot to alter the succession had collapsed. On 3 August, dressed in a gown of purple velvet and a kirtle of purple satin 'all thicke sett with gouldsmiths worke and great pearle' Mary triumphantly entered London with a large and magnificent retinue, which the populace greeted with joy and traditional festivities. As she entered the Tower there was 'a terrible and great shott of guns' which had never been heard before 'lyk to an earthquake' (Wriothesley, 2.93-4). The size of Mary's retinue, her dress, and the cannonade at the Tower left no doubt about her regal position. 
Now Mary had to rule, a burden she had not desired and a task for which she had had little training or preparation. Up to this point in her life she had been resolute in the face of serious challenges to her principles, surviving several crises which tested her political mettle. But she had learned the lessons of resistance, not the skills of leadership. From the beginning she indicated she would take an active part in governance. This she did throughout her short reign, working long hours in trying to solve problems that would have tested the most skilled of England's rulers. As she assumed the throne Mary, an unmarried woman of thirty-seven, small in stature and near-sighted, appeared older than her years and often tired, because of her generally poor health. For the past seventeen years Mary had settled for life as a royal magnate, and she held the views about marriage and the hierarchical order of society conventionally espoused by the early-sixteenth-century aristocracy. Since Mary was the first woman to rule England in her own right issues of gender dominated and complicated the early days of her reign. On the legal level, a suggestion that parliament meet before the coronation to confirm her title seemed to threaten her regal powers, but that danger was quickly recognized and the coronation preceded the opening of parliament. Her first parliament then reinforced the 'Act of Succession' of 1543 by declaring the validity of the marriage of Henry and Katherine so that the issue of Mary's legitimacy could not be associated with the abolition of the royal supremacy and the restoration of papal authority. At a personal level her advisers assumed that her marriage was as important a consideration as her coronation and the first parliament. Rumours about her marriage circulated at the court in August and September as Mary concentrated on forming her government and looking for a political adviser she could trust implicitly. 
Although she had the nucleus of her council and court from her days as princess, and although she had chosen a council at Kenninghall to direct her military effort, Mary now had to create a government out of two groups who naturally distrusted each other, at least at first: her faithful inner circle of servants and the supporters of Jane Grey, powerful men experienced in government. Critics of the size and operation of this council have neither understood how it was formed nor have they separated the tensions of its early days from the working body that soon developed. Mary retained her emergency military council and rewarded her trusted household servants. Members of the old Howard affinity remained on the council, because Mary had to rely on these local gentry to stabilize East Anglia, an area that had spawned rebellion in 1549 and now suffered from unrest and food shortages, making the region appear particularly volatile in July and August 1553. Meanwhile those councillors who had supported Northumberland's attempted coup besieged Mary with apologies. 
Mary now had to weigh these men's fine words of apology against their actions in order to select as councillors either seasoned professionals or powerful, conservative nobles, who would be loyal and put their knowledge of royal administration at her service, thereby compensating for the inexperience in national affairs of her trusted household servants. She also added a few men who had suffered under the previous regime, notably the old duke of Norfolk and Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, whom she named lord chancellor. This combination of the experienced Henricians and Edwardians, her household officers, and emergency councillors produced a council larger than those of the recent past. Although their different experience and roles before August 1553 inevitably gave rise to tensions, the men Mary chose shared a loyalty to the Tudor regime. They might differ on policy at times and they might have old personal quarrels to settle, but they were above all servants of the crown. The council was neither hopelessly faction-ridden nor too large to operate efficiently and effectively, since an inner working group quickly emerged. The imperial ambassador, Simon Renard, reported in September that for many the title of councillor was honorary. Subsequent criticism of the council's size had more to do with Paget's objections to those who constituted the regular working body than numbers. The circumstance that made it most difficult for Mary to govern during her critical first year was not the number of men on the council, but the absence of one single person she could trust implicitly and whose concepts of policy matched her own. Gardiner and Mary shared a common religious ideal, and he bore the burden of restoring Catholicism until late 1554, but the chancellor vigorously opposed her marriage to Philip; Paget, an experienced councillor since the 1540s, who actively supported her choice of husband, obstructed her religious programme, causing her relationship with him to be permanently strained after the spring of 1554. Mary's distant cousin Cardinal Reginald Pole might have filled the void, but his intransigence on the politically explosive issue of returning church lands meant that Mary with the aid of Charles V had to delay his return to England until November 1554. 
With the obvious exception of the privy chamber, where the queen's gender dictated a complete change of personnel, considerable continuity characterized the organization of her royal household. The household officers who had served her as princess, men like Rochester, Waldegrave, and Sir Henry Jerningham, were rewarded with equivalent responsibilities at court, while her long-standing female servants such as Susan Clarencius, Jane Dormer, Mary Finch, Frances Waldegrave, and Frances Jerningham formed the nucleus of the privy chamber and ladies at court. In the absence of trusted family members, Mary added religiously conservative women, wives and daughters of privy councillors, and the conservative aristocracy to her chamber and court. Close personal contact with the novice queen gave these women a measure of influence, especially in the first year of her reign, before the personnel of government had become settled and Mary had found an adviser on policy with views to match her own. In particular they could facilitate access to the queen: thus Anne Bacon, wife of Nicholas, helped her husband and her brother-in-law, Sir William Cecil, to gain admission to Mary, while Mary Finch interceded for her half-sister, the wife of Sir Thomas Wyatt, after the latter's rising in 1554. Renard voiced his fear of their influence until Mary announced her marital choice, and they protected her during her false pregnancies. 
The subdued court Mary created at the beginning of her reign reflected the quiet life she had enjoyed since 1536. A lively, glamorous court like her father's would have been extraordinary given the queen's matronly age, the circumstances of her accession, and the insecurity of the early months. Her court was not short of talented women, as a contemporary poem noted: Anne Bacon was 'cumly' and 'in bookes sets all her care in lerninge', Catherine 'Briges prayeth with harte and voise' while Baynum was noted for her 'stedfasteness' and 'chastity', and Dorothy Mancell was 'a merye one' (Loades, 'Tudor Court', 212-13). But as Mary, the first English queen regnant, sought to project an image of sobriety and maturity, so her court reflected her public serious side, her mission to fulfil God's plan by ruling well and restoring Catholicism, rather than the private woman who enjoyed music, fine jewels, fashion, dancing, and gambling at cards. 
Two important ceremonies, Edward's funeral and Mary's coronation, set a symbolical tone for the new regime, while two important issues requiring immediate resolution, religion and the queen's marriage, initially divided her council and court. Mary wanted a Catholic funeral for Edward, but some of the council feared that would inflame religious passions. Mary's acceptance of a compromise that provided a public protestant ceremony while she attended a private mass demonstrated the sensitivity to popular sentiment that made the Tudors generally successful rulers. The grandeur of Mary's coronation on 1 October spoke for itself, sweeping away the initial conciliar bickering and fears about her safety. Her procession from the Tower to Westminster dazzled the London crowd as she passed through the streets dressed in her magnificent gown of blue velvet trimmed with powdered ermine. A gold trellis-work cap and a gold garland, both studded with jewels and pearls, were too heavy for the head of a small woman, and she had to hold them up with her hands as she rode in a chariot covered with cloth of gold beneath the canopy of state. Knights, judges, bishops, councillors, and peers preceded her as the parade passed by elaborate pageants accompanied by the sound of trumpets and church bells. 
On the morning of the coronation, wearing a mantle of crimson velvet, Mary entered Westminster Abbey where Gardiner, in the absence of the schismatic archbishops of Canterbury and York, presided over an otherwise traditional coronation ceremony. He anointed Mary with holy oil which she had secretly obtained from the continent (thereby avoiding the use of oil tainted by consecration during her brother's reign), while she had previously examined the wording of her coronation oath to ensure that in swearing to uphold the laws she was not committing herself to the religious changes instigated by her father and brother. Historians have criticized Mary for missing a golden opportunity to define the nature of her rule during the celebrations surrounding her entry into London and the coronation. But although Mary's entry into London on 3 August attested to her capacity for a dramatic gesture when necessary, no guidance for the coronation of a woman as a ruler in her own right existed. The only precedents were those for the coronation of a queen consort. Mary's ceremony, which followed the tradition as it had developed for male rulers, invested her with all the power exercised by her ancestors. She had restored the rightful order of succession, and she also saw herself as an instrument of God's will for the restoration of the religion of her childhood, giving symbolic expression to her vision by adopting the motto 'Truth the daughter of time', a motto that first appeared on her great seal in 1553. Mary now expanded the concept of herself as a potential royal consort, which she had developed in childhood, to embrace her new duties as a ruler, and she further articulated this idea in her Guildhall speech during Wyatt's rebellion in 1554 by saying she was married to the realm first. 
No matter how well these rites and ceremonies served to establish Mary's rule in the minds of her subjects, contemporaries soon criticized the proposed Catholic restoration and her decision to marry Philip II of Spain. The religious settlement came as no surprise, but her choice of Philip, no matter how understandable, astonished many and complicated the implementation of her religious programme. Although gender had not been an issue during the succession crisis, since both contenders were female, prevailing opinions on the issue resurfaced quickly afterwards. Mary shared the contemporary opinion that a woman could not rule alone. At the age of thirty-seven she privately preferred to remain single, but she accepted the danger of childbirth in order to fulfil her public duty to her faith and her kingdom. The realm expected that personal sacrifice, but not the husband she chose. 
Although Mary found herself in a unique position for a woman of royal birth, because she had complete freedom to choose her husband, in fact there were few candidates and Mary further restricted herself by turning to Charles V for advice. Charles, with little concern for Mary, seized the opportunity to increase his influence over England by proposing his son Philip. He entrusted the delicate but not difficult task of proposing Philip's name to his ambassador, Renard, who readily exploited Mary's habitual reliance on imperial ambassadors and who also had the benefit of Paget's expert advice and assistance. No other candidate could match Philip's appeal, for he was not only Spanish but also an intelligent, experienced ruler far superior to foreign candidates proposed for her in years past. The only plausible English candidate was Edward Courtenay, newly created earl of Devon, whose lineage as a great-grandson of Edward IV made him eminently eligible. However, Courtenay's dissolute behaviour following his release in August after years in the Tower demonstrated his inability to be the serious helpmate Mary sought. 
As rumours about Mary's choice spread about the court in October, councillors, courtiers, and the women of the privy chamber all disagreed on the issue. Gardiner, Rochester, and other long-time servants favoured Courtenay. After Mary announced her choice both Rochester and Waldegrave considered leaving her service. Renard worried about the influence of her ladies, but unnecessarily, it seems. Two of Mary's longest-serving and closest confidantes, Susan Clarencius, who had ties to Courtenay, and Frideswide Strelly, supported Philip, though Mary Finch, another trusted servant, voiced her concern about the eleven-year age difference. In making her decision Mary, aware that Gardiner and her old faithful household servants supported Courtenay, did not consult the council as she pondered the pros and cons of Philip's marriage proposal, which was delivered on 10 October. She waited until the end of the month to announce her decision to twenty-eight councillors, the largest gathering of that body during the reign. 
In deciding to marry Philip, Mary made her first and most serious political error. She either failed to comprehend or chose to disregard the depth of an English xenophobic sentiment which was made all the more powerful for being combined with anxiety about the potential power of a male consort. The prospect of a foreign ruler created considerable opposition in parliament and throughout the realm; on 16 November a delegation from parliament went to the queen to try to dissuade her. Although Mary accepted conventional ideas of the inferiority of women where her private affairs were concerned, she reacted forcefully to parliament's unprecedented action. When the speaker of the Commons suggested she marry an English subject, not a foreign prince, Mary angrily swept Lord Chancellor Gardiner aside to tell the delegation she would not subject herself in marriage to an individual whom her position made her inferior. She then repudiated the notion that parliament could dictate her marriage partner, declaring indignantly that they would not have behaved thus in her father's reign. 
Nevertheless Gardiner, Rochester, and Paget exploited the opposition expressed by parliament to hammer out a remarkably favourable marriage treaty, designed to preserve all Mary's legal rights as queen as well as to keep Spanish influence and power to a minimum. The eldest son of the union would inherit England and Philip's lands in southern Germany and Burgundy, while his own son from his first marriage, Don Carlos, would inherit Spain and the Habsburg lands in Italy, which would come under English control only if Philip and Mary had issue but Don Carlos had none. The children and the queen herself could not be taken from England without parliamentary approval. If Mary remained childless and predeceased Philip, he would have no right of succession; in fact he was forbidden to influence it. Although Philip could style himself king of England, the treaty denied him regal power while requiring his assistance to the queen in the administration of her realm in so far as the 'rights, laws, privileges and customs' of both kingdoms permitted. Finally England was not to be involved in Habsburg wars. In spite of the favourable terms obtained by her councillors, however, the treaty failed to calm fears of foreign domination and privately Philip repudiated it. 
In contrast to Mary's determined action in regard to her marriage, she demonstrated her flexibility and political sensitivity when she accepted changes in her religious legislation during her first parliament. Although most English people had neither absorbed nor fully accepted the reforms of Edward's reign, Mary's view that a small political cabal had imposed religious change proved mistaken. She had at first signalled a cautious approach to religious change, issuing a proclamation on 18 August 1553 saying she would not coerce any of her subjects into Catholicism until parliament could be called. Consequently the scope of the legislation designed to turn the clock back to 1529 surprised the political nation, and threatened the titles to ecclesiastical lands of those who had acquired them since Henry's first monastic dissolution in 1536. As resistance to the legislative package emerged in October, Mary had the sense to accept Gardiner's judgement that connecting a restoration of church land with a return to Rome would be fatal to the Catholic cause, and ultimately she accepted a compromise that simply abolished the Edwardian legislation. Unfortunately the announcement of Mary's intention to marry Philip obscured her willingness to moderate this first attempt to restore Catholicism in England. 
Wyatt's rebellion in January 1554 demonstrated that the queen's marriage and religious change had already been conflated in the public mind. Alarmed by the Spanish marriage and unaware of the favourable treaty accompanying it, some members of parliament plotted to prevent the match by co-ordinating four separate risings in Kent, Hereford, Devon, and Leicestershire in March 1554. However, when the conspiracy began to come to light in January, the council acted promptly: the Devon conspirators fled; the Hereford revolt never materialized; and only a few men joined Jane Grey's father, the duke of Suffolk, in Leicestershire. Kent, where Sir Thomas Wyatt raised between 2500 and 3000 men, was the only area where the conspirators had any success. Wyatt himself clearly feared foreign domination; others joined him for reasons both religious and political. The rebellion became dangerous when the trained bands of London led by the aged duke of Norfolk deserted before a possible engagement with Wyatt at Rochester on 28 February. With London and Westminster exposed, Mary and her council handled the critical situation as best they could. 
Mary refused to flee; she refused imperial aid, which would only have exacerbated resentment against foreigners; and while her councillors raised troops, she put her faith in the City of London. The queen's instincts proved correct. When she went to the Guildhall to rally the City she rose to the occasion, demonstrating all the courage and eloquence of a Tudor as she declared Wyatt a traitor and defended her religious programme as well as her proposed marriage. She declared herself 'already married to this Common Weal and the faithful members of the same', and she vowed she would stay to shed her royal blood to defend them (Proctor, 239-40). The combination of Mary's speech, correct tactical decisions, and Wyatt's fatal hesitation defeated the rebellion. In its aftermath the government rejected a policy of vengeance, and in spite of Charles V's advice to treat political opponents harshly, the queen and her council punished only the leaders. The two women who had the potential to be the focus for future rebellions suffered as well: Jane Grey lost her life, because of her father's treason, and Elizabeth went to the Tower. But despite the varied motives of leaders and followers, the government chose to emphasize the religious component of the revolt and ignore the opposition to Philip. Thus queen and council equated protestantism with treason, a tactic Elizabeth would later adopt in her effort to crush English Catholicism. 
By the time parliament met in April 1554 Wyatt's rebellion had imparted a sense of urgency to the supporters of Catholic restoration. Gardiner's attempt to restore the heresy laws, which resulted in an unseemly political battle in the Lords with Paget, demonstrated that much more needed to be done, but also that further measures to reduce heresy and revive the old faith would have to wait for Pole's arrival and England's formal reconciliation with Rome. The implications of Mary's impending marriage also provided work for parliament, which ratified the marriage treaty with all its clauses, in an act reaffirming the queen's power in relation to a foreign consort. The reasons for another act dealing with the queen's royal power remain unclear, but whether due to Wyatt's rebellion or to the prospective Spanish marriage, its extent was manifestly felt to need clarifying. 
As soon as Mary dissolved parliament, her attention turned to her marriage. After lengthy delays Philip arrived in England on 19 July. Their first meeting turned out well in spite of the obvious age difference. On the feast of St James, 25 July, dressed in a golden robe, Mary arrived at Winchester Cathedral with a large company of councillors and ladies to meet Philip, who was also dressed in gold. Having no close male relatives, Mary was given away by four councillors, the marquess of Winchester, and the earls of Derby, Bedford, and Pembroke. After a nuptial mass the king and queen walked slowly under the canopy of state to the bishop's palace, which had been hung in gold and silver for the wedding banquet. Following a few more days in Winchester the couple moved at a leisurely pace to Windsor and then to London so that Mary's subjects could view her husband. For Mary the wedding should have brought relief, giving her the fellowship of a ruler who could help her manage the myriad problems England faced. 
The joy of the wedding was soon enhanced by a doctor's assurance in the autumn that Mary showed all the signs of pregnancy. Unfortunately for Mary's hopes and plans both she and the doctor were deluded, but that did not become obvious until June 1555. She publicly celebrated her pregnancy with a procession and Te Deum at St Paul's just as her second parliament convened in late November 1554. But although the ambassadors reported the obvious signs of pregnancy, her physical condition was the result of a combination of long-standing menstrual problems and a great deal of wishful thinking. Her subsequent failure to produce an heir represented the ultimate failure for a sixteenth-century woman. However, until disillusionment set in the time between the wedding and Philip's departure in September 1555 has always been considered the high point of Mary's reign and presumably the happiest part of it for her. 
Two portraits painted between June and December 1554 depict Mary during this period. They not only reflect the different views of the English and Habsburg courts but cast doubt on this so-called idyllic time. Hans Eworth's picture, though lacking the complicated symbolism of later portraits of Elizabeth, displays a somewhat idealized, ageless, good-looking woman. This portrait makes a simple statement of Mary's life and goals shortly before her marriage, showing her wearing a pearl given to her by Philip and a cross at her neck, while she holds the Tudor rose in her hand. The more famous and most frequently reproduced portrait, painted by Anthonis Mor, probably in November or December 1554, does not reflect the happiness Mary is usually presumed to have experienced after her marriage, her assumed pregnancy, and England's reconciliation with Rome. She looks uncomfortable as she sits stiffly on her throne holding the Tudor rose and wearing Philip's pearl, but without a cross. Moro's portrait is more realistic than most court portraits, and though it may reflect a Habsburg view of royalty (Philip commissioned it), it clearly depicts a face that was beginning to suffer the ravages of illness and age. 
Although Philip took his position in England seriously, the nature and extent of his influence on English affairs has been debated from the sixteenth century onwards, thanks to conflicting sources: the Spanish ambassadors assigned him a significant role in public affairs, while the Venetian ambassador thought his political contribution negligible. Mary and her councillors certainly expected Philip to assist the queen forcefully if necessary. His arrival with a complete household, only to find an English one established for him, caused some friction, but initially at least Mary's government did all it could to help him understand English political problems. But although the council ordered the secretaries to translate the minutes into Latin so that he could read them, he could only communicate with some individuals through an interpreter, which constituted a considerable handicap. When Philip left England in 1555, he and Mary appointed a small group of councillors to correspond with him and act on his behalf. The few surviving letters from Philip to this 'council of state', as he called it, attest his famous attention to detail, but cannot be interpreted as constituting government from afar, or reform of the council. As the months passed England receded from the centre of Philip's attention, and Mary's unsuccessful attempt to secure legislation making him king, followed early in 1556 by Henry Dudley's anti-Spanish conspiracy, confirmed Philip's sense that his influence in England had decided limitations. 
There is little doubt, however, that Philip's arrival broke the religious stalemate. To facilitate England's reunion with Rome and the revitalization of Catholicism, he initially employed Dominican friars: Father Pedro de Soto, who later received a chair at Oxford, helped negotiate the return of Pole to England in November; Juan de Villagarcia, who also received a chair of divinity at Oxford, was instrumental in obtaining Cranmer's recantations. These two were so effective at Oxford that John Jewel later commented, 'one could scarce believe that so much mischief could have been done in such a short time' ('CSP for.', '1558-9', 269-70). A third Dominican, Bartolome Carranza, became Mary's confessor. Alfonso de Castro, a Franciscan who was an authority on heresy, remained a member of Philip's household; he argued for a more determined campaign against dissent, while expressing misgivings about the use of the death penalty to punish it. 
Cardinal Reginald Pole, the man Mary relied upon to direct her kingdom's return to orthodoxy, did not arrive in England until November 1554. His intransigence on the issue of returning church lands caused Charles V to delay his journey to England so that the marriage to Philip could proceed with as little trouble as possible and without being unduly associated with that political quagmire. Pole had considerable experience and talent to bring to the revitalization of the faith. He had developed a solid reputation as a humanist, and was an advocate for reform at the early sessions of the Council of Trent. Mary arranged the ceremonial restoration of the Roman primacy so that it would have a maximum effect on MPs, who would then return home with news of Pole's conciliatory tone and impressions of the beauty of pre-Reformation ceremony. Pole's speech, delivered on 30 November before Mary, Philip, and the assembled parliament, offered reconciliation in exchange for the revocation of all ecclesiastical legislation after 1529 with the notable exception of laws pertaining to ecclesiastical lands. With carefully chosen words he assured the audience that he came 'to reconcyle, not to condemne,... not to destroy but to build,... not to compel but to call agayne'. He also advanced the idea of Mary's marriage to the kingdom when he emphasized how God had 'miraculously' preserved the queen, 'a virgin, helples, naked and unarmed' who had prevailed over tyranny (Nichols, 'Chronicle of Queen Jane', 157, 159). 
With Mary's approval and support, Pole, at first as papal legate and later as archbishop of Canterbury, was free to pursue his humanist vision of a reformed Catholic church in England. However, his twenty-year absence had not prepared him for the extent of damage to the ecclesiastical structure and finance, and ultimately these issues absorbed most of his time and energy. The programme which he developed concentrated on the education of the clergy and through them the laity, and he rejected one more rapid, based on missionary work by the Jesuits. Most of Pole's programme was outlined in his London synod of 1555-6. He gave particular emphasis to episcopal and clerical leadership and to training: bishops had to hold regular diocesan visits to detect disorder and audit finances, and priests had to be resident, while his decrees provided a plan for clerical education that later became a model on the continent. The ranks of the clergy had been reduced over the years of religious change and recently by Mary's deprivation of married clergy before her second parliament. Although Pole generally pardoned those who abandoned their wives, his high standards guaranteed that it would take time to provide adequately trained men for all the benefices in England. Only then could those born in the last twenty years be instructed properly and participate in the ancient liturgy in all its fullness. 
Pole's appointments to the episcopate reflect both his own and Mary's intellectual interests. Many of the new bishops were highly regarded scholars who began to produce solid defences of the Catholic faith. The Marian regime was well aware of the educational value of the printing press, and promoted a number of religious treatises, sermons, and catechisms. Thomas Watson, bishop of Lincoln, wrote 'Holsome and Catholic Doctrine Concerning the Seven Sacraments' while Edmund Bonner, the restored bishop of London, produced a book of homilies entitled 'A Profitable and Necessarye Doctryne' and a children's catechism which Pole endorsed for use throughout the realm. Mary and Pole also emphasized the beauty of the pre-Reformation church by ordering the restoration of rood screens and other forms of church decoration, while the royal chapel encouraged the recovery of liturgical music. Most of what Pole achieved was carried out without papal help after the election of Pope Paul IV in summer 1555. A hardline traditionalist, the new pope later revoked Pole's legatine authority and demanded his return to Rome to answer charges of heresy; he also delayed the confirmation of bishops, leaving Elizabeth in the happy position of having several important ecclesiastical vacancies to fill at her accession. 
Pole's programme of Catholic restoration was generally positive, as he had promised, but it had one negative side, the pursuit of heresy, and attitudes towards this have coloured all subsequent evaluations of Mary's religious policy, and indeed of her entire reign. The question of responsibility for the active pursuit of heretics remains difficult to resolve, both because conclusive evidence is lacking and also because, quite naturally, the biographers of the critical players tend to deflect blame from their subject. Most sixteenth-century people agreed that heresy was a cancer that must be excised for the health of society; Pole and Mary believed that the country had been misled by a small group, whose elimination would speed the restoration of Catholic worship. That they were mistaken became clear following the reinstatement of the fourteenth-century heresy laws in 1555, which resulted in the burning of Hugh Latimer and Nicholas Ridley in 1555 and Thomas Cranmer in 1556, as well as of the popular preachers John Rogers and Rowland Taylor, but which failed to discredit protestantism. After executing the leaders, the government expanded its pursuit of heretics until about 290 individuals, largely from the lower classes in south-east England, had been executed by the end of the reign. The Venetian ambassador noted the unpopularity of the London burnings and Mary's advisers divided on the issue. Pole attempted to restrain Bonner's energetic pursuit of heretics in London, only to have the council sternly order Bonner to continue. Gardiner, who initially saw eliminating heretics as an effective policy, quickly recognized that prosecutions had become counter-productive, but others like Sir John Baker, another privy councillor, continued to encourage the prosecutions in Kent. Apart from Mary's determination to execute Cranmer, there is little explicit evidence for her continuing involvement, except for the obvious fact that as queen she could have halted the process at any moment. 
The prejudice against Mary and her religion which developed in Elizabeth's reign has continued to obscure the positive aspects of the former's reign. She laboured mightily to cope with a series of highly complex problems inherited from her brother and father. Debt plagued the regime from the outset, with government finance proving particularly intractable. The marquess of Winchester, Sir John Baker, and Sir Walter Mildmay, all men skilled in the arcane workings of the exchequer, started to restore the supremacy of that office, though their policies took time to implement and even longer for their effects to be felt. The currency too was problematic, the result of years of debasement. The council took vigorous action against forgers of domestic and foreign coins, but while the queen's financial advisers discussed a major recoinage, dearth and the disruption of war in Mary's last two years prevented action. Still, these advisers had laid the foundation for the Elizabethan recoinage. Mary's commercial policy was forward-looking and earned the support of the merchant community. Shrinking markets and dependence on the Calais staple led to a search for new markets in Guinea, the Baltic, and Russia. The latter resulted in the formation of the Muscovy Company in 1555. When the government overhauled the book of rates in 1558, adding substantially to its revenue, the merchants registered only a mild protest. During her last two years Mary and her council also tried to provide relief to localities afflicted by a series of poor harvests and the epidemics that followed. 
From the beginning of the reign Mary and most of her council had understood that any involvement in continental hostilities would place England's fiscal resources under intolerable strain, any reforms notwithstanding. Mary saw herself as an advocate for peace and she succeeded in bringing the two antagonists, the Habsburgs and Valois, to the table in 1555 at Gravelines. But in spite of the efforts of Pole and his colleagues neither side was willing to make the necessary territorial concessions and the talks collapsed. Worse, although they signed a peace at Vaucelles in February 1556 without English participation, it lasted only long enough for the combatants to regain their fighting strength. When Philip invaded the Papal States in September 1556, Mary and her council, with the exception of Paget, watched events with considerable dismay because they realized it was probably only a matter of time before England became involved. There were many good reasons for remaining on the sidelines: in particular, plans for fiscal solvency would be compromised and popular support for the government and its religious reform would be damaged. 
The advocates of peace, Mary's trusted household servants, constituted a majority on the council until Philip returned to England in March 1557 to plead his case for English support before her sceptical advisers. Even then the council repeated their concerns about crown finance, the possibility of a Scottish invasion, the predictable decline in England's trade with France, and the effect of bad harvests on the realm. While Philip and Mary were doing their best to persuade individual councillors, the English protestant exile Thomas Stafford sailed from France to invade England. Local forces easily dealt with his troops when he landed at Scarborough, but when the 'invasion' news reached the council those against the war had lost the political battle. Militarily England was better prepared to meet the challenge than she had been since Henry's reign. Mary's government had overhauled the administration and finances of the navy and her ships were in good repair. Having realized the inadequacy of the old feudal and national levies, the council had also begun to reorganize England's land forces. In 1558 parliament passed a 'Militia Act' which gave responsibility for raising troops and to muster commissions in the counties to the lord lieutenants. Mary's council and competent military leaders together achieved a number of successes at first. In summer 1557 the navy aided Philip by clearing French shipping from the channel and successfully ferried English forces to the continent. Land forces under the earl of Pembroke participated in the capture of St Quentin in August 1557, while another army defended the northern border against a threatened Scottish attack. Nevertheless, the war has been viewed as foolish because Calais and its associated forts fell to the French in January 1558. As the last remnant of the English claim to continental monarchy, Calais had a symbolic value which arguably outweighed its economic and military importance. Its loss was certainly felt as a humiliation. 
Mary received the news of Calais stoically, perhaps encouraged by the belief that she was pregnant (the story that she declared that the word 'Calais' would be found engraved on her heart appears to be apocryphal). Her profound desire to produce an heir resulted in another disappointment, and she appeared depressed in the spring. Over the years her general health had deteriorated as severe headaches and dysmenorrhoea took their toll. As summer ended Mary had an unusual bout of fever, probably induced by the influenza that carried away so many in 1558. Although she rallied in September, by the end of October another serious fever signalled the end. Mary's gradual decline in autumn 1558 allowed Elizabeth to plan for her succession even though Mary postponed the inevitable naming of her half-sister until the last minute. Although their relations were not always overtly hostile, Mary had long disliked and distrusted Elizabeth. She had resented her at first as the child of her own mother's supplanter, more recently as her increasingly likely successor. She took exception both to Elizabeth's religion and to her personal popularity, and the fact that first Wyatt's and then Dudley's risings aimed to install the princess in her place did not make Mary love her any more. But although she was several times pressed to send Elizabeth to the block, Mary held back, perhaps dissuaded by considerations of her half-sister's popularity, compounded by her own childlessness, perhaps by instincts of mercy. On 6 November she acknowledged Elizabeth as her heir. Feria, the Spanish ambassador, devoted his last dispatches of the reign largely to an analysis of the princess and her plans for the realm. 
Mary died on 17 November 1558, before many of her policies could come to fruition. She was buried in Henry VII's chapel in Westminster Abbey. Her early death at forty-two thus left an incomplete programme and a country at war, one that was also suffering from two years of poor harvests, famine, and a flu epidemic, but her successor had the decided advantage of being the second woman to rule and of having had the opportunity to learn from her sister's successes and failures. 
The shift in religious policy which came in 1559 brought with it increased criticism both of Mary's Catholic restoration and of her achievements. The vehement anti-Catholicism fostered by John Foxe and by Elizabeth's advisers merged in the sixteenth century with England's sense of national identity and in the nineteenth century with notions of predestined English greatness, a potent combination that has made it difficult even for Mary's most sympathetic defenders to escape the bonds of a history written by the political and religious victors. In the mid-twentieth century, as the work of A. G. Dickens shifted the focus of discussion and research from the level of the political and ecclesiastical elite to that of the man and woman in the pew, he opened a debate about the nature of religious change, on the strengths and weaknesses of Catholicism, and on the numbers and influence of protestants, which has yet to be resolved. By then historians were also beginning to challenge the black and white picture painted by religious polemic and hagiography. J. A. Muller produced a biography of Gardiner in 1926 which started to free him from the venom of Foxe's portrayal, E. H. Harbison looked at Mary's reign from the perspective of the rival ambassadors at her court, and in 1953 H. F. M. Prescott tried to present an objective biography. A collection of essays on the mid-Tudor period edited by J. Loach and R. Tittler in 1980, and authoritative studies of Mary's reign by D. M. Loades, heralded new interpretations of such issues as parliament, the council, and the military, reinforced between 1990 and 2000 by biographies of Gardiner, Pole, and Cranmer. A growing interest in women's history has led to a fruitful discussion about female succession and the presentation of a woman as ruler, although most of this writing has centred on the evolution of Elizabeth's image, which took a long time to develop, and not on the short reign of Mary and her very different sense of herself. Thus Mary still stands condemned by ideology, no longer for her religious faith but for her failure to challenge the place of women in a patriarchal society. 
There is no question that while Mary's choice of husband made sense in terms of her personal history, with its long-standing reliance on her Spanish relatives, it was a political mistake because it exacerbated English xenophobia and complicated the implementation of her main objective, the restoration of the Catholic church. This marital alliance, with the aid of expert Elizabethan propaganda, stamped Catholicism as an alien presence in England, and has consequently prevented 'a just assessment of the aims and achievements of the Marian Church' (Duffy, 524). In fact the revived Catholicism that Mary left to her sister took a considerable effort over more than five years for Elizabeth to reverse. 
In the political arena, although Mary was a conscientious and hard-working ruler, she lacked the personal charisma needed to lead the realm through a difficult period. There was much more continuity than change in Mary's administration, and co-operation largely characterized her work with parliament and the council. There were moments of tension: members of parliament wanted to protect the ecclesiastical lands they had acquired before they were ready to consider sweeping religious change; and they refused to crown Philip. However, Mary was generally willing to compromise or wait for a more auspicious time to enact her religious programme because she realized the value of the support of the political nation. The personal rivalry between Gardiner and Paget as well as their differences over policy initially deprived Mary of an adviser she could trust completely, but the council was still able to carry out its many functions effectively. Indeed, it did a remarkable job in leading a reluctant nation during the war of 1557-8. Circumstances beyond her control such as bad weather and the flu epidemic exacerbated Mary's problems, but above all she was not given the time she needed to consolidate her initiatives in religion and finance, which were predicated on a longer reign and her hopes for a child who would carry on her policies. Consequently the economic, naval, and administrative reforms enacted by parliament benefited Elizabeth more than they did Mary. 
In the final analysis, it seems more profitable for historians to compare Mary's five years as queen with the first five years, not the whole forty-five, of her sister's reign. Mary demonstrated that a woman could rule the kingdom in her own right. Her marital choice, by revealing the problems that a foreign marriage could create, gave her sister good reason to resist pressure to marry. In forming her government Elizabeth retained some of Mary's experienced councillors, who continued to work toward fiscal reform. Both queens had to make compromises in their initial religious legislation, and both had to deal with a body of dissent, but Elizabeth had learned the futility of religious persecution, and was more adept in applying Mary's equation of religious dissent with treason. Given a fair chronological comparison, and the perspective provided by the secularized culture of the late twentieth century, Mary emerges as a much more sympathetic person and conscientious ruler than was previously allowed, one who belies the simplistic bloody tyrant of protestant mythology. 


@@@@@


doc= 18246


Mary II (1662-1694), queen of England, Scotland, and Ireland, was born on 30 April 1662 in St James's Palace. She was the eldest child of James, duke of York, the future James II (1633-1701), and his first wife, Anne Hyde ['see 'Anne (1637-1671)]. Her maternal grandfather was Edward Hyde, first earl of Clarendon, architect of the restoration of Charles II. She was named after her aunt, Mary, princess of Orange, who had recently died. At her baptism her godparents were Prince Rupert and the duchesses of Buckingham and Ormond. These relationships identified the princess with the Stuart dynasty and its survival from her birth. 
Apart from a sojourn in York from 1665 to 1667, to escape the last visitation of the plague, Mary lived in the south of England until she married. The question of her education was extremely sensitive, given her father's Roman Catholicism and the fact that her mother also exhibited Catholic sympathies before her death from breast cancer in March 1671. After her mother died Mary lived at Richmond Palace, where her upbringing was entrusted to a governess, Lady Frances Villiers. To avoid any suspicions being aroused about Mary's protestantism she was educated by George Morley, bishop of Winchester, Henry Compton, bishop of London, and Edward Lake, archdeacon of Exeter, who instructed her in the principles of the Church of England, to which she became devoted. Although she learned no Latin or Greek, she did acquire French from Pierre de Laine, who in 1667 published a grammar written for the princess. According to her teacher she was 'absolute mistress of the French tongue' (Laine, 8). Her drawing-master was the dwarf Richard Gibson, who later went with her, together with his equally diminutive wife, to the Netherlands. Among Mary's other accomplishments were playing music on the lute and the harpsichord, and dancing, at which she was so proficient that on 2 December 1674 she appeared at court in the title role of John Crowne's ballet, 'Calisto, or, The Chaste Nymph'. When Crowne published it in 1675 he dedicated it to her. Another work dedicated to her was one by Bathsua Makin on female education published in 1673, which hailed her as principal among all 'Ingenious and Vertuous ladies' (A. Fraser, 'The Weaker Vessel: Women in Seventeenth Century England', 1984, 321). 'Her Age and her Rank had denied her opportunities for much study', observed Abel Boyer in 1701, 'yet she had read the best Books in English, French and Dutch' (Maccubbin and Hamilton-Phillips, 4). She showed her own concern for education in 1693 by helping to establish the College of William and Mary in Virginia. Mary spent much of her leisure time gardening, doing needlework, and playing at cards. Her interest in gardens led her to advise on the design and planting of those of the houses she possessed in the Netherlands as princess of Orange and in England after she became queen. Thus she took part in the design of the garden at Honselaarsdijk and selected exotic plants for it, and suggested the aviary at Het Loo. After 1689 she discussed with Sir Christopher Wren the planning of the gardens at Hampton Court and Kensington Palace. As for her needlework, she embroidered curtains for the bedrooms in her various residences. Her addiction to card games earned her a rebuke from her tutor Dr Lake, especially when she played on Sundays. 
The question of Mary's marriage partner was already being openly discussed when she was only eight years old. The deaths of her mother and her brother Edgar in 1671 made her second in the line of succession to the throne. In the absence of any legitimate children of Charles II, her uncle, Mary became heir to the crown after her father, James. The disposal of her hand thus became a crucial issue in British politics and European diplomacy. From the start, the claims of William of Orange were pressed by protestants. William himself visited England in the winter of 1670-71 'to pretend to the Lady Mary' ('Memoirs of Sir John Reresby', ed. A. Browning, M. K. Geiter, and W. A. Speck, 1991, 82). Although Charles II was in favour of the match, James was not, and had to be bullied into it by his brother. For a while James held off, hoping to arrange a marriage between Mary and the French dauphin. When William became stadholder in 1672 he cooled on the question, as he did not wish to identify himself with the English court and its pro-French foreign policy. With the ending of the Third Anglo-Dutch War in 1674, however, the negotiations for a marriage treaty were reopened. The earl of Danby, who was by then the chief minister in England, was particularly keen on this protestant match. Sir William Temple discussed it in a two-hour conversation with William in the Netherlands in which he enthused about the princess's eligibility. William visited England again in the autumn of 1677, when his marriage to Mary was arranged between himself and her father and uncle. She was then informed of the outcome on 21 October 1677, at which she 'wept all that afternoon and the following day' ('Diary of Dr Edward Lake', 5). 
Mary's reaction was natural in an attractive young woman of fifteen when faced with the prospect of being married to the Dutchman who was so unappealing, with his blackened teeth and hooked nose, that her sister Anne called him Caliban. Mary was taller than her husband, being all of 5 feet 11 inches while he was 5 feet 61/2 inches in height. She was also a passionate woman, while he was cold and regarded as unfeeling. Mary's highly emotional nature was expressed in the adolescent letters she wrote to her friend Frances Apsley, in which she described herself as the wife and her correspondent as her husband. Much of the passion she displayed can be dismissed as the excess of adolescence. The correspondents were consciously play acting, for they also signed their names Mary Clovin and Aurelia, based on characters in Philip Massinger's play 'The Maid of Honour'. Nevertheless, the emotion which Mary put into her letters was very strongly expressed, in that peculiar spelling of hers which was atrocious even by the lax standards of the time. Thus about 1675, when she was thirteen, she wrote: 'I love you with more zeal then any lover can, I love you with a love that ner was known by man, I have for you excese of friandship more of love than any woman can for woman and more love then ever the constanest love had for his Mrs, you are loved more then can be exprest by your ever obedient wife vere afectionate friand humbel sarvant to kis the ground where one you go to be your dog in a string, your fish in a net your bird in a cage your humbel trout. (Bathurst, 60)' The reference to the love of a man for his mistress is one of many in the correspondence, revealing how exposure to the dissolute courts of Charles II and her father affected her early impressions of married life. She once observed to Frances that 'in tow or three years men are alwais wery of thier wifes and look for Mrs as sone as thay can gett them' (ibid., 51). Such youthful cynicism was a good preparation for marriage to William, who took a mistress, Mary's friend Elizabeth Villiers, even before two years had elapsed. 
Their wedding took place at nine o'clock at night in Mary's bedchamber on 4 November 1677. Significantly the king and not her father gave Mary away. Charles 'was very pleasant all the time'. Thus 'when the prince endowed her with all his worldly goods, hee willed to put all up in her pocket, for 'twas clear gains' ('Diary of Dr Edward Lake', 6). As part of the settlement Mary received jewels worth $40,000 and an annual allowance of $10,000 plus $2000 a year pin money. Sir Edmund Waller composed an epithalamium for the occasion, which included the lines '
Not Belga's fleet (his high command) 

Which triumphs where the sun does rise 

Nor all the force he leads by land, 

Could guard him from her conquering eyes. 
('The Poems of Edmund Waller', ed. G. T. Drury, 2 vols., 1893, 2.80)' The last line was especially unfortunate. Mary's eyesight was always affected by migraine-like aching, which made it at times impossible for her to read or write. At the same time William was scarcely smitten by her, at least in the early stages of their marriage which he regarded as purely diplomatic, and treated her with indifference. 
The departure of the newly married couple for the Netherlands was delayed, initially because Mary was reluctant to leave London where her sister Anne was ill with smallpox at St James's Palace. They also had to stay until Catherine of Braganza's birthday was celebrated on 15 November. The celebrations included a ball at which it was observed that William danced only once with his wife. There was court gossip about 'the prince's sullennesse, or clownishness, that he took no notice of the princess at the playe and balle' ('Diary of Dr Edward Lake', 9). The royal party left for Margate on 19 November, Mary weeping all the morning. When the queen tried to cheer her up by relating the similar circumstances which attended her own nuptials, when she had left her native land for a strange country, Mary replied 'But madam you came into England; but I am going out of England' (ibid., 10). Contrary winds held them up, so they made a leisurely journey to the coast by way of Canterbury. They eventually set sail on 28 November, Mary in the 'Katherine', William in the 'Mary'. The crossing was rough, and because Rotterdam was icebound they had to land at Terheyde. They went straight to Honselaarsdijk, which was to become Mary's favourite Dutch palace. On 14 December they ceremonially entered The Hague to a magnificent reception. Although the Dutch found her more appealing than the other Mary Stuart they had known, William's mother, her husband's insistence on strict protocol upset many of them. For William insisted that, while his wife could kiss the cheeks of noblemen's wives, she could not extend the same favour to those of the burghermasters. 
Mary miscarried in spring 1678 and again a year later. After the first miscarriage her father wrote 'Pray let her be more careful of herself another time' ('CSP dom.', '1678', 126). These miscarriages were bitter disappointments to her maternal aspirations and dynastic ambitions in the Netherlands and in Britain. She apparently never conceived again. This, together with her sister's failure to leave an heir after many pregnancies, suggests that there was a genetic problem, though whether inherited from their father, as has been suggested, or their mother is impossible to determine. 
Although Mary scarcely found wedded bliss with the unfaithful William, she was able to transform some of the mock affection she had shown for Frances Apsley into real devotion to him. Thus she wrote to her friend on 3 March 1678: 'I supose you know the prince is gone to the Army but I am sure you can guese at the troble I am in, I am sure I coud never have thought it half so much, I thought coming out of my own contry parting with my friands and relations the greatest that ever coud as long as thay lived hapen to me but I am to be mistaken that now I find till this time I never knew sorow for what can be more cruall in the world then parting with what on loves and nott ondly comon parting but parting so as may be never to meet again to be perpetually in fear for god knows when I may see him or wethere he is nott now at this instant in a batell. (Bathurst, 88-9)' Mary's pining for her absent husband might have been inspired as much by loneliness as by love. For her life in the Netherlands appears to have been very solitary. Although she moved around her husband's palaces -- Dieren, Honselaarsdijk, Hoofdyke, the House in the Wood, and, when it was eventually built in the 1680s, Het Loo -- she was not invited to other people's residences. This could have been partly her fault, since she seems to have felt that as a princess her status was so far above the Dutch regents that she could not accept invitations. Consequently her existence was spent in card playing, needlework, and religious devotions. This pattern was only occasionally disturbed by visits, such as that which her stepmother and sister paid her in October 1678, followed by her father in February 1679, and all three in September 1679. Mary got on well with Mary of Modena while she was duchess of York. In their correspondence the duchess addressed the princess as 'the lemon', by contrast with the prince or 'the orange'. Anne's visits were also very welcome. James's second visit was to be the last time he was in the presence of his daughter. Otherwise her routine was mundane. As the author of 'The character of... Queen Mary II' observed of her regular practice when she returned to England, it repeated a pattern established in the Netherlands: 'What an enemy she was to idleness, even in Ladies, those who had the Honor to serve her, are living witnesses. It is well known how great a part of the Day they were employed at their needles... the Queen herself, when more important business would give her leave, working with them. And that their minds might be well employed at the same time it was her custom to order one to read to them while they were at work either Divinity or some profitable History. ('The Royal Diary', 8)' Her time was also employed in purchasing jewellery, perfume, porcelain, silks, and other luxury fabrics. She became quite concerned about her extravagance, struggling vainly to reduce her expenses to some kind of order. 'I beg ye Prince to pardon... my mistakes', she wrote in her account book in December 1687, 'if he happens to look over this book after my death' (Walker, 322). As an early biographer noted: 'the course of her life in her Court abroad (being indeed all little else but one unvaried scene) affords but little matter of particular memoirs worthy a peculiar relation; there happened nothing of importance or weight... till the death of... Charles the second. (Laine, 49)' At the time of the king's death Mary and her husband were entertaining Charles's illegitimate son, the duke of Monmouth, at The Hague. Monmouth relieved the tedium of Mary's life in the Netherlands, attending magnificent balls and skating with the princess on the ice. One of the first communications from her father, now James II, which Mary received was a polite request to dismiss Monmouth from court. The duke went off to raise his fatal rebellion in England. In 1686 Gilbert Burnet took refuge from James II in the Netherlands and was kindly received by Mary and William, who invited him to their court. There he found that: 'she knew little of our affairs till I was admitted to wait on her. And I began to lay before her the state of our court, and the intrigues in it, ever since the restoration: which she received with great satisfaction, and shewed true judgment, and a good mind, in all the reflections that she made. ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.134)' Burnet claimed that, until he pointed it out, Mary was ignorant of the fact that, if she became queen, William would not be king. She expressed surprise and asked him to propose an alternative, which led him to suggest that she should give her husband the real authority and try to get it legally invested in him. Although Burnet insisted that it was his own idea, and that 'no person living had moved me in it', the earl of Dartmouth, when he glossed this passage, took it for granted 'that the prince ordered him to propose it to the princess before he would engage in the attempt upon England: and she must understand it so' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.138-9). 
Mary appears to have become more concerned about the state of affairs in England following Burnet's account of them. Thus she intervened in favour of Bishop Compton of London when her father used the commission for ecclesiastical causes to suspend him from his spiritual duties. She also gave $200 to the ejected fellows of Magdalen College, Oxford. When James issued the declaration of indulgence in July 1687 she endorsed her husband's objections to it. Their views were made public in 'Pensionary Fagel's Letter to James Stewart' 'giving an account of the Prince and Princess of Orange's thoughts concerning the repeal of the Test and Penal Laws'. This open letter to Stewart, a Scottish presbyterian lawyer, dated from Amsterdam 4 November 1687, was published in Dutch and English shortly afterwards. 'Their highnesses have often declared', Fagel wrote, 'that no Christian ought to be persecuted for his conscience'. They therefore offered 'full liberty of conscience' even to Roman Catholics. But they were not prepared to agree to the repeal of the 'Test Acts', which were a necessary safeguard for the Church of England. 
In view of these gestures in support of that church it is surprising that James sought to convert his daughter to Catholicism. Nevertheless, in November 1687 he wrote to Mary a letter explaining why he had converted from the Anglican to the Catholic church. She replied that: 'though she had come young out of England, yet she had not left behind her either the desire of being well informed, or the means for it. She had furnished her self with books, and had those about her who might clear any doubts to her. ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.200)' Among the latter were her chaplains. George Hooper had accompanied her to the Netherlands in 1677. He had incurred William's wrath by insisting that she worshipped exclusively according to the liturgy of the Church of England, and by recommending Anglican works such as Richard Hooker's 'Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity'. In 1679 he had been succeeded by Thomas Ken, whom William also disliked because he complained to the prince about the effects his infidelity were having on Mary. When Ken returned to England, where he became bishop of Bath and Wells, John Covel succeeded him from 1681 until 1685. In October 1685 Covel indiscreetly wrote to Bevil Skelton, English ambassador at The Hague, to inform him that 'the Princess's heart is ready to break; and yet she, every day, counterfeits the greatest joy... The Prince hath infallibly made her his absolute slave' (Singer, 2.165). When William was told about the contents of this letter he was so incensed that he gave Covel three hours' notice to leave the country. William Stanley replaced him as Mary's chaplain. Burnet also acted as her spiritual adviser, for although James had demanded his removal from her presence he still influenced her, reading the king's letter and helping her to compose a reply: 'Thus... she gave him the trouble of a long account of the grounds upon which she was persuaded of the truth of her religion; in which she was so fully satisfied, that she trusted by the grace of God that she should spend the rest of her days in it. ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.202)' James replied with a reading list of relevant books, recommending her to discuss them with an English Jesuit, Father Morgan, who was then in The Hague. Mary undertook to read the books but not to see Morgan, on the grounds that conferences with a Jesuit would not be kept secret and that news about them would do her a great deal of harm. Mary informed her sister Anne, Bishop Compton, and (by means of her chaplain Dr Stanley) William Sancroft, archbishop of Canterbury, of her father's attempts to convert her. These included sending her the printed account of her own mother's conversion before she died. James's efforts ended when Mary protested against the recall of the English regiments from the Netherlands. She was relieved at being spared reading more devotional literature, which had taken up a good deal of her time without in any way shaking her Anglican faith. 
Mary expressed her shock at the trial of the seven bishops, getting Dr Stanley to write to Archbishop Sancroft on behalf of herself and her husband 'to express their real concern for your grace and your brethren' (Strickland, 5.484). She also expressed scepticism about the birth of the prince of Wales in June 1688. Her conviction that there was 'quelque tromperie' ('some deceit') in the queen's pregnancy partly arose from her perplexity in reconciling the conviction that God would preserve the church through her, with the fact that she herself had not been blessed by providence with an heir (Bentinck, 71, 92-3). Although she ordered prayers for the prince in her chapel, she sent her sister Anne a long list of questions concerning the circumstances of Mary of Modena's pregnancy and lying-in. The first of these was 'whether the Queen desired at any time any of the Ladies... to feel her belly, since she thought herself quick?' (Dalrymple, vol. 2, appendix, part 1, 305). Mary became convinced that the prince was a supposititious child, and stopped the prayers for him. The thoughts that her father was capable of perpetrating such a fraud, and that humanly speaking the only way to save the church and the state in England was for her husband to dethrone him by force, afflicted her severely over the summer of 1688. She spent much of it at the newly finished palace at Het Loo, in remote Gelderland, where she was rarely disturbed by visitors. She had much time on her own, and spent it in meditation. She thanked God that her eyes were better than they had been for many years, and that she was able to read and write as well as to reflect. In September she moved to Dieren, but was still sufficiently remote in the country, and felt a spiritual tranquillity there despite the preparations that were being made by William to invade England. 
Then in October Mary went to The Hague to be present at the prince's departure. William told her that if it so turned out that they never met again, she should remarry, though not to a papist -- 'paroles qui me percerent le coeur' ('words which pierced my heart'; Bentinck, 80). She told him that she loved him only and could never love another. Besides, having been married so long and not been blessed with a child, she believed that was enough to prevent her ever thinking of what he proposed. She went with him to the river where he boarded the boat to take him to Briel. The thought of never seeing him again if the expedition miscarried was so terrible that it deprived her of her senses, and she sat immobile in her carriage for as long as she could still see him. A storm rendered the first embarkation abortive, and the task force had to return to port. This occasioned a second farewell which might have been anticlimactic after the first, but which Mary insisted 'm'etoit plus sensible encore que la premiere, et lorsqu'il me quitta, c'etoit comme si l'on m'eut arrache le coeur' ('was to me even more affecting than the first, and as he left me it was as if one had torn out my heart'; Bentinck, 86). That was the last time she saw William before she herself followed him to England the following February. 
Burnet saw Mary just before the expedition left, and noted that 'she seemed to have a great load on her spirits, but to have no scruple as to the lawfulness of the design'. He urged upon her the importance of her backing William up to the hilt, since any sign of discord would be ruinous to the enterprise. 'She answered me that I need fear no such thing: if any person should attempt that, she should treat them so, as to discourage all others from venturing on it for the future. She was very solemn and serious, and prayed God earnestly to bless and direct us. ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.311)' While the expedition was under way she worshipped four times a day, and the rest of the time meditated and composed prayers. When she learned that William had successfully landed she allowed herself to relax four days a week, but refrained from playing cards. She still kept herself away from the public during the weeks of the revolution in England, coming out of her self-enforced seclusion only to entertain the Elector Frederick III of Brandenburg and his wife. 
One of the prayers that Mary composed was for the proceedings in the Convention which was discussing the arrangements for the disposal of the crown. The proposal that there should be a regency she privately preferred. There was a strong party led by the earl of Danby which wanted her to be queen regnant. Danby wrote to urge her to insist on her hereditary right, claiming that her insistence would sway the Convention to declare her queen. Mary replied 'that she was the prince's wife, and never meant to be other than in subjection to him, and that she did not thank anyone for setting up for her an interest divided from that of her husband' (Strickland, 5.521). Until her views were known, however, her supporters argued strenuously against those who wished William to be king. Thus where the latter were in favour of the view that the throne was vacant, Mary's supporters contested it on the grounds that James had forfeited the crown through his Catholicism and that all other Catholics were similarly disbarred, so that the succession went automatically to the next protestant heir, who was Mary. Had Mary been present in England, notwithstanding her own preference, this view might have gained more adherents. It certainly appears that William did not encourage her to leave the Netherlands until he was assured of the crown. He got this assurance when he indicated that he had not gone over to England to be 'his wife's gentleman usher'. On or about 3 February 1689 he held a meeting of leading politicians and told them that if Mary were to be declared queen 'he could not think of holding any thing by apron strings'. Unless he were offered the crown 'he would go back to Holland and meddle no more in their affairs'. This announcement 'helped not a little to bring the debates at Westminster to a speedy determination'. What clinched them was Mary's own wish, conveyed by Burnet, to rule jointly with her husband ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.395-6). The declaration of rights then declared William and Mary king and queen, though giving him the sole executive power. Mary was quite happy with this solution. 'My opinion', she wrote in her memoirs, 'has ever been that women should not meddle in government' (Doebner, 23). 
Mary finally arrived in England on 12 February 1689. Although she expressed sadness at leaving the Netherlands where she had been so happy, her cheerful deportment when she entered Whitehall was noted and condemned by many observers as not acting with due decorum. 'She ran about it, looking into every closet and conveniency, and turning up the quilts of beds, just as people do at an inn' wrote one admittedly hostile observer ('An Account of the Conduct of the Dowager Duchess of Marlborough', 1742, 26). But even Burnet confessed he 'was one of those that censured this in my thoughts' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.406). She put it down to guidance she had received from William that she should not betray any misgivings about entering a place from which her father had so recently fled. The very next day she went with William to the Banqueting House in Whitehall to assent to the declaration of rights and to accept the crown. 
Their coronation took place in Westminster Abbey on 11 April. Bishop Compton of London officiated at it since ominously the archbishop of Canterbury, William Sancroft, declined on conscientious grounds. Mary herself felt scruples about the 'pomp and vanity' of the ceremony and the stress on the Anglican communion during it, which she felt arose from 'worldly considerations' (Doebner, 13). Throughout the ceremony the unprecedented nature of the dual monarchy was stressed. Thus where Mary or William would have received the crown kneeling on the steps of the altar if they had been mere consorts, both sat in specially made coronation chairs. The two sovereigns took a new form of coronation oath. Where James had sworn to confirm the laws and customs granted to the English people by his predecessors, they undertook to govern according to the statutes agreed on in parliament. Again, where their predecessor had agreed to uphold rightful customs, they took the oath to maintain the protestant religion. A medal struck to commemorate the coronation depicted William as Jove thundering against James II as Phaeton leaping out of a chariot at Jove's anathemas. But Jacobites claimed that the chariot represented Mary as the Roman matron Tullia, who had driven out Tullius to set up Tarquin, and that she was dethroning her father. 
Far more devastating to Mary's peace of mind was a letter she received from her father at this time, saying that previously he 'had wholly attributed her part in the revolution to obedience to her husband; but the act of being crowned was in her power, and if she were crowned while he and the prince of Wales were living, the curse of an outraged father would light upon her, as well as of that God who has commanded duty to parents. (Strickland, 6.9)' Jacobites kept up throughout her reign the charge that she had behaved unnaturally in replacing James. In June 1689 they exploited the queen's discomfiture at a production of Dryden's 'The Spanish Fryar'. The plot, involving a queen of Aragon who had usurped the throne, was grist to their mill. 'In one place, where the queen of Arragon is going to church in procession, tis said by a spectator, Very good, she usurps the throne, keeps the old king in prison and at the same time is praying for a blessing on her army... Twenty more things are said which may be wrested to what they were never designed. (Dalrymple, vol. 2, appendix 2, 79)' In 1690 a Jacobite poem imagined her lying in bed 'at dead of night... in her own father's lodgings at Whitehall'. The ghost of her mother draws back the curtain and upbraids her saying: '
Can quiet slumber ever close thine eyes? 

Or is thy conscience sunk too low to rise? 

From this same place was not thy aged Sire 

Compelled by midnight-summons to retire?... 

Had he been murdered, it had mercy shown 

'Tis less to kill a king, than to dethrone. 
(Lord, 5.298-9)' To most of her subjects, however, Mary was more acceptable than her father or for that matter her husband, who was hated as a Dutchman and despised as an alleged homosexual. William was well aware of this, and told the marquess of Halifax in June 1689 that 'if hee left us, the Queen would governe us better' (Foxcroft, 2.222). According to Burnet, in December he came close to bringing this about: 'He thought he could not trust the tories, and he resolved he would not trust the whigs: so he fancied the tories would be true to the queen, and confide in her, though they would not in him. He therefore resolved to go over to Holland and leave the government in the queen's hands. ('Bishop Burnet's History', 4.71)' In the event wiser counsels prevailed.Soon after the coronation in Westminster Abbey, commissioners arrived from the convention which had met in Edinburgh to offer the crown of Scotland to William and Mary. The formal ceremony was held in the Banqueting House where the king and queen accepted the claim of right, the Scottish equivalent of the declaration of rights, and took the coronation oath. They thereby became king and queen of Scotland as well as England. Their claim to Ireland, however, was currently being disputed by James II, whose landing in Kinsale was reported to them on their coronation day in England. James was effective ruler of Ireland for over a year. 
William's departure for Ireland in June 1690 raised the problem of the arrangements to be made for the governing of the country in his absence. At first he did not want to leave Mary in charge at all, preferring to appoint a council which would simply report to her but be answerable to himself. Thus he told Halifax that 'there must be a Councell to governe in his absence, and that the Queen was not to meddle' (Foxcroft, 2.246). However, he was persuaded that it was most convenient to pass an act of parliament vesting the administration in Mary. The 'Regency Act' stated that, notwithstanding the 'Bill of Rights': 'whensoever and so often as it shall happen that his Majesty shall be absent out of this realm of England it shall and may be lawful for the Queen's Majesty to exercise and administer the regal power and government of the kingdom. ('Statutes of the Realm', 11 vols., 1810-28, 6.170)' Some members of parliament objected to the arrangement. As one put it 'if the king should die in this expedition and the queen be regent, what if, out of duty to her father, if he land she should not oppose him?' 'The question is', riposted another, 'whether you will trust the government in the queen's hands or not at all?' Such arguments were set aside when it became clear that 'the king is resolved to trust the queen' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 6, 1690, 611-18). 
Mary was anxious that she 'should not make a foolish figure in the world' (Doebner, 23) when she took on her new responsibilities. For much of 1689 after the coronation she had devoted herself to the same kind of interests she had cultivated in the Netherlands. Thus she had brought her collection of Chinese porcelain to Hampton Court where the royal pair spent the summer. In the autumn they had moved nearer to London to Holland House, and just before Christmas acquired Kensington Palace. Mary herself remarked on the difference between the tranquillity she had enjoyed in the Netherlands and the bustle which surrounded her in England: 'et ce qui m'afflige' she wrote to Mademoiselle la Baronne de Wassenaer d'Obdam on 10 August 1689, 'c'est le peu d'apparence que je voie d'estre encore si heureuse' ('what afflicts me is the small prospect I see of ever being so happy again'; Bentinck, 119). 
The major disturbance to Mary's domestic peace had been a disagreement with her sister over Anne's intrigues with members of parliament to get a financial settlement for herself. This was the first round in a quarrel which was to estrange Mary from Anne completely. Mary thought that her sister should be content to depend on herself and her husband for her finances. But Anne, who had agreed to set aside her hereditary claim to the throne in William's favour, thought that an adequate parliamentary grant was a fair compensation, especially since she was in financial difficulties. The matter came to a head in the House of Commons in December, when Anne's supporters voted her an annual allowance of $50,000, much to Mary's chagrin. On 3 March 1690 she observed privately that there was a Jacobite party and a republican party in England, 'et que j'ay raison de craindre que ma soeur en forme une troisieme' ('and that I have reason to fear that my sister is forming a third'; Bentinck, 95). Apart from this foray into public affairs, however, Mary had been very much left at leisure to pursue her hobbies of gardening and needlework. As Burnet observed, 'she seemed to employ her time and thoughts in any thing rather than matters of state' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 4.87). Now she had to take over the government of the country. 
Mary was not left alone to govern, for although the 'Regency Act' made no mention of a council, William appointed one consisting of nine of the principal ministers of state. He clearly gave her his opinion of them, for in July she wrote to him 'I thought you had given me wrong characters of men, but now I see they answer my expectation of being as little of a mind as a body' (Dalrymple, 2/2, 143). Their failure to arrive at a consensus was due to the fact that five were tories while four were whigs. Mary was not impressed by any of the nine, her own comments on each of them being negative. Of Thomas Osborne, marquess of Carmarthen, whom William had particularly recommended to her, she wrote that he was 'of a temper I can never like'. The earl of Devonshire she found 'weak and obstinate', the earl of Dorset was too lazy, the earls of Monmouth and Pembroke were 'mad', the earls of Marlborough and Nottingham were untrustworthy, while Sir John Lowther was 'a very honest but weak man'. The ninth, Edward Russell, though he 'was recommended to me for sincerity, yet he had his faults' (Doebner, 29-30). 
Mary's inexperience in affairs of state showed in her dealings with the council, who were not overimpressed by her abilities. She confessed to William that 'as I do not know when I ought to speak and when not, I am as silent as can be'. 'Every one sees how little I know of business and therefore will be apt to do as much as they can' she further informed him. 'I find they meet often at the Secretary's [Nottingham's] office, and do not take much pains to give me an account' (Dalrymple, vol. 2, appendix, part 2, 119, 121). She soon demonstrated that they had underestimated her. Carmarthen, who held the post of president of the council, felt he should have the prevailing influence. One Jacobite libel asserted that 'she's governed in Council by the marquis [of] Carmarthen' (Lord, 5.193). In fact she was quite able to divide and rule the nine. To offset the influence of Carmarthen, a tory, she made a point of cultivating the whig Edward Russell, telling him 'that I desired to see him sometime, for being a stranger to business I was afraid of being too much led or persuaded by one party'. When the whigs tried to take advantage of her by offering $200,000 if she dissolved parliament she told Monmouth, who made the offer, that she would have to consult the king about it (Dalrymple, vol. 2, appendix, part 2, 122, 141). Mary's deference to William in fact resolved a problem which had agitated debates on the 'Regency Bill' as to the division of the executive power between them. There had been some concern about the consequences of their not seeing eye to eye. In the event this never arose, because Mary was anxious to prevent it. 'That which makes me in pain', she wrote to William, 'is for fear what is done may not please you. I am sure it is my chief desire... as much as may be to act according to your mind' (Dalrymple, vol. 2, appendix, part 2, 129). She stuck by the resolution adopted at the first meeting of the nine that 'all business that will admit delay must be sent to the king that his pleasure may be known' ('Finch MSS', 2.378). 
A crisis arose during Mary's first experience of government, however, which demanded decisions which could not be referred to the king. The defeat inflicted on the English fleet by the French at Beachy Head in June 1690 called for urgent action by the regents. Mary rose to the occasion. 'Heaven seems to have sent us one of the most threatening junctures that England ever saw', a newspaper claimed, 'merely to set off with the greater lustre the wisdom magnanimity and justice of a princess who has made good some people's fears and other's hopes in deserving the character of another Queen Elizabeth' ('Mercurius Reformatus, or, The New Observator', 1 Aug 1690). Burnet, who saw her every week that summer, observed that she 'shewed an extraordinary firmness... her behaviour was in all respects heroical' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 4.98). She also kept a cool head, as the treatment of the earl of Ailesbury, a suspected Jacobite, reveals. In July she issued an order for the arrest of several Jacobites, including Ailesbury. He got his wife to communicate to the queen how mortified he was that, as a suspect on bail, he could not pay his duty to her. He recalled: 'The Queen's answer was in these very words: 'Tell my Lady of Ailesbury that I love to do good to all persons as far as I can, but more especially to her husband and his family, whom I knew so well in my youngest years... and therefore, for his sake, I will break through the common forms and direct him to come at four tomorrow afternoon.'' Ailesbury accordingly waited on 'that good and incomparable Queen' and even played cards with her, to the astonishment of her companions ('Memoirs of... Ailesbury', 1.264-5). 
The loss of the battle of Beachy Head was attributed to the misconduct of the earl of Torrington, the English admiral. Mary determined to dispense with his services and to imprison him in the Tower to await the outcome of a judicial inquiry into his actions. Fortunately the situation was saved by William's victory at the battle of the Boyne. Mary was relieved to learn that her husband had won and that her father had managed to escape unscathed. Her relief that both had been spared was expressed in the letter she wrote to the electress of Hanover. 'La conservation et la victoire d'un mary d'un cote, et la preservation de la personne d'un pere de l'autre... etoit plus que je n'osois esperer' ('the conservation and the victory of a husband on one side, and the preservation of a father on the other... was more than I dared to hope'; Bentinck, 107). 
The problem of replacing Torrington Mary had to resolve by herself. She had initially referred the decision to William, but the advice he gave, that Edward Russell and Richard Haddock should replace the admiral, proved abortive, for Russell declined the appointment. Mary then proposed that Haddock should serve with Sir John Ashby, a proposal endorsed by the nine. When the commissioners of the Admiralty were brought in to be informed of this, however, one of them, Sir Thomas Lee, objected that they should have been consulted earlier and invited to recommend a replacement. To this Mary replied 'then the king... could not make an admiral which the admiralty did not like?' Lee answered 'no, no more he can't' (Dalrymple, vol. 2, appendix, part 2, 147). Although in the end she got her own way, backed up by the nine, Mary discovered how much such matters were accomplished 'by partiality and faction'. As she confessed to the electress of Hanover in a letter of 14 August 'les animosites personelles, que les gens ont l'un contre l'autre, sont bien desagreables, et les partis differents sont trop difficiles a menager pour moi' ('the personal animosities that men have for one another are disagreeable enough, and the different parties are too difficult for me to manage'; Bentinck, 107). 'When I... see what folk do here', she wrote to William, 'it grieves me too much, for Holland has really spoiled me in being kind to me' (Dalrymple, vol. 2, appendix, part 2, 3). Mary's first real experience as queen had been bruising. She was relieved when her husband returned in September and expressed himself 'very much pleased with her behaviour' (Doebner, 34). 
When William left England again in January 1691, this time for the Netherlands, his previous year's absence had established a routine for the running of the country. While he was on the continent, which apart from a brief return in mid-April lasted until October, the regency council dealt with routine business while Mary coped with any crises. There was concern about the discovery of a Jacobite plot involving Lord Preston, but this was dealt with by the king when he returned briefly to England. Mary's involvement in the process was limited to an exchange with Preston's daughter, whom she found admiring a portrait of James II at Kensington and asked her why she did so. The young girl answered 'I am reflecting how hard it is that my father should be put to death for loving your father' (Dalrymple, 1.466-7). The only alarm the queen faced was a disastrous fire at Whitehall, which destroyed much of the palace, and forced her to escape in her nightdress, just before the king returned in April. Otherwise Mary was able to pass her time in public playing cards and arranging a ball for her sister's birthday, and in private meditating that God would bring success to their undertakings. These meditations were not just for the blessing of providence in general, but for particular enterprises. Thus she asked God to: 'Regarde avec un oeil de compassion ceux qui sont en Irlande, et, si c'est ta volonte, mets fin a cette malheureuse guerre. Benis pour cette fin les efforts de notre general, Mr de Ginkle, et les autres qui sont employe a cet oeuvre.(Regard with a compassionate eye those who are in Ireland, and, if it is Thy will, put an end to this unhappy war. Bless for this end the efforts of our general, Mr van Ginkel, and the others who are employed in this work. Bentinck, 101)' 'The only thing of business' she dealt with, according to her memoirs, 'was the filling the Bishoprics' (Doebner, 37). The bishoprics which had to be filled were those occupied by the nonjurors, who had been deprived of their sees for not swearing oaths of allegiance to William and Mary. Burnet maintained that 'the king left the matters of the church wholly in the queen's hands' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 4.211). But that was not always the case. 'The Queen shall give no bishoprics', he informed Lord Halifax on the eve of his first departure in 1690 (Foxcroft, 2.251). When Canterbury became vacant in 1694 on Tillotson's death, he translated Thomas Tenison to it, whereas she would have preferred Edward Stillingfleet ('Bishop Burnet's History', 4.244). The sensitive business of depriving Archbishop Sancroft and other nonjuring bishops, however, he did leave to his wife. She handled it admirably, choosing John Tillotson as Sancroft's replacement at Canterbury. Tillotson was just the man to lead the Church of England during the troubled years following the revolution of 1688. 'Had it been put to a poll', William Sherlock claimed, 'there had been vast odds on his side that he would have been voted into the see of Canterbury' (Sherlock, 17). Mary was even prepared to risk offending her husband by promoting George Hooper to the deanery of Canterbury, for William had expressed his dislike of the new dean. Hooper had apparently said that 'if her husband retained his throne it would be by her skill and talents for governing' (Strickland, 6.62). 
Relations with Anne continued to deteriorate over the summer of 1691. This time they involved perceived slights to Anne's husband, George, prince of Denmark. George had already felt insulted by the king, whom he had accompanied to Ireland the previous year. William virtually took no notice of his brother-in-law, ignoring his part in the battle of the Boyne. To the insult offered to George's military prowess the king added another relating to his naval expertise. George told William that he wished to join the navy as a volunteer, an ambition the king did nothing to curb before his own departure in January 1691. He gave orders to Mary, however, that the prince was not to be allowed to serve, and she had the invidious task in May of sending Lord Nottingham to George with orders forbidding him to join a ship to which he had already consigned his baggage, which had to be removed. The upshot was, according to a contemporary report, that 'the two sisters quarreled terribly' (Gregg, 80). 
They were to quarrel even more fiercely when William returned from the campaign in October 1691 complaining about the conduct of the earl of Marlborough, Anne's favourite. The king accused Marlborough of corresponding with the exiled James II and of conniving with his wife to alienate Anne from her sister and himself. Certainly John and Sarah Churchill, the earl and countess of Marlborough, were Anne's most intimate confidants in her dispute with William and Mary. Their intrigues, which did indeed include correspondence with James, led William to cashier the earl from all his offices and to ban him from court in January 1692. Although the ban undoubtedly extended to Marlborough's wife, Anne provocatively took Sarah to court at Kensington Palace on 4 February. Mary restrained herself from remonstrating with her sister at the time, on the grounds of the princess's pregnancy. But she wrote to her the very next morning to complain that she had 'all the reason imaginable to look upon your bringing her as the strangest thing that ever was done' (Strickland, 5.344-6). She concluded by virtually ordering Anne to dispense with Sarah's services. When Anne refused Mary evicted her from her apartment at the Cockpit. Before quitting the Cockpit, Anne sought an interview with her sister who, according to Sarah, 'was as insensible as a Statue' (Gregg, 88). Anne and Prince George moved to Syon House. In April Mary sent the earl of Rochester to Anne to demand the immediate dismissal of Sarah, upon which the princess and her husband could be reinstated in their former residence. Anne gave the spirited reply that she was quite content with her new abode, so much so 'that should the Monsters grow good natured and endulge her in everything she could desire... she would be hardly persuaded to leave her retirement' (Gregg, 90). William had become a monster, 'Caliban', the 'Dutch abortion', to the princess before this. Now Mary was identified with him in Anne's eyes. Mary attempted a reconciliation with her sister by visiting her after she had given birth to a stillborn child on 17 April. But her insistence on the dismissal of Sarah made the attempt futile. It was the last time that the sisters met. Mary made the breach permanent by issuing an order that nobody could appear at court who had visited Anne. She even forbade the mayor of Bath to receive the princess, though when she did so, according to the earl of Nottingham, she 'could not refrain from tears, and said 'Thus it becomes a Queen to act, but I cannot forget she is my sister'' (Gregg, 96). 
Mary was again queen regnant under the terms of the 'Regency Act' when William was out of the country from 5 March to 18 October 1692. She appears to have been more reluctant than before to take decisions without reference to William. Perhaps he had criticized her for some of those she had taken the previous year, possibly concerning the replacing of the nonjurors. Or it could be that she was reprimanded for her initial flippancy when she was asked to round up the usual Jacobite suspects and presented with a list headed by Ailesbury. According to him she replied that he had been arrested in 1690 for nothing, and ordered his name to be eliminated. Nottingham then replied that they had orders from the king, at which 'with warmth' Mary demanded to see his orders: 'On which the Secretary replied 'Madam we have received orders to clap up a certain number.' On which she laughed, and with life and judgement added, 'I thought persons were to be taken up for crimes and not to make up numbers as they empanel jurymen.' So other names of persons were presented to her, and finding at the top, Robert of Scarsdale, 'Stop there, my Lord. Since you will have your number, put in that Lord's name insted of my Lord Ailesbury's, and if titles please you, there is an Earl for an Earl. What is sauce for one is sauce for another.' ('Memoirs of... Ailesbury', 1.298)' If this story reached William he might not have seen the joke and instructed his wife to take his orders more seriously. At all events the earl of Nottingham noted of one decision that her advisers thought it 'very reasonable for the Queen to grant... but her Majesty would take no resolution without the king' ('Finch MSS', 4.40). Mary was later criticized in parliament for referring matters to William, one member expressing the wish that 'she had dispatched more herself without sending abroad for orders' ('The Parliamentary Diary of Narcissus Luttrell', ed. H. Horwitz, 1972, 251). 
There was unease among officers of the armed forces at the disgrace of Marlborough, who spent some weeks in the Tower this year, that it was the prelude to a general purge. So seriously was this threat taken that Mary felt obliged to reassure naval officers: 'that she reposes an entire confidence in them all, and will never think that any brave English seaman will betray her or his country to the insolent tyranny of the French, and as it is their duty and their glory to defend the government, it shall be her part to reward their service. ('Finch MSS', 4.141-2)' This reassurance inspired sixty-four naval officers to sign an address of loyalty, pledging to venture their lives in defence of her rights and the liberty and religion of England. The navy went on to win the battle of La Hogue, and with it the command of the sea. The queen was as good as her word and rewarded the seamen with a substantial sum of money, and pledged herself to establish a hospital at Greenwich for those who were disabled. Mary might have left more to William than she needed to have done in 1692, for whatever reason; but as this episode reveals she could still rise to the occasion when it was required. Both houses of parliament recognized this when they thanked her for her administration of the government during William's absence. The Lords congratulated her on her resolute conduct 'by which the danger of an invasion was prevented and a glorious victory obtained at sea' ('JHL', 15.115). The Commons noted that while Europe was engulfed in war: 'we, your Majesty's subjects under your auspicious reign, enjoyed the blessings of peace at home, and... saw your Majesty's fleet return with so complete and glorious a victory as is not to be equalled in any former age and can never be forgotten by Posterity. ('JHC', 10.698)' Although she might have treated the Jacobites leniently, Mary's feelings for her father hardened during the course of this year. When James issued a declaration on the eve of La Hogue offering vague concessions to English protestants, Mary allowed it to be published in England in order to discredit him. And when she discovered that he was involved in a plot to assassinate her husband it removed the last vestiges of respect for the former king. 
Mary noted in her memoirs that her administration during William's absence from 24 March to 29 October 1693 'was all along unfortunate, and whereas other years the King had almost ever approved all was done, this year he disapproved almost every thing' (Doebner, 59). The friction between them was political. Mary's attachment to the tories became stronger than ever, while William began to show a preference for the whigs. In April the queen was godmother at the baptism of the earl of Nottingham's fourteenth child. Yet the previous month, before setting out for the Netherlands, the king had appointed the whigs John Trenchard and John Somers to the second secretaryship of state and the lord keepership. The whigs in the cabinet criticized Nottingham's alleged failure to protect a merchant fleet bound for the Levant, which was attacked by the French. These criticisms distressed Mary, who praised Nottingham as 'the man I found the most constant in serving the king his own way, and who was the man who really toock the most and greatest pains to do so' (Doebner, 59). Yet when William returned he dismissed Nottingham from the senior secretaryship and offered it to the whig duke of Shrewsbury. 'When I begin to reflect on this year', Mary noted at the end of 1693, 'I am almost frighted and dare hardly go on; for t'is the year I have met with more troubles as to publick matters than any other' (ibid., 58). 
The following April Mary complained of infirmities which she attributed to advancing years, or to 'le chagrin et les inquietudes qu'on a si regulierement tous les estes' ('the grief and anxieties that I have so regularly every summer'; Bentinck, 146). It seems that Mary played less of a role as regent than usual while William was absent from 6 May to 9 November. She continued to preside at meetings of the privy council, which met almost twice a week. But she rarely attended the cabinet, which took the major decision to have the fleet winter in the Mediterranean without her in consultation with the king. She was thus less involved in the government of the country in 1694 than she had been in 1690. During that period, however, William had been abroad for over two and a half years, rather more than half the time. Mary had made a crucial contribution to the development of a system of governing the country during the regular absences of the king. 
Mary reconciled the bulk of the tories to the revolution of 1688. Had William been sole ruler from the start he would have been king mainly of the whigs. Jacobitism, by no means a negligible force, would have become even more formidable. It was no coincidence that the most serious Jacobite plots against the regime took place after the queen's death. By that time, however, thanks to her most tories remained loyal to William. They accepted her as next in line to the throne after her father, conveniently dismissing her half-brother as a supposititious child. As Aphra Behn put it on Mary's arrival in England in 1689: '
The murmuring world till now divided lay, 

Vainly debating whom they shou'd Obey 

Till you great Cesar's Off-spring blest our Isle 

The differing Multitudes to Reconcile. 
('The Works of Aphra Behn', ed. J. Todd, 7 vols., 1992-6, 1.307)' Mary reconciled herself to the revolution by attributing it to providence. God had weighed her father in the balance and found him wanting. She and her husband were therefore the instruments of divine judgment. As Burnet recorded, she was fully convinced 'that God had conducted her by an immediate hand and that she was raised up to preserve that Religion which was then everywhere in its last Agonies' (Burnet, 'Essay', 95). Mary's belief in providence was absolute. 'I cannot tell, if it should be his will to suffer you to come to harm for our sins', she wrote privately to William in Ireland, 'for though God is able, yet many times he punishes the sins of a nation as it seems good in his sight' (Dalrymple, vol. 2, appendix, part 2, 130). The outcome of the battle of the Boyne was a clear sign that providence still blessed their cause. But if the English mocked it by continuing in their sinful ways, providence would condemn it. 
What was needed to ensure the permanence of the revolution of 1688 was a moral revolution. To inspire this Mary set an example of piety and devotion. Services in royal chapels became more frequent and more public. She surrounded herself with clergymen who had been foremost in the campaign against popery and vice under her father and her uncle. She publicized their sermons by having many which were preached before her printed. Thus where under Charles II a mere three a year had appeared by command of the king, an annual average of seventeen sermons were published by Mary's command. After her death the average commissioned by the court dropped to four a year. Preaching a sermon on the occasion of her demise Thomas Manningham noted that: 'Tis to the Queen that we owe many of those Pious Treatises which have been lately Publish'd amongst us; And that multitude of plain, useful and Practical Sermons, which she approv'd of, and caused to be printed, are Her Gift to the Publick. (Claydon, 98)' Her efforts to promote piety included schemes to eliminate pluralism and non-residence in the Church of England by putting pressure on clergymen guilty of these practices 'when not enforced by real necessity' to abandon those livings where they were not resident. Just before her death she admitted that 'she had no great hope of mending matters, yet she was resolved to go on' ('The Royal Diary', 5). 
Besides setting an example at court, Mary also supported the societies for reformation of manners in their efforts to get the country to mend its ways in order to avert God's wrath. In July 1691 she issued a proclamation to the justices of the peace for Middlesex for the suppressing of profaneness and debauchery. The following year 'the queen, in the king's absence, gave orders to execute the laws against drunkeness, swearing and the profanation of the Lord's day; and sent directions over England to all magistrates to do their duty in executing them' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 4.181-2). Some of the measures undertaken by the queen to prevent the profanation of Sunday provoked ridicule. Lord Dartmouth noted against this passage in Burnet's 'History of my Own Time': 'There came forth at this time several puritanical regulations for observing the sabbath in London, savouring so much of John Knox's doctrine and discipline, that Burnet was thought to have been the chief contriver. One was that hackney coaches should not drive upon that day; by another, constables were ordered to take away pies and puddings from anybody they met carrying of them in the streets; with a multitude of other impertinences so ridiculous in themselves, and troublesome to all sorts of people, that they were soon dropt, after they had been sufficiently laughed at. ('Bishop Burnet's History', 4.182)' Mary even tried by fiat to suppress vice in the army and navy, though without much success. Notwithstanding that some of them were excessive, the result of all Mary's endeavours, according to the dissenters who presented William with an address of condolence on her death, was 'that the Court, that is usually the centre of vanity and voluptuousness became virtuous by the impression of her example' (Bates, 25). 
Mary died on 28 December 1694. She had not been well since 24 November, when she was present at a service conducted by Archbishop Tillotson at which he had collapsed with a stroke from which he never recovered, dying a few days later. The first signs of Mary's fatal illness appeared on 19 December. She shook these off initially, so that it was hoped she only suffered from measles. But by the end of Christmas day it became clear that she was suffering from the most virulent smallpox. Archbishop Tenison felt duty bound to inform her that she was dying, for which she thanked him, since 'she had nothing then to do, but to look up to God and submit to his will' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 5.247). Her death occurred at Kensington Palace about one o'clock on the morning of the 28th. 
Jacobites insisted that Mary's death was a judgment of God upon her. One pamphleteer pointed out that she died in the same month that her father had endured an unnatural rebellion, while she was cut off in her prime -- she was only thirty-two -- according to the punishment threatened to breakers of the fifth commandment. A Jacobite 'Epitaph' appeared: '
Here ends, notwithstanding her specious pretences, 

The undutiful child of the kindest of princes. 

Well here let her lie, for by this time she knows, 

What it is such a father and king to depose. 
(Strickland, 6.130)' Mary's admirers turned the tables on her detractors, claiming that her death was a judgment on the nation for its sins. 'We have just cause to fear our sins have hastened her death' preached the duke of Newcastle's chaplain: 'God in his goodness sent us such a princess as was both a patroness and an example of goodness: a glass by which this crooked age might have rectified itself; and seeing he has waited divers years, and found no amendment, what was it but just to take the mirror from us? What should they do with a light who will not walk by it? (Pead, 19)' 'Natural causes had their share in this evil', conceded Archbishop Tenison, 'but it was the immorality, the sin of the nation which hastened it as a judgment' (Tenison, 26). 
Mary's body was embalmed the day she died, a necessary precaution in view of the putrescent effects of smallpox. It took from 28 December 1694 to 21 February 1695 to prepare for her lying-in-state, which took place from noon until five o'clock every day until 5 March. Although Mary herself had privately expressed the wish for a simple funeral, she was then buried with elaborate ceremony in Westminster Abbey. Sir Christopher Wren supervised the construction of a railed walk from the Banqueting House to the abbey, along which the funeral procession made its way in a blinding snowstorm. For the first time in English history the coffin of a monarch was accompanied by members of both houses of parliament. Although normally they were dissolved by the death of a king or queen regnant, William's surviving her as sole monarch created a unique situation. Consequently Mary's funeral procession was the largest ever held for an English monarch. The mourners entered the abbey to the solemn strains of Purcell's specially composed funeral anthem. The casket was laid under a catafalque designed by Wren, while the archbishop of Canterbury preached a sermon, and then it was lowered into the tomb. A wax effigy of the dead queen was placed on display in the abbey, so that Mary's image would be perpetuated beyond the grave. She had not wanted her funeral to be expensive, but the total cost came to about $100,000. 
Her reputation was fiercely disputed between Jacobites and Williamites. A Jacobite epitaph summed up the view of James's supporters: '
Between vice and virtue she parted her life, 

She was too bad a daughter and too good a wife. 
(Strickland, 6.130)' On the other hand John Somers, the whig leader, stated in parliament 'I believe her the best woman in the world' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 5.631). Mary generated these contrary responses in her subjects. The public image she projected could foster both. Her behaviour on taking over Whitehall Palace in 1689 certainly seemed unfeeling in a daughter, while her toleration of William's infidelity did seem to be beyond the call of duty, even given the lax court morals of the age. At the same time her piety struck many observers as being sincere. 'If any person came to visit her in the morning before she pour'd forth her prayers', observed one admirer, 'she sent them back with this expression 'That she was first to serve the King of Kings'' ('The Royal Diary', 2). Her private memoirs, letters, and meditations, however, leave little doubt that the eulogists were nearer the truth than the detractors. The survival of these papers, some preserved in French, gives a rare insight into her private thoughts. They document a simple piety and devotion to the Church of England. Of course she was no saint, as she readily admitted to herself. Her treatment of her sister Anne could be called an unnecessary vendetta. Yet she clearly felt affection for her father until he forfeited it by countenancing the death of her husband. And, although their marriage got off to a rocky start, William and Mary did come to respect and even perhaps to love each other with the passage of the years. Certainly he was distraught at the onset of her fatal illness, risking infection from smallpox himself by insisting on ministering to her, and her death devastated him. 
Mary was a passionate and intelligent woman, which made her sensitive to her position. She was very aware of the role which, in her view, she had been called upon by providence to play. And she played it well. Her actions at the time of the revolution of 1688 reconciled many Anglicans, who were uneasy about replacing James with William, to the new regime. She did not wish to rule as well as to reign, being more than content to let her husband exercise the executive authority. But, when called upon in his frequent absences to administer affairs, she showed that she was quite able to do so, and to stand up to the cynical and experienced politicians with whom she had to work. 
Perhaps above all Mary was prepared for death. She read Charles Drelincourt's 'Art of Dying Well' (its published title was 'The Christian's Defence Against the Fears of Death') seven times over. She often expressed indifference to dying, only wishing that she would die before William. She got her wish. And after the delirium in the first onset of her final illness, in which she raved alarmingly, she became perfectly composed and conscious of her fate. Mary had learned Drelincourt's lesson and died an exemplary death. 


@@@@@


doc= 18247


Mary (1658-1718), queen of England, Scotland, and Ireland, consort of James II and VII, was born Maria Beatrice Anna Margherita Isabella d'Este on 25 September/5 October 1658 at the Palazzo Ducale, Modena, Italy, the first of two surviving children of Alfonso IV d'Este, duke of Modena and Reggio (1634-1662), and his wife, Laura (1639-1687), daughter of Giralamo Martinozzi and his wife, Margherita Mazarini. Through her maternal grandmother Mary Beatrice was a great-niece of Cardinal Mazarin. On the death of her father on 6/16 July 1662 and the succession of her infant brother, Francesco II, to the dukedom, her mother became regent of the duchy and her uncle, Prince Rinaldo d'Este, her joint guardian. Her education was entrusted to the nuns of the local Carmelite convent. She later recalled with pleasure the summers she had spent at d'Este's summer palace of Sassuolo. The family was well aware that a marriageable daughter was a potential diplomatic bonus. Following the death of Henrietta, duchess of Orleans, in 1670, Mary Beatrice's great-uncle Cardinal d'Este hinted to Cardinal d'Estrees that she might make a suitable second wife for Orleans. Even so, there was an assumption that she would probably enter the local Convent of the Visitation and she herself believed that she had a vocation. 
The future of the young Mary Beatrice was transformed by the death of James, duke of York's first duchess, Anne Hyde, in March 1671. York's wish to remarry was a matter of the utmost dynastic importance. The growing likelihood that Charles II's wife, Catherine of Braganza, would never bear any children made it ever more probable that any surviving son born to York's future wife would eventually inherit the British throne. That the newly converted York was determined to choose a Catholic bride meant that the marriage was bound to be controversial. His groom of the stole, the second earl of Peterborough, was appointed to investigate the various candidates. Klaudia Felizitas, daughter of the late Archduke Ferdinand Karl of the Tyrol (who instead married Emperor Leopold I); Marie Anna of Wurttemberg, daughter of Prince Ulrich of Neuenburg; Elizabeth, widow of Louis Joseph, duc de Lorraine-Guise; and Eleonore Magdalene, daughter of the elector palatine of Pfalz Neuburg (and Leopold I's future third wife), were among the possibilities considered. 
Peterborough, on the advice of the Modenese representative in Paris, Abbe Rizzini, instead favoured Mary Beatrice, a choice which was also acceptable to Louis XIV. Initial indications from Modena were, however, unfavourable, either because the intention was to honour her wish to enter a convent or, more probably, because the king of Spain, Carlos II, was preferred as a bridegroom. Her aunt Leonora, sister of Alfonso IV, was promoted as one possible alternative bride for York and Mary Beatrice bluntly told Peterborough when she first met him that she would prefer to become a nun. In the end pressure applied by the French government in the person of the marquis de Dangeau persuaded the Duchess Laura to capitulate. The decision distressed her daughter who cried for several days on being informed of her fate. Several problems remained. Another of the bride's great-uncles, Cardinal Barberini, lobbied the pope, Clement X, for a dispensation to allow her to marry someone who had not yet publicly declared himself a Catholic, but objections were raised as to whether Mary Beatrice would be able to worship in public and about whether any children would be brought up as Catholics, and the pope recalled the dispensation at the last minute. The Modenese decided to proceed anyway, although the bishop of Modena refused to officiate. The wedding took place on 20/30 September 1673 in the Palazzo Ducale with Peterborough standing in as proxy for York. The new duchess set out for England five days later, her fifteenth birthday, accompanied by her mother and Prince Rinaldo. 
What diplomatic importance the dukes of Modena enjoyed was as the traditional pro-French counterweight to the papacy in central Italy and it was understood by everyone that the marriage reinforced Charles II's alliance with Louis XIV. This made the match all the more unpopular in England. The House of Commons presented a protest to Charles II on 3 November 1673 asking him to cancel the marriage and the Fifth of November commemorations in London that year were much larger than usual. These protests were ignored on the grounds that the marriage had already taken place and suggestions that Mary Beatrice should delay her arrival were rejected. 
The bride landed at Dover on 21 November and was greeted on the beach by her new husband. That evening, in the presence of the bride and groom, Bishop Crewe of Oxford formally acknowledged the validity of the ceremony which had taken place in Modena. Five days later the couple sailed up the Thames to Whitehall. The reception there was marred when a number of peeresses objected to the king's offer of a chair to the new duchess of York's mother. Such disputes over the right to sit in the royal presence often occurred during the visits of foreign royalty, but on this occasion the protest seemed designed to cast aspersions on the marriage, for the implication was that the Duchess Laura was not royalty and that York had once again married beneath himself. The incident embarrassed the duchess, who cut short her stay in England. 
Mary Beatrice was never considered a great beauty. In this respect, her most striking feature, her long, narrow face, was a disadvantage. Shortly before her arrival in England, Peterborough's nephew, Henry, Lord O'Brien, joked that parliament planned to reward his uncle by granting him a pair of spectacles. Those who distrusted her for political reasons were quick to criticize her appearance. Others were more positive. The third Viscount Conway thought that she was: 'a proper hansome Lady, she hath very good eyes, very good features, and a very good complexion, but she wants the Aire which should sett off all this, and having been bred in a Monastry, knows not how to set one foot before another with any gracefulnesse. ('Conway Letters', ed. M. H. Nicolson and S. Hutton [1930], rev. edn, 1992, 376)' When she visited Cambridge in 1680 she was considered to be 'a very handsome, gracious looking person, pretty tall, not very big, black eyed, something pale-faced and a little outlandish-like swarthy colour' ('The Diary of Samuel Newton', ed. J. E. Foster, 1890, 80). Similar comments were made five years later by the marquis d'Auvers who described her as tall and well proportioned, with a white complexion, beautiful eyes, and a mouth which was a little too large. The person least concerned by any shortcomings in her appearance was perhaps her husband, who had a reputation for choosing his mistresses for their personalities rather than their beauty. What he really wanted from his new wife was an heir. 
Mary Beatrice soon settled into her new life at the English court. Charles II and Queen Catherine made her feel welcome and she got on well with her two stepdaughters, the elder of whom, Princess Mary, was only four years younger than she was. The countess of Peterborough was appointed as her groom of the stole as a reward to her husband for his efforts as royal matchmaker, and a number of her Italian servants were allowed to remain in the duchess's service. The one restriction placed on her was that, unlike Queen Catherine, she was required to conduct her religious devotions in private. This contravened the marriage treaty but, as her husband had still not publicly acknowledged his conversion, this had some advantages because the two of them were therefore able to attend private services together in her closet chapel. She was permitted the handful of Catholic priests she needed for that purpose. 
There was no doubt that the duchess was fertile. The rate of her pregnancies during the first eleven years of her marriage bears comparison with the more celebrated fertility of her younger stepdaughter. As with Princess Anne, the problem was that the pregnancies ended in miscarriage or that the children were short-lived. A miscarriage in May 1674 was followed by the birth of a daughter on 9 January 1675. Much to Charles II's annoyance, the child was baptized Catherina Laura in secret by the duchess's Jesuit chaplain, Antonio Galli. The king insisted on a second Anglican baptism and all three of the later children born before 1685 had to be baptized as protestants. Mary Beatrice again miscarried on 14 May 1675 but became pregnant almost immediately, only to lose that child on 4 October in her shock at the death of Catherina Laura the previous day. A second daughter, Isabella, was born on 28 August 1676 and she survived until 1681. Moreover, on 7 November 1677, just three days after Princess Mary had married the prince of Orange, Mary Beatrice was delivered of the longed-for son. He was baptized Charles and granted the dukedom of Cambridge. For the next five weeks it seemed as if Princess Mary's marriage might, after all, prove to be of only secondary importance. The infant duke, however, died on 12 December. 
For the time being Mary Beatrice was largely sheltered from political controversy. Burnet believed that she avoided any involvement in public affairs while her husband remained duke of York ('Bishop Burnet's History', 2.43). It was instead those around the duchess who caused problems. Her French Jesuit confessor, Pierre de Saint-Germain, was forced to flee to France in November 1675 when he was accused of attacking another French priest, Hippolite Chastelet, alias de Luzancy, who had taken refuge in England after deciding to become a protestant. Her secretary, Edward Colman, had to be dismissed in December 1676 after he was caught leaking military secrets. 
It was, however, always going to be only a matter of time before the duchess's life was thrown into confusion by a more substantial anti-Catholic panic. Any political moves against Catholics had to be seen as a potential threat to York and his wife, but what was not predictable was the series of revelations, deceits, and coincidences which conjured up the Popish Plot of 1678. This time bad luck, together with the resolve of their political opponents, came close to ruining them both. The seizure of Colman's papers on 29 September 1678 replaced the unsubstantiated allegations of Titus Oates with hard facts. As it happened, Mary Beatrice had already planned a trip to the Netherlands to visit Princess Mary. She and Princess Anne set out on 1 October and did not return until 16 October. The earl of Ossory accompanied them in order to brief the prince of Orange on the true nature of Oates's evidence. In Mary Beatrice's absence the full implications of Colman's letters became apparent, but the assumption that she and her husband must have known what Colman had been doing was to be the least imaginative part of the emerging conspiracy theory. It was also unfair. Colman's position as the duchess's secretary had been entirely nominal and the job had remained unfilled after his dismissal. The only definite secrets about Mary Beatrice that came to light in his papers were that she had used the disgraced Father Saint-Germain as a contact at the French court during the first half of 1676 to seek support for the proposal that her uncle should become a cardinal and to press the case of the English Carmelites at Antwerp who wished to move to Lille. Mary Beatrice's involvement in the broader conspiracy was often implied by York's critics but was one line of speculation which remained undeveloped. The duchess's absence in the Netherlands also provided her with the perfect alibi against any direct complicity in the death of Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey and by late December the evidence of Miles Prance had shifted attention to the supposed involvement in the plot by Catholic members of the queen's household. 
When the new parliament met in March 1679, Charles II decided that it would be better if the duke and duchess left the country. They reached Brussels on 17/27 March and took up residence at the Hotel de Bassigny, the house of the prince de Ligne. Three months later Mary Beatrice expressed disappointment that the trial of the five Catholic peers accused of complicity in the plot had been postponed, as she thought that they would each have been acquitted. She correctly foresaw that the dissolution of the 1679 parliament would not remove her husband's problems. Letters of denization were granted to her by the king on 24 September 1679 so that deeds confirming her jointure could be sealed on 26 and 27 September. This was intended to clarify her legal status at a time when her husband's future was uncertain. In the following month she and her husband were recalled to London, but almost immediately they were sent to Scotland. They arrived in Edinburgh on 24 November and held court at the palace of Holyroodhouse. Their return to England in February 1680 turned out to be only temporary, as the decision to allow parliament to assemble in October 1680 made it necessary for them to return to Scotland. This second Scottish exile was to be even longer than the first. On 2 March 1681, in Mary Beatrice's absence, her daughter, Isabella, died at St James's. By November 1681 she knew that she was pregnant once more, although she came close to another miscarriage on 16 December when she had, in the words of her physician, William Waldegrave, a 'dangerous fall' while out riding (Cambs. AS, R.51.17.31). Her expectant condition was one reason why she and James were allowed to leave Scotland in May 1682. Her mother visited England in order to be present at the birth. A daughter, Charlotte Maria, was born on the morning of 15 August 1682 but she lived only until 6 October. Mary Beatrice suffered two further miscarriages in October 1683 and on 8 May 1684. She was therefore childless when she became queen on the death of Charles II on 6 February 1685. 
No English queen consort in living memory had conformed to the Church of England but what made Mary Beatrice's position different was that her husband also openly acknowledged that he was a Catholic. The two of them attended mass in public for the first time on 15 February 1685. Despite the fact that it was a protestant ceremony, Mary Beatrice was crowned along with her husband in Westminster Abbey on 23 April 1685, becoming the first consort since 1603 to participate in a coronation. The frame of her coronation crown survives in the collections of the Museum of London, while her diadem, state crown, sceptre, and ivory rod remain part of the crown jewels. She seems to have adjusted well to her new role. John Evelyn noted with approval in July 1686 that 'her outward affability [had] much changed to statelinesse &c. since she has ben exalted' (Evelyn, 4.519). She remained in good health, although she did receive minor injuries in another riding accident in October 1685 and she suffered a bout of shingles in April 1686. 
The major reorganization which James imposed throughout his own household did not extend to that of his wife. Her household was modelled on that which had been provided for Catherine of Braganza and, before her, for Henrietta Maria. Comparable financial arrangements were also made to meet its costs. Revenues from the Post Office (almost $20,000), the excise on beer ($18,000), her lands, and other sources gave her an annual income of about $40,000. In the event this income was not quite sufficient as her actual expenditure reached almost $50,000. She was therefore granted a further $10,000 in December 1686 in the form of an official annuity to cover the difference. It was agreed that these payments would be continued as her jointure after James's death. The death of her maternal grandmother, Margherita Martinozzi, in June 1685 brought her some property in Italy. She also benefited from her husband's building projects at Whitehall. In May 1685 work began on a range of new state apartments for her and these were ready by 1687. In the following year attention shifted to her privy apartments, which were rebuilt by Sir Christopher Wren as the dominant feature on the palace's river frontage. Mary Beatrice, however, never got the chance to occupy them as they were not quite finished when she fled the country. In January 1686, in the absence of a prince of Wales, she was granted St James's Palace. 
Contemporaries almost certainly overestimated Mary Beatrice's role in policy-making. The duke of Monmouth's attempts to use her influence to save himself from the block came to nothing. Her subsequent request to be granted 100 of his supporters who were due to be transported to the West Indies, in order to collect the money made from their sale as indentured labour, has often been condemned. Seen from her point of view, however, the request could hardly seem callous as the deal was a purely financial transaction which made no practical difference to the prisoners themselves. Her principal concern during the first half of the reign was to persuade Pope Innocent XI to elevate her uncle Prince Rinaldo to the cardinalate. This request was granted on 23 August/2 September 1686. In November 1687 James disregarded her advice that it would be unwise to appoint his Catholic clerk of the closet, Edward Petre, to the privy council. Her secretary, John Caryll, claimed that she was also overruled when she tried to dissuade her husband from removing Cardinal Howard as cardinal-protector of England in order to appoint the new Cardinal d'Este to that position. Even so, the general fear was that she herself or those around her might use her position to meddle in politics, particularly that she might do so to support the Catholic interest. Her stepdaughter Princess Anne made it clear to her sister, the princess of Orange, that she was unconvinced that the queen could not be manipulated: 'The Queen, you must know, is of a very proud, haughty humour, and though she pretends to hate all forms and ceremony, yet one sees that those that make their court this way, are very well thought of. She declares always that she loves sincerity and hates flattery, but when the grossest flattery in the world is said to her face, she seems extremely well pleased with it. It really is enough to turn one's stomach to hear what things are said to her of this kind, and to see how mightily she is satisfied with it. ('Letters and Diplomatic Instructions', 30-31)' A number of courtiers, most notably the two Catholic converts the earl of Sunderland and the earl of Melfort, exploited this weakness to charm their way into her favour, although in both cases this was only a secondary factor in the influence they were able to exercise over the king. The Catholic earl of Dumbarton gained his position as a gentleman of the bedchamber in July 1687 in part because of the queen's backing. What complicated the question of Mary Beatrice's potential influence was her disapproval of the king's continuing affair with Catherine Sedley. The banishment of the new countess of Dorchester in early 1686 was a temporary victory for the queen, but this incident was the most obvious indication that the marriage was not an entirely happy one. 
News of the death of Mary Beatrice's mother at Rome on 9/19 July 1687 reached London by 26 July and six months of official court mourning commenced five days later. One of the duchess of Modena's final acts had been to visit Loreto to pray that her daughter might produce a male heir and the progresses of the king and queen that summer had been planned with the same aspiration in mind. While James made his own pilgrimage to Holywell his wife remained at Bath to take the waters in the hope that both undertakings would aid the conception of a son. These measures appeared to work: the future prince of Wales was probably conceived shortly after James had been reunited with Mary Beatrice at the end of his progress. 
In late November 1687 the first rumours of the queen's pregnancy began to circulate. An official announcement confirming the fact was made on 23 December. Days of thanksgiving were held on 15 January 1688 in London and on 29 January elsewhere. Unfortunately these public celebrations were out of step with the unease felt by most of the king's protestant subjects. The implications of a surviving Catholic male heir were obvious to all. The more paranoid took refuge in claims of popish deception in high places. The rumours that the birth would be faked, which had first circulated in 1682 when she was pregnant with Charlotte Maria, were recycled. By the middle of March 1688 Princess Anne was already claiming in private that these suspicions seemed well founded. Her main misgiving was that the queen seemed too healthy. The original intention was that the birth would take place at Windsor, mainly because that was where the court usually spent the summer. The date on which the queen intended to move there, 15 June, would in any case have been too late, but the change of plan was used by those who wished to create a mystery about these events. The queen had decided that she would stay at St James's, which was still her principal residence, and it was there that she went into labour on the morning of 10 June 1688. A son, James Francis Edward, was born shortly before 10 a.m. after a short confinement made difficult only by the crowd of witnesses crammed into her bedchamber. In accordance with contemporary post-natal practice, she remained in seclusion for one month after the birth, making her first public appearance on 9 July. 
The birth clinched the prince of Orange's decision to invade. That the child was a son seemed to confirm the predictions of those who were determined to believe that the birth was suppositious. All this wild speculation played into William's hands and the need to establish the truth about the birth was cited by him in his declaration of 1/10 October as one of the reasons justifying his actions. William's use of the rumours in this way required some sort of response. An extraordinary meeting of the privy council was held at Whitehall on 22 October to hear the testimonies of all those who had been present. Five days later these were enrolled in chancery as permanent proof of the prince's authenticity but it was already too late as only the weather was delaying the departure of the Dutch invasion fleet. On 17 November, twelve days after William had landed at Torbay, James set out from London to join his army at Salisbury. Mary Beatrice and a subcommittee of the privy council which had been appointed to assist her were left behind to manage events in the capital. The will which James signed that same day named her as regent in the event of his death. There was in truth little that Mary Beatrice could do from London to help her husband once the desertions to William's side began. 
By the time James returned to London on 26 November, withdrawal abroad already seemed the most prudent option. The comte de Lauzun offered to organize Mary Beatrice's escape. On 1 December it was decided by James that she would leave on the night of 3 December. The subsequent failure to get the prince of Wales out of the country, as well as highlighting just how dangerous any escape would be, made it necessary to delay the plan until the following week. The queen finally left Whitehall early on the morning of 10 December disguised as a laundry woman, taking her son with her and accompanied only by Lauzun and a few of her most trusted servants. She boarded one of the royal yachts which was lying off Gravesend later that morning. Bad weather prevented their sailing until early the next day, 11/21 December, and it then took them about six hours to reach Calais. After a short stay at Boulogne, waiting for news of James, Mary Beatrice set out for Paris. She was greeted by Louis XIV at Chatou, 6 miles to the west of the French capital, on 27 December 1688/6 January 1689, whereupon Louis presented her with the use of his palace at St Germain-en-Laye. James joined her there the following day. 
St Germain was to be Mary Beatrice's home for the rest of her life. In some ways her time there was to be more congenial than it had been in England. She and James were honoured guests at the greatest court in western Europe, all their domestic needs were well provided for, and most of her closest servants had been able to join her. Louis XIV, who always had a soft spot for her, made sure that she was treated as a queen. As the public status of Louis XIV's morganatic wife, the marquise de Maintenon, remained ambiguous, Mary Beatrice outranked every other woman at Versailles. What tarnished it all was the sense of disappointment and failure which inevitably pervaded the court James and Mary created for themselves at St Germain. Efforts to reverse the setbacks they had suffered brought their own problems. The seventeen months James now spent in Ireland was the longest period of separation during their years of marriage. For his wife, the hope that he might regain his three kingdoms was offset by the fear that he might die in the attempt. After his return, late in 1691 Mary Beatrice became pregnant once again. On 23 March/1 April 1692 James issued summonses to several leading English peeresses to attend the birth, which was then expected to take place some time around the middle of May. This time the estimate was too optimistic and it was not until 18/28 June that she gave birth to a daughter, Louise-Maria. This weakened but did not dispel the beliefs of those that wanted to think that there had been something suspicious about Prince James's birth. The defeat of the French invasion fleet at La Hogue the previous month had ended any real possibility of an early Stuart restoration and James was realistic enough to nickname this daughter La Consolatrice. The earl of Ailesbury, seeing Mary Beatrice in 1693 for the first time in over four years, noticed how much she had aged. As she pointed out to him, 'Afflictions alter people fast' (T. Bruce, 'Memoirs of Thomas, Earl of Ailesbury', 2 vols., 1890, 324). 
Religion became even more important to the exiled queen. Whereas James found spiritual solace in the time he spent at the Cistercian monastery of La Trappe, Mary Beatrice regularly retreated to the Convent of the Visitation at Chaillot, the founder of which had been her late mother-in-law, Queen Henrietta Maria. Her devotion to the memory of the order's founder, Francois de Sales, had been a constant theme in her life and while at Chaillot she could feel that she was, in part, fulfilling the vocation that she had been forced to abandon. Another key strand in her piety was her interest in the devotion to the sacred heart. Claude de la Colombiere, the Jesuit priest who had been instrumental in the movement's development, had been one of her French chaplains in the late 1670s. 
One recurring issue of the years of exile was the question of Mary Beatrice's jointure. She was able to argue that if, as the 1689 convention had assumed, her husband was legally dead, she was entitled to the payments of $50,000 per annum which she had been promised for her widowhood. The French took up the issue during the peace negotiations at Rijswijk (Ryswick) in 1697. The English government indicated that payments would be forthcoming but this undertaking came to nothing as no payments had been made by the time hostilities with France were renewed in 1702. In 1706 Mary Beatrice indicated that, in return for this money, she would pay off the bills she still owed to tradesmen in England. Her attempts to claim the personal property of her brother following his death in 1694 were equally unsuccessful. Cardinal d'Este, who had withdrawn from holy orders on succeeding to the dukedom as Rinaldo I, aligned himself with the League of Augsburg against Louis XIV and, although they were never broken off, relations between uncle and niece were strained thereafter. Modena was occupied by French troops in 1698. 
James's health was declining fast, and in the spring of 1701 Mary Beatrice accompanied him on his trip to Bourbon to take the waters. She was, however, not present when James died on 5/16 September 1701, as it was not thought appropriate for queens to attend royal deathbeds and she had retired to her own apartments after taking her final leave from him. On receiving the news and after paying her respects to her son, Mary Beatrice withdrew to Chaillot. By James's will of 28 August/8 September 1701, Mary Beatrice became his sole executor and guardian of their son. For the next five years she was, in Jacobite eyes, the 'de jure' regent of England, Scotland, and Ireland. In 1702 she opposed the idea that her son should go to Scotland to oppose the accession of his half-sister Anne. It made little sense to seek his restoration while his mother remained regent. Her own health was not good. In the autumn of 1703 she was operated on for breast cancer. The tumours reappeared and she underwent a second operation in 1705. 
On 10/21 July 1706 James Stuart (the Old Pretender James III) came of age. Mary Beatrice's public role then shrank to that of the matriarchal figure presiding over the court at St Germain, which, even from a Jacobite point of view, was facing a period of slow, terminal decline. Two separate developments in 1712 deprived Mary Beatrice of the company of both her children. On 7/18 April 1712 Louise-Maria died of smallpox. Four months later her son was forced to move to Chalons in order to allow the French to commence peace negotiations with the British. On the other hand, the conclusion of the treaty of Utrecht in the following year revived hopes that her jointure might finally be paid. In December 1713 Queen Anne authorized the payments of those sums which were owed from the previous Lady day onwards, with the payments to be made via the heirs of Sidney, Lord Godolphin, Mary Beatrice's former lord chamberlain, who had been the last surviving of the trustees for her jointure appointed in 1685. However, none of this money ever reached her. Anne died eight months later and George I had no reason to resolve the issue. In June 1715 Mary Beatrice visited her son at Bar-le-Duc. She saw him for the last time early the following year when he stopped off at St Germain on his return from Scotland. Before long he had moved first to Avignon and then to Italy. By this time Mary Beatrice's main preoccupation was the question of who her son should marry. 
Mary Beatrice died at Chateau de St Germain on 26 April/7 May 1718. The cause of death was believed to be inflammation of the lungs, complicated by an abscess on her left side remaining from her most recent cancer operation. Her body was interred in the chapel at Chaillot on 16/27 June, while her viscera were buried before the monument containing her husband's brain in the College des Escossois in Paris. The tomb at Chaillot was destroyed, along with the other Stuart tombs and the rest of the convent, during the French Revolution. 
Most of her biographers to date have shown Mary Beatrice to have been a fairly typical princess of the seventeenth century. The life of a royal bride married off to a foreign prince was always difficult, but she had the advantages of intelligence, charm, and diffidence and she quickly adapted to life at the English and French courts. On a purely personal level, James's marriage to her was one of the better decisions he made. Her virtues should not, however, be overstated. Too often, the way in which her popular biographers have presented her life, as being particularly romantic, ill-fated, and Catholic, has owed more to the manner in which those historians have also interpreted those other imprudent or ineffectual Stuart queens, Mary, queen of Scots, Henrietta Maria, and Catherine of Braganza. Stuart queens are expected to be tragic. Some of the sympathy which Mary Beatrice has thus been accorded is, however, understandable, given the undoubted unfairness of many of the misfortunes which befell her. Historians of her husband's reign have, on the other hand, been much more hard-headed, portraying her influence on James as generally misguided, although this has sometimes been exaggerated. The circle of courtiers around her, which may yet prove to be the key to understanding the true nature of that influence, has been little studied. 


@@@@@


doc= 18248


Mary (1542-1587), queen of Scots, was born in Linlithgow Palace on 8 December 1542, the only surviving child of James V, king of Scots (1512-1542), and Mary of Guise (1515-1560). 
Mary's father died at Falkland on 14 December 1542, lamenting that his Stewart dynasty 'come witht ane lase, it will pase witht ane lase' ('Historie and Cronicles', 1.407). The prophecy proved inaccurate, but it was made during a crisis for Scotland, at war with England and recently humiliated at the battle of Solway Moss (24 November). Mary's succession was accepted without question, although before her coronation she was referred to officially as 'the princess', while 'the queen's grace' meant her mother. Her existence opened the way to a peace settlement involving her betrothal to the future Edward VI. This was agreed (treaty of Greenwich, 1 July 1543) but soon renounced by the Scots. Anglo-Scottish war, later dubbed the 'rough wooing', was renewed. 
Details of Mary's early life are sparse. On 26 July 1543 her mother took her from Linlithgow to Stirling Castle, where she remained under the formal charge of lords Livingstone and Erskine. She was crowned there hurriedly on 9 September, the day after the regent, the earl of Arran, had publicly repudiated his flirtation with England. Her mother usually remained with her, using the influence that this gave her to bolster Scotland's links with France. After the disastrous Scottish defeat at Pinkie (10 September 1547) Mary was sent briefly to the island priory of Inchmahome, in the Lake of Menteith. 
The Scots now sought French military aid, the price of which turned out to be the queen's delivery to France and betrothal to the dauphin, subsequently Francois II (1544-1560). On 29 February 1548 Livingstone and Erskine took her to Dumbarton to await transport to France. On 7 July the Scottish parliament agreed to the betrothal on condition that Scottish liberties were respected. She and her company -- including the aristocratic four 'Queen's Maries' with whom she was long associated -- embarked on French royal galleys on 7 August, landing at Roscoff on 13 August. Mary's arrival consolidated the political prominence of her French family: her grandfather Claud, first duc de Guise (died 1550), and then her uncles, Francois, second duc (1519-1563), and Charles, cardinal of Lorraine (1524-1574). As the dauphin's prospective bride she was adopted by the French royal family, living mainly in the royal palaces with him and his brothers and sisters. Elisabeth, later queen of Spain, became a special friend. Mary remained connected to the Guises, and they carefully cultivated their dynastic prize. Her grandmother Antoinette de Bourbon monitored her closely. 
Mary's education was courtly rather than academic, developing her considerable talents in music, singing, dancing, needlework, and horsewomanship. She was taught Latin and the rudiments of some other languages, but not written Scots or English. Autograph letters of hers in Scots exist, but she usually wrote to educated people like Elizabeth or Sir William Cecil in French. In spoken language she was bilingual. For her formal 'oration' at the opening of parliament in 1563, 'she wrote yt in Frenche, but pronunced it in Englishe with a verie good grace' ('CSP Scot.', '1563-9', 10). She was an accomplished poet in French, and occasionally in Latin. 
People wanted a princess to be beautiful, and it seems that Mary really was: her beauty was universally and fulsomely praised, along with her charm, wit, and grace. She was unusually tall, like her mother. Yet she herself seems hardly to have exploited her appearance. Most authentic portraits of Mary were commissioned in her teens by the French royal family -- notably three or four of 'c'.1555-1559 attributed to Francois Clouet. In Scotland she patronized musicians and poets but few portraitists. For twenty years her portrait was available almost solely on coins, which remained mundane objects, however well suited her classical profile was to them. During her English captivity she learned the value of the image as propaganda, and occasional miniatures were produced. The best known and most securely attested was one by Nicholas Hilliard ('c'.1578) that served as the model for most of the many images of the queen in later life. 
Mary's thirteen years in France made her effectively a Frenchwoman by upbringing. Her four Scottish Maries were cherished but kept at a discreet distance. Even after leaving France she felt personally closer to her French Guise and royal relations than to anyone in Scotland. In her will of 1566, there was greatest warmth in the bequests to her French connections. Her last letter, written on the morning of her execution, was to her brother-in-law Henri III, and she asked to be buried in Rheims. This did not endear her to the Scots. French court culture was alien to Scottish nobles like Lord Ruthven, who masterminded the murder of Riccio. He feared Mary's wiles, 'because she was trained from her youth in the Court of France' (Keith, 3.275). Ruthven adhered to what he regarded as a straightforward code of honour and vengeance; when Mary outwitted him she was not playing fair. 
Nevertheless, a point on which Mary was most thoroughly educated was her dynastic position and destiny. This was not in itself French. Queen of Scots from infancy, she was also, as the granddaughter of Margaret Tudor, poised to inherit the crown of England. While in France she used these positions to benefit France, but as personal ruler of Scotland she pursued indigenous Scottish policies. As claimant to the English succession she sought above all to make herself acceptable to the English political establishment. From the English perspective, Mary in Edinburgh represented a conservative candidate to succeed Elizabeth, with her personal Catholicism a crucial issue. Her French background was unimportant; she was not seen as Charles IX's candidate. Only in her English captivity did her French connection regain diplomatic significance. 
In 1550-51 Mary saw her mother for the last time, when Mary of Guise visited the French court, accompanied by a train of Scottish nobles, whose support she hoped to win in a bid for power in Scotland. Mary of Guise was finally granted the regency by the Scottish parliament on 12 April 1554. She was aided by having her daughter declared of age a year early, in December 1553, allowing her nominally a personal choice. The young queen also obtained her own household on 1 January 1554. The new regent set out to assimilate Scotland to France, a policy that would prove deeply unpopular. 
Mary and Francois were married splendidly in Notre Dame on 24 April 1558. The official marriage agreement (15 April, 25-26 June 1558) was that Scotland would remain a distinct kingdom, although ruled by the same monarch. A separation was envisaged should the marriage produce no male issue (a daughter would inherit Scotland but not France). Meanwhile (4 April) Mary signed secret documents making the French crown her heir if she had no issue, and assigning her kingdom to France in pledge until the French were reimbursed for their military costs in Scotland and her own upbringing. This in effect authorized a French military takeover of Scotland. The fifteen-year-old queen's acceptance of the duplicitous measures urged on her by those she trusted is unsurprising, but it is worth noting that she was now committed to two inconsistent policies. The simultaneous pursuit of incompatible policies would be a recurring phenomenon in her career. 
With the death of Queen Mary of England (17 November 1558), the Tudor blood of the 'queen-dauphiness' suddenly became an immediate issue. The legitimacy and religion of the new queen, Elizabeth, were doubtful and England and France were at war, although peace negotiations were in train. Wanting peace, Henri II was cautious about proclaiming his daughter-in-law queen of England, but the English royal arms came to pervade the already febrile French royal pageantry and iconography about Mary, to English fury. Then Henri died (10 July 1559), and Mary became queen of France. Power passed to her Guise uncles, possibly assisted by her new status. Mary's prestige had never been higher. 
But Mary's native throne was being rocked by a protestant and anti-French uprising (1559-60). English military intervention on the side of the insurgents led to the treaty of Edinburgh (6 July 1560) by which the French occupying forces agreed to evacuate the country, leaving Scotland in the hands of a noble coalition that swiftly enacted protestantism in the Reformation Parliament (August). Her mother's death, of which she was told on 28 June, distressed her deeply; otherwise she was hardly involved in the revolution. In November it was apparently Francois alone who received the coalition's emissary to France. 
The death of Francois on 5 December 1560 hit Mary as a personal tragedy, and transformed her political position. She could theoretically have been married to her eleven-year-old brother-in-law, now Charles IX, but the new regent was the queen mother, Catherine de' Medici, who wanted to take the Guises down a peg. The French dynasty thus had no further direct use for Mary, and she ceased using the English arms or title. 
Until Francois's death, Mary had fulfilled her glittering but symbolic role admirably. Now she had to find a new one -- or rather, her Guise relatives had to find one for her. She spent her period of strict mourning with her grandmother Antoinette, and went to Lorraine in the spring. The Guises in January 1561 put in a bid for her to marry Don Carlos, eldest son of Philip II, but in April this was blocked by Catherine de' Medici. Nor did any other suitable marriage emerge. 
Return to Scotland was thus an obvious move. Mary had already informed the Scottish estates in January that she hoped to return as soon as her affairs permitted, and that she would be willing to overlook the recent offences against her authority. She wanted to renew the Franco-Scottish alliance, but without French troops it would be a shadow of its former self. She might still use domestic Scottish forces to overthrow the protestant regime. The two alternatives -- confrontation with the regime or acceptance of it -- were put to the queen in April, with near-simultaneous visits from Catholic and protestant representatives. John Leslie, future bishop of Ross, invited her to land at Aberdeen, where the earl of Huntly would raise 20,000 men to support her in restoring Catholicism. Lord James Stewart, Mary's illegitimate half-brother and one of the protestant leaders, promised her that she could retain a private Catholic mass if she were to work with the regime. 
Mary accepted Lord James's offer, which was in line with her existing policy. Lord James probably pointed out Huntly's unreliability: although a Catholic he had co-operated with the anti-French insurgents. Leslie's plan would also have invited renewed English military intervention at a time when the Guises could offer no French support. Mary would have liked to restore Catholicism, but she was in no hurry and did not want to take risks. Lord James's colleague, the secretary William Maitland of Lethington, worked out the details of the arrangement, and in June practical preparations for the journey began. Elizabeth refused Mary a passport through England (changing her mind too late), so she went by sea. Her party, including the four Maries and three of her Guise uncles, arrived at Leith on 19 August 1561. 
Although the widowed queen's return was natural, Mary's co-existence with protestantism made it an experiment, even an adventure. It has sometimes been thought that her major interest in Scotland was the English succession, but she could have pursued that from a French chateau. Her interest in the English succession is obvious, but she also wanted to be queen of Scotland for its own sake. Even in her later English captivity, she directed her main diplomatic efforts towards fostering a party of Scottish supporters who would restore her to her northern throne. 
On Mary's first Sunday, 24 August, she heard mass in her chapel at Holyroodhouse, protected by Lord James from the threats of more militant protestants encouraged by John Knox. A proclamation, perhaps improvised in response to the incident, was issued next day, commanding that no attempt was to be made to alter the present (that is, protestant) form of religion, on pain of death, until parliament should settle the religious question. This proclamation and its reissues remained the legal basis for religion throughout her personal reign. She governed with the aid of her privy council, unlike previous Scottish monarchs who had regarded a privy council as a device for a royal minority, an 'alternative' to royal government. Conciliar government may reflect the growing administrative sophistication of the Scottish state, but Mary's sex also mattered; men tended to insist that female rulers should take as much male counsel as possible. Lord James and Maitland were her leading councillors. 
The religious compromise was behind several governmental initiatives of the early personal reign. In December 1561, for instance, all surviving Catholic benefice holders were ordered to give up one-third of their income, to finance both crown and protestant ministers. Meanwhile, Mary herself tried four times to argue politely with Knox; the effort usually reduced her to tears, but also exposed Knox's marginal position, since the protestant establishment represented by Lord James and Maitland was prepared to accept her. The hostility to the settlement of the earl of Arran, who had aspired to marry Mary on her return, was nullified when he became insane in 1562. Meanwhile the queen firmly suppressed radical anti-Catholic moves by the burgh council of Edinburgh (October 1561). 
The stability of Mary's regime was based ultimately on the pursuit of detente with Elizabeth. Her leading nobles and ministers owed their positions not primarily to their own queen, but to the English-backed revolution of 1559-60. With Mary's return, it was not obvious how she would fit into this new establishment, but it was her ministers' task to find her a role in it. The new-found Anglo-Scottish 'amity' had to develop traditions and mechanisms, and it was soon realized that Mary's position in the English succession was crucial. Scots and English alike assumed that the unmarried Elizabeth had to name a successor, and Mary's policy was to ensure that it would be her. Her ministers, too, saw the dynastic issue as vital; it would be dangerous for Scotland if any other candidate were to succeed. 
So, only days after Mary's arrival in Scotland, she sent Maitland to England to ask Elizabeth for the succession. Elizabeth told him that she knew no better right than Mary's, but that she did not want to nominate a successor because it would undermine her own position, as she had learned when heir apparent to her sister. Maitland took this at face value, as an opening position in negotiations. With hindsight it can be seen that Elizabeth's refusal to name a successor was adamantine and non-negotiable; to all but Elizabeth at the time, a negotiated settlement seemed likely and Maitland saw clearly the lines that it should take. Mary wanted Elizabeth's friendship, and an assurance of her throne after her death. Elizabeth wanted Mary's friendship, renunciation of her 1558 claim to 'be' queen of England, and commitment to protestantism in Scotland and England. The treaty of Edinburgh had included a pledge by her not to bear the English arms or title, which might be interpreted as renouncing the succession. Mary had not yet ratified this treaty, much to Elizabeth's frustration. Guided by Maitland, Mary presented her demands to Elizabeth as a simple clarification of the treaty. She would renounce the English throne in return for a clear promise of the succession. 
In England, however, things were not so simple. Not only was there Elizabeth's personal touchiness to contend with, but English politicians were by no means agreed that if a successor were to be named it should be Mary. Her religion was a serious objection. Whether Mary would have converted to protestantism if offered the succession in return is a fascinating if ultimately unanswerable question. She might well have been swayed by the Guises' advice, which in 1562 was that conversion might be necessary. At any rate it suited neither queen to rule out concessions, and so the negotiations proceeded on what were perhaps false premises. In spring 1562 it was agreed that the queens should meet at Nottingham in the autumn. But in July the English intervened to support the Huguenots in the deteriorating French civil war, while Mary remained neutral. The meeting was postponed -- indefinitely as it turned out. At this point (24 July) Mary reluctantly received the pope's envoy, Nicholas of Gouda, and told him firmly that the time was not right for Catholic initiatives. 
The queen now undertook the first of her extended progresses around her kingdom, a visit to the north-east (August-November 1562). This demonstrated, perhaps deliberately, how far her wooing of the Anglo-Scottish protestant establishment had marginalized her Catholic subjects. In order to advance protestantism in the north-east, Mary had decided to establish Lord James in the earldom of Moray, currently being administered by the Catholic earl of Huntly. Mary did not intend to destroy Huntly, but he was to be cut down to size. As the royal party approached his domains, Huntly staged a half-hearted protest which spiralled into open revolt. His small army was defeated at Corrichie (28 October) and he died of natural causes in his captors' hands. Huntly's downfall demonstrated to the English that Mary was willing to maintain protestantism, and further entrenched a domestic regime that could claim to be benefiting all concerned in it. 
Mary's frequent progresses became important governmental devices. She covered over 1200 miles between August 1562 and September 1563, visiting not just the north but also the south and west. In 1564 she reached Inverness again, travelling through the central highlands via Blair Atholl -- a remarkable venture. In Inverness she had the court wear what passed for highland dress. Like her grandfather James IV, she was solving the problem of governing a decentralized kingdom by bringing her court physically to the localities. Her personal charm was deployed to maximum effect among local elites. Most of the lords whom she visited would espouse her cause during the civil wars that followed her deposition. 
Although Mary had failed to meet Elizabeth, she continued to pursue the English succession. She made a declaration renouncing the English throne in one of her parliaments, probably that of 1563 or 1564. Although this fell short of ratifying the treaty of Edinburgh, it did indicate that Mary was seeking 'only' the succession. Yet to the English establishment, represented by Cecil, the prospect of Mary's succession was never welcome. The Scottish establishment, represented by Moray and Maitland, recognized their dependence on England and hoped to keep their queen on a conciliatory course. 
One of the main ways in which Mary could demonstrate her protestant and pro-English commitment was to make an acceptable marriage. Yet her first major marriage project was spectacularly unacceptable to the English. In February 1563 she reopened negotiations for the hand of Don Carlos. Maitland hinted to Philip that she might otherwise marry Charles IX, and Philip was initially beguiled. But by early 1564 he decided against the marriage. The Don Carlos project may have been a feint to put pressure on Elizabeth. If so, Elizabeth initially responded as Mary must have hoped. She told Maitland in June 1563 that she would regard a Habsburg marriage as a hostile act, but would show all favour to Mary if she married suitably. When asked who a suitable husband would be, Elizabeth prevaricated and dropped vague hints. Eventually, in March 1564, the English ambassador Thomas Randolph told Mary that the husband Elizabeth had in mind for her was her own favourite, Lord Robert Dudley. 
This remarkable proposal astonished the Scots and still puzzles historians. Was Elizabeth sincere, or was she using Dudley (a man over whom she had complete control because he still hoped that she would marry him) purely to deflect Mary from a continental marriage? There is no positive evidence for the latter theory, and in any case Dudley was definitely reluctant. He was created earl of Leicester (29 September) to enhance his eligibility, but what Mary and her advisers wanted was a firm promise of the succession. Elizabeth would make only vague promises, which never elicited more than a polite but unenthusiastic response in Scotland. Randolph remained hopeful, but by early 1565 the plan was dead in the water. 
When the Leicester match lost momentum, Elizabeth moved to stall Mary's marriage completely. She would ideally have wished to keep her permanently unmarried -- a traditional Tudor policy towards potential dynastic rivals, which she had recently inflicted on Catherine Grey. With Mary she had less influence than with one of her own subjects, but she could still aim to stave off a marriage for a while. Thus she declared on 5 March 1565 that she had decided not to name a successor until she herself had either married or decided not to marry. This said to Mary, in effect, that she could retain English friendship only by marrying Leicester or one of her own subjects, or by remaining unmarried -- and none of these would secure the English succession. 
There remained one theoretical candidate for Mary's hand, however: her cousin Henry Stewart, Lord Darnley (1545/6-1567), who stood next to her in the English succession. Darnley's father, the earl of Lennox, had been exiled to England for opposing the Hamiltons in the 1540s. Having been born in England, Darnley might even have a better claim to the succession than Mary, who was technically an alien at English common law -- a minor point, but one that had been made against her in the English 1563 parliament. Although a Mary-Darnley match was highly undesirable to Elizabeth, because uniting the two claims would prevent her playing them off against each other, she assumed that she could always block it because Darnley was an English subject, and his parents were her dependants with lands in England. Elizabeth had originally asked Mary to restore Lennox in June 1563, as a gesture of Anglo-Scottish amity. Mary and her advisers had agreed, since the proposal mainly damaged the Hamiltons who were then in partial eclipse. Lennox returned to Scotland in September 1564, and his restoration to his estates (16 October) was confirmed by parliament on 13 December. He pressed for Darnley to join him, and this was agreed in January with the apparent blessing of both Leicester and Cecil; he arrived on 11 February. There is no evidence for the popular theory that Elizabeth sent Darnley deliberately to trap Mary into an unwise marriage; the theory is also quite irreconcilable with the desperate English shifts and manoeuvres as the marriage loomed. Darnley's release proved a major blunder. 
Mary first took up the idea of a Darnley marriage as a means of putting pressure on Elizabeth to retract her declaration of 5 March. During April she also conceived a personal attraction to him, though its exact nature -- romantic, sexual, even maternal -- is unknown. But such feelings would have led at most to light courtly dalliance if he had not possessed solid dynastic credentials. On paper his credentials were impressive. His religion, like his father's, was also attractively ambiguous: while his mother was a committed Catholic, in mid-1565 Darnley generally posed as a protestant, absenting himself from his own wedding mass. Nevertheless, the marriage offered Mary advantages with the Catholic powers, keeping both France and Spain friendly; had she married a Habsburg she would have forfeited Valois support, and vice versa. Perhaps, though, Darnley won Mary's hand mainly by being, apart from Leicester, the sole remaining candidate in the field. Mary might have avoided disaster if she had married Leicester after all, abandoning her Catholic friends and resigning herself to a future of being bossed around by Elizabeth. But if she wanted more than that, she simply had to marry Darnley and hope to overcome English displeasure. 
Randolph realized in mid-April that marriage to Darnley could be imminent. The English council debated the Darnley problem on 1 May, and sent Sir Nicholas Throckmorton as a special envoy. Formally, the nearest Mary ever came to the English succession was now, when his instructions came close to offering it if Mary were to marry Leicester. Elizabeth also offered the duke of Norfolk or earl of Arundel, though with no assurances on the succession. But this was too little, too late. On 15 May Mary created Darnley earl of Ross, effectively announcing their engagement. This was bad news to Moray and Maitland, and also to the Hamiltons, traditional foes of the Lennox Stewarts. Lennox was attracting a new, heterogeneous party from all those dissatisfied with the regime to date. Prominent among these were the earl of Huntly, now rehabilitated after his father's downfall, and James Hepburn, fourth earl of Bothwell (d. 1578), whom Moray had forced into exile in 1562. Frantic at the way in which Darnley was precipitating a redrawing of the political map to their disadvantage, Moray and the Hamiltons broke with Mary during May and June, and made vague military gestures in the hope of securing English support. 
Seeing the danger, Mary carefully refrained from making open anti-protestant moves during the summer. She reissued the proclamation of August 1561, and made it clear that her mass remained a personal one. She nevertheless needed papal approval, and asked the cardinal of Lorraine to obtain a dispensation. By July she assumed that this would be on its way; in fact it was issued only on 25 September, but backdated to 25 May to cover the possibility that the marriage might already have taken place. Her banns were called on 22 July and she was married in her own chapel at Holyroodhouse on the 29th. She also proclaimed Darnley king. 
The English reacted with open hostility. Their refusal to recognize the marriage or address Darnley by his new titles left Mary's diplomatic relationship with Elizabeth in tatters. 'All ther sisterly famyliarite was cessit, and insted therof nathing bot jelousies, suspitions and hattrent' (Melville, 156). On 16 July Mary even mentioned the possibility of warfare against 'oure auld inymeis' (Keith, 2.328). The breach was a failure of English policy, but in the long run it would harm Mary more. 
Encouraged by the English stance, Moray and the Hamiltons now rebelled openly. However, Mary kept the allegiance of most protestants, notably the earl of Morton, head of the Douglases. Sporadic military manoeuvres began in late August, later dubbed the Chase-about Raid. Mary's forces were greatly superior, and when the English saw that, they reluctantly abandoned the rebels to their fate. On 6 October they all fled over the border, except Argyll who retreated to the highlands. 
The key to Mary's problems from 1565 onwards does not lie in her relationship with Darnley as such, nor in her religious policy, nor in factionalism among the Scottish nobles. All these played their part, but they were all exacerbated by the single overriding fact of the breakdown of her relations with the English establishment. This was linked to religion, since protestantism was an inextricable part of the Anglo-Scottish 'amity' that Mary's marriage had disrupted. A hostile England would inevitably succour Mary's protestant enemies and make life awkward for her protestant friends. The playing of the protestant card by rebels would also tend to drive Mary towards a pro-Catholic policy; on the whole she resisted this, but on one occasion she did not. 
With Maitland's eclipse and Moray's rebellion, Mary had to choose new councillors, and did so mainly from a range of conservative protestants. Catholics were more prominent than before, and her largely Catholic household had more political prominence. Here one notorious adviser was David Riccio, a Savoyard musician who in late 1564 had become secretary for her French correspondence. Riccio became a confidant, advising her on patronage, though it seems unlikely that he made policy as Maitland had done. During the Moray-Hamilton rebellion there was a brief flurry of appeals to Spain, France, and the papacy for financial and military support; Spain sent a subsidy, but it never reached Scotland. 
Darnley, for whom Mary had done so much, rapidly proved himself vain, foolish, idle, and violent, with a rare talent for offending people, including his wife. He had been proclaimed king the day before his marriage, and Mary seems to have promised to get him the crown matrimonial in parliament. This honour, which Francois had received, would have granted Darnley equal power with his wife in the government. On realizing Darnley's incapacity Mary declined to grant him the crown matrimonial, causing him deep offence. By late October the marriage was already on the rocks -- and Mary was known to be pregnant. 
After her bloodless victory over the Moray-Hamilton rebellion, the queen's instincts turned to conciliation. It accorded with Scottish tradition, especially from the nobles' point of view, that dissident nobles should eventually be reintegrated into the body politic. In December she detached the Hamiltons from their allies by conditionally restoring them. This angered Darnley and Lennox; Darnley suddenly became ostentatiously Catholic in protest at Mary's wooing of professed protestants. A parliament was proclaimed (18-19 December) for March 1566, to which the other exiles were summoned to be forfeited, but it was assumed that the threat would not be carried out. Until mid-January 1566 Mary continued to make conciliatory gestures. 
In late January, however, Mary reversed her policy abruptly. She evidently felt secure in her position, and she was encouraged into an aggressive stance by the cardinal of Lorraine and others on the continent. The impending parliament took on a new character when she announced that it really would forfeit the exiles. She also pressed ahead suddenly with open promotion of Catholicism, urging the nobles who had given her political support to attend mass (with limited success) and apparently planning to legalize the mass in the parliament. This plan horrified many leading nobles and royal officials, who had acquiesced only reluctantly in the ejection of Moray from power. There was no consensus that he should suffer permanent forfeiture; and yet there was no guarantee that the parliament would cross the royal wishes. If Mary was going to be stopped, it would have to be soon and it would have to be sensational. About 9-10 February, the exiles' Scottish friends started to plan a coup. 
The plot's immediate aim was to discharge the parliament before it could forfeit the exiles and legalize the mass. In the longer term it aimed to take permanent control of Mary's council, if necessary by coercing her. What has become known as 'the murder of Riccio' was not primarily about him; it was simply a seizure of political power. Such a coup had to use the legitimating ideology of the ancient nobility whose right and duty it was to counsel the monarch. Since Mary was to be accused of taking the wrong advice, an adviser had to be sacrificed. Riccio, a low-born foreigner, was a necessary but largely symbolic grievance. The plotters rapidly gathered wide support. Maitland co-ordinated the early stages, the leading noble involved was Morton, and Knox and Randolph approved. The most remarkable recruit was Darnley. Only a week earlier he had been ultra-Catholic, with the exiles his chief enemies. But the plotters fanned his jealousy of Riccio with insinuations against Mary's honour, and promised him what she had refused -- the crown matrimonial. Darnley was largely a pawn, but as king he added legitimacy to the coup. He and his father also increased the threat to Mary personally: nobody else sought her death, which might lead to a disputed succession, but one of the candidates for that succession was Lennox. It was Darnley who insisted that the assassination should be in the pregnant queen's presence. 
The parliament assembled on 7 March 1566. Mary heard but dismissed a warning of plots. On the 9th her supper-chamber at Holyroodhouse was entered unexpectedly, first by Darnley, then by a band of armed men led by Lord Ruthven and George Douglas (Morton's henchman and Darnley's uncle). Darnley seized the queen, Ruthven harangued her on the iniquity of her recent policies, and Douglas and others dragged Riccio into the next room and stabbed him to death. The plotters barred the palace gates (Bothwell and Huntly escaped out of a window) and showed every sign of staying. Darnley publicly assured the Edinburgh burgesses that the queen was well, and ordered the parliament to disperse. Imprisonment of the queen in Stirling Castle was discussed. 
Mary met the crisis with courage and resourcefulness. She skilfully detached Darnley from the plotters, who saw that they could not now retain her in captivity; they were reduced to seeking a pardon for their offence. This was drafted and redrafted, but Mary delayed signing. She manoeuvred the plotters into giving Darnley responsibility for her guards, and then staged a daring midnight escape to Dunbar (11 March), where she and Bothwell assembled an army that soon swept her back to power. She pardoned Moray and the other exiles, and the plotters fled to England where (as Melville commented) they might find the other lords' nests still warm. The plotters' immediate aim had succeeded. The parliament did not reassemble, there were no forfeitures, and the mass was not legalized. Their long-term aim, though, had failed, and Mary was back in charge. Scottish politics now had to cope with the simultaneous presence in royal favour of two hostile and unpopular factions: Moray and his friends against Bothwell, Huntly, and theirs. Mary tried with difficulty to remain above the factions. 
In April Mary took up residence in Edinburgh Castle in order to await her child's birth, and on 19 June 1566, after a difficult labour, Prince James ['see 'James VI and I] was born. The birth of a male heir enhanced the queen's dynastic attractiveness, and Patrick Adamson, a Hamilton client, published a Latin poem in Paris describing James as prince of Scotland, England, France, and Ireland -- to the fury of the English government, who demanded Adamson's punishment. 
Over all this loomed the problem of Darnley, in disgrace with everyone and yet still king. Governmental documents ran in the joint names of king and queen until the very day of his murder. Occasional efforts at reconciliation did not last. In early October Mary and her courtiers went to Jedburgh to hold a justice ayre for trials of border malefactors. There she received news that Bothwell had been wounded in Liddesdale. On the 15th or 16th she, Moray, and others visited Bothwell at Hermitage Castle, a 50 mile round trip. On her return she soon became seriously ill. She vomited blood and green matter, was feverish, and repeatedly lost consciousness. On the 25th her life was despaired of, and she made a moving deathbed speech, but by early November she had made a partial recovery. The French ambassador attributed her problems to depression at her relations with Darnley, who had paid her a brief and unwelcome visit in Jedburgh. 
Mary returned fully to public life on 20 November on her arrival at Craigmillar Castle near Edinburgh. There she discussed the Darnley problem with Bothwell, Huntly, Maitland, Argyll, and Moray. According to a later account (sympathetic to Mary and written by Leslie for Huntly and Argyll to sign), divorce was ruled out, and an understanding was reached that Maitland and others would pursue an unspecified solution that might offend the scrupulous Mary and Moray when they heard of it, but would receive parliamentary approval. This may refer to a murder plot, to a scheme to put Darnley on trial, or (perhaps most likely) to something in between, such as a plan to have him killed resisting arrest. 
The court was now taken up with preparations for the prince's baptism at Stirling Castle. Ambassadors arrived from France and England. Three days of festivities ensued, the high point being the siege of a mock fortress. The baptism itself (17 December) was a Catholic service, so the English ambassador, Bedford, absented himself, as did most Scottish nobles including Huntly, Moray, and Bothwell. Darnley too stayed away, although he was still posing as a Catholic; he preferred a stance of open opposition to the court rather than exposing himself to its contempt. The festivities were the high point of the Renaissance culture that Mary had fostered at her court, sending a political message of reconciliation under a glorious monarchy. Alongside this splendid and public Catholic gesture, Mary was carefully making practical concessions to the protestant church; and on 24 December Morton and the remaining murderers of Riccio were pardoned and returned from England. The pardon was regarded as Bothwell's initiative. His reconciliation with Morton was ominous for Darnley, since Morton was likely to seek vengeance for his betrayal by Darnley at the time of Riccio's murder. One Catholic concession was the restoration of Archbishop Hamilton's consistorial jurisdiction (23 December). This enabled him to grant divorces, though not for the queen (that would have been reserved to the pope). Moray opposed the move, so Bothwell probably supported it; he may already have been foreseeing a need to call on the archbishop's services. 
In early 1567 Mary's career suffered a series of disasters culminating in her deposition. The first disaster was Darnley's murder -- an abiding historical whodunnit, generating a mass of contradictory evidence, and with a large cast of suspects since almost everyone had a motive to kill him. One of these suspects is Mary, and here three main views have been taken. The extreme anti-Mary case is that from late 1566 onwards she was conducting an illicit love affair with Bothwell, with whom she planned the murder. The extreme pro-Mary case is that she was wholly innocent, knowing nothing of the business. In between these two extremes, it has been argued that she was aware in general terms of plots against her husband, and perhaps encouraged them. 
The Bothwell love affair can readily be dismissed. Once the casket letters (discussed below) are discarded as forgeries, there is no contemporary evidence for it, merely the loudly proclaimed later assertions of men whose political survival required them to make such assertions. Along with this falls the Bothwell-Mary murder plot. The extreme pro-Mary case is equally untenable, since her main apologist, Leslie, conceded in his account of the Craigmillar conference that she had discussed a variety of options for disposing of Darnley. The question thus becomes: how much encouragement, if any, did she give to a murder plot? There is no direct evidence either way, but it is necessary to explain Mary's motives in seeking a reconciliation with Darnley in late January, when her dislike and distrust of him were vivid. Darnley had fallen ill (officially with smallpox, possibly in fact with syphilis) and was staying with his father in Glasgow. Mary went there (20 January) and persuaded him to complete his convalescence in Edinburgh, whereupon she would resume marital relations with him. This move to the notorious house at Kirk o' Field looks suspicious in retrospect, but is sufficiently explained by contemporary evidence of her concern to forestall Darnley's schemes against her. One can speculate that she wanted to facilitate a murder plot, but it is equally plausible that she was taking Darnley under her personal protection to prevent his murder. 
As for who did kill Darnley, a consensus soon emerged that Bothwell was the main culprit. Despite what was said later, he probably did not act alone; Morton is his likely chief associate. There are several pointers to Douglas involvement, and Morton would later be executed for the murder (1581). A murder bond was drawn up (later carefully suppressed), and probably many others signed it. 
In the early hours of 10 February 1567 the house at Kirk o' Field was blown up with gunpowder and the strangled or suffocated bodies of Darnley and his servant found in the garden. The murder made international headline news, and the courts of Europe and the common folk of Edinburgh both expected queen and council swiftly to identify and punish the culprits. The Scottish nobility, accustomed to vengeance killings, had no such expectation, which indeed was hardly realistic when leading councillors like Bothwell, Morton, and Maitland had been involved. For Mary to have made a show of prosecuting some underlings would have implicated their masters. Moray himself, possibly as innocent as Mary, urged Cecil (13 March) not to expect speedy results from the enquiries that the council claimed to be making. The one man who really wanted the murderers punished, Lennox, was fobbed off with a rigged acquittal of Bothwell (12 April). Then a parliament was held (14-19 April) at which most leading nobles extracted concessions for themselves. 
Mary's own involvement in this was minimal, since she suffered a nervous breakdown after the murder. She had been depressed for some time, and had probably not fully recovered from her physical collapse in October-November 1566. The breakdown may well have been prompted by guilt feelings -- she had wished Darnley dead, and now he was. There were reports of her 'melancholy'. Her council, concerned for her health, urged her to mitigate the seclusion of her formal mourning. On 8 March she received the English ambassador in a darkened room: she was clearly ill, possibly so ill as to have had one of her ladies impersonate her. She did not recover fully for months -- especially since Darnley's murder was not the last of her problems. 
As the parliament closed, Bothwell was already bidding to marry the queen. He invited the leading lords to a banquet (20 April) known as 'Ainslie's supper' from the tavern in which it was reportedly held. Nine earls, seven lords, and eight bishops signed a bond pledging themselves to promote his marriage to Mary. They represented a wide cross-section of the mainly protestant political establishment. Morton's name was prominent, and there were several other former Riccio murderers and Chase-about raiders. Many of these men were soon to rise in revolt against the Bothwell marriage, but the Ainslie bond shows that they were not initially hostile to it. Mary later claimed that they had urged Bothwell forward insincerely, hoping to use him to destroy both himself and her. But the most straightforward interpretation of the Ainslie bond is that Morton and his friends, having helped Bothwell to get rid of Darnley, were still prepared to work with him. They did not trust him; although a protestant he had a record of opposition to the Anglo-Scottish 'amity'. But for that very reason it was important to sign the bond to keep him in line. A marriage to the queen that they promoted could benefit them as well as him. 
What changed their minds was what happened next. Bothwell at once took the bond to the queen and proposed marriage -- and she refused him. He then made the disastrous mistake of striking out on his own. Mary went to Stirling on 21 April to visit her son. On her return on the 24th, Bothwell with a large troop of horsemen intercepted her party at Bridge of Almond and carried her captive to Dunbar. 
The abduction is a major impediment to the theory of a Mary-Bothwell love affair, and believers in the theory have had to claim that it was collusive. There is one piece of evidence for this: Sir William Kirkcaldy's letter of 24 April, announcing Bothwell's abduction plan and exclaiming, 'Judge ye geif it be with hyr will or no!' But Kirkcaldy in Edinburgh had no means of knowing the intentions of the queen in Stirling, and is likely to have been led astray by Bothwell's own claims that Mary had consented. Kirkcaldy's letter is of a piece with his earlier assertion (20 April) that Mary had said she would marry Bothwell 'and sall go with him to the warldes ende in ane white peticote or sho leve him' ('CSP Scot.', '1563-9', 322, 324). This malicious gossip is flatly contradicted by Mary's refusal to marry Bothwell on that very day. Believers in the Mary-Bothwell love affair have of course made the most of Kirkcaldy's 20 April letter too, but accepting it at face value forces the improbable conclusion that Mary was simultaneously declaring her intentions openly to Bothwell's enemies and engaging in an elaborate and demeaning deception to conceal those intentions. Sir James Melville, who was in Mary's company and was taken to Dunbar with her, wrote: 'Then the Erle Bodowell boisted to mary the quen, wha wald or wha wald not; yea whither sche wald hir self or not... the quen culd not bot mary him, seing he had ravissit hir and lyen with hir against hir will. (Melville, 177)' Mary too came as close as she could to admitting that she had been raped: 'Albeit we fand his doingis rude, yit wer his answer and wordis bot gentill' (Labanoff-Rostovskii, 2.38). 
Mary thus had to go through with the marriage: 'as it is succeedit we mon tak the best of it' (Stevenson, 177). On 6 May Bothwell brought her back to Edinburgh, accompanied by his one committed ally, Huntly, having secured a rapid divorce from his existing wife, Huntly's sister. On 12 May Mary declared formally that although she had not welcomed the abduction, she was now a free agent and willing to marry Bothwell. On 15 May the marriage was celebrated at Holyroodhouse with little festivity and by protestant rites. The whole experience deepened her depression and distress; she and Bothwell argued constantly and she more than once threatened suicide. 
Whatever Morton and his friends thought about abduction and rape, they were now faced with a Mary-Bothwell match that they had not promoted and from which they had no prospects of benefiting. When they signed the Ainslie bond they had assumed that they, Bothwell, and the queen would all be part of a new post-Darnley regime. But Bothwell was now making no efforts to include them in his plans. From 1 May onwards a large confederacy assembled at Stirling, including Morton, Argyll, and the young prince's keeper the earl of Mar. Their professed intentions were to avenge Darnley's murder, with which they charged Bothwell, and to liberate the queen from his thraldom. Military manoeuvres began in early June. The confederate lords occupied Edinburgh and captured the privy council machinery, while Mary and Bothwell were increasingly driven back on Bothwell's own followers. They operated first from Borthwick Castle, then from Dunbar. Eventually two armies confronted each other at Carberry Hill in Haddingtonshire (15 June). The day passed in fruitless negotiations and challenges to single combat until the queen's army began to dwindle. Mary surrendered to the confederates on a promise (not kept) of honourable treatment; Bothwell fled to Dunbar and eventual exile. The queen was now a captive for a second time. As she was led into Edinburgh, the lords' soldiers cried out 'Burn the whore'. She was imprisoned in a burgess's house in a state of collapse. 
What happened next flowed from the confederates' general political position: to support protestantism and the Anglo-Scottish 'amity'. Mary's recent record here was far from appealing. Some of the confederates took their original aim -- her liberation from Bothwell -- seriously; but many were determined to seize the opportunity provided by her public humiliation. They had to act quickly, for the Hamiltons were assembling an army for a rescue attempt. On the night of the 16th Mary was sent as a prisoner to the island fortress of Lochleven. 
The period between then and 24 July, when her abdication was extorted, is crucial. Various options for Mary were initially discussed by her captors: conditional restoration; enforced abdication and exile; enforced abdication, trial for murder, and life imprisonment; enforced abdication, trial for murder, and execution. The idea of the murder trial was linked to the confederates' demand for justice for Darnley's killers. After some of Bothwell's servants were executed in late June, it was dropped. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton had been sent by Elizabeth to demand Mary's restoration, but he did not himself believe in this demand and was probably more effective in preserving her life. He probably discouraged the idea of exile for her, since it was against English interests for her to go to France; indeed he tried to get Mary's son sent to England. The options were thus narrowing, with enforced abdication and imprisonment without trial looking more likely. But restoration remained conceivable. There were intense negotiations with the queen's supporters, presumably about the conditions on which this might be possible. 
One essential precondition for restoration was divorce from Bothwell. This would have meant personal shame and disgrace for Mary, especially since by the time of Carberry she probably knew that she was pregnant. She could not bastardize her child. There is also no evidence that the confederates seriously offered to restore her if she would agree to a divorce. From the outset they claimed that she was refusing to abandon Bothwell, and milked this refusal for all it was worth. It was the formal rationale for her arrest warrant (16 June). A rumour was circulated that the lords had intercepted a letter from Mary to Bothwell written on the night of her arrival, 'calling him her dear hart' and saying that she would not leave him. This letter, never produced, was suspected even at the time to have been 'invented' (Melville, 185). It was not the last time that letters would be fabricated to blacken Mary's reputation. 
Gradually, then, the confederates reached a consensus that Mary should be deposed, though this cost them some defections, notably Argyll. They ascertained from Throckmorton that English objections would be pro forma. On 24 July lords Lindsay and Ruthven presented the queen with deeds of abdication, telling her that she would be killed if she did not sign. Mary was then prostrate with illness, having on top of everything else suffered a recent miscarriage. She received messages from Throckmorton and others advising her that she should sign to save her life, since a deed extorted under duress would be invalid. She signed. 
The effect of Mary's deeds of abdication was to make her son king (he was crowned on 29 July), and to appoint an interim regency council until Moray could return from France and assume the regency. The regime now had no further use for her. Perhaps Moray scrupled to order her murder; perhaps Elizabeth's lobbying on her behalf was effective. At any rate, the regent seemingly intended to keep the 24-year-old queen in prison for the rest of her life. 
In the later months of 1567 Mary, in her enforced seclusion, gradually recovered her physical and mental health. On 2 May 1568 she escaped from Lochleven Castle and was met by Lord Seton and some of the Hamiltons. Both they and the regent rushed to arms. Mary offered Moray a compromise settlement if he would accept her restoration, but he refused. Mary's initial support came mainly from the Hamiltons and Argyll, though many more supporters would have rallied to her in time. The queen's forces headed for the stronghold of Dumbarton, and Moray was based at Glasgow, so a battle ensued at Langside near Glasgow (13 May). It was lost by Mary's commander, Argyll, whose fainting fit prevented the reinforcement of his advance guard. Few were killed, but the queen's forces were scattered and many captured. 
The queen now panicked. 'Efter the tincell [loss] of this battaill hir majeste tint curage, quhilk sche did never befoir, and tok sa gret fear that sche rested never untill sche was in England' (Melville, 202). Her party initially made for Dumbarton, but finding the way blocked they turned to the south, led by Lord Herries. Mary later recalled with a shudder the frantic night ride, without food or drink for the first twenty-four hours. Finally she reached Herries' house, Terregles, near Dumfries, where she stayed a day or two, and resolved to go to England to seek Elizabeth's support. On 16 May she embarked near Dundrennan and crossed the Solway Firth in a fishing boat, landing at Workington. 
Mary's decision can easily be criticized, but her other options were hardly attractive. In retrospect it is evident that her best bet was to remain in Scotland as a focus for a regrouped queen's party. Her mistake was not to recognize that Langside was an indecisive defeat. Here she was evidently swayed by her long and desperate flight after the battle. Although the queen herself made the decision at Terregles, it was a natural extension of Herries' decision to flee southwards from Langside; the momentum of Mary's flight from Langside carried her across the Solway. Her critics have sometimes urged that she should have gone to France, where she had estates, friends, and relatives. But even if a ship could have been found, France offered merely a comfortable refuge for an exile, not military assistance to restore her to her protestant throne. Mary still accepted Scotland's link with England and relied on regaining the support of the Anglo-Scottish protestant establishment. To that end it was natural that she should go to England. At best, English arms and diplomacy would restore her; at worst, she could always go on to France later. It was hardly likely that Elizabeth would deny her that right. 
Elizabeth, who had initially welcomed Mary's escape from Lochleven, was in a dilemma. Her standing with continental powers, and perhaps her domestic position too, would suffer if she appeared to sanction rebellion. But Moray and his colleagues were her most reliable friends. Mary herself was not necessarily an enemy, but if her restoration would involve Moray's destruction, this would harm English interests. The English government quickly got Mary into its hands and away from the Catholic earl of Northumberland. She was well guarded, but it was not yet entirely clear that she was a prisoner -- largely because she herself did not wish to leave. Still, Elizabeth stressed that she was not to go to France. 
Elizabeth's attitude to Mary was driven mainly by 'realpolitik' -- a wish to promote her own and her regime's interests. She had not forgotten Mary's claim to the English throne in 1558, nor her failure to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh. Mary was thus a potential enemy. But Elizabeth also experienced other feelings: a wish for friendship with her closest relative, and a sense of solidarity with a fellow monarch afflicted by rebels. She was never vindictive towards her. She later told the parliament that petitioned for Mary's execution (12 November 1586) that she wished 'that we were but as two milk-maids, with pails upon our arms', so that she might forgive her offence (Neale, 2.117). Her chief adviser, Cecil, focused on 'realpolitik' alone. He was clear that Mary could not be restored unconditionally, but the main line of English policy in the summer and autumn of 1568 was to work for a conditional restoration. The treaty of Edinburgh would be ratified, Moray's position guaranteed, and the queen limited by a great council and parliament. It would be a signal achievement of English diplomacy. 
This required three-cornered negotiations between Elizabeth, Mary, and Moray. The idea took shape during the summer of a conference to inquire into Mary's and Moray's charges against each other and to resolve their differences. Neither proved keen, and each wanted the conference to concentrate on hearing their own charges against the other. Mary also hesitated to compromise her sovereign status. But she agreed to the conference on being given the impression that she was going to be restored whatever the outcome; at worst the English might insist on guarantees for Moray's position. Moray, however, was told that if Mary were proven guilty of murder she would not be restored. 
The conference convened at York in early October, with Moray present in person but Mary confined in Bolton. Mary's commissioners, principally Leslie and Herries, treated the conference as being about how Elizabeth was going to restore their mistress. The English commissioners, led by Norfolk, also began that way, and were impressed by Mary's case. Compromise was in the air. But Moray had other ideas, sensing that if Elizabeth were forced to choose between him and Mary, she would choose him. He had brought with him the casket letters, documents which purported to prove her adultery with Bothwell and complicity in Darnley's murder. In November Elizabeth moved the conference to Westminster, whereupon it became almost wholly an inquiry into Mary's guilt. Moray, after much hesitation, made a formal murder accusation on 26 November. Mary's commissioners protested her innocence but soon withdrew (6 December), realizing that continued co-operation could not benefit her. 
It was then, with no hostile witnesses present, that Moray produced the casket documents (7 December). His aim was twofold: to convince the English commissioners of Mary's guilt, and to show Elizabeth that compromise between him and Mary was now impossible, he having accused his sister of murder. The first aim seems to have failed, since Norfolk, the chief commissioner, was soon seeking to marry Mary; but the second and more important aim succeeded. In political terms her actual guilt or innocence mattered little, so long as the English accepted that Moray and his regime were committed to maintaining her guilt. 
The casket letters, consisting of eight letters (written in French but surviving only in translations) and twelve French love-sonnets supposedly written by Mary to Bothwell early in 1567, and two draft contracts of marriage, are crucial to any understanding of Mary's career and reputation. If genuine, they prove Mary's adultery and complicity in the murder of Darnley. It is obvious, however, that they have been extensively tampered with, largely by blending Mary's genuine letters with existing material from other sources. The sonnets date on stylistic grounds from about 1520. A passage about 'mes subjects' spoils the metre and is an obvious interpolation, while they contain various passages that could not have been written by Mary. Of the letters, four are flowery love letters which probably come from the same source as the sonnets -- most likely one of the romantic manuscript collections that circulated in Renaissance courts. The other four letters are Mary's own, straightforward and businesslike in tone, but with places, dates, and addresses manipulated, and passages interpolated. Letter two is the only really important one. It purports to have been written in late January 1567 by Mary in Glasgow to Bothwell in Edinburgh, describing her mission to fetch Darnley to his fate at Kirk o' Field. Most of the text is probably genuine, though some passages suggest that it was addressed to someone other than Bothwell. The forgers' demonstrable practice of interpolation means that the passages alluding to adultery and murder cannot be accepted as evidence of Mary's guilt. 
The letters' provenance is also suspicious. Morton testified in December 1568 that George Dalgleish, Bothwell's servant, had been captured on 20 June 1567 with a casket containing them. Yet Dalgleish's deposition, dated 26 June, had mentioned neither casket nor letters. The dossier probably evolved gradually. In July 1567 a single letter was mentioned that sounds like a more explicit version of letter two than the one which eventually emerged. George Buchanan, drafting Mary's indictment during 1567, mentioned only a letter or letters from Glasgow (presumably a version of letter two) in June, but by the autumn the evidence against her was being described as numerous letters written on different occasions. Forgery of legal documents was frequent, and Mary's italic hand easy to simulate. Once the production of an incriminatory dossier had been decided, the necessary skills would easily have been procured. 
The documents were not intended for publication, only for private use by the English commissioners. They did not even have to be convincing, so long as they were plausible and forced the necessary breach between Moray and Mary. The same applies to the 'book of articles', the narrative indictment of Mary by Buchanan that was presented along with the letters; it was wildly inaccurate, but the English commissioners could not know this. Even when Buchanan's lies were published (1571), they did not generate the kind of debate that modern scholars would have expected. Sixteenth-century polemicists primarily used a priori reasoning to support entrenched positions, and when Buchanan was condemned it was on the grounds that his partisanship made him untrustworthy. 
The original casket documents returned to Scotland in 1569. Their last known possessor was the first earl of Gowrie; after his execution in 1584 they disappeared. They may or may not have come into James VI's hands, and much has occasionally been made of his apparent failure to publish them. All that can safely be said is that if the letters were forgeries, it was against his interest to expose the fact while Mary lived. 
After inspection of these dramatic documents, the York-Westminster conference ended in anticlimax. Elizabeth declared (10 January 1569) that nothing had been sufficiently proved by either side against the other. But her actions were far from even-handed. It seems that Cecil had been resigned to the necessity for Mary's restoration before the conference, but seized upon Moray's evidence as a means of avoiding it. Moray went home to govern Scotland, with a $5000 English subsidy; Mary remained in England, although she had no further reason to stay. She was now unambiguously a prisoner, and was moved to more secure (if insalubrious) accommodation, Tutbury Castle in Staffordshire. 
Mary's imprisonment was obviously illegal. She was accused of no crime in England, and Elizabeth's jurisdiction over her was questionable. But political reality was pressing. Early in 1569 Elizabeth had the theoretical option of allowing her to go to France, where she would probably have been welcomed politely but not aided, especially since her scandalous protestant marriage. By 1572, when France and England signed a formal alliance, Mary would have become a back number. However, Moray's regime in Scotland was precarious and memories of the Franco-Scottish alliance were green. It was unthinkable that the French should be given another opportunity to dabble in Scotland. In fact Elizabeth in early 1569 was still discussing another scheme for Mary's restoration to Scotland; Moray dragged his feet and rejected it in October. 
Moreover, the main danger that Mary eventually posed to Elizabeth came in the form of assassination plots. There was no reason why these should cease once Mary was free. So long as she was a prisoner, any plotters seeking to place her on the English throne had to prevent her gaolers killing her; Mary was effectively a hostage for Catholic good behaviour. To Elizabeth's councillors, who worried about what would happen if the English queen died (she had a serious illness early in 1572, for instance), the detention of her rival also offered the prospect of a breathing-space in which to settle the succession. 
So Elizabeth, encouraged by hawkish councillors, kept Mary in captivity to retain the initiative. The rising of the northern earls in late 1569, and Elizabeth's excommunication by the pope in 1570, closed Mary's prison door more firmly by showing that her religious and dynastic position threatened her cousin's throne. In 1570 there were still fitful negotiations for her restoration, but soon Cecil was exploring the possibility of returning Mary to Scotland for imprisonment or execution there. Intermittent discussions continued until 1576, but the Scots were unwilling. 
Mary in England had two choices, once it was clear that Elizabeth intended neither to restore her nor to allow her to go to France. First, she could try to rehabilitate herself with the Anglo-Scottish protestant establishment, which had tolerated her for some four years, though most of it had never welcomed her. Mary had some benefits to offer Elizabeth: Scottish stability; legitimacy; links with the continental powers. If Mary had pursued this course it might have been politically advantageous for her to convert to protestantism. Second, she could become actively hostile to Elizabeth, capitalizing on her Catholicism and her direct claim to the English throne on the assumption of Elizabeth's illegitimacy. This would involve throwing in her lot with the militant Counter-Reformation movement and with Spain, in order to attempt to overthrow and replace Elizabeth. 
What Mary in fact did was to adopt both options. She always publicly professed friendship and loyalty towards Elizabeth, even offering to sign the bond of association (1584); but she did also plot against her. As early as 24 September 1568 she wrote to the queen of Spain, offering to risk her life for the re-establishment of Catholicism in England if she had foreign aid. She surely recognized that the two stances were inconsistent; but whether she fully grasped what effect it would have on English attitudes to her is questionable. The point, to her, was that both options were legitimate. The plots were genuine, and when plotting she really did want to overthrow Elizabeth; but the negotiations with Elizabeth were genuine too. If a deal had been struck to restore her to her Scottish throne, she might well have performed her side of the bargain in good faith. What she did not foresee was that the English would see it differently. They regarded her plotting as sincere, and her professions of friendship towards Elizabeth as hypocritical. 
Mary's main immediate aim between 1569 and 1571 was to marry the duke of Norfolk. This was originally discussed as part of a plan to restore her to Scotland under Elizabeth's auspices, but although Norfolk was a protestant the match increasingly acquired a Catholic cast. Norfolk, politically naive, was manoeuvred into heading a faction at the English court that would oust Cecil and reverse his policy of confrontation with Spain. The bid for Mary's hand was intended to procure Cecil's disgrace. Elizabeth consequently vetoed it in mid-September 1569. Norfolk, frustrated, left the court in disgrace, and was soon arrested (October). This was followed by the rising of his Catholic supporters, the earls of Northumberland and Westmorland (November-December). Mary was hurriedly moved south to Coventry to forestall any rescue attempt. 
The Norfolk match revived after his release in August 1570. It was now definitely subversive. In early 1571 Mary wrote to the banker and papal agent Roberto Ridolfi denouncing the French and soliciting Spanish aid. She also wrote to France seeking aid, and to Elizabeth assuring her that her hopes of the English succession rested on the queen. She was thus pursuing not two but three incompatible policies. But her most significant line of action concerned what came to be known as the Ridolfi plot. This called simultaneously for an uprising of English Catholics, the release of Mary, and an invasion of England by the Spanish army in the Netherlands. Elizabeth would be arrested by Norfolk, who would marry Mary and place her on the English throne. The scheme was grandiosely and incompetently co-ordinated by Ridolfi with the support of Mary's ambassador, Leslie. Mary gave her full approval in March 1571. The English government gradually unravelled the plot during the summer, and Norfolk was arrested in September. 
The year 1572 was a turning point -- one of the worst periods for Mary's career, through a concatenation of English, Scottish, Dutch, and French events over which she had no control. Norfolk was convicted of treason in January, though Elizabeth hesitated to put him to death. The English parliament of May-June wanted Mary executed, or at least excluded from the succession. Elizabeth was forced to have Norfolk executed to deflect the clamour. A commission was established for Mary's trial also, but nothing came of it. By the end of 1572, stability had returned to English politics. Mary's continental friends also suffered setbacks. The Spanish position in the Netherlands was shaken by an uprising in April 1572 and Mary's French hopes were simultaneously shattered by the Anglo-French treaty of Blois, in which she was not mentioned. 
Mary's most solid prospects in 1570-71 lay in Scotland, where her party had recovered from the disasters of 1567 and 1568. In late 1569 Moray's regency began to crumble, and in January 1570 he was assassinated by a Hamilton. Civil war was renewed, with the 'queen's party' looking strong. But they were not a cohesive group. To the extent that they really were Mary's friends, their war aims involved her restoration; and instead of offering this, the English sent troops to support the 'king's party'. The leading Marian nobles gradually made their peace with successive regents, and by 1572 those who remained in arms were hoping to do the same. The last nobles surrendered in February 1573. A few diehards remained holed up in Edinburgh Castle, but it fell to English artillery in May. Mary's cause was at its lowest all over Europe. Almost a decade elapsed before it showed signs of revival. 
Although deposed and incarcerated, Mary was always treated as a queen. She maintained her own household under her keepers' supervision, corresponded freely (until 1585), and received guests. Her position could be regarded as house arrest rather than imprisonment. Her household aimed to be a royal court, with privy and presence chambers, dais, throne, and cloth of state. She usually had about forty servants, and guarding them was an administrative challenge -- some were armed with swords and even pistols. Closest to her were her secretaries, gentlewomen of the chamber, and (usually) a Catholic priest under the guise of an almoner. One of the four Maries, Mary Seton, served her until 1583, when in poor health she retired to a French convent. As dowager queen of France, Mary enjoyed large revenues (though reduced in 1576). She paid her servants' wages, while her keepers (subsidized haphazardly by the English government) provided their food and accommodation. The head of her French council, James Beaton, exiled archbishop of Glasgow, skilfully maintained her diplomatic presence in France. Her household's funds were remitted via the French embassy in London. The Guises stayed in contact, and in 1574 provided her with a new secretary, Claude Nau. 
For most of the period 1569-84, Mary's keeper was the sixth earl of Shrewsbury, a wealthy midland magnate. She was treated as his personal guest; he and his formidable countess, Bess of Hardwick, were her regular companions. Mary and Bess spent many hours in embroidery, producing a large output which influenced the decorative fashions of the Sheffield region for generations. Mary spent fourteen years in Sheffield (1570-84), mainly alternating between Shrewsbury's adjacent residences of Sheffield Castle and Sheffield Lodge. She was occasionally allowed to visit the spa at Buxton, a social centre where she once met Cecil, now Lord Burghley, and twice met Leicester. In Shrewsbury's household she acquired some new relations when in 1574 Darnley's brother Charles married Bess's daughter Elizabeth Cavendish. Their daughter Arabella was born in 1575, and Mary involved herself with her welfare, trying unsuccessfully to get her the earldom of Lennox. Mary was embroiled in the Shrewsburys' marital breakdown in 1583, with Bess spreading the wild rumour that she had borne a child to Shrewsbury. Her health, never good, declined markedly during this period. She suffered from recurrent vomiting and abdominal pains that have been attributed to porphyria -- a hereditary condition that may also have contributed to her mental problems in 1566-7. She fretted at being deprived of fresh air and exercise. Arthritis in her arms and legs became severe, and by the 1580s she could often hardly walk. 
Mary's diplomatic prospects revived briefly in 1576 when Don John of Austria, Philip II's dashing half-brother, became governor of the Netherlands. His martial image was such that he seemed likely to subdue the rebellious Netherlands and then lead a crusade against England, culminating in his marriage to Mary, whom he would place on the English throne. Mary herself was never committed to the idea, rightly seeing it as improbable. Don John's governorship collapsed in 1577 and he died the next year. 
Mary continued to take a strong interest in Scotland. As James grew up, she looked forward to a time when he would espouse her cause like a dutiful son. Despite her self-presentation on the continent as a committed Catholic, for Scottish audiences she retained her pose as a tolerant 'politique'. James later recalled that 'in all her letters (whereof I received many) she never made mention of religion, nor laboured to perswade me in it' ('Workes', 301). She attended protestant services regularly, and was never a recusant. Her servants were mainly Catholic but some, including her steward Andrew Melville, were protestants. She did not adopt the Gregorian calendar reform of 1582. As with her pluralist approach to politics, she probably saw both her religious positions -- commitment to the Counter-Reformation and willingness to compromise with protestants -- as legitimate. 
Mary's last serious effort to rehabilitate herself with the protestant establishment came in the early 1580s, when her son showed signs of rejecting English tutelage. The association scheme, devised by Mary in October 1581 and discussed between February 1583 and October 1584, would have freed Mary and restored her to a nominal joint sovereignty with her son. She offered to live in England and resign the executive government to him. In three-cornered negotiations she skilfully persuaded both James and Elizabeth that the other favoured the scheme, but it was eventually called off when they both realized that this was not so. An Anglo-Scottish league was soon being discussed, and was concluded in June 1586 without reference to Mary. 
Even while the association scheme was being discussed, Mary was moving into the final stage of her career as a plotter. She was probably involved (her trusted agents certainly were) in the Throckmorton plot, exposed in November 1583, by which the duc de Guise would invade England with Spanish support in order to place her on the English throne. After her son disappointed her over the association scheme, plotting became her main political activity. She was playing for high stakes; the risks were great but so were the benefits. She knew that she had nearly been executed over Ridolfi. It would be anachronistic to say that she should have refrained from plotting because it was dangerous; she thought the risks worthwhile. 
The mid-1580s saw increasing international tension, with prospects of Spanish support for plots better than they had been since 1572. After the assassination of William of Orange in July 1584 the Dutch resistance against Spain began to crumble, and English armed intervention in the Netherlands became increasingly likely; it finally came in August 1585. This sharpened Anglo-Spanish conflict, increasing Mary's symbolic value if not her ability to take initiatives. Her French background was a problem to Spain, as was her son's heresy. In early 1586 Philip II was already planning to invade England and depose Elizabeth. In negotiations with the pope he agreed that Mary would be placed on the English throne, but married to a husband of Philip's choice, and succeeded not by James but by Philip's nominee (he intended to nominate his eldest daughter, Isabella). Philip's reservations about Mary were reciprocated. In the 1570s she had often placed high hopes in France, and had been hesitant about any pro-Spanish moves that might alienate France. Nevertheless, on 20 May 1586 in connection with the Babington plot, Mary informed the Spanish ambassador of her intention to bequeath her kingdoms and rights to Philip if James remained protestant. On 23 November 1586, after her conviction for treason, she announced this to the pope in a letter which, because it became public, Philip regarded as a suicide note. 
English actions towards Mary were also provocative. The English council on 19 October 1584 sponsored a bond of association by which thousands of loyal Englishmen swore to defend their queen, and to 'prosecute to death' any 'pretended successor' in whose name any assassination attempt might be made. Subscriptions flooded in. With the 'Act for the Security of the Queen's Royal Person' (27 Eliz. I c. 1, debated from 1 December 1584 to 13 March 1585) this was modified: instead of lynch law, a special commission would be established for the trial of the 'pretended successor'. The act also confined itself to Mary (who was of course not named), in contrast to the original bond which would also have excluded her son. In January 1585 she was imprisoned more strictly under Sir Amyas Paulet. She was allowed no correspondence except via the French ambassador, and that was inspected by Paulet. In December she was moved to Chartley Hall in Staffordshire. 
A new plot took shape in May-June 1586 around Anthony Babington, a Catholic gentleman who had been a page to Mary's former gaoler Shrewsbury. It involved a Catholic uprising, assassination of Elizabeth, and invasion by Spain. Sir Francis Walsingham's double agents knew of the plot throughout, and fostered it carefully in the hope that Mary would commit herself to it. A channel of communication with Mary was arranged, with packets of coded letters hidden in beer barrels; unknown to the plotters, Walsingham saw all Mary's correspondence. The plot was thus a frame-up, a point of which Mary's defenders sometimes complain. It is not, however, obvious that the English government was obliged to nip the plot in the bud to prevent Mary from incriminating herself. The frame-up was directed almost as much against Elizabeth as against Mary. 
Babington could never have organized an uprising; his preliminary enquiries showed that most Catholics would support the government. The assassination, however, was perfectly conceivable and some of those in the plot were committed to it. Under surveillance, Babington wrote to Mary (6 July) proposing invasion, rescue, and 'dispatch of the usurper' by 'six noble gentlemen' (Pollen, 'Babington Plot', 21-2). Mary replied (17 July), endorsing the plot in detail and making numerous recommendations. The plot as she saw it was that English Catholics would make military preparations, alleging self-defence against the 'Puritans'. Elizabeth would then be assassinated -- 'sett the six gentlemen to woork' (ibid., 41). Immediately thereafter, Mary herself would be rescued, and defended until a Spanish army could arrive. This 'Bloody Letter' (as Thomas Phelippes, the code-breaker, dubbed it) gave Walsingham enough evidence against Mary, but he hoped for more. He had her letter sent on to Babington, with a forged postscript asking for the names of the six gentlemen and the intended assassination method. However, the postscript was never effective; Babington had made only a general interim reply (3 August) by the time the authorities pounced. He and most of the plotters were rounded up on 14 August. Mary's secretaries, Claude Nau and Gilbert Curle, were arrested on the 11th and her papers seized. It was they who had written out and encoded the 'Bloody Letter'; their confessions (5 September) authenticated it, as did Babington's own. The evidence of Mary's complicity in the plot could not be suppressed, as it was needed to convict the other plotters. 
Burghley and Walsingham dragged Elizabeth reluctantly into appointing (9 September) a commission for Mary's trial in terms of the act of 1585. Elizabeth was never told that the plot had been a frame-up, and to her the danger seemed immediate. Mary was moved to Fotheringhay Castle for the trial. In a two-day hearing (14-15 October) she defended herself with skill and dignity, but the evidence was clear and the verdict never in doubt. The trial was continued to the Star Chamber at Westminster (25 October), where the commissioners pronounced that: 'the aforesaid Mary pretending title to the crown of this realm of England, hath compassed and imagined within this realm of England, divers matters tending to the hurt, death and destruction of the royal person of our sovereign lady the Queen. (Steuart, 61)' Mary was thus condemned for plotting political assassination. She herself always claimed to be a martyr for her religion, and it was said after her death that she had been offered a pardon in return for conversion to protestantism. The truth was, as the English authorities made clear to her on the scaffold, that she was welcome to convert to protestantism but would still be executed. If her pose as a Catholic martyr was genuine, it was because political Catholicism encouraged the assassination of its opponents. 
The verdict had brought Mary several steps nearer the block, but there was now a pause -- mainly to overcome Elizabeth's reluctance, but also to assess the international situation. One way of pressurizing Elizabeth was to summon a parliament, and this her councillors persuaded her to do in early September when the Babington plot was in the headlines. Parliament met on 29 October, explicitly to consider Mary's position. Elizabeth absented herself; she must have guessed that parliament would launch itself at Mary's throat, and it duly did, petitioning forcefully for her execution (12 and 24 November). On 4 December the sentence of death was publicly proclaimed, stressing parliament's responsibility. The likely reaction in France and Scotland had to be gauged. Henri III sent a special ambassador to intercede for Mary, but it soon emerged that France could or would do little. Scotland was more of a problem, politically volatile and deeply involved. James VI's honour required him to make a display of diplomatic activity on his mother's behalf, which he duly did. But although he huffed and puffed, his only effective move would have been to break the Anglo-Scottish league, imperilling his own succession claim. By mid-December Elizabeth saw that he would not do this. His final appeal (26 January 1587) urged clemency on the feeble grounds that it would damage his reputation among his own subjects if Mary were executed and he took no action. 
On 1 February 1587 Elizabeth finally signed the long-prepared warrant authorizing Mary's execution. She gave it to William Davison, Walsingham's recently appointed colleague as principal secretary, with vague and contradictory instructions. She also told Davison to get Walsingham to write to Paulet and his colleague Sir Dru Drury (1 February) asking them to assassinate Mary -- as the bond of association conceivably committed them and others to do. Paulet had been willing to kill her to forestall a rescue attempt; but (as Davison predicted to the queen) they refused outright assassination, either on principle or fearing that an assassin would become a scapegoat. The episode reveals much about Elizabeth: most relevantly, it shows that she was no longer aiming to keep Mary alive, merely to preserve her own reputation. Elizabeth was genuinely distraught by the execution; her claim that it had been against her wishes was not strictly true, but may be understandable when it is recalled how long and how hard she had resisted the pressure for it. 
Meanwhile, Davison sealed the execution warrant as soon as he received it, and convened the leading councillors (3 February). At Burghley's prompting they agreed on its immediate implementation without further reference to the queen. The warrant was sent up to Fotheringhay and practical preparations made. Mary was informed on the evening of 7 February that she was to be executed. She was ready for the news and took it calmly, stressing her view that she was being condemned for her religion. On the morning of 8 February 1587 she mounted the scaffold in the great hall of Fotheringhay, attended by two of her women servants. Denied the services of a Catholic priest, she refused protestant ministrations with dignity and made her own Latin prayers. The axe severed her head with three blows. 
Mary's execution prompted a howl of protest from Catholic Europe, presenting her as a martyr for her faith. This was offset by the grim English insistence that she had died for treason, not religion. There were mass demonstrations of sorrow in Paris, and of joy in London. The execution achieved its purpose, since plots against Elizabeth's life ceased. It is sometimes said that the Spanish Armada (1588) was a reprisal for Mary's death, but plans for the Armada were already well under way. 
Contrasting images of the dead queen -- a tragic Catholic martyr, or a murderous traitor -- were sharply etched. Yet the images soon became blurred. There were occasional Catholic reports of miracles at Mary's tomb, but her dubious past ruled out canonization. As the prospect of her son's succession grew during the 1590s, Catholic writers deserted her cause while protestants discreetly glossed over her faults. When James at last succeeded Elizabeth, Mary's image was at its most anodyne. In 1606 he commissioned a tomb for his mother in Westminster Abbey; her remains were transferred there from Peterborough Cathedral (where she had been buried on 1 August 1587) on the tomb's completion in 1612. Her verse epitaph by the crypto-Catholic earl of Northampton avoided controversy. James's successful succession, by drawing a line under the succession disputes of the 1590s, nevertheless enabled Catholics to revive the notion of Mary as martyr -- an image which enjoyed fitful circulation for much of the seventeenth century. 
There matters rested until the revolution of 1688, when dynastic strife intensified partisan arguments about Mary. Buchanan was translated, while Jacobite sympathizers began to expose his untruths. But the polite muting of religious passion among the most prominent eighteenth-century writers soon led to the creation of an 'unfortunate' Mary. There was keen debate over the casket letters, but those on both sides could treat her as a victim of circumstances, or perhaps of her own tragically flawed nature -- a precursor of the later flowering of Marian romanticism. Religion regained prominence in nineteenth-century views of the queen. Assaults on her once again tended to come from protestants -- or, in the prominent case of J. A. Froude, from a disillusioned former Anglo-Catholic. Religion also anchored Mary's story to a broader historical perspective: the triumph of the Reformation, of Anglo-Scottish union, and ultimately of the Enlightenment and modern progress. In the leading British fictional representation of her, that of Sir Walter Scott in 'The Abbot' (1820), her Catholicism was emphasized. While romantically alluring, she was also ultimately wrong -- a historical dead end. 
But a more modern Mary was already under construction, a Mary who could float free of long-term historical context. In his play 'Maria Stuart' (1800), Friedrich Schiller created the first dramatically satisfying Mary, both guilty and sympathetic. When he allowed her to meet Elizabeth, as everyone wished she had, he personalized their story. The broader significance of the two queens for subsequent British history never concerned Schiller's German audience, and it declined in British significance too. Scott's novel led to one opera, but Schiller's play inspired three, including Donizetti's classic 'Maria Stuarda' (1835). Schiller gave Mary a stage triumph in death over Elizabeth which showed that the latter, however charismatic in her own way, could no longer match Mary's romantic appeal. For the liberal Schiller, the passionless Elizabeth and her scheming sidekick Burghley were archetypes of repression and tyranny. This was a crucial reversal, since for Buchanan it had precisely been Mary's unbridled passions that made 'her' a tyrant; his ideal would have been Elizabeth's rational triumph over desire. The 'virgin queen' now symbolized only sterility and frustration, while Mary's sexual activity was celebrated as life-affirming. 
This gave Mary one of her most important modern roles: as a popular image in women's fantasy. In the twentieth century this required her to have a worthy sexual partner, and she was duly provided with an upgraded Bothwell, a masterful, wickedly attractive libertine. Neither Scott nor Schiller had put Bothwell on stage, but he now came to dominate Mary's story and his alleged romantic and sexual relationship with her was embroidered. Buchanan had asserted that Bothwell had raped Mary in September 1566; to him this was just another piece of mud to sling, but novelists fused it imaginatively with the real rape at Dunbar to perpetrate a genre of ugly romances (including one of literary merit, Margaret Irwin's 'The Gay Galliard', 1941) in which Mary responded passionately to Bothwell's violent advances. 
Twentieth-century research on Mary was marked by the decline of religious partisanship and by fresh directions in scholarship. Many traditional assumptions were overturned by M. H. Armstrong Davison's detailed textual analysis of the casket letters in 1965. By demonstrating how far they had been manipulated by Mary's accusers, he freed scholars from any obligation to believe in her guilt over Darnley's murder. Antonia Fraser seized the opportunity thus presented and produced a detailed and highly sympathetic biography in 1969 which has enjoyed both a wide general readership and a high reputation among scholars ever since. The studies of noble politics published by Gordon Donaldson between 1965 and 1983 offered factional, rather than primarily religious, interpretations of the conflicts of Mary's reign, and demonstrated the extent of Scottish support for her after her deposition and even into the 1580s. The fourth centenary of Mary's death produced two new scholarly contributions in 1988. Jenny Wormald attempted to reduce the issue to one of Mary's personal incompetence, while Michael Lynch edited a collection of essays taking a more nuanced view of her; Lynch later produced a review article comprehensively rebutting Wormald's central claims. 
Meanwhile the commanding position enjoyed by Fraser's biography among general readers has permitted sympathy with Mary's tragedy to flourish unchecked. Fraser's own conclusions were generally judicious, but were so presented as to allow the emergence of a popular Mary-Elizabeth story that unequivocally favoured Mary. This was noticeable, for instance, in the film 'Mary, Queen of Scots' (1971), with its Schiller-inspired meetings between the two queens. A jealous Elizabeth tricked Mary into an unsuitable marriage; she imprisoned her unjustly; she (or her scheming ministers) framed her deceitfully over the Babington plot; she executed her although lacking jurisdiction to do so. 
But one can respect Mary and even regret her execution while still recognizing that this is mostly unfair to Elizabeth. She did not want the Darnley marriage. The evidence of Mary's plotting, however obtained, was genuine -- and if Mary's plots had succeeded she would have become queen of England and Elizabeth would have been killed. This is also relevant to the legalities of Mary's captivity; freeing her would have harmed English political interests. Mary was well aware of the rules of the political game in which she was engaged, and in claiming that Elizabeth had no jurisdiction over her, she was playing another card in that game. She lost the game, but need not lose our respect: Elizabeth won, but by the rules of the game she won fairly. Elizabeth was the more skilled player, and also held more of the cards. However, the game itself was not of their making; both queens saw themselves as being forced by circumstances into enmity. In happier times they might have met and been friends. Mary's deep and long-standing wish for such a friendship is a striking memorial to her character. 
One should thus turn the spotlight away from Elizabeth and towards her ministers, associates, and proteges: Burghley, Walsingham, Moray, Morton, and ultimately James VI. They shared a coherent Anglo-Scottish religious and political programme. Could Mary ever have found a place in it? Critics have argued that her downfall was due primarily to her own errors, notably her marriage to Darnley, flight to England, and plotting against Elizabeth. But a cannier politician than Mary could have been forgiven for misreading the tortuous English diplomacy of early 1565. Flight to England looks less foolish in the light of Elizabeth's repeated efforts to negotiate her restoration, abandoned only in 1570. Mary's plots were all undertaken after she had seen other avenues close; she knew the risks, but would not abandon hope. She was not an outstanding politician, but she scored some notable successes: integrating herself with the Scottish regime in 1561, seeing off the Moray-Hamilton challenge in 1565, and outmanoeuvring the Riccio murderers in 1566. Her personal breakdown in 1567 can hardly be called a political error, however disastrous its consequences. 
From the moment that Mary returned to Scotland, she was in a minefield. The Anglo-Scottish protestant establishment found a French Catholic queen with a claim to the English throne highly inconvenient. It tolerated her at first because it had to, but it allowed her minimal room for her own initiatives, as the reaction to her second marriage showed. After she had angered the establishment twice -- over Darnley and over the plan to forfeit Moray early in 1566 -- her enemies were determined to pounce on even the slightest mistake. Her sex, too, was obviously crucial. Darnley was a problem only because a male consort, however useless and insufferable, was expected to play a political role. Darnley's tragedy was that he never had the chance to grow up. Mary's was quite different. Any woman ruler, even Elizabeth, had to appeal to the emotions of a patriarchal world; Mary did so forcefully. Her charisma, intelligence, and determination to maintain her status were frequently noted and impossible to ignore. The English parliament of 1572 complained that she had written to Norfolk with 'great discourses in matters of State (more than woman's wit doth commonly reach unto)' (Neale, 1.249). Her religion was just tolerant and flexible enough to make her a passable ruler of a protestant Scotland, and a plausible candidate to rule a protestant England; but it was still the wrong religion and her persistent attempts to advance her career were fraught with danger. A woman's political career also depended on marriage, and many men wanted to marry her. Yet few were politically suitable -- certainly not Darnley, Bothwell, or Norfolk. In late sixteenth-century Britain an attractive, talented, and ambitious woman with Mary's background was bound to make more enemies than friends. Only by jettisoning ambitions, principles, or both would she stand a chance of success -- and failure could easily be fatal. Mary remained true to herself, and paid the price. Ultimately one is left with a historical Mary remarkably close to the popular image: a romantic tragedy queen. 


@@@@@


doc= 18249


Mary (d. 1463), queen of Scots, consort of James II, was probably born in Gueldres, the eldest daughter of Arnold, duke of Gueldres, and Catherine, duchess of Cleves. From an early age she enjoyed the support of her powerful uncle, Philip the Good, duke of Burgundy, at whose court she was brought up. Scottish diplomatic success in finding prestigious European husbands for four of James II's sisters (in France, Brittany, Austria, and Veere) may have led to raised expectations on the part of the Scottish commissioners -- William, Lord Crichton, the chancellor, John Ralston, bishop of Dunkeld, and Nicholas Otterburn, official of St Andrews -- in their pursuit of a marriage alliance in Burgundy, Gueldres, and Cleves. 
Negotiations appear to have been tough and protracted. James II (1430-1460) enlisted the aid of his kinsman, Charles VII of France, as early as January 1448, and gave full powers to the Scottish ambassadors on 6 May. But it was not until 1 April 1449 that the marriage contract was finally drawn up at Brussels. The long delay was caused by the fact that Duke Arnold of Gueldres's original plan, drawn up on 6 September 1448, had been to marry his eldest daughter, Mary, to Duke Albrecht of Austria, brother of Friedrich, king of the Romans (Emperor Friedrich III), while Arnold's second daughter, Margaret, was to marry the Scottish king. Both marriages were to be negotiated by Philip of Burgundy. It seems likely that the final deal, whereby James II obtained the hand of Mary, was the result not so much of tough talking by the Scots commissioners as of an agreement between Philip of Burgundy, who was to pay Mary's dowry, and the Scottish king's ally Charles VII, who stood surety for the bride's Scottish dower (10,000 crowns) in the event of James II's death. Significantly the Franco-Scottish alliance was renewed on 31 December 1448, during the course of the Burgundian negotiations which resulted in the treaty of Brussels. 
Mary of Gueldres came to Scotland not only with the promise of a dowry of 60,000 gold crowns (to be paid over two years by Philip the Good), but also at the duke of Burgundy's expense, in a magnificent fleet of fourteen vessels which sailed from Sluys on 9 June 1449, reaching Leith on the 18th after a detour to visit the chapel of St Adrian on the Isle of May. The marriage treaty was duly ratified by James II a week later, and on 3 July James and Mary were married at Holyrood, with Mary's coronation taking place on the same day. The queen's dower lands included the lands of the earldoms of Strathearn and Atholl, the castle and lordship of Methven, and the palace of Linlithgow, as well as the great customs of the burgh of Linlithgow. These were supposed to yield the huge sum of 10,000 crowns, the equivalent of $5000 Scots. The fact that this ambitious total was not even approached, taken together with James II's fear that Burgundy might withhold the substantial balance of Mary's dowry if an adequate Scottish dower was not forthcoming, probably played a role in the king's assault on the Livingston family in 1449-50 and in his subsequent efforts to wrest the earldom of Wigtown from the Black Douglases. Significantly, the queen played a considerable role in the first parliament of James II's active rule, held in Edinburgh in January 1450. Not only did she back the Scottish bishops in their complaint to the crown that the estates of deceased prelates were being requisitioned by royal officers, but she also secured the widest possible support for the payment of her dower, assigned by the estates on the day after the axe fell on two of the forfeited Livingstons. 
Throughout the 1450s Mary of Gueldres acted as a dutiful wife, providing her husband with four sons and two daughters. The most crucial period from the point of view of the continuing Stewart succession, however, came in the early 1450s. At Stirling on 19 May 1450 the queen gave premature birth to a child who lived only six hours; about a year later she had a daughter Mary; but no surviving male child was born to the royal couple until May 1452, by which time James II was embroiled in the greatest crisis of his reign and was forced to send his wife from the storm centre of Stirling to the comparative safety of the episcopal castle at St Andrews. There, towards the end of May 1452, the future James III was born. Further children followed: Alexander Stewart, duke of Albany and earl of March, most probably in 1454, David, earl of Moray, in 1456, John Stewart, earl of Mar, in 1457 or early 1458, and a second daughter, Margaret, in 1459-60. With the exception of David, all these children survived into adulthood. 
The sudden death of Mary's husband, James II, aged only twenty-nine, killed by the explosion of one of his own cannon at the siege of Roxburgh on 3 August 1460, ended the queen's lengthy preoccupation with childbirth and forced on her the new task of stateswoman, a role which she performed equally well during the last three years of her life. Within five days of James II's death the queen had brought her eldest son, the eight-year-old James III, to the siege; Roxburgh was taken, and the new king was crowned at Kelso on 10 August. A contemporary chronicler comments, albeit disapprovingly, that at the first parliament of the new reign (February 1461), the estates 'left the king in keping with his modere the queen and governing of all the kinrik' (McGladdery, 170). Mary lost no time in appointing her own men as keepers of the vital castles of Edinburgh, Stirling, Blackness, and Dunbar; and she made James Lindsay of Covington, a man mistrusted by her late husband because of his Douglas connections, keeper of the privy seal. 
In foreign policy the queen dowager followed James II's line of playing off Lancaster and York in England in order to recover Scottish strong points on the borders. In this she was spectacularly successful. By offering sanctuary to the refugee Lancastrian king and queen, Henry VI and Margaret of Anjou, she was able to recover Berwick by negotiation in March 1461. When it became clear that the Lancastrian cause was lost in England, Mary of Gueldres switched to dealings with the Yorkist Edward IV; she paid large sums to be rid of Margaret of Anjou, sending her from Kirkcudbright to Brittany in April 1462 to seek French aid, while Queen Mary herself went to Dumfries to meet the Yorkist earl of Warwick. The queen's great rival, Bishop James Kennedy of St Andrews, who was pro-French and Lancastrian by conviction, tried to upset Mary's more realistic inclination towards Burgundy and the Yorkists, partly by besmirching the queen's name through accusations of causing divisions and bloodshed, and ultimately by forcing her into an abortive raid on Norham Castle (July 1463). Mary died on 1 December 1463. Her legacy was the peace process with Yorkist England, into which even Kennedy was drawn after her death; the spectacular Fife castle of Ravenscraig, on which the queen spent at least $600 Scots between 1460 and 1463; and Holy Trinity Church in Edinburgh, on which she lavished the huge sum of $1100 Scots, and in which she was buried in December 1463. Stories that circulated in later generations, alleging that Queen Mary had been the mistress successively of Edmund Beaufort, duke of Somerset (died 1471), and Adam Hepburn, without much doubt originated in confusion with another maligned queen mother, James I's widow, Joan. 


@@@@@


doc= 18250


Mary (1515-1560), queen of Scots, consort of James V, and regent of Scotland, was the eldest of the twelve children of Claude, first duc de Guise (1496-1550), and his wife, Antoinette de Bourbon (1493-1583), daughter of Francois, third comte de Vendome (1470-1495). 
Born on 20 November 1515 in the castle of Bar-le-Duc, she was baptized there twelve days later. When she was four her father's mother, Philippa of Gueldres, entered the convent of Poor Clares at Pont-a-Mousson and Mary's parents went to live in her former residence, the family's ancestral castle of Joinville. Some years later Mary was sent to her grandmother to be educated in the convent, perhaps with the intention that she should become a nun, but when she was about fourteen her uncle Antoine, duc de Lorraine, and his wife visited her and decided that it would be a waste to keep a handsome, eligible girl like Mary shut away from the world. Exceptionally tall, like the rest of her father's family, she had auburn hair, grey eyes, and a charming manner. Her uncle took her back to Nancy, and then to the French court to witness the coronation of Francois I's new wife, Eleanor of Austria. Mary was presented to the king and queen, rode in the royal procession when Eleanor made her formal entry into Paris, and attended the royal banquet afterwards. She was soon a great favourite, the king treating her almost as if she were his own daughter. 
Among those who had played a leading part in the queen's coronation was Louis, duc de Longueville (1510-1537), grand chamberlain of France. His lands lay in Normandy, to the north of the Guise possessions, and in 1534 he and Mary were betrothed. Louis settled on her the castle and lands of Chateaudun, while she brought with her a dowry of 80,000 livres, augmented by 40,000 livres from Francois I. They were married on 4 August 1534 in the Louvre, before the entire court, the celebratory banquets and tournaments lasting for sixteen days afterwards. 
Mary and her husband were happy together and their first son, born in their castle at Amiens on 30 October 1535, was christened Francois after the king. They travelled round their estates in the summer months, but much of their time was spent at court and on 1 January 1537 they attended the wedding of Madeleine, the elder daughter of Francois I, to James V, king of Scots (1512-1542). By then Mary was pregnant again, but on 9 June 1537 her husband died of a fever in Rouen, leaving her a widow at twenty-one. Her second son was born at Chateaudun on 4 August 1537 and named Louis after his father. 
Mary's intention was to live quietly at Chateaudun, running the Longueville estates for her elder son, but two months after her husband's death she was dismayed to receive a letter from Francois I informing her that she was to marry the widowed king of Scots. Queen Madeleine, always delicate, had died on 7 July 1537, and James V now wanted another French bride. Soon afterwards Henry VIII of England announced that he too was a suitor for Mary. His third wife, Jane Seymour, had just died and he wanted to prevent his nephew James V from strengthening Scotland's traditional alliance with France by taking James's intended wife for himself. When the French ambassador asked Henry why he was so set on marrying the duc de Guise's daughter, the English king replied that Mary was big in person and he needed a big wife. 'I may be big in person', she commented dryly when she heard this, 'but my neck is small' (Fraser, 7). 
In December 1537 Mary's infant son Louis died and in the midst of her grief she received a letter from Francois I ordering her to proceed with the Scottish marriage. Bowing to the inevitable she sent a representative to court, and was horrified to learn that the king had decided that although he himself would supply 30,000 livres of her dowry of 150,000 livres, the rest was to come not from her father but from the lands and revenues settled on her by her first husband. This would be very prejudicial to the interests of her surviving son, for it meant that part of his inheritance was in effect being transferred to the king of Scots. Mary urged her friend Marguerite de Navarre, sister of Francois I, to speak to the king, and Marguerite must have done so to some effect, for when the contract was signed in Lyons at the end of March 1538, the offending clause had been removed. Francois I would provide no less than 70,000 livres and Mary's father would contribute the remaining 80,000 livres. If James V died first, his heirs would return to Mary one third of the dowry if there were children of the marriage, one half if there were none. As her jointure she would receive Falkland Palace and the castles of Stirling, Dingwall, and Threave, the earldoms of Strathearn, Ross, Orkney, and Fife, and the lordships of Galloway, Ardmannach, and the Isles. Were she to be widowed, she would be free to return to France if she wished, and she would continue to draw the revenues from her jointure lands. 
Mary's grandmother Philippa of Gueldres had been the niece of James's great-grandmother Mary of Gueldres, the wife of James II, and so James wrote to the pope for the necessary dispensation of consanguinity. He decided not to return to France to collect his new bride in person, but instead sent Robert, fifth Lord Maxwell, to France as his proxy. Mary's second wedding took place on 9 May 1538 in the castle of Chateaudun, Maxwell placing upon her finger a diamond spousing ring which had cost James considerably less than the ring with which he had married Madeleine. Mary could not take her small son with her to Scotland, for his inheritance lay in France, and so she left him with her mother, who was expecting her twelfth child. The little duke would be happy in the nurseries at Joinville with Mary's young brothers and sisters, some of whom were about his own age. Several weeks after the proxy wedding Mary's family escorted her to Rouen. Her father, her sister Louise, and a retinue of French servants would accompany her to Scotland, and they embarked at Le Havre on 10 June aboard the same three galleys which had carried James V and Madeleine north the previous year. 
On Trinity Sunday (16 June) 1538 Mary of Guise set foot in her new country for the first time, landing at Balcomie in Fife. She spent the night in Balcomie Castle, and in the morning her new husband arrived with a procession of courtiers to escort her to St Andrews. There she was greeted with a pageant specially composed by Sir David Lindsay, the lord Lyon (the Scottish king of arms), and next morning the royal marriage was solemnly confirmed and blessed at a service in the cathedral. Even the sophisticated French were impressed by 'the magnificent novelties' with which the guests were subsequently entertained (Marshall, 'Mary of Guise', 60). The celebrations lasted for forty days and included archery contests, hunting, hawking, and a series of tournaments in which the duc de Guise played a prominent part. He and the other French courtiers remained in Scotland until August, when James took his queen on a tour of her various jointure lands. She finally made her formal entry into Edinburgh on St Margaret's day, 16 November 1538. 
Despite homesickness, Mary expressed tactful pleasure at all she saw, while the Scots for their part were delighted with this impressive, well-made mother of sons, so different from fragile Madeleine. James treated Mary kindly and soon she was thinking of ways of improving her surroundings, sending to her mother for French masons to work at Falkland Palace and Stirling Castle, begging a French friend for cuttings from fruit trees, and trying to obtain young wild boars for the forests of Falkland. She also urged her mother to dispatch experienced miners from Lorraine to exploit the valuable minerals of Crawfordmuir, high up in the hills of western Scotland. 
As the months went by, however, there was a good deal of concern that Mary of Guise showed no sign of pregnancy, and it was noticeable that she had not yet been crowned queen of Scots. She would have to produce a son to secure her position. In August 1539 she and James V made a pilgrimage to St Adrian's shrine on the Isle of May, a well-known source of help for barren women, and not long afterwards she found that she was pregnant. She was crowned in Holyrood Abbey on 22 February 1540, and on 22 May her child was born at St Andrews, a son, who was baptized James when he was a week old. On 24 April in the following year another son, Robert, was born to her in Stirling Castle. 
A week after that alarming news arrived from Fife. Prince James was seriously ill. The king rode at once for St Andrews, but by the time he got there his elder son was already dead. Even as he left the chamber where the baby lay, an anxious messenger arrived from Stirling to tell him that Prince Robert had also fallen ill. The infant was still alive when his father reached the castle, but he died a few hours later. The little princes were buried together in Holyrood Abbey, and James's mother observed that the king and queen were said to be in great distress. Clad in deepest mourning they made a progress through Perth and Aberdeen that summer, returning to Edinburgh by way of Falkland. Early the following year Mary was pregnant once more. 
Relations between Scotland and England were now deteriorating rapidly. James V had ignored Henry VIII's urgings to follow his example and break with the Roman Catholic church and Henry decided that he could no longer tolerate the threat from his northern neighbour. In spring 1542 he not only instructed his archbishop of Canterbury to search through the ancient records for any document which would prove his claim to be overlord of Scotland, but he also considered the cheaper and quicker expedient of having his agents kidnap James. 
The archbishop's search failed to yield anything and Henry decided to invade Scotland. Mary of Guise walked 7 miles to Our Lady of Loretto, just outside Edinburgh, to pray for the safety of her husband and his kingdom, but on 24 November 1542 the Scots were defeated at the battle of Solway Moss. James was not present at the battle but the defeat plunged him into despair. Riding first to Tantallon Castle, where he kept a mistress, he made his way to Linlithgow to see Mary and then travelled on to Falkland, 'his mind near gone through dolour and care' (Lesley, 2.258-9). On 8 December 1542 the queen gave birth to her first daughter. James was lying ill in bed when they told him, and it was then that he made his famous remark, 'It cam' wi' a lass and it will gang wi' a lass', meaning that although his family had gained the throne through a woman, Robert I's daughter Marjorie, a male heir was now vital in such troubled times. He died on 14 December, just before midnight, leaving Mary of Guise a widow for the second time, at the age of twenty-seven. Hitherto clad in gorgeous purple, crimson, and tawny silks encrusted with gold passementerie, she now put on the mourning black which she would wear for the rest of her life. 
Although her marriage contract entitled Mary to return to France, she decided to stay in Scotland to protect the interests of her baby daughter, known to posterity as Mary, queen of Scots. Traditionally, a widowed Scottish queen could expect to act as regent for her child, but Mary of Guise was lying in childbed at Linlithgow while Cardinal David Beaton, primate of Scotland, and James, second earl of Arran, head of the house of Hamilton and heir presumptive to the throne, were locked in a determined struggle for the regency. Meanwhile, the threat from England remained. Henry VIII had immediately seen the possibilities of the changed situation. He would persuade the Scots to marry their infant queen to his young son Edward, take her into his own hands, and Scotland would be his. 
On 3 January 1543 the Scottish lords chose the earl of Arran as regent. The lord governor, as he was styled, believed that a further invasion of Scotland could only be averted by making peace with England. Mary of Guise supported Cardinal Beaton, who was known to favour the French alliance, for now, virtually Arran's prisoner in Linlithgow, she feared that he would hand her daughter over to Henry VIII. In fact she wished to be regent herself, but in the present emergency it suited her to collaborate with the cardinal, just as he hoped to profit from her influence in France. Desperate to counteract the lord governor's influence, they together decided to invite back to Scotland the earl of Lennox, Arran's great rival, then living in France. Lured on by illusory promises that Mary of Guise would consider marrying him, Lennox returned, but his rival's very presence did much to strengthen Arran's wavering resolve to pursue an English alliance. The treaties of Greenwich were concluded on 1 July 1543. There would be peace between Scotland and England and Mary, queen of Scots, would be married to Henry VIII's son Edward. Mary of Guise's opposition to the match was well known, and when a French fleet was sighted off the east coast there were immediate rumours that the ships had come to take her and her daughter to France. Arran at once set about fortifying Linlithgow Palace, but Lennox and Beaton marched against him and he was forced to agree that Mary could move her daughter to Stirling Castle. 
The treaties of Greenwich had not yet been ratified, and while Mary did her best to influence the Scottish lords against them, Beaton persuaded Arran to abandon the English alliance. On 8 September 1543 the lord governor did public penance for his recent support of the protestants, promising to take no action without the advice and consent of the cardinal. The following day Mary, queen of Scots, was crowned in the Chapel Royal at Stirling. Mary of Guise now became the principal member of a new council of regency and in December the Scottish parliament solemnly declared the treaties of Greenwich to be null and renewed their ancient alliance with France. Vowing vengeance, Henry VIII sent a fleet to the River Forth in May 1544 and the first of the series of devastating invasions later known as the 'rough wooing' began. While Mary of Guise and her daughter remained in the safety of Stirling Castle, the English burned Holyrood Abbey, where her husband and sons were buried. A general council meeting at Stirling on 29 May blamed Arran for his failure to drive back the English and ordered him to resign the regency in favour of Mary of Guise and a council of twelve advisers, but the lord governor clung to power and Mary was not powerful enough to dislodge him. 
On 27 February 1545 Arran won a resounding victory over the English at Ancrum Moor and that April the Scots rejected English requests that negotiations be reopened on the basis of the treaties of Greenwich. In response to Mary of Guise's pleas for help, the French sent assistance in the form of a force led by Jacques de Montgomery, seigneur de Lorges, but that autumn Henry VIII's forces were back, burning the abbeys of Kelso, Melrose, Dryburgh, and Jedburgh. Henry himself died on 28 January 1547, but Lord Protector Somerset, commander of the previous invasions, continued his policy towards Scotland, marched north in August, and routed Arran and the Scots at the battle of Pinkie on 10 September 1547. 
Sending her daughter to the secluded island of Inchmahome, on the Lake of Menteith, Mary of Guise pleaded with the French ambassador, Henri Cleutin, seigneur d'Oysel, for further help. It was not in the interests of France to see Scotland overrun by the English, and so Henri II instructed d'Oysel to persuade Mary of Guise to agree to a new scheme. Her daughter should marry the king's son, the dauphin, Francois. England would then be trapped irrevocably between France and Scotland. In return for Mary of Guise's compliance, he would send her substantial assistance. 
Mary was relieved, even though it meant agreeing to her daughter being brought up at the French court. At least she would be safe there. The following February the English invaded yet again, and Mary sent the little queen west to Dumbarton Castle. Not until mid-June did the promised French assistance arrive, led by Andre de Montalembert, sieur d'Esse. Mary of Guise urged him to recapture Haddington from the English but he was reluctant, for the French wanted the new treaty to be signed before they did anything. However, when Mary personally rallied the Scots, urging them to join with the French in driving out the enemy, the siege began, and the treaty of Haddington was signed on 7 July 1548. Mary, queen of Scots, would marry the dauphin, and Henri II promised to defend Scotland as he did his own realm, while maintaining Scottish laws and liberties. 
Touring the French and Scottish camps at Haddington two days later, Mary of Guise narrowly escaped death when English guns from the town fired on her cavalcade, killing and wounding sixteen of her gentlemen as well as other members of her household. She fainted with horror, but she was unhurt. As soon as she had heard masses for the dead, she left for Dumbarton to see her daughter embark for France. The young Queen Mary set sail on 7 August 1548 and the earl of Arran was persuaded, somewhat against his will, to make the journey to the French court too. Henri II then rewarded him for agreeing to Mary's marriage by making him duc de Chatelherault. 
In June 1549 yet another English fleet sailed into the River Forth, but at Mary's instigation newly arrived French reinforcements managed to seize the strategically important island of Inchkeith which the English had captured. When France and England signed a peace treaty the following April, she decided to take advantage of the opportunity to visit the French court herself. She was, of course, anxious to see her children, but there were urgent matters of public business too. She wanted to press Henri II for financial assistance and she needed his support if she was to oust Chatelherault from his position as lord governor. 
In the middle of August 1550 Henri sent Leon Strozzi with six galleys to bring Mary of Guise from Scotland, and after a series of delays she finally embarked at Leith, arriving at Dieppe on 19 September. She was accompanied by a large number of Scottish noblemen whom she had not dared leave behind for fear of the trouble they could cause in her absence. The duc de Chatelherault had remained at home, however, for he was too satisfied with his new title to cause any trouble, and the French ambassador d'Oysel, now lieutenant-general of Scotland, would keep a watchful eye on him. 
Mary's father had died earlier in the year, but her brothers the duc de Guise and the cardinal of Lorraine were waiting to escort her to Paris. She made a ceremonial entry into the city with her retinue of Scottish noblemen, and was reunited with her children. Mary, queen of Scots, was seven now, and her son Francois, duc de Longueville, was fourteen. She had not seen him for twelve years. When he was small, her mother had sent her pictures of him and even a length of cord to show his height, but in more recent times he had been able to write to her himself, telling her that he longed to come to Scotland to fight in her cause. After a delighted reunion Mary lost no time in engaging the French king and his advisers in serious discussions about the future of Scotland. Some of the French said that since Mary, queen of Scots, would so soon be the bride of the dauphin, a Frenchman should be appointed to govern Scotland in her name, but Mary insisted that she herself should rule as regent. In November she went with the court to Chartres and then on to Blois, where they spent the winter. Secret discussions continued, the Scots who had come with Mary received lavish bribes, and the English ambassador complained that the queen dowager of Scotland was exercising far too much influence. 
The discovery of a plot to poison her daughter caused Mary of Guise to cancel her plans to return to Scotland in the spring of 1551, and she remained with the French court throughout the summer, visiting Tours, Angers, and Nantes and then making a progress through Brittany. When Henri II moved to his favourite residence of Fontainebleau, he agreed that she could visit Joinville. Her old home was sadly changed, with her father dead, her mother in deepest mourning, and her brothers and sisters grown up and living elsewhere, but she stayed there until early September. When she then moved to Amiens to begin the preparations for her journey back to Scotland, another family crisis intervened. Her son had gone with her to see her off, but when they reached Amiens he fell ill and although Mary nursed him tenderly, he died in her arms. 'Our Lord must wish me for one of His chosen ones, since He has visited me so often with such sorrow. Praised be He by all', Mary wrote sadly to her own mother (Pimodan, 380). After the funeral she hastened the preparations for her departure and sailed from Dieppe in mid-October. 
Mary of Guise had decided to visit Edward VI on her way back to Scotland, and so she crossed the channel and made her way to Hampton Court, where she was welcomed by a large delegation of English courtiers. Next day she sailed along the Thames to the bishop of London's palace and then on 4 November went in procession to the palace of Westminster, where Edward VI entertained her to a banquet. The following day he sent her a gift of two horses and a ring set with a diamond. She left London on 6 November 1551, escorted for the first part of the journey by the duke of Northumberland, the earls of Pembroke and Wiltshire, and many other lords and ladies and their retinues. As she passed through each shire on the way north she was accompanied by the local dignitaries until she finally reached Berwick, where she was welcomed by various Scottish noblemen including the earl of Bothwell and Lord Hume. 
She had come back with her status greatly enhanced by her reception in Paris and London, but even so she could not wrest the regency from Chatelherault right away. In the summer of 1553 she welcomed the accession of Mary I to the English throne but when she heard disturbing rumours that the earl of Lennox was plotting to seize the government of Scotland for himself, she decided that the time had come to act. She sent d'Oysel to France to consult Henri II, and when he returned worked with him to persuade Chatelherault to relinquish his position. He was predictably reluctant, but on 19 February he capitulated in return for promises of financial benefit, grants of property to various relatives, and the position of lieutenant-general, currently held by d'Oysel. Parliament met on 12 April 1554, Chatelherault resigned his office, d'Oysel placed the crown of Scotland on Mary of Guise's head, and handed her the sceptre and the sword of state. At last she was queen regent of Scotland. 
Mary of Guise replaced Chatelherault's men with her own supporters, rewarded her adherents with gifts of land and money, and bribed those who were liable to waver. She also aroused much hostility by appointing Frenchmen to various public positions. Monsieur de Rubay, one of the French king's counsellors, would keep the king's seal, Bartholomew de Villemore would control the customs, Monsieur Bonet, a member of her own household, became her bailie of Orkney, and in 1557 the Frenchman Jean Roytell was appointed principal master mason. At the same time she tried to restore firm central government. She attended parliament personally in 1555 and much of its legislation dealt with the administration of justice and the regulation of trade. That summer she went to Dumfries to try border thieves, and the following year she held justice eyres throughout the north of Scotland, telling clan chiefs that she intended to continue her late husband's policy of making them responsible for the behaviour of their clansmen. 
The Scots viewed Mary of Guise's activities with deep suspicion, and when parliament met early in 1557 she was unpleasantly surprised by the hostility of its members. They complained bitterly that her daughter was still not married to the dauphin, and wondered openly if the wedding would ever take place. The continuing uncertainty undermined the queen regent's position, and although she wanted to fortify the borders against English raids, she doubted whether she would be able to raise the money from her unco-operative subjects. Ruling the country was no easy task, she told the cardinal of Lorraine, adding, 'God knows, brother, what a life I lead. It is no small thing to bring a young nation to a state of perfection.... Happy is he who has least to do with worldly affairs. I can safely say that for twenty years past I have not had one year of rest' (Marshall, 'Mary of Guise', 211). 
No one was more anxious than Mary of Guise to see her daughter married to the dauphin, but there was little she could do about it, and her position became even more difficult when France went to war with Spain that autumn and Henri instructed her to create a diversion by sending an army to invade England, Spain's ally. She dutifully summoned all able-bodied men between the ages of sixteen and sixty, and addressed them herself, but when they reached the borders the Scots turned and marched home again. Her relatives were, however, in an increasingly influential position at the French court, not least because the duc de Guise had in January 1558 captured Calais from the English. Henri therefore decided to go ahead with his son's marriage to the young Scottish queen. 
Scottish commissioners were sent to France to negotiate the contract, the couple were formally betrothed on 19 April, and the marriage finally took place on 24 April 1558. The marriage contract ostensibly safeguarded Scotland's independence and stated that Mary of Guise was to act as regent as long as her daughter was out of the country, but the Scots' worst suspicions would have been realized had they known that Mary, queen of Scots, had also signed secret clauses. If she died childless, Henri II would inherit Scotland and he would enjoy all Scottish revenues until he had been repaid for the money he had spent in defence of his daughter-in-law's kingdom. 
Apart from Scottish hostility to the French, the situation in Scotland was complicated by the growing tide of protestantism, and on 1 September 1558, St Giles's day, a riot broke out in Edinburgh when the saint's image was carried in procession through the streets. That winter the protestants presented Mary of Guise with a series of petitions demanding the right to convene publicly or privately, hear services in the vernacular, and take communion in both kinds. They likewise demanded the repeal of all the laws against heresy. Mary regarded their religious demands as a mere cloak for sedition, but they gained a valuable ally when Mary I of England died on 17 November 1558 and her protestant half-sister Elizabeth succeeded to her throne. 
On 1 January 1559 protestants pinned to the doors of the Scottish friaries copies of a document known as 'beggars' summons', demanding that the friars give up their property to the poor. The signing of the treaty of Cateau Cambresis that spring brought peace between France and Spain. Scotland and England were comprised in the treaty, but religious disturbances continued in Scotland and Mary of Guise resolved to outlaw the protestant leaders. Shortly before they were to appear before her, John Knox the energetic protestant preacher arrived back in Scotland, and his inflammatory sermon in St John's Church in Perth roused up the townspeople to smash images, tear down furnishings, and drive friars out of their friaries. 
Mary of Guise and Chatelherault rode to Perth at the head of an army, intending to disperse the protestants, but they were outnumbered and on 29 May 1559 it was agreed that both armies would disband. Mary of Guise entered Perth, gave orders for the repair of the damaged buildings, and replaced the protestant provost with one of her own supporters. She then garrisoned the town with Scottish soldiers in French pay, and withdrew to her palace at Falkland. The lords of the congregation, as the protestant leaders now called themselves, immediately declared that the queen regent had broken the truce and hostilities were renewed. 
Mary herself had fallen ill and she remained at Falkland while Chatelherault and d'Oysel marched to confront the rebels at Cupar, in Fife. Realizing that they were outnumbered once more, the royal commanders entered into discussions with the rebels and reached a new agreement. The queen regent would grant the protestants freedom of worship, they would disband their army, and the French soldiers would retire to Lothian. Well aware that it was unsafe for her to remain in Fife, Mary crossed to Edinburgh and then sought shelter in Dunbar Castle, on the east coast. If all else failed she could escape from there to France. Her precautions were justified, for the congregation marched to Stirling and then entered the capital. 
When she heard that Scotland's coining irons had been seized by the congregation, Mary was affronted. She ordered Chatelherault and d'Oysel to march on Edinburgh but, recognizing that they were not strong enough, they seized Leith instead and entered into negotiations once more. Agreement was reached on Leith Links on 23 July 1559. The congregation would deliver up the coining irons and leave Edinburgh the following day. In future they would obey the authority of the queen regent and molest neither churches nor churchmen. In return, Mary would grant the people of Edinburgh freedom of worship and no one would interfere with the protestant preachers. Two days later the royal army entered Edinburgh, the congregation dispersed, and Mary herself returned when order had been restored. 
The appearance of peace was no more than an illusion, however, for the protestants were engaged in secret negotiations with Elizabeth I and on 7 August 1559 the English queen sent Sir Ralph Sadler north. He was to stir up further opposition to the French, urge Chatelherault to abandon Mary of Guise, and persuade her nobles to force her to make a treaty of perpetual peace with England. Mary meanwhile learned that Henri II had died as the result of a jousting accident and, to add to her troubles, Chatelherault's protestant son James, third earl of Arran, arrived back from France. Within twenty-four hours the duc had changed sides and joined the congregation. 
Sending urgent pleas to France for assistance, Mary persuaded d'Oysel to fortify Leith, and she took refuge there when she heard that the congregation were marching on Edinburgh once more. Her health was deteriorating rapidly -- she seems to have been suffering from chronic heart disease -- and her remaining supporters were diminishing daily. Her once sumptuous furnishings were worn and threadbare, and her wardrobe was reduced to a sparse collection of black garments, some of them lined with fur to keep out the cold. Personal splendour no longer mattered. She was desperately short of money, for she had inherited a deficit of $30,000 when she took over as regent from Chatelherault, and although an appeal to Rome brought grants of ecclesiastical subsidies, her attempts at introducing new forms of lay taxation aroused great opposition. On 21 October the lords of the congregation announced that her regency was suspended, and transferred her authority to a council of regency under the leadership of Chatelherault. Mary sent a defiant reply when she was told, and d'Oysel managed to drive off a protestant assault on Leith. Mary determinedly entered the capital once more but a fortnight later she was so seriously ill that her friends despaired, and reports of her grave condition continued to circulate throughout November. By the end of the month she was said to be recovering a little, although 'without hope of long life' ('CSP for.', '1559-60', 146-7). 
The French were enjoying some success in Fife early in the new year when word came on 22 January 1560 that an English fleet had been sighted off the east coast. At the same time a French fleet coming to Mary's aid was driven back by storms. Worse was to follow, for on 27 February 1560 Elizabeth I signed the treaty of Berwick with the congregation, taking Scotland into her protection and promising the protestants her assistance. She then sent an army north to besiege Leith. Mary of Guise left her palace of Holyroodhouse for Edinburgh Castle, where she held lengthy discussions with English envoys in a desperate attempt to play for time. The siege of Leith dragged on, the queen's health continued to decline, and her pleas to her brothers in France for men and money seemed to be going unanswered. Even so, when the bishop of Valence arrived to try to mediate between Scotland and England, he found Mary 'in want especially of health and of everything else except greatness of spirit and good understanding, for she is quite undaunted by these troubles' (Teulet, 'Papiers d'etat', 1.574). 
On 27 May Mary had a relapse and her companions could see that her condition was very grave. She was suffering from dropsy and a high fever, and from 1 June she was unable to take any nourishment. By 7 June she knew that she was dying. She sent for the duc de Chatelherault, her stepson Lord James Stewart, and her other lords, urging them to maintain the alliance with France and asking their forgiveness if she had ever offended them. The following evening, at about seven o'clock, she dictated a simple will, requesting that her servants' wages and her debts be paid and nominating her executors. After that, she sank into semi-consciousness and died in Edinburgh Castle about half an hour after midnight on 11 June 1560, Lord James Stewart and Archibald Campbell, fifth earl of Argyll, at her side. Her embalmed body lay in state on a black satin bed until it was taken in a lead coffin to St Margaret's Chapel in the castle. There it remained for many months. On 6 July the French, Scots, and English signed the treaty of Edinburgh, agreeing that all foreign soldiers, French and English alike, would withdraw from Scotland, and in August the Scottish parliament passed legislation making the country officially protestant. Not until the following year was permission given for Mary of Guise's burial. On 16 March 1561 her coffin was taken from the castle at midnight and put aboard a ship for France. 
Mary of Guise was buried in July at Rheims, in the convent of St Pierre, where her sister was abbess, and a public funeral service was held in the cathedral of Notre Dame, Paris, in the presence of Mary, queen of Scots. The priest who gave the eulogy compared the dead queen to Judith, the heroine in the biblical 'Apocrypha' who had saved her city of Bethulia by cutting off the head of the besieging Assyrian general Holofernes, nor was the comparison inappropriate. Sacrificing her own comfort, interests, and ultimately her life, Mary of Guise had fought a long, desperate, and, in the end, hopeless struggle to preserve Scotland as a pro-French, Roman Catholic nation for her daughter. In so doing, the witty, vivacious, and popular young woman who had been such a favourite at the French court developed qualities of determination and endurance which impressed even her enemies. Charming, highly intelligent, and hard-working, with a diplomatic manner and an ability to fight on regardless of hostility, disappointment, and ill health, Mary was never merely a pawn of the French king. Her correspondence makes it clear that her ambitions were not necessarily those of the French monarchy, and indeed both she and her mother worried that not only Francois I and later Henri II but also her own brothers would ignore her interests and simply use her for their own political advantage. While it is true that Mary saw Scotland as an ally for France, she seems to have viewed her daughter's realm as an independent nation, albeit an infant one which she would have to organize and transform into a well-governed state. She intended doing this on her own terms and indeed, if it had not been for her determination, the French would probably have come to an agreement with the English in 1559, rather than having to wait until she was dead. 
John Knox detested Mary of Guise because for him she stood for Roman Catholicism and the mass, but later historians have viewed her with a kindly eye. Not only have her biographers, Strickland in the nineteenth century, McKerlie and Marshall in the twentieth, been unanimous in praising her intelligence and fortitude, but other writers discussing mid-sixteenth-century Scotland have also signalled their approval. 'Her methods were diverse', wrote Gordon Donaldson in 1974, 'but in the main they were along the lines of conciliation, which was always the key to the successful government of Scotland' (Donaldson, 35). In the end Mary of Guise failed in what she was trying to do, and the Scots became the protestant allies of England, but her dignity and dedication have won her the lasting admiration of protestants and Catholics alike. Her life is indeed best summed up by the emblem she chose for herself: a crown set above a rock beaten by winds and waves, with the motto 'And yet it stands'. 


@@@@@


doc= 18251


Mary (1496-1533), queen of France, consort of Louis XII, was born in the first half of 1496, probably in March, the third daughter and fifth child of Henry VII (1457-1509) and Elizabeth of York (1466-1503). 
Elizabeth and Henry had eight children, one of whom died in infancy, two others within the first year, and one at the age of three. Arthur, the eldest, died at fifteen, while Margaret, Henry, and Mary survived their parents. Mary would have had no recollection of her younger siblings, and grew up as the youngest member of a close family. Arthur died early in her seventh year, and her mother before it was complete. Seven months later her sister Margaret, a few weeks short of her fourteenth birthday, departed for Edinburgh to marry James IV of Scotland. As a result of these changes, and of her father's declining health and close preoccupation with business, Mary grew close to her remaining brother, Henry, nearly five years her senior. The bond of affection between them was lasting, and was to be of great importance to her. 
As the only princess of the royal blood remaining at court Mary enjoyed her own retinue of attendants, but they remained an integral part of the royal household. She was not given an independent endowment. Little is known of her upbringing beyond what can be learned from the household accounts. She had her own physician, apothecary, and schoolmaster, as well as attendant ladies. Frequent references to medication suggest delicate health, but they may prove no more than conscientious accountancy. It can be deduced that her schoolmaster taught her Latin and French -- although probably not to the same rigorous standards as her brother -- because later in life she is known to have had some intellectual interests. Thomas Linacre and John Palsgrave accompanied her to France, and the latter began to write a French grammar for her. She also had a reputation for piety in the humanist mode, and received the dedications of several devotional works. She also learned, although not from the same person, the courtly accomplishments of music and dancing, and the feminine art of embroidery. Princesses were pawns on the chessboard of royal politics, and Mary's hand was first sought in November 1498, when she was about two and a half. The hopeful suitor was Massimiliano, the son of Ludovico Sforza, duke of Milan, a child of about her own age. Sforza was in earnest, but was overreaching himself, and his bid was politely rejected. 
Visitors to the English court occasionally commented upon Mary as an attractive child, but her real debut did not come until 1506, when at the age of ten she helped her father to entertain Philip the Handsome, formerly archduke of Austria and now king of Castile, during his unintended visit to Windsor. She danced, played the lute, and generally made a gracious and desirable impression. Philip died later that year, but Mary's efforts had not been wasted because his father, the emperor Maximilian, then sought her as a bride for his grandson, Philip's eldest son Charles of Ghent (later the Emperor Charles V), who was six. This idea had been aired earlier, and was a proposal very much to Henry's liking, so the negotiation was seriously pursued. The terms were agreed by the end of 1507, and on 21 December a marriage treaty was signed at Calais. It was not until 17 December 1508, however, that the formal betrothal 'per verba de praesenti' took place at Richmond, with the sieur de Bergues standing as proxy for Charles. At this point Mary was nearly thirteen, and although attractive, well schooled, and well disciplined, was thought young for her age. Records do not reveal what she thought of her commitment to Charles, but, as he was some five years her junior, she would have plenty of time to grow up before being required for the duties of childbearing. 
Both sides to the bargain were pleased. Henry had bestowed his younger daughter as royally as possible, and in a direction that should have been greatly to his kingdom's advantage. At the same time Maximilian, whose resources never matched his imperial dignity, had managed to extract a loan of 100,000 crowns from his granddaughter-in-law's father, which is in itself an eloquent testimony to Henry's enthusiasm for the match. When the king died in April 1509 Mary was officially styled archduchess of Burgundy and princess of Castile, and it was under the latter title that she was recognized in the will of her grandmother Margaret Beaufort, who died very shortly after her son. Many things changed with Henry VII's death, however. Henry VIII sought war and glory, and his ambitions were directed to re-establishing an English presence in France, which made both Spain and Maximilian necessary allies. So the young king married his widowed sister-in-law Katherine of Aragon, with momentous consequences, and was keen to see his sister's marriage consummated. In October 1513, when Henry and Maximilian were already companions-in-arms, a new treaty was made, stipulating that the union should be completed at Calais not later than 15 May 1514, which must have been the earliest date that Charles's age would have permitted. Mary had been exchanging tokens with Charles since shortly after her father's death, and at the age of fifteen seems to have been looking forward to the reality of marriage with some enthusiasm. 
However, political unions were slippery properties. First Ferdinand of Aragon made a separate peace with France. Henry was furious, and Katherine distressed, but worse was to follow. The more the English pressed for the marriage to be completed, the more Maximilian vacillated. There were divided councils in Brussels, and tempting offers from France. The treaty date passed, and the excuses became lamer. By the summer of 1514 it had become clear to Henry that Maximilian intended to make a separate peace, and marry his grandson elsewhere. To avoid the humiliation of being stranded in this way, the king moved fast, impelled by the man who was now his chief adviser, Thomas Wolsey. On 30 July Mary solemnly repudiated her marriage contract, and a week later was pledged to Louis XII of France (1462-1515) by the terms of the peace treaty that brought the war to an end. Romantic fiction has attributed to Mary a bargain with her brother, whereby she agreed to exchange her youthful bridegroom for a broken man of fifty-two on the condition that she could have her own choice next time. However, nothing is known about her feelings. Her repudiation of Charles was a formal statement, written for her, and she is not known to have raised any objection to being unexpectedly raised to the dignity of queen of France. At eighteen Mary was beautiful, poised, and charming: a desirable bride for any king. A French observer described her as 'a nymph from heaven' and 'one of the most beautiful young women in the world' (Russell, 5-6). She was also apparently a dutiful and obedient sister, prepared to serve the political purposes of a brother for whom she had a genuine affection and respect. On 18 August she was married by proxy, 'per verba de praesenti', for the second time, the duc de Longueville representing Louis. On the 22nd she appointed the earl of Worcester as her own proxy to repeat the ceremony in Paris, and that was done on 14 September. The ceremony at Greenwich had been enhanced by a symbolic gesture of consummation, presumably to make it more binding, but this time neither party had any intention of reneging, and Mary embarked with a suitable retinue at Dover on 2 October. 
After a stormy crossing, during which one ship was wrecked, an extremely seasick princess was literally carried ashore near Boulogne the following day. Hasty repairs to Mary's poise and magnificence ensued before she could join the French king at Abbeville on 8 October, and their marriage was celebrated with great pomp the following day. However pleased Louis may have been with his bride, he was not pleased with her entourage, which numbered over a hundred, and was exclusively English. Whether such tactlessness was calculated is not clear, but Louis had had trouble with the Breton attendants of his first wife, and was not going to be caught again. His reaction was equally unmannerly, and the day after the wedding most of the queen's retinue was dismissed. Mary was perfectly at home in the French language, but felt suddenly isolated and vulnerable. She complained bitterly to her brother, and a diplomatic storm was narrowly averted. Louis refused to modify his orders, but he did condescend to explain the reasons for them, and both Henry and Mary professed themselves content. A handful of English ladies (including Anne Boleyn) were allowed to remain. The new queen of France was crowned at St Denis on 5 November, and entered Paris in great state the next day. Mary's reign was an almost continuous round of jousts and triumphs, and partly for that reason was extremely brief. Louis died on 1 January 1515, danced to death, it was said, by his energetic young consort. 
The possibility that this might happen had occupied Wolsey's mind for some weeks, and was one of the reasons why the delegation of honour led by Charles Brandon, duke of Suffolk (c.1484-1545), had lingered in Paris after the coronation. Ostensibly the captain of the English jousting team, Brandon had also been entrusted with the delicate task of suggesting an offensive alliance against Ferdinand of Aragon, and with the even more delicate (and secret) responsibility of safeguarding the queen if Louis's fragile health should indeed collapse. Believing that all was well, Henry had recalled him before Christmas, and then rushed him back to France as soon as the news of the king's death was received. A widowed queen not yet nineteen years old was extremely vulnerable, and Louis was scarcely buried before her name was being linked with both the duke of Savoy and the duke of Lorraine. Such a match would not have been at all in Henry's interest, and he also knew that Brandon, who was his closest friend, aspired to marry her himself. Before Suffolk returned to France it was agreed that such a marriage might take place, but only after a seemly interval and once the pair were back in England. 
Mary, however, had other ideas. She may well have been fearful of being used in another political match that might have been personally distasteful. Neither Henry, nor Francois I, Louis's successor, could be altogether trusted when a sudden advantage beckoned. Nor was Francois, a notorious womanizer, altogether trustworthy in other respects. Suffolk was a desirable partner, and he was immediately available, so ignoring the conventions of 'shamfastness', and with a courage born equally of lust and desperation, the dowager queen virtually forced him to marry her secretly in mid-February. It was the one decisive action of her life, and it nearly ruined both of them. Suffolk's mission, apart from escorting the king's sister home, had been to establish good relations with the new king of France. He did that, but not quite in the way that Henry had envisaged, by seeking and securing Francois's support for his secret marriage. Henry was furious; mainly because he had been deceived and his honour tarnished, rather than because he had any other destination in mind for his sister. The crisis also impinged immediately upon the politics of the English court. Wolsey, humbly begged for his intercession, supported Suffolk. The Howards, and most of the rest of the council, denounced him, some out of envy of Suffolk and some out of hostility to Wolsey. It soon transpired that Wolsey was the best judge of the king's mind. For about two months Suffolk did his best to redeem himself by extracting the balance of his wife's dower, the jewels that she claimed Louis had given her, and a continuation of her French income from a reluctant Francois. Eventually a complex bargain was struck, which recovered a portion of what was claimed. This ruined the rest of Suffolk's intended diplomacy because he had become heavily dependent upon Francois's goodwill, and in mid-April with repeated messages of self-abasement he and Mary set out apprehensively to return to England. 
In a sense their concern was exaggerated. When Henry met his sister at Birling on 3 May his anger had largely evaporated. He did not pretend to be pleased, but he attended their public wedding at Greenwich on the 13th, and was publicly reconciled to his old friend. Wolsey's ascendancy was firmly re-established, but Suffolk became little more than his client. This was useful as the duke recovered Henry's favour, but was based upon a sense of obligation rather than common purpose. In spite of the king's apparent indulgence, the financial settlement imposed upon the erring couple was onerous. Mary was to pay her brother $2000 a year for twelve years, drawn from the income of her dower lands in France, which can have left her with very little independent income. Suffolk lost the wardship and marriage of Lady Lisle, but kept control of her lands until she should come of age. On 12 May the duke and duchess entered into the enormous recognizance of $100,000 to abide by the terms of the settlement. Thereafter Suffolk discovered urgent (and genuine) business to attend to on his estates, particularly in East Anglia where he was trying to establish himself on the former de la Pole lands. He soon returned to regular attendance at the council, but Mary became only an occasional visitor to the court. However passionate the origin of her relationship with her husband, her children arrived only after discreet intervals. Henry was born on 11 March 1516, Frances ['see 'Grey, Frances, duchess of Suffolk] on 16 July 1517, Eleanor at some time between 1518 and 1521, and a second Henry in 1522, after the death of the first-born of that name. 
Mary's occasional appearances at court over the next decade are duly chronicled. In 1517 the Suffolks escorted Queen Katherine to Walsingham; in the spring of 1518 Mary was taken ill at Woodstock and attended by the royal physicians; in October of the same year she attended the espousal of Princess Mary to the dauphin at Greenwich. In 1520, in spite of further illness, she accompanied her brother, both in his meeting with Charles V and to the competitive festivities of the Field of Cloth of Gold, where it was she, rather than Queen Katherine, who provided the 'female lead'. The treaty of the More with France in 1525 finally settled outstanding issues relating to her dower, which had fallen into arrears as a result of the war, and in May 1526 she was again at Greenwich as the king's guest. The troubles over Henry's Great Matter, which began in 1527, and the fall of Wolsey in 1529 made little difference to the fortunes of the Suffolks, although the duke's successful request to Clement VII in 1528 for a bull protecting his marriage from being impugned on grounds of precontract may have been prompted by his brother-in-law's concerns. 
Mary did not, however, approve of Anne Boleyn. The two women exchanged insults of a semi-public nature, and when Anne accompanied Henry VIII to Calais for a meeting with Francois I in 1532, Mary refused to attend, although her health may also have been a reason for that. It is possible that Anne knew something about the origins of Mary's relationship with her husband, and had attempted to use that knowledge in a manner that led to personal as well as political estrangement. Mary died at Westhorpe in Suffolk on 25 June 1533, and was interred in Bury St Edmunds Abbey. Her quarrel with the king over his second marriage does not seem to have been reconciled, and in spite of the close relationship that they had once enjoyed, he left no recorded reaction to her death. She was survived by her second son, Henry, earl of Lincoln (who died in 1534), and by her two daughters, Frances and Eleanor. On 7 September Charles Brandon married his fourteen-year-old ward, Catherine Willoughby. 
Mary was important for who she was rather than for what she did, although for a few months in 1514-15 her actions and reactions affected the high politics of the realm. Apart from the circumstances of her marriage to the duke of Suffolk, her main impact on the history of the period came in the claim to the English throne that she transmitted via her elder daughter, Frances, to Jane and Katherine Grey, Frances's daughters from her marriage to Henry Grey, seventh marquess of Dorset. Her younger daughter, Eleanor, married Henry Clifford, later second earl of Cumberland, in 1535, and died in 1547. A number of portraits of Mary survive. The best known of these, now at Woburn Abbey, represents her with Charles Brandon and was probably painted shortly after their marriage. It bears eloquent testimony to her good looks. 


@@@@@


doc= 18252


Mary, princess royal (1631-1660), princess of Orange, consort of William II, was born at St James's Palace on 4 November 1631, the eldest daughter of King Charles I (1600-1649) and his queen, Henrietta Maria (1609-1669). Since at first it seemed unlikely she would survive, she was baptized in a sober ceremony by William Laud, bishop of London, on the same day. Her childhood was spent under the tuition of Jean Ker, 'nee' Drummond, countess of Roxburghe, and she and her siblings lived alternately at Richmond and in London. 
On 2 May 1641, only nine years old, Mary was married to William II (1626-1650), son of Frederick Henry, prince of Orange. The tentative overtures between the English and Spanish in the late 1630s caused much alarm in the Dutch republic, as it was feared this would greatly jeopardize Dutch trade at sea. In 1639 an ambassador was sent from The Hague to England to discuss a possible treaty between England and the United Provinces, and in January 1640 another Dutch envoy, Johan Polyander van Kerckhoven, Lord Heenvliet, arrived in London to negotiate a match between William and Mary. Should Charles accept this marriage, it was reasoned, the Spanish king Philip IV, set on a match between his son and Mary, would certainly not be satisfied with Charles's second daughter Elizabeth as an alternative. Charles, however, proposed not Mary but Elizabeth as William's future wife, and after some deliberation this proposal was approved both by the Dutch authorities and Frederick Henry, as well as by the English parliament. Another Dutch embassy crossed the North Sea in order to discuss the conditions of the marriage treaty, but once in London it appeared Charles had changed his mind. The English-Spanish negotiations having failed, and Spain backing out because of troubles in Portugal and Catalonia, he now offered his eldest daughter to William, on the condition of a political alliance with the Dutch republic. This, however, was not accepted by the Dutch, who feared they might become implicated in the troubles between king and parliament, and in the end Charles had to succumb. His wish that Mary should stay in England until she had reached the age of twelve, when, according to English marriage laws, she officially had to agree to the match, was granted by the Dutch. The marriage articles stipulated that Mary's dowry from England should be $40,000, while the prince of Orange agreed that Mary and members of her court were allowed to exercise religion according to the rites of the Church of England; that she would keep all her English servants while any vacant post would be filled from England; that all household expenses would be paid for by her husband; that in addition she would receive $1500 per annum and that her Dutch dower would be $10,000 a year with two residences, were her husband to die. Prince William and his entourage of 250 people arrived in Gravesend on 19 April 1641, and some days later he was received in Whitehall Palace, presenting members of the royal party with diamonds, pearls, and other jewellery, worth almost $23,000. The couple were married by the bishop of Ely in the Chapel Royal at Whitehall Palace on 2 May. The groom, wearing a suit of crimson velvet, was accompanied by the Dutch ambassadors, while Mary, dressed in a silver robe, her train borne by sixteen ladies dressed in white satin, was led in by her brothers Charles, prince of Wales (later Charles II), and James, duke of York (the future James II). A Roman Catholic, Henrietta Maria did not attend the Anglican ceremony, but watched the wedding from an upstairs gallery. Afterwards, the party dined, and later in the evening William was led to Mary's bedchamber, where the royal family had assembled. For an hour and a half, the young couple lay beside each other on the bed, the princess wrapped from head to toe in a sheet, and then the prince was taken back to his own quarters. A few days later he dutifully reported to his parents that 'although we were at first very solemn towards each other, now we feel more at ease; I find her to be more beautiful than the painting' -- a Van Dyck portrait of the princess that had been sent to Holland before -- 'I love her very much and I believe she loves me too' (Groen van Prinsterer, 2nd ser., 3.460). On 29 May OS (8 June NS) William returned to the Netherlands. 
Less than a year later, in March 1642, Mary followed her husband. She was brought over by Henrietta Maria, who, under the pretext of accompanying her daughter, was bringing large quantities of jewels and plate, planning to trade them in the Netherlands for money and weapons for Charles's campaigns. Mary, Henrietta Maria, and their train of almost 400 courtiers were received with great pomp. They were met by Prince William, Elizabeth, the exiled queen of Bohemia, and some of her children, and escorted into The Hague, where cannon were fired and all the streets were richly decorated. In the following weeks they travelled to various Dutch towns and cities, and in every one of them they were entertained on a grandiose scale. 
In February 1644 Mary was officially installed in her conjugal position, fulfilling from that moment onwards all functions of state, and in March 1647, after Frederick Henry had died and William had succeeded his father as stadholder of the main provinces of the republic, she became princess of Orange. With her father-in-law, the prince of Orange, Mary had stood on good terms, while her aunt Elizabeth of Bohemia quickly became one of her greatest friends and allies in The Hague, but with her mother-in-law, Amalia van Solms, relations were strained from the beginning. 
Mary's royal status gave her precedence over members of the house of Orange, which on several occasions caused friction at the court. Also, Amalia bitterly complained about the sumptuous lifestyle of her son and his wife, and Mary's ladies had been overheard saying that 'it was time the princess should run the country', because Amalia had done so long enough (Visser, 431). The 'English' match was often discussed, and greatly regretted, by members of the Orange entourage, and in 1648 Amalia was reported to be 'hateful of all things English' (ibid., 540). When, in 1648, and again in 1649, the prince of Wales and the duke of York came to The Hague to seek support for the royalist cause, William not only lent them large sums of money, but also paid for all their expenses, which led Amalia and others to object that supporting four households would certainly bankrupt the house of Orange. 
Meanwhile, the fact that Mary did not get pregnant was another worrisome matter. Her relationship with her husband was never cordial, and the couple did not spend much time together. After a miscarriage in October 1647, it was rumoured she could not conceive again, and in 1649 one of Mary's servants was dismissed because she had given the princess something 'to prevent her from having children' (Visser, 700). However, when on her nineteenth birthday, on 14 November 1650 NS, Mary gave birth to a son, there was not much ground for celebration. Eight days before, on 6 November, her husband had died of smallpox. 
On 15 January 1651 NS the young prince was baptized in the Great Church of The Hague, his mother being absent from the ceremony. Only a few days after his birth discord had risen between Mary and Amalia, his mother preferring to name the baby Charles, and his grandmother intent on naming him William -- which name eventually was decided upon ['see 'William III and II (1650-1702)]. The 'royal' character of the baptism was frowned upon by some, who did not take well the fact that 'halberdiers were riding on the side of the Prince's coach, and also that the Child was dressed in fur, black on white' (Royal Archives, The Hague, account of the baptism 1651, inv. A-16-I-3). 
Other disputes arose soon after the burial of Mary's husband on 8 March 1651 NS. First, it had to be decided whether William should be elected as stadholder, succeeding his father, but the states general, despite petitions from both Amalia and Mary, decided against this and resolved to take over all offices themselves. Second, the guardianship over the young prince proved to be a cause of such conflict that it took the supreme court to settle the matter in August 1651. The court decided upon the appointment of three guardians: Mary, with one vote, on one side, and Amalia and the elector of Brandenburg, sharing one vote, on the other side. Under supervision of these guardians, the administration of William's estate would be executed by the Nassau estates council. Not only was Mary thought too young and too ignorant of national affairs to become sole guardian, but Amalia in particular suspected that 'her Daughter-in-law... will spend all his estate upon her family and party; that shee and they have undone her son' ('Mercurius Politicus', 37, 603). 
Although after 1651 the support for the English royalist exiles in Holland had diminished and it was thought that the 'great disbanding of the English [should] be attributed to the death of the Prince of Orange, whose onely study and indeavor was to win the hearts of the strangers wholly to himself' ('Mercurius Politicus', 38, 616), Mary tried to assist them financially whenever she could. She was supported by her faithful courtiers, staunch royalists and Anglicans themselves, such as her personal chaplain Thomas Browne, who would never allow Mary to attend services in the English Reformed church in The Hague. Especially the dominating influence of Catherine Stanhope (later countess of Chesterfield), first lady of honour, and her Dutch husband, Lord Heenvliet, superintendent of Mary's household, was greatly feared, by both the Dutch and the English. Sir Edward Hyde, chancellor to Charles II, despaired in 1653 that the princess would not take counsel from anyone but 'subjects herself solely to Henfleet and his lady' ('Clarendon State Papers', 2.169), and Mary indeed preferred staying at their country house in Teylingen over her own residence in The Hague. 
Cromwell's spies reported that royalists were plotting against him at The Hague, 'which is a nest of malignant vypers. The princess royall's and queen of Bohemia's court nourishes those creatures' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 2.344). The outbreak of the First Anglo-Dutch War in 1652 temporarily roused Dutch sympathy for the royalist party, but the peace treaty of May 1654 stipulated that enemies of England would not be tolerated in Holland. Having hosted her brothers, Charles II, James, duke of York, and Henry, duke of Gloucester, on several occasions in The Hague, Teylingen, and her own country estates during the early 1650s and in 1654 (and as she was to again in 1657), Mary was now officially forbidden to receive them on Dutch territory. From that moment onwards she travelled extensively in France, Germany, and the Spanish Netherlands to meet her brothers and the exiled English court whenever she could. During these travels rumours circulated in Europe about a possible marriage between Mary and several candidates, among whom were the king of Sweden, George Villiers, second duke of Buckingham, the dukes of Savoy and Brunswick, and Prince Radziwill of Poland. Her everyday movements were duly reported in newspapers and in intelligence sent to Cromwell, informing him that she had gone, for example, in July 1654, to take the waters at Spa, where she was to meet Charles, and that she then would travel with him to Aachen and Cologne. In the summer of 1655 she visited her brother at his Cologne residence, staying until November, and in January 1656 she was royally received in Paris by her mother and the French court: 'On the 16th [February] the grand Balet, called 'Psyche' or the Power of Love, was danced at the Louvre, in presence of the Queen, the Princess of Orange... with many great Lords and Ladies' (L. Hotson, 'The Commonwealth and Restoration Stage', 1928, 137). She returned to The Hague in February 1657, almost a year later. 
By that time the conflict between Mary and her mother-in-law had flared up again, focusing on Mary's claims to the regency over the princedom of Orange in the south of France. William II had died without an official will, but in a sealed letter of 24 February 1649 NS to Count Dohna, governor of Orange, he had left instructions that, in case of his death, only Mary's orders should be followed. Dohna -- a protege of Amalia's -- had ignored the instructions, pledging loyalty instead to young Prince William, while Mary had found a copy of the letter when she opened a chest containing her husband's papers, which had been sealed immediately after his death. Defending her rights, and firmly opposing Dohna's position, she had assented in August 1651 to submit the case to the court of Holland and the supreme court, which, in February 1652, dismissed her claims. During her visit to Paris in 1656 she asked Louis XIV to intervene; he denounced Dohna and his followers as rebels, and on 24 August 1658 NS the 'parlement' of Orange declared Mary sole regent, which position she formally accepted in October. When, in 1659, and again in 1660, Louis XIV sent troops to Orange, the states general forced Mary to recall the French intervention, but she was too late, for in March 1660 Orange capitulated to Louis's troops. The conflict would continue after Mary's death, resulting ultimately in the loss of Orange to France. 
On 14 May 1660 NS Mary notified the Dutch government that the English parliament had invited her brother to the throne of England. Together with her young son and her brothers she took part in the celebrations in Breda and The Hague, and witnessed Charles's embarkation for England from Scheveningen. The Restoration placed both Mary and her son -- now fifth in succession to the throne of England -- in a completely different position in the Dutch republic. In the following weeks they were officially received and entertained in several Dutch cities, and in Amsterdam allegorical pageants were staged, representing the tragedies and triumphs of the house of Stuart. Encouraged by the change in attitude towards her, Mary once again asked the Dutch states to consider reinstating her son in his father's dignities, referring to a similar request of her brother to the state pensionary of Holland. Although some provinces looked upon her demands favourably, Holland required time for deliberation. Meanwhile, Mary made plans to travel to England, confessing to Charles that to stay in the Netherlands would be 'the greatest punishment of this world' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 1.662), but when she left in September 1660, only the education of the young prince had been officially settled. Even before arriving, she learned that her brother Henry, duke of Gloucester, had suddenly died of smallpox, and thus her visit was deeply coloured by mourning. Her only public act was the recognition of $10,000 presented to her by parliament in November, while in the same month Charles appointed a committee to investigate her claims to the yet unpaid dower of $40,000. 
A Dutch embassy, sent over to congratulate Charles on his restoration and to renew the alliance between England and the Dutch republic, sought Mary's assistance when some difficulties over the treaty arose in late November. However, she was already feeling ill, and when it became clear that she was suffering from either measles or smallpox, court physicians started to bleed her frequently, causing her to take a turn for the worse. Anxious to settle her affairs, Mary dictated her will to her secretary Nicolas Oudaert on 24 December 1660 OS (3 January 1661 NS). Asked repeatedly what she wanted with regard to her son, she answered that she trusted her brother and mother completely with his well-being: 'My greatest pain is to depart from him. Oh my child, give him my blessing' (Royal Archives, The Hague, report Oudaert 1661, inv. G1-6II-H, fol. 41). The same evening, after one last blood-letting incision, according to an eyewitness, 'her eyes did look so dim that it was obvious to all she was dying. After that, she had no signs of great pain, but every instant did visibly decay, till she lost her senses' (Green, 6.328). She was buried, as she had wished, near her brother Henry, in Henry VII's chapel, Westminster Abbey, on 29 December 1660. In the same year a double biography of Mary and Henry was published by Thomas Manley, who lamented their untimely death: '
What raging Seas of dangers, and what storms, 

What foaming billows of Tempestuous harmes: 

The royal Issue has escap'd! Then ar' 

The 'Fates' more cruel in their Peace, than 'War'! 
(Manley, 114)' Immediately after her death Oudaert started settling Mary's estate, discovering that already many valuables had disappeared: Lady Stanhope had taken all jewellery, plate, and linen from the bedchamber, while the duchess of York was seen wearing Mary's pearls. His first concern was to separate Mary's own possessions -- to be inherited by her brother and mother -- from jewellery that had once belonged to her husband, because 'my Sonnes Jewels, being those I found in his Fathers Cabinet expressed in a note of them to be delivered to him' should be returned to Holland (Royal Archives, The Hague, will of princess royal, inv. A15-XIII-1). He drew up a detailed 'Representation of estates, concerns and debts', including payment due to all Mary's servants (TNA: PRO, SP 84/164, fols. 118-24), and specified all moneys borrowed by her father and brother from the prince of Orange in the 1640s, as well as the outstanding dower, to be restituted with interest. In 1667 these affairs were still not settled. Although in her will Mary had named Charles II as guardian over her son William, this was accepted neither by the other guardians nor by the states of Holland, who feared the English influence over the Dutch prince. After long, and often bitter, deliberations, it was decided in September 1661 that Amalia van Solms would have custody over the young prince. 
Dutch historians, in particular those writing from a republican point of view, have, for the most part, evaluated Mary's significance in history in rather negative terms. Her marriage to William II in 1641 caused the involuntary involvement of the princes of Orange and the Dutch republic in the English troubles of the 1640s. This put a heavy strain on the finances of the house of Orange, while the interference of Mary and her English councillors in Dutch politics of the 1650s is generally considered to have had disastrous consequences, as in the case of Orange. Her Dutch contemporaries judged her for her 'royal' arrogance, her obstinacy to accept anything Dutch, and her refusal to learn the language, and after her death state pensionary John de Witt was appalled by the fact she had not named her son universal heir, leaving him 'not even a stiver' (Geyl, 133). On the other hand, her English contemporaries and biographers praised her continuous support to the royalist case of her brother, and it was said that her love and zeal in this respect 'deserved to be engraved with a diamond pen upon tablets of brass, that its memory might never pass away' (Green, 6.188). As she died before the age of thirty, her most important accomplishment came posthumously when, in 1689, her son became William III of England. 


@@@@@


doc= 18253


Mary, Princess (1723-1772), landgravine of Hesse-Cassel, consort of Friedrich II, was born on 22 February 1723 (between eight and nine o'clock in the evening) at Leicester House, London, the fourth daughter and eighth child of George II (1683-1760) and Queen Caroline (1683-1737). She was carefully brought up by her mother and, after the queen's death, by her elder sister Princess Caroline. The 'Memoirs of the House and Dominions of Hesse-Cassel', published in 1740, described her as 'a lover of reading, and far more solicitous to improve the mind than to adorn the body' (Hall, 127). When she was seventeen a marriage was arranged for her with Prince Friedrich of Hesse-Cassel (1720-1785), the only surviving son and heir of Landgrave Wilhelm, then ruling in Kassel as regent for his elder brother, King Fredrik I of Sweden. Parliament voted the princess a marriage portion of $40,000 and the proxy wedding took place at the Chapel Royal, St James's Palace, in the evening of 8 May 1740, the bride's brother William Augustus, duke of Cumberland, standing in for the bridegroom. Princess Mary sailed from Greenwich on 6 June and travelled via the Netherlands to Kassel, where she was married in person on 28 June. Her husband, although tall and handsome, was profligate and brutal, and Mary's married life was very unhappy. In the October following her marriage the statesman Jacob Friedrich von Bielfeld saw her at a fancy dress ball at Herrenhausen and described her as tall, and handsome enough to be a painter's model ('faite a peindre'). Horace Walpole, who had played with her when they were both children, said she had 'the softest, mildest temper in the world' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 19.295) and referred to her husband as a boor and a brute. In late 1746 she paid an extended visit to Britain to recover from her mistreatment at Kassel. Mary gave birth to four sons, of whom the eldest died in infancy and the youngest was born in September 1747. 
In 1749 Prince Friedrich was converted in secret to the Roman Catholic faith, believing that by so doing he would be reunited in the afterlife with his dying Catholic mistress. His conversion was made public in 1754, giving Mary the excuse to separate from him in February 1755. George II urged his daughter to return to England, but she felt that her place was with her young sons and she received much support from her father-in-law, since 1751 reigning landgrave as Wilhelm VIII, who provided a residence for her at Hanau, a sovereign county of the Holy Roman empire, which he had acquired in 1736 through a family arrangement. In 1757 the French invaded Hesse-Cassel and Mary with her father-in-law and children fled to Hamburg, where their circumstances were such that William Pitt the elder anticipated the meeting of parliament by remitting the sum of $20,000 to provide for their immediate expenses. In 1758 a life annuity of $5000 was settled on the princess. Landgrave Wilhelm VIII died at Rinteln on 1 February 1760 and was succeeded by Mary's estranged husband as reigning Landgrave Friedrich II. Wilhelm had made provision for Mary's eldest surviving son, also called Wilhelm, to become reigning count of Hanau with his mother as regent until he came of age on 13 October 1764. The landgravine, as she now was, possessed coinage rights, and very handsome thalers and half-thalers were struck bearing her bust, the coats of arms of Hesse-Cassel and Great Britain, and her name and titles in the fashion of a reigning sovereign. 
Mary continued to reside at Hanau during her son's rule there. She continued to play an active part in the life of the British royal family from Hanau through correspondence. Her niece Caroline Matilda, queen of Denmark, was reported to have appealed for her help in 1769 against the Danish queen mother, Juliane Marie. In the same year her nephew William Henry, duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh, visited her at Hanau as part of his continental tour. After suffering some years of failing health, she died at Hanau at seven o'clock in the morning on 14 January 1772. She was buried in the Reformed church (now the Marienkirche) there on 1 February. Landgrave Friedrich II married secondly on 10 January 1773 Philippine, daughter of Friedrich Wilhelm, margrave of Brandenburg-Schwedt, but they had no children and on his death on 31 October 1785 he was succeeded by his eldest surviving son from his first marriage, Landgrave Wilhelm IX, subsequently Elector Wilhelm I of Hesse. He and his two younger brothers, Karl and Friedrich, who both had distinguished military careers and to whom their mother bequeathed the bulk of her property, left numerous descendants, several of whom (including Edward VII's queen, Alexandra, and Mary, queen to George V) married back into the British royal family. 


@@@@@


doc= 18254


Princess Mary, duchess of Gloucester (1776-1857), was born on 25 April 1776, 


@@@@@


doc= 18255


Mascall, Edward James (1757/8-1832), civil servant, may have been the Edward Mascall baptized at St Katharine Cree, London, on 3 October 1757, the son of William Mascall and Mary, 'nee' Kilby. He entered government service probably in 1779. He was appointed examiner of the outport quarter books on 12 January 1813, and collector of customs for the port of London, at a salary of $1500 per annum, on 9 October 1816. His books on the customs, sanctioned by the commissioners, provided merchants with information about the changes made between 1784 and 1817. The first, 'The Consolidation of the Customs and other Duties', appeared in 1787, and a revised edition of his 'A Practical Book of Customs' (1799) was published in 1813. He also produced 'A Digest of the Duties of Customs and Excise' (1812). He married, on 19 September 1793, at Croydon, Juliana Anne, eldest daughter of Robert Dalzell of Tidmarsh, Berkshire. She died on 24 July 1823. Mascall died, aged seventy-four, at Yateley Cottage, Yateley, Hampshire, on 6 March 1832, 'after six weeks extreme suffering from a gradual mortification of the foot' ('GM', 379). He was buried on 12 March at Yateley. 


@@@@@


doc= 18256


Mascall, Leonard (d. 1589), translator and author, was a near kinsman of Eustace Mascall (died 1567), clerk of the works at Christ Church, Oxford, Hampton Court Palace, and other buildings of Henry VIII; he may have been the son of Eustace's brother, Evan Mascall ('fl'. 1531). In 1569 his 'Booke of the Art and Maner, howe to Plante and Graffe All Sortes of Trees' was published. This was partly a translation of Davy Brossard's 'L'art et maniere de semer, et faire pepinieres des sauvageaux', and was partly 'taken out of diuerse Authors' (sig. A4'v'); the last third was from a Dutch or German work. Thirteen further editions, one of them a piracy, appeared between 1572 and 1656. 
By 1573 Mascall was clerk of the kitchen to Matthew Parker, archbishop of Canterbury. In this year he transcribed the parish register of Farnham Royal, Buckinghamshire, with Thomas Cromwell's injunctions and English verses of his own on the keeping of such records, at the request of Eustace Mascall, 'because their Friends were Christend Marryd & buryed in yt Parish' (Wright, fols. 101'v'-102). This transcript appears no longer to be extant. In 1581 he produced 'The Husbandlye Ordring and Gouernmente of Poultrie', which was based on French versions of Lucius Junius Moderatus Columella's work on agriculture ('De re rustica'), and Charles Estienne's 'Praedium rusticum'. It was dedicated to Katherine Woodford of Britwell, near Farnham Royal, whose husband James was chief clerk of the kitchen to the queen. (Mascall's two other dedications were both to aristocrats with Buckinghamshire marriage connections.) A book of recipes for removing stains, dyeing, dressing leather, gilding and soldering various metals, and hardening and softening iron and steel, translated from Dutch or German, followed in 1583; a translation of selected apothecarial recipes from the Latin 'Dispensatorium ad aromaticos' attributed to Nicolaus Praepositi appeared in 1587; and a book on animal husbandry, claiming to draw on the practice of 'straungers as of our owne country men' (sig. A3'v') was published in the same year. This work appeared in numerous editions, well into the seventeenth century, and, like others by Mascall, was a source for Gervase Markham's very successful writings. 
Mascall's last book, entered in the Stationers' Company's registers in 1587 and published posthumously in 1590, was 'A Booke of Fishing with Hooke and Line' (with a long appendix on traps for vermin); this was based on the 'Treatyse of Fysshynge wyth an Angle' which had accompanied the 'Book of St Albans' since 1496, and was a major source for Izaak Walton's 'Compleat Angler'. It contains the story that one of the Mascalls of Plumpton in Sussex (a family to which the writer was not related) introduced carp and pippins into England, and this has, mistakenly, been taken as an autobiographical statement. Leonard Mascall was buried at Farnham Royal in early May 1589. 


@@@@@


doc= 18257


Mascall, Robert (d. 1416), bishop of Hereford, is said by the sixteenth-century bibliographer John Bale to have been born in Ludlow. He became a Carmelite, and is also said to have been prior of the friary at Ludlow, where he probably received some schooling as a boy. He refers in his will to his only known kinsman, one John Gase. His family background appears to have been undistinguished. He had received the degree of DTh from Oxford University by 3 October 1393, when he took part in the trial of the suspected Lollard Walter Bryt (also recorded as Brut and Bryte) at Hereford. He preached before Richard II at Candlemas 1396. But the fact that he became confessor to Henry IV as soon as that king seized the throne points to a gap in the known details of Mascall's career. There is no evidence that he had shared Henry Bolingbroke's exile, but, as his title of duke of Hereford indicates, Henry had considerable interests in the west midlands and Welsh march, much of it through his late wife, Mary de Bohun, and may have encountered Mascall accordingly. On 24 December 1400 Mascall was granted the temporalities of the vacant see of Meath in Ireland, being licensed on 22 and 25 January 1401 to stay in England and collect the revenues (for what they were worth) by attorney. On 13 February he was referred to as 'elect' of Meath and dispensed to hold the church of Kildalke in Ireland to augment the revenue. However, in 1402 Robert Montain was provided to the see, and Mascall's remuneration at court readjusted. 
Mascall remained in constant attendance on the king until his dismissal was demanded and ceded, for no specific reason, in the parliament of January 1404, the latest in a line of unpopular royal confessors of unpopular kings. It happened that the see of Hereford fell vacant on 29 March, for which Mascall might well have been an obvious candidate anyway. Adam Usk, not the most reliable of autobiographers, would claim later that he himself was nominated by the pope, and it is true that Mascall travelled to Rome in person to secure provision on 2 July and consecration there four days later; but this journey may have been in part a dignified withdrawal from his detractors at home. In August or early September 1404, returning from Middleburg in Zeeland to England, he was captured by Flemish pirates and detained at Dunkirk with at least the tacit consent of the duchess of Burgundy, but released, if maybe for a ransom, before 25 September. On 20 March 1406 he received $10 from the crown for his losses during Owain Glyn Dwr's rebellion. He attended parliaments regularly, but otherwise was fully resident in his diocese. Bale refers to Mascall as a noted preacher and of upright character, although, in the absence of any explicit slur on him and given his career, Bale might simply have been settling for the obvious. Mascall made a perfunctory will on 23 November 1416 in London, with a codicil on 16 December. He died on 22 December 1416, in London, and was probably buried, as he requested, in the Carmelite church at Ludlow, which he had reputedly rebuilt in large part, although a series of antiquarians have preferred to believe he was buried at the London house. Bale attributes a number of writings to him, including a collection of sermons preached before the king, but none of them is known to survive. 


@@@@@


doc= 18258


Mascarene, (Jean-)Paul (1685-1760), army officer and colonial administrator, was born Jean-Paul Mascarene in October or November 1685 in Languedoc, France, the only child of Jean Mascarene and his wife, Margaret de Salavy. Shortly after the birth of his son, Jean Mascarene was imprisoned and then expelled from France as a Huguenot, following the revocation of the edict of Nantes. Jean-Paul was eventually smuggled out of the country and made his way in 1696 to Geneva, where he was cared for by the Rapin family, relatives of his father. He went later to Utrecht, and then to England, where he joined the army. Commissioned as a lieutenant in 1706, he went to North America in 1709 with the expedition intended to capture the French colonies of Acadia and Canada, under the command of Samuel Vetch and Francis Nicholson. The following year Mascarene assisted at the capture of Port Royal (Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia) and mounted the first British guard at the fort. In spite of many attempts to find other avenues of employment -- especially in the more congenial environment of Massachusetts, where he married Elizabeth Perry (died 1728) in 1714 -- Mascarene spent the remaining forty years of his career tied to the new British colony of Nova Scotia. 
Mascarene was commissioned captain in 1717 in Philipps's regiment (later the 40th). He was also appointed one of the members of the new governing council of Nova Scotia, the colony's first civil government, in 1720. Over the next thirty years he was to serve that government in many capacities, especially in attempts to deal with and regulate the Acadians (the French inhabitants) and the native peoples of the region. In 1731 he led an unsuccessful attempt to entice New Englanders to resettle in Nova Scotia. The 1720s and 1730s brought repeated disappointments in Mascarene's efforts at self-advancement. Although nominated for the lieutenant-governorship of Massachusetts by Governor Andrew Belcher, he was passed over, probably owing to his lack of patronage in London. He increasingly spent time in Boston, especially after the death of his wife on 1 January 1728 left him with four young children. A stint as commanding officer at the fishing outport of Canso appears to have involved him briefly in the profitable smuggling business with nearby Louisbourg. When advancement did come, it was ironically not in Boston but in Annapolis Royal, from where he had tried so hard to break free. With Governor Richard Philipps a long-time absentee, the death of Lieutenant-Governor Lawrence Armstrong in 1739 brought Mascarene hastening to Nova Scotia from Boston. After a brief struggle he emerged as president of the governing council, a position he held until 1749. From 1742 he was also the senior military officer. In spite of claims by later historians, he never attained the rank of lieutenant-governor, the parsimonious Philipps repeatedly refusing to pay the necessary salary. 
In spite of Mascarene's best efforts, the colony was poorly equipped to deal with the outbreak of the War of the Austrian Succession in 1744, with the Annapolis Royal fortifications in disrepair and the garrison inadequate. Only through the intervention of Massachusetts was Mascarene able to stave off repeated French and native attacks. Even the capture of the French fortress of Louisbourg by New Englanders in 1745 and the subsequent peace treaty of 1748 did not lead to military stability in Nova Scotia. Mascarene's major contribution towards peace in the colony during this difficult period lay in his efforts to conciliate the Acadians. In spite of the religious differences which separated them, Mascarene had developed a strong sympathy for the Acadians' predicament, as both France and Britain attempted to use them as pawns in the struggle for control of north-eastern North America. Among officials in Nova Scotia and Massachusetts, Mascarene was nearly alone in his view that reasonableness and time, not force, would eventually make of these people 'good British subjects', but his ability to keep them largely neutral in the conflict contributed materially to the defence of the colony. 
After the conclusion of the war, London for once acted quickly and decisively in respect to Nova Scotia. The founding of the new administrative and military centre of Halifax in 1749 meant that both Annapolis Royal and Paul Mascarene were to be replaced -- the latter by a new governor, Edward Cornwallis. Having handed over the reins of government, Mascarene remained in the colony for another year and then in 1750 quietly retired to his home in Boston, where he lived comfortably, surrounded by his children and grandchildren. He sold his lieutenant-colonel's commission (ironically to Charles Lawrence, who in 1755 ordered the expulsion of the Acadians) and received the rank of brevet colonel. 
Mascarene's lively intellectual interests -- in the classics, in debate on religious issues, and in translating the plays of Moliere into English -- made it natural for him to prefer cosmopolitan Boston to tiny Annapolis Royal. Yet he had remained an outsider wherever he went: a Huguenot in France, in Britain a military officer without strong patronage connections, a devout Anglican in largely Congregationalist Massachusetts. Able and dedicated officer that he was, nowhere did his talents find full expression. He died in Boston on 22 January 1760. 


@@@@@


doc= 18259


Maschiart, Michael (1544-1598), Latin poet and Church of England clergyman, born in St Thomas's parish, Salisbury, was elected scholar of Winchester College in 1557, probationary fellow of New College, Oxford, on 29 January 1560, and full fellow in 1562 (the same year as George Coryate, his fellow Latinist from the same parish). He became BCL on 9 December 1567, DCL on 13 October 1573, and advocate of Doctors' Commons in 1575. In April 1572 he was appointed by his college vicar of Writtle, Essex. He gained a reputation for Latin poetry, and was 'not only esteemed an able civilian, but also excellent in all kinds of human learning' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.673). His poems were probably never published, and seem almost entirely lost. A fragment is preserved in Camden's 'Britannia', two 'pretily versified' couplets on Clarendon Park, near Salisbury: '
Nobilis est lucus, cervis clausura, Saronam 

Propter... 

A famous parke for Stag and hind, neere Salisburie doth lie. 
(in Philemon Holland's translation, Camden, 1610, 250)' Holland notes in the margin, 'this name [Sarona, for Sarum, or Salisbury] poetically devised'. This quotation does not appear in Camden's original 'Britannia' of 1586, although other verses on Wiltshire do, from Daniel Rogers, 'vir eruditus', and Alexander Neckam, 'non Apolline plenus' (Camden, 1586, 118-19). Apart from a talent for coining names that will fit the metre, and explaining the presence of twenty groves, each a mile in circumference, these lines reveal little of Maschiart's poetic genius. One may note merely that they are not quite so dull in Latin as in Holland's English. Maschiart died in Writtle in December 1598 and was buried there the same month. 


@@@@@


doc= 18260


Maseres, Francis (1731-1824), colonial administrator and author, was born in London on 15 December 1731, the son of Peter Abraham Maseres, a physician in Broad Street, Soho, and his wife, Magdalena, daughter of Francis du Pratt du Clareau. He spent his childhood in Soho and at Betchworth on the North Downs, which gave him a lifelong affection for Surrey. A Huguenot by descent, he was raised on stories of persecution in France which left him with an interest in seventeenth-century history and a hostility to Catholicism that was 'part of his very frame' (Cobbett, 234). Educated at Kingston upon Thames grammar school under the Revd Richard Wooddeson, Maseres, together with his brother Peter, was admitted to Clare College, Cambridge, in July 1748. Taught by John Courtail, another Huguenot by descent, Maseres graduated BA in 1752 with first-class honours in mathematics and was awarded the first chancellor's medal for classics. A fellow of Clare from 1756 until August 1759, he pursued his mathematical interest and retained his enthusiasm for Latin authors for the rest of his life. In 1758 he published a textbook to 'remove from some of the less abstruse parts of algebra, the difficulties that have arisen therein from too extensive use of the Negative Sign', which he argued should be used only as the symbol of subtraction ('Dissertation on the Use of the Negative Sign in Algebra', 1758, preface, i); he dedicated this work to the duke of Newcastle, then chancellor of Cambridge University. Two years later he applied unsuccessfully to Newcastle for the Lucasian chair of mathematics at Cambridge, which went instead to Edward Waring. He was also a fine chess player and even held out for two hours against Francois-Andre Philidor. 
Maseres combined his academic career with studying law. He had been admitted to the Inner Temple in 1750 and was called to the bar from the Middle Temple in 1758. He practised with little success on the western circuit and as a common pleader in London. Promotion, even 'a Welsh Judgeship' ('Maseres Letters', 74), evaded him and it was probably the hope of future advancement that led him to accept the potentially demanding post of attorney-general of Quebec in 1766, a province in which French-speaking British officials were in short supply. Recommended by Charles Yorke, attorney-general in Rockingham's administration, he replaced George Suckling and set sail on 23 June 1766. 
Maseres arrived in Quebec in September to join the administration, headed by the newly appointed Guy Carleton, of a lightly governed province that had been ceded to Britain only in 1763; one of the judges was a ship's surgeon. The population consisted of a small community of British merchants, 'the violent gentlemen of the army' ('Maseres Letters', 18), and the French Catholic majority. Maseres wrote on 19 November 1767 that he believed 'the right way of settling this province would be to take away their religion (that is, discourage it without persecution, and powerfully encourage the Protestant religion)'; at the same time the French should be left with 'their... innocent, useful and compendious laws', which were so much to be preferred to 'the voluminous, intricate, unknown laws of England' (ibid., 57-8). The trouble was, as Maseres perceived, that while the treaty of 1763 had promised toleration of Catholicism 'as far as the laws of Great Britain permit', 'the laws of England do not at all permit the exercise of the Catholic religion'. He commented, 'Tis difficult [for a Catholic people] to be well-affected to a set of governours whom they look upon as enemies of God, deserving of, and destined to, eternal damnation' (ibid., 54). His preferred solution was to produce a code of the French and English laws applicable to Quebec. 
During his three years in office Maseres managed to offend both the merchants and the military. He antagonized the former by claiming in 1766 that Britain had inherited the powers of the former regime to collect customs duties on rum, and by attempting to introduce English bankruptcy laws in 1767. He earned the enmity of the latter by treating as murder the death of a soldier, Donald Mackenzie, who had died after a vicious flogging, and by attempting to prosecute six army officers for assaulting a magistrate. His fiscal policies had to be dropped after his customs proposals were dramatically resisted by a jury of 'pretended patriots' who followed the lead of their American neighbours in resisting imposed taxation. His prosecution of the six officers failed because of the evidence provided by an unreliable witness. As a result, his position was seriously weakened. 
Maseres was 'a good deal out of heart' at the failure of his 'schemes for the benefit of the province' ('Maseres Letters', 86) and began to yearn for his beloved Surrey. Rigid he may have been, but Maseres was simply trying to uphold order in a turbulent community where even the basis of law was uncertain. Tensions came to a head in February 1769 when the governor, Carleton, bluntly rejected his long-awaited report on methods of reconciling French and English law. He granted his attorney-general indefinite leave, hoping that 'some Opportunity may offer this Gentleman in a Situation more agreeable to his own Inclinations, and where the Fervor of his Zeal can be of no essential disadvantage to the King's Service' (ibid., 24). 
Back in Britain, Maseres kept his interests in Canada alive by lobbying on behalf of the merchants at the time of the 'Quebec Act' of 1774 and by writing copiously about Canadian affairs in a series of pamphlets published under the title 'The Canadian Freeholder' (3 vols., 1776-9). In 1773 the influence of the lord chancellor, Henry Bathurst, then Lord Apsley, secured his appointment to the virtual sinecure of cursitor baron of the exchequer, which gave him an income of between $300 and $400 a year. Contemporaries often referred to him as Baron Maseres, but this was not a peerage title. He became a bencher at the Inner Temple in 1774 and its treasurer in 1782. From 1780 until 1822 (when he was over ninety) he served as a judge of the sheriff's court in the city of London. His life was bound up with the Temple: his rooms were at 5 King's Bench Walk, and although out of term he used to dine at his home in Rathbone Place, which he inherited from his brother John, he always returned to the Temple to sleep. Just as he spoke the French of Louis XIV, so to the end of his life he wore clothes from the time of George II, including a 'three-cornered hat, tye-wig and ruffles' ('GM', 573). He was very sociable and delighted in entertaining visitors, many of whom were eminent mathematicians, to dinner. 
Maseres was a prolific author. He pursued his mathematical studies and published a number of treatises on subjects such as trigonometry, logarithms, and algebra, which Joseph Priestley declared were 'original and excellent' (J. T. Rutt, 'Life and Correspondence of Joseph Priestley', 2 vols., 1831-2, 2.490). Elected FRS on 2 May 1771, he contributed papers to the 'Philosophical Transactions' for 1777, 1778, and 1779. He had acquired a lifelong fascination for history in his youth when he had set himself the task of reading the whole of Rapin's 'History of England', paying special attention to the sources used. He showed a keen interest in the civil wars of the seventeenth century, and in 1815 edited for the first time a collection of important tracts, which he attempted to contextualize in his introduction. He edited a number of reprints of historical works, including Thomas May's 'History of the Parliament of England which Began 1640' and Sir John Temple's 'History of the Irish Rebellion', both of which revealed his anti-Catholic prejudices. A fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, he wrote a 'View of the ancient constitution of the English parliament' which was published in 'Archaeologia' (2.301-40), eliciting a response from Charles Mellish. According to William Cobbett, Maseres 'had no asperity in his nature; he was naturally all gentleness and benevolent' (Cobbett, 233). He was generous to refugees from revolutionary France, Catholic priests included. A whig in politics, he was always stirred by injustice; he visited Cobbett during his imprisonment in Newgate in 1810, wearing his wig and gown to underline his protest. Jeremy Bentham hailed him as 'one of the most honest lawyers England ever knew' ('Maseres Letters', 33), while Cobbett admired him for refusing to accept a salary increase. Someone, Maseres said, would have to meet the cost 'and the more I take the less that somebody must have' (Cobbett, 233). In later life he associated with advanced whigs such as the radical William Frend but, despite writing over thirty books and pamphlets, he generally kept out of political disputes. 
Maseres could afford to be lofty about money. 'He was by no means stingy' (Cobbett, 233) but his bachelor life was frugal. Legacies inherited from his father and brother grew into a massive fortune. Cobbett recalled Maseres as a loyal Anglican, who endowed a Sunday afternoon service at Reigate, where he had a country home, The Barons, to provide an additional opportunity for church attendance. He was not blind, however, to the abuses in the contemporary church and wrote two pamphlets proposing reforms, such as the division of populous parishes and an end to pluralism and non-residence, though he stopped short of advocating equalization of clerical incomes. In old age he moved towards the Unitarians, a conversion that Cobbett dated to 1812 when Maseres was over eighty. However, this may simply have represented the late flowering of radical protestant ideas common among Huguenots. Robert Fellowes, a young Anglican clergyman leaning to Unitarianism, became his unofficial chaplain, and then his principal heir. When Maseres, who was unmarried, died at his house in Church Street, Reigate, on 19 May 1824, $30,000 was bequeathed to relatives, while Fellowes scooped about $200,000. Fellowes erected a monument to his memory in Reigate churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 18261


Masham, Abigail, Lady Masham (1670?-1734), royal favourite, was the elder daughter of Francis Hill (died 'c'.1690), an Anabaptist and merchant of Smyrna and, after 1657, of London, and his wife, Elizabeth ('bap'. 1642, died 1691x9), the youngest daughter of Sir John Jenyns of St Albans. Her parents were married in 1663, but the only source for 1670 as her date of birth is an inscription on an unauthenticated portrait now in the National Portrait Gallery (Piper, 226-7). It does, however, fit with the evidence that she was 'a grown woman' by 1690 ('Memoirs of Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough', 126). On her mother's side Abigail was the first cousin of Sarah (Jenyns) Churchill, duchess of Marlborough, and on her father's the second cousin of Robert Harley, first earl of Oxford. Her paternal grandparents were William Hill of Teddington, one of the auditors of the revenue, and Abigail, the daughter of Richard Stephens of Eastington, Gloucestershire, whose niece and namesake married the father of Robert Harley. These two kinships drew her into court politics. 
Towards the end of the 1680s Francis Hill went bankrupt and he died shortly after, leaving his family destitute. Abigail appears to have joined the household of the newly married wife of Sir George Rivers, fourth baronet, of Chafford, Kent. The Rivers were neighbours of the Packers of Groombridge, a family connection of the Harleys, but Abigail's position was such a menial one that it cast doubt on her subsequent status as a gentlewoman. When Sarah Churchill, in high favour at the court of Princess Anne, was told of the Hill family's plight, she made herself responsible for their future support. Elizabeth Hill told her that her greatest concern was for her children, 'that they might have a subsistence in this vally of tears when I shall be no more' (BL, Add. MS 61454, fol. 194). Sarah put the younger son John Hill into St Albans grammar school in 1690-91 and took Abigail into her own household nearby, meanwhile asking the princess to reserve a place for her as one of her bedchamber women, whenever a vacancy should occur (BL, Add. MS 61415, fol. 32). Jealous references to 'that enchantress' Mrs Hill in Anne's letters to Sarah of the 1690s have sometimes been taken as evidence that Abigail Hill was intimately involved in the royal friendship at this early stage; a novel by Doris Leslie (1950) based on her life takes its title from this epithet. In fact, in the famous correspondence between Mrs Morley and Mrs Freeman it was Sarah's friend Lady Fitzhardinge who figured as Mrs Hill. Abigail is not recorded among Anne's household until 1700, when she was 'Mother of the Maids'. When Anne succeeded to the throne Abigail's appointment as bedchamber woman was confirmed on 3 June 1702 with a salary of $500 a year. 
As Abigail's own account makes clear, her duties were essentially those of royal chambermaid, dressing her mistress and waiting on her at table ('Letters to and from Henrietta', 292-3). Despite a somewhat volatile temperament she proved herself a devoted servant and there was soon a degree of emotionalism in her relations with the queen. During the court's visit to Bath in 1703, when Abigail refused to sleep in the lodging assigned to her, the queen followed her about, begging her to go to bed, and 'calling her Dear Hill twenty times over' (Gregg, 235). By 1705 she was regarded as the most influential of the queen's personal servants after the duchess of Marlborough, whose growing estrangement from her mistress over politics was not yet public knowledge. 
Robert Harley's political association with Abigail must have begun about 1706, when, as secretary of state, he began to part company with the Marlborough-Godolphin ministry over the appointment of the whig junto to cabinet office and realized that his cousin might be a useful ally in the royal bedchamber. A contemporary historian with inside information wrote of their night-time meetings 'under colour of concerts of music, at which the Queen herself is also said to have been present' (Cunningham, 2.76). In the spring of 1707 it first came to Sarah's attention that her cousin had begun to speak to the queen about politics, and soon she was taxing Anne with taking all her advice from Harley and Abigail, who constantly fed 'Mrs Morley's passion for the torrys' (BL, Add. MS 61417, fol. 76). The queen insisted that Abigail's only role was that of a useful servant. 
Royal favour also brought Abigail Hill the prospect of marriage. According to a whig lampoon of 1708, 'The Rival Dutchess, or, Court Incendiary', she was suspected 'of having too great a Regard' for her own sex, because she had remained so long unmarried. In fact her want of fortune and beauty were more than sufficient to account for this; Swift, who otherwise admired her, admitted that she was not handsome. All the evidence suggests that she was susceptible to the younger male courtiers. By Sarah's account she had been in love with one of the equerries, William Breton, 'but not to have an affair that ever I heard of' (BL, Add. MS 61422, fol. 156). There were also protracted negotiations with another young man, in which the indigent Lady Newport acted as go-between. Again the detail comes from 'The Rival Dutchess', but the duchess of Marlborough testified that the account was essentially true. 
Finally in the spring or summer of 1707 Abigail was secretly married to 
It was the belated discovery of the queen's collusion in this marriage which confirmed Sarah's suspicions about her cousin as a political rival. Realizing that Abigail had been in the queen's confidence for much longer than she had suspected, she decided that this underhand influence had been entirely responsible for her own loss of favour and the queen's resistance to her political advice. Her constant invective against her cousin from this time on, and particularly the insinuation that there was an unnatural element in Anne's affection for her bedchamber woman, turned the queen completely against her. 
In the winter of 1707-8 Harley's attempt to form a moderate political ministry failed and he was forced to resign. But in the course of this crisis it became public knowledge that he had the support of his cousin in the queen's bedchamber, 'a great and growing favourite of much industry and insinuation' ('Correspondence of Jonathan Swift', 1.69). Even after his resignation he boasted that he would continue to 'play [her] against any body' ('Private Correspondence of Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough', 1.113), and before he retired into the country in May 1708 they arranged to keep up a correspondence in a code ingeniously based on the financial problems of their shared kinfolk. By this means he continued to feed her with accounts of the 'Pride, Ambition and Covetousness' of the Marlboroughs and their whig allies, and their mismanagements at home and abroad, 'which I think very necessary to be communicated to my aunt' (Longleat, Portland MSS, X, 16 Oct 1708). When Harley returned to London, Abigail arranged for him and his associates to have backstairs access to the queen at both Windsor and St James's. Probably she also encouraged press attacks on their opponents. When Delriviere Manley's 'New Atalantis' was published in 1709 the duchess of Marlborough noted that 'it was said that Mrs Masham had given the author money' ('Private Correspondence', 1.238). 
Matters came to a head in January 1710 when the queen, on Harley's advice, instructed Marlborough to give a regiment vacant on the death of the whig earl of Essex to Abigail's brother John. Seeing this as a public blow to his authority in the army, and believing that Harley and Abigail were trying to force his resignation by this means, Marlborough urged his whig colleagues that 'now is the time or never for getting rid of... Mrs M[asham]' (Harris, 164). When they began canvassing support for a parliamentary address to remove her from court, Abigail was alarmed and contemplated resignation herself, but, since she had already done her work in helping Harley and his associates to re-establish relations with the queen, the attempt was too belated to be effective. The queen managed to rally tory support against it and by the end of the year the Godolphin ministry was dismissed, Harley restored to office, and the duchess of Marlborough forced to resign all her court offices. 
The post of keeper of the privy purse was bestowed on Abigail Masham on 24 January 1711. She kept her accounts with Hoare's Bank (in 1726 her daughter Anne was to marry Henry Hoare II), but these are uninformative, stating only the amounts and dates of withdrawals, often in the form of round sums to herself. She was also authorized by royal warrant to give full receipts in her own right, 'notwithstanding coverture' (BL, Add. MS 63093, fol. 45). But the queen was always reluctant to bestow a peerage on the Mashams, saying that she would 'lose a useful servant about her person, for it would give offence to have a peeress lie on the floor and do several other inferior offices' (Burnet, 6.36n.). She was only brought to consent in December 1711, when there was a need to create a batch of tory peers to ensure the passage through parliament of the preliminaries to the treaty of Utrecht, and then only on condition that Abigail remained as bedchamber woman, 'and did as she used to do' (ibid.). 
Although Swift berated Lady Masham whenever she absented herself from court for family reasons, her political involvement remained remarkably sustained after her marriage, in spite of five pregnancies and at least one miscarriage in six years. Her first child, Anne, was born in September 1708; the second, Elizabeth, a year later; George, who died as an infant, in September 1711; Samuel ['see below'] in November 1712; and Francis in 1714. Like several of the tory women at court she employed the man-midwife Hugh Chamberlen, and believed that she owed her life to him. 
Once Harley was restored to office he had less need of his cousin as intermediary, a common pattern with such backstairs allies. But he noted that, 'following the example of the Duchess of Marlborough', she still expected that nothing should be done 'without her privity and consent' ('Portland MSS', 5.661), and took care to maintain their confederacy, believing that she still had power to 'pull down' if she chose (Holmes, 216). In 1711 Swift could still come upon them alone together, 'settling the nation' (Swift, 'Journal', 412). But it was not long before Abigail began to grow suspicious of her cousin, now Lord Oxford, and to shift her allegiance to his rival Bolingbroke. The accusation that he had bribed her with illicit profits from the Assiento contract comes from Oxford's family and is unreliable ('Portland MSS', 5.661), but he was the more thorough-going tory of the two and also more willing to further the career of her brother John. In return she privately conveyed his opinions and associates, including the Jacobite earl of Mar, to the queen. Whether she actually favoured the Pretender herself is uncertain. A work purporting to be an account by Nicolas Mesnager of his negotiations at the English court, which represents Lady Masham as the only one of the queen's advisers who was willing to speak to him openly about the restoration of the Pretender, is now known to be by Defoe. As the queen's health failed, Abigail maintained the partnership with Oxford for her sake. But by the last weeks of Anne's life, when he was in decline himself with drink and indecision, she became completely disillusioned with him, and rejoiced in, even if she did not bring about, his dismissal. 
Abigail appears to have been genuinely grief-stricken at the queen's death, and gossip about her depredations afterwards was probably unfounded. When she was accused of making away with some of the queen's jewels, the duchess of Marlborough testified that none were missing: 'in this manner I justify'd Lady Masham, who I believed never rob'd any body but 'me'' (Harris, 205). With her political role at an end under the Hanoverians, Abigail lived the rest of her life in obscurity, first at Langley, near Windsor, and, after the death of her husband's father in 1723, at Otes, in Essex. She died there after a long illness on 6 December 1734 and was buried in High Laver church. 
Reacting against contemporary exaggerations, modern accounts of court politics under Queen Anne tend to minimize Abigail Masham's role. In the last resort the exact nature and extent of all such unofficial influence is unknowable, but what is significant in the context of women's roles in public life is the seriousness of her political aims. In minor matters of patronage, by which the influence of court women was normally measured, she was reluctant to exert herself and made no secret of her impatience with importunate courtiers. What she wished above all, as her letters to Harley make clear, was to shape policy, and like the duchess of Marlborough she was quite ready to risk alienating the queen with her hectoring in order to achieve her ends. Her frustration when Anne was unresponsive and her complaints about the limits of her influence should be read in this light, and not simply as objective evidence of her impotence. 
Abigail's husband, described by the duchess of Marlborough as 'a soft, good-natured, insignificant man, always making low bows to everybody, and ready to skip to open a door' (Butler, 191), rose to be brigadier-general, was MP for Ilchester in 1710, and in 1716 succeeded by reversion to the office of remembrancer of the exchequer. He survived his wife by many years, and died on 16 October 1758, aged seventy-nine. His son 


@@@@@


doc= 18262


Masham, Damaris, Lady Masham (1658-1708), philosopher and theological writer, was born in Cambridge on 18 January 1658. Her father was Ralph Cudworth (1617-1688), the philosopher and a leading member of the Cambridge Platonists. In 1645 he became regius professor of Hebrew, a post which he held until his death. Her mother, Damaris (died 1695), possibly the daughter of Mathew Cradock, a London merchant, had been married to Thomas Andrewes of London before her marriage to Cudworth. The younger Damaris was Cudworth's only daughter, but she had a stepsister, a stepbrother, and at least three brothers. 
Cudworth, whom his daughter was to defend against critics including Leibniz, was an 'unusually open-minded controversialist' and Damaris was brought up in a rare atmosphere of free enquiry and intellectual independence (Wallas, 75). From a young age she was distinguished by her learning and the keen mind she brought to all her studies. When on 25 June 1685 she married Sir Francis Masham ('c'.1646-1723), son of William Masham and his wife, Elizabeth Trevor, she acquired nine stepchildren. In 1686 her only son, Francis Cudworth Masham, was born. He was to become accountant-general to the court of chancery. Sir Francis later served as MP for Essex. 
Damaris Masham first met John Locke in 1682 when she was twenty-three. They became close friends. In her Locke found 'a soul not of ordinary alloy' ('Correspondence', ed. Rand, 14). He taught Damaris philosophy and divinity. At Otes in Essex, where she and Sir Francis lived, Damaris obviously found life frustrating, as in 1687 she wrote to Locke complaining that he 'might advise me to converse with the dead since here [at Otes] are so few living that are worth it' (HoP, 'Commons, 1690-1715'). After returning from exile in Holland in 1688 Locke became increasingly ill in London and in 1691, aged fifty-nine, he was persuaded to leave the city for his health's sake. Already a frequent and welcome visitor at the home of Sir Francis and Lady Masham, Locke was invited to live with them. This he did for thirteen years until his death in 1704. His influence on Damaris, both as a writer and as a mother, was profound. Without Locke's influence she would almost certainly have been ignored, despite the fact that she was a most remarkable and learned woman. Early on in his time at Otes, Locke, in a letter to Limborch of 1690-91, acknowledged her rare qualities: 'The lady is so well versed in theological and philosophical studies, and of such an original mind, that you will not find many men to whom she is not superior in wealth of knowledge and ability to profit by it. ('DNB')' Locke's 'Some Thoughts Concerning Education' was to be Masham's guide in her son's upbringing. According to Locke she taught her son Latin 'without knowing it herself when she began' (Wallas, 86). Despite some natural reluctance she followed Locke's guidance on the importance of sun and fresh air for children to the extent of providing her son with thin-soled shoes. This was at a time when children were carefully shielded from the elements. After Locke's death Damaris wrote that: 'my first acquaintance with him began when he was past the middle age of man and I but young... I had for a great part of above two years conversed freely with him, and he favoured me sometimes with his correspondence in Holland. ('Correspondence', ed. Rand, 13)' Life at Otes provided a stimulating and sympathetic atmosphere in which to live and write and Locke benefited greatly from it, although his health did not improve. He continued to supervise Lady Masham's studies as well as the education of her son. He made time for a close friendship with Esther Masham, the stepdaughter of Damaris, and acted as medical adviser to old Mrs Cudworth, who since her husband's death had made her home at Otes. Edward Clarke, husband of Locke's cousin, was a frequent visitor with his children, Edward, on whom Locke tried out his theories of education, and Elizabeth. 
Against those who thought this life was merely a preparation for the next, Damaris Masham defended a life of reason -- this was particularly bold as most people thought women had no business being reasonable. Her first published work was 'A Discourse Concerning the Love of God' (1696), an essay on morality. Although published anonymously it was widely known to be hers. It was an answer to the works of John Norris. Norris, who had known Damaris Masham for some time and had been impressed by her piety and learning, dedicated his 'Reflections upon the Conduct of Human Life' (1690) to his friend under the mistaken notion that she had gone blind. Her friends promptly informed him that he was wrong and that Damaris had not lost her sight, but this did not persuade Norris to withdraw his book. As she commented in 'A Discourse', Norris, 'having fitted his Epistle to that supposition, could not be hindered from publishing it' (Masham, 'Discourse', preface). It was an incident that finally severed Masham's friendship with Norris. In 'A Discourse' Damaris Masham responded to volume 3 of Norris's 'Practical discourses upon several divine subjects' (1693). She characterized Norris's position as being that 'God's creatures have no warrant for our love, having as they do 'no Efficiency at all to operate upon us'; they are simply the 'occasional Causes of those Sentiments which God produces in us'' (Pyle, 560). Her object was to refute Norris's understanding of divine love as 'morally subversive and a dangerous imposture as a principle of Christianity' (ibid.). Her most profound concern was that Norris's account: 'provides no foundation for virtuous conduct. Additionally, it may cause positive harm by encouraging people to strive for a love of God which they cannot possible attain 'and opposite to their very Constitution and Being in this world', while failing to recognize that their ideal indeed 'Destroys all the Duties and Obligations of Social Life'. (ibid.)' Damaris Masham's second work, 'Occasional thoughts in reference to a vertuous or Christian life' (1705), argues against social prejudice for the rational life, and 'that the Pursuit of virtue must be based upon a rational commitment to sound religious principles acquired through education' (Pyle, 560-61). She saw such prejudice as responsible for the ignorance of daughters of the middle and upper classes. 'Girls', she wrote, 'betwixt silly Fathers and ignorant Mothers, are generally so brought up that traditionary Opinions are to them, all their lives long, instead of Reason' (Masham, 'Occasional Thoughts', 162). Parents, she saw, were afraid of the consequences of learning in their daughters. 'They might be in danger of not finding Husbands' (ibid., 197). She shared Locke's conviction that mothers should be able to educate their children -- boys as well as girls. Men would not welcome learning in their wives but 'if Men did usually find Women the more amiable for being knowing, they would much more commonly, than now they are, be so' (ibid., 204). Unhappy marriages were common and education in women could counter discontent. It was not advice easily followed. A woman must 'order the Course and Manner of her Life somewhat differently from others of her Sex and Condition' (ibid., 198). From her own experience as a learned woman she knew the difficulties and the opposition to be met. 
Damaris Masham died at Otes on 20 April 1708 and was buried in the middle aisle of Bath Abbey. Over her grave it was written of 'her Learning, Judgement, Sagacity, and Penetration together with her Candor and Love of Truth' (Ballard, 337). 


@@@@@


doc= 18263


Samuel Masham (1678/9-1758), courtier and army officer, the eighth son of Sir Francis Masham, third baronet ('c'.1646-1723), of Otes, in whose house John Locke had spent his later years, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Scott. Masham, who had been first page and then equerry (1701) and was now groom of the bedchamber to Prince George, was several years younger than his wife, and Harley was said to have been instrumental in the match by pointing out to him the advantages of marriage to a royal favourite. Masham's family were certainly fully aware of these, but he himself assured them that it was a love match. The queen was present at the ceremony, made a privy purse payment of $2000 to Abigail as a dowry, and, to allow for her necessary absences as a married woman, appointed her younger sister Alice as a supernumerary bedchamber woman. 


@@@@@


doc= 18264


Samuel Masham (1712-1776), courtier, who succeeded him as second Baron Masham, following an education at Westminster School and Christ Church, Oxford, was made auditor-general of the household of George, prince of Wales, and a lord of the bedchamber in 1762. He was married twice, first on 16 October 1736 to Henrietta Winnington (died 1761) and second on 4 February 1762 to Charlotte Dyve (died 1773), but had no heirs. When he died, heavily in debt, on 14 June 1776, his titles became extinct. The collections of John Locke, which had remained at Otes until then, were dispersed by his principal creditor. 


@@@@@


doc= 18265


Maskell, William (1814-1890), Roman Catholic convert and liturgical scholar, the only son of William Maskell (1777-1841), solicitor, and Mary Miles (1772-1854), was born on 17 May 1814 at Shepton Mallet, Somerset. In 1823 the family moved to fashionable Bath. Maskell matriculated on 9 June 1832 at University College, Oxford. He graduated BA in 1836, and proceeded MA in 1838, having taken holy orders in the previous year. From the first an extremely high-churchman, in 1840 he attacked the latitudinarian bishop of Norwich, Edward Stanley, for supporting the movement for the relaxation of subscription. In 1842 he became rector of Corscombe, Dorset, but within a year he resigned his living to devote himself to research into the history of Anglican ritual. His 'Ancient liturgy of the Church of England... and the modern Roman liturgy, arranged in parallel columns' appeared in 1844 and was followed by his 'Monumenta ritualia ecclesiae Anglicanae, or, Occasional Offices of the Church of England' (3 vols., 1846; 2nd edn, 1882). In 1970 there was a facsimile reprint of this work. 
These works at once placed Maskell in the front rank of English ecclesiastical antiquaries. His diocesan, Edward Denison, bishop of Salisbury, to whom he had dedicated his 'Monumenta', recommended his appointment as domestic chaplain to the bishop of Exeter, Henry Phillpotts, and in July 1847 he was instituted vicar of St Mary Church, Torquay. His first major duty was to assist the bishop in his examination of the Revd George Cornelius Gorham, concerning his views on baptism, after his presentation to the vicarage of Brampford Speke, near Exeter. Maskell was peculiarly well qualified for this duty, in view of his extensive knowledge of the history of the doctrine and practice of baptism. The Gorham case inspired his 'Holy Baptism: a Dissertation' (1848). In 1849 he published a volume of sermons in which high-church views both of baptism and of the holy eucharist were expounded; and in 'An Enquiry into the Doctrine of the Church of England upon Absolution' (1849) he attempted to justify the revival of the confessional. 
However, the Gorham case changed Maskell's view of the Church of England. Initially he had agreed wholeheartedly with the bishop of Exeter that Gorham's teaching on baptism was heretical and he deplored Gorham's appeal to the privy council against the bishop who had refused to institute him; but as the case unfolded, Maskell underwent a period of anguished reflection, and came to the conclusion that the privy council committee, though composed of laymen, was indeed the legitimate arbiter of the doctrinal dispute, and that Gorham's views on baptism were not repugnant to the formularies of the Church of England. He published his volte-face in three provocative pamphlets between February and June 1850: 'The Royal Supremacy and the Authority of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council', 'The Want of Dogmatic Teaching in the Church of England', and 'Correspondence of the archbishop of Canterbury and the bishop of Exeter with the Rev. W. Maskell'. These pamphlets made it clear that Maskell's faith in the Church of England was collapsing. 
Soon afterwards, having sought advice from J. H. Newman, Maskell resigned his living, and was received into the Church of Rome. He publicized his secession in his 'Letter to the Rev. Dr. Pusey on his Receiving Persons in Auricular Confession' (1850). As a Roman Catholic he refrained from controversy until the decree of the Vatican council defining the dogma of papal infallibility. In his pamphlet entitled 'What is the Meaning of the late Definition on the Infallibility of the Pope?' (1871), he espoused the views propounded by liberal Roman Catholics such as Newman, and challenged the interpretation of the decree put forward by the archbishop of Westminster, Henry Manning, in his pastoral letter of 1870. For this Maskell was violently attacked in the ultramontane 'Tablet' and had his pamphlet examined for heresy by the archbishop. However, he made his peace with Manning and in 1872 published under the title 'Protestant Ritualists' some very trenchant remarks on the privy council case of 'Sheppard v. Bennett' and the position of the Tractarians in the Church of England. W. J. E. Bennett had been charged with heresy for his extremely high views on the eucharist, but had been acquitted. In a final burst of controversy in 1876 Maskell castigated Sabine Baring-Gould's biography of the poet Robert Stephen Hawker, and defended his friend Hawker against the allegation that he had secretly subscribed to Roman Catholicism while officiating as vicar of Morwenstow. 
Maskell never took orders in the Church of Rome. Although a widower at the time of his conversion in 1850, he told Newman emphatically that he was 'quite sure' he 'never should or would' ask for holy orders in the Church of Rome. This was probably because he had three young sons to care for. His second marriage in 1852 made priesthood impossible. He spent his later life in retirement, residing at Bude, Cornwall, and dividing his time between the activities of a country gentleman and antiquarian pursuits. In 1855 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London, but resigned some time after 1886. He was judged to be a man of considerable literary and conversational powers. Thanks to a fortune inherited from his father, he amassed a considerable library of patristic literature, and collected medieval service books, enamels, and carvings in ivory, many of which he gave to the British and South Kensington museums. For the committee of council on education he edited in 1872 'A Description of the Ivories, Ancient and Modern, in the South Kensington Museum'. He was a JP and a deputy lieutenant for the county of Cornwall. 
Maskell was married twice, first in 1837 to Mary Scott (died 1847); second in 1852 to Monique Stein (died 1895). With his first wife he had one daughter and three sons: Mary (1838-1845); William (1839-1898), registrar of the University of New Zealand; Stuart (1843-1912), solicitor; and Alfred (1845-1912), art historian. He died at 1 Alexandra Terrace, Penzance, on 12 April 1890 and was buried at Penzance. 
A conscientious and profound liturgical scholar, Maskell was also a keen theological controversialist. Particularly adept at legalistic and historical argument, he would castigate his opponents with firm belief in his superior logic and in the complete righteousness of his cause. 


@@@@@


doc= 18266


Maskelyne, Nevil (1732-1811), astronomer and mathematician, was born on 5 October 1732 in Kensington Gore, London, the third of the four children of Edmund Maskelyne (1698-1744), one of the clerks of the duke of Newcastle, secretary of state, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1748), the only child of John Booth of Chester, a distant cousin. In his own words, written about 1800, Nevil was 'the last male heir of an antient family long settled at Purton in the County of Wilts, which from the name probably came from Normandy, where there is or was 50 years ago a family of that name Masqueline' (autobiographical notes, CUL, RGO MS.4/320:8). All Nevil's siblings were born in Kensington: William in 1725, Edmund in 1728, and Margaret in 1735. The following year the family moved to Tothill Street, Westminster, saving a walk of more than 2 miles each way to Edmund senior's office in Lincoln's Inn Fields, and to Westminster School, where the two eldest boys were king's scholars. In January 1741 Nevil followed his brothers to Westminster, becoming a town boy. 
In March 1744 their father died, leaving a somewhat meagre inheritance in trust for the three younger children. Then, in the winter of 1748-9, their mother died also. William and Edmund were already provided for. Nevil became a boarder in Vincent Bourne's house in Westminster, and Margaret went to live with her aunts in Wiltshire until 1752, when she sailed to India to join her brother Edmund, whose friend and colleague Robert Clive she married in Madras in 1753. 
It was while Nevil was still at Westminster School that he decided that astronomy was the career for him. For this, the study of mathematics was essential, and he decided he must follow his eldest brother to the University of Cambridge. After leaving Westminster in July 1749 he entered St Catharine's College as a sizar in November, and migrated in July 1750 to Pembroke College, where he matriculated. In 1752 he moved again, to Trinity, the college of his brother William, where he took the mathematical tripos for the BA degree in 1754 and graduated as seventh wrangler. 
Maskelyne wanted to be an astronomer -- and an important one. The first hurdle was the mathematical tripos. Then, fellowship of Trinity would be an enormous advantage, not only for its academic distinction but also because it would pay a small stipend and give free board and lodging in college until marriage. While waiting for the appropriate moment to apply, he decided to anticipate one of the fellowship requirements, the taking of holy orders. At Michaelmas 1755 he was ordained to the curacy of Chipping Barnet in Hertfordshire, where he came under the rector of East Barnet. In 1756 he was elected a fellow of Trinity, and, after proceeding to the MA degree, in July 1757 was elected to his major fellowship. 
It was about this time that Maskelyne was introduced to the astronomer royal, James Bradley, who, in January 1758, was one of those signing a certificate recommending Maskelyne, 'well versed in Mathematical Learning and Natural Philosophy', for fellowship of the Royal Society, to which he was duly elected on 27 April 1758, at the age of twenty-five. 
Of Maskelyne's activities in Chipping Barnet, pastoral or scientific, little is known, but he began to see his way ahead in an astronomical career on 14 July 1760, when he was appointed by the Royal Society to go to St Helena to observe the transit of Venus, a phenomenon which was to occur on 6 June 1761. This was part of an international programme of observers all over the world (in the event somewhat frustrated by the Seven Years' War) to measure the sun's parallax and thereby derive the mean distance between the earth and sun, a fundamental quantity known today as the astronomical unit. 
With Robert Waddington as second observer, Maskelyne sailed for St Helena in the East Indiaman 'Prince Henry' on 18 January 1761. While on passage he became involved for the first time in practical navigation at sea, in the development of which he was later to play such an important role. He had with him a 20 inch Hadley quadrant by Bird and, thanks to Bradley, a copy of Mayer's solar and lunar tables, so was able to try out the lunar-distance method of measuring longitude, effectively continuing the 1757-9 trials of Captain John Campbell. 
Maskelyne's first task on arrival at St Helena on 6 April 1761 was to find a site and to set up the instruments for observing the transit of Venus on 6 June. Sadly, clouds covered the sun at the critical moment. Waddington left the island immediately, but Maskelyne remained to continue scientific observations, principally to measure the annual parallax of the star Sirius, which passes nearly overhead there. However, after many months of inconsistent results he decided there was a defect in his zenith sector, so he sailed for home in the East Indiaman 'Warwick' in February 1762, taking further lunar-distance observations for longitude while on passage. He reached Plymouth on 15 May. 
Maskelyne resumed his pastoral duties at Chipping Barnet. At the same time he assiduously attended Royal Society meetings and wrote 'The British Mariner's Guide', published in April 1763, containing an English edition of Mayer's tables and giving simple instructions for finding longitude at sea by lunar distance, with worked examples from his observations in the 'Warwick'. 
Meanwhile, the board of longitude was giving much attention to the rival method of finding longitude -- by chronometer. The longitude watch (H4) of John Harrison had been tried out on a voyage to Jamaica in 1761-2, but the results did not satisfy the board, which decided that, if Harrison was to qualify for the full reward offered by the 'Longitude Act' of 1714, there must be another sea trial to the West Indies. In August 1763 Maskelyne agreed to sail on the board's behalf (with Charles Green, assistant at the Royal Greenwich Observatory) to establish the longitude of Barbados by observations of the eclipses of Jupiter's satellites, so that the accuracy of H4 could be assessed. Maskelyne and Green left from St Helens Roads off the Isle of Wight in HMS 'Princess Louisa' on 23 September, and on 7 November reached Bridgetown, Barbados, where they set up an observatory and began observations. John Harrison's son William arrived with H4 on 13 May 1764, when he objected to Maskelyne being involved because, he said, the latter was a candidate for a reward on behalf of the lunar-distance method. Maskelyne was greatly upset by this slur on his character. Why this objection was not raised before Harrison left England is not clear, but a compromise was reached so that Maskelyne and Green made observations on alternate days. Harrison, Green, and H4 sailed for home on 4 June; Maskelyne remained until 30 August to complete his longitude observations and continue some lunar observations started in St Helena. 
Maskelyne reached London on 12 October 1764 to be greeted with the news that Bradley's successor as astronomer royal, Nathaniel Bliss, had died on 2 September and that he, Maskelyne, was a strong candidate for the vacant post. The royal warrant appointing him director of the Greenwich observatory was dated 8 February 1765. The very next day he was at the Admiralty in London attending his first meeting as an 'ex officio' member of the board of longitude. At what was probably the most important meeting of that body in the 114 years of its existence, the board recommended awards to Harrison for his watch -- only half the major award -- and to Mayer and Euler for the lunar tables. They also approved a proposal by Maskelyne that the board should publish annually a nautical almanac containing tables for facilitating the lunar-distance method of finding longitude at sea, to be edited by Maskelyne himself. With minor amendments, these proposals were ratified by parliament in May. 
Maskelyne took up residence at the Greenwich observatory on 16 March 1765. According to the king's instructions: 'forthwith to apply yourself with the most exact Care and Diligence to the rectifying the Tables of the Motions of the Heavens, and the Places of the fixed Stars, in order to find out the so much desired Longitude at Sea, for perfecting the Art of Navigation (royal warrant, 8 Feb 1765)' Maskelyne's primary task was astronomical observation. Top priority was given to the moon: the astronomer royal and his assistant took observations on every possible occasion it crossed the meridian, the former noting the time of crossing with the transit instrument, the latter measuring the zenith distance with the mural quadrant. The sun and planets were observed likewise, though at lower priority. As for star positions, Maskelyne decided that enough such data existed on some 3000 stars for the time being, so, except in special circumstances, limited his observations to thirty-six stars, lying near the celestial equator and bright enough to be visible through a telescope in daylight, needed to ascertain the going of the clocks. With one assistant only, Maskelyne followed this policy for more than forty-five years, and some 90,000 observations were made. Through the Royal Society, the results were published every ten years or so, something his predecessors had failed to do. 
Many occasional observations had to be taken at Greenwich in addition to the routine meridian observations -- the timing of predictable phenomena used for finding longitude, such as the eclipses of Jupiter's satellites; the occultation of stars and planets by the moon; solar and lunar eclipses; and measuring the places of newly discovered bodies, such as Uranus in 1781, Ceres and two other minor planets in 1801-4, and fairly frequent comets. Then there was the transit of Venus of 1769, when Maskelyne was not clouded out as he had been in St Helena in 1761. 
The annual 'Nautical Almanac and Astronomical Ephemeris' and its companion 'Tables Requisite' were undoubtedly Maskelyne's greatest contribution to the improvement of navigation and astronomy and to science as a whole. It was almost entirely through his efforts and persistence that they came to be published in the first place -- for the year 1767 -- and he was the first editor. As such he superintended the complex calculations, the precision of which was improved year by year as a result of work by mathematicians and astronomers throughout Europe with whom, despite the bellicose state of that period, Maskelyne kept in touch. He was entirely responsible for the first forty-nine issues of the almanac, from 1767 to that for the year 1815, published in 1811, the year of his death; and for three editions of the 'Tables Requisite', published in 1766, 1781, and 1801. He also had to oversee the production of some eighteen other works published by the board of longitude. 
Other work for the board of longitude kept Maskelyne extremely busy, particularly arranging for and assessing the performance of timekeepers submitted for trial at Greenwich, which led to acrimonious disputes with Harrison (in 1765-7), Thomas Mudge (in 1774-93), and John Arnold and Thomas Earnshaw (in 1798-1807). He was also responsible for the planning of the scientific sides of voyages of exploration to which the Royal Society or board of longitude appointed observers -- for the 1769 transit of Venus, for the first fleet to New South Wales, and the voyages of Cook, Phipps, Vancouver, and Flinders. 
Maskelyne's other responsibility was to the Royal Society, to whose council he was elected in December 1766, and on which he remained, except for two short breaks, until his death. In the summer of 1774, having obtained the king's leave of absence, he went on the Royal Society's behalf to conduct an experiment which he had himself proposed, to determine the earth's density -- to 'weigh the world' -- by measuring the deviation of a plumb line produced by the gravitational attraction of the mountain Schiehallion in Perthshire, and by observing stars near the zenith on both the north and south sides of the mountain. From the results he postulated that the density of the whole earth was 4.5 times that of water; the current accepted value is 5.52. For this work he was given the society's highest award, the Copley medal, in November 1774. In the society's dissensions in 1784 he strongly supported Dr Charles Hutton (who had carried out the analysis of the Schiehallion results) against the president, Sir Joseph Banks. 
In 1768 Maskelyne took the degree of bachelor of divinity at Cambridge, followed in 1777 with that of doctor of divinity. In 1775 he was presented by his nephew Lord Clive with the living of Shrawardine in Shropshire, and in 1782 by Trinity College to the rectory of North Runcton, Norfolk. On 21 August 1784, in St Andrew's, Holborn, he married Sophia Rose (1752-1821), the second daughter and coheir of John Pate Rose of Cotterstock, Northampton, and Jamaica; she was twenty years his junior. Their only child, Margaret, was born in Greenwich on 27 June 1785. Nevil's eldest brother, William, had died in 1772, leaving him Pond's Farm, Purton Stoke, Wiltshire, which became his 'country cottage' after he married, and where the family used to go for five weeks or so each autumn. 
Maskelyne was elected fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences at Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1788, and received honours from Hanover, Russia, and Poland, but the honour he appreciated most was his election in 1802 as one of only eight foreign members of the Institut de France, established in 1795. 
Maskelyne's final years were as busy as ever, and he had a large amount of paperwork to deal with, particularly on 'Nautical Almanac' business and during the Earnshaw affair of 1806. He took what proved to be his last recorded astronomical observation on 1 September 1810. The same year he attended all three meetings of the board of longitude, and on 6 December took the chair -- his 150th attendance (he missed only one, when on Schiehallion); he was also at the Royal Society council meeting on 13 December. Then, in mid-January, he fell ill, and he died at the Greenwich observatory on 9 February 1811 in his seventy-ninth year, having completed forty-six years as astronomer royal. He was buried on 20 February at the church of St Mary, Purton, Wiltshire. He was survived by his widow, Sophia, and his daughter, Margaret, who in 1819 married Anthony Mervyn Story (who subsequently took the additional name of Maskelyne); their eldest son, (Mervyn Herbert) Nevil Story-Maskelyne, became a distinguished mineralogist. 
The evidence from the large body of correspondence that has survived proves that, pompous and a bit of a bore as he might have seemed to some, Maskelyne was almost universally liked and admired by his contemporaries -- except perhaps by some chronometer makers and their families. The reputation that survives in some popular twentieth-century books of Maskelyne as the evil genius who tried to deprive the poor illiterate carpenter of his just rewards -- out of personal spite and because of his own involvement in the rival lunar-distance method of finding longitude -- was certainly not one that was held generally in his own day, nor is it in any way justified by modern research: he was a member of the board of longitude, appointed by parliament to advise on the award of large sums of public money; there is no evidence whatsoever that he at any time abused his position as a public servant, still less lined his own pocket. 
Although he promoted the cause of astronomical science through his routine work at Greenwich -- and, most important, made it available to mathematicians and astronomers the world over by ensuring the prompt publication of results -- Maskelyne never lost sight of the principal object of the observatory's existence, the improvement of navigation. But undoubtedly his greatest achievement was to set in motion the annual publication of Britain's 'Nautical Almanac', the model for similar ephemerides now published worldwide, and the reason why the international system of time and longitude measurement are today based upon the Greenwich meridian. 


@@@@@


doc= 18267


Mason, Charles (1616/17-1677/8), Church of England clergyman, was reputedly born at Christmas time 1616. He was among at least seven sons of William Mason (died in or before 1629), an official in the court of king's bench, and his wife, Ann, most of whom were baptized in Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk. Charles's younger brother Benjamin ('bap'. 1622) was MP for Herefordshire in 1656. Charles himself was educated at Eton College from about 1628. On 10 March 1632 he was admitted a scholar of King's College, Cambridge, graduating BA in early 1636 and proceeding MA in 1639. Chosen as a fellow on 10 March 1635 he was a lecturer in the college from Christmas 1636 to Michaelmas 1639 and proceeded BD in 1642. On 1 November of that year he was created DD of Oxford University. Mason was one of the five fellows of King's College ejected by the parliament in 1644, but was chosen by the college as rector of Stour Provost in Dorset in 1646. His institution was ordered by the Lords on 1 March 1647, and he seems to have retained the living until his death. 
On the Restoration Mason was created DD of Cambridge University (1660). On 15 June 1661 he was presented by the king to the rectory of St Mary Woolchurch, London, but the church was destroyed in the great fire of 1666 and the parish annexed to that of St Mary Woolnoth. In 1662 -- with the support of Gilbert Sheldon, bishop of London -- Mason petitioned the king for the rectory of Chipping Barnet in Hertfordshire; on 3 September a warrant for his grant was drawn up, but he does not appear to have been instituted. Although, on 31 December 1663, Mason was collated to the prebend of Portpool in St Paul's Cathedral, he wrote in January 1665 to William Sancroft, then dean of St Paul's, complaining of poverty and ill health, and begging for preferment. On 14 May 1669 he was presented to the rectory of St Peter-le-Poer, Broad Street; there, on 27 August 1675, James Fleetwood (died 1683) was consecrated bishop of Worcester, and Mason arranged the use of a neighbouring hall for the consecration feast. On 15 July 1671 he was installed in the prebend of Beaminster Prima, in Salisbury Cathedral, and in 1675 he was appointed president of Sion College. Mason published several sermons, including 'Miles Christianus: a sermon preached to the artillery company, October 16 1673 at St Michael's in Cornhill', in which a preface to Sir John Robinson, lieutenant of the Tower of London, explains that it appeared in print partly because 'I am told that my trumpet was not shrill enough to be heard by those at a distance'. Mason held his two prebends and the rectory until his death, which occurred between 22 December 1677, when he made his will, and the grant of probate on 25 January 1678. He left all his property to his wife, Barbara, his two daughters having earlier married. 


@@@@@


doc= 18268


Mason, Charles (1728-1786), astronomer and mathematician, was born early in 1728 at Wherr in the parish of Bisley, near Stroud, Gloucestershire, the third child of Charles Mason, a baker, and his first wife, Ann, 'nee' Damsel, and was baptized in Sapperton church on 1 May 1728. Details of his early life and education are lacking, but it seems likely that between 1730 and 1750 he had the help of Robert Stratford, a schoolmaster and mathematician of Sapperton, to give him the necessary mathematical skills to be appointed -- in 1756 at the age of twenty-eight -- to the Royal Greenwich Observatory as assistant to the astronomer royal, James Bradley, who had been born in Gloucestershire and whose wife, Susannah Peach, came from Chalford, near Sapperton. At a meagre $26 a year Mason was able to acquire the skills of observational astronomy; his recorded observations at Greenwich span the period between October 1756 and November 1760. But his mathematical ability was also much appreciated by Bradley, particularly in helping to assess the accuracy of Tobias Mayer's solar and lunar tables submitted to the board of longitude in 1757 -- with which Mason was to be much concerned later in his career. His first wife, Rebekah, died at Greenwich on 13 February 1759, leaving two sons, William and Isaac. 
In 1760, on Bradley's recommendation, the Royal Society chose Mason to go to Sumatra to observe the 1761 transit of Venus, assisted by Jeremiah Dixon. An encounter with a French frigate delayed their final sailing, and as they could not reach Sumatra in time they landed at the Cape of Good Hope, from where they successfully observed the transit on 6 June 1761. On the passage home they landed at St Helena and, after discussion with Nevil Maskelyne (whose observation of the transit had been thwarted by clouds), Dixon returned temporarily to the Cape with Maskelyne's clock to carry out gravity experiments, while Mason assisted Maskelyne with astronomical and tidal observations at St Helena. Mason and Dixon eventually reached England early in 1762. 
In August 1763 Mason and Dixon signed an agreement with Thomas Penn and Frederick Calvert, Lord Baltimore, hereditary proprietors of the provinces of Pennsylvania and Maryland, to help local surveyors define the disputed boundary between the two provinces. After arriving in Philadelphia with their instruments in November, they began operations the following month at the north-east corner of Maryland. Proceeding along the parallel of 39 degree 43'17".6 N, they surveyed and marked the boundary for 244 miles; hostile Indians prevented the survey of the last 36 miles. When late in 1766 work for the proprietors was completed on what was to become the famous Mason-Dixon line -- popularly regarded as the boundary between the northern and southern states -- they began, on the Royal Society's behalf, to measure a degree of latitude on the Delmarva peninsula in Maryland and to make gravity measurements with the clock sent out by the society, the same that Maskelyne had had in St Helena and Dixon had taken to the Cape in 1761. Having completed their task on 21 June 1768, they sailed for England on 11 September. Before leaving, both were admitted as corresponding members of the American Society for Promoting Useful Knowledge, in Philadelphia. 
In December 1768 Mason was appointed to be one of the Royal Society's observers of the second transit of Venus, which he successfully observed on 3 June 1769 at Cavan, near Strabane, in northern Ireland; in July 1773 he was appointed by the Royal Society to make a tour of Scotland to find a mountain suitable for experiments to 'weigh the earth' by measuring the deflection of a plumb line by the gravitational attraction of the mountain. He recommended Schiehallion in Perthshire as a suitable site for the experiment and was immediately offered the task of leading the expedition for doing this. However, he declined, nominally on financial grounds, though perhaps, after South Africa, America, and Ireland, fieldwork no longer appealed to him. He retired to Gloucestershire to look after his growing family, having married his second wife, Mary, about 1770. 
Meanwhile Mason had been commissioned by the board of longitude to complete the computation of Bradley's Greenwich observations, which resulted in the publication in 1771 of a catalogue of the places of 387 stars in the 'Nautical Almanac' for 1773. Secondly, he was commissioned to improve Mason's solar and lunar tables, which had been used by the computers of the annual 'Nautical Almanac' since its first publication in 1767. He presented his first results in November 1772, then improved tables in November 1777, and again in March 1781. They were used immediately for computing the 'Nautical Almanac' and were published in 1787. For the first set of tables Mason received $417 10's'.; for the last he asked originally for $5000 but had to be content with $800. In 1786 he emigrated to America with his wife, seven sons, and a daughter. Having been taken ill while on passage, he died at the George tavern, on the corner of Arch and Second, Philadelphia, on 25 October 1786. He was buried at Christ Church burial-ground, Philadelphia. In 1793 his widow presented to the board of longitude various papers concerning the lunar tables, for which she received an additional $200 reward. 
Mason should not be confused with the Revd Charles Mason FRS (1699?-1771), Woodwardian lecturer in the University of Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 18269


Mason, Francis (1565/6-1621), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born in co. Durham; his parents are unknown. He matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, on 10 May 1583, aged seventeen, and was elected a probationer fellow of Merton College in 1586. Although he graduated BA from Brasenose College, on 27 January 1587, it was Merton that presented him for both his MA (4 July 1590) and BD (7 July 1597) and for his licence to preach (30 June 1597). The only hint of his later controversialist temperament came in 1591 when he was censured for objecting vehemently to the divinity defence of Thomas Aubrey. On that occasion he successfully defended himself against the decision to suspend him from full membership of the university. During the royal visit to Oxford the following year he was one of the defendants before Queen Elizabeth in the after-dinner Latin debate 'whether civil disorders are useful to a state' at which the French ambassador was also present (Merton College, Oxford, Registrum Annalium, 1567-1603, 158). On 23 November 1599 he was presented to the rectory of Sudbourn, with the chapelry of Orford in Suffolk, an appointment that he held for the rest of his life. Within a few years he married Elizabeth Price. They had three children, two of whom, Elizabeth and Samuel, were baptized at Orford respectively on 9 September 1604 and 4 May 1606. 
Mason's first work, 'The Authority of the Church in Making Canons and Constitutions', appeared in London in 1607. It derived from a sermon that Mason preached in the summer of 1605 at the Green Yard at Norwich and was dedicated to Archbishop Richard Bancroft. Against the puritans Mason reiterated the validity of a church over which James VI and I was supreme governor, and in which only the king could authorize the making of canon law, and urged the superiority of bishops. 'The ministers of England are not in popular paritie, but our Bishops are advanced above the rest, being indued with power by giving orders and the exercise of ecclesiasticall jurisdiction' (p. 16). In support of this opinion Mason adduced the biblical witness of the letters of Timothy and Titus before appealing for a learned ministry to be established in each parish in accord with canon 34. While he admitted that where there was no apostolical injunction for ceremonies such as the use of the surplice, the ring in marriage and the sign of the cross at baptism, and kneeling at communion, he claimed that to 'transgress the law of his Prince' was to 'leave his pastorall charge, and make a rent in the Church of Christ' (p. 38). Discipline, especially the ceremonies, 'is for the most part variable, according to circumstance of time and place' (p. 34). Such a moderate defence of the present state of the church was principally intended to remind all parties in the church that division was a much greater scandal than that alleged in the enforcement of ceremonies. Mason hoped that 'this olive branch', 'an exhortation to holy obedience', would serve to correct those carried away 'rather from weaknesse then of wilfulnesse' (sig. A2). A revised edition was entered at the Stationers' Company on 26 August 1632, to be printed in London, but it was stayed at the printers. Not until 1634, when, according to Thomas Crosfield, Dr Brian Duppa, then vice-chancellor of Oxford, ordered it to be reprinted 'in opposition to what Dr Prideaux read his lecture upon' at the Act of 12 July (Oxford, Queen's College, MS 390, fol. 68'r'), was it published, by John Lichfield at Oxford. 
A more vigorous defence of the Church of England, this time against Romish attacks on the validity of Anglican episcopacy in the context of the controversy over Anglican orders begun by George Downham's rigorist consecration sermon of 1608, appeared with Mason's name on the title-page in 1613. 'Of the Consecration of the Bishops in the Church of England' was dedicated to Archbishop George Abbot and is framed as a discourse between one Philodox, a seminary priest, and Orthodox, a minister of the Church of England. Using archival evidence from Lambeth Palace, the book traced the episcopal succession in England from the reign of Edward VI to refute the claims of Bellarmine, Nicholas Sanders, Richard Bristow, Thomas Harding, William Allen, Thomas Stapleton, Robert Parsons, and other leading Romanists. In particular it sought to end the controversy of the 'Nag's Head' story and to show that the consecrations of Matthew Parker and the first Elizabethan bishops had been canonically valid and that the full apostolic succession had been maintained in England since before the Reformation: 'I have set downe the successive Ordination, and Golden Chaine of the most reverend Father George, now [Lord] Archbishop of Canterbury, extending linke by linke unto the Bishops in the time of King Henry the 8, which our adversaries acknowledge to be canonicall. (p. 142)' On 12 May 1614, according to Mason in a note on the flyleaf of the copy of his book surviving at Merton College, Oxford, Archbishop Abbot showed the archival evidence to 'some of their discreet catholics' -- John Cottington, Thomas Leake, and Thomas Laithwaite SJ -- that 'they might view and consider whether they be true, or counterfeit'. 
Whether or not Mason wrote the defence in its entirety has been disputed, despite his autograph note in the copy that he presented to his Oxford college. George Davenport, a friend of John Cosin in Paris, later claimed that according to Cosin, who had been Bishop John Overall's secretary and chaplain from 1616, it was written by the bishop of Norwich himself. 'Mr Mason indeed added something to it, with the approbation of the Bishop, and printed it in his own name at the desire of the Bishop whose Chaplain (I think) he was' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 52, fol. 103). According to Cosin, Mason had lodged with Overall in London at the time and may have held the same posts in the household in which Cosin succeeded him. Both Overall and Mason are credited with writing 'The Validity of the Ordination of the Ministers of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas' that finally appeared in 1641 as part of the debate over moderate episcopacy. 
The 1613 vindication was roundly answered by Anthony Chamney in 'A Treatise of the Vocation of Bishops and other Ecclesiasticall Ministers' (1616), published at Douai and dedicated to the archbishop of Canterbury. Later reprinted in Latin at Paris, it was the first of several antagonistic responses to the calm assertiveness of the original work, and Thomas Fitzherbert, Henry Fitzsimon, and Matthew Kellison joined in the attack. Mason's work was reissued in 1618 and at Abbot's prompting he began to translate it into Latin. 
On 13 December 1619 Mason was chosen archdeacon of Norfolk by Abbot, who had the right of presentation following Bishop Samuel Harsnett's promotion; he was instituted on 18 December. However, the following year illness curtailed his activities, although he still attended the king as a royal chaplain and preached before him in January 1621. 'Upon David's Adultery' and 'Upon David's Politick Practice', published as 'Two Sermons Preached at the Kings Court' (1621), censured James for going after foreign women, and in the prelude to the Spanish match are part of the literature drawing admonitory models of James from King David, attacking the rhetoric of 'carnall Concupiscence' so often found in the court of princes. Mason died at Orford in December 1621 and was buried in the chapel there on 21 December. The funerary monument put up by his widow depicts him in academic dress kneeling in prayer. His 'De ministero Anglicano' was completed and published by Nathaniel Brent. An amplified version, 'Vindiciae ecclesiae Anglicanae' (1625), was dedicated to Bishop Henry de Gondy of Paris. The Latin editions extend the scope of the original, not only by taking the allegations of Champney and others into account but also defending the ordinal of Edward VI and the impropriety of speaking of sacrifice in the eucharist. 
Mason's younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 18270


Mason, Francis (1837-1886), surgeon, youngest son of Nicholas Mason, a lace merchant, of Wood Street, Cheapside, London, and his wife, Ann, was born at Islington on 21 July 1837. He received his early education at the Islington proprietary school, of which John Jackson, afterwards bishop of London, was then the headmaster. Mason subsequently attended the King's School, Canterbury, and, matriculating at the London University, he pursued his medical studies at King's College, London, of which he was made an honorary fellow. While in the medical school attached to King's College, Mason became a friend of Sir William Fergusson, who formed such a high opinion of Mason's surgical skill that he made him his private assistant. Mason was admitted a member of the Royal College of Surgeons on 25 July 1858. He served as house surgeon at King's College Hospital in 1859-60, and he was granted the diploma of fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons on 11 December 1862. 
In 1863 Mason was appointed an assistant surgeon to King's College Hospital, and surgeon to the St Pancras and Northern Dispensary. In 1867 he became assistant surgeon to, and lecturer on anatomy at, the Westminster Hospital, and he became full surgeon there in 1871. Later the same year Mason accepted an invitation to join the medical staff of St Thomas's Hospital as assistant surgeon and lecturer on anatomy. He became full surgeon there in 1876, when he resigned the lectureship of anatomy for that of practical surgery. From 1879 to 1886, Mason was editor of the hospital's 'Reports'. 
Mason filled many important offices at the Medical Society of London, being orator in 1870, Lettsomian lecturer in 1878, president in 1882, and subsequently treasurer. Throughout his professional career he published a number of works, including 'On Harelip and Cleft Palate' (1877) and 'On the Surgery of the Face' (1878), which were well received. 
Mason was a man of genial character and had great musical talents. He died of acute erysipelatous inflammation of the throat, at his home at 5 Brook Street, Grosvenor Square, London, on 5 June 1886, leaving a widow; there were no children. He was buried at Highgate. 


@@@@@


doc= 18271


Mason, George (1735-1806), writer and book collector, was baptized on 17 September 1735 at St Alban, Wood Street, London, the second son and fourth child of John Mason (1686-1753/4), a wealthy malt distiller in Deptford, who on 23 February 1728 had married Amelia ('c'.1698-1782), the illegitimate daughter of General George Wade (1673-1748). Two other children of this marriage, John ('b'. 1729) and Sarah ('b'. 'c'.1733), survived into adulthood; three died young. 
Mason was admitted to the Middle Temple on 5 June 1752 and matriculated at Oxford from Corpus Christi College on 7 February 1753. By his father's will, proved on 19 January 1754, the distillery business, valued at $15,000, and property in Deptford and Greenwich went to his brother John, who was charged to pay an annuity of $500 p.a. to their mother. She was given a life interest in more valuable property in Hertfordshire, Essex, and Ormonde Street, London, all of which was to descend to George on her death; George also received $8000 and Sarah $5000. Their mother married on 20 November 1755 George Jubb (1718-1787), later the regius professor of Hebrew at Oxford; she died on 4 February 1782, but long before her death (perhaps from the date of her remarriage or his majority a year later) George Mason had part ownership and use of the landed property bequeathed to her. He left Oxford without graduating, was called to the bar from the Inner Temple in 1761, became a manager of the Sun Fire Office in 1770, and lived comfortably at Porter's, Shenley, near St Albans, Hertfordshire, as a country gentleman, landscape gardener, and bibliophile. His anonymously published 'Essay on Design in Gardening' (1768), intended to supplement the 'Unconnected thoughts on gardening' in Shenstone's 'Works' (vol. 2, 1764), shows familiarity with gardens in many parts of England, but refers to his own practice only in general terms. Its main theoretical concern is to draw a line between desirable contrast and undesirable incongruity. 
In 1772 Mason and his mother, as joint owners, sold Porter's to Admiral Richard Howe, then Viscount Howe, and Mason went to live at nearby Aldenham, another of his estates. He became friendly with Howe, of whom he wrote a eulogistic 'Life' (1803). His knowledge and his library contributed a little to Thomas Warton's 'History of English Poetry' (1774-81). In 1780 John Mason became insolvent. Funds inherited by their mother for the future benefit of both brothers went to pay his debts, and George, complaining of John's 'knavery' (Nichols, 4.554), was forced to retrench. He relinquished his coach, but continued to live at Aldenham Lodge and remained a keen collector of incunabula. His friend and neighbour, Georgiana, Countess Spencer, wrote in 1786 that Mason 'has but one good room in his house but that is a very Curious & Valuable Library of chiefly Greek Latin & Italien books'. Rare early English works also in his collection included Pynson's original edition of Chaucer's 'Canterbury Tales', two early editions of 'Le Morte d'Arthur', and Caxton's 'Blanchardyn and Eglantine'. A 'singular turn' noted by Lady Spencer was that Mason planned 'to have a book printed in every year from 1467 to the present time' (BL, letters to Caroline Howe). 
In 1793 'a stroke on the forehead' resulted in visual impairment and a 'perpetual debility' in his 'tottering knees', from which Mason suffered for the rest of his life (Mason, 'Earl Howe', 89-90). He sought relief in electrical treatment, seemingly in vain. He also belatedly returned to authorship, evidently in quarrelsome mood. In 1795 he published a revised and greatly enlarged edition of 'An Essay on Design in Gardening', in which he now disparaged the gardening theories of Thomas Whately and Uvedale Price. Whately was dead but Price hit back in the second edition of his 'Essay on the Picturesque' (1796-8), to which Mason responded testily in 1798 with two appendices to his own 'Essay'. 
Mason assisted the antiquary William Herbert (1718-1795) in revising Joseph Ames's 'Typographical Antiquities' (1785-90), and in 1796 he published a creditable edition of Thomas Hoccleve's poems, selected from a manuscript in his possession, now in the Huntington Library. His finical correspondence with Samuel Pegge the younger (1733-1800) about the notes and glossary for this edition is published in Nichols's 'Illustrations' (4.561-70). He sold a considerable part of his library in four sales between January 1798 and April 1799, raising about $2500, including $73 10's'. for a perfect copy of Dame Juliana Berners's 'Boke of Haukyng and Huntyng' (1486). Dibdin comments that 'it must have been a little heart-breaking for the collector to have seen his beautiful library, the harvest of many a year's hard reaping, melting away piece-meal, like a snow-ball' (Dibdin, 419n.). 
Mason's belligerent 'Supplement to Johnson's English Dictionary' (1801), intended to rectify Johnson's 'palpable errors' and supply his 'material omissions', received a hostile notice in the 'British Critic', to which Mason made a blistering reply in a supplement to his 'Review of the Proposals of the Albion Fire Insurance' (1806), an attack on a commercial rival, disclaimed by Mason's fellow Sun Fire managers. This incongruous mixture of financier's and lexicographer's controversy was Mason's last publication. In it he implied that he was the author of letters signed 'Superior of the Jesuits' which in 1771 'put Junius to silence'. These letters have not been traced; neither has 'A British Freeholder's Answer to T. Paine', attributed to Mason in Nichols's 'Illustrations' (4.551). 
Mason never married. He died of apoplexy at Aldenham Lodge on 4 November 1806. He had settled Aldenham Lodge and other landed property on his brother John's son, Bryant. After other small bequests the residue of his estate went to Mrs Anna Maria Dalby, 'nee' Carteret ('bap'. 28 Dec 1764), who, according to Nichols, was Mason's natural daughter. Bryant Mason and his son Frank were drowned on the way back from India in 1809. 


@@@@@


doc= 18272


Mason, George Heming (1818-1872), landscape painter, the son of George Miles Mason and his wife, Eliza Heming, was born on 11 March 1818 at Fenton Park, near Stoke-on-Trent. The Mason family, whose fortune derived from the invention and manufacture of Mason's ironware china, later lived at Wetley Abbey, a large Gothic house between Stoke and Leek, built in the 1820s. Mason was educated at Anderton's school in Newcastle under Lyme. Mason seems to have inherited an interest in literature and the arts from his father, but, despite this, when he left school he was articled to William Royden Watts, a surgeon in Birmingham. In 1843, however, he gave up his medical training to travel in Europe and to study art. Travelling with his brother Frederick Miles, George Mason visited France and Switzerland and eventually arrived in Rome in 1845. In due course, the two brothers joined in the patriotic campaign to free Rome from foreign control; in 1848 Frederick Miles Mason joined the Roman legion, and served in the military campaign against the Austrians, while George tended the wounded during the siege of Rome by the French in 1849. 
When George Mason first lived in Italy he found time to explore Rome and the surrounding countryside. However, a financial crisis at home meant that remittances were stopped and for a period Mason suffered dire poverty. He seems to have turned to painting in earnest as a means of supporting himself. Gradually he gained the support of a circle of English visitors to Rome, including fellow Staffordshire man David Watts Russell, and of William Cornwallis Cartwright (later a Liberal MP) with whom, in 1851, Mason explored the Sabine hills. Mason met the Italian painter Giovanni Costa at Ariccia in 1852, when Costa was lying low from the papal authorities following the suppression of the patriotic uprising, in which he had played a part. Costa and Mason made painting expeditions into the Roman campagna, and it was Costa who encouraged Mason to sketch directly from nature. Mason entered upon a close friendship with Frederic Leighton from the time of their first meeting in Rome in 1853. In 1855, Mason travelled to Paris with George Aitchison to visit the Universal Exhibition, where he studied the works of contemporary French landscape painters, notably Antoine Hebert and Gabriel-Alexandre Decamps. In Paris Mason sold a Roman landscape to the English artist J. B. Pyne. He and Aitchison then travelled on to England for a short visit. 
Mason's early paintings seem to have been conventional rustic subjects but, as he became increasingly entranced by the landscape scenery of the campagna, an intense and poetic quality entered his works. Like Costa, Mason sought to represent the landscape of the Lazio region in a specific and authentic way, with reference to the hardships and endurance of the working people. He returned to Italy for a further period after 1855, working on increasingly ambitious paintings such as the scene showing horses being watered at a campagna farmstead known as 'An Italian Landscape' (Tate collection), or 'Ploughing in the Campagna' (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), which was the first painting he exhibited at the Royal Academy, in 1857. 
Finally, in 1858 Mason moved back to England, to marry, on 5 August that year, his cousin Mary Emma Wood; they had seven children, five of whom survived their parents. Following the death of Mason's father in 1859, the couple set up home at Wetley Abbey. In these years Mason struggled to earn enough to support his family; in addition he suffered from bouts of depression and poor physical health. Frederic Leighton encouraged him to allow the Staffordshire landscape to become the inspiration of his painting: 'Wind in the Wolds' (Tate collection, on loan to Leighton House, London) of 1863, which Mason painted in response to a commission from Leighton, marks his new interest in subjects set in the English countryside. From this time on Wetley, and its immediate vicinity (which includes hills and moorland and the impressive Wetley Rocks), became the dominant motif of his art. In 1863 Costa visited Mason at Wetley Abbey, finding 'in the structure and outlines of that upland landscape a resemblance in the distribution of particular hillsides in the remote Maremma region, while the distinguished appearance of the Staffordshire people was reminiscent of the Etruscan physical type' (Costa, 'Quel che vidi e quel che intesi', 1927, 159). After a stay of three months, the two artists travelled together to London, and then on to Paris to see the Salon exhibition, where that year Costa was showing two works. From 1864, the Masons lived principally in Hammersmith, London, first at Westbourne House, Shaftesbury Road, and later at 7 Theresa Terrace. 
In the late 1860s and early 1870s Mason's reputation as one of the most aesthetically advanced painters of the day was confirmed by works shown at the Royal Academy and Dudley Gallery, as well as by the exhibition of seventy-one paintings by him shown at the Burlington Fine Arts Club after his death. In 1868 'The Evening Hymn' (previously Wyndham collection; probably destroyed) was, according to Algernon Charles Swinburne, 'the finest... of his works, admirable beyond all where all are admirable'. Swinburne went on to describe the subject: 'A row of girls, broken in rank here and there, stand and sing on a rough green rise of broken ground; behind them is a wild spare copse, beyond it a sunset of steady and sombre fire stains red with its sunken rays the long low space of the sky; above this broad band of heavy colour the light is fitful and pale. (repr. Swinburne, 366)' The success of 'The Evening Hymn' led to Mason's election as an associate member of the Royal Academy. Mason's later paintings are of the same panoramic landscape type that he had devised in Italy, but with a subtlety of mood and soft tonality adapted to the English countryside. Figures occur, often engaged in some rural occupation -- harvesting or plodding home from the fields at the end of a day's labour -- and by these motifs Mason suggested in symbolical terms the very cycle of existence. 

'Girls Dancing' (priv. coll.), later known as 'A Pastoral Symphony', was shown at the 1869 Royal Academy exhibition, where its intense and wistful mood and an atmosphere of romantic enticement was admired. The French critic Philippe Burty mentioned Mason in his review of the exhibition as: 'the landscapist who touched me most deeply. He introduces to his vistas something that is vibrant and impassioned... He has a feeling for romantic colour, and a quality of light which fills the open spaces and loses itself beneath the leaves like the waves of sound of a shepherd's song. (P. Burty, 56)' This beautiful painting was one of a group in the exhibition in which the 'Art Journal' found: 'manifest the idealism and the realism, the romance and the naturalism, which are so strangely blended in certain new phases of the English school; to these characteristics may be added signs of the growing sway of Continental styles, together with tendency to intensity of sentiment, and to a sustained rhapsody of colour. ('Art Journal', 1869, 199)' Mason died on 22 October 1872 at 7 Theresa Terrace. He was buried in Brompton cemetery on 28 October. His wife survived him. 'The Harvest Moon' (Tate collection), his last painting, became his most famous work, appearing at a succession of exhibitions in the years after Mason's death and through to the turn of the twentieth century. It was reproduced in an etching by Robert Walker Macbeth, published in 1891, and it was the work that moved critics to compare Mason with Jules Breton, Jean-Francois Millet, and Charles Daubigny among French painters. 


@@@@@


doc= 18273


Mason, George Henry Monck (1824-1857), administrator in India, was born at Southampton on 23 October 1824, the only son of Captain Thomas Monck Mason RN (died 1838), of co. Wicklow, Ireland, and his second wife, Mary (died 1863), eldest daughter of Sir George Grey, first baronet. His father was a brother of Henry Joseph Monck Mason, writer, and William Monck Mason, historian of Ireland, and a nephew of John Monck Mason, writer on Shakespeare. 
Mason was educated at King William's College, Isle of Man. In 1842 he entered the Bengal army as an ensign and in June 1843 was attached to the 74th regiment of native infantry, first at Nowgong and afterwards at Hoshangabad and Mhow. He was promoted lieutenant in October 1845, and in March 1847 was made assistant to the governor-general's agent in Rajputana. In this post he acquired a reputation for energy and resourcefulness, undertaking several arduous expeditions to hunt down Sindhi robber chiefs who raided the border areas of Rajputana. 
In October 1854 Mason was appointed political agent at Karauli. Dalhousie admired his political skills and in March 1857, at the relatively young age of thirty-two, Mason was promoted to resident at Jodhpur. He was popular with the maharaja, Takht Singh, who, grateful for British backing in his struggles against his unruly nobles, stuck to the British throughout the uprising of 1857. Jodhpur remained quiet during the early months of the rising, but towards the end of August the Jodhpur legion mutinied at Erinpura and sought protection at Awah, a stronghold which was controlled by one of Takht Singh's most recalcitrant chiefs, Thakur Kushal Singh. Kushal Singh had no quarrel with the British and approached Mason with assurances that the rebels would surrender if they were guaranteed safety and a resumption of their old employment. Mason rejected this offer out of hand; he had just received orders forbidding any deals with rebels who were still in arms and he was wary of alienating Takht Singh by treating with one of his enemies. Rebuffed, Kushal Singh threw his lot in with the rebels. 
In September, Brigadier-General George Lawrence approached Awah with a small force, intending to reduce it quickly. Ignoring Takht Singh's warnings of danger, Mason insisted on leading a few of the maharaja's troops to Lawrence's assistance. However, by the time he arrived at Awah, on 18 September, the battle was already raging. He dismounted and set off alone through the jungle in search of Lawrence's camp, but was almost immediately shot and cut down by rebel sowars. Lawrence, meanwhile, was forced to retreat. 
Mason was survived by his wife, Sarah Louisa, daughter of Dr John Cheyne, queen's physician in Ireland, whom he had married at Calcutta on 10 February 1850, and by three surviving small children -- a son, Gordon George Monck ('b'. 1850), who went on to join the Indian Civil Service, and two daughters, Secelia Mary Monck ('b'. 1850) and Alice Frances Monck ('b'. 1853). A second son, Leslie Arthur Cheyne Monck, had died in infancy. 


@@@@@


doc= 18274


Mason, Henry (1575/6-1647), Church of England clergyman, was born at Wigan, Lancashire, a younger son of John Mason, a minor tradesman. He entered Brasenose College, Oxford, as a servitor in 1592, was elected an exhibitioner in 1593 and matriculated on 23 November aged seventeen. He graduated BA on 22 January 1596 and proceeded MA from Corpus Christi College, where he became chaplain in 1602, on 11 May 1603. Showing early signs of his later anti-puritan commitment, in 1603 he was a party to the attempt at Corpus Christi to learn the contents of the university's response to the millenary petition in advance of its publication. 
Mason proceeded BD in June 1610, and on 15 January 1611 was collated to the vicarage of Hillingdon, Middlesex, which he resigned in December 1612 when he became rector of St Matthew's, Friday Street, London. He was appointed chaplain to John King, bishop of London, and subsequently, on 14 February 1613, collated to St Andrew Undershaft with St Mary Axe, London. In October 1616 he was installed prebendary of Willesden in St Paul's Cathedral. 
Mason became an important figure within English Arminianism. In a series of seven devotional tracts published between 1624 and 1634 he distanced himself from both Roman Catholic and Calvinist doctrines. Already a controversial cleric by 1625 when, in 'Christian Humiliation, or, A Treatise of Fasting', he criticized the position of the reformed church on Lenten fasting, in 1633 he co-authored with Samuel Hoard the unlicensed Arminian tract, 'God's Love to Mankind'; in 1635 he attacked the clergy who 'do nible at the orders of our Church, and the Government of the present State' and the 'ambitious professors, who talk still in a popular language, and speak for the good of their country, and finde fault with the errors in our government, and like zealous 'Patriots' indeed, take part with the Commoners, against their Aldermen, and with the subjects against their Soveraigne; and all that they may steale the hearts of the multitude. ('Hearing and Doing the Ready Way to Blessedness', pp. 31, 429)' Instead, Mason identified himself with the doctrinal positions of bishops John King and William Juxon, and said of the Church of England, 'I am also perswaded in my soule, that she is the purest, best reformed Church in Europe' ('Christian Humiliation', sig. A4). 
Mason resigned his prebend on 29 March 1637, and Anthony Wood reports that when the 'puritan or presbyterian began to be dominant' in London in 1641, Mason also resigned his rectory and retired to Wigan (Wood, 'Ath., Oxon.', 3.220-21). In receipt of an annuity of $20 from the Lancashire gentry family of Ince, Mason disappeared into humble, but not uncontroversial, obscurity. Wigan was a hotly contested county town during the civil war and Mason suffered at the hands of parliamentarians; in his will of June 1647 he requested that the mayor and recorder, 'help me & the poor against their oppressors who are well known so that I need not to name them' (Lancs. RO, WCW). Several of Mason's close associates, including his cousin the pewterer Geoffrey Scott to whom Mason bequeathed his personal 'Bible', supported the royalists at Wigan. Mason died at Scoles, Wigan, and was buried in the churchyard of All Saints, Wigan, on 7 August 1647. He had in his lifetime (in 1632 and 1639) bestowed $240 in trust for the relief of the poor of the town, and gave most of his library to the grammar school. Mason's publications were frequently reprinted during his lifetime, and in some instances up to 1656. They influenced an individual as markedly different as Sir Simonds D'Ewes, who in 1627 adopted Mason's rules on fasting as his lifelong guide. 


@@@@@


doc= 18275


Mason, Henry Joseph Monck (1778-1858), legal writer and antiquary, was born at Powerscourt, co. Wicklow, on 15 July 1778, the son of Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Monck Mason of Kildare Street, Dublin, and his second wife, Jane, the only daughter of Bartholomew Mosse MD. His uncle was John Monck and his brother William Charles Monck Mason, the antiquarian scholar. After attending schools at Portarlington and Dublin, Mason entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 7 October 1793. He was elected a scholar in 1796, and was awarded the gold medal, along with his BA, in 1798. During his time at college he befriended the poet Thomas Moore; their friendship continued into later life. 
In Trinity term 1800 Mason was called to the Irish bar, but he did not practise. Under judges Radcliffe and Keatinge he held the post of examiner to the prerogative court. About 1810 he was asked by the record commissioners for Ireland to prepare a draft catalogue of the manuscripts of Trinity College, Dublin. Although he never finished the project, his work in progress was eventually acquired by the college and deposited in the manuscript room, and he was elected a member of the Royal Irish Academy on 22 June 1812. In Easter term 1814 he was appointed assistant librarian of the King's Inns, Dublin, and in 1815 he became chief librarian; he was awarded the honorary degrees of LLB and LLD by the University of Dublin in 1817. During a tour in Cumberland in 1814 Mason came to know Robert Southey, and they corresponded for twenty years. In 1816 he married the Hon. Anne Langrishe; they had two sons and four daughters. 
In 1818, with the help of Bishop Daly, Mason founded the Irish Society for 'promoting the scriptural education and religious instruction of the Irish-speaking population chiefly through the medium of their own language', and he also acted as its secretary for many years, writing many papers to further its causes. At his suggestion two scholarships (the Bedell scholarships) and a bursary, to be held at Dublin University, were founded in 1844 to encourage the study of the Irish language, and it was largely due to his influence that a chair of Irish was established at the university. In 1818 he also helped to found an association for the improvement of prisons and of prison discipline in Ireland, and in 1819 he published a pamphlet on the objects of the association. He also visited prisons in the hope of rehabilitating first offenders. 
Mason's most enduring work of scholarship was his 'Essay on the Antiquity and Constitution of Parliaments in Ireland' (1820), which offered a concise account of his history of Irish common and statute law from the period of the Anglo-Norman invasion to the reign of Charles I. Originally intended as an introduction to a projected work on the annals of the early Irish which would describe developments to the year 1782, the sequel was never finished or published. Yet his essay was still being reprinted as late as 1891, when a short biography of its author was appended by the Revd John Canon O'Hanlon. In 1830 Mason also published a 'Grammar of the Irish Language' (2nd edn, 1839), in which he admitted that he was acquainted with Irish only as a written language. Following a letter to the 'Christian Examiner' in September 1833 (pages 618-32), ostensibly criticizing Owen Connellan's edition of the Irish prayer book, but accusing both Mason and Connellan of serious errors in their knowledge of Irish grammar, it was also suggested that the Irish Society's pocket edition of Bedell's 'Irish Bible' was a mass of errors. Connellan published a defence entitled 'A Dissertation on Irish Grammar' (1834). 
However well or badly the work was translated, Mason is also thought to have been the editor of an Irish-language edition of the 'Book of Common Prayer' which was published in Dublin in 1825. He also wrote many pamphlets in support of the Irish Society and the Association for the Improvement of Prisons, and a series of papers for the 'Christian Examiner'. In 1836 he published a letter addressed to Thomas Moore, entitled 'Primitive Christianity in Ireland', in refutation of some statements made by Moore in the first volume of his 'History of Ireland'. 
In 1851 Mason resigned as librarian of King's Inns and left his house in Henrietta Street, Dublin, and moved to Dargle Cottage, near Bray, co. Wicklow, where he died on 14 April 1858. He was buried in the old cemetery of Powerscourt Demesne. 


@@@@@


doc= 18276


Mason, James (c.1723-1805), landscape engraver, was listed in 1744 by George Vertue as one of a group of new engravers being employed by the publisher Arthur Pond. Nothing is known of his early life, but he was probably born about twenty years earlier. For Pond he engraved ten landscapes by Gaspard Poussin and three by Claude, the earliest dated 1743, and he also engraved illustrations for Anson's voyages. In April 1746 Mason himself co-published with Peter Canot six landscapes after Jean-Baptiste Chatelain. He rapidly established a reputation as a talented landscape engraver, working after Thomas Smith (1749-51), William Bellers (1754-63), George Lambert (1745-61), Paul Sandby (1754), Jean Pillement (1759-62), Thomas Gainsborough (1763), Francesco Zuccarelli (1765), William Woollett (1766), and Richard Wilson (1767), and he was one of a group of talented landscape engravers whose work attracted favourable notice throughout Europe during the 1760s. 
In 1763 Mason was living in Phoenix Alley, Hart Street, Covent Garden, but in the late 1760s he moved to Windmill Street and finally, in 1771, to Winchester Row, Paddington, where he remained for the rest of his life. He was a fellow of the Society of Artists but exhibited with them only before trouble broke out between the court faction and the rank and file and after the mass resignation of the court faction. In the mid-1760s he exhibited with the Free Society of Artists. He produced several prints of sea fights and some important colonial views, notably four views of Halifax, Nova Scotia, after Dominic Serres, but his most highly regarded prints were three large landscapes after Claude for John Boydell's 'Collection of Prints Engraved after the most Capital Paintings in England'. While he engraved several more landscapes after old masters for Boydell, he seems to have engraved less and less after 1780. He died at his home in Winchester Row in April 1805, and was buried at St Mary, Paddington, on 27 April. In his will, proved on 20 May 1805, he called himself engraver and shopkeeper. The sale after his death held by King and Lochee on 3 April 1806 consisted chiefly of his own proof prints and others by fellow landscape engravers, and the catalogue reveals nothing of the nature of his shop. He left a widow, Mary Magdalen, two unmarried children, Benjamin James and Mary Elizabeth, another son, Michael, a widowed daughter, Elizabeth Wareup, and a grandson, William Mark Wareup, and was able to leave modest annuities to all of them. The apparent difference in age suggests that Michael and Elizabeth might have been children of an earlier marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 18277


Mason, James (1778/9-1827), writer, was the son of James Mason, draper, of St John's Hill, Shrewsbury, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Arthur Heywood, banker in Liverpool. Mason lived in Shrewsbury all his life. He was captain of the Shrewsbury Volunteers, and was involved in politics and literature. He was a supporter of Charles James Fox, advocating the abolition of slavery and Roman Catholic emancipation. In 1804 his 'Considerations on the Necessity of Discussing the State of the Irish Catholics' appeared. This was followed by 'A Brief Statement of the Present System of Tythes in Ireland, with a Plan for its Improvement'. He took part in the Shrewsbury election of 17 October 1806, and next year issued 'A Letter to the Electors of Shrewsbury'. His other political pamphlets were 'Observations on Parliamentary Reform' (1811) and 'A Review of the Principal Arguments in Favour of Restricting Importation, and Allowing the Exportation of Corn' (1814). 
Mason's published literary work included a tragedy, 'The Natural Son' (1805), which should be distinguished from Richard Cumberland's earlier comedy with the same title, and in 1809 he issued two volumes of 'Literary Miscellanies'. The first contained 'Mortimer', a novel in a series of letters, and translations from the classics; the second contained two tragedies, 'The Renown' and 'Ninus', and two comedies, 'The School for Husbands' (an original play, unlike John Ozell's translation from Moliere) and 'The School for Friends'. A comedy, under the same name as the last, by Marianne Chambers, was produced at Drury Lane in December 1805, and published the same year. In 1810 Mason published a verse translation, 'The Georgicks of Publius Virgilius Maro'. Robert Watt, in his 'Bibliotheca Britannica', also attributes to him, probably wrongly, 'A Plea for Catholic Communion in the Church of God' (1816). 
Mason died at Shrewsbury on 27 April 1827, aged forty-eight. 


@@@@@


doc= 18278


Mason, Sir John (c.1503-1566), diplomat and member of parliament, was born of humble parents in Abingdon, Berkshire. While the identity of his father is unknown, his mother was the sister of a monk at Abingdon Abbey (possibly the last abbot, Thomas Rowland); she was still living in Abingdon, as a widow, in 1533. After attending Abingdon grammar school Mason was sent to Oxford University, with support from the abbey. As a young man he was apparently destined for a clerical career, as he was ordained an acolyte in 1521. That year he was elected a fellow of All Souls and admitted to the BA degree, and in 1525 he incepted MA. His career path changed at Oxford, after he attracted the attention of Sir Thomas More, perhaps by delivering the welcome oration for Henry VIII's visit to the university in 1529. With More's support he secured a royal exhibition to study in Paris. In 1531 his old patron (and perhaps uncle) the abbot of Abingdon presented him to the first of his many ecclesiastical benefices: the rectory of Kingston Bagpuize, Berkshire; but he remained in France. In 1532 he attended the meeting between Francois I and Henry VIII at Calais. 
On leaving Paris in 1533, Mason embarked upon a diplomatic career, and was soon employed carrying letters between London and Paris. To further his knowledge of foreign lands, he went from France to Spain, and by July 1534 he was at Valladolid. That year he seemed to exhibit conservative religious views, lamenting the imprisonment of Sir Thomas More and Bishop John Fisher. In 1535 he was with Emperor Charles V's court in Sicily, from where he wrote to his colleague Thomas Starkey at Padua. Both men belonged to the cadre of young scholars and diplomats recruited and directed by Thomas Cromwell. By late 1536 Mason was back in England, his basic diplomatic training complete. At this time he was rewarded by Cromwell with the canonry of Crediton (Exeter), and was named a chaplain to the bishop of Lincoln. 
In 1537 Mason received his first major assignment, as secretary to the new English ambassador to the emperor, Sir Thomas Wyatt. The embassy included Edmund Bonner, at that time an anti-papalist and loyal servant of Cromwell, and almost immediately relations between Bonner and Mason were tense. Bonner complained that Wyatt listened only to Mason, relying upon him 'as a God almighty'. Denouncing the secretary as 'as glorious and as malicious a harlot as any that I know', Bonner also accused Mason of treasonous contact with Cardinal Pole and described him as a papist. Aware that these complaints derived from malice, Cromwell protected Mason, and throughout 1539 and 1540 the secretary remained at work in the Netherlands. As a token of Cromwell's continued favour, in February 1540 Mason added the canonry of Timsbury (Hampshire) to his growing sheaf of benefices. During a brief visit to England, in late December that year he married Elizabeth (died 1594), widow of Richard Hill (died 1539) of Hartley Wintney, Hampshire, and daughter of Thomas Isley of Kent. Although he acquired Hill's estate through his marriage, and was licensed to continue holding his benefices despite it, Mason soon set off to rejoin Wyatt. His journey was cut short, however, for in the turmoil following the fall of Cromwell Bonner's earlier charges of treason were revived, and on 25 January 1541 Mason was urgently recalled to London, to join Wyatt in the Tower. With Wyatt's support, however, he was soon cleared, and on 21 March Mason and his master were pardoned. 
Following his release Mason did not immediately return abroad, but instead remained in England, where his acknowledged administrative acumen led to his appointment in late September 1541 as a clerk of the privy council, as a deputy for William Paget. In October 1542 Mason replaced Sir Brian Tuke as French secretary. He also regularly acted for Paget as clerk of parliaments and, upon Paget's appointment as principal secretary, in May 1543 Mason was named clerk of the council for life. The summer of 1544 found him once more across the channel, serving as a royal secretary at the siege of Boulogne. In November 1545 Mason and Paget were appointed joint masters of the posts, while at the same time a second French secretary was appointed to alleviate Mason's heavy workload. Mason finally resumed diplomatic work in April 1546, when he visited a number of German princes to promote a league with England (designed to frustrate French diplomacy) and to propose a council to resolve religious differences within the empire. Neither suggestion found much favour, forcing Mason to admit failure and to seek speedy recall. While waiting to return, he attended the emperor's court at Speyer; he arrived home some time between July and November. 
Mason's labours were rewarded with a knighthood at the coronation of Edward VI in February 1547. Although not a member of Protector Somerset's inner circle, he remained active in royal service, and there were rumours in April 1547 that he was to become English ambassador to the emperor. On 11 May his stepdaughter Mary Hill married the king's tutor John Cheke. Mason prepared a manuscript treatise on the superiority of the English crown over Scotland, apparently for the protector. With the overthrow of Somerset in the council coup of October 1549, Secretary Paget's power was further enhanced, which in turn had important consequences for his friend and protege Mason, whose wife was also a relative of the Dudleys. Despite being a married layman, on 2 November Mason was presented by the crown to the deanery of Winchester. He had no chance for leisure, however, for in January 1550 it was reported that he was soon to be sent to France to negotiate peace. To enhance his diplomatic stature, on 19 April he was sworn of the privy council, and four days later he departed for France. By mid-June he was in Paris, and then joined the peripatetic French court. Negotiations dragged on (from Poissy to Blois to Amboise), while Mason complained repeatedly about the twin curses of early modern diplomatic life: ill health and poverty. His appeals to return to England were not ignored: by February 1551 he had been joined in France by his replacement, but the council ordered Mason to remain until a peace treaty was settled. At last, on 20 July 1551, a marriage treaty was concluded at Angers (between Edward VI and a daughter of Henry II), and a relieved Mason departed for England. By mid-September he was back at the council board, but one lasting legacy of his stay in Paris was the publication, which he had arranged while there, of Edward Wotton's treatise on botany, 'De differentiis animalium' (1552). 
Mason was an active member of the Edwardian privy council: hearing the case against Bishop Cuthbert Tunstall (1551); investigating tampering with the coinage (1552); and reporting on Irish mines (1553). His standing is illuminated by the fact that, after a by-election in Reading in which the borough had unsuccessfully tried to return a kinsman of Somerset, on 18 January 1552 Mason was certified as its new MP; he had no previous connection with the town. He also served as a clerk of parliament. In early 1553 he was to be sent as ambassador to the emperor, but excused himself as too old. As a councillor Mason witnessed the will of Edward VI which altered the succession, and was directly involved in the crisis which followed the king's death on 6 July. On 12 July Mason was chosen to meet the anxious imperial ambassadors to discuss the fate of Princess Mary, and the council's intentions. Despite his role as a spokesman, Mason was an astute political survivor and, realizing that Jane Grey's cause was doomed, quickly made his peace with Mary. Indeed, by 30 July he had joined Mary's privy council. Suspicions undoubtedly remained, for in early September reports circulated that Mason (and Paget) would retire from court. Before the month was over, however, Mason had been named to replace Thomas Thirlby as English ambassador to the emperor. In late 1553 Thirlby briefly returned to Brussels and Mason to England. Misfortune befell his family in early 1554 when two of his brothers-in-law were executed for their parts in Wyatt's rebellion, despite Mason's anxious appeals for clemency. None the less, he was elected MP for Hampshire to the parliament which opened on 2 April. He was in London on 15 April, but soon after returned to the Netherlands. Still mistrusted in some quarters, he was reported by the imperial ambassador that year to be hostile to Catholicism, yet in 1555 he was rumoured as a possible candidate for the post of chief secretary. Although opposed to Mary's proposed Habsburg marriage, Mason remained as ambassador to Charles V but he was in Windsor in March 1556 and finally recalled to England that summer. As a layman, and married, Mason was stripped of his ecclesiastical benefices that year and in October was compelled to resign his chancellorship at Oxford in favour of Cardinal Pole. However, he was compensated with a substantial pension. In October 1557 there were rumours that Mason, an active Marian councillor, would shortly replace William Petre as principal secretary, and on 31 October 1558 (not long before her death) the queen appointed him treasurer of the chamber. He served again as knight of the shire for Hampshire in that year's parliament. 
Upon the accession of Elizabeth in November 1558 Mason was the sole senior household officer (treasurer of the chamber) to retain his post (and also the richest): testimony to his strong administrative ability and sound political judgement. Despite the distrust of some protestants, Mason also remained at the council board, where during the early weeks of the reign he pressed for peace with France, even at the price of abandoning claims to Calais. Elizabeth soon drew upon his considerable diplomatic experience, unhappy with the lack of progress by English negotiators at the peace talks at Cateau-Cambresis. Dispatched to the conference in mid-March 1559 to deliver a royal rebuke to the English commissioners, Mason found that a treaty had been concluded a few days earlier. He was soon back in England as a councillor; rumours that he was to be sent as ambassador to Madrid came to nothing. While he was personally closer to his old friends Paget and Petre than to William Cecil, Mason's opposition to the secretary's intervention in Scotland and the Newhaven (Le Havre) expedition owed more to his pragmatism than to factional politics. Despite recurring bouts of ill health, Mason continued freely to offer counsel, warning of the perils of foreign military adventures and urging the queen to pursue peace. He last attended the council in June 1565. Meanwhile he was again MP for Hampshire in the parliaments of 1559 and 1563, and was re-elected chancellor of Oxford in June 1559, serving until his resignation in December 1564. 
Throughout his career Mason worked to protect and promote the interests of his native Abingdon. As a Berkshire chantry commissioner he was involved in the suppression of the Hospital of St Helen, which he later restored as Christ's Hospital (May 1553), serving as its first master. In 1549 Mason became steward of the lands of the dissolved abbey, and was a patron of the local grammar school. Although in 1551 he wrote to William Cecil opposing Abingdon's bid for a borough charter, it seems likely that he assisted in securing that charter in 1556, earning him the effusive praise of Francis Little in 'A Monument of Christian Munificence' (1627), as one 'whose memory deserves and ought to be honoured with a statue advanced in the most conspicuous place of this town' (p. 47). During his final years he divided his time between his principal estate at Hartley Wintney and the house of his son-in-law Francis Spelman at Gunnersbury, Middlesex. The ambiguity surrounding Mason's religious views was shared by many of his colleagues, and continued to the end of his life: in 1564 the bishop of Winchester reported that he was favourable to true religion, while at his death the Spanish ambassador claimed he was a Catholic. There is no evidence of Catholicism in his will, in which he asked forgiveness for his sins from God 'who hathe saved us not according unto workes of Justice that we have doon but acording unto his Mercie' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/49, fol. 10'r'). Among its many beneficiaries were his half-brother Thomas Wikes, or Wykes, of Drayton, near Abingdon, Thomas's children, and the children of another half-brother, John Wikes. His overseers were named as Secretary of State Sir William Cecil, the master of the rolls, Sir William Cordell, the archdeacon of Surrey, John Watson, and Robert Creswell. He died on 20 or 21 April 1566 and was buried in the north choir aisle of St Paul's Cathedral in London, where his widow and his heir, his nephew Anthony Wyckes (later Mason), erected a monument; his son Thomas had predeceased him, although he was survived by several stepdaughters. 
The monument proclaimed that Mason had faithfully served four Tudor monarchs as ambassador and councillor, successfully weathering a succession of religious and political storms. His political longevity testified to his discretion in keeping his own counsel, and his adroitness in rendering himself indispensable to the crown. His diplomatic skill and personal affability were noticed by his contemporaries. On one occasion, during a dinner-table debate the scholar Roger Ascham observed how Mason, 'after his maner, was verie merie with both parties, pleasantlie playing both' (Ascham, sig. B1'v'). Mason himself claimed that his motto was 'do and say nothing' (BL, Sloane MS 1523, fol. 39). Yet he had consistently promoted scholarship, and his scholarly interests were praised by John Leland in his 'Encomia'. He bequeathed at least a dozen volumes to the library of All Souls. 


@@@@@


doc= 18279


John Mason (b. 1576/7), Church of England clergyman, matriculated at Merton College, Oxford, on 15 October 1591, aged fourteen, and graduated BA from Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 23 July 1599. He proceeded MA on 9 July 1603, when he became a fellow. He obtained his BD in June 1610 only after recanting opinions that were regarded as unorthodox. He was granted a licence to preach on 12 May 1612 and may have become in 1620 vicar of Yazor, Herefordshire. Nothing further is known of him. 


@@@@@


doc= 18280


Mason, John (1586-1635), founder of New Hampshire, was born in King's Lynn, Norfolk, the son of John Mason and Isabel Mason ('nee' Steed), and baptized there on 11 December 1586. His father was apparently the John Mason who in 1575 had bought his freedom of the borough. The records of Magdalen College, Oxford, suggest that some time before the younger John's matriculation there on 25 June 1602 the family had moved to Southampton. In 1606 he married Anne Greene (died 1655), daughter of a London goldsmith. In 1610 he commanded a small fleet sent by James VI and I to help put down resistance to Scottish rule in the Hebrides. He fitted out the expedition at his own expense on the promise of reimbursement from the Scottish treasury, which never happened because of the death of the treasurer. His failure to gain immediate reimbursement may have been a factor in his appointment in 1615 as governor of Newfoundland, where a company of adventurers of London and Bristol had established a colony in 1610 in order to exploit the north Atlantic fishery. The title captain by which he is invariably known dates at least from this period if not earlier. 
During his six-year governorship Mason oversaw the expansion of settlement, explored thoroughly, wrote an important promotional tract, and drew the first accurate map of the island. 'A Briefe Discourse of the New-Found-Land', his tract published in Edinburgh in 1620, helped persuade Sir William Alexander to sponsor a colony in Nova Scotia. After his return to England in 1621 Mason became closely associated with Sir Ferdinando Gorges, governor of Plymouth Fort and treasurer of the council for New England, and on 9 March 1622 became the second beneficiary of a grant of land from the council. This was a sizeable strip of land between the Naumkeag and Merrimac rivers, including Cape Anne, which Mason named Mariana. The entire grant is within the present bounds of Massachusetts; neither Mason nor his heirs ever successfully defended it against the conflicting claims of the Massachusetts Bay Company. 
Later in 1622, however, Mason and Gorges became joint proprietors of the council's third grant in New England, a much larger piece between the Merrimac and the Kennebec called the province of Maine. The Spanish and French wars, 1624-30, during which he served as commissary-general in the expedition against Cadiz and then as treasurer and paymaster of the English armies, kept both Mason and Gorges from moving ahead with their New England project at once. At the end of the war with France in 1629 the partners turned their attention once again to the province of Maine, and agreed to divide it between them. Mason took the part between the Merrimac and Piscataqua (or Pascataqua) rivers. Since he was living in Portsmouth, Hampshire, the place from which he had conducted his military and naval affairs during the wars and with which he and his family may have been associated before that, he named his province New Hampshire. The Council for New England confirmed the arrangement the same year by granting separate new patents for Maine and New Hampshire to Gorges and Mason respectively. Gorges and Mason, together with other associates, received two more joint grants, the Laconia patent in 1629, intended to forward the interior fur trade, and the Pascataqua patent of 1631. The first of these latter grants reflected a vague understanding of American geography. Both overlapped the adjoining provinces of Mason and Gorges and were of extremely short duration; both helped to stimulate settlement of the Piscataqua region under Mason's sponsorship. 
Besides investing in his own province and sending over agents, settlers, equipment, and livestock, Mason became increasingly involved in colonial affairs in general. In April 1632 he warned the secretary of state, Sir John Coke, about trading encroachments by Dutch 'interlopers' on the coast between Cape Cod and Delaware Bay, and in June of the same year joined the Council for New England. The council thereafter met frequently at his London house in Fenchurch Street, which he maintained in addition to his house in Portsmouth. By the time of its dissolution in April 1635, three days after it issued a new grant to Mason for New Hampshire along with a 10,000 acre tract to the east to be called Masonia, he was the council's vice-president. At the same time as he was active in the council, he led the way in developing the fishery in the Hebrides and became treasurer of a company chartered for the purpose by the king. 
In 1634 Mason was appointed captain of Southsea Castle, commanding Portsmouth harbour, and inspector of forts and castles on the south coast. In 1635 he was named a judge of the court of oyer and terminer for Hampshire, and appointed vice-admiral of New England, a position in what was intended as an elaborate viceregal government for all of New England to be headed by Gorges. Mason's death and a shipwreck prevented either man from sailing to put the plan into effect. 
Mason died in London between 26 November and 22 December 1635 after providing in his will, dated 26 November, that the sons of his only daughter, Anne Tufton, should become the heirs to his New England lands provided they adopt the surname Mason. Only one of the grandsons, Robert Tufton Mason, lived to come of age. The subsequent history of New Hampshire until 1746 is in large measure the story of his ultimately unsuccessful efforts, and those of his representatives and heirs, to gain permanent and secure possession of the lands granted to his grandfather against the contending claims of politically powerful settlers. Mason's will was admitted to probate on 22 December. He is probably buried somewhere in Westminster Abbey in accordance with his wishes, but neither his grave nor a record of his burial has been located. 


@@@@@


doc= 18281


Mason, John (c.1601-1672), army officer and colonial official, was born in England. His parentage and place of birth are unknown. He served in the Low Countries under Sir Thomas Fairfax, who reportedly wrote to him at the outbreak of the civil war to urge his return; in 'A Brief History of the Pequot War' Mason mentions Grubbendunk, who commanded Bois-le-Duc ('s-Hertogenbosch) during the siege of 1629 (Mason, v, 3). 
By 1632 Mason had migrated to Massachusetts, where he was appointed to chase away pirates harassing the coast. In 1633 he was promoted captain. Mason represented Dorchester at the first general court that included deputies (1635). Later that year he moved to Connecticut, where he helped to found Windsor. The influx of settlers into New England in the 1630s heightened tensions with Native Americans. After a series of skirmishes Connecticut voted to attack the Pequots. Mason led the expedition and persuaded Mohegans and Narragansetts to join him. The combined force attacked a Pequot fort at Mystic on 26 May 1637, slaughtering as many as 700 people, most of them non-combatants, in less than an hour. Fighting continued into the summer before ending in a resounding success for the English; most Pequots were either killed or captured to be sold into slavery within New England or elsewhere. 
His role in the Pequot War ensured Mason's place as the premier military commander in Connecticut. Although a number of older sources state that Mason was elevated to the rank of major shortly after the war, contemporary references to him invariably style him as captain until 1654, major thereafter. The war apparently created in Mason an abiding loyalty to Uncas, a Mohegan leader who fought with him at Mystic. Mason repeatedly defended Uncas against other Indian leaders and even against his fellow colonists. Considered an expert on Indian affairs, Mason was called upon repeatedly to amass information about, give advice on, collect tribute from, or otherwise intimidate the Native Americans. Decades later, at the behest of the colony, Mason composed a history of the Pequot War, which was not published under his name until Thomas Prince saw it into print in 1736. Mason's account, as might be expected of a history commissioned by a 'puritan' Commonwealth, casts the war in a providential framework, glorying in the gruesome victory as a sign of God's approval. Along with other contemporary accounts it has fuelled a vociferous debate about the brutality of the English conquest. 
Mason served on the Connecticut general court from 1637, rising from deputy in the 1630s to magistrate in 1642. Nothing is known of his first marriage except that it produced one daughter and ended in his wife's death in 1639. Later that year he married Anne Peck (1619-1671), daughter of Robert Peck, minister of Hingham, and Peck's first wife, Anne. After New Haven, Connecticut, Plymouth, and Massachusetts formed the United Colonies in 1642, Mason served repeatedly as a commissioner (1647, 1654-7, 1661). The Connecticut government requested that he move to Saybrook Fort in 1647. Mason and his family resided at Saybrook until 1659, when they helped found Norwich. This town stands in the heart of Pequot country, and settling it was part of an effort to keep that region under Connecticut's control. Mason had earlier laboured to prevent Indians from using the old Pequot hunting grounds, clashing with John Winthrop junior over the issue. He also defended Connecticut's interests against other colonies that laid claim to the region. The significance of the town and of Mason's role in it was not lost on the Indians, who reportedly attempted to assassinate him at the new town site in 1660. For his work on this and other colonial business Mason was frequently granted large tracts of land. He became deputy governor in 1660, a position which Charles II confirmed in the charter granted in 1662. 
Mason's views contrasted with those of Roger Williams, who none the less called him his 'Honrd deare and ancient friend' ('Correspondence of Roger Williams', 609). Unlike Williams, who traded with the Indians and learned their language, Mason may never have mastered Algonquian, and he invariably recommended military solutions to tensions, where Williams might work for peace. The two men also differed on religious toleration, a topic Mason thought unworthy of discussion. Late in life Mason advised his colony to drop its boundary dispute with Rhode Island. He wanted to avoid royal intervention, but he also worried that the settlers whom Connecticut would absorb by seizing the land from Rhode Island were unsuited to 'any Tollrable Christianlike society' (Ellis, 325-6). 
Mason retired from public office in 1671, 'in Extream misery with the Stone or Strangury or some such desease' ('Bradstreet's journal', 9.46). He died on 30 January 1672. In 1889 Norwich residents erected a statue of a colonial-era soldier in Mason's honour. In 1996, after an extended controversy over celebrating a man guilty of genocide, it was removed and relocated elsewhere. 


@@@@@


doc= 18282


Mason, John (1646?-1694), Church of England clergyman and millenarian, was probably the son of Thomas and Margaret Mason, who were mentioned in the parish registers at Irchester, Northamptonshire, as the parents of Thomas ('b'. 3 April 1643) and Nicholas ('b'. 2 Feb 1644); an unnamed child of theirs referred to in March 1646 was probably John. Contemporary biographical sources suggest that Mason's early life was spent in Northamptonshire. Certainly Mason's contemporary biographer Henry Maurice mentioned a school in Strixton, where one teacher said of Mason 'that if he liv'd, he was like to be a violent Zealot' (Maurice, 25). On 16 May 1661 Mason was admitted as a sizar at Clare College, Cambridge, from where he graduated BA in 1665 and proceeded MA in 1668. It was at university that he began to fulfil the prediction of his former teacher, and was known to be 'but careless in some part of his Life there, that he would be sometimes starting of Questions, in reference to the usages of the Church of 'England' (which seem'd to discover some dissatisfaction)' (ibid., 26). 
From 1668 until 1674 Mason was the vicar of Stantonbury, Buckinghamshire. In this he seems to have been the beneficiary of the patronage of John Wittewronge, who had been a parliamentary officer in the civil wars. At the funeral of Wittewronge's daughter, Clare, on 22 October 1669 Mason preached a sermon (later published as 'The Waters of Marah Sweetned' (1671), based on 'Hebrews' 9: 27-8; this seems to be the first indication of his increasing interest in the second coming. It is unclear exactly when Mason married, but it was while he was at Stantonbury. He had a family of six children including John (1677-1722/3), who became a dissenting minister and whose son John (1706-1763) edited the 'Select Remains of John Mason' in the 1740s; and William (1681-1744), who became a Church of England clergyman. In 1674 Mason became the rector of Water Stratford, Buckinghamshire, where he lived until his death. 
In 1683 Mason published 'Spiritual Songs, or, Songs of Praise'. This was extremely popular, going into its sixteenth edition in 1761. It is usually cited as among the first compositions in English hymnology. One can find elements borrowed from it in the works of Isaac Watts, and it allegedly influenced John and Samuel Wesley. However, the importance of song in Mason's beliefs suggests that the compositions have more significance than is usually thought. Mason 'was a rigid 'Calvinist', and not a little inclining to 'Antinomianism'', and he also believed strongly in predestination (Maurice, 27). His interest in the millennium is hard to pinpoint. Maurice's account divides Mason's life into two separate stages: before 1690 he was a moral, hard-working, moderate cleric, 'a Man of severe Morals' (ibid., 26); Richard Baxter allegedly wrote that he was 'the glory of the Church of England' ('Select Remains', xii). Christopher Hill seems to concur with Maurice that between 1690 and his death in 1694 Mason became 'increasingly odd' (Hill, 332). However, some letters written by Mason, included in 'Some Remarkable Passages in the Life and Death of Mr John Mason', published in 1694, predate 1690 and suggest some continuity in his beliefs. Indeed, it was possibly in the 1680s that Mason first became interested in the millennium. Maurice wrote that it was the minister of the nearby town of Haversham, James Wrexham, who was 'the very Man that put him first upon 'Revelation Thoughts''; Wrexham owned a copy of one of John Henry Alsted's works of millenarian chronology (Maurice, 31). The catalyst for Mason's change has been seen as Wrexham's death and that of Mason's wife shortly afterwards in February 1687, both of which affected Mason greatly. 
It is certainly around this date that Mason's fame seems to have been made by his preaching of a sermon based on the parable of the ten virgins, published in 1691 under the title 'The Midnight Cry'. This is millenarian in tone and interprets apocalyptic passages of scripture in the light of events such as the Thirty Years' War. At the same time Mason started to preach exclusively on the subject of Christ's personal reign on earth, believing that this was to begin shortly in Water Stratford. He began to attract followers, and a community of about 100 gathered south of the village of Water Stratford in an area they named the Holy Ground. Here all possessions were shared, no work was done except that connected to basic survival, and singing and dancing were carried out continuously day and night. Song seems to have been an important part of Mason's eschatology. He believed that Christ 'would have all sorts of Musick to attend Him' (Maurice, 13), and so thought it fitting to have constant singing and dancing in preparation for his arrival. Music also heightened the spiritual process. His followers 'found great raisings of their 'affections' by it' ('Some Remarkable Passages', 5). 
It was in this fervent atmosphere that at 1 a.m. on 16 April 1694 Mason had a vision of Christ. He appeared in 'a Crimson Garment, his Countenance exceeding Beautiful' with 'a deep 'Scarlet Robe' down to his Feet' (Maurice, 6; 'Some Remarkable Passages', 1). This image is reminiscent of 'Revelation' 19: 13, which described Christ as 'clothed with a vesture dipped in blood'. Mason believed that this appearance of the Son of God heralded the start of Christ's personal reign on earth -- and as a result Mason stopped giving the sacrament, preaching, and praying. Mason saw himself in relation to the appearance of Christ and, indeed, his followers 'witnessed, That their Prophet was the very Person spoken of, 'Rev.' 1.1. 'He sent and signified it by his Angel to his servant' 'John'.... Mr. 'Mason' was 'that' 'Elijah'' (Maurice, 10). Another spiritual predecessor cited by Mason was Noah, and Water Stratford was for Mason the ark where the elect would be safe until the Lord removed them to the New Jerusalem. Also, just as John the Baptist was the Elias who heralded the first appearance of Christ on earth, Mason was the Elias heralding his second coming. However, although Mason styled himself as the messenger and minister of Christ, there is a suggestion that his followers saw him quite differently, believing him to be Christ. Maurice's account of 1695, while sceptical of Mason's claims, does excuse him as a well-meaning but misled clergyman; however, towards Mason's followers Maurice is not so lenient: 'I can't forbear expressing my resentment and indignation against all such, as would rob, as would dethrone God, that they may Deifie a Man' (ibid., 59-60). 
Mason published a number of minor works: 'Dives and Lazarus', which was appended to the 1685 second edition of 'Spiritual Songs'; 'A Little Catechism, with Little Verses and Little Sayings, for Little Children' (1692); and 'Penitential Cries' (1692). He died from quinsy (possibly linked to the smoking that Maurice claimed he was fond of) in May 1694 at Water Stratford, where he was buried on 22 May. His community did not believe in his death, and Mason's successor, Isaac Rushworth, was forced to exhume his body to prove that he was not about to be resurrected. None the less, the community survived, still believing that Christ would return to earth. Although they were evicted from the land, remnants of the group existed until 1710 and even survived until about 1740. 


@@@@@


doc= 18283


Mason, John (1706-1763), Independent minister and author, was born at Dunmow, Essex, the son of John Mason (1677-1723), an Independent minister. His grandfather was John Mason (1646?-1694), vicar of Water Stratford, Buckinghamshire, the millenarian and hymn writer. He began his training for the ministry under John Jennings at Hinckley about 1722, but this was probably completed in London following Jennings's death in 1723. In the mid-1720s he became private tutor and chaplain to the family of John Feake, for several years governor of Bengal, at his seat near Hatfield, Hertfordshire. Mason commenced his first ministry in 1729 at West Street Independent Chapel in Dorking, Surrey, where on 10 April 1732 he married Mary Walters, daughter of the Revd James Walters of Uxbridge, Middlesex. He was pressed to move to a ministry at Uxbridge in 1744, but declined the offer. 
In September 1746, however, Mason accepted the call to follow John Oakes as minister of the large congregation meeting at Crossbrook, Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, which had been formed in 1733 by a union of Presbyterians and Independents. He had come into prominence the previous year with the publication of his 'Treatise on Self-Knowledge', which quickly became one of the most popular works of moral advice and self-help of its time, with a popular appeal that lasted into the following century. By 1836 it had gone through more than twenty editions, both in Britain and America, and had been translated into Welsh and several European languages. Many of the later editions varied greatly from the original version. It was 'esteemed by able and impartial judges, as one of the most useful treatises on practical piety that was ever written in English, or perhaps in any language' (Good, 9). In consideration of this book and his 'Plea for Christianity' (1733) Mason was awarded an MA degree by Edinburgh University. This was probably conferred between 1746 and 1749 when the names were not recorded, as his name does not appear in the list of Edinburgh graduates. 
Mason was considered a sound but not outstanding preacher. 'In the pulpit he pleased by a grave simplicity, but never rose to the higher excellencies of a preacher' (Bogue and Bennett, 2.590). His theological views, presented with a quiet determination, were conservative rather than radical, though he studiously avoided controversy. However, in private he was a lively conversationalist and expressed himself differently: 'his early works show that he was a believer in the trinity, which however he gave up some years before his death' (Good, 23). 
While at Cheshunt, Mason prepared young men for the ministry, who had the benefit of his wide culture and learning. His attitude to study was encapsulated in 'The student and pastor, or, Directions how to attain to eminence and usefulness in those respective characters' (1755), his second most popular work. The sound advice he offers is as valid today as it was in the mid-eighteenth century: 'Consult your own genius and inclination in the study you intend to pursue. You will else row against the tide, and make no progress that is either comfortable, or creditable to yourself' ('The Student and Pastor', 22). His success as an author lay in an ability to explain his views in a popular way to an intelligent, if non-expert, eighteenth-century readership. His books on elocution (1748), the power of numbers (1749), and on becoming a minister of religion (1753) all went to several editions, and his sermons for both young and old also appeared in numerous volumes and editions. He published a book of the sayings of his grandfather, together with a memoir, in 1742, the content of which was praised in a foreword by Isaac Watts. 
Mason continued in the ministry at Cheshunt until his death there of a chill on 10 February 1763. He was buried in the parish churchyard on 20 February, survived by his wife. His name was inextricably linked with his 'Treatise on Self-Knowledge', and his claim to fame rests on the sensible moral advice which he gave, linked with broadly accepted Christian principles. His chief tenet is summed up in the preface to early editions: 'The great end of all philosophy, both natural and moral, is to know ourselves and to know God. The highest learning is to be wise, and the greatest wisdom is to be good'. 


@@@@@


doc= 18284


Mason, John Charles (1798-1881), East India Company servant, was born in London in March 1798, the only son of Alexander Way Mason, chief clerk in the secretary's office of the East India Company's home establishment, and one of the founders and editors of the 'East India Register' in 1803. His grandfather Charles Mason served with distinction in the expedition to Guadeloupe in 1758-9 and with the allied army in Germany in 1762 and 1793-6. Mason was educated at Monsieur de la Pierre's Commercial School, Hackney, and at Lord Weymouth's Grammar School, Warminster. For three years he worked in the office of Dunn, Wordsworth, and Dunn, solicitors, at 32 Threadneedle Street, until, in April 1817, he received an appointment as a clerk in the secretary's office at East India House on the ground of his father's services to the company. 
From 1817 to 1837 Mason was almost wholly employed upon confidential duties under the committee of secrecy: in 1823 in negotiating a treaty with the government of the Netherlands for the exchange of settlements in India and the Malay peninsula and archipelago, in 1829 in arranging the secret signals for the East India Company's ships, in 1833 in negotiating for the renewal of the company's charter, and in 1834 in advising the parliamentary inquiry on matters connected with China. The company granted him several gratuities for his confidential work, which included transcribing the secrecy committee's papers from 1829 to 1834. In 1822 he compiled an 'Index to the Debates at the East India House, 1815-1822'; this was followed in 1825-6 by 'An analysis of the constitution of the East India Company, and of the laws passed by parliament for the government of their affairs at home and abroad'. 
In 1837, on a salary of $1000, Mason was appointed assistant in the newly formed marine branch of the secretary's office; under his management the Indian navy was improved and the coasts of India were surveyed. At the outbreak of the uprising of 1857 he expedited the transportation of 50,000 troops to India. In September 1858, upon the transfer of the government of India from the company to the crown, Mason retired from the service, but in January 1859 he was recalled to duty as secretary of the marine and transport department. The evidence he furnished to the select committees in 1860, 1861, and 1865 on the transport of troops to India led to his appointment in 1865 as the government of India's representative on the committee on the Indian overland troop transport service. 
Mason retired in April 1867 with fifty years' service to his credit. With his wife, Jane Augusta (died 1878), daughter of James Ensor, he had five daughters and an only son, Charles Alexander James ('b'. 1832), who in 1848 followed his father into the Indian home establishment. He became assistant secretary in the military department and retired in 1882. Mason died at his home, 12 Pembridge Gardens, Bayswater, London, on 21 December 1881. 


@@@@@


doc= 18285


Mason, John Monck (1726?-1809), literary scholar and politician, eldest son of Robert Mason of Mason-Brook, co. Galway, and Sarah, eldest daughter of George Monck of St Stephen's Green, Dublin, was born in Dublin. After attending Mr Young's school in Dublin, he entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 12 August 1741, graduated BA in 1746 and proceeded MA in 1761. He was called to the Irish bar from the Middle Temple in 1752 and in 1761 was elected to the Irish House of Commons. There he represented Blessington, co. Wicklow, from 1761 to 1768 and 1769 to 1776, and St Canice, co. Kilkenny, from 1776 to 1800. On 11 July 1766 he married Catherine, the second daughter of Henry Mitchell of Glasnevin, co. Dublin. They had no children. 
In 1765 Mason was appointed a commissioner of barracks for Dublin, and in 1772 a commissioner of revenue, a position he held until 1795, whereupon he became a commissioner of the Treasury. In 1761 he had introduced a bill allowing Catholics to invest money in mortgages on land, which was rejected by the English privy council. The same bill failed when introduced again in 1772 and 1773. A staunch supporter of the administration, Mason became so unpopular that in 1779, during the free trade agitation, he feared for his life and would not attend the house. He was, however, gratified to be made a privy councillor on 23 December 1783. He retired in 1799 on a pension of $1200 p.a. and voted for the Union in the last Irish parliament. 
Mason combined his parliamentary activities with a deep interest in Elizabethan drama. He first came to notice with a four-volume edition of the plays of Philip Massinger, an inauspicious beginning, as his edition was fraught with errors and was severely criticized. The reviewer for the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1st ser., 49, February 1779, 887-8) praised Tom Davies's account of Massinger, prefixed to the edition, but wasted no word on the edition itself. Not so the reviewer for the 'Critical Review', who was merciless from the first paragraph on. Acknowledging that he had never heard of Mason before but had learned that he was one of the commissioners of revenue in Ireland, he sincerely hoped that 'he has more knowledge of his 'Majesty's customs' than those of the 'drama'. To be plain, and to use the mildest terms we can think of, we do not remember, since the commencement of our literary labours, to have had any work pass through our hands, in which we have found such absolute insufficiency in an editor, joined with such perfect confidence and self-complacency. ('Critical Review', 47, April 1779, 293-300)' Mason next planned a complete edition of Shakespeare's plays but was beaten to it by the publication of Isaac Reed's edition in 1785. Mason confined himself to 'Comments on the Last Edition of Shakespeare's Plays' (1785), that consisted of remarks, notes, and corrections to Reed's text. In the preface he blamed the errors in his edition of Massinger on 'the negligence of the person entrusted with the conduct of it' (J. M. Mason, 'Comments', x). 
Mason's scholarly reputation and abilities were viewed ambivalently by his contemporaries. His fellow Shakespearian scholar, George Steevens, in the advertisement prefixed to his own edition of Shakespeare's plays of 1793, noted that he included 'a large proportion of Mr. Monck Mason's strictures on a former edition of Shakespeare', namely Reed's, although 'a small number of his proposed emendations are suppressed through honest commiseration' ('The Plays of William Shakespeare', ed. S. Johnson and G. Steevens, 15 vols., 1793, 1.x). None the less, Steevens incorporated a number of Mason's notes in the edition. In a letter to Bishop Thomas Percy, dated 11 January 1788, Steevens blew hot and cold. Mason, he wrote, 'is often ingenious and sometimes right; but occasionally outdoes even Dr. Warburton in absurdity of conjecture. There is also somewhat of ferocity in his manner which had better been avoided. Still, with all his extravagances, I must allow that he is a man of thinking and erudition. (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 7.1)' Percy, in a letter to Edmond Malone, dated 3 July 1785, told him: 'We have a Volume of Criticism by Mr Monck Mason, who never saw one ancient Edition. I have promised to lend him the 1 st and 3d 'folios', and some of the 'Quartos', &&. You will then see what he makes of them. ('Percy Letters', 1.28)' If Mason made use of the folios, he did not think it incumbent upon him to acknowledge Percy's kindness when he re-edited his 'Comments on... Shakespeare' in 1807. Francis Douce praised Mason's Shakespearian efforts, aligning him with Steevens, Malone, and Thomas Tyrwhitt, the great editors of the eighteenth century, in his 'Illustrations of Shakespeare and Ancient Manners' (1807). Mason's 'Comments' of 1785 and 1807 have not been entirely forgotten by the editors of the twentieth-century variorum editions of Shakespeare's plays. 
Mason also published 'Comments on the Plays of Beaumont and Fletcher' (1798), which he dedicated to Steevens, despite their differences over the Shakespeare editions. This work won praise from the 'Critical Review', but Mason was criticized as 'rather deficient in his acquaintance with old English books -- the only source from which our authors of the 17th century can be illustrated' ('Critical Review', new ser., 32, June 1800, 155). He was a member of the Dublin Society from 1768 and of the Royal Irish Academy from 1792. He died in Dublin on 2 April 1809. 


@@@@@


doc= 18286


Mason, Sir Josiah (1795-1881), pen-nib manufacturer and philanthropist, was born on 23 February 1795 at Mill Street, Kidderminster, the second son of Josiah Mason, carpet weaver, and his wife Elizabeth Griffiths. At the age of eight he commenced selling cakes in the streets, and afterwards fruit and vegetables, which he carried from door to door on a donkey. He taught himself shoemaking in 1810, and was afterwards a carpenter, a blacksmith, and a house-painter. In 1814 he became a carpet weaver, and from 1817 to 1822 he acted as manager of the imitation-gold jewellery works of his uncle, Richard Griffiths of Birmingham. On 18 August 1817 Mason married the latter's daughter, his cousin Anne Griffiths (died 24 Feb 1870). They had no children. Mason subsequently became manager of Samuel Harrison's business producing split rings in 1824, and a year later he purchased the business for $500. He then invented a device for making split keyrings by machinery, which proved to be profitable. 
Other manufacturers, including John and William Mitchell and Joseph Gillott, had already commenced making steel pens, and in 1829 Mason also began to produce them. He made the acquaintance of James Perry, a stationer, of Red Lion Square, London, and acted as his pen maker for many years. These pens, however, bore the name of the seller, Perry, and not of the manufacturer, Mason. The first order of 100 gross of pens was sent to London on 20 November 1830. About twelve workpeople were employed, and up to 1 hundredweight of steel was rolled in a week. In 1874 one thousand persons were employed, the quantity of steel rolled every week exceeded 3 tons, and on an average one and a half million pens were produced from each ton of steel. By this time Mason had become the owner of the largest pen-nib manufactory in the world. 
In 1844 George Elkington (1801-1865) took out a patent for the use of cyanides of gold and silver in electroplating, and, requiring capital to develop the business, he and his cousin Henry Elkington were joined by Mason. The electroplated spoons, forks, and other articles soon came into use, and their popularity was much increased after the Great Exhibition of 1851. Having made a large sum of money in this connection, Mason retired from the firm in 1856. But, with Elkington, he also established copper-smelting works at Pembrey, Carmarthenshire, and became a nickel smelter. In December 1875 he sold his pen manufactory to a limited liability company. Mason died at Norwood House, Erdington, Warwickshire, on 16 June 1881. His estate was valued at $51,729 5's'. 7died 
Much of Mason's wealth (estimated to be in the order of half a million pounds) had been spent on charitable causes during his own lifetime. In 1858 he founded almshouses in Erdington village for thirty aged women and an orphanage for fifty girls. Between 1860 and 1868 he spent $60,000 on the erection of a new orphanage at Erdington, and then, by a deed executed in August 1868, he transferred the edifice, together with an endowment in land and buildings valued at $200,000, to a body of seven trustees. This orphanage was capable of receiving three hundred girls, one hundred and fifty boys, and fifty infants, and remained in existence until 1960. On 30 November 1872 he was knighted. His most important work, the establishment of a scientific college at Birmingham, which cost him over $200,000, was opened on 1 October 1880, and in 1893 had 556 students. The purpose of the college was originally to provide instruction in science, but by 1881 the trustees were permitted to extend this to all branches of science, art, languages, and literature. Mason College was subsequently absorbed into the University of Birmingham, which was founded and incorporated in 1900. Mason's heraldic crest, representing a mermaid, forms part of the coat of arms of the university. 


@@@@@


doc= 18287


Mason, Martin (fl. 1655-1676), religious writer, was probably the son of John Mason (died 'c'.1675), 'gentleman', of St Swithin's, Lincoln. Mason's knowledge of Latin suggests a grammar school education. By 1655 he had become a Quaker, possibly 'convinced' during the visits of George Fox and William Dewsbury to Lincoln the previous year. Mason's first books were published in 1655. 'A Check to the Loftie Linguist' refuted the assertions made by George Scortreth, a preacher at Lincoln Cathedral, in a debate with the town's sheriff, Robert Craven, whom Fox had convinced in 1654. Mason's other 1655 publication, 'The Proud Pharisee Reproved', attacked the Independent Edward Reyner's 'Precepts for Christian Practice' (8th edn, 1655); Reyner, too, was a preacher at Lincoln Cathedral. Mason challenged the Baptist Jonathan Johnson in a letter (apparently lost), and then replied to his response in 'The Boasting Baptist Dismounted' (1656). When Johnson renewed the debate in 'The Quaker Quasht' (1659), Mason answered in 'Sion's Enemy Discovered' (n.d. [1659]), arguing in part for the Friends' conception of the Christ who suffers within believers, enabling them to experience an unquenchable fire. 
At the Restoration, Mason contributed to the chorus of Quaker advice to King Charles and parliament in two broadsides, 'Charles, the King of England, the Infinite Being' (1660) and 'To both Houses of Parliament' (2 November 1660), calling for religious toleration. In 'A Faithful Warning, with Good Advice' (7 January [1661]), he protested against incarcerating the innocent, the conspiracy of priests and people against God's annointed, and charges that Quakers were plotters. England's rulers, he argued, should be nursing fathers to Zion, and should bury revenge in 'the grave of Eternal forgetfulness' ('Faithful Warning', 6). By 2 February he was in the Lincoln town prison, where he composed 'A Loving Invitation, and a Faithful Warning to All People', complaining that innocency was now a crime and warning of imminent divine vengeance. Reflecting the Quakers' belief in the pre-eminence of spirit over word, he averred that recourse to the 'Bible' could not save England; 10,000 bibles were nothing without Christ's presence. Dutch and German translations of the tract appeared the same year. From his prison cell he issued another work on 18 February, 'Innocence Cleared', defending the Friends' right to meet for worship, denouncing oaths, and espousing a view of government limited to preserving peace and curtailing wickedness. When the validity of a Quaker marriage was challenged in Nottinghamshire ('Ashwell v. Theaker') Mason wrote to two judges of assize on 2 August 1661, arguing that refusal to recognize Quaker matrimony would undermine religion, make Quakers fornicators, and bastardize their children; the verdict upheld Quaker marriage. Mason joined John Whitehead in September 1662 in an appeal to bishops to reform themselves, their clergy and ecclesiastical courts, their parishioners, and their worship; restrained in tone, 'An Expostulation with the Bishops' politely explained why Friends could not in good conscience belong to the Church of England. Two months later, writing against the background of Charles's proposed indulgence, Mason addressed 'A Friendly Admonition' to Catholics, urging them to repudiate compulsion as an instrument of religion. 
Imprisoned again by 20 March 1665, Mason published meditations entitled 'One Mite More Cast into God's Treasury' (1665), condemning professional clergy and persecutors, and depicting Quakers as a handful of harmless people. Increasingly attracted to poetry, Mason completed a broadside in verse on 1 May 1665, 'Love and Good-Will to All', cautioning his adversaries that they strove against God, not the Friends. Physically ill, he consulted with the German physician Albertus Otto Faber in 1666-8, obtaining relief. By April 1669 he was again in the Lincoln prison; he was released by the royal pardon of September 1672. Among his fellow Quaker correspondents were Rebecca Travers (February 1671) and John Pennyman (April 1669). Mason's last published work was a tribute in verse to John Perrot, written on 17 October 1676 and printed on the back of the title-page of 'The Vision of John Perrot' (1682). Perrot had challenged Fox's authority by claiming to have had a divine revelation against men removing their hats during prayer; for this, Fox accused him of destroying Quaker unity. Mason admired Perrot, and, like George Whitehead, espoused a moderate position on wearing hats during prayer, deeming the issue inconsequential. Mason saluted the spiritual power in Perrot's works: '
In Shilohs Holy Ink thy Learned Pen 

Was dipt, which Ravished the Sons of Men. 
('Vision of John Perrot')' The date of Mason's death is unknown. He was apparently survived by his son, Martin, who was married in Lincoln on 29 July 1679. His daughter, Abigail, was interred in the Quakers' burial-ground in Lincoln on 4 April 1658. 


@@@@@


doc= 18288


Mason, Robert (1579-1635), lawyer and politician, was the son of Stephen Mason of Kingsclere, Hampshire. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 26 February 1592, was called to the bar in 1617 and made a bencher of Lincoln's Inn in 1633. Mason married twice: his first wife was Edith, daughter of John Foyle of Dorset, and his second Hester, daughter of Edward Richards of Yaverland on the Isle of Wight. 
Mason was the author of 'Reasons Monarchie' (1602), a work on the nature of reason, dedicated to Sir John Popham, chief justice of king's bench, which ends with some verses entitled 'The Minds Priviledge'. In 1605 he published 'Reasons Academie', at the end of which are some verses entitled 'Reasons Moan', attributed to Sir John Davies. The book was reprinted in 1609 under the title 'A Mirrour for Merchants with an Exact Table to Discover the Excessive Taking of Usurie'. In 1616 Mason was secondary of the Poultry Compter prison in London, but for most of his career his main offices lay in his home county, where he served as steward and recorder of Basingstoke from 1624, recorder of Winchester from 1628, and recorder of Southampton from 1633. He acted as legal counsel to Winchester Cathedral and to the earl of Southampton (to the latter he also lent money). In 1627 he received a commission of oyer and terminer for Southampton, renewed in 1635. 
Mason's parliamentary career began in 1626 with his return for Ludgershall, Wiltshire, contested and upheld in a by-election. He supported the Commons in their proceedings against George Villiers, duke of Buckingham, together with Sir Benjamin Rudyerd assisting Mr Herbert in the delivery of the impeachment charges to the Lords on 3 May, and later motioning for the commitment of the duke. On 17 May, following the imprisonment of Sir John Eliot and Sir Dudley Digges for their speeches at a joint conference, Mason spoke eloquently of the privileges of parliament men, noting that 'We sit not here as private men but as public vessel[s] for the commonwealth's service' (Bidwell and Jansson, 3.271). In 1628 he was returned for Winchester. His parliamentary maturity is apparent by 1628. He spoke frequently and assisted at several conferences related to the drafting of the petition of right. Arguing passionately against the use of martial law in peacetime, against unparliamentary taxation, and for cause to be shown on warrants he said 'We sit here not only to take men out of jail but to keep them free' (Johnson and others, 3.188). His speeches are masterpieces of legalese honed and shaped for fellow lawyers. While serving in the Commons he was counsel for Sir Simeon Steward and in 1629 defended Sir John Eliot in his case against the crown. Throughout the early 1630s there is little evidence of the pattern of his career. He was greatly respected by Attorney-General Noy and in 1634, in the heat of the ship-money controversy, the king appointed him recorder of London. In that capacity he was ordered by the council to appear before them regularly with an account of London moneys raised for ships. His term as recorder was short but the judge Sir Richard Hutton wrote that Mason was a good recorder, and a man of great intelligence whose death would be lamented ('Diary', 106). Mason died in London on 20 December 1635 and was buried in Winchester Cathedral on 6 January 1636. His contribution to the 'Perfect Conveyancer, or, Several Select and Choice Presidents Collected by Four Sages of the Law, Ed. Hendon, Robert Mason, Will. Noy, and Henry Fleetwood', was published posthumously in London in 1650. 
Mason is not to be confused with two namesakes. Confusingly, Robert Mason ('b'. 1570/71) of Shropshire also entered Lincoln's Inn in the 1590s; following his matriculation at Balliol College, Oxford, in 1591, he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 8 October 1597. 


@@@@@


doc= 18289


Robert Mason (1589/90-1662), civil lawyer, was the son of George Mason of Greenwich, Kent, formerly of Keighley, Yorkshire, and his wife, Barbara, daughter of John Parkins of Flintshire. He was admitted a scholar of St John's College, Cambridge, in 1606, graduating BA in 1610 and proceeding MA in 1613; his MA degree was incorporated at Oxford in 1617. He was a fellow of his college from 1610 to 1632 and senior proctor of Cambridge University in 1619-20. In the early 1620s he became associated with the duke of Buckingham, possibly through his cousin, John Mason, and was appointed one of the duke's secretaries, spending time in France from May 1624. In 1626 Mason was actively involved in Buckingham's election as chancellor of the University of Cambridge. In 1626 he contested the parliamentary seat of Ludgershall, Wiltshire, but a close contest and a double return were followed by Mason withdrawing his candidacy when the election was re-run. He served as Buckingham's secretary on the expedition to the Ile de Re the following year. His fidelity to the duke was rewarded by a legacy of $500 in Buckingham's will and his creation as LLD by royal mandate in 1628. In 1629 he was granted full admission to Doctors' Commons. He subsequently held positions in the ecclesiastical and admiralty courts. He served as chancellor of the diocese of Winchester from 1628 until the civil war and as commissary of the archdeaconries of Surrey and Winchester. At the Restoration he was restored to Winchester and also became chancellor of the diocese of Rochester. He served on the admiralty courts in London and Hampshire and was a commissioner for piracy in both places. He was appointed a master of requests in 1640, in which year he moved from Doctors' Commons to Whitehall. On 11 July 1633 he married Judith, daughter of Sir Christopher Buckle of Great Burgh, Banstead, Surrey; the couple had six sons and five daughters. He died of apoplexy at Bath in 1662 and was buried in Bath Abbey on 27 June of that year; his monument (now lost) gave his age at death as seventy-three. Mason, who was survived by his wife, left his library to St John's College, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 18290


Mason, Thomas (1579/80-1649?), Church of England clergyman and author, was born in Hampshire. He claimed to be the grandson of Sir John Mason (c.1503-1566), sometime member of Queen Elizabeth's privy council. He matriculated from Magdalen College, Oxford, on 29 October 1594, aged fourteen, graduated BA on 13 December 1602, and proceeded MA on 12 June 1605. The lengthy gap between the matriculation and the first degree has led some scholars, including Bertha Porter in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', to conclude that the Mason who matriculated and the Mason who collected the degrees were distinct individuals. A fellow of the college between 1603 and 1614, Mason took his BD on 1 December 1613 and was awarded his doctorate the following 18 May. 
Mason acquired two Hampshire vicarages, Newton Valence in 1606, and Odiham in 1614. From Odiham he signed the preface to 'Christ's Victorie over Sathans Tyrannie' (1615), addressed to Sir Edmund Coke and Archbishop Abbot, in which he described himself as 'your daily and faithful orator, being a professed soldier under Christ's banner'. In his epistle to the reader, it was estimated on the basis of biblical prophecies that there remained 'about 46 years to come until God shall call together the kings of the earth to destroy Rome'. In the meantime, however, a Thomas Mason acquired the rectories of Littleton, Middlesex, on 26 October 1616, North Waltham, Hampshire, in 1623, and Weyhill, Hampshire, in 1624. Mason was resident at Odiham when signing 'A Revelation of the Revelation... whereby the Pope is most Plainely Declared and Proved to be Antichrist', in 1619. Mason was deprived of Odiham in that year. 
Mason's later career is difficult to trace, given that there may have been two Masons: a second Mason graduated DD in 1631 from Magdalen College, Oxford, and some of the events following may not belong to the man who was vicar of Odiham. On 25 August 1624, Mason was collated to the Salisbury prebend of Alton Australis (South Alton), and on 7 October 1626 he was elected as the next canon residentiary of Salisbury when a vacancy should arise. However, when the time came another prebend, Humphrey Henchman, was on 28 May 1633 admitted to residence at the request of the dean, Edmund Mason. Thomas Mason and another pre-elected canon, Matthew Nicholas, decided to contest the admission. After a long and complex wrangle, which takes up much space in the state papers of 1633-4, and in which King Charles himself was involved, Henchman's appointment was confirmed, but Mason and Nicholas were to have the next two vacant places. Mason was still in occupation of South Alton on 6 May 1634 but was in residence at the chapter house by 20 November. 
In 1646 Mason was ejected by the Wiltshire county committee from his residence; he was charged with having used the rents of the dean and chapter to support the royalist cause. It was alleged that when parliamentarian forces were in Salisbury he refused to preach. Refusing the solemn league and covenant, Mason responded that he would stand for the 'Book of Common Prayer' until the day of his death, comparing the parliamentarian cause with the rebellion of Absalom. Thomas Mason, rector of Weyhill, died on 7 November 1649 and was buried at Weyhill. His will was proved on 5 May 1655 by his widow, Elizabeth. 


@@@@@


doc= 18292


Mason, William (d. 1719?), stenographer and writing-master, is of unknown origins. He wrote that from his youth he 'delighted in the Art of Short-Hand' (W. Mason, 'La plume volante', 1707, 'To the reader'). In 1736 it was noted, 'As for Mr. Mason he has obtained a very great Reputation in the world (and that deservedly) as a short-hand writer' (Gibbs, 51). Mason's shorthand system may be described as a perpetual work-in-progress. For a half century he taught and made radical modifications to his system, which was originally based, as Mason acknowledged, on that of Jeremiah Rich (more accurately called the William Cartwright-Jeremiah Rich system). 
In 1672, 'to delight the Ingenious, and to encourage the Industrious', Mason published his first shorthand treatise, 'A Pen Pluck'd from an Eagles Wing'. The alphabet contained nineteen of Rich's characters; by contrast, the alphabet of his second treatise, 'Arts Advancement' (1682), contained only six. Elaborately engraved, 'Arts Advancement', which sold for only a shilling, had ornamental borders with a bird's feather and quill pen motif and a handsome oval portrait of Mason by Benjamin Rhodes. Both works were among the shorthand books in the library of Samuel Pepys. Even fewer echoes of Rich's system were found in Mason's last and most influential treatise, 'La plume volante' (1707), from which he had taught in manuscript from about 1692. All three versions of Mason's system had subsequent editions, and Mason also published broadsheet learning aids to accompany his texts. 'La plume volante' also offers an insight into Mason's personal life, of which few details were known until recent research. The volume includes a poem, 'To William Mason on his Excellent Short-hand', by Joseph Stennett, who was from 1690 pastor of the Pinner's Hall Seventh Day Baptist church in Old Broad Street, London. 'La plume volante' also includes Mason's definition 'Seventh day (is the) sabbath', which indicates that he too was a Seventh Day Baptist. Record books for Pinner's Hall (1686) refer to a William and Jane Mason (the only Masons listed in the books), and entries for 1689 identify Jane as Mason's wife. This Jane, who appears to have been the stenographer's wife, died on 27 January 1718, when she and William Mason were resident in Lombard Street, All Hallows parish. Mason is mentioned frequently in the Pinner Hall records and it may be that he was the William Mason arrested with twenty-six fellow sabbatarians at the Bell Lane church in 1671. B. S. Capp, for one, has suggested that the Mason arrested at Bell Lane (and then described as an upholsterer) was the person who appears in the Pinner Hall records. 
A self-described teacher of 'Fair-Writing, Arithmetick, Merchants Accompts, and Short-Hand' ('Aurea clavis', 1695, 'Advertisement'), Mason was also 'very famous, in writing many things in a little Compass' (Turner, pt 3, chap. 13, p. 26), a reference to his skill in miniature writing. Indeed, John Bagford claimed that he 'graved in the Compass of an Heart the number of Letters, words, Chapters and verses in the 'Bible'' (Heal, 73). In 'Arts Advancement' Mason announced his intention to engrave and print the entire 'Bible' in 'Character' (i.e. shorthand -- a task evidently never completed) and also wrote a collection of aphorisms. His name appeared among the recommenders of the 1678 and 1700 editions of Edward Cocker's 'Cocker's Arithmetick'. 
In the tradition of the great seventeenth-century writing-masters, Mason was a keen advertiser and promoter of both his personal qualifications and his very moderately priced books. A successful teacher who emphasized his many years' experience, Mason boarded pupils and advertised that he would instruct students at convenient hours in their own houses. On 27 August 1700 the 'Post Man' announced the removal of Mr Mason's academy the Hand and Pen (previously in Prince's Court, Lothbury, and in Talbot Court and Bell Yard off Gracechurch Street) to Scalding Alley 'over against Stocks Market' near the Royal Exchange. As late as 1716, Mason advertised his services: 'William Mason, designs to teach [shorthand] twice a Week at his very next Door, being Leaden-Hall Coffee House in Leaden-Hall Street, where is a Room for that Purpose, called the Stenographical Club Room, to teach in ['sic'] Monday and Thursday Evenings, for two Hours together, at such Times as all may agree to, for One Shilling a Week... where all will receive ample Satisfaction. ('Monthly Catalogue', November 1716)' In the previous year the Pinner Hall record books recorded that William Mason (most probably the stenographer) had held a meeting for the church at his house. Membership lists for the church also show that this William Mason died on 3 September 1719 in Carolina (Glass, 264). The likelihood that Mason died in this year, and was the person listed in the Pinner Hall records, is strengthened by the fact that by 1719 his pupil Joseph Smith was the instructor at the Hand and Pen. 
Mason's 'La plume volante' 'shaped the destiny of shorthand reporting' (Butler, 40), for it was adapted and published by Thomas Gurney, official shorthand writer to the Old Bailey (T. Gurney, 'Brachygraphy', 1750; eighteen editions by 1884), who maintained what amounted to a rigid copyright. Through the medium of Gurney and his stenographic family, Mason's system profoundly influenced the use and status of shorthand in the eighteenth-century law courts and continued in use well into the nineteenth century. The 'secret diaries' of William Byrd of Westover, Virginia, who may have studied with Mason while Byrd was a student in London, are written in Mason's system. Mason is now generally regarded as one of the greatest stenographers of the seventeenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 18293


Mason, William (1725-1797), poet and garden designer, was born on 12 February 1725 at Holy Trinity Church vicarage, Vicar Lane, Kingston upon Hull, the only son of the Revd William Mason (1694-1753), incumbent of Holy Trinity from 1722 to 1753, and his first wife, Mary Wild (died 1725). He was baptized at his father's church on 11 March 1725. His mother died before he was a year old, and was buried at Holy Trinity on 26 December 1725; his father remarried twice. Mason's ancestors had included locally important merchants, civic and ecclesiastical officials. His great-grandfather Robert (died 1718) had been successively sheriff (1675) and mayor (1681 and 1696) of Hull, and his grandfather Hugh was controller of the customs at the port of Hull from 1696 and patron of the church livings at Sutton-on-Hull as well as Thorp Brantingham. 
Mason's family was staunchly whig, with some antiquarian interests, well connected, and considerably influenced his life's direction. Mason was distantly related to his first patron, Robert D'Arcy, fourth earl of Holdernesse (1718-1778), secretary of state for the north from 1751 to 1761. Matthew Hutton, archbishop of York from 1747 to 1757, and later of Canterbury, gave Mason his first church preferment, the prebend of Holme, at York Minster in 1757. His brother John Hutton left Mason a considerable landed estate at Marske, North Riding of Yorkshire, in 1768, said to be worth $1500 in rents (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 2.241), which gave him the financial independence to abandon church ambitions, and to pursue his artistic and political projects. 
Mason's father exercised influence over his early development in religion, politics, poetry, and painting, as acknowledged in a 1746 poem 'To the Author's Father' (Mason, 'Works', 1.172-5). Mason began his formal education at the nearby Hull grammar school, thus literally following in the footsteps of Andrew Marvell, whom he greatly admired. His teachers there included John Clarke (1687-1734), an advocate of Locke's educational ideas, and John Blyth (1708-1762). Mason lived with his father and stepmothers until he went to St John's College, Cambridge, being admitted on 1 July 1742. He graduated BA in 1746, MA in 1749 at Pembroke College, and was a fellow of the latter college from 1749 to 1759. He grew to prefer the social life of Cambridge and London, and then Aston's rural retreat, to Hull's bustle and pollution. His native town, and the Humber shoreline are, however, glimpsed in works throughout his career, such as the 'Ode to Independency' (ibid., 1.38-41), his tribute to Marvell, and 'On Expecting to Return to Cambridge' (1747): '
Commerce, riding on thy refluent tide, 

Impetuous HUMBER! Wafts her stores 

From Belgian or Norwegian shores 

And spreads her countless sails from side to side. 

' The death of his childhood friend Marmaduke Prickett MD (1724-1753) on 18 September 1753 (F. F. Prickett, 'The Pricketts of Allerthorpe', 1929, 72), only weeks after losing his father, was a turning point; from then on he was only an occasional visitor to Hull, usually on family business. 
His father's death, on 26 August 1753, deprived Mason of a paternal allowance, leaving him with only a fellowship of $100 per year, and the will excluded Mason completely, leaving the estate to his father's third wife and their daughter. Mason's career as a Cambridge fellow and promising young writer was thus interrupted; these financial implications virtually obliged him to enter the church -- which was perhaps his father's intention. After a period of indecision lasting more than a year, during which he served as private secretary to Lord Holdernesse, Mason was ordained deacon on 17 November 1754 in St Margaret's, Westminster, made a priest a week later, and was then presented by Holdernesse on 27 November 1754 to the living of Aston, West Riding of Yorkshire, where he remained rector for forty-three years. For some years until his 1768 inheritance Mason actively pursued preferment, holding five church offices by 1777. Through the duke of Devonshire, he was made a royal chaplain in 1757, relinquishing the post in 1772. His most significant post was as precentor of York Minster, held for thirty-five years from 1762, in which his activities, compositions, and writings affected the development of provincial church music (see N. Temperley, 'Jonathan Gray and church music in York, 1770-1840', 'Borthwick Papers', 51, University of York, 1977, 7-8). 
Entry into the church vitally affected the kind of writer Mason was to become, giving much of his work a tone, varying from piousness to bombast, Miltonic romance to sentiment, which rendered it highly fashionable to a contemporary audience, and increasingly unacceptable to subsequent Romantic and modern tastes. The church provided him with a framework for his life and polymathic activities in poetry, music, antiquities, gardening, art, politics, and a rich social life. He became a man of letters, but 'never was an author for bread. The aim of all his writings was to dignify the poetic art' (Coleridge, 454). He was 'as a man, as a poet, as a politician, and as a divine... highly respectable' (ibid., 397), and adopted anonymity, and later a pseudonym, Malcolm MacGreggor, when publishing his satires, most famously 'An Heroic Epistle to Sir William Chambers' (1773). 
At Cambridge, Mason sought out a series of older men who became his mentors and friends: firstly, his tutors William Powell and Thomas Balguy, then his lifelong friends Thomas Gray, William Whitehead, Richard Stonhewer, and Richard Hurd. Another important influence was William Warburton (1698-1779), bishop of Gloucester, who, as the friend and literary executor of Alexander Pope, offered Mason an example of combining the ecclesiastical and literary life. Much of his early verse was written to impress or memorialize these and other friends, notably in 'Odes' (1756) and 'Elegies' (1763). At Pembroke College, Gray and Mason were regarded as being at the head of the university's 'polite scholars', who 'confined all merit to their own circle' and 'looked down with fastidious contempt on the rest of the world' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 5.613). Perhaps too much emphasis has been placed on Gray's very early view of Mason as having 'much Fancy, little Judgement, and a good deal of Modesty... he reads little or nothing, writes abundance, & that with a Design to make his Fortune by it' (Mitford, 195). 
Mason's first works were imitations of Milton, written as an undergraduate in 1744 (Mason, 'Works', 1.158-65, 166-71) and his first widely praised poem was 'Musaeus: a Monody to the Memory of Mr Pope, in Imitation of Milton's Lycidas' (ibid., 3-15), which brought him to the attention of Gray. Mason's 'Ode for Music' was performed in the Senate House at Cambridge on 1 July 1749 at the installation of the duke of Newcastle as chancellor of the university, set to music by William Boyce, master of the king's music. Hurd and Gray were at this time close advisers, though Mason by no means always accepted their views: for instance, Mason's use of a chorus in his dramatic poem 'Elfrida' (1752), written 'on the model of the ancient Greek tragedy', was much against Gray's advice. This experiment was continued by 'Caractacus' (1759), described by Warburton as 'a prodigiously fine thing, vastly above 'Elfrida'' (E. H. Pearce and L. Whibley, eds., 'The Correspondence of Richard Hurd and William Mason', 30 Nov 1757). Both were successfully adapted for the London stage during the 1770s. Mason's most historically significant work, 'The Poems of Mr Gray, to which are Prefixed Memoirs of his Life and Writings' (1775) was in essence to establish the rank of Gray's reputation, and, using Gray's entertainingly waspish letters to his friends in censored, sometimes bowdlerized forms, it succeeded. The format -- five sections of letters interspersed with biographical commentary, leading to an edition of Gray's poems -- was innovative, and is credited with introducing the 'life and letters' mode to biography. Its plan was taken up by Boswell's 'Life of Johnson' (1791) and by a host of nineteenth-century imitators. 
Mason's work also had consequences for copyright law: his successful lawsuit in 1777 against the Scottish bookseller John Murray for having reprinted fifty lines by Gray from the memoirs without his permission, greatly extended the rights of authors. Murray had wanted to settle out of court, and then issued a virulent 'Letter to W. Mason' (May 1777), impugning his motives, but it was pursued by Mason as an important test case. Mason's own poetry was often criticized by contemporary critics for its rhetorical flourishes, and over-fondness for alliteration, but he was a fashionable author, satirized by Churchill in 'The Rosciad' (1762), by Charles Lloyd and George Colman in their 'Odes to Obscurity and Oblivion' (1760), and especially condemned by Dr Johnson who became his favourite enemy. 
On 25 September 1765 Mason was married at St Mary's, Lowgate, Hull, to Mary Sherman ('c'.1738-1767), daughter of William Sherman, the local garrison storekeeper. On 27 March 1767 she died of consumption (tuberculosis) at Bristol Hot Wells (now Clifton) where she had been taken for the waters, and was buried at Bristol Cathedral, with a pious but moving epitaph by her husband, which is still to be seen there: 'Take, Holy Earth, all that my soul holds dear'. It was singled out by Wordsworth in his 'Essay on epitaphs' (3, 1810, 82-3; 'Prose Works of William Wordsworth', ed. W. Owen and J. Smyser, 2, 1974). 
Mason did not have a unified identity. The highly respected author of odes, elegies, epitaphs, dramatic poems, and epic blank verse was at the same time the subversive satirist Malcolm MacGreggor. One side of his work is 'correct', informed by history, romance, religion, and sentiment; the other is informed by virulent political and personal attacks. He has been often stigmatized as a dilettante: conventional, pious, monotonously high-flown, a dull imitator of Gray and Milton. But he was an undeniably restless literary experimenter. He can be seen as a vital transitional figure between the late Augustan and Romantic modes, by way of the picturesque. This is most obvious in his 'magnum opus', 'The English Garden' (4 books, 1772-81), over 2400 lines of blank verse based on Virgil's 'Georgics', a didactic poem concerning landscape, art, and gardening -- with an occasional vein of romanticized autobiography. Mason started out as a very ornamental, 'Parnassian' poet and evolved towards the much more natural language of his satires and the birthday sonnets of his last years. His student imitations of Milton, Chaucer, and Spenser in 'Musaeus' (written 1744, published 1747) were already moving away from the dominant Augustan modes. With Gray and Hurd, Mason shared an antiquarian interest in the British Muse, in its Anglo-Saxon, Scandinavian, and especially Celtic sources (see his commonplace book, York Minster Archives, Add. MS 25). Mason concluded his writing with a series of birthday sonnets during the 1790s, a lengthy exposition of his faith, 'Religio clerici', and a versification of a chapter in the book of 'Job', sent to Hurd a few days before his fatal accident. 
Gardening, like politics, formed both a subject for Mason's writing and a sphere of practical activity. His two major poems, 'An Heroic Epistle to Sir William Chambers' (1773), which ridicules the royal taste for chinoiserie, especially at Kew Gardens, and 'The English Garden', both deal with garden history and aesthetics, albeit in radically different manners. Mason frequented the houses and estates of his friends and patrons throughout his life, and designed several flower gardens for them, notably for Hurd at Thurcaston in Leicestershire; for Lord Jersey at Middleton Park; and most spectacularly for Lord Harcourt at Nuneham Courtenay, Oxfordshire. Mason believed in hybrid arts, '
Those magic seeds of fancy, which produce 

A Poet's feeling, and a Painter's eye. 
('English Garden', 1.20-21)' He absorbed some of his garden tastes from an early love of poetry, but had more practically seen the work of William Kent, and Launcelot 'Capability' Brown (1715-1783) whose epitaph at Fenstanton church, Suffolk, Mason later wrote (Mason, 'Works', 1.143). Mason's gardens were themselves very literary, with classical and modern busts, memorials, and verse inscriptions taken from Milton, Marvell, Gray, and Rousseau, to give a melancholy, sentimental atmosphere; his gardens were to be places of spiritual refreshment and aesthetic contemplation. 
Mason's horticultural masterpiece was for George Simon (1736-1809), Lord Nuneham until 1778, thereafter second Earl Harcourt. The walled garden was created in 1772-3, improved in 1784, and was regarded by visitors for generations as one of the most beautiful in Britain. It is the only one of Mason's gardens which still survives, having been restored in the 1970s. Mason created a series of points of interest in the picturesque manner (later more associated with his friend William Gilpin), and irregularly shaped flower beds containing wild, native, and imported flowers. The gently sloping ground was covered with patches of flowers including roses, lupins, tulips, hollyhocks, and sweet-scented mignonette; and trailing garlands of clematis, bryony, and creepers draped the surrounding trees, in imitation of Julie's garden in Rousseau's 'La nouvelle Heloise' (1760). Mason describes it in the fourth book of 'The English Garden', with Lord Harcourt as 'Alcander'. Mason's gardening style became fashionable, inspiring numerous imitators, and Queen Charlotte wanted a Mason garden for Frogmore, Windsor. Mason's gardening has been seen as his most original cultural contribution: the informal flower garden was without precedent (see Batey, 11-25). 
Mason spent much of his adult life in opposition to the government of the day -- to the policies of Lord Bute, and Lord North during the American war in particular. Mason's major political involvements were with the Yorkshire Association, and he was particularly active during the 1780 and 1784 general elections, being Christopher Wyvill's deputy from 1779 to 1785, and with the anti-slavery campaign. His whig politics affected both his personal and literary relations: the mutual antipathy between him and the tory Dr Johnson had a political as well as a personal element. In his satires tory ministers, pensioners, and placemen were ruthlessly pursued; but Charles James Fox also suffered: the 'Heroic Epistle' ends with the inveterate gambler being seized by Jewish moneylenders and circumcised in public (P. J. Toynbee, 'Satirical Poems Published... by William Mason', 1926, 52). Eventually disillusioned by the infighting of whig politicians, and their failure to deliver even moderate reforms, Mason switched his allegiance in 1784 to the young William Pitt, as the best hope for parliamentary reform and for the abolition of slavery, a decision which cost him friends, notably Horace Walpole (Walpole, 'Corr.', 29.xxviii). Mason was a friend of William Wilberforce, and of Beilby Porteous, bishop of London, and was himself one of the earliest abolitionists. His sermon 'God the universal and equal father of all mankind', delivered in York Minster on 27 January 1788, was widely circulated. Perhaps to annoy his tory archbishop William Markham, he baptized a young American black man, Benjamin Moor, in the minster on 11 May 1777 ('Yorkshire Archaeological and Topographical Journal', 6, 1881, 393). Mason's social and charitable concerns stretched widely, to include the treatment of prisoners and lunatics in York (see A. Digby, 'From York Lunatic Asylum to Bootham Park Hospital', 'Borthwick Papers', 69, University of York, 1986, 8-10). 
Mason knew, observed, and sometimes collaborated with, leading composers and performers -- Boyce, Giardini, and Avison -- and was a friend of Charles Burney. Thomas Arne composed the incidental music for Mason's dramatic poems 'Elfrida' and 'Caractacus' when they were adapted for the stage in 1772 and 1776 respectively. Mason was an accomplished amateur musician, playing several keyboard instruments, and had strong progressive views about both cathedral and parochial music (Mason, 'Essays on English Church Music', 1795; and see 'MT', 114, 1973, 894). He concerned himself with the state of church music in practical ways and in his essay 'On parochial psalmody' he criticized the habit of leaving the choice and conduct of metrical psalms to the parish clerk, and the music in the hands of a self-appointed choir and band. He also criticized many of the verse translations in use, and proposed using a 'judicious selection' of passages from the metrical psalms; Mason advocated unison singing in which all could easily join, with the accompaniment of an organ or barrel organ and tunes to be sung faster and more rhythmically. Congregational devotion through music had been his aim. Mason's best-known anthem was 'Lord of all pow'r and might', which was sung in the Chapel Royal, Windsor, and in York Minster. In 1782 he published 'A Copious Collection of those Portions of the Psalms of David... which have been Set to Music and Sung as Anthems... and Published for the Use of the Church of York'. He introduced a new form of the piano to Britain, actually a combination harpsichord-pianoforte, which he brought back from Hamburg, Germany, in 1755 and is said to have popularized at court. He invented the celestinette, which according to his friend Mrs Delany had 'a delicate, exquisite sound, something between a fiddle and the musical glasses' (Barr and Ingamells, 18). 
Mason had a squint in his right eye, giving him a roguish leer somewhat at odds with his cultivated manners and priestly duties. In maturity he was a stout, short man; his voice was said to incline towards a nasal whine. He could be disputatious, but on a visit to Aston in 1788, the poet Richard Polwhele found 'a kind of sedate benignity in his countenance' (R. Polwhele, 'Traditions and Recollections', 1826, 2.217). Sarah Siddons recorded that Mason 'spoke broad Yorkshire, and good-naturedly allowed us to accuse him of affectation in so doing', adding that 'he was a great humorist, but with all his oddities, a benevolent man' (P. Fitzgerald, 'The Kembles', 2 vols., 1871, 1.252-3). 
On Friday 31 March 1797 Mason fell and injured his leg while entering his carriage. The wound became inflamed over the weekend and his curate reported: 'Mr Mason was suddenly seized with a violent shivering fit & never spoke afterwards... It seemed as if his whole frame had given way at once; for the malady was so rapid that he died the day following [Wednesday 5 April 1797] at two in the afternoon. (Brunskill to William Gilpin, Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. Misc. d.571)' He had died at his rectory in Aston, and was buried at All Saints Church, Aston, on 11 April. Among the obituaries of Mason which appeared, that in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (April 1797) praised him, but in ways which presaged subsequent attitudes through the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries: 'Mr Mason was an acknowledged scholar, and possessed high claims to a considerable degree of poetical reputation. All that could be gathered from the Greek and Roman stores certainly contributed to embellish his mind, but it may be reasonably questioned whether it was enriched by great share of original genius. ('GM', 359)' Accounts of Mason's life and works appeared in books such as Hartley Coleridge's 'Worthies of Yorkshire and Lancashire' (1836, 397-462), and R. W. Corlass's 'Sketches of Hull Authors' (1879, 54-63) viewed him as a respected if old fashioned figure. Coleridge called Mason 'the most considerable Yorkshire poet since Marvell', adding that, 'With the great poets in any department of poetry, Mason cannot be numbered. Yet he was, for many years of his life, England's greatest living poet' (Coleridge, 462). Later critics, Edmund Gosse and Leslie Stephen in particular, severely deprecated Mason's silent mutilation of Gray's letters -- and this proved an essential element in the radical downgrading of his reputation. Stephen reached the damning verdict that Mason 'mistook himself for a poet... his serious attempts at poetry are rather vapid performances' ('DNB'). George Saintsbury dismissed him as 'one of the paltriest and most pretentious poetasters who ever trespassed on the English Parnassus' (Saintsbury, 'A History of English Prosody', 2, 1910, 518). 
Most twentieth-century critical attention has found Mason 'typical' of his class and era, an imitator of Milton and Gray, notably J. W. Draper in his 'William Mason: a Study in Eighteenth-Century Culture' (1924). The only significant publication of Mason's works in the twentieth century was an edition of his satirical poems (Oxford, 1926), edited by Paget Toynbee, with notes by Horace Walpole written in 1779. There is evidence that interest in Mason has revived in recent decades, certainly in his gardening, and also in his combative role in the political and aesthetic debates of his time. A wide-ranging exhibition of Masoniana, including portraits, manuscripts, and first editions, was held in York Art Gallery and York Minster Library from 16 June to 15 July 1973, organized by Bernard Barr and John Ingamells. A one-day conference to mark the bicentenary of Mason's death was held at the King's Manor, York, under the auspices of the Yorkshire Gardens Trust, on 24 July 1997. 
Mason was one of the most famous, fashionable -- and most often satirized -- poets of his era. He wrote one of the best-selling poems of the eighteenth century, the 'Heroic Epistle', and critically influenced another, Gray's 'Elegy in a Country Church-Yard'. His debates with Walpole, Gray, Hurd, and later William Gilpin, were instrumental in forming the ideas of the picturesque and the Gothick, and were an important influence on the Romantic movement. Mason's polymathic activities make him one of the most comprehensive cultural figures of his age. He survives as a name in the indexes of books about his contemporaries, from Dr Johnson to Sarah Siddons, Sir Joshua Reynolds to David Garrick. His influence has been felt in the most diverse spheres. But as a poet of at least historical importance, he still awaits resurrection. 


@@@@@


doc= 18294


Mason, William Charles Monck (1775-1859), historian, was born in Dublin on 7 September 1775, the eldest son of Henry Monck Mason, colonel of engineers. His mother, Jane, Henry Mason's second wife, was a daughter of Dr Bartholomew Mosse (1712-1759), founder of the Dublin Lying-in Hospital. Henry Joseph Monck Mason, writer, was William's brother. He was an uncle of George Henry Monck Mason (1825-1857). Mason's father held an office in the household of the lord lieutenant as well as the post of 'land waiter for exports' in the revenue department at Dublin. When Mason was twenty-one, in 1796, he succeeded to the land-waitership. Throughout his life Mason worked on the history and topography of Ireland; he collected rare books and manuscripts, and transcribed many documents. His ambition was to produce a topographical account of Ireland similar to Samuel and Daniel Lysons's 'Magna Britannia' (1806-22) and George Chalmers's 'Caledonia' (1807-24). The intended title was 'Hibernia antiqua et hodierna: being a topographical account of Ireland, and a history of all the establishments in that kingdom, ecclesiastical, civil, and monastick, drawn chiefly from sources of original record'. The first part, published in 1819, was devoted to the history of St Patrick's Cathedral. More than one third of the book was taken up by a biography of Jonathan Swift. It remains an important source for the history of Dublin. Mason hoped to publish a companion volume on Christ Church, Dublin, but although engravings were prepared under his direction, the work was not printed. 
In 1823 Mason issued a prospectus for a history of the city and county of Dublin, hoping to revise the work of historians such as Walter Harris, but subscriptions were not forthcoming. The plan was abandoned, and Mason's manuscript collections for it remained unrevised and unsorted. His excerpts from Dublin municipal archives were superseded by J. T. Gilbert's publication of the calendars of the ancient records of Dublin. 
About 1826 Mason left Ireland for the continent, having been granted a government pension on the abolition of his office in the revenue department at Dublin. During his travels and residence abroad he collected many valuable works on continental literature and the fine arts; these were auctioned in London in 1834-7. Mason moved to England in 1848, and devoted himself mainly to the study of philology. Once again he formed a very large library, which he sold at auction at Sothebys in 1852. Also at Sothebys in 1858 he sold by auction his literary collections and compositions relating to Irish history and philology. 
Mason was married, but the name of his wife is not known. He died at Surbiton Hall in Kingston upon Thames, where he had been living, on 6 March 1859. 


@@@@@


doc= 18295


Mason, William Shaw (1774-1853), statistician and bibliographer, was born in Dublin, the son of Henry Mason, described as 'publicanus' (Burtchaell & Sadleir, 'Alum. Dubl.'). He was educated, first, under a Mr Carpendale, and then at Trinity College, Dublin, to which he was admitted in 1791, graduating BA in 1796. In conjunction with two others he was appointed by patent in 1805 to the office of remembrancer or receiver of the first-fruits and twentieth parts in Ireland; to this was added in September 1810 the post of secretary to the commissioners for public records in Ireland. Sir Robert Peel, while chief secretary to the lord lieutenant of Ireland, conceived a high opinion of Mason, and encouraged him to undertake an Irish statistical work similar to that executed by Sir John Sinclair for Scotland. The first volume of Mason's publication was issued at Dublin in octavo, with maps and plates, in 1814, as 'A Statistical Account or Parochial Survey of Ireland, drawn up from the Communications of the Clergy'. The second volume appeared in 1816, and a third followed in 1819. Mason devoted much attention to the subject of the census of Ireland, and compiled a 'Survey, Valuation, and Census of the Barony of Portnahinch' in Queen's county. This was printed in 1821 in a folio volume, and submitted to George IV during his visit to Ireland as a model for a statistical survey of the whole country. Mason's annotated catalogue of the books relating to Ireland that he had collected for Peel was published as 'Bibliotheca Hibernicana' (1823). During an investigation into the integrity of the Irish records, their keeper alleged that Mason had refused him the keys on the grounds of being 'servant to the Record Commissioners, and not of the Lord Lieutenant' ('Observations', 19), and said that Mason had been threatened with dismissal by the lord chancellor. Mason died in Camden Street, Dublin, on 11 March 1853. 


@@@@@


doc= 18296


Masquerier, John James (1778-1855), painter, was born in Chelsea, London, on 5 October 1778, of French Huguenot parents. He had two elder brothers, both of whom emigrated to America; Louis (or Lewis) married in Bourbon, Kentucky, in 1798 and named his first daughter Mary Barbot (later Barbett), preserving the maiden name of his mother, who was born in 1742 or 1743. His father, Lewis Masquerier (1735/6-1803), returned with his family in 1789 to Paris, where his wife and daughter opened a school. Masquerier entered the Academie Royale as a painting student in the studio of Francois Vincent. In 1792 he made a drawing of his father (BM), who remained in Paris until his death in 1803. From the vantage point of Vincent's second-floor studio in the Palais du Louvre, Masquerier witnessed many of the unfolding events of the French Revolution. He knew Danton especially well, as he used to come and practise speaking English to the boy. After the massacres of the first reign of terror in September 1792, rumours circulated that all foreigners would be arrested. Masquerier fled to England, while his mother and sister remained in Paris. Though imprisoned, they were eventually released and continued to run the school in Paris until 1814. Masquerier enrolled at the Royal Academy Schools on 31 December 1792. He received the silver medal in 1794 and in the following year exhibited his first work in the annual exhibition, a self-portrait. In 1796 he exhibited 'The Incredulity of St Thomas', his only attempt at grand-manner history painting; thereafter he concentrated primarily on portraiture. He is said to have worked as an assistant to John Hoppner, but soon gained a clientele of his own, thanks to support from one Alexander (an MP whose portrait was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1803) and Major John Scott Waring (whose portrait he painted in 1801). 
In 1800 Masquerier returned to Paris, and was granted access through Mme Tallien to Napoleon to make drawings of him from life. On his return to London he created a composition, 'Napoleon Reviewing the Consular Guard in the Court of the Tuileries'. The work was exhibited in a house in Piccadilly in 1801 and excited intense interest as the first true likeness of the first consul seen in England. The sale of tickets reputedly brought the artist $1000, along with an accusation from 'Peter Porcupine' (William Cobbett) of acting as an enemy agent, which he refuted by the production of the register of his birth in England. 
Masquerier was again in Paris in 1802, assisting Joseph Farington and others among the many English artists who flocked to the city during the peace of Amiens. On this occasion he probably painted the portrait of Mme Tallien which he showed at the Royal Academy in 1803. The mezzotint after this portrait by William Bond published the same year reveals, aptly, a debt to David. Masquerier continued to maintain contacts with some of the leading French artists: his surviving papers include an undated invitation to visit the studio of Gerard and a letter from Girodet in 1823 expressing gratitude for numerous visits from Masquerier over the years. 
Masquerier had by now gained a particular reputation among patrons from Ireland and Scotland, but failed to establish any individual style. He fluctuated between the manner of Romney, of Hoppner, and of Lawrence; his Scottish sitters are often painted in conscious emulation of Raeburn. In 1810 he spent five months as guest of George Augustus, second marquess of Donegal, completing eleven canvases. It was, however, through his Scottish connections that he met his future wife, Rachel Scott ('nee' Forbes-Mitchell), whom he married in 1812. She was the widow of Robert Eden Scott (1770-1811), professor of moral philosophy at Aberdeen University, and descended on both her father's and her mother's side from aristocratic Scottish families. She died in 1850. Thus he came to paint the portrait of the poet James Hogg, the Ettrick Shepherd, and John McDairmid, through whom he became acquainted with many of the circle of Sir Walter Scott. His small-scale portrait of the playwright and poet Joanna Baillie seated in an interior (1831; University of Glasgow), reminiscent of the style of Francis Wheatley or perhaps of Louis Boilly, is one of his more unusual and original works. 
While his annual submissions to the Royal Academy were almost exclusively portraits, Masquerier produced occasional fancy and historical pictures for the British Institution. It was there that he showed in 1816 'Sketch of a Meeting between the Duke of Wellington and Marshal Blucher at the Belle Alliance after the Victory of Waterloo', based on a visit to the battlefield. The appearance of paintings of Italian monuments in 1819 presumably derives from a further continental visit in 1818. Masquerier painted a royal sitter only once. This was the duke of Sussex; the portrait was exhibited in 1812 and engraved by Hodgetts in 1813. Other notable sitters included Lady Hamilton in 1804 and Michael Faraday, who retained a lifelong affection for the painter. 
In 1823 Masquerier effectively retired from his practice as portrait painter, accepting commissions only from family and close friends. He moved to Brighton in 1824, but made frequent trips abroad over the next twenty-five years, often in the company of Henry Crabb Robinson. During these final years he formed a special relationship with Baroness Burdett-Coutts; it seems to have dated from 1828, when she sat for him as the duchess in 'The Lay of the Last Minstrel to the Duchess of Buccleugh' (exh. British Institution, 1828). Baroness Burdett-Coutts subsequently owned many paintings from all periods of Masquerier's career (most were sold at Christies on 4 May 1922). Masquerier died at his home, 10 Western Cottages, Brighton, on 13 March 1855, and was buried on 20 March in St Andrew's Church, Hove. 


@@@@@


doc= 18297


Massey, Sir Edward (1604x9-1674), parliamentarian and royalist army officer, was the fourth of eleven sons of John Massey of Coddington, Cheshire, and Anne ('b'. 1582), daughter of Richard Grosvenor of Eaton, Cheshire. The family were long-established minor gentry with various estates in Coddington and Bechin. Two younger brothers, George and Robert, served under Edward's command in Gloucester and he also had seven sisters. He never married. Much of the early evidence about Massey is uncertain because it derives from Clarendon, who detested him, but other sources concur that he saw military service in the Low Countries. In the bishops' wars of 1639-40 he served as a captain of pioneers under Colonel William Legge. According to a later diatribe 'hee had not 12died some time in his pockett to pay for his dinner' (Firth, 2.159). Clarendon says that he was with the king's forces in York in June 1642 but, despairing of preferment, went to London and was appointed lieutenant-colonel to the earl of Stamford's regiment. Massey himself later wrote that he had initially been uncertain when both king and parliament seemed to profess the same beliefs, but was convinced by parliament's declarations that it never intended to alter government by king, Lords, and Commons and had taken up arms to defend the king's authority and its own privileges, punish evil counsellors and restore pure worship to the church by removing superstitious practices. He remained a rigid presbyterian throughout his career, adhering equally firmly to the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, the protestation, and the covenant. 
In the autumn of 1642 Massey marched with Stamford to Gloucester, and was left behind with one regiment when Stamford continued into Devon. Although not officially appointed governor until June 1643 he worked closely from the outset with the strongly parliamentarian aldermen of the city and the local deputy lieutenants in the military government of Gloucester. When Prince Rupert sacked Cirencester on 2 February 1643 this also shattered the self-defence forces which had been raised locally before Massey's arrival and made Gloucester the sole focus of the local parliamentarian cause. From now until May 1645 Massey defended the city against a wide array of royalist commanders from within and outside the county. Although Gloucester was vital to parliament's cause Massey rarely had much practical help and the garrison became notorious for hard service and bad pay. His dashing leadership and the general belief that the defence of Gloucester was the turning point of the war brought him hagiographic treatment from the press -- notably in the account by his personal chaplain, John Corbet, which was first published in 1647. In March 1643 Massey's troops joined Waller's army and overwhelmed Lord Herbert's Welsh forces at Highnam Court, taking 1500 prisoners. They then cleared the Forest of Dean and recaptured Tewkesbury. 
Despite being worsted by Prince Maurice at Ripple Field on 12 April, Massey took Hereford in May. However, after the royalists stormed Bristol in July, Gloucester became totally isolated. Massey's conduct before the siege is the most controversial aspect of his career. Clarendon says that his former commander William Legge sent him a cordial message and that, while publicly roaring defiance, Massey intimated that he would not fight against the king in person. This swayed the debate and on 10 August the king's army appeared before the walls. Massey wrote to the Commons of his lack of men and the treacherous inclinations of the citizens. It appears that he was seeking to save his skin whatever the outcome, but in the event, he signed Gloucester's defiant answer to Charles's summons and led a sturdy defence. The royalists besieged the town until forced to retreat when the earl of Essex's army arrived on 5 September. By then the garrison was down to three barrels of powder and its numbers were shrinking rapidly. Massey was voted $1000 plus all his arrears in thanks. He probably never received either. Throughout the winter he was desperately short of men and money, and subject to constant alarums from royalists forces on all sides. He fought at least fourteen minor battles between November and April as he sought to enlarge the garrison's quarters. Finally, after a relief convoy slipped through with $8000 and large amounts of material, Massey took the offensive. In April he drove Sir John Winter's forces from the Forest of Dean and marched into Herefordshire. He then doubled back to take Beverstone Castle through the governor's treachery on 21 May, then Malmesbury and, on 4 June, Tewkesbury. With Waller's help, Sudeley Castle was reduced on 9 June. 
Just as the military situation was improving, however, Massey became embroiled in a vicious feud with most of the Gloucestershire county committee, which both sides pursued locally and through parliament over the next year. The initial focus was control of the two new regiments that were raised in the associated counties of Gloucestershire, Herefordshire, and south Wales. Massey believed that some committeemen were trying to raise Sheriff Thomas Stephens's horse under their own authority while systematically starving the regiments he controlled of pay and men. While there was an overlap in authority between Massey and the deputy lieutenants -- which he hoped to have resolved by an ordinance confirming him as governor -- this was mainly a clash of personalities. Massey's enemies included both conservatives like Isaac Bromwich and radicals like Alderman Thomas Pury and William Sheppard, later Cromwell's law reformer. He had also squabbled with his future political ally Waller over the allocation of money when both forces were in Gloucestershire. Massey's letters to the committee of both kingdoms, the Harleys and Sir Samuel Luke, which chronicled the feud throughout, are shrill, petulant, and self-pitying in tone. 
None the less, despite this and his being barely in control of the mutinous troops, Massey continued to fend off the royalists. Colonel Mynne was defeated and killed at Redmarley on 2 August, after which Massey went briefly to London to pursue his case against the committee. On his return he marched first towards Bath, then drove Langdale's Northern horse from around Corse Lawn, destroyed Winter's naval station at Beachley and took Monmouth on 24 September. Beachley had to be retaken, after being abandoned for lack of men to garrison it, on 14 October; Massey's headpiece was knocked off by a musket-butt during the assault. In November, when Massey was ordered away to Oxfordshire, Monmouth was lost again, which sparked off more bitter recriminations on both sides. Only in February 1645, when royalists trapped Stephens's forces at Rawden House, Wiltshire, and forced him to surrender, was the feud somewhat defused. In March, Massey defeated Winter at Lancaut and moved into Herefordshire. Although beaten by Rupert at Ledbury on 22 April (he later wrote that he and Rupert had shot each other's horses from under them, though neither knew it at the time), he withdrew in good order and flushed Winter out of the Forest of Dean, then stormed Evesham on 26 May. 
In the same month, after repeatedly requesting to leave Gloucester, Massey was appointed general of the western association forces. He helped in the relief of Taunton on 29 June and routed Porter's horse at Ilminster on 8 July when the royalists tried to surprise Taunton again. He took part in the battle of Langport two days later and the storming of Bridgwater on 23 July, then returned to Taunton to blockade Goring. He spent the winter reducing the few remaining royalist garrisons in the west as Fairfax swept away the field armies. His men committed major disorders in Dorset, Wiltshire, and Somerset. Massey was already a known enemy of the Independent party in parliament and the army, and some hoped to use his brigade as a counterweight to the New Model. For this reason the disbandment of his troops became a major issue after May 1646, but obstacles were continually put in the way until Fairfax finally disbanded them at Devizes in October. On 18 June 1646 Massey took his seat in the Commons as member for Wootton Bassett, Wiltshire. 
Thanks to his popularity in London and his enduring military reputation Massey rapidly became an influential figure in parliament. He was appointed lieutenant-general to command the army in Ireland on 2 April 1647, but the troops strongly opposed this. With Waller and others he vainly tried to persuade them to enlist at Saffron Walden. On 6 June he rode the streets of London urging the citizens to defend themselves against the madmen in the army who sought to put the best men in parliament and the city to death. When the army arrived on 16 June the officers laid articles of impeachment for high treason against eleven MPs, including Massey, for trying to start a new civil war. To let matters cool down, these 'eleven members' withdrew temporarily. In late July, with the presbyterians briefly in control again, he was named to the reconstituted committee of safety and as commander of the 40,000 men the city proposed to raise. However, on 3 August, London capitulated. Massey and Poyntz fled to the Netherlands from where they published a vindication, reciting their past services, justifying their withdrawal and vowing to return to settle the peace and restore the covenant to religion. Massey and his past were the subject of heated argument in the London mercuries at this time. From some of these we have the only extant descriptions of him. One says that he was 'of a sanguine complexion, of a middle age, brown trizld hair' ('A Speedy Hue and Crie after Generall Massie'), while a satirical skit attributed to Lilburne describes 'A strange fat unlickt, [s]mall-faced fellow' ('Generall Massey's Bartholomew Fairings for Collonell Poynts and the London Reformadoes'). Now, and again later, Massey was accused of amassing vast riches by extorting money from Gloucestershire royalists and embezzling moneys raised from taxation and other sources. These allegations are unproved; for his part, Massey complained that he never received the $1000 per year plus lands and iron mills voted to him from Winter's estates at various times. He was back in England by August 1648, when certain presbyterians planned to put him at the head of a body of infantry to be raised to restore Charles I. He was secluded from the Commons and imprisoned in St James's after Pride's Purge on 6 December, but on 18 January 1649 he slipped out by an open door and escaped to the Netherlands. 
Here, Clarendon was later to grouse, Massey presented himself to Charles II 'with as much confidence, and as a sufferer for the King his father, as if he had defended Colchester' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 4.467). Shortly before going abroad he penned another personal vindication, professing his fidelity to the original principles of the parliamentarian cause and calling the regicides the vilest of traitors. With the other presbyterian exiles in the Netherlands, Massey established contact with Charles II soon after Charles's return from Scotland in October 1649. His estates were consequently sequestered. In December he encountered the council of state's agent, Sir Walter Strickland, who wrote of Massey's vain attempts to dissuade locally resident members of the West India Company from taking the engagement: 'truly I have not seen a man thrust himself into a business with less advantage than he did. It seems that he had rather play at a small game than stand out' (Scrope and Monkhouse, 3.144). Massey later joined Charles II in Scotland, served as lieutenant-general of the duke of Buckingham's horse regiment and as governor of Kirkcaldy, and took part in the battle of Inverkeithing on 20 July 1651. As Charles's army marched towards Lancashire he sent Massey to rally the local presbyterian gentry. With the earl of Derby, Massey addressed a meeting at Warrington on 18 August, urging them to put past differences aside, but they found little practical support. He rejoined Charles at Stoke next day and volunteered to raise support in Worcestershire and Gloucestershire. Fighting with his customary tenacity to defend a house he had fortified near Upton Bridge, he was badly wounded in the thigh, arm and hand by 'rag-shot' on 28 August and was too ill to take any part in the battle of Worcester. Afterwards, he fled as far as Droitwich but, unable to keep up, parted from Charles and threw himself on the mercy of the countess of Stamford at Broadgate Manor, Leicestershire. Here his wounds were treated -- they were so severe that a deathbed declaration was published in his name -- but he was kept a prisoner. On 24 November Lord Grey sent him to London. He tried to escape by spurring his horse away, but was recaptured and confined in the Tower. The Rump had earlier listed him among eleven who should face trial for treason, but clemency prevailed after Derby's execution. Massey survived to escape to the Netherlands again on 30 August 1652, this time out of a chimney. 
Charles II trusted Massey implicitly. He apparently called Massey 'my dear and faithful friend' at a tearful farewell during the retreat from Worcester (Ormerod, 2.739), and regarded him as a useful link to the presbyterians. Massey was twice in England on such business, in 1654 and 1656, as well as in Denmark in 1655. To many other royalists, his past and his character counted against him; Clarendon thought him 'a wonderfully vain, weak man', though he acknowledged Massey's courage and devotion (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.144). From late 1658 Massey became more actively involved in royalist plotting. He returned to London on 5 March 1659 and in May went west to revive faltering plans for an uprising in Gloucestershire. He spent most of the next three months in hiding with the Veel family in Symondshall, distributing commissions and drumming up support among local gentlemen and presbyterian clergymen for a rising on Gloucester. From the outset, this was hampered by internal divisions. Lord Mordaunt, who was co-ordinating the plot, relied mainly on the ultra-cautious John Howe, and Massey frequently complained that Mordaunt and Howe were ruining his best efforts. Some support was raised in the Stroudwater clothing district and the Forest of Dean and the rising was planned for 1 August. However, the rebel activity was all too obvious and Sir Richard Willis had betrayed much detail to the government. The Gloucester militia seized Massey and others on 31 July, and the risings here and around Bath fizzled out. While being brought over Nympsfield Hill to Gloucester at dusk, Massey contrived yet another improbable escape by making his horse stumble, rolling downhill and fleeing in the dark. He spent the next few months in the Southern Netherlands and Holland, preparing to return. On 14 January 1660 Charles commissioned Massey to return to England, authorizing him to use his own judgement as to where to act but urging him to revive the Bristol and Gloucester business if possible. He arrived by 27 January. Again friction arose because Mordaunt appointed Howe commander-in-chief above him and again Clarendon had to smooth things over. Massey was in the Bristol area in early February seeking to promote the rising, then returned to London to agitate for the readmittance of the MPs secluded at Pride's Purge. Events rapidly overtook him, though, and he did little more than report on national events and complain. 
On Monck's advice Massey went to Gloucester to seek election to the Convention Parliament in March. Despite opposition from some citizens and garrison troops, which led to scuffling as Massey went to dine with the mayor on 30 March, he was made a freeman and elected. He was arrested, but the Convention subsequently acquitted him of causing the riot. He worked intensively for the king's restoration in the Convention, putting forward motions to take down republican insignia and to increase the king's supply to $50,000 per annum. He was voted $1,944 6's'. 2died plus interest for his past arrears and expenses and took command of Twiselton's regiment until its disbandment in October. Charles knighted him at Canterbury on 27 May. In December he was granted a further $3000 from the excise. He was again elected for Gloucester in the Cavalier Parliament in April 1661. Presumably for this reason he did not take up the governorship of Jamaica which the king had earmarked for him in September 1660 at the request of the merchant adventurers. Massey was a moderately active MP, serving on 110 committees over the next fourteen years. He spent much time in Ireland between 1661 and 1664, after receiving a command in the Irish army and a grant of an estate on very favourable terms at Abbey Leix, now in Queen's county. He may have lost favour for trying to defend the Gloucester corporation when it was purged in 1662-3 under the 'Act for the Well Governing and Regulation of Corporations', for he never again held any significant posts. During the Second Dutch War he served in the Dover prize office and as the commander of auxiliary troops. Just as in Gloucester twenty years before, he was popular with the townsfolk but appears to have alienated many of the town council. In 1673 he spoke in support of bills to ease restrictions on protestant dissenters and backed Lord Arran's complaints of Catholic worship going unchecked in Ireland after the declaration of indulgence. He died in Ireland between 6 February 1674, when he last spoke in parliament, and 30 May, when his will was proved, and was buried at Abbey Leix. 
Massey rose from obscurity through a mixture of outstanding qualities of military leadership, courage, sheer luck, and a talent for publicizing himself. The successful defence of Gloucester made him a nationally important figure. However, he was ill at ease in the world into which his success thrust him. Rigid, self-righteous, humourless, and paranoid to the point where his very sanity might be questioned, he was unable to work with others and invariably annoyed allies and enemies alike. It was largely because of his character defects that he never really scaled the military and political heights. Conversely, his courage, doggedness, and consistent devotion to his version of the cause of 1642 made him too useful to ignore, and he was never far from the public spotlight. 


@@@@@


doc= 18298


Massey, Eyre, first Baron Clarina (1719-1804), army officer, born on 24 May 1719, was the sixth son of Colonel Hugh Massey of Duntrileague, co. Limerick, and his wife, Elizabeth, the fourth daughter of George Evans, father of George, first Baron Carbery. His eldest brother, an MP and office-holder in Ireland, was Hugh, first Baron Massy. In a 'Memorial' of his services he stated that he 'purchased a pair of colours' in the 27th foot in 1739, and went with them to the West Indies as lieutenant of the grenadiers. The 27th foot, of which General William Blakeney 
(later Baron Blakeney; 1672-1761)
was colonel, was at Admiral Edward Vernon's capture of the port and treasure of Porto Bello (on the north side of the isthmus of Darien) in 1739, and the few survivors returned home in December 1740. The dates of Massey's commissions in the 27th foot as ensign were 25 January 1741 and 3 November 1741. He served with his regiment against the Jacobites in Scotland in 1745-6, and was wounded at the battle of Culloden (16 April 1746). He was made captain-lieutenant and captain in the regiment by William Augustus, duke of Cumberland, apparently in 1747, captain on 24 May 1751, and major on 10 December 1755. In 1757 he went to North America as a major in the 46th foot, of which he became lieutenant-colonel in 1758, and in summer 1759 he commanded the regiment in the expedition against the French Fort Niagara, succeeding to the command of the king's troops after Brigadier-General John Prideaux was accidentally killed by a British mortar shell on 19 July. Massey stated in his 'Memorial' that, as Sir William Johnson (1715-1774) was in command of a large force of American Indians, who were lukewarm in the British cause, he waived the chief command in favour of Johnson. Massey commanded in the action at La Belle Famille (24 July 1759), where, with 500 of the 46th and some Indians and New York provincials, he ambushed and routed the relief force of 1800 French regulars and French Canadians together with 500 of the Five Nations Indians; almost all the French officers were killed or captured. This action took place in view of Fort Niagara, which surrendered that day, leaving the whole Upper Ohio region in British hands. According to Massey's 'Memorial', this was the first time American Indians had been defeated in the war. At his request Massey was transferred to his old regiment, the 27th (Inniskilling) regiment, and in 1760 he commanded the grenadiers of the army in James Wolfe's advance on Montreal. He commanded a battalion of grenadiers at the capture of Martinique in 1761 and at the conquest of Havana in 1762, though he was wounded several times. Massey commanded the 27th at New York, Quebec, and Montreal from 1763 to 1769, and afterwards in Ireland, and was its colonel from 19 February 1773 until his death. On 27 December 1767 Massey married Catherine (died 1815), the daughter of Nathaniel Clements and the sister of Robert Clements, first earl of Leitrim; they had two sons and two daughters. Massey went to Nova Scotia in 1776 and commanded the troops at Halifax for four years. He was promoted major-general in 1777, and later he commanded at Cork. In 1782 he was promoted lieutenant-general, and he was reportedly marshal of the army in Ireland. 
For many years Massey appears to have remained unemployed. In letters to General Sir John Vaughan about 1793-4 he wrote about his disappointments in not obtaining a command (as lieutenant-general), and he regarded as heartbreaking the appointment by George Nugent-Temple-Grenville, first marquess of Buckingham, the lord lieutenant, of 'Popish children' (Master Talbot, aged eight, Master Skerritt, aged nine, and others), to ensigncies in his regiment. The carrying of the standards taken at Martinique in 1794 in state to St Paul's angered him: 'We had no such honours paid to our noble and brave commander, General Monckton!' (BL, Egerton MS 2137). From 1794 until promoted full general in 1796 he held the Cork command. It was a critical one, with, among other problems, the difficulties with new regiments, which the government persisted in 'drafting' against their recruiting engagements. He quelled a potentially serious mutiny of 2000 of these young troops at Spike Island, Cork Harbour, in 1795. Massey was MP for Swords, co. Dublin (1790-97), and governor of Limerick (1797-1804) and of the Royal Hospital, Kilmainham. In a letter to William Cavendish Cavendish-Bentinck, third duke of Portland, dated 9 November 1800, Charles, first Marquess Cornwallis stated that Massey had 'most strongly urged upon him' that his wife should be made a peeress in her own right, as a reward for his own 'long and faithful services as a soldier and his zealous loyalty as a subject' ('Correspondence of... Cornwallis', 3.301). Massey was raised to the Irish peerage on 27 December 1800 as Baron Clarina, of Elm Park, co. Limerick; his was one of nine peerages conferred on commoners on the last day of such creations before the union with Great Britain. He died at his residence in Bath, Somerset, on 17 May 1804, and was buried at Bath Abbey on 24 May. He was succeeded by his second and only surviving son, Nathaniel William Massey (1773-1810), army officer. His widow, Catherine, died on 27 January 1815, aged seventy-one. 


@@@@@


doc= 18299


Massey, John (1650/51-1715), dean of Christ Church, Oxford, and Roman Catholic convert, was born at Wedhampton, Wiltshire, the son of John Massey, a puritan minister. He matriculated at University College, Oxford, on 16 March 1666, aged fifteen (as John Macie), and was listed among the college's servitors in 1669/70, Anthony Wood recording that he was servitor of Obadiah Walker, fellow of University College. (Foster, 'Alum. Oxon.', confuses this John Massey with a John Massey who matriculated at Magdalen College in 1669.) He graduated BA from University in 1670, and on 10 April 1672 was admitted probationer fellow of Merton College, from where, on 29 January 1676, he proceeded MA. His academic career was undistinguished, with no known published works. He drank, and quarrelled, with Anthony Wood; assisted the Maurists by collating St Augustine; and was one of the six who took 'a course on chimistrie' in September 1683, joining the Philosophical Society on 26 March 1684 (Gunther, 1.47). He served as proctor in 1684-5, after which he was a delegate to raise a regiment of scholars and a troop of horse to combat Monmouth's rebellion. 
This support for James II must have drawn Massey to the king's attention, and he was rewarded in October 1686 with the deanery of Christ Church. The king's patent, dated 16 December, specifically exempted Massey from the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, subscribing the Articles, and (unusually for the dean of an Anglican cathedral) celebrating or receiving the sacrament of the Church of England. The king promised him exemption from all prosecution, 'notwithstanding that the said John Massey is not consecrated priest, or is or at any rate hereafter shall be a convict Recusant' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 30, fol. 163'v'). Clearly he was, or at any rate was about to be, a Catholic, influenced probably by the vicar apostolic of all England, John Leyburn, more than Walker. 
Massey's tenure of the deanery was short but energetic. In March 1687 he declared himself a Catholic, furnished an oratory, and appointed a Jesuit chaplain named Ward. As a justice of the peace from July 1687 he dealt with scoffers who disrupted services at his own and Walker's chapels. He helped Walker to print Catholic works, including those of Abraham Woodhead, provoking considerable anti-Catholic response. When the king visited Oxford later that year he attended Massey's chapel on Sunday 4 September and, speaking the following day, the king alluded to the attacks on Catholic chapels, urging all to practise charity. Despite this the subdean and canons of Christ Church consistently opposed Massey. Ignoring the king's dispensation they denounced him for not receiving the sacrament and forged a note purporting to be from Sunderland ordering Massey to expel all non-Catholic students. Massey saw through this and reported it to the king, who commended him for his integrity. Although Hearne believed that Massey 'lived amongst them with great respect' ('Remarks', 8.343), in reality the senior members of Christ Church 'did everything they could to give him a rough ride', while undergraduates were 'insolent and unruly' (Beddard, 935). The university pointedly ignored the king's request to make him a DD. 
The Dutch invasion in autumn 1688 extinguished Massey's career, and he had to flee Oxford before daybreak on 30 November. From London he escaped to the exiled court in St Germain disguised as a trooper. He entered the English College at Douai on 14 December 1692, moving soon afterwards to the oratorian seminary at St Magloire, where he was supported by Mary of Modena, wife of the exiled James II. He was ordained by August 1695, when he became confessor to the famous blue nuns in Paris, moving into the convent at rue de Charenton, faubourg St Antoine, Paris, as chaplain on 23 December 1699. He presided at professions and jubilees of the community, who referred to him as 'our worthy Confessor' (Gillow and Trappes-Lomax, 65). A friend of Hearne visited him there and found him 'in a very chearfull condition' ('Remarks', 8.343). There he died, on 11 August 1715, and was buried in the church, leaving his rented property and library to the convent charities. 


@@@@@


doc= 18300


Massey, William (1691-1764?), writer and translator, born in January 1691 of Quaker parents, learned Latin, Greek, and French at a private grammar school kept by William Thompson at Nottingham, and afterwards took lessons in Hebrew from a clerk of the parish of St Gregory, Norwich. In 1712 he became Latin usher in a boarding-school at Half-Farthing House, Wandsworth, Surrey, kept by Richard Scoryer, after whose death in 1714 he continued in the same employment for about a year under Scoryer's successor, Edward Powell, a noted writing-master and accountant. Afterwards he ran a boarding-school of his own for many years at Wandsworth which proved popular with Massey's fellow Quakers. 
Massey's first published work was 'Musa paraenetica, or, A Tractate of Christian Epistles, on Sundry Occasions, in Verse' (1717, repr. 1746), and he went on to compose further works of a religious or scholarly nature. These include a translation of Ovid's 'Fasti', and 'Synopsis sacerrima, or, An Epitomy of the Holy Scriptures, in English Verse' (1719, repr. 1801). The latter is a whistle stop tour of the 'Bible', 'chiefly designed for children, to be got by heart when they have learn'd to read'. Also of interest are his 'Remarks upon Milton's Paradise Lost, Historical, Geographical, Critical, and Explanatory' (1761) and 'Corruptae Latinitatis index' (1755). The latter is an attack on post-classical Latin neologisms; of 'flatuosus', for example, he remarks: 'This word is not, that I can find, in the Classics. Whatever Occasion some Modern Physicians may have for it, other Writers ought to reject it.' Massey's most substantial work is 'The Origin and Progress of Letters, an Essay' (1763). The first part deals with the origin of writing and includes discussions of writing materials, printing, and alphabets. The second part, treating of calligraphy, is 'a compendious account of the most celebrated English penmen'. 
Dr Birch notes that on 24 March 1764 Massey was seized with the dead palsy on his right side, and on 28 August he adds: 'I visited him at his house on Cambridge Heath, near Hackney, and found him very ill of the stone, added to the palsy.' Probably he died shortly afterwards. 


@@@@@


doc= 18301


Massey, William Nathaniel (1809-1881), politician and historian, son of William Massey, was a distant member of the Clarina family. He was called to the bar in 1844, and became recorder of Portsmouth in 1852 and of Plymouth in 1855. In the same year he was returned to parliament in the Liberal interest as member for Newport in the Isle of Wight, which he represented until 1857, when the moderate Liberal Party in Manchester invited Robert Lowe to oppose T. Milner-Gibson and John Bright in that city and extended a similar invitation to Massey to contest Salford against Sir Elkanah Armitage. Massey, wiser than Lowe, responded to the summons, and won the seat with an ease astonishing to all who were not acquainted with the personal unpopularity of his opponent. 
Massey was under-secretary in the Home Office from August 1855 to March 1858, and, though opposing Russell's 'Reform Bill' in 1860, was chairman of ways and means and deputy speaker from 1859 to 1865. He continued to sit for Salford until 1863, when he succeeded Samuel Laing as financial member of the government of India, a position which he held until 1868, when he unsuccessfully contested Liverpool. Massey possessed high qualifications for this important post, but his efficiency in it, as well as in the chair of the house in committee, was thought to be impaired by his indolence. He was sworn a privy councillor on his return to England, was elected for Tiverton in 1872, and sat until his death, but took no prominent part in politics, and did not again hold office. He married first, in 1833, Frances Carleton (died 1872), daughter of the Revd John Orde, and second, in 1880, Helen Henrietta, the youngest daughter of Patrick Grant, sheriff-clerk of Inverness-shire. Massey had at least one child, Charles Carleton, probably from his first marriage. 
Massey was a devoted follower of Palmerston, and both by conviction and temperament averse to political innovation. He was personally popular both in the house and among his constituents; his abilities were considerable, his legal and financial knowledge extensive, but he lacked energy and ambition. He published an essay on legal reform, 'Common Sense versus Common Law' (1850), but his only important literary performance is an unfinished history of the reign of George III until the Peace of Amiens (4 vols., 1855-63). In writing this book he had the assistance of the extensive materials collected by E. H. Locker for his intended biography of George II; Massey's style is lucid, and his general treatment of the subject sensible and impartial, but his work is devoid of all distinctive characteristics, and exhibits the qualities neither of a picturesque nor of a philosophic historian. 
Massey died at his home, 71 Chester Square, London, on 25 October 1881 and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 18302


Massie, James William (1799-1869), missionary and abolitionist, born in Ireland, was taught by Dr David Bogue, presumably at the missionary college at Gosport, Hampshire, and began his independent ministry as a missionary to India, where he lived and worked from 1822 until 1839. His 'Continental India' was published in two volumes in 1840. At some point, Massie married; he and his wife had three children: a son, Milton, and two daughters, Elizabeth and Isabella. Massie then worked as a pastor in Perth, Dublin, and Salford, and travelled through Belgium, Switzerland, and Germany, before moving to London where he was secretary to the Home Missionary Society from 1848 to 1859. 
Massie was an advocate of free trade and for the anti-slavery movement, and he was an ardent member of the union and emancipation societies that were formed during the American Civil War. He published 'The American Crisis, in Relation to the Anti-Slavery Cause' (1862) and 'America: the Origin of her Present Conflict: her Prospect for the Slave, and her Claim for Anti-Slavery Sympathy' (1864). Massie was a frequent visitor to America; his last trip was as a member of a deputation appointed to deliver the address adopted at the ministerial anti-slavery conference held in the Free Trade Hall, Manchester, on 3 June 1863. He was also often in Ireland for 'revival work', and he published 'The Evangelical Alliance: its Origin and Development' (1847). 
Before his death, Massie was granted the degrees of DD and LLD and was elected a member of the Royal Irish Academy. He died at 28 Adelaide Street, Kingstown, near Dublin, on 8 May 1869. 


@@@@@


doc= 18303


Massie, Joseph (d. 1784), writer on trade and economics, was of unknown origins. Likewise it is not known if he married or had children. Several of his early writings exhibit an in-depth familiarity and interested concern with the West Indian sugar trade which suggests that he was a merchant or factor in this branch of business for some years. In the 1750s he began to establish a reputation as a writer, statistician, and economic theorist. During the Seven Years' War and its aftermath he was particularly active as a pamphleteer in support of, and probably in the pay of, William Pitt. Possibly he entertained hopes of a post as a Treasury civil servant or as an official historian of commerce. One of Massie's chief claims to fame is as a bibliographer of economics. Between 1748 and 1764 he formed an unprecedented collection and a catalogue of books and pamphlets on trade and commerce dating back to 1557. He hoped that this collection would provide a resource for the development of economic theory as a science, and for the training of students in the theory and practice of trade. He attempted unsuccessfully to persuade either the City of London or the government to buy this collection and make it the centrepiece of a projected academy of commerce. The indexed catalogue of this collection and other works on economics, last updated in 1764 and then listing more than 2400 titles, is to be found among the Lansdowne manuscripts in the British Library. Later in life Massie became bitter at the repeated rejection of his schemes and advances for patronage; his publications and memorandums then became cranky and paranoid. 
Massie's name has been linked with a pioneering work of economic theory published anonymously as 'An Essay on the Governing Causes of the Natural Rate of Interest' (1750), but the evidence of authorship is unclear (most of Massie's later writings were signed). This work argued that the natural rate of interest was regulated by the profits of trade rather than by the amount of circulating money as John Locke and other writers had previously assumed. Massie's approach to economics was profoundly shaped by his reading of economic literature as it had developed since the sixteenth century as well as his own experience of trade. He bemoaned the fact that 'some writers have considered commerce as a science, and endeavoured to deduce the knowledge of it from axioms and maxims &c. while many others have treated it as a branch of history, and given narratives' ('Representation', preface) and that there was little consensus on first principles, and his ambition was to unite the historical and the scientific-deductive approaches to the subject of economics. In pursuance of this goal he planned but did not complete a detailed history of British trade divided into its separate branches which he hoped would facilitate the formulation of general maxims. This project was influenced by the Baconian intellectual tradition and the methods of the Royal Society. Although the next generation of political economists preferred to use more abstract and systematic models of the economy, Massie's essay may still be considered one of the more interesting attempts at generating a unified body of economics prior to the work of Adam Smith. 
Commerce for Massie was an essential art and he hoped that the subject would soon become an accepted component of a liberal education. These views were stated most clearly in his 'Representation Concerning the Knowledge of Commerce as a National Concern' (1760). Massie also continued to pursue the statistical work begun by the political arithmeticians and produced several interesting calculations on population, social structure, consumption, and taxation. The most significant of these productions first arose from a polemical broadside against the sugar planters whose title is a precis of its argument: 'A computation of the money that hath been exorbitantly raised upon the people of Great Britain by the sugar planters... shewing how much money a family of each rank, degree or class hath lost by that rapacious monopoly' (1760). One of the work's most interesting elements is a tabular representation of English and Welsh social structure and income distribution based on the returns of the hearth-tax and his own estimates. Similar material is also contained in his 'Calculations of Taxes for a Family of each Rank, Degree or Class' (1756). These have proved useful resources for modern social and economic historians. 
For most of his career as a writer Massie lived in Covent Garden, London. He died on 1 November 1784 and was buried on 7 November at St Andrew's, Holborn. 


@@@@@


doc= 18304


Massie, Thomas Leeke (1802-1898), naval officer, was born at Coddington Hall, Cheshire, on 20 October 1802, the second son (of twenty-two children, eighteen of whom survived to maturity) of the Revd Richard Massie (1771-1854). He entered the navy in October 1818 on the 'Rochefort', flagship in the Mediterranean of Sir Thomas Francis Fremantle and later of Sir Graham Moore, and continued in different ships in the Mediterranean. He was wrecked in the brig 'Columbine' on the coast of the Morea (25 January 1824), was in the 'Martin' at the demonstration against Algiers, was frequently in boat actions against Greek pirates, and was in the 'Asia' at Navarino (20 October 1827). For this he was rewarded with promotion to lieutenant on a death vacancy on 11 November 1827. Thereafter he served mostly on the channel, North Sea, and Lisbon stations, but was three years on the South American station with Captain Robert Smart in the 'Satellite' and two years in the Mediterranean as first lieutenant of the 'Carysfort' with Henry Byam Martin. On 28 June 1838 Massie was made commander, and in 1839 was, with others, sent to Constantinople to assist in organizing the Turkish navy. They were, however, recalled after about six months, and in March 1840 Massie was appointed (as second captain) to the 'Thunderer' with Maurice Frederick Fitzhardinge Berkeley, afterwards Lord Fitzhardinge. In the 'Thunderer' he took part in the operations on the coast of Syria in the summer and autumn of 1840, culminating in the capture of Acre, for which he was promoted captain on 17 March 1841. On 8 February 1844 he married Charlotte Hester, the only daughter of E. V. Townsend of Wincham Hall, Cheshire. 
In April 1849 Massie was appointed to the 'Cleopatra', which he commanded in the East Indies and China and during the Second Anglo-Burmese War. In September 1854 he commissioned the 'Powerful', which during the latter part of 1855 and 1856 was on the North American station. He had no further service, but became rear-admiral on 7 November 1860, vice-admiral on 2 April 1866, and admiral on 20 October 1872, having been placed on the retired list in 1866. He died at his home, 3 Stanley Place, Chester, on 20 July 1898. 


@@@@@


doc= 18305


Massingberd, Francis Charles (1800-1872), Church of England clergyman, the son of Francis Massingberd, rector of Washingborough, near Lincoln, and Elizabeth, his wife, youngest daughter of William Burrell Massingberd of Ormsby Hall, was born at his father's rectory, on 3 December 1800, and baptized on 30 December. After preparatory education at a school at Eltham, Kent, he entered Rugby School in 1814. He matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, and was elected a demy on 23 July 1818. He gained a second class in 'literae humaniores', and graduated BA on 5 December 1822 and MA on 26 June 1825. He was ordained deacon by Edward Legge, bishop of Oxford, on 13 June 1824 and priest by Bishop Tomline of Lincoln on 5 September 1825, and was instituted to the family living of South Ormsby, Lincolnshire, on 9 December of that year. 
The previous summer, together with his friend William Ralph Churton, Massingberd had accompanied Thomas Arnold, headmaster of Rugby School, on a visit to Italy, undertaken by Arnold to identify the line of Hannibal's passage over the Alps, and to explore the battlefields of his campaign, for the purposes of his history of Rome. He returned to Rome for health reasons in the early 1840s. On 15 January 1839 he married at Putney church Fanny (died 2 April 1891), eldest daughter of William Baring MP and his wife, Frances, 'nee' Paulett Thompson. They had two sons: Francis Burrell, a captain in the 5th lancers, and William Oswald, an Anglican clergyman. 
Massingberd was an exemplary rural clergyman. He rebuilt Driby church and thoroughly restored that at Ormsby; he erected a new rectory on a better site, and built premises for schools that developed from classes he had started in a kitchen. In 1840, at the request of his life-long friend, Edward Churton, he wrote on the leaders of the Reformation, volume 21 of the 'Englishman's Library', of which Churton was editor. Published in 1842, it reached a fourth edition in 1866. It reflects a distinct but unembittered high-churchmanship in the tradition of John Keble, as do his other main publications, 'The Educational and Missionary Work of the Church in the Nineteenth Century' (1857) and 'Lectures on the Prayer Book' (1864). In 1846 he declined an offer from Bishop Phillpotts of Exeter to move into that diocese with the prospect of appointment to the first vacant archdeaconry. He was appointed to the prebendal stall of Thorngate in Lincoln Cathedral by Bishop Kaye on 15 May 1847, and was made chancellor and canon residentiary by Bishop Jackson on 11 December 1862. 
From an early period Massingberd was a strenuous advocate for the revival of the deliberative functions of convocation. In 1833 he published 'Reasons for a Session of Convocation', and when that object was attained he was one of its most active members, first as proctor for the parochial clergy in 1857, and subsequently, in 1868, for the chapter. He frequently sat on committees and drew up their reports, and took a large share in the debates, proving himself a persuasive, if prolix, speaker. As chancellor of Lincoln he directed his efforts to the increase of the practical efficiency of the cathedral. Together with other minor reforms, he was the first to institute an afternoon nave sermon, and during successive Lents he delivered courses of lectures on the prayer book and on church history. He died at 2 Cambridge Place, London, of congestion of the lungs on 5 December 1872, and was buried at South Ormsby. 


@@@@@


doc= 18306


Massinger, Philip (1583-1640), playwright, was born in November 1583, probably in Salisbury, and baptized at St Thomas's, Salisbury, on 24 November 1583. He was the son of Arthur Massinger ('c'.1550-1603), fellow of Merton College, Oxford, MP, general agent for the earls of Pembroke, and examiner to the council in the marches of Wales, and of Anne Crompton (died in or after 1614), whose father was a merchant of Stafford and London. According to John Aubrey, Philip Massinger was married and his widow, who lived and died in Cardiff, continued to receive from the earl of Pembroke and Montgomery a pension formerly paid to her husband. Nothing further is known of the marriage. 
Massinger went up to St Alban Hall, Oxford, in 1601 or 1602. Gerard Langbaine and Anthony Wood credit him with three or four years at Oxford -- studying hard, says Langbaine; sidetracked by poetry and romances, says Wood -- but he left without a degree so his departure probably occurred sooner than that, perhaps at about the time of his father's death in 1603. Conceivably he became an actor; in his poem 'The Copy of a Letter' ('c'.1615-1620) he speaks of not being 'knowne beyond A Player or A Man' ('Plays and Poems', 4.390). But nothing certain is known about Massinger's activities from his arrival in Oxford until (probably) 1613, when, with his fellow playwrights Nathan Field and Robert Daborne, he wrote from the Clink prison to ask Philip Henslowe for $5 that was owed to them for an unidentified play. (By 1629, when Massinger apparently owed Field's brother Nathaniel $60, his credit must in some respects have improved.) 
Another area of some uncertainty is Massinger's religious affiliation; a tradition grew up in the nineteenth century that he was a Roman Catholic. There is no strong evidence for this; the tradition was based mainly on the presence of Catholic characters and contexts in two of his plays with Mediterranean settings -- 'The Maid of Honour' and 'The Renegado' -- and a third, 'The Virgin Martyr', which was set at the time of the early church. Perhaps more significantly it is known that Massinger's uncle Anthony Crompton was a recusant in the 1580s and that another uncle, Thomas Crompton, was suspected of being a Catholic although he later became chancellor of the diocese of London and vicar-general for the archbishop of Canterbury. Massinger also had a number of Catholic friends or associates, including Sir Aston Cokayne and the playwright James Shirley, but this in itself proves little. 
Writing collaborative drama was Massinger's principal occupation between 1613 (or before) and the early 1620s. There has been a strong measure of agreement among scholars as to his share in these works. About 1613 he is believed to have contributed part of act III of 'The Honest Man's Fortune', which was written mainly by Nathan Field and John Fletcher. He is given a more substantial role in his other collaborations with Field and Fletcher of about 1616-18 ('The Knight of Malta', 'The Queen of Corinth', and the lost 'Jeweller of Amsterdam'); with Field alone ('The Fatal Dowry', 1616-18?); with Thomas Dekker ('The Virgin Martyr', probably 1620); and in the series of plays written with Fletcher mostly between about 1618 and 1623. Often Massinger writes the opening and closing scene (or sometimes the whole of act I and act V); partly as a result his share contains a somewhat higher percentage than his partners' of expository, rhetorical, and forensic material and a lower percentage of comic material. (One of his best early opportunities for forensic oratory occurs in the judicial and quasi-judicial scenes of 'The Fatal Dowry'.) 
The collaboration between Fletcher and Massinger was at its height about 1619-22 and included such plays as 'The Custom of the Country' ('c'.1619-1620), 'The Double Marriage' ('c'.1621), 'The False one' (1620?), 'The Prophetess' (licensed 14 May 1622), and 'The Spanish Curate' (licensed 24 October 1622). Almost all the Fletcher/Massinger pieces are either comedies or tragicomedies in the tradition established earlier by Fletcher and Francis Beaumont. In the summer of 1619, however, they produced the controversially topical 'Tragedy of Sir John Van Olden Barnavelt', concerning the fall of the Dutch statesman and opponent of Prince Maurice. Barnavelt was executed on 3 May and the play was ready for performance by the King's Men by mid-August when, as Thomas Locke wrote to Sir Dudley Carleton, they 'at th' instant were prohibited by' the bishop of London (Bentley, 3.415). (This is the first of several known instances when a Massinger play encountered censorship problems.) Somehow, Locke reports on 27 August, 'Our players have fownd the meanes to goe through with the play of Barnavelt, and it hath had many spectators and receaved applause' (ibid.). 
How Massinger and others regarded his collaborative work is largely uncertain. The 'toyes I would not father' in 'The Copy of a Letter' ('Plays and Poems', 4.390) probably refers to such work but could, of course, be disingenuous or could, since the poem may date from as early as 1615, predate prestigious co-operation with Field and Fletcher, the leading actor and leading playwright of the day. (According to Sir Aston Cokayne in 'A Chain of Golden Poems' (1658), Massinger and Fletcher were 'great friends' as well as collaborators (p. 186).) It seems likely that at the time Massinger's role in the plays was known and even celebrated; in 1620, before any recorded non-collaborative work, John Taylor, the 'water poet', lists him among the best-known playwrights in 'The Praise of Hemp-Seed'. And clearly even after Fletcher's death in 1625 Massinger continued to engage with their joint work; it is evident that in a number of plays datable in their original form to 1622 and after his role is that of reviser. This is almost certainly the case, for instance, in two plays performed in 1634: 'Cleander', a revision of Fletcher's 'The Lovers' Progress', and 'A Very Woman'. Several of the plays, moreover, continued to flourish on stage during Massinger's later career. As Fletcher's original joint-author, reviser, or both Massinger worked, in addition to plays already mentioned, on 'The Little French Lawyer' (1619-23), 'The Sea Voyage' (1622), 'The Elder Brother' (1625?), and 'Love's Cure' (1625?). He may also, less certainly, have had some role in 'Beggars' Bush' (1615-22) and a revised version of 'Thierry and Theodoret' (before 1621). 
The work with Fletcher and others may, then, have contributed much to Massinger's earnings and renown. This fact -- to the detriment of his reputation during the later seventeenth and eighteenth century in particular -- was subsequently obscured by the complete omission of his name from the Beaumont and Fletcher folios of 1647 and 1679. Only Massinger's friend Cokayne is known to have protested about this state of affairs, and then chiefly out of concern for Fletcher's honour: '
In the large book of Playes you late did print 

(In 'Beaumonts' and in 'Fletchers' name) why in't 

Did you not justice? give to each his due? 

For 'Beaumont' (of those many) writ in few: 

And 'Massinger' in other few; the Main 

Being sole Issues of sweet 'Fletchers' brain. 
(A. Cokayne, 'A Chain of Golden Poems', 1658, 217)' 

About 1620 Massinger started to work with companies other than the King's Men, for whom he had so far co-scripted almost all his surviving plays. 'The Virgin Martyr' was performed at the Red Bull, probably in 1620 and probably by His Majesty's Revels. And between about 1621 and 1625, while not breaking his connection with the King's Company, he wrote in all five unaided plays -- four tragicomedies and a comedy -- for the companies based at the Phoenix or Cockpit theatre. Another tragicomedy, 'The Great Duke of Florence', was licensed for performance by the queen's company at the Phoenix in July 1627. Since it is Massinger's only non-King's play after 1625 -- unless, as seems unlikely, Donald S. Lawless is right that 'The Maid of Honour' was first performed in 1630 and not merely revived -- this has caused some puzzlement. It seems probable either that 'The Great Duke' was written a year or two earlier and remained the property of the Phoenix company or that it was written in 1627 in fulfilment of an earlier obligation. 
In the Phoenix tragicomedies -- 'The Maid of Honour' (1621/2?), 'The Bondman' (1623), 'The Renegado' (1624), 'The Parliament of Love' (1624), and 'The Great Duke of Florence' (1627) -- romantic plots are so shaped, as in many other Massinger plays, as to emphasize ethical themes and dilemmas. Seeming uprightness is often undermined or forced to rethink itself. For instance Leosthenes, in 'The Bondman', falls victim to the belief that military success gives him right of conquest over Cleora and, particularly where the disguised Pisander is concerned, that physical slavery is an index of moral slavery. More immediate political concerns are also explored. 'The Bondman' fairly evidently, in its opening scenes, suggests support for the new anti-Spanish views embraced by Prince Charles and by the duke of Buckingham since their return from Spain in October 1623; the play was performed before the prince on 27 December 1623 at Whitehall. But it also, more subtly -- potentially less palatably -- sounds a warning note through the slaves' rebellion and through Pisander's lecture on the wider issue of a perceived 'descent from a benevolent patriarchy to governmental tyranny' (Patterson, 85). Similarly 'The Maid of Honour' (1621/2?) explores, without risking censorship or imaginative limitation, a situation at least analogous to the affairs of Frederick, elector palatine, and James I's policy of non-intervention on his behalf. 
The comedy 'A New Way to Pay Old Debts' (1625) scores more direct hits at the universally vilified monopolist Sir Giles Mompesson, from whom the rapacious Sir Giles Overreach is at least in part developed. Set in the country (although drawing on many of the conventions of 'city comedy') the play pits aristocratic virtue against 'nouveau riche' greed, which it defeats by encouraging it to overreach itself. That 'A New Way' became overwhelmingly Massinger's most popular play in later generations, however, is mainly the result of Sir Giles's energy of language and activity. Forever concocting new schemes, berating his underlings, walking 'to get me an appetite' (II.iii), triumphing over his enemies, and in defeat violent, insane, hallucinating, he is more like the protagonist of a revenge tragedy than the central figures in most contemporary comedy. 
Massinger says in his 1624 dedication of 'The Bondman' to Philip Herbert, earl of Montgomery, that 'When it was first Acted, your Lordships liberall suffrage taught others to allow it for currant' ('Plays and Poems', 1.313). Many of the issues explored in Massinger's plays at this time -- attitudes to engagement in foreign wars, for instance -- were dear to the heart of Montgomery, Montgomery's brother the third earl of Pembroke, and their associates. It was at this point very probably, therefore, that the playwright succeeded in gaining Montgomery's patronage, perhaps in the form of the pension referred to by Aubrey. His first known attempt to attract the notice of the 'Honourable House' in whose service his father 'Many years... happily spent' ('Plays and Poems', 1.313) was 'The Copy of a Letter' ('c'.1615-1620), addressed to Pembroke. Later evidence of patronage by Montgomery (from 1630 also fourth earl of Pembroke) is the poem 'Sero, sed serio' (1636), addressed to him as 'my most singular good Lord and Patron'. The poem, on the death of the earl's son Charles, starts apologetically from Massinger's failure to write in honour of his marriage in 1634: '
I cursd my absence then 

That hindred itt, and bitt my Star-crost pen 

Too busie in Stage-blanks, and trifeling Rime. 
('Plays and Poems', 4.419)' Massinger also sought the patronage of Robert Dormer, Philip Herbert's son-in-law, to whom 'A New Way to Pay Old Debts' was dedicated on its publication in 1633. 
Lady Katherine Stanhope (later countess of Chesterfield), Massinger's first known patron, was the sister of Fletcher's patron the earl of Huntingdon and was of fairly similar political persuasion to the Herberts. 'The Duke of Milan' was dedicated to her in 1623; she is acknowledged as Massinger's 'Lady and Mistress' in his poem 'A Newyeares Guift' ('c'.1622). In 1630 he dedicated 'The Renegado' to George Harding, Lord Berkeley, Stanhope's relative by marriage, and in 1632 he dedicated 'The Emperor of the East' to Lord John Mohun, her son-in-law, noting that: 'My worthy friend Mr 'Aston Cokaine' your Nephew [also Stanhope's nephew], to my extraordinarie content, deliver'd to mee, that your Lordship at your vacant hours sometimes vouchsaf'd to peruse such trifles of mine, as have passed the Presse, and not alone warranted them in your gentle suffrage, but disdain'd not to bestow a remembrance of your love, and intended favour to mee. ('Plays and Poems', 3.403)' As well as these aristocratic patrons Massinger attracted the attention and the money of, among others, Sir Francis Foljambe, recipient of an autograph poem to accompany a copy of 'The Duke of Milan' in 1623 and co-dedicatee of 'The Maid of Honour' in 1632; the Norfolk landowner Sir Philip Knyvett, co-dedicatee of 'The Roman Actor' in 1629, to whose daughter Massinger addressed 'The Virgin's Character' ('c'.1625-1630); Sir Thomas Jay, a close associate of Massinger, also from Wiltshire, co-dedicatee of 'The Roman Actor'; Sir Robert Wiseman -- 'for many yeares', the playwright tells him in the 1636 dedication to 'The Great Duke of Florence', 'I had but faintly subsisted, if I had not often tasted of your Bounty'; and Sir Warham St Leger and his son Sir Anthony, the former commemorated in 'A Funerall Poem Sacred to the Memorie of the Trewly Noble... Sir Warham Sentliger' (1631?), the latter dedicatee of 'The Unnatural Combat' in 1639. 
By 1625 Massinger was well established as a playwright. Payment for plays and pensions or gifts from well-connected patrons mean that he may also have become fairly prosperous. (No doubt he was not rich, but the later perception of his knowing extreme poverty results mainly from the early 'tripartite letter' and over-literal reading of references such as that, in the 1639 dedication of 'The Unnatural Combat', to his 'necessitous fortunes'.) He became all the more well known when he succeeded Fletcher as company dramatist of the King's Men in 1625 or soon afterwards. (Fletcher had died in the major plague outbreak of that year, which was the subject of Massinger's poem 'London's Lamentable Estate, in any Great Visitation'.) Although no contract survives it is clear that there must have been one; all Massinger's remaining plays were for this company with the exception of 'The Great Duke of Florence'. 
Contact with the king's company appears to have been maintained during Massinger's Phoenix years since he wrote for it the tragedies 'The Duke of Milan' ('c'.1621) and 'The Unnatural Combat' ('c'.1624). These explore, respectively, obsessional jealousy and a father's incestuous passion for his daughter; here seemingly brave and admirable public figures -- exposed or redeemed in the tragicomedies and comedies -- are destroyed by private flaws. 'The Roman Actor', as performed in 1626 and published in 1629, is somewhat more complex in effect. This inaugural fanfare for and by the company's new staple dramatist draws on many classical sources in a way that is likely to excite comparison with Ben Jonson's Roman tragedy 'Sejanus', itself another of Massinger's sources. And with its three inset plays and impassioned defence by Paris of the moral, reformative function of the stage, 'The Roman Actor' encourages debate on the very premises of drama. The 'most perfit birth of my 'Minerva'' ('Plays and Poems', 3.15) is presented confidently in print, complete with six commendatory poems: one in Latin; several, including one by the esteemed classicist and playwright Thomas May, stressing the appropriate Roman dignity of the work; and one by Joseph Taylor, the leading King's Men 'sharer', who first played Paris, professing 'our loves Antiquitie' ('Plays and Poems', 3.20). 

'The Roman Actor' was followed by several lost plays, which include 'The Judge' (1627), 'The Honour of Women' (1628), and 'Minerva's Sacrifice' (1629). (Eight plays written by Massinger after 1625 are known to be lost and a number of other titles have been more conjecturally attached to his name.) 'The Picture' (1629), a tragicomedy, subtly and often humorously examines jealousy, vanity, and double sexual standards before arriving at the deceptively simple conclusion: '
And to all married men be this a caution 

Which they should duly tender as their life: 

Neither to dote to[o] much nor doubt a wife. 
(V.iii)' In the process audiences were provided with some scenes that help to explain the dramatist's presence in the library of love studied by 'our courtly dames' in John Johnson's 'Academy of Love' (1641). For instance Queen Honoria enters masked, with ''Musicke above, a song of pleasure'', to offer or seemingly offer Mathias: '
This moist palme, this soft lippe, and those delights 

Which Darkenesse should onely judge of. 
(P. Massinger, 'The Picture', 1629, III.v)' According to the author, 'The Picture' 'in the presentment found... a generall approbation' ('Plays and Poems', 3.195). 
Massinger's last surviving tragedy, 'Believe as you List' (1631), returns to the ancient world but only as a result of censorship. On 11 January 1631 Sir Henry Herbert, master of the revels: 'did refuse to allow of a play of Messinger's, because itt did contain dangerous matter, as the deposing of Sebastian king of Portugal, by Philip the [Second], and ther being a peace sworen twixte the kings of England and Spayne. ('Plays and Poems', 3.293)' Probably there was also too evident a parallel between the hero's plight and that of Frederick of Bohemia, but changing the story of Sebastian (or the pretender claiming to be him) to the conveniently similar story of King Antiochus was apparently sufficient for Herbert to grant the revised play its licence on 6 May. Hearers may have rejoiced in the disingenuousness of the prologue to 'Believe as you List', which blames the apparent similarity of ancient things to 'a late, and sad example' on the author's ignorance of ''Cosmographie'' ('Plays and Poems', 3.305). As with 'Barnavelt' and, in 1638, 'The King and the Subject', the non-publication of the play (until 1849) may suggest that it was too dangerous or too immediately topical to print, but this did not preclude its stage success. 
It seems likely, although performances are not recorded, that 'The City Madam' (1632) was successful in the theatre. This city comedy features a tester tested: Luke Frugal secretly observed by his brother Sir John as he uses the intended reformation of the wilful Frugal wife and daughters as an excuse for unreasonable harshness, revenge, and personal financial gain. Luke provides a central role popular with actors, especially in the nineteenth century. (Nineteenth-century adaptations of the play, however, give a somewhat exaggerated impression of Luke's importance; 'The City Madam' is less a one-man play than 'A New Way to Pay Old Debts'.) Luke's rapt soliloquy ''Twas no phantastick object, but a truth' (III.iii), on the gold, silver, and jewels he thinks his own, is one of the more psychologically convincing speeches in Massinger. 
Massinger's commenders' confident proclamation of the excellence of 'The Roman Actor' in 1629 may have been directed at sections of the literary community who were more doubtful about his worth. This at least is suggested by the fact that in the same year the playwright became embroiled in a quarrel over the place and function of professional playwrights and their work. The dispute began, or perhaps only simmered over, when William Davenant's 'The Just Italian' was badly received at the Blackfriars theatre in October. Davenant's supporters, led by the poet Thomas Carew, attacked James Shirley's contrastingly well received 'The Grateful Servant', given at the Phoenix in November, as work for a stage: '
where not a tong 

Of th' untun'd Kennell, can a line repeat 

Of serious sence. 
('The Poems of Thomas Carew', ed. R. Dunlap, 1949, 96)' Shirley's supporters replied in kind in the verses attached to the 1630 quarto of his play. They included Massinger, who used terms similar to those in which his own commenders often praised his own work to contrast Shirley's 'well/Exprest and orderd' composition with Davenant's 'forc'd expressions', 'rack'd phraze', and '
Babell compositions to amaze 

The tortur'd reader. 
('Plays and Poems', 4.416)' The documents of the second, more vitriolic phase of the struggle remained unpublished until 1980; Massinger contributed a prologue for a 1630 revival of his Phoenix play 'The Maid of Honour', which attacked those resolved to dislike any play performed at that theatre and also censured Carew's Italianate 'Chamber Madrigalls or loose raptures' (Garrett, 60); a reply, almost certainly by Davenant, defends Carew, his 'ditties fit onely for the eares of Kings' and all 'Ingenious Gentlemen' and attacks Massinger and the actors -- as a professional playwright he is merely their 'hirelinge' (Garrett, 62-3). Finally, in a furious counter-defence, 'A charme for a libeller', Massinger attacks the libeller for hiding behind the so-called 'poets tribune' Carew as well as for slander and immorality, upholds writing plays for money on classical precedent, and maintains that 'witlesse malice' cannot overthrow: '
The buildinge of that Meritt whiche I owe 

To knoweinge mens opinions. 
(Garrett, 65)' It is clear that this is less an argument between rival companies than one between professional dramatists and newer courtly rivals. (Massinger remains staple dramatist at the Globe and Blackfriars while rallying to the defence of Phoenix actors and playwright.) How long the quarrel went on, whether it ended in any sort of reconciliation, and how consistently seriously the participants took it -- it was no doubt good for trade at both the Blackfriars and the Phoenix -- are unknown. But it may explain a number of references to discontent with Massinger's plays -- by, for example, the 'gallants' of Henry Parker's manuscript poem 'To his honoured frend Mr Phillip Massinger, having not had that just applause for one of his playes which was due to him' (T. A. Dunn, 'Philip Massinger: the Man and the Playwright', 1957, 33) or by: '
[the] 'tribe', who in their 'Wisedomes' dare accuse, 

this ofspring of thy 'Muse'. 
(Shirley's poem printed with 'The Renegado'; 'Plays and Poems', 2.14)' In 1631 or 1632 the dramatist himself says that 'The Emperor of the East' has: '
suffer'd by the rage, 

And envie of some Catos of the stage. 
('Plays and Poems', 3.408)' It is clear from several remarks in its front matter, and probably from its early publication in 1632, that 'The Emperor', a tragicomedy with sources in Byzantine history, was one of Massinger's least popular plays. 
Either the 'untun'd kennell' affair rumbled on for some time or there were similar 'wars of the theatres' soon afterwards. The prologue of 'The Guardian' (1633) speaks of two plays failing, of two years' silence (mystifying commentators since this was clearly not the case), and of the need to confute rumours that the author has 'quite forgot to make a Play' ('Plays and Poems', 4.114). 'The Guardian', performed at the Blackfriars in 1633 and 'well likte' at court in January 1634, seems an appropriate play with which to 'regain his credit lost'. For while there are elements of serious testing and moral interrogation here, and a shadowing of some contemporary issues in the Robin Hood-like code observed by Severino and his bandit followers, on the whole the play is less morally absolute and more light-hearted and festive than most of Massinger's earlier work. (Its title-page in 'Three New Playes', 1655, bills it as 'A Comical-History'.) That this is the case is due, above all, to the presence of the energetic, generous, red-blooded, sometimes outrageous Durazzo, the eponymous guardian whose love of hunting, good living, and no-nonsense lust is set against the more swooning amours of his nephew and ward Caldoro and his beloved Caliste. 
However much sniping may have continued from supporters of Davenant or some other rival, Massinger's career in the 1630s continued to thrive, perhaps buoyed up, indeed, by the publicity attendant on the 'untun'd kennell' affair and the brush with censorship over 'Believe as you List'. It can be argued that the publication of six of Massinger's plays between 1630 and 1633 suggests decreasing popularity since companies often (if by no means invariably) protected work from publication while it was likely to be reusable. But confidence in achievements so far is suggested by Massinger's action, about 1632-3, in having copies of his then published seven unaided plays, together with 'The Fatal Dowry', bound into what is now called the Harbord volume (Folger Shakespeare Library, Washington). The volume contains corrections in Massinger's hand up to about half way through. Perhaps he intended to present the collection to a patron but he may also have been at least thinking ahead to putting together his works, following the example of the Jonson and Shakespeare collections of 1616 and 1623. And if non-publication is indeed a sign of continuing theatrical viability it may be significant that only two of Massinger's hitherto unpublished plays were printed between 1633 and his death in 1640: 'The Great Duke of Florence' in 1636 and 'The Unnatural Combat' in 1639. 
Massinger's last decade was one of undiminished business -- of making good 'in some labor'd Song' that 'Though he grow old, 'Apollo' still is yong' (epilogue to 'The Guardian', 'Plays and Poems', 4.197). He produced at least a play a year, besides working on poems for patrons and friends (usually left in manuscript; a number of similar works may have perished) and revision of Fletcher or Fletcher/Massinger plays, including 'A Very Woman' (1634) and 'Cleander' (a version of Fletcher's 'The Lovers' Progress'), which was presented before Queen Henrietta Maria at Blackfriars in May 1634. There were also court productions, untouched or more lightly revised, of the Massinger/Fletcher collaborations -- 'The Spanish Curate' in 1638 and 1639, and 'The Custom of the Country' in 1630 and 1638 -- and 'The Fatal Dowry', which was given at the Cockpit-in-Court, Whitehall, on 3 February 1631. A second edition of 'The Bondman' was brought out in 1638. 
In 1636 'The Bashful Lover', Massinger's last surviving play, exploited the fashion for romance and Neoplatonism particularly associated with Henrietta Maria. Galeazzo, the suitor of the title, exemplifies noble, selfless, sometimes self-abnegating love and ultimately wins Matilda through it. But that this was by no means the only sort of drama Massinger was writing in the late 1630s is shown by the one speech that survives from the tragedy 'The King and the Subject' and begins: '
Monys? Wee'le rayse supplies what ways we please, 

And force you to subscribe to blanks. 

' Sir Henry Herbert recorded it because some time before June 1638 Charles I himself, 'readinge over the play at Newmarket, set his marke upon the place with his owne hande, and in thes words: 'This is too insolent, and to bee changed''. 'Note', Herbert continues, that 'the poett makes it the speech of a king, Don Pedro, king of Spayne, and spoken to his subjects' ('Plays and Poems', 1.xxxix); he might have added that Charles probably understood, and the playwright and company perhaps intended, an allusion to his raising of forced loans. Following a change of title (possibly to 'The Tyrant', which appears in Humphrey Moseley's 1660 list of Massinger plays) and 'reformations' which were to be 'most strictly observed' in performance, 'The King and the Subject' was licensed on 5 June, a day after Herbert was 'given... power from the king to allowe of the play'. 
When dedicating 'The Unnatural Combat' to Anthony St Leger in 1639 Massinger looked back with pride and a degree of nostalgia on 'this old Tragedie, without Prologue, or Epilogue, it being composed in a time (and that too, peradventure, as knowing as this) when such by ornaments, were not advanced above the fabricque of the whole worke' ('Plays and Poems', 2.197). But his plays do not generally seem to have been perceived as old-fashioned. The last of them, the lost 'The Fair Anchoress of Pausilippo' (1640) may, to judge from the title, have been in the fashionable vein of 'The Bashful Lover'. And where older plays were concerned, in August 1639 the lord chamberlain protected the five Phoenix plays of the 1620s for the King and Queen's Young Company, and in August 1641 he protected from publication, for the King's Men, seven plays wholly by Massinger ('The City Madam', 'The Guardian', 'The Bashful Lover', and four late lost works), and eleven of the collaborations. 
Massinger died in March 1640 in a house on Bankside, 'neer the then playhouse'; 'he went to bed well, and dyed suddenly -- but not of the plague' ('Plays and Poems', 1.xliv, xliii). He was buried on 18 March in Southwark Cathedral, either, as Aston Cokayne says, in the church and in the same grave as John Fletcher or, according to the probably less reliable testimony of Aubrey and Wood, in the Bull-Head churchyard. Since he was a 'stranger' -- resident outside the parish -- the burial fee was doubled to $2. 
Almost nothing is known of Massinger's personal life and character as opposed to his literary associations. His friends or acquaintances included John Selden, the jurist; among his fellow dramatists were John Ford and James Shirley. In a younger generation, Philip Edwards and Colin Gibson point out, a group of men who were at Oxford in the early 1620s seem to have shared 'an enthusiasm for the theatre and an admiration for the dramatist who was twenty years their senior' ('Plays and Poems', 1.xxxviii); one of these was the minor poet James Smith, whom Massinger hailed (in a largely humorous context) as his 'son' ('To his sonne, upon his 'Minerva'', 'c'.1635?; 'Plays and Poems', 4.423). He also had contacts at the Inner Temple, to his 'Honored, and selected friends' at which he dedicated 'The Picture' in 1630, mentioning no names mainly because 'I had rather injoy (as I have donne) the reall proofes of their friendship, than mountebancke like boast their numbers in a Catalogue' ('Plays and Poems', 3.195). Particularly in the nineteenth century Massinger was supposed, on flimsy evidence, to be of a gentle, grave, melancholy nature. The subsequently discovered irate 'Charm for a libeller', where he does not rule out the possibility of confuting his critic with a cudgel, is one useful corrective to this image. 
The only known likeness of Massinger is the engraving by Thomas Cross in 'Three New Playes' (1655); all other representations of him derive from it but adapt it to accord with different generations' perceptions of the author. Eighteenth-century editions use Grignion's engraving based fairly closely on Cross; Massinger is more vigorous and earnest in the 1820 engraving by John Thurston, and more melancholy and uncertain in the R. Bocourt version used as the frontispiece of Arthur Symons's selection of 1887. 
Massinger's reputation has undergone a series of fluctuations; it reached its zenith in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century and its nadir in the early to mid-twentieth century. Commenders of his work in his own lifetime emphasize its constructive skill and strength, and the purity, dignity, and theatrical appropriateness of its language; for example Sir Thomas Jay praises 'A New Way to Pay Old Debts' for: '
The craftie 'Mazes' of the cunning plot; 

The polish'd phrase, the sweet expressions; got 

Neither by theft, nor violence; the conceipt 

Fresh, and unsullied. 
('Plays and Poems', 2.296)' Those who disagreed, then as often later, perceived crude moralizing and dull dialogue -- Davenant's 'rude/Modells of vice and virtue unpursued' (Garrett, 62) or what Abraham Wright, about 1640, saw as 'onely plaine downright relating the matter; without any new dress either of language or fancy' in 'A New Way' ('Plays and Poems', 2.379). 
During the 1640s and 1650s Massinger was quite well represented in such miscellanies as Cotgrave's 'English Treasury' (1655). Then and for the rest of the century he features in lists of notable poets much more frequently than such subsequently more popular contemporaries as Webster, Marston, Ford, or Middleton. While the theatres were closed 'The Guardian', 'A Very Woman', and 'The Bashful Lover' first became available to readers in 1655, and 'The City Madam' in 1658. With other pre-interregnum successes a number of Massinger's plays remained popular on the early Restoration stage. 'The Bondman' seems to have appealed most; between 1661 and 1666 Samuel Pepys saw and read the play several times with enthusiasm, and praised especially Thomas Betterton's Pisander and the Cleora of Mrs Saunderson (later Mrs Betterton). On the whole, however, Massinger's fame declined markedly during the remainder of the century. Unmentioned in the Beaumont and Fletcher folios he did not share those authors' high renown. Nicholas Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent' (1703), founded on 'The Fatal Dowry', was popular throughout the eighteenth century; Rowe's failure to acknowledge his original suggests to what extent Massinger's star had waned. 
From the mid-eighteenth century, however, this trend began to be reversed. Massinger fared well in such selections as 'The British Muse' (1738) and Dodsley's 'Select Collection' (1744), and full editions followed in 1759 (reissued in 1761) and 1779. The plays were studied for their historical interest and admired for their 'flowing, various, elegant, and manly' diction, clear morality, strength of characterization, and, concomitantly, their theatrical viability (Garrett, 93). From about 1780 performance of some of the plays, above all 'A New Way to Pay Old Debts' (somewhat adapted) became more frequent. After John Henderson first played Sir Giles in 1781 the part was soon established as one which all leading male actors would wish to attempt. It was one of Edmund Kean's most successful roles from 1816; audiences, among them Byron, Mary Shelley, and William Hazlitt, were deeply affected by Sir Giles's outrageous boldness and sudden and total overthrow, and by Kean's suitably spasmodic and passionate style. The play remained immensely popular in Britain until at least the 1860s and in America until the 1880s, with some productions in the early twentieth century. 'The City Madam' enjoyed not inconsiderable but briefer success in such adaptations as Sir James Bland Burges's 'Riches, or, The Wife and Brother', first performed in 1810. 
Massinger was at his most well known, partly because of such productions, in the early nineteenth century. He was established, in repeated references to his 'sentimental biography', as a noble, 'melancholy' figure. William Gifford's editions of 1805 and 1813 were the most thorough that had so far been accorded a contemporary of Shakespeare. In some quarters, however, critical disenchantment soon began to make itself felt; in particular, clarity of language and morality began to seem to some, as in the playwright's own time, insipid. Hazlitt found him harsh, crabbed, unpoetic; Charles Lamb, in his influential 'Specimens of English Dramatic Poets' (1808), judged him inferior in 'the higher requisites of his art' to 'Ford, Webster, Tourneur, Heywood, and others' -- 'He never shakes or disturbs the mind with grief. He is read with composure and placid delight' (Garrett, 116). While Massinger still had his partisans, notably Coleridge, such perspectives became, increasingly -- with the addition, later in the century, of complaints about his 'indecency' -- the critical orthodoxy. Lamb's and Hazlitt's views are essentially repeated in the mostly unfavourable Victorian verdicts of Leslie Stephen and Edmund Gosse and, most famously, in T. S. Eliot's essay of 1920, where the dramatist is easy, bland, an initiator of the 'dissociation of sensibility' (T. S. Eliot, 'Philip Massinger', 'The Sacred Wood', 1920, 123-43). 
Eliot long seemed to have delivered the 'coup de grace' to Massinger's reputation. By the 1970s, however, some interest in him was reviving in scholarly circles, much helped by a major edition in 1976. Study has concentrated especially on social and political aspects of the plays. 'A New Way to Pay Old Debts' continued periodically to be revived in the theatre. 


@@@@@


doc= 18307


Masson, Francis (1741-1805), botanist, was born in August 1741 at Aberdeen. He made his way to London, where he obtained a gardening appointment at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. In 1771 or 1772 he was selected by Aiton, the superintendent, on the advice of Sir John Pringle, as the fittest person to undertake a journey to the Cape for the purpose of collecting plants and bulbs -- the first collector thus sent out by the authorities at Kew. 
Masson made Cape Town his headquarters and undertook at least three separate journeys into the interior, the first of which was from 10 December 1772 to 18 January 1773, with F. P. Oldenburg; the second, in company with C. P. Thunberg, the Swedish naturalist, lasted from 11 September 1773 to 29 January 1774; and the third, also in 1774, was begun on 26 September and brought to an end on 29 December. Having for the time thoroughly supplied the wants of Kew from that locality, Masson was sent on a like errand in 1776 to the Canaries, Azores, Madeira, and the West Indies, more especially to St Kitts. He returned to England in 1781, and remained at home until 1783, when he was dispatched to Portugal and Madeira. In 1786, when once more sent out to the Cape, he confined his botanical excursions, by the advice of Sir Joseph Banks, to a circuit of 40 miles round Cape Town. He remained there until 1795. 
Masson spent some two years in England with his friends, and prepared and published in 1796-7 his well-known book, 'Stapeliae novae, or,... new species of that genus discovered in the interior parts of Africa'. The work was issued in four instalments and contains forty-one charming coloured plates by Masson, only one of which was copied from another drawing. In 1798 he set out for North America, where he died at Montreal, on 23 December 1805. 
Many plants common in conservatories were first sent to Britain by Masson. 'Massonia', a genus of eight southern African bulbous species, was named after him, as were the southern African shrubs 'Thamnea massoniana' and 'Protea massonii'. 


@@@@@


doc= 18308


Masson, (George Joseph) Gustave (1819-1888), French scholar and teacher, was born in London on 9 March 1819, the son of Emile Masson, who served under Napoleon and having survived the retreat from Moscow lived in exile in London where he met and married Masson's English mother. Gustave Masson received his primary and secondary education in Tours. As the eldest son of a highly decorated officer's widow Masson was, ironically enough, exempted from military service, but he quickly developed into a precocious scholar and earned the diploma of 'bachelier-es-lettres' at the Universite de France in August 1837 when he was still only eighteen years old. On completion of his studies Masson embarked on a decade of intense but ultimately futile literary struggle in Paris. On 26 September 1844 he married Janet, daughter of George Clarke. They had two sons and two daughters. In 1847, with his resources at an end, Masson accepted an invitation to cross the channel and serve as private tutor to a wealthy family in Harrow, Middlesex. The decision to settle in Harrow was a fortuitous one and it was followed, in 1855, by Masson's appointment as French master at the renowned Harrow School. Over the next thirty-three years Masson proved an able administrator, a beloved teacher, and an innovative librarian (of the Vaughan Library), who balanced his official duties with an ambitious scholarly agenda that ranged from the middle ages to the nineteenth century, but placed emphasis on articulating the development and main contours of modern French literature. 
Indeed, Masson was a critic, editor, translator, lexicographer, linguist, textbook compiler, and journalist on a prodigious scale, whose chief works on French literature, language, and history include 'Introduction to the History of French Literature' (1860), 'La lyre Francaise' (an anthology in the 'Golden Treasury' series, 1867), 'A Compendious Dictionary of the French Language' (1874), 'Outlines of French Literature' (1877), 'Early Chronicles of Europe: France' (1879), 'The Huguenots: a Sketch of their History' (1881), 'French Literature' (1888), and 'Medieval France from Hugues Capet to the Sixteenth Century' (1888). In addition, Masson published original monographs of Richelieu (1884) and Mazarin (1886), and numerous successful school and university editions of French classics, including Moliere, Racine, Corneille, Madame de Sevigne, Voltaire, Regnard, Musset, Victor Hugo, George Sand, and Germaine de Stael (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1867-80). In terms of scope, lucidity, and contemporary importance, Masson's contributions to French studies in Victorian England may be compared to Thomas Carlyle's and George Saintsbury's construction, respectively, of German and English literary history during the same period. 
While engaged in producing a vast and, for its time, innovative body of scholarship for specialists and valuable study aids for students and pupils, Masson was also a frequent contributor to 'The Athenaeum' and the regular reviewer of French literature for the 'Saturday Review' from 1872 to 1880. He gave up his Harrow mastership in 1888 and died a few weeks later on 29 August at Woodlands, Tooting Common, Streatham, Surrey, while on a visit to his good friend Sir Henry Doulton. Masson was buried in Harrow churchyard. He was survived by his wife and four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 18309


Massue de Ruvigny, Henri de, earl of Galway, and marquess of Ruvigny in the French nobility (1648-1720), Huguenot leader, army officer, and diplomat, was born in Paris, probably in the Faubourg St Germain, on 9 April 1648, the eldest son of five surviving children of Henri de Massue, first marquess of Ruvigny (1599/1610-1689), general, diplomat, and deputy general of the Huguenots to Louis XIV, and his wife, Marie (died 1698), daughter of Pierre Tallemand and Marie de Rambouillet. 
As a young man Ruvigny served in the French army, first under Schomberg in Portugal, where he was present at the siege of Fort de la Garda, and then under Turenne on the Rhine. In 1674 he was granted a pension for his distinguished service, and by 1677 had achieved the rank of colonel and command of a regiment. In 1678 Louis XIV sent him to England on a successful diplomatic mission aimed at reaching an accommodation with the earl of Shaftesbury and the parliamentary opposition to preserve English neutrality in the final phase of the third Dutch war. In 1679 he left the army and succeeded his father as deputy general of the Huguenots. Thereafter he worked diligently on behalf of the Huguenots at the French court, although there was some criticism that he was the too compliant protege of the marquess of Seignelay, whose interests he sought to gratify. The revocation of the edict of Nantes in 1685 and subsequent severe persecution of protestants in France undermined his position, and at the end of the year he emigrated to England with his father and younger brother Pierre, seigneur de la Caillemotte. The family did not, however, at that stage forfeit their property in France, and received the special privilege of being allowed to take with them whatever personal goods they chose. 
Ruvigny's father, a former French ambassador to England and related through his sister to the whig family of Russell, dukes of Bedford, had prudently obtained letters of naturalization as an English subject in 1680. He settled at Greenwich and became one of the most important of the refugees' leaders in England. Before his death in July 1689 he was influential in the formation of four Huguenot regiments to serve William of Orange. Command of one of the infantry regiments went to la Caillemotte, who was killed in Ireland at the battle of the Boyne. Ruvigny himself had initially avoided military service against France in order to preserve his title to the extensive family estates in Picardy and Champagne. In January 1691, however, he accepted a major-general's appointment with the Williamite army in Ireland and was given the vacant command of Schomberg's cavalry regiment. In June he was present at the siege of Athlone, where he was one of those to advocate the hazardous assault across the river which ultimately won the town for William. At the closely fought battle of Aughrim in co. Galway on 12 July he turned the tide in favour of the Williamites by achieving a vital breakthrough on the right wing, where he led a force of cavalry, including some of his own regiment, along a narrow causeway near Aughrim Castle into the heart of the enemy position. The Jacobite resistance crumbled as a consequence, and in the ensuing collapse James's army suffered as many as 7000 casualties. On the battlefield Ginckel, the Williamite commander, publicly embraced Ruvigny in gratitude for his conduct and courage in helping to win the decisive victory of the war. Subsequently he took part in the second siege of Limerick, where he commanded the cavalry force which crossed the Shannon to cover the Jacobite cavalry in Clare. He played a role in the preliminary contacts which led to the negotiation of the Jacobite surrender, and later took part in the victory celebrations in Dublin before crossing to England in November. 
On 3 March 1692 Ruvigny was created Baron Portarlington and Viscount Galway in reward for his military services, made an Irish privy councillor, and sent back to Ireland as commander-in-chief of the forces there in succession to Ginckel. However, in response to the French invasion threat he was called back to England, where he was appointed second-in-command of a proposed expedition against St Malo and spent much of the year at Portsmouth until the project was abandoned. He returned to Ireland in January 1693, departing again the following April to join William's army in Flanders. In July he played an important role at the battle of Landen, covering William's retreat by defending the bridge at Neerhespen against the entire French cavalry. He was slightly wounded in the engagement and made prisoner, but soon afterwards freed by his magnanimous French captors, who thereby preserved him from a traitor's fate. 
In December 1693 Galway was promoted lieutenant-general and appointed to command the British forces in Savoy. On 14 February 1694 he was given the additional appointment of envoy-extraordinary to Victor Amadeus, duke of Savoy. He brought with him a considerable sum of money for the relief of the Vaudois and the French protestant refugees, and persuaded Victor Amadeus to allow the Vaudois limited toleration. War had ruined the Savoyard economy, and he sought to promote commercial links, especially in textiles, with England. Despite the high hopes of the allies, very little was achieved on the military front in 1694 except the capture of Fort San Giorgio. The duplicitous Victor Amadeus completely deceived Galway as to his trustworthiness. He was secretly in touch with the French, who in 1695 surrendered Casale to him after a token siege. He would not agree to Galway's proposals for combining with the English navy to attack Toulon and Nice, and in 1696 he made a separate peace with France and withdrew from the war. Having declined to accept a gift from Victor Amadeus, Galway retired into the Milanese with the English contingent before rejoining William in Flanders in October. 
In 1697 Galway was appointed one of the lords justices of Ireland, an office he retained until 1701. His French nationality prevented him from being made lord lieutenant, but the absence or indolence of his colleagues made him effective head of the Irish administration. On 12 May 1697 he was advanced to the earldom of Galway and given a grant of $3000 per year out of the forfeited estates of Ireland. His achievements in Ireland included the establishment of a system of discipline and regulations for the army together with an extensive programme of barrack building. He was trusted and liked by William for his frankness and spirit, and repaid the confidence with total loyalty. Although labelled a whig, he had neither the tone nor the temper of a partisan in British politics. The forfeiture of his French estates led him to write to William in 1692, reminding him of a promise that he should get something of the order of $25,000 in compensation for his loss. As a result he was given possession of the 36,000 acre Portarlington estate of the outlawed Jacobite Sir Patrick Trant. This was made an absolute title in 1696. Thus Ireland was effectively his home in the 1690s. He liked Dublin and praised the plentiful crops and fine fish. 
Galway, throughout his life, used his wealth and influence on behalf of the exiled Huguenots. Described as 'their head, their friend, their refuge, their advocate, their support [and] their protector' (Agnew, 'Protestant Exiles from France', 1.162), effectively he continued to act as their deputy general, working tirelessly to improve their general position and to lobby on behalf of individuals. In England he maintained his father's practice of dispensing hospitality and bounty to Huguenot supplicants who crowded his house from early in the morning. In 1689 he paid for the release of Huguenot slaves from Algiers, and in 1696 was known to be maintaining eighty refugees in Switzerland. As early as 1692 he was planning a French colony in Ireland. He spent much of his brief visit that year viewing suitable locations and settling refugees, including half-pay officers and their families. In 1693 he was involved in an abortive scheme to establish a French university at Kilkenny, and in 1694 he discussed the possibility of settlement in Ireland with the leaders of the exiled Waldenses in Switzerland. 
Following Galway's return to Ireland in 1697 the settlement of the French proceeded in earnest, especially when the Huguenot regiments, including his own, were brought there for disbandment in 1698 after the treaty of Ryswick. He helped secure pensions for 120 officers and settled 500 French people on his Portarlington estate, financing the construction there of two churches, two schools, and more than a hundred houses. His vision did much in the 1690s to establish Ireland as a fit haven for Huguenot refugees. Almost a score of settlements, large and small, were established, and the number of Huguenots in the kingdom was greatly increased. He is said to have paid for the grandsons of Viscount Clanmaliere, a previous owner of Portarlington, to be educated at Eton College and to have promised to restore them to their family lands if they converted to the protestant religion. He complained that his expenditure and a reduction in his emoluments had left him virtually penniless, and in 1700 he lost his Portarlington estates when William's land grants in Ireland were cancelled by the 'Act of Resumption'. It was even mooted that as a foreigner he might be precluded from serving in the army. William wrote to Galway of his grief over the matter, and compensated him with a general's appointment in the Dutch forces and command of his prized regiment of Dutch footguards, which he held until 1711. 
Galway's term of office as a lord justice coincided with the enactment by the Irish parliament of the first of the notorious anti-Catholic laws and its ratification of only a severely mutilated version of the 1691 treaty of Limerick. Then, and since, the suggestion has been made that these measures were Galway's revenge. He seems, however, to have been motivated throughout by the government's need to placate the Irish parliament rather than by any personal spleen. In part the contemporary criticism was undoubtedly founded on the genuine, if perhaps mistaken, suspicions of the exiled Irish Catholics and their supporters. An element of 'black propaganda', emanating from the French court, may also have been involved, motivated by Louis's vindictive determination to thwart any attempt by Galway to recover his estates in France under the private clauses of the treaty of Ryswick. In May 1698 William's close adviser the earl of Portland made representations to Louis at Versailles about a possible restoration, but to no avail, and Galway's French estates were eventually granted to Cardinal Polignac. Louis also persuaded President d'Harlay to betray a private trust covering moneys which he held for the Ruvigny family. An even more sinister explanation was Louis's need to discredit Galway in Catholic circles before the disclosure of damaging information Galway had acquired in Savoy relating to Louis's complicity in Jacobite plans to have William assassinated. 
Galway left Ireland in 1701, and in July accompanied the earl of Marlborough to Holland, where he met William at Het Loo and was sent on an unsuccessful diplomatic mission to detach the elector of Cologne from alliance with France. Next he returned to England to negotiate on William's behalf with lords Somers and Sunderland to gain their support for the coming war. William's death found him without public or military employment in Britain, but with an annual pension of $1000. He retired to the manor house of Rookley in Hampshire, which he evidently leased because of its proximity to Stratton House, the residence of Rachel, Lady Russell, his kinswoman and friend. 
In July 1704 Galway was called out of retirement by Queen Anne, given $10,000, promoted general, and sent with 4000 reinforcements to take command of the English forces in Portugal. He arrived at Lisbon on 10 August, where he found the Portuguese army to be of poor quality and ill paid, the clergy hostile to protestants, and the politicians corrupted by French bribes. An early offensive against Ciudad Rodrigo was undertaken, although he counselled against it because of the deficiency in supplies. His view was vindicated when lack of provisions forced the army to retreat. During the winter he reinforced Gibraltar and busied himself in preparing his forces for the 1705 campaign. There were a number of councils of war with the quarrelsome and incompetent earl of Peterborough, who had arrived with a fleet to take command of the allied forces in Spain. Eventually it was decided that Peterborough, accompanied by Archduke Charles, the Habsburg claimant to the Spanish throne, would attack Barcelona, while Galway and the Portuguese under Las Minas invaded Estramadura. His plan for an immediate attack on Badajoz was postponed until Valencia d'Alcantara and Albuquerque had been reduced, and only on 2 October was the siege of Badajoz opened. While he was supervising the erection of a battery, a cannon shot from the fortress carried off his right arm a little below the elbow. His injury forced him to withdraw, and the siege was raised. Marshal de Tesse, the French commander, allowed him a pass to go to Olivenza for his recovery and sent his own physicians to attend him there. During his convalescence he received sympathetic letters of gratitude for his service from both the king of Portugal and Queen Anne. He later learned to write with his left hand. 
Encouraged by Peterborough's capture of Barcelona, Galway resumed his command in the spring of 1706, mounting a fresh offensive with the 25,000 men at his disposal to take advantage of the French preoccupation with Catalonia. Although physically so weak that he had to be lifted into the saddle, he conducted a vigorous and successful campaign. The numerically weaker Hispano-French forces under the duke of Berwick were driven back, and were powerless to prevent the capture of Alcantara and Ciudad Rodrigo. After some delay the reluctant Portuguese were persuaded to continue the offensive towards Madrid, which was occupied without resistance in the name of King Charles on 27 June. The event occasioned much public rejoicing when news of it reached England. It had less impact in Spain, because most of the Spanish grandees had already left the city, and Peterborough and Charles, despite repeated requests from Galway, failed to put in an appearance in the capital. While the allies delayed, Berwick was reinforced and given time to mobilize Spanish support. On 6 August French troops reoccupied Madrid, which Galway had vacated finally to join Peterborough and Charles at Guadalajara. The meeting of the allied leaders was marked by recriminations. Galway's generous proposal that Peterborough should assume overall command of their united forces was rejected by the other generals. After spending a month at Chinchon, the allies withdrew to winter quarters in Valencia. 
Galway sought to be recalled to England, but instead in February 1707 orders came appointing him commander of all the British forces in Spain while Peterborough was summoned home. Reinforced from England, but without the Catalan and German troops which were brought north by Charles to garrison Catalonia and Aragon, he planned a fresh attack on Madrid. However, to consolidate the security of Valencia, he delayed the offensive to reduce first the potential French bases in Murcia. Meanwhile Berwick, having received substantial reinforcements from France under the duc d'Orleans, opened his own offensive in Murcia. Galway, mistakenly believing that the French reinforcements had yet to arrive, advanced on 25 April against Berwick's position outside Almanza, only to find that his army was heavily outnumbered. The left wing gave way before the French and the Portuguese cavalry on the right fled from the field leaving the infantry to be massacred or made prisoner. Galway himself behaved courageously, but he lost direction of the battle when severely wounded by a sabre cut to the face, which cost him the sight of his right eye. He managed to leave the field, but his army was virtually destroyed. Although the war was to drag on for several years, Almanza was probably the decisive engagement which ensured that the throne of Spain would go to the French claimant. 
In the immediate aftermath of the battle Aragon, Murcia, and Valencia fell to the French, while Galway concentrated on the defence of Catalonia, where he displayed considerable energy in reorganizing the remnants of his broken infantry into five battalions and raising four more of Catalans. However, he was powerless to prevent the fall of Lerida in November. He became the focus of growing criticism in England over the set-backs in the peninsula, and in December he was replaced by James Stanhope as commander of the British in Spain. Debilitated by his war wounds, deafness, and gout, he had long sought to be recalled. Instead, as a mark of the government's approbation, he was sent as envoy to Lisbon and resumed command of the English forces in Portugal. He had little influence with King Pedro, the new Portuguese monarch, who was pro-French and was only kept in the allied alliance by his fear of the English fleet. Apart from diplomatic duties he was largely inactive in 1708. In 1709 he participated in a fresh offensive in Estramadura, which was ended on 17 May by a sharp reverse on the banks of the Caya, during which his horse was killed beneath him and he narrowly escaped capture. The defeat was largely caused by the rashness of the Portuguese commander, but the set-back renewed criticism of Galway in England, and in 1710, much to his relief, he was finally recalled, arriving at Falmouth on 21 October. 
A month later, despite the fall of the Godolphin and Marlborough faction with whom Galway was associated, he was kindly received at St James's Palace by Queen Anne on 18 November. In January 1711, however, the management of the disastrous Peninsular War was the subject of several acrimonious debates in the House of Lords. He and Peterborough gave conflicting accounts, and although Marlborough defended Galway's conduct, for entirely political reasons the house, by sixty-eight votes to forty-eight, chose to believe Peterborough and voted to censure him. He then retired to Rookley, where he remained until 1715, when he was summoned from retirement to serve once more as a lord justice of Ireland with the young duke of Grafton. His appointment was probably intended to preserve the military security of Ireland at the time of the Jacobite rising in Scotland. He landed with Grafton at Dublin on 1 November, and found the Irish parliament and establishment totally loyal. His plan to improve the legal position of the presbyterians was thwarted by the bishops in the House of Lords, but it was some compensation that parliament granted him a military pension of $500 per year. He was recalled in January 1716, when he retired for the final time to Rookley. In 1718 he was named as first governor in the charter establishing the French Hospital in London. His mind remained clear to the end of his life. On 3 September 1720 he died at the age of seventy-two, while visiting Lady Russell at Stratton House, and was buried three days later in nearby Micheldever churchyard. Ruvigny was unmarried and left no immediate family, so that at his death all his honours both French and English became extinct. Under his will, after legacies of $12,670 mainly to Huguenot charities, the residue of his estate went to Lady Russell. 
Although the many failures and vicissitudes of Galway's career suggest that his abilities were limited, contemporaries generally held him in high esteem. In France, as a young man, the writer Benoit judged him 'handsome in person, and mentally he was affable, sagacious and intelligent, brave without temerity, prudent without meanness, agreeable to the king, beloved by all the court, and on excellent terms with His Majesty's ministers... his merits procured him neither enemies nor detractors' (Agnew, 'Henri de Ruvigny, Earl of Galway', 33). In later life the whig bishop Burnet thought him 'one of the finest gentlemen in the army, with a head fitted for the cabinet as well as the camp; is very modest, vigilant and sincere, without pride or affectation; wears his own hair [and] is plain in his dress and manners' (GEC, 'Peerage'). This assessment provoked the partisan and probably unfair response of the tory dean Swift that he was 'a deceitful, hypocritical, factious knave, [and] a damnable hypocrite of no religion' (GEC, 'Peerage'). 


@@@@@


doc= 18310


John Master (bap. 1637, d. in or after 1684), physician, was William Master's younger brother and their parents' fifth son. He was baptized at Cirencester on 25 September 1637, although he was said to be forty-eight years old in 1682. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 20 July 1654, graduated BA on 3 February 1657, proceeded MA from St Mary Hall on 25 June 1659, and was created MD from Christ Church on 4 July 1672. He was unmarried. He assisted the noted medical author Thomas Willis in some of his publications and was admitted an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians on 30 September 1680. He is last recorded on 27 April 1684, when William Master named him an executor of his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 18311


Master, Richard (d. 1587/8), physician, was a younger son of Robert Master (died before 1551) of Street End, near Canterbury, Kent. A fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, from 1533 to 1541, Richard Master graduated BA in 1533 and MA in 1537. Later he would claim that he became a protestant at about this date through reading the works of Heinrich Bullinger, and that he gave up a lucrative benefice 'c'.1538-9 because he considered himself unsuitable for the post, and 'Popery, though officially abolished flourished in reality' (Robinson, 'Original Letters', 1.177). Master certainly met Bullinger's associate, Rudolph Gwalther, on 11 March 1537 during his visit to England and subsequently corresponded with him. Master's enthusiasm for the protestant cause was tempered by a native shrewdness: he suspended the correspondence with Gwalther during the reign of Mary. 
Master began studying medicine about 1541. In 1545 he was admitted BM at Oxford University with licence to practice. From 1547 he studied at Christ Church and graduated DM on 29 July 1555, despite suffering severe illness through much of 1549 and 1550. Master's medical standing rose steadily throughout the 1550s. In March 1553 he became a fellow of the College of Physicians. He was censor of the college in 1556-8 and 1560, and elect in 1558. He was also incorporated MD at Cambridge in 1571. 
Master's appointment for life as royal physician on 26 June 1559 represented the zenith of his career. Other preferment soon followed. In 1561 he was elected president of the College of Physicians. In 1563 he was granted the lucrative prebend of Fridaythorpe in the East Riding of Yorkshire and lands in Sheriff Hutton near York. He was appointed master of the hospital of St Mary the Virgin, Newcastle upon Tyne, and consiliarius of the College of Physicians in 1564. In September 1566 he was moderator of the physic act kept there before the queen at Oxford. In 1568 Elizabeth I granted him a coat of arms. In the same year he was granted the reversion of the site of the former abbey of Cirencester in return for $590, where, after buying out the sitting tenants, he built a substantial house. Further grants of property in Huntingdonshire, Sussex, Lincolnshire, Oxfordshire, Middlesex, Hertfordshire, and Essex occurred in 1577 and 1581. His standing is also indicated by his being chosen as dedicatee of a translation of a French tract on gout by Christopher Arbaleste in 1577. Master's good relationship with the queen is suggested by his exchange of gifts with her on new year's day of 1562, 1578, and 1588, one of which was almost certainly a fine silver covered cup bearing the badge of Anne Boleyn, the queen's mother ('Reports of the itinerary', 32). Master had married Elizabeth, daughter of John Fulnetby of Fulnetby near Wragby, Lincolnshire, by 1560; they had seven sons. 
Richard Master made his will on 10 January 1587; he was buried on 15 January 1588 at St Olave, Silver Street, London. He was survived by his wife, who received the lease estate, income from Bisley Wood in Gloucestershire, and two thirds of the marriage settlement of their eldest son George. George inherited the Cirencester house and estates in Gloucestershire and Wiltshire. Master set aside $310 for the purchase of Sinckley Manor, Gloucestershire, for his son John. Henry received his father's house in Silver Street, St Olave, London, and his father's 'books of phisick and books of philosophie' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/72, sig. 34). His other sons received annuities. Four of Master's sons had distinguished careers. George, of St John's College, Oxford, and Lincoln's Inn, was MP for Cirencester in 1586 and 1588. Thomas (1560-1628), BTh, master of the Temple in 1601, became canon of Lichfield in 1613 and archdeacon of Shropshire in 1614. Robert (1565-1625), DCL, was principal of St Alban Hall, Oxford, 1599-1603, chancellor of Rochester and Lichfield, and MP for Cricklade in 1601. Henry, MA, was principal of St Alban Hall 1603-14. 
In addition to some of his correspondence with Rudolph Gwalther, a number of other letters by Richard Master survive. These include his undated reply to Elizabeth I concerning her question about the general causes of disease (Strype, 4.271) and several letters to William Cecil, Lord Burghley, which give advice concerning loose teeth, gout, and pains in the head and neck (TNA: PRO, SP 12/141/33; BL, Lansdowne MS 46.38, 121.19). 


@@@@@


doc= 18312


Master, Streynsham (1681-1724), naval officer, was born on 7 March 1681, at Great Bartholomew Close, Smithfield, London, and baptized on the following day at St Bartholomew-the-Great, West Smithfield, the fourth but only surviving son of James Master (1626/7-1702), of East Langdon, Kent, and his wife, Joyce (1645/6-1719), daughter of Sir Christopher Turnor, baron of the exchequer. Master was originally intended for the law, being admitted on 22 May 1699 to Gray's Inn (where his father had entered in 1648). However, the influence of his brother-in-law Sir George Byng (who had married his elder sister, Margaret) led him instead to embark upon a naval career. 
With Byng as a patron, Master served on board the 'Ranelagh' as a midshipman, becoming a lieutenant in 1704, and being 'much hurt in the leg' (Laughton, 143) during the capture of Gibraltar in July of that year. When Byng was in command in the Mediterranean, he appointed Master to command the 'Fame' prize on 15 July 1709. On 22 March 1710 Sir John Norris made him captain of the 'Ludlow Castle', and on 7 December 1712 he was appointed to command the 'Ormonde'. He commanded the 'Ormonde' in July 1715 when it was one of the extra ships commissioned to deal with the Jacobite threat. In 1716-17 he was captain of the 'Dragon' serving under Byng and Norris in the Baltic. On 14 March 1718 he was in command of the 'Superb' again in the Mediterranean, and on 31 July 1718 was in action at the battle of Cape Passaro. In this action he took part in the capture of the Spanish flagship and her admiral, being much lauded as the first captain to achieve that honour. 
Master returned to England, and saw no further service. On 10 February 1724 he married Elizabeth (1691-1759), only daughter of Richard Oxenden and Mary, daughter of Henry Oxenden. She was the heir of Brook, Kent. Master died on 22 June 1724 of a fever; he is not to be confused with his kinsman the Indian administrator Sir Streynsham Master, who also died in 1724 (28 April). His will, made the previous day, left Brook to his wife, but ordered other property to be sold in order to pay his seven surviving sisters $1000 apiece. Interestingly, he still possessed a chamber at Gray's Inn, which was also to be sold. He was buried in the parish church of Wingham, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 18313


Master, Thomas (1602/3-1643), poet and amanuensis, was born in Coates, Gloucestershire, where his father, William Master (died in or after 1637), was rector. He studied under Henry Topp at Cirencester grammar school and in 1617 advanced to Winchester College on a scholarship. He was nineteen on 15 November 1622 when he matriculated from New College, Oxford; he was named perpetual fellow before graduating BA on 22 November 1625. He proceeded MA on 6 June 1629. According to Anthony Wood, he 'was esteemed a vast scholar, a general artist and linguist, a noted poet, and a most florid preacher' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.84). 
Master contributed Latin and English poems to no fewer than ten Oxford University collections, including 'Carolus redux' (1623), 'Musarum Oxoniensium' (1633), and 'Horti Carolini rosa altera' (1640). Some of this poetry is substantial, such as 'Oceani convivium' in 'Britanniae natalis' (1630). Wood mentions three poems not included in any of these collections: 'On Bishop Lake' (1626), 'On Ben Jonson' (1637), and 'On Vaulx'. Master is the author of a Greek ode, dated 19 April 1633, on the crucifixion. It was first published as an appendix to Sir Henry Saville's 'Oratio' (1658), along with a Latin translation by Henry Jacobs, and an English translation, entitled 'Christs passion', by Abraham Cowley. 
In the 1630s Master served as an amanuensis to Edward Herbert, Lord Herbert of Cherbury, and according to John Aubrey he lived with Herbert until 1642. The Bodleian Library holds four manuscript volumes related to Herbert's 'The Life and Raigne of King Henry the Eighth'. The first three volumes (Jesus College MSS 71-73) are original drafts, partly in Master's handwriting, of the three-volume printed work. A fourth volume (Jesus College MS 74) comprises research notes in Master's hand and 'is dated internally to 1635-1638' (Hoyle, 54). Wood suggests that Master translated several of Herbert's books into Latin, but this has not been confirmed. At Herbert's request in 1636 Master composed a Latin poem, 'Mensa lubrica', on the game of shuffleboard. It was published in 1651 and republished, with an English version entitled 'The shovel-board table turn'd', as an appendix to Saville's 'Oratio'. 
In August 1637 Master travelled from Montgomeryshire to Lincolnshire to be inducted into the sinecure living of East Wickham, near Louth. He recounts his journey in a Latin letter to his father, dated 25 September 1637. He apparently became ill near Lincoln and had to stay briefly with his uncle at Stockwith before attending the ceremony and returning to Montgomeryshire. Written in prose and verse, the letter was later edited by his travelling companion George Ent and published as 'Iter boreale' (1675). 
Shortly after receiving his BD, on 25 March 1641 Master preached an English sermon on 'Luke' 1: 26-7 at New College. It was later published as 'The Virgin Mary' (1665) and achieved some measure of popularity, with reprints in sermon collections throughout the eighteenth century. On 19 March 1642 Viscount Newark wrote to the bishop of London to recommend Master for an ecclesiastical preferment. There is no evidence, however, that his petition was successful. About a week later, in the chapel of New College, Master delivered a Latin oration on the British monarchy, surveying the reigns of Elizabeth I and James I and concluding with praise of Charles I. The oration was later edited by the history professor John Lamphire of New College and published as 'Monarchia Britannica' (1661). 
According to Wood, Master died 'either in Dec. or Jan. in sixteen hundred forty three' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3. 86), having succumbed to the so-called Oxford camp disease, but the date of Master's death is probably closer to 31 August 1643: his replacement at New College, Thomas Brickenden, was admitted as a scholar on 9 September. Master may have died in Oxford or at Louth, but is said to have been buried in 1643 in the north part of the outer chapel of New College. Edward Herbert's 'Occasional Verses' (1648) concludes with a poem dedicated to Master and a Latin epitaph on 'Amate Master'. 


@@@@@


doc= 18314


Sir William Master (1600/01-1662), local politician, and his wife, Alice Estcourt (died 1660). Sir William was the son of George Master ('b'. 1556?) and Bridget Cornwall, and the grandson of Elizabeth I's physician, Richard Master -- the family was one of the most important in the Cirencester area. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in November 1612 and knighted on 3 December 1622. He was MP for Cirencester in 1624 and high sheriff of Gloucestershire in 1627, when he was also among twelve county commissioners who refused either to pay the forced loan or to enforce it on others. He was present when Lord Chandos tried unsuccessfully to execute the commission of array at Cirencester on 15 August 1642 and afterwards smuggled Chandos away through his house to escape the wrath of the mob. Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice quartered at his house and batteries were sited in his garden prior to the sack of Cirencester on 2 February 1643. During the civil war he was a moderately active royalist, though not in arms. He was nominated to the royalist commission of the peace in March 1643 and to several other administrative commissions. Sir William surrendered to the county committee in August 1644 but then entertained the king at his house on the night of 31 October 1644. The estates, already severely reduced in value, were consequently sequestered. He took the covenant and the negative oath on 18 February 1647 and petitioned to compound for his estates, claiming that he had only acted as he had to prevent worse damage. In 1650 he compounded for $1200, plus a further $282 for undervaluations in 1652. He died on 3 March 1662 at the age of sixty-one, a year and a half after the death of his wife, Alice Estcourt, on 5 September 1660, and was buried at Cirencester. 


@@@@@


doc= 18315


Master, William (bap. 1627, d. 1684), Church of England clergyman, was baptized on 7 September 1627 at Cirencester, the second son, in a family of six sons and six daughters, of 
The younger William Master matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 2 April 1647 and was admitted as a fellow of Merton College while still an undergraduate by order of the parliamentary visitors on 25 March 1650. He graduated BA on 7 November 1650 and MA on 19 November 1652. He also took a BD, according to Anthony Wood. In 1653 he published 'Essayes and Observations Theologicall and Morall', a series of twenty-five short, well-written essays on the humours of the age, under the pseudonym 'A student in theologie'. These actually skirted around theological matters and did not openly express Master's firmly Anglican views. Instead, he contrasted the wise government under bishop or presbyter in the primitive church with the false certainties of contemporary saints who 'take upon themselves to be Daniels, persons greatly beloved of God and yet have no better authoritie for their assurance, than that of a presumptuous fancy'. Master also took a wry dig at Cromwell, noting that 'Alexander's way with Gordian knots is too well knowne in this age, and too much practised' (Master, 52-3, 86). In 1654 he published, again anonymously, 'Drops of Myrrhe', seven prayers and meditations on such matters as 'a distracted Church and state' and the spirit of moderation and discernment. Wing's 'Short-Title Catalogue' also attributes to Master an anonymous tract of 1653 entitled 'Master John Goodwins Quere Questioned', which rebutted Goodwin's denial of the magistrate's right to enforce observation of the sabbath and generally upheld his powers in religious matters. The beliefs this expresses are similar to Master's, but the writing style is different. 
At some stage before 20 May 1658 Master was presented to the vicarage of Preston, near Cirencester, the advowson of which was in the family. On that date he officiated at the wedding of George Bull, the future bishop of St David's and a close friend of the family, using the proscribed Anglican form. Master became rector of Woodford, Essex, on 13 February 1661 and prebendary of Chamberlainwood at St Paul's on 17 July 1663. On 18 May 1665, at Woodford, he married Susanna Yate, daughter of the Revd Job Yate, rector of Rodmarton, Gloucestershire. They had two sons and a daughter: Richard, Thomas, and Elizabeth. He resigned the prebend of Chamberlainwood in 1666 and was collated to the rectory of Southchurch, Essex, on 3 July 1666 by Archbishop Sheldon. He resigned this living after he was appointed by royal prerogative to the prebend of Caddington Major in St Paul's on 14 February 1667. On 29 April 1671 Sheldon conferred on him the rectory of St Vedast-alias-Foster, London, with the united parish of St Michael-le-Querne, which he retained until his death. His wife was living when he made his will on 27 April 1684; he was buried at Woodford on 6 September 1684. 




@@@@@


doc= 18316


Masters, Mary (fl. 1733-1755), poet and letter-writer, was born of humble parents who, by her admission, 'always brow-beat and discountenanc'd... her Genius to Poetry' (Masters, 'Poems', preface, A2), her father endeavouring 'to prevent [her] from acquiring the use of the Pen or a proper Pronunciation in Reading', since he maintained that 'Writing would only qualify [women] for intrigue' (Masters, 'Familiar Letters', 52-3). Though 'ill-provided with the gifts of Fortune' (ibid., preface) she published two original volumes, 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1733) and 'Familiar Letters and Poems on Several Occasions' (1755), whose lengthy subscribers' lists, which included Elizabeth Carter, Hester Chapone, Samuel Johnson, Charlotte Lennox, John Newbery, Samuel Richardson, and Christopher Smart, show that Masters was well promoted within elite literary networks. In fact such 'genteel' (Landry, 8) social connections mean that Masters, unlike Mary Collier, Mary Leapor, and Ann Yearsley, was not a typical plebeian poet. Despite Boswell's unsubstantiated claim that Johnson 'revised' her volumes, 'illuminated here and there with a ray of his own genius' (Boswell, 8.241), Masters's work not only discloses whatever scant biographical information can be pieced together but conveys the mind of a determined, self-possessed woman. The biographical facts are oblique at best, glimpsed through hints of extended sojourns in various London households, Edward Cave's among them, and a period of residence in Derbyshire. The volumes, in effect, establish and confirm Masters's literary presence, their fleeting attention to geography notwithstanding. Her response to 'ingenious letters' from the then elderly poet Jane Barker was praise of 'such Indications of the clearest Mind' and 'such steady Sense' (Masters, 'Poems', 86-7). Whether imitating Dryden or Horace, recommending to female correspondents books such as Francesco Algarotti's explications of Newton, or annotating her copy of poet and prose writer Elizabeth Rowe's work, Masters, as she justified herself to an intemperate 'London Magazine' critic in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (April 1739), let her 'Themes themselves... for their Author plead' (Masters, 'Familiar Letters', 285). 
These themes include the vagaries of courtship and marriage, women's intellectual equality, and the transformations and raptures of Christian charity. 'Never distrest [with] am'rous Cares', Masters did not marry, preferring 'a safe Part... out of the Snare' of Cupid (Masters, 'Familiar Letters', 219). However, in poems and prose letters she held forth on love, marriage, and childbirth, pointedly opposing the union of a foolish man and a witty woman, since 'those who are not Fools, will Fools despise', but approving the marriage of two minds where 'wit to Wit gives, mutually, Delight' (ibid., 193-4). Convinced that 'Souls have no Sex' Masters devoted several letters and poems to proto-feminist issues: the desire 'to rescue [her] Sex from so base a Slavery as some of them undergo who are Married to such as Delight to keep them in a mean Subjection' (ibid., 77), the asseveration that 'as I'm born, I will be, free' (ibid., 80), and the opinion that the intellectual 'difference between Men and Women... proceeds only from the difference in Education' (ibid., 313). Answering a female correspondent who argued for women's inferiority and for 'female poets fall[ing] short of Milton' Masters contended that 'Female Authors have thoughts as sublime as his can possibly be', citing such exemplars of acumen and artistry as the biblical Deborah, the Socratic Diotima, Pope Joan, and Catherine the Great, along with Mary Astell, Alison Cockburn, and Elizabeth Rowe (ibid., 313-15). Both volumes, especially the first, show her expertise in blending humility and self-aggrandizement; an 'unletter'd Maid... wholly unpractis'd in the learned Rules', she insists that she writes 'simple Nature unimprov'd by Art', yet clings to 'distinguishing Defects to prove them Mine' (Masters, 'Poems', 45). From early childhood, during which she was particularly affected by the narrative of the friendship of David and Jonathan, the 'Bible' provided a storehouse of allusion and metaphor. Masters's paraphrastic verse translations of several psalms garnered rhymed epistles from Thomas Scott, attesting that: '
the soft melodious Hebrew's Voice 

In your sweet, echoing Notes rejoice. 
(ibid., 231)' Masters was also an adept imitator whose skill verged on parody. Her two-part extension of Thomas Gray's 'Ode on the Death of a Favourite Cat', aiming to comfort Selima's grieving young mistress, installs the favourite 'on Clio's Lap Divine' with 'two snow-white cows' attending to dispense 'Nectareous Milk of Taste and Hue', of which Selima 'has all the Cream' (Masters, 'Familiar Letters', 253-6). Her response to Dryden's version of Catullus's berating of Lesbia for 'the Lechery of Deceit' adroitly turns the tables -- in the manner of Christopher Marlowe's articulate nymph -- in its observation on the philandering of men, charmed by 'dear Variety' and loving 'to range' (ibid., 89-90). Like so many enigmas of her life, the place of Masters's death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 18317


Masters, Robert (1713-1798), historian, was born on Christmas day 1713 at Hetherset, Norfolk, son of William Masters (1681-1759) and his wife, Anne Fish (died 1758) of Hetherset, and was descended from the royalist Sir William Masters. His parents had two other sons, who died in infancy, and a daughter. Nothing is known of his schooling; he entered Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, as a sizar in 1731, and proceeded BA in 1735, MA in 1738, and BD in 1746. He was ordained priest at Ely in September 1738, the same year that he was elected into a fellowship of his college. There he remained for twenty years, filling at times the offices of dean, bursar, and tutor; his pupils remembered his plain-speaking. In 1752 he was presented to the vicarage of St Benet, Cambridge, and he eventually became a rural parish priest in Corpus livings at Landbeach from 1756 to 1797 and Waterbeach from 1759 to 1784. Masters married at Landbeach on 12 August 1757 Constance Cory ('c'.1730-1764), daughter of John Cory, vicar of Impington and Waterbeach in Cambridgeshire. She died on 29 August 1764 leaving a son, William, and three daughters: Anne, who married the Revd Andrew Sprole, Mary, who married the Revd Thomas Cooke Burroughes, and Constance, who died young. 
Although Masters published a timely sermon entitled 'The Mischiefs of Faction and Rebellion Considered', delivered in October 1745 when a Jacobite invasion from Scotland was expected daily, his real passion was the past. He belonged to a small and intimate group of antiquaries whom William Cole dubbed the Benedictines because of their association with Benet (Corpus Christi) College. Cole, who acted very uncomfortably as Masters's curate at Waterbeach for two years, admitted that much of what he recorded about him was 'wrote with too much acrimony', and as a witness he is not always to be relied on. Both were strong-minded and liked their own way. That Masters had a rough edge and did not court popularity is, however, evident; his attempt to have his son elected a fellow of Corpus failed, he was embroiled in a controversy with the young architect James Essex in 1748 and appears to have been in the wrong, and he later engaged successfully in litigation about his parochial rights to tithes. Masters contributed a few papers to 'Archaeologia', the journal of the Society of Antiquaries, to which he was elected in May 1752. The first of them, a scholar's remarks on Horace Walpole's 'Historic Doubts' on Richard III ('Archaeologia', 2, 1771, 198), only confirmed the dislike that Walpole had been taught by Cole and alienated him from the society. Masters also wrote on stone coffins and skeletons discovered at Cambridge Castle (ibid., 8, 1785, 63), and on a stained-glass pedigree of the Stewart family (ibid., 8, 1786, 321). He compiled 'Memoirs of the Life and Writings of the Late Rev. Thomas Baker', the nonjuror of St John's College, using materials of Zachary Grey to which he appended a catalogue of manuscripts (1784) and a 'Catalogue of the several pictures in the public library and respective colleges in the University of Cambridge' (1790). 
Of greater value than such works was Masters's first major book, which attracted favourable attention and proved durable. In 1749 he printed a biographical list of the alumni of Corpus, and was led to compile a large 'History of the College of Corpus Christi' (in two parts, 1753-5) which is the first published account of its kind of any college at Oxford or Cambridge. He had permission to inspect the archives and printed what by the standards of the time are well-edited documents together with a narrative history in which biographical material predominated. His interleaved and extra-illustrated copy at Corpus shows a painstaking concern. John Lamb, master of the college, continued and revised the history, bringing it down to 1831. The second pioneering historical work that Masters undertook came at the end of his life when he issued in an edition of only twenty-five copies 'A Short Account of the Parish of Waterbeach' (1795) 'by a late vicar', which is the first separate Cambridgeshire parish history. It allowed him to settle an old score with Bishop Yorke of Ely and remains of interest for its evidence about the agriculture of a fenland parish on the eve of enclosure. 
In typical eighteenth-century fashion, Masters resigned the living of Waterbeach in favour of his son William who, however, predeceased him, dying in 1794, and the Landbeach parish to his son-in-law, Thomas Burroughes, with whom he lived until his death at Landbeach on 5 July 1798. He was buried in Landbeach church. His considerable library had been sold by auction at London some months before he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 18318


Mastertown, Charles (1679-1750), minister of the Presbyterian General Synod of Ulster and religious controversialist, was born in Scotland, probably near Linlithgow, on 23 March 1679, and was educated at Edinburgh University, whence he graduated MA on 28 June 1697. He was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Linlithgow probably in 1703 and, having moved to Ireland, his credentials were accepted by the synod of Ulster at Antrim on 1 June 1703. He accepted a call from the congregation of Connor and was ordained there by Antrim presbytery on 17 May 1704. His ministry in this charge earned him a growing reputation as a preacher and a scholar. In view of their future disagreements it is worth noting that in 1718 he headed a protest against synod's decision to force John Abernethy, a leading non-subscriber, to move to Dublin, a decision which Abernethy at this time refused to obey. 
The installation of Samuel Haliday in the First Belfast congregation in 1720, in spite of his refusal to subscribe to the Westminster confession of faith, alienated several members of both Presbyterian congregations in Belfast. On 4 July 1721 a subscription list was opened for the building of a third meeting-house. Generous help was forthcoming, including gifts from Scotland, and the new church was opened in 1722; the congregation called Mastertown to be their minister, and he was installed on 20 February 1723. It is a remarkable tribute to his ability that so soon afterwards, on 18 June 1723, he was elected moderator of the general synod, meeting at Dungannon. The controversy over subscription was now at its height. Mastertown's own contribution to the debate was substantial. In 1723 he published 'An Apology for the Northern Presbyterians in Ireland', defending the practice of subscription in reply to Abernethy's 'Seasonable Advice to the Protestant Dissenters in the North of Ireland' (1722). Abernethy replied with his 'Defence of the Seasonable Advice' ('c'.1725) and Mastertown answered with his 'Short Reply', published in 1726; this was a pamphlet of considerable importance that dealt with the doctrinal issues that lay behind the subscription controversy. 
Meanwhile Mastertown had published in 1725 a sermon entitled 'Christian Liberty Founded on Gospel Truth'. Against Abernethy's argument that sincerity is enough and that truth is founded on 'personal persuasion' Mastertown maintained that a Christian's knowledge of the truth must be based on the persuasion of the Holy Spirit speaking through scripture. It was not a liberty to embrace error, but to accept the revelation given by God. His most significant work was undoubtedly 'The Doctrine of the Holy Trinity', originally published in Belfast in 1725. This went through several editions -- in Belfast, London, and Edinburgh -- during the author's lifetime. Mastertown himself contributed a supplement to the 1745 edition, entitled 'The Great Importance of the Scripture Doctrine of the Ever-Blessed Trinity'. After his death it was reprinted a number of times. The final edition (1880) contained a biographical memoir by his great-grandson the Revd Hope Masterton Waddell. 
Mastertown suffered considerable opposition from Samuel Haliday and James Kirkpatrick, the ministers of the First and Second Belfast congregations, both before and after the separation of the non-subscribing congregations into the separate Presbytery of Antrim in 1725 and the exclusion of that presbytery from the jurisdiction of synod in 1726. Mastertown pursued his ministry calmly but firmly and built up a large congregation. He attended the general synod in 1745 but by the next year was no longer capable of preaching; William Laird was appointed his assistant and successor on 16 September 1747. Mastertown died in Belfast on 15 July 1750. His only child, Susan, married John Poaug in 1725 and had numerous descendants. After his death Mastertown's friends arranged for the publication of two of his sermons in one pamphlet, which was printed in Belfast in 1753. The first was the farewell sermon that he had preached at Connor in 1722 and the second was a reprint of his 1725 sermon 'Christian Liberty'. 
Charles Mastertown was probably the most capable and influential proponent of orthodoxy in the synod of Ulster as it tried to deal with the contentious issue of subscription in the 1720s. His attitude appears rigid but his writings reveal that he might have proved less inflexible had the non-subscribers been more forthcoming about their doctrinal views. He was above all else an able and gifted minister who built up a strong congregation while at the same time contributing significantly by his writings to the support of orthodox doctrine not only in Ireland but beyond. 


@@@@@


doc= 18319


Matcham, George (1753-1833), traveller, was born at or near Bombay, India, the only surviving son of Simon Matcham (died 1776), superintendent of the Bombay marine of the East India Company, and his wife, Elizabeth, formerly Bidwell. Matcham's travels began when he was sent from Bombay to Charterhouse School, and put under the guardianship of Henry Savage, a director of the East India Company. On leaving Charterhouse in 1769 he returned overland to India and entered the Bombay civil service in 1771, subsequently becoming the East India Company's resident at Broach until its cession to the Marathas in 1783. 
His father's death left Matcham with a good inheritance. In 1777 his mother sailed to England, to live near Canterbury, while he travelled overland to join her, spending his home leave exploring England and Ireland, where he had cousins. In 1780 he again crossed the desert on his way back to India. Matcham followed various routes: sometimes taking a ship through the Mediterranean to explore the Greek islands and view their antiquities; on another journey, he sailed through the Red Sea; at other times his route carried him through Kurdistan, Turkey, and the Balkan lands, into western Europe. He normally crossed the desert on horseback, either alone or in the company of other Europeans, and accompanied by Arab guides and servants. From the frequency of these expeditions, he was well known to such British diplomats as Sir Robert Murray Keith at Vienna and Sir Joseph Yorke at The Hague, and on one occasion he was presented at the court of the emperor Joseph II, to whom he recounted his travels. Accounts of these journeys were said to appear in James Capper's 'Observations on the Passage to India' (1783) and Eyles Irwin's 'Voyage up the Red Sea' (1780; 3rd edn, 1787, 2 vols.) but Matcham's precise route is difficult to establish from these sources. 
Matcham retired from the service in 1785, and the following year settled with his mother at Enfield, near Bath. There he met Catherine 
(Kitty; 1767-1842)
, daughter of the Revd Edmund and Catherine Nelson, and sister of Horatio, later Viscount Nelson (1758-1805). Two months later, on 26 February 1787, they were married at Burnham Thorpe, Norfolk, by her father, and they stayed at Barton Hall, near Norwich, for the birth in 1789 of George Matcham ['see below']. The Matchams then moved to Ringwood, Hampshire, where their subsequent seven children were born. In 1797 they decided to move to Bath for the sake of the children's education, and subsequently to Ashfold Lodge, Sussex. Throughout these moves, they kept in close contact with the Nelson family, and followed with interest the progress of their famous naval relative. 
On his Hampshire and Sussex estates, Matcham was concerned with the planting and improvement of his property; he took pleasure in guiding the education of his children, and in his own liberal studies. He sent many letters to the higher authorities of the state, proposing various improvements. These were mostly ignored, one exception being the conversion of some marshy ground into a public pleasure garden in St James's Park. His patent (no. 2676 of 1803) for a method of raising sunken vessels or other heavy objects was likewise ignored, as it was completely impractical. His specification described a leathern bag filled with water, and attached to a rope led over a pulley and counterweighted. When air was pumped into the bag, the counterweight would, he supposed, raise the air-filled bag and the wreck to the surface. Matcham died at Kensington on 3 February 1833; Catherine spent her widowed years at Holland Park, Kensington, where she died on 2 April 1842. 
Their son 



@@@@@


doc= 18320


George Matcham (1789-1877) was born on 7 November 1789, and entered St John's College, Cambridge, in 1808, where he graduated LLB in 1814 and LLD in 1820. He was an advocate of Doctors' Commons, 1820-30. On 20 February 1817 he married Harriet, eldest daughter and heir of William Eyre, of Newhouse, Whiteparish, Wiltshire. They are known to have had at least one son, William Eyre Matcham, his father's sole executor, since his mother died before his father. George Matcham maintained his association with Wiltshire, serving as justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant of the county, and in due course residing at Newhouse. He became chairman of Wiltshire quarter sessions in 1836, an office he continued to hold until 1867. He drew on his lifelong antiquarian pursuits to contribute accounts of the hundreds of Downton and Frustfield to R. C. Hoare, 'Modern History of Wiltshire' (1825), and published a collection entitled 'Notes on the Character of Lord Nelson' (1861). He died at Newhouse in 1877, in the words of an obituarist: 'Ripe in years, and honoured and revered by all his relatives and friends, with a vigorous mind unimpaired to the last, he passed away on 18 January last, leaving a character almost peculiar to our nation, of an accomplished, an able, and useful country gentleman. ('Law Magazine and Review', 416)' 


@@@@@


doc= 18321


Mather, Cotton (1663-1728), minister in America and author, was born on 12 February 1663 in North End, Boston, Massachusetts, the first of ten children born to Increase Mather (1639-1723), minister and president of Harvard College, and his wife, Maria (1641-1714), daughter of John Cotton. Both grandfathers, Richard Mather and John Cotton, were founding ministers of Massachusetts. 
Mather entered Harvard College at the unprecedentedly early age of eleven. He was by then fluent in Latin, familiar with Greek and Latin literature, and had started Greek and Hebrew grammar. Young as he was, he already exhibited several lifelong characteristics. He habitually directed others how to improve their spiritual lives. He was a voracious reader and became easily the widest-read man in Anglo-America. He acquired a personal library inferior to none. Passionate, voluble, and extroverted, he was also vain and sensitive to slights real or imagined. He expounded all subjects at the drop of a hat. He wrote and published as much as he talked, kept a large journal, and carried on an equally large correspondence with men in England, Scotland, and throughout Europe. His writing was always self-referential, and despite incessant protestations of modesty, he was immodestly aware of his extraordinary mental powers: 'Proud thoughts flyblow my best performances' (Levin, 'Trying to make', 170). His writing was larded with quotations from and allusions to classical Greek and Roman literature, as well as patristic and Reformation scholarship. He freely invented new words. 
Of his approximately 380 separate published titles, these are thought to be the most important: 'Memorable Providences Relating to Witchcraft and Possessions' (1689); 'The Wonders of the Invisible World' (1692); 'Magnalia Christi Americana' (1702); 'Bonifacius, Essays to do Good' (1710); 'The Christian Philosopher' (1721); 'Parentator' (1724); 'Manuductio ad ministerium' (1726); 'Ratio disciplinae' (1726). Book-length manuscripts unpublished at Mather's death included 'Biblia Americana', 'Angel of Bethesda', and 'Triparadisus'. The last two were published in the twentieth century. 
Mather suffered at Harvard College, where he was roughly handled by the older students and developed a stammer that he largely overcame later. His brilliance was quickly recognized, and he received important preaching requests before he was twenty. He was ordained teacher in his father's North Church in Boston in 1685, and preached there the rest of his life. Shortly after ordination he married, on 4 May 1686, his first wife, Abigail Phillips (1670-1702). The couple had nine children, but miscarriage, infant mortality, accident, and disease took a heavy toll. Four children survived their mother in 1702: Katharine (1690-1716), Abigail (1694-1721), Hannah ('b'. 1697), and Increase (1699-1724). 
Shortly after Mather's marriage he brought home Martha Goodwin, an emotionally disturbed girl who was believed to have been a victim of witchcraft. He laboured to exorcise the evil spirits. During this exhausting face-to-face encounter with a disturbed but physically active teenage woman, Mather believed he was engaging in the great contest over materialism and atheism. His traditional view was that a myriad of invisible, malicious spirits filled the air. They 'swarm like the frogs of Egypt in every chamber of our houses' (Silverman, 'Life', 91). He believed that failure to come to grips with this reality would open the door to materialism, disbelief in Satan, and ultimately atheism itself. After six months Martha Goodwin left, completely restored, thus confirming Mather in his world-view and his belief in the power of prayer. He wrote his first important book about that experience, 'Memorable Providences Relating to Witchcraft and Possessions' (Boston, 1689). It was immediately successful and published in both London (1691) and Edinburgh (1697). 
When eighteen people were executed in Salem for witchcraft three years later, in 1692, other ministers questioned the trial procedures, but Mather, intent on the reality of evil spirits, wrote another book, 'The Wonders of the Invisible World', in which he defended the judges. The Salem witchcraft trials became a fixture in American historical memory, and those two widely read books ruined Cotton Mather's reputation there for ever. 
When William of Orange landed in England in 1688 Increase Mather was already in London to negotiate a new colonial charter. Cotton Mather found himself in charge of the large, influential North Church. Before his father returned he admitted the first new members under the half-way covenant, an important step toward wider access to the church, as it extended baptism to the children of baptized adults. He found himself drawn increasingly into public life. When Boston learned of the success of William in England, the city arrested the governor, Sir Edmund Andros, and disarmed his two regiments and a frigate in the harbour. 
That afternoon a 'Declaration of the Gentlemen, Merchants and Inhabitants of Boston, and the Country Adjacent', which declared Boston loyal to William and Mary, was read to the crowd in the streets. The declaration spoke largely in the terms of English civil liberties rather than the providential language of puritanism. Although there is no direct evidence, many scholars believe Cotton Mather composed it. One month afterwards he was chosen by the magistrates to deliver the election day sermon, a much sought-after privilege never before given to one a mere twenty-six years old. It was the high point of Mather's political reputation. 
Political developments after 1690 centred on the new colonial charter and the royal governor provided for in it. The Mathers, father and son, supported the new governor, Sir William Phips (1651-1695), who was a member of their church but a poor choice for governor. Afterwards they were unable to gain the good graces of his successor, Joseph Dudley (1647-1720). Their nemesis in the world of New England politics was the Cook family. Elisha Cook (1637-1715), a physician and contemporary of Increase Mather, and his son, a merchant, also Elisha Cook (1678-1737), thought to be the wealthiest man in New England, actively opposed both Mathers. They finally managed to remove Increase from the presidency of Harvard College, and later prevented Cotton from attaining that cherished post. 
In 1693 Cotton Mather began work on his 'magnum opus', a history of puritan New England. By 1700 he was able to send to London a large manuscript, about 850 folio pages, 'Magnalia Christi Americana, or, The Ecclesiastical History of New England'. It was published in London in 1702 in a large folio volume closely printed in double columns. 'Magnalia' is an ambitious project that envisages the movement of Christian civilization from Europe to America. Mather fancied himself as Boston's Virgil. The opening lines of his general introduction, 'I write the wonders of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION, flying from the Depravations of Europe, to the American Strand', echo George Herbert's '
Religion stands on tiptoe in our land, 

Readie to pass to the American strand. 
(Murdock, 89)' The whole comprises seven 'books' very disparate in character. These include important biographies of governors and ministers, some already published separately, histories of Harvard College, the conflicts with the American Indians, and selected churches, and an engraved 'Ecclesiastical map of the country'. 

'Magnalia' was at once controversial. The British historian John Oldmixon used its information, but ridiculed its pedantry and errors. The University of Glasgow, on the other hand, awarded Mather an honorary degree of doctor of divinity in 1710. In 1818 the editor of the 'North American Review' described 'Magnalia' in a way characteristic of detractors for three centuries: 'a chaotick mass of history, biography, obsolete creeds, witchcraft, and Indian wars, interspersed with bad puns, and numerous quotations in Latin, Greek and Hebrew which rise up like so many decayed, hideous stumps to arrest the eye and deform the surface.' He called Mather a 'credulous, pedantick, and garrulous writer' (Murdock, 33). But two years later, in 1820, Thomas Robbins, a bibliophile in Connecticut, published the first American edition (2 vols., 1820; 2nd edn, 1853, 1855). It was the American editions that were important in the American literary renaissance of the mid-nineteenth century. For Herman Melville in 1856, 'His style had all the plainness and unpoetic boldness of truth' (Silverman, 'Life', 54). Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803-1882), Nathaniel Hawthorne (1804-1864), Harriet Beecher Stowe (1811-1896), and Elizabeth Stoddard (1823-1902) are among the American writers who were inspired by 'Magnalia'. Twentieth-century scholars continued these opposing patterns: for some, scathing ridicule of Mather's pedantic, overblown prose, and for others, admiration for the coherence, power, and influence of his vision. 
In 1702, the year that 'Magnalia' was published in London, Abigail, Mather's wife of sixteen years, died in Boston after a miscarriage and a long illness, on 28 November. Eight months later, on 18 August 1703, Mather married Elizabeth (1684?-1713), daughter of John Clark, a Boston physician, and widow of four years of Richard Hubbard. She and Cotton had six children, of whom one died in infancy and three more succumbed with their mother in a single month in 1713 to measles and smallpox. Two children from this marriage survived her: Elizabeth (1704-1726), who in 1724 married Edward Cooper, a shipmaster, and Samuel (1706-1785). 
Through the ten years of this second marriage Mather continued to work furiously. Once his concerned father wrote from London, 'do not Let him kill Himself. He will do it if you do not hinder him' (Silverman, 'Life', 77). Cotton published no fewer than 135 separate titles in the first decade of the new century. By far the most important of these was 'Bonifacius, Essays to do Good' (1710, title varies). 

'Bonifacius' is a small book by Mather's standards, and perhaps for that reason his most widely read. He published it anonymously in Boston in 1710. There was a second Boston edition in 1845, and many London editions appeared throughout the nineteenth century under the title 'Essays to do Good'. Writing to 'all Christians' Mather put the question 'What service is there that I may now do for my Saviour, and for His People in the world!' (Levin, introduction, 31). He answers with practical suggestions, first for 'the Duty to Oneself', and then in separate chapters suggestions for doing good in family, neighbourhood, and among several different occupations and social classes. The book is 'warm, friendly, helpful, encouraging' (Holmes, 1.92). It was the perfect book to introduce the new century of pietism and experiential religion. Although Benjamin Franklin started out ridiculing it, in his mature years he gave credit to 'Bonifacius' for being an important influence on him. 'Bonifacius' put Mather squarely in the mainstream of the German pietism emanating from the university at Halle and reaching America's middle colonies. In 1711 he opened a correspondence with August Herman Francke at Halle that lasted many years, and brought Mather into contact with like-minded men around the world. 
Many of Mather's letters to England were about the natural sciences. In 1712 he sent the first of several accounts of unusual natural phenomena to John Woodward, a prominent English geologist. He followed up with letters addressed to John Waller, secretary of the Royal Society, with the hope that they be published in the society's 'Philosophical Transactions'. From 1712 to 1724 Mather sent a total of eighty-two such letters, known collectively as 'Curiosa Americana'. Many were printed in the 'Transactions'. Mather made no secret of his wish to be included among the circle that made up the Royal Society, and was elated when news came of his election to the fellowship in 1713. Thereafter with great pride he put FRS after his name. In 1714 he sent to London a large manuscript epitomizing the science of the day that was published in 1721 as 'The Christian Philosopher'. The chapter on astronomy, according to a modern historian, is 'The finest example of how Newtonian Science came to America and was disseminated' (Theodore Hornberger in Holmes, 1.137). Already the indefatigable Mather had started another large survey, this time of medical practice. He called it 'Angel of Bethesda'. Like the other, it reviewed the work of scores of European scientists. Mather sent the manuscript to England in 1724, but it remained unpublished until the twentieth century. He was 'the first native-born American colonial to advance beyond the status of a mere field agent for European scientists in the New World and to demonstrate a genuine 'philosophical' approach to science, with scientific 'ideas' and 'hypotheses' of his own. (Stearns, 426)' Mather's contributions to the 'Transactions' often seem rather credulous by recent standards. Twice, however, he made experiments that have stood the test of time. In 1712 he experimented in his own garden with strains of Indian corn that produced red and black kernels. Reasoning correctly from the evidence, he described the process of plant hybridization. 
His most famous scientific experiment was the use of inoculation against smallpox. Accounts from Turkey had already appeared in the 'Transactions', and Mather had word-of-mouth accounts from Africa. He and his friend Dr Zabdiel Boylston, in the face of vicious public protests, inoculated over 200 people during an epidemic in Boston in 1721. They kept statistical records that raised the whole procedure from the realm of anecdote. The following year he sent a full description to the Royal Society, which considered it at three consecutive meetings. Mather and Boylston provided Britain with first-hand evidence that inoculation against smallpox worked, in Mather's words, 'upon both 'Male' and 'Female', both 'Old' and 'Young', both 'strong' and 'weak'; 'Whites', and 'Blacks'; on 'Tawnies', Women in 'childbed'... on Women 'with child', at all Seasons' (Silverman, 'Life', 362). As usual, Mather's every action spurred extremes of hostility. In Boston someone tried to assassinate him. At this time of heated pamphleteering over inoculation, Benjamin Franklin, a youthful sixteen, lampooned 'Bonifacius' with an enduring literary character, Silence Dogood. 
Eighteenth-century Boston was no longer a city upon a hill. Merchant wealth fostered English fashions in dress, homes, and thought; big houses and new churches sprang up everywhere. Disgruntled members broke from Mather's North Church to form the New North Church three blocks away. Church of England chapels multiplied, Quakers built a meeting-house, and, a sure sign of religious pluralism, in 1718 Cotton Mather himself helped install the pastor at the new Baptist church, observing 'Liberty of Conscience is the Native Right of Mankind' (Silverman, 'Life', 302). 
Mather's second wife, Elizabeth, died on 8 November 1713 in a measles epidemic. A year and a half later he found a third wife in Lydia (died 1734), daughter of the well-known puritan Samuel Lee (1625?-1691), and widow of John George, a wealthy Boston merchant. George died in November 1714 and left Lydia a large fortune. Mather and Lydia married on 5 July 1715, after signing a pre-nuptial agreement that gave her the entire control of her fortune and left Mather unprotected. It turned out to be an unfortunate marriage. Lydia was emotionally unstable. Her wide swings of mood tormented Mather. He was sued for debts arising from her first husband's business affairs, and as a consequence was repeatedly thrown on the mercy of wealthy members of his church. He and Lydia had no offspring; she outlived him and died on 17 January 1734. 
Mather's father died in 1723. Cotton wrote a large, fulsome biography, 'Parentator', in imitation of Increase's famous biography of his own father, Richard Mather. The two books are in sharp contrast. Increase's is slim, anonymous, written in the third person. Cotton's biography fits the new, post-puritan century. It is personal, immodest, ornate, and rich in its praise. It was followed five years later by yet a third of these father-son biographies, when Mather's son Samuel published a biography of Cotton himself, 'The Life of the Very Reverend and Learned Cotton Mather' (1729). 
In 1724 Cotton's first-born son, named Increase after his grandfather, died at sea. Two years later, in 1726, his daughter Elizabeth, now Elizabeth Cooper, died, and only two of Mather's many children remained alive -- Hannah, who had been badly scarred in childhood and remained unmarried, and Samuel (1706-1785). Despite these disappointments and being besieged by creditors, Mather remained as energetic as ever. He continued adding to a huge compendium of scriptural comments, 'Biblia Americana', but failed to get it published. He maintained his very large correspondence. In 1726 he brought out two more noteworthy books: 'Manuductio ad ministerium' and 'Ratio disciplinae fratrum Nov-Anglorum'. 

'Manuductio ad ministerium: Directions for a Candidate to the Ministry' (1726, 1781, 1789) is an urbane summary of a life spent in the ministry. In it Mather advised young men to do good, and also to study languages, sciences, poetry and style, natural philosophy, mathematics, and history, in short to imitate himself. He urged young candidates to an evangelical ministry. Perry Miller thought it the culmination of one century and 'the beginning of a new era', the age of reason (Holmes, 2.631). 'Manuductio' is said to have been in use in Britain into the nineteenth century. 

'Ratio disciplinae fratrum Nov-Anglorum' (1726) is a description of Congregational practice in Massachusetts. Mather began it in 1701, but as happened so often with his projects, he kept working on the text for many years. By 1726 his ecumenical description of the church contrasted sharply with his grandfather Richard Mather's famous description of the early puritan church, 'Cambridge Platform' (1648). In 1726 Mather no longer wrote of New England as 'Immanuel's land', as his father had. That signature of seventeenth-century puritanism had faded with the passage of time. Silverman ('Life', 404) describes 'Ratio disciplinae' as a statement to the world of a uniquely American church, comparable to Hector St John de Crevecoeur's description of the distinctively American citizen in 'Letters from an American Farmer' (1782). 
Mather had always been an eager millenarian. Between 1720 and 1726 he broke away from his father's literalist interpretations to a preterite position similar to the new philological interpretations in Europe. This decisive break with his father's generation and his own earlier thinking provides a link to Jonathan Edwards's postmillenarianism of the 1740s. 
In or before 1727 Peter Pelham painted Mather's portrait in oil on canvas, a shoulder-length frontal view that shows a cheerful, rubicund face under a large, fashionable wig. Contemporaries said that it was not a good likeness, but did resemble Mather's loyal son Sammy. Pelham also engraved an often-reproduced mezzotint, said to have been 'the first mezzotint known to have been made in the New World' (Silverman, 'Life', 410); it shows a more serious expression. 
Early in 1728 Mather became ill, and by 10 February he was confined to bed with a cough, asthma, and a fever. On 13 February 1728 he died at home (probably Ship Street, North End), peacefully, surrounded by friends and family, aged sixty-five, in a Boston that he had left only to attend college across the river. He died intestate. The mandatory inventory of his estate does not mention the great library. Without it the estate amounted to $235 10's'. 10died, and '500 Acres of wast land' in Scituate valued at $36. Two children survived: Hannah and Samuel. After a state funeral, Mather was buried on 19 February in the family crypt on Copp's Hill in Boston's North End. 
Cotton Mather was the most influential writer of his generation in America. He brought the puritan period of New England history to an end and started towards the evangelical pietism of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. His vision of Christian religion flying to America inspired nineteenth-century writers on America's manifest destiny. In the twentieth century his writings were an inexhaustible source for a revivified intellectual history: 'He was the one man of his time in America not dwarfed beside the virtuosi of the continent' (Silverman, introduction, xvii). 


@@@@@


doc= 18322


Mather, Increase (1639-1723), Congregational minister, was born in Dorchester, Massachusetts, on 21 June 1639, the youngest son of Richard Mather (1596-1669), minister, and Katherine (died 1655), daughter of Edmund Holt, who had migrated to New England from Lancashire, England, in 1635. At the age of twelve he went to live and study with the Revd John Norton in Boston, and then attended Harvard College, graduating BA in 1656. In 1657 he followed his brothers Samuel Mather and Nathaniel Mather to England, and then settled briefly in Ireland, graduating MA from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1658 and preaching in Magherafelt and Ballyscullion, co. Derry. 
Mather moved to England in 1659 where he substituted for his brother Nathaniel's friend John Howe as minister at Great Torrington, Devon. When Howe returned from London in 1659 Mather moved on, serving briefly as a minister in Guernsey and Gloucester. With no settled congregation, he was not one of the ministers ejected from their posts after the Restoration of 1660 but clearly his religious views were incompatible with the new regime and he returned to Massachusetts in 1661. 
On 6 March 1662 Mather married Maria (1642-1714), daughter of the New England minister John Cotton. Cotton Mather was their first child. Nine others survived childhood. At the same time Mather was engaged in the controversy over the half-way covenant, opposing the proposed expansion of membership by relaxing the rules concerning religious conversion. In 1664 he was ordained teacher of the North Church in Boston, Massachusetts, and over the next twenty-five years he emerged as the foremost figure in American puritanism. During the next two decades he published nearly fifty books, including sermons and works of theology, natural science, and history. He criticized what he saw as a decline from the standards of the founders and was the key figure in the reforming synod of 1679 which called for a moral cleansing of the society and covenant renewals. He was involved in the affairs of Harvard College and accepted the presidency in 1685 but continued in his post at North Church and to live in Boston. 
Part of Mather's stature derived from his key role in maintaining the link between English and American puritanism through his continuing connection with English dissenters such as Thomas Jollie. He both gave and received advice and assistance and aided others in their correspondence with transatlantic friends. When New Englanders were criticized by English dissenters for their treatment of Baptists, Mather defended the colonists. He argued that the colonial Baptists were not Calvinists and did not value a learned ministry and were therefore different from the Particular Baptists with whom English congregationalists (and he himself when he had been in England) found it possible to co-operate. 
In 1684, when the government of Charles II demanded that Massachusetts surrender its charter, Mather urged the citizens of Boston to resist, but without success. The Bay colony was incorporated, along with the other New England colonies and then New York, into the dominion of New England. In 1688, distressed with Sir Edmund Andros's policies as governor-general of the dominion, Mather slipped away from Boston and sailed to England to seek redress for the colonists. Initially he had three audiences with James II in which he pleaded for restoration of the old charter. Following the revolution of 1688 he was granted access to King William through the intercession of English friends and attempted to gain royal acceptance of the colonial revolt that had overthrown the dominion in reaction to news of England's revolution, and to gain a return of the old Massachusetts charter. At the same time he immersed himself in the affairs of the English dissenters, preaching to their congregations, associating with their leaders such as Richard Baxter, and playing an active role in the short-lived 'heads of agreement' that united congregational and presbyterian clergymen. 
Mather failed to gain restoration of the old charter but was instrumental in obtaining a new charter for the colony in 1691. He was also allowed to nominate the first royal governor and member of the governor's council. On his return to Boston he found the colony embroiled in the Salem witchcraft hysteria. Mather certainly had done his share to warn people of the dangers of the devil, but he was disturbed by the nature of the court proceedings. Though he was slow to make public his concerns, his publication, 'Cases of Conscience Concerning Evil Spirits' (1692), criticizing the use of spectral evidence, played a key role in bringing the trials to a close. 
Over the remaining decades of his life Mather's star was in the decline. He was criticized, though not as much as his son Cotton, for his role in the witchcraft episodes. His efforts to curtail the spread of liberal and latitudinarian influences in New England led to his losing the Harvard presidency in 1701. Though a believer in ministerial associations he was critical of a movement to create regional clerical boards that he felt impinged too much on congregational autonomy. Those dissatisfied with aspects of the new charter government criticized him unrealistically for not having achieved a restoration of the old. His support of his son Cotton's promotion of inoculation during a smallpox epidemic in 1721 was also unpopular. Yet he continued to publish -- forty new volumes in the first two decades of the new century -- and was recognized as the region's greatest link to the founding generation. His wife, Maria, died on 4 April 1714 and the following year he married Anne (1663-1739), widow of Maria's nephew John Cotton of Hampton and daughter of Thomas Lake, a merchant of Boston. Following his death on 23 August 1723 an immense procession followed Mather's coffin to its burial place on Copps Hill, not far from the North Church that he had served for over half a century. His wife, Anne, survived him; she died on 29 March 1739. 


@@@@@


doc= 18323


Mather, Nathaniel (1630-1697), Independent minister, was the second son of Richard Mather (1596-1669), minister, and Katherine (died 1655), daughter of Edmund Holt. He was born in Much Woolton, Lancashire, on 20 March 1630 and in 1635 travelled with his family to Massachusetts, where his father became minister for the town of Dorchester. He attended Harvard College, and graduated MA in 1647. He soon returned to England, probably at the same time as his brother Samuel Mather in 1650 and perhaps inspired by Oliver Cromwell's call for ministers in Ireland. On his arrival he wrote to his Harvard friend John Rogers that ''Tis a notion of mighty great and high respect to have been a New-English man, 'tis enough to gayne a man very much respect, yea almost any preferment' ('Mather Papers', 4). And indeed Mather was soon placed in the ministry, serving first as an assistant to George Mortimer at Harberton, Devon, and then succeeding Mortimer in 1655. The next year he was presented by Oliver Cromwell to the living of Barnstaple in Devon. He befriended John Howe and became a member of the Devonshire Association. He also served as an assistant to the Devon commission of triers. During this period he married Mary (died 1699x1706), daughter of the Revd William Benn of Dorchester, England. Their only child died in infancy in 1660. Nathaniel was possibly one of the delegates at the congregationalists' Savoy conference in 1658. 
Mather was disappointed by the Restoration and he was ejected in 1660. Like most nonconformists he was horrified by the 1661 uprising led by the radical Thomas Venner and signed the declaration against it. He then left England with the aid of Matthew Mead and became pastor of an English congregation in Rotterdam. Calamy says that he briefly ministered to a congregation in Sudbury, Suffolk, in 1671. When his brother Samuel died in 1671 he accepted the call to replace him as pastor of the New Row congregational church in Dublin. He laboured to bring some of Samuel's works to print and led a drive to raise funds in Dublin for the relief of New Englanders suffering from King Philip's War. In the early 1680s his congregation experienced difficulties due to declining membership and a division over the selection of the young Nathaniel Weld as Mather's assistant. In the aftermath of the Rye House plot of 1683 persecution of dissenters in Dublin was stepped up and Mather's congregation was forced to meet privately. In 1688 Mather left Ireland to accept the pastorate of the Lime Street Church in London, succeeding another former New Englander, John Collins, who had died in November 1687. 
Nathaniel provided his brother Increase Mather and other colonists with information on English and Irish religious and political developments and followed events in New England closely. In the 1660s he wrote a foreword to his father's treatise in favour of the half-way covenant, a move aimed at expanding numbers in New England churches by allowing the children of congregation members to join as partial or 'half-way' members before they had experienced religious conversion. He worked with Increase when the latter went to England in 1688-92 to seek a reversal of the policies that had led to the formation of the dominion of New England. Nathaniel is also believed to have worked with John Howe, George Griffith, and other dissenting clergymen in support of the revolution of 1688-9 which placed William of Orange on the English throne. 
Nathaniel was initially a supporter of the 'heads of agreement', the union of congregational and presbyterian clergy that his brother Increase had helped to organize, and he was one of the original managers of the common fund for the support of such clergy in the early 1690s. But while his brother Samuel had been a leading proponent of interdenominational co-operation, and Increase a supporter of the movement, Nathaniel was much less eirenic and more suspicious of presbyterians. He was one of the clergy who attacked Daniel Williams in 1693 for preaching Arminian views, a dispute which led to the break-up of the union and the withdrawal of the Presbyterian clergy from the jointly sponsored Pinners Hall lectureship. Mather was one of those then named to the vacant positions at Pinners Hall. 
Mather died in London on 26 July 1697 and was buried in Bunhill Fields. He was survived by his wife, whose will of 29 April 1699 was proved in 1706. Mather was said to have been of a 'most amiable spirit and... an unaffected modesty' in his personal relationships, and as a preacher 'his aspect was venerable, his gesture pleasing, and his pronunciation agreeable', although 'in addressing sinners, he possessed an awfulness in his manner' and he had 'a certain heaviness in the pulpit, which rendered him unpopular' (Sibley, 159). 


@@@@@


doc= 18324


Mather, Richard (1596-1669), minister in America, was born in Lowton, within present-day Liverpool, son of Thomas Mather and his wife, Margarite Abrams, of whom little is known except that they were modest landowners. Mather attended the nearby grammar school at Winwick until, in 1611, the master there, William Horrock, recommended his pupil to be teacher at a newly organized school at neighbouring Toxteth Park. Here Mather was profoundly influenced by the pious puritan Edward Aspinwall and his family, with whom he boarded, and experienced his own spiritual conviction in 1614. 
In 1618 Mather matriculated at Brasenose College, Oxford, but his experience there was unhappy, and he left within a few months to return to Toxteth Park, now as the minister in a newly built chapel. He was ordained in March 1619 by Thomas Morton, bishop of Chester. On 29 September 1624 Mather married Katharine (died 1655), daughter of Edmund Holt of Bury, Lancashire. The couple purchased a house at Much Woolton and while there had three sons -- Samuel Mather ('b'. 13 May 1626), Timothy ('b'. 1628), and Nathaniel Mather ('b'. 20 March 1630). In 1633 Mather was suspended after a frank exchange of views with Archbishop Richard Neile's visitor, who is said to have remarked: 'What... preach fifteen years and never wear a Surpless? It had been better for him that he had gotten Seven Bastards' (Mather, 27). 
Having read of the recent experiments of puritans in Massachusetts with a congregational form of church polity, the Mathers decided to emigrate to New England; they reached Boston, Massachusetts, in 1635. They settled at Dorchester, where they had two more sons, Eleazar ('b'. 13 May 1637) and Increase Mather (1639-1723). The local church was in its infancy. From his arrival Mather played a leading role in shaping Congregationalism, a role all the more remarkable because he alone of the leading ministers was without a university degree. The early years were contentious. Recent scholarship has emphasized the different views represented by John Cotton's emotional 'spiritism' and Thomas Shepard's logical intellectualism. Mather's particular genius was a knack for expressing arcane matters plainly and the ability to find a middle ground between the positions of brilliant and opinionated fellow clergymen. Not only did Mather reconcile their disputes, but he navigated between what his learned colleagues wanted and the often very different expectations of the lay members of churches. 
The proof of Mather's growing stature among both the ministers and the governing magistrates was their use of him in the 1630s and 1640s to respond to inquiries from England about the new polity. Criticisms by Charles Herle, a former neighbour of Mather's, Samuel Rutherford, the Scottish apologist, and others who favoured a presbyterian polity, were countered in three responses published in London which served to define and justify the New England church and its congregationalist autonomy -- 'Church-Government and Church Covenant Discussed' (1643), 'A Modest and Brotherly Answer to Mr. Charles Herle' (1644), and 'A Reply to Mr. Rutherfurd' (1646). However, another, non-political side of Mather is evidenced by his contributions to 'The Whole Book of Psalms' (1640), soon known as 'The Bay Psalm Book', the first book printed in English America, at the press in Cambridge, Massachusetts. It comprised translations of psalms from the Hebrew into metred English verse, so that they could be sung, after a fashion, in the puritan church services. 
None the less Mather's most important achievement by far was to provide the working draft for the results of a synod in 1646, printed in 1649 on the Cambridge press as 'A Platform of Church-Discipline', and known since as the Cambridge 'Platform'. Although a full third of the house of deputies voted against its adoption, possibly because in it the lay brothers and sisters lost authority to the elders, the Massachusetts general court adopted the 'Platform' as an advisory model, and it became the standard description of the New England way. Mather's text reveals his own characteristic gentleness and leniency: 'The weakest measure of faith is to be accepted in those that desire to be admitted into the church.... Severity of examination is to be avoyded' (Walker, 'Creeds', 222). 
Mather's first wife, Katharine, having died in Dorchester in March 1655, he married on 26 August 1656 John Cotton's widow, Sarah ('nee' Hawkridge and widow, first, of John Story), thus uniting two of the most influential families in New England. Richard Mather's fifth son, Increase, later married Sarah Cotton's daughter Maria, and their eldest son was Cotton Mather (1663-1728). 
Richard Mather had always argued for leniency in regard to baptism, and he pleaded for open baptism to the children of non-members, of whom his son Timothy was one, if at least one of their grandparents was a church member. At a synod in 1662 this issue was fiercely debated. John Davenport, the last surviving great figure of Mather's own generation, and Mather's son Increase both opposed him, but the change won out among the ministers present, and the proposal, known ever since as the half-way covenant, passed, although it brought a storm of disapproval from lay members and was not generally adopted for another generation. In this as in parts of the Cambridge 'Platform' Richard Mather was less puritanical than the general population. 
In the 1660s Mather's health deteriorated. He lost the sight of one eye, his hearing failed, and he suffered from kidney stones. In 1669, while moderating one of the most contentious church disputes in New England history, one that resulted from the call of John Davenport from New Haven to the First Church of Boston, Mather collapsed. Within the week, on 22 April 1669, he died from the stoppage of urine, while in bed at home. He was buried in Dorchester. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 18325


Mather, Robert Cotton (1808-1877), missionary and translator, was born at New Windsor, Manchester, on 8 November 1808, the second son of James Mather, Congregational minister of Sheffield and formerly of Clapton. He was educated at Edinburgh and Glasgow universities (MA Glasgow 1831) and at Homerton College. On 1 June 1833 he was ordained at Lendal Chapel, York, and soon afterwards he sailed for India as a missionary with the London Missionary Society. He had recently married, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Sewell (died 1879), a worshipper at Hew Court Chapel, Carey Street, London, accompanied him. 
In September 1834, after ten months at Calcutta, Mather moved to Benares and then, in May 1838, to Mirzapur, where he founded a small but viable mission with churches, schools, and an orphan school press. Schools, he discovered, were almost the only way of establishing contacts with Hindus. He became an excellent Hindustani scholar and was well placed to witness and foster the emergence of Khari Boli Hindi as a major written language; a tiny magazine which he issued from his press, 'Balko ke liye Phulo ka har', was one of the first publications in Khari Boli Hindi for children. He also revised the 'Bible' in Urdu, in 1860, and compiled an English-Urdu 'New Testament', a Hindi 'Bible' in roman script, an Urdu commentary on the 'New Testament', and the beginnings of another on the 'Old Testament'. He saw his new Urdu 'Bible' through the press while back in England on furlough in 1857-61 and was thus ideally positioned to issue speedily 'The Indian Church during the Great Rebellion' (1859), compiled by his son-in-law, the Revd M. A. Sherring, who covered for Mather at Mirzapur during his absence. While the rebellion was still raging Mather also published 'Christian Missions in India' (1858). In common with other evangelicals he viewed the rebellion as proof that God would let no political administration survive, no matter how sound, if it were not underpinned by true religion. 
Mather returned to India in February 1861. In 1862 Glasgow University honoured him with the degree of LLD for his new Urdu 'Bible'. He returned to England permanently in 1873 to work on his 'Bible' commentaries and died at his home, 5 Torrington Park Villas, North Finchley, Middlesex, on 21 April 1877. After his death his widow, Elizabeth, who had published an Urdu dictionary of the 'Bible' and many improving booklets in Hindustani for Indian women and children, joined the female mission at Mirzapur. She died on 29 March 1879. The Mathers' youngest son, Dr C. B. Mather, became a medical missionary in German East Africa. 


