@@@@@


doc= 18326


Mather, Samuel (1626-1671), Independent minister, was the eldest son of Richard Mather (1596-1669) and his wife, Katherine Holt (died 1655). He was born at Much Woolton, Lancashire, on 13 May 1626, and emigrated with his parents and three brothers to New England in 1635. He was educated at Harvard College, graduating MA in 1643. He was the first graduate named a fellow. Mather preached to what became the Second Church of Boston (North Church), but refused an offer to become that congregation's pastor, choosing to return to England instead. His New England connections with leading English Independents secured for him a position as chaplain to Thomas Andrewes, the lord mayor of London, who had earlier been a member of Thomas Goodwin's Arnhem congregation. Mather preached at Gravesend and Exeter and in 1650 became a chaplain at Magdalen College, Oxford, where Thomas Goodwin was president. He became a close friend of Sidrach Simpson and accompanied Simpson to Scotland with the English commissioners. During the next two years he preached occasionally at Leith. 
In 1654 Philip Nye recommended Mather as a preacher to the council of state in Ireland. Two years later he was called to the ministry of the church of St Nicholas in Dublin, where most Dublin aldermen worshipped; he was ordained in a congregationalist ceremony. His colleague at St Nicholas was Samuel Winter. Mather was also a lecturer at Christ Church, a fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, and one of the leading puritan clergy in the country, with a close relationship to Henry Cromwell during the latter's administration of Irish affairs. He served as a commissioner for approbation of ministers in co. Cork. For part of this time he had the companionship of his brother Increase Mather, who received an MA from Trinity in 1658. In that same year Samuel married a sister of Sir John Stevens. They had four or five children but only one, named Catherine, lived to maturity. 
Mather accepted the accession of Charles II but preached a sequence of two controversial sermons in September 1660, urging Charles to assume the role of a reforming Hezekiah and identifying as needing reform the use of the clerical surplice, signing with the cross in baptism, kneeling at communion, bowing to the altar, use of cathedral music, and other targets common to the puritan agenda. He warned that if such reforms were not initiated and, worse, 'If you super-adde the sin of Persecution to the sin of Superstition, you will be quickly ripe for final Ruine', as 'the Lord himself will fight against you' (Greaves, 56). He was prohibited from further preaching and ordered to deliver his sermon notes, but instead sent them to New England where they were published in 1670 through the efforts of his brother Increase. 
Deprived of his living, Mather returned to his Lancashire homeland and ministered at Burtonwood until ejected in 1662. He was advised that the repression of dissent was less thorough in Ireland and returned to Dublin, where he preached regularly to a congregation on New Row. Though briefly incarcerated in 1664 for holding a conventicle, he was able to continue his ministry. In 1666 or the following year Mather preached a sermon justifying withdrawal from the Church of Ireland, 'the wicked party'. He urged co-operation between congregationalist, Baptist, and presbyterian dissenters, particularly in 'Irenicum, or, An Essay for Union', which was published posthumously in 1680. In that work he pointed with approval to the fact that the dissenters attended each others' services in Dublin. But Mather's eirenic interests were limited to orthodox Calvinists. He was critical of the Fifth Monarchist Jeremiah Marsden and preached 'A Defence of the Protestant Christian Religion Against Popery' (1672). Another of his interests was typology, and his sermons on 'The Figures or Types of the Old Testament' were published by his brother Nathaniel Mather in 1683. 
Mather's first wife died in 1668 and by the time he wrote his will on 18 August 1671 he was married to Hannah, whom he named one of his executors. They seem to have had no children and Mather's daughter, Catherine, was his heir. He died on 29 October 1671 and his widow proved his will on 7 March 1672. He was soon succeeded by his brother Nathaniel as pastor of the New Row congregation. 


@@@@@


doc= 18327


Mather, William (fl. 1657-1708), pamphleteer and schoolmaster, was born in Bedford. Nothing is known about his family, other than that his grandfather was a mayor of Hull. Appointed a surveyor of highways, Mather trained as a schoolmaster, and kept a private school in Bedfordshire. The latter post inspired his chief literary work, an enhanced primer entitled, 'A Very Useful Manual, or, The Young Man's Companion', which was printed in London in 1681. Eclectic in range, the text contained advice on a diverse array of subjects from the traditional curriculum, and incorporated additional exercises in husbandry, housekeeping, and legal matters. Mather intended that his manual should be read in tandem with the 'Bible', and emphasized, in his address to the reader, the importance of self-awareness in achieving purity in religion (sig. A2'v'). Popular and respected, the text ran to twenty-four editions, and Mather's son Samuel, who died at the age of twenty-two, added verses and fourteen further chapters to the fourth edition in 1695. 
Initially a conformist within the Church of England, about 1661 Mather with his wife became a Quaker, a shift of commitment and loyalty which dominated Mather's later works. In November 1657 he was imprisoned for thirty-two weeks for non-payment of tithes and, later, in 1683, after a prosecution in the ecclesiastical court, he was subjected to a second period of imprisonment on a writ 'de excommunicato capiendo' (Besse, 1.3, 11). By this time the Quaker population of Bedford was estimated at thirty (ibid., 1.xxxviii), and Mather resorted to writing pamphlets as a means of vindicating his own position and attracting support. In 1694 his two texts, 'An Instrument from that Little Stone Cut out of the Mountain without Hands' and 'A Novelty, or, A Government of Women Distinct from Men', were distributed in order to promote Mather's own mistrust of segregated meetings (which could ultimately result in 'Unscriptural Government'), and to justify his personal patronage of Margaret Everard, who had preached of God's grace to a crowd gathered in his own house in June 1694. 
In the following year Mather offered chronological discussions of Quakerism from its semantic origins to the core of its creed ('A Brief Character of the Antient Christian Quakers'), but a simultaneous sense of disillusionment can also be detected from this date. This culminated in published attacks advertising the flawed nature of scripture ('Of the Quakers Despising the Holy Scriptures', 1700), and denouncing the efforts of 'Lifeless Preachers... who are Taught to preach neither by Grace nor Holy Scriptures' (W. Mather, 'An Answer to the Switch for the Snake', 1700, 9). In 1701 this breach became permanent, and Mather, careful throughout to reassure that he entertained no quarrels with individual Quakers, articulated his public dissatisfaction with their spirit: 'That the Substance and Summ of the Religion of the Quakers, turns upon one Single Hinge, viz That the Spirit by which they are moved, and inspired, is really the Holy Ghost, or the Universal Spirit of God... we have clear evidence, and can make it appear to all, who are not wilfully blind, that their Spirit is not the Holy Ghost, but a Spirit of Error. (Mather)' Consonant again with the teachings of the English church, Mather sought to stress that his absence had been in part due to his desire for martyrdom and his love of habit and harmony (pp. 1-5). His final work, 'A letter from a Quaker-preacher to a church-man '[Mather]' (who had been a Quaker forty years.) With the church-man's answer' was printed in 1708. It is not known when Mather died. 


@@@@@


doc= 18328


Mathew, Theobald (1790-1856), Capuchin friar and temperance campaigner, was the fourth son of Ann Mathew, 'nee' Whyte, and James Mathew, a cousin of Francis Mathew of Thomastown Castle near Cashel in co. Tipperary. James, who was descended from a Catholic line of the family, had been adopted by Francis, who had conformed to the established church to secure his property and later became the earl of Llandaff, and was employed by Francis as an agent at Thomastown Castle, where Theobald was born on 10 October 1790. While the title derives from the family's Welsh origins, the Mathews's association with Tipperary went back to the seventeenth century, when George Mathew of Llandaff in Glamorgan married the widow of Viscount Thurles. 
Mathew spent much of his childhood at Thomastown Castle, even after his father took a farm at nearby Rathcloheen, and Lady Elizabeth Mathew, who was later to inherit the castle and estate, took an interest in his education. He attended a school in Thurles and, in 1800-07, a school in Kilkenny (which later became St Kieran's College). In 1807 he went to St Patrick's College, Maynooth, to train for the priesthood, but left about 1809 when he was caught entertaining some friends in his room, which was considered a serious breach of college regulations. He continued his studies for the priesthood, this time in the Capuchin order of Franciscans in Dublin, and at Easter 1814 was ordained by Dr Daniel Murray who later, as archbishop of Dublin, was to become a firm supporter of Mathew's temperance work. While an assistant priest in a poor parish in Kilkenny, Mathew was wrongly accused of a breach of regulations concerning the administration of paschal communion, and was transferred in late 1814 to Cork by the provincial of his order. 
In Cork, Mathew was assigned as assistant to a Father Donovan at a chapel known as the Little Friary in Blackamoor Lane, a poor part of the city. He gained a reputation for his non-sectarian outlook in religion and politics, and as an effective preacher of charity sermons. Above all, he became known for his concern for the poor of Cork city. He set up schools for both boys and girls, organized charities for the poor and visits to the sick, and founded a cemetery in the south of the city where the Catholic poor could be interred free or for a nominal charge. He noticed that, in a city where brewing and distilling were major industries, many of the problems of the poor were related to excessive drinking. 
There had been temperance societies in Cork city from 1831, but as they were promoted mainly by Anglicans, Quakers, and other protestant nonconformists few Catholics had joined them. By the time Mathew was persuaded publicly to promote temperance by agreeing to become leader of the Cork Teetotal Society in 1838, the earlier pledge to drink in moderation had given way to a teetotal pledge which demanded total abstinence from all alcoholic drink except when prescribed for medicinal purposes. The public attachment of such a well-loved and charismatic figure as Mathew to the temperance cause enabled the movement to grow rapidly, especially among the Catholic poor in the city, and by the end of 1838, 6000 people had taken the pledge. Teetotal 'missionaries' were sent to towns around co. Cork, and by the autumn of 1839 crowds were arriving daily from all over Ireland to take the pledge in person from Mathew. 
At the end of 1839 Mathew conducted the first of many crusades outside Cork when he spent several days administering the pledge to large numbers in Limerick, where the native population had been swelled by thousands who had come into the city from the surrounding countryside. This was followed by equally successful missions in Waterford, Clonmel, Galway, and Dublin, and by 1842 almost every district in Ireland had been reached by one of his missions. In 1842 he made the exaggerated claim that 5 million people had taken the pledge, but even half that figure would have justified J. G. Kohl's reference to the enormous numbers flocking to take the pledge as 'extraordinary occurrences, for which the historian can hardly find a parallel' ('Travels in Ireland', 1844, 100). 
Temperance societies were established in towns throughout the country, providing mutual support for members who had pledged themselves to avoid drinking in a society where drinking had previously played such an important part. They organized confessional meetings and social gatherings, provided coffee houses and reading rooms, founded provident and savings schemes for members, and arranged processions with temperance bands and banners that offered an alternative to the drink-related entertainments of the fair day, the pattern, and the racecourse. Mathew reinforced these new attitudes by visiting and revisiting towns, encouraging teetotallers to persist with the pledge, and, while he was careful to explain that the pledge entailed no vow in the religious sense, many of his supporters at a local level were less scrupulous, and stories were current about the misfortunes that had befallen those who abandoned the pledge. But whether maintained by Mathew's charismatic influence, by the work of temperance societies, by superstitious rumours, or by individual commitment to a better way of life, there can be no doubt that for a number of years the Irish temperance movement succeeded in changing habits to the extent that social pressure to drink gave way to social pressure to abstain. 
In the years before the famine of 1845-9 alcohol consumption decreased dramatically in Ireland and there was a substantial reduction in crimes, especially those relating to intoxication. Although other factors besides Mathew's work contributed to those improvements, and the improvements did not endure into the second half of the century, many people who knew Ireland well saw his crusade as having a lasting effect on Irish life. One of them, Samuel Hall, writing fifteen years after Mathew's death, noted that while heavy drinking had once been acceptable in Ireland it was no longer so, but had become 'a shame and a reproach' ('A Book of Memories of Great Men and Women of the Age', 1871, 409). 
From 1842 the number of Mathew's crusades around Ireland began to decrease, partly because of his chaotic financial situation. This had come about by his poor financial organization, by parishes failing to reimburse him for medals he had bought and distributed, by his generous contribution to charities, and by his hopes of a legacy from Lady Elizabeth Mathew, the heir to the Thomastown estates, who, when she died in 1842, left him nothing. Attempts to raise money by public subscription to enable his work to continue met with only limited success because he was resentful of the interference that was thought necessary to put his financial affairs in order. 
Mathew made a successful visit to Scotland in 1842, and although he had been invited to England as early as 1840 did not take up the offer of a major crusade there until the summer of 1843. The timing was partly determined by his wish to be away from Ireland while Daniel O'Connell's campaign for the repeal of the union with Britain was reaching its height. While he was not opposed to repeal, he was reluctant to have his temperance movement associated with it; but, as great numbers of people belonged to both movements, it was proving impossible to keep the two apart. Despite Mathew's opposition, many temperance bands were taking part in repeal meetings, and repeal speakers were referring to his work as Ireland's preparation for self-government. 
Mathew was unable to escape from political and religious issues in England, however, where some newspapers, such as the 'Morning Herald', insisted on associating his movement with repeal and with 'popery'. His refusal to allow political issues to be raised on his platforms and his consistent respect for the representatives of all creeds that he encountered in England, as in Ireland, were sufficient to deflect the most prejudiced criticisms, and there was general approval of his work in the Irish quarters of English cities. There was opposition from brewers, who were suspected of offering free beer to men to disrupt some of his meetings in London. A few Catholic clergymen also had reservations about his mission, fearing it would interfere with the prospects of employment for Irish immigrants in England. Having pledged 200,000 people, most of them Irish, Mathew returned to Ireland in September 1843 in time to witness the decline in repeal agitation that followed the government's banning of the 'monster' meeting planned for Clontarf. 
From as early as 1840 there had been suspicions that some of Mathew's supporters were breaking their pledges. Cordials containing alcohol and dispensations from doctors were among the stratagems employed by waverers to adhere to the letter, if not the spirit, of the pledge. With the onset of the famine there were increased accusations that many were abandoning the pledge, accusations which Mathew vigorously denied. In time he had to accept, however, that in the great social disruption that accompanied the potato failure of the late 1840s many of his followers would die of starvation, many would emigrate, and many of those who remained in Ireland would abandon the pledge for ever. 
From 1846 Mathew's own energies became increasingly absorbed in famine relief work, although he continued to make regular, if less frequent, visits to promote temperance. He was on the Cork Relief Committee and worked tirelessly soliciting aid from abroad, advising and assisting government relief officers, publicizing the virtues of the controversial 'yellow meal', and even turning his own home in Cove Street into a soup kitchen for the starving. 
Mathew was disappointed not to have been appointed bishop of Cork by the Vatican, having been the preferred candidate of the clergy of the diocese. Some of the Irish bishops, while supporting his crusade against drink, were suspicious of what they saw as his accommodating attitude towards British power in Ireland. He suffered an attack of paralysis, probably brought on from overwork, in 1848, from which he made a rapid but incomplete recovery. 
In 1849 Mathew went to America, where he immediately became embroiled in a series of controversies. Catholics and protestants in New York vied with one other to welcome him, Irish nationalist immigrants condemned him for having received a pension from the British government in 1848 as a solution to his financial problems, abolitionists vilified him for not condemning slavery in public in America as he had done in Ireland seven years earlier, and politicians from southern states denounced him for having condemned slavery in the first place. He successfully steered his way through the various minefields, and large numbers, mostly Irish Americans, took the pledge in hundreds of towns and cities in twenty-five states over a period of two and a half years. His exertions in America weakened him further, and after his return to Ireland in December 1851 he was unable to take part in any further temperance crusades, although people continued to visit Mathew at his brother's home, where he was living, at Lehenagh near Cork to take the pledge. 
Father Mathew had a stroke early in 1856 and died on 8 December of the same year at Queenstown, near Cork. His friend and biographer, John Francis Maguire, recorded that he left no property except his watch and the altar plate and sacred vestments which belonged to him as a priest, so it was perhaps appropriate that he was buried in the cemetery which he founded many years earlier for the poor of Cork. 
Considered attractive as a child, Mathew retained his good looks into middle age. Kohl described him in 1842 as having the same height and figure as Napoleon, 'really a handsome man', with a fresh complexion, large eyes, and a nose that was 'a little too arched in the middle' (J. G. Kohl, 'Travels in Ireland', 1844, 97). W. M. Thackeray, who met him the same year, recalled 'a stout, handsome, honest-looking man' ('The Irish Sketch Book', 1843, 113). Towards the end of his life, Mathew acknowledged that his cherished aim of banishing drunkenness from Ireland had not been achieved and he became more sympathetic towards legislative changes to prevent the abuse of alcohol. His personal influence on the Irish temperance movement was enormous, however, and several successful campaigns against drink in the late nineteenth century, both in Ireland and among the Irish in Britain, owed their inspiration to him and to those of his followers who had kept the pledge. The wider influence of his work, especially the activities of the temperance societies he encouraged, has been controversially viewed by H. F. Kearney as contributing to the modernization of Irish life. While there will continue to be discussion among historians on the influence of his work, his enigmatic personality -- with his single-minded commitment to opposing drunkenness and his reputation for personal sanctity -- will ensure that he remains a revered figure among the heroes of nineteenth-century Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 18329


Mathews, Charles (1776-1835), actor, the seventh son of James Mathews, a bookseller and Wesleyan local preacher, and his wife, Elizabeth, was born on 28 June 1776 at 18 Strand, London. His youth was spent in his father's bookshop in Richmond, Surrey, where he acquired an early interest in the literature of the theatre. By the time he was twelve years old, he could usually be found in a large room above the nearby stable which he and a friend had converted into a theatre for the purpose of entertaining their youthful companions. After two years in that stable theatre, in 1790, at the age of fourteen, Charles Mathews applied to Henry Harris, the manager of the Covent Garden Theatre, for the position of leading comedian: Harris did not consider Mathews ready for leading comic business. 
For three years Mathews studied the contemporary plays which the leading comedians of the day were performing and the classic comedies of Shakespeare and Jonson, building a repertory of roles. In September 1793 he paid the manager of the Richmond Theatre in Surrey 10 guineas for the privilege of playing Richmond in 'Richard III' (he had selected the role for his debut because it gave him a chance to display his fencing abilities against Richard in the last act). Two years later he accepted a position with a company of players in Dublin, and in September 1794 made his first appearance before an audience in comic imitations of famous actors. His imitations of Joseph Munden, John Kemble, and Mr Wathen were received with roars of laughter, marking his early beginnings in the area of impersonation. 
One year later, in September 1795, disillusioned by lack of promotion, lack of salary, and lack of support, Mathews decided to give up the prospect of the stage and set sail for London. The ship, which also carried Montague Talbot, another actor, met rough weather and came to rest at Swansea. In an effort to profit from their enforced loss of time, Talbot and Mathews agreed to appear with the Swansea company for two nights. The venture led to a three-year stay with this provincial company, during which, on 19 September 1797, Mathews married Eliza Kirkham Strong (1772-1802) ['see 'Mathews, Eliza]. 
In January 1798 Mathews heard that John Emery, the principal comedian with the York company, was about to move to London, and he applied to Tate Wilkinson, the manager of the York company, for the vacated position. The York circuit was considered a nursery and preparatory school for metropolitan performers. In August 1798 he arrived in York, and by the end of 1799 he enjoyed all the roles he requested, and played leading comic business for the following three years. During that period his first wife died, and on 28 March 1803 he married Anne Jackson (died 1869), an actress with the York company. Also during that three years he continued to perfect his imitations of the leading actors of the day, and he acquired a knack for ventriloquism. 
On Monday 16 May 1803 Mathews made his London debut, as Jabel in Richard Cumberland's 'The Jew' and as Lingo in 'The Agreeable Surprise', under George Colman at the Theatre Royal, Haymarket. The following night he repeated the performance by command for King George III and his family. At the close of the 1803 season, after signing a contract with Colman for three further seasons, he joined the company at Liverpool for the winter. Charles James Mathews, the couple's only child, was born on 26 December 1803. Mathews's second season at the Haymarket was as successful as the first, and reviewers ranked him with the best London comedians, finding him less flippant than John Fawcett, as natural as John Bannister, and less laboured than Joseph Munden. 
In the summer of 1804 Mathews and his wife signed a joint contract with the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, for five years. The following autumn (18 September 1804), as Don Manuel in Colley Cibber's comedy 'She Would and She Would Not', Mathews established himself as one of the leading comedians of London. 
The summer of 1805 again found Mathews before the audiences of the Haymarket Theatre, and another new piece was written for him. More and more, he began to appear as a character who disguised himself as someone else. It was later said that he had the faculty of putting on another man's thoughts with his clothes, and many plays written for him were skeletons left for his elaboration. One year after Bannister's solo performance at Covent Garden in 'Bannister's Budget' (1807), Mathews conceived the idea of performing an entertainment that would eliminate his dependence on provincial companies for work outside the London season. He constructed a 'solo' entertainment and displayed it for the first time in Hull on 12 April 1808 (in fact his wife also took part in it). 
This entertainment, called 'The Mail Coach Adventure, or, Rambles in Yorkshire', was intended solely for the consumption of the provincial audiences, and, when he created it, Mathews probably had no idea that ten years later it would launch him on a totally new career. The structure of this early entertainment -- provided by James Smith -- was crude and disjointed, with the last act, the monopolylogue that came to be Mathews's trademark, absent. Mrs Mathews played a minor role in 'The Mail Coach Adventure', and the couple performed this entertainment with some regularity nearly every season between 1808 and 1811, when Mrs Mathews retired from the company of two. In that latter year Mathews created his second entertainment, based on the first, 'The Travellers, or, Hit or Miss', this time joining forces with Charles Incledon. 
The difference between the entertainment of 1808 and that of 1811 was that, instead of using the novelty as an intermittent rest from the regular drama, Mathews now began to produce it in a regularly scheduled tour of the provinces. This two-man show lasted only one season. There are some indications that the provinces saw Mathews periodically between 1812 and 1817 in a one-man version of 'The Mail Coach Adventure'. In 1817 he wrote to his wife: 'During my performance at Brighton, Mrs George Farron's mother and sister went to see me 'At Home'.' This reference marks 1817 as the date Mathews first associated the title 'At Home' with his entertainment. In that same year Mathews joined Frederick Yates to tour England with 'The Actor of All Work', and with him played the two-man show in Paris. 
In 1809 Drury Lane burnt down and Mathews moved with the company to the Lyceum. He left in 1811 because of a disagreement with the management. After touring the provinces for a year, he returned to the city in 1812, this time to Covent Garden. From then until 1814 his career progressed smoothly. In the summer of that year he fell from his carriage and suffered a broken hip: the accident left him lame for the rest of his life. 
After a brief retirement for rest and recovery, Mathews returned to Covent Garden to fulfil his contract, but he now walked with an obvious limp and was cast in the roles of gout-stricken old men, as he could no longer handle the demanding physical activity required for the leading comic roles. Finally, in 1816 Mathews asked Henry Harris, the manager, to release him from his contract. Harris agreed, but made Mathews promise not to play anywhere in London for its duration. 
Mathews returned to the provinces. He appeared in Scotland and Ireland before returning to London for the summer season of 1817 at the Haymarket. The following autumn he appeared before London audiences for the first time in the one-man version of 'The Mail Coach Adventure'. S. J. Arnold saw him perform and gave him a contract to appear at the English Opera House every spring for the next seven years. The title 'At Home' was first used publicly by Mathews in London during the 1817 season. It was structured as a table entertainment in which a monologue provided the avenue for anecdote, jest, and song that carried his audience through a series of amusing adventures and provided the opportunity for imitations of all the human oddities encountered along the way. It was followed by a farce, in which he played multiple characters using his skills in quick changes and ventriloquy. The 'At Home' was to be given annually in April and May, leaving Mathews free to tour the provinces for the remainder of the year. The 'At Homes' succeeded, and the people of London and the provinces flocked to see them each year. Each new entertainment was the talk of the town for months before it began, and everyone speculated on the topic of the next one-man show. Annually, with the assistance of two or three highly gifted writers, Mathews devised new and varied delights. Richard Peake, James Smith, Charles James Mathews, and others contributed to the scripts. 
In search of variety and material, and in hopes of large profits, Mathews devised a tour of America. He set sail in August 1822 and after thirty-five days at sea arrived at New York, then plagued by yellow fever. He opened in Baltimore, and he was triumphant. The critics universally praised his performances, and he was the hit of the season. The popular and critical success did not however, produce the financial bonanza he had anticipated. Mathews returned to England as 'the' comedian of the age. After a summer of rest, he again entered the fray at the English Opera House for the month of August in the regular drama. Following another month in Dublin, he took up residence in London and retired for the winter to prepare his new entertainment. 'A Trip to America', perhaps his finest venture, opened at the English Opera House on 25 March 1824. From then until 1834, in the spring of each year apart from 1828, Mathews was 'At Home' for forty nights. In addition, he played short-term engagements at the patent houses in the regular drama and undertook brief tours through the provinces. In 1828 there was no 'At Home', as Price, the manager of Drury Lane, offered him an extravagant salary to perform there for the 1827-8 season. His nightly salary was then the highest ever paid to a comic performer. 
In the spring of 1828 Mathews paid $17,000 for a half-share of the Adelphi Theatre, and commenced as manager. The Adelphi held the 'At Homes' until the death of the host. The last London 'At Home' was in 1834, when Mathews advertised a succession of selections from his old entertainments. He was fifty-eight years old. He had spent forty of those years as a professional actor, but he could not retire, as, although he had earned large sums of money, bad investments had rendered him nearly impoverished. So, when an American agent came to him in the spring of 1834 and offered financial independence in exchange for another crossing of the Atlantic, Mathews accepted. The offer, the details of which have been obscured by time, would supposedly have made Mathews wealthy after only one year in the United States. 
Mathews designed the tour himself. He intended to remain absent from England for at least eighteen months and possibly for as long as two years, because he wanted to extend his tour to the Canadian provinces. He had also decided to appear only in his monodramatic performances and to maintain his independence of the American managers. He was destined never to see Canada, and his dependence on the American managers was ordained before landing by the illness he contracted while on board ship. Before leaving England, however, he gave a farewell performance at Richmond on 25 July: his last performance in England was thus on the very stage where he first appeared in public in 1793. 
With each day of the crossing Mathews became weaker, and by the time New York was in view he held in his lungs the infection that would kill him in less than a year. In addition to his illness, the tour had an awkward beginning: the public was somewhat opposed to his appearances because of the reports that had preceded him concerning his 'A Trip to America' show. When he arrived at the theatre, he found bills posted calling him a scoundrel and an ungrateful slanderer, suggesting he be pelted from the stage for his insult to the American people in his London productions on their national character. In spite of this polemic, he appeared in his 'A Trip to America': his audience made no effort to hinder the production, and the entertainment was acclaimed throughout the American theatrical capitals. 
The Philadelphia papers were universal in their praise, often comparing this visit with the first, marvelling at Mathews's ability 'to look through the windows of the heart'. But behind the footlights Mathews was changed, even though he tried to hide his pain and discomfort as he brought himself before his auditors. By December 1834 his condition was worse, but still he clung to the American venture out of desperation. Notices regularly appeared indicating that he could not appear as the result of a severe cold. All the plans fell through. By January he had given up the 'At Homes' entirely. He was forced to keep to the drama, being too weak to do his table acts because the necessary energy was too severe an exertion on his lungs. In six months he performed on only thirty-two nights. He had lost a year's income. 
Mathews and his wife returned to England and arrived in Liverpool on 10 March 1835, after nineteen days at sea. Mathews died in Plymouth on 28 June 1835, his fifty-ninth birthday, and was buried there two days later at St Andrew's Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 18330


Mathews, Charles James (1803-1878), actor and playwright, the only child of Charles Mathews (1776-1835) and his second wife, Anne Jackson (died 1869), was born in Basnett Street, Liverpool, on 26 December 1803, and baptized at St Helen's Church, York. 
After attending preliminary schools at Hackney and Fulham, Mathews went to Merchant Taylors', where he boarded with Thomas Cherry, the headmaster, who is said to have taken a strong dislike to him. He was then moved to a private school on Clapham Common kept by the lexicographer Charles Richardson, where he formed friendships with John Mitchell Kemble and Julian Young, and was one of Richardson's assistants in copying extracts for his 'New English Dictionary'. On 4 May 1819 he was articled to Augustus Pugin as an architect, and designed the picture gallery for his father's cottage in Kentish Town, where he later met Byron, Scott, Moore, Coleridge, Lamb, Leigh Hunt, and other men of eminence. In company with his master he visited York, Oxford, and various provincial towns, executing sketches, some of which were inserted in architectural works. 
A visit with Pugin to Paris, in which Mathews saw the principal French comedians, fostered a lurking disposition towards the stage. After his return he made his first appearance as an amateur, under the name of M. Perlet, at the Lyceum Theatre on 26 April 1822, playing Dorival, a comedian in 'Le comedien d'etampes' (a French piece subsequently adapted by him under the title 'He would be an Actor'), singing a song as M. Emile of the Theatre Porte St Martin. He also acted under his own name as Werther in 'The Sorrows of Werther', by John Poole, in which his mother took the part of Charlotte. His imitations of French actors were received with much favour. His father urged him to adopt the stage, but he liked his profession. When his articles expired he refused a renewed invitation to join the architect John Nash, and went instead in 1823 to Ireland to build a house for Lord Blessington at Mountjoy Forest, co. Tyrone. Very little progress, or none at all, was made with the scheme. Mathews remained hunting, shooting, and fishing, and discussing details of the house, never to be built, and then accepted an invitation from his patron to accompany him to Italy. In Naples he stayed a year at the Palazzo Belvedere, where the party included his host and hostess, Miss Power, the sister of Lady Blessington, and Count D'Orsay, with whom he had a misunderstanding almost leading to a duel. His imitations of Italian life and manners were the delight of a fashionable world, English and foreign. 
After a couple of years spent in Wales as architect to a Welsh iron and coal company at Coed-talon, Flintshire, where he built Hartsheath Hall, an inn, a bridge, and some cottages, Mathews was employed by Nash, but kept on an office in Parliament Street as a practising architect. He occupied his leisure time in writing songs for his father's 'At Homes' and trifling pieces for the theatre, including 'Pongwong' and 'The Court Jesters'. On 30 April 1827, in company with D'Egville, he started once more, on an allowance from his father, for Italy. They visited Milan, Venice, and Florence, where Mathews caught smallpox. At the Palazzo San Clementi, Mathews played comic characters, such as Peter in 'Romeo and Juliet', Launcelot Gobbo, and Falstaff in '1 Henry IV', at Lord Normanby's private theatre. From Rome, where Mathews suffered much from malaria, they returned to Venice, and at the close of 1830 Mathews arrived back in England on crutches. The next five years of desultory life, financed by his father, were spent in visiting the houses of noblemen and the like. His father's financial collapse forced him to accept the post of district surveyor at Bow, but this did not last long. 
The death in 1835 of Mathews's father put an end to this idle career, and on 28 September 1835 he turned his attention seriously to the theatre: in conjunction with Frederick Yates, his father's partner, he opened the Adelphi Theatre. The first piece was 'Mandrin', an adaptation by Mathews of a well-known French melodrama. But the speculation failed, and Mathews retired from management. On 6 November 1835 he appeared at the Olympic in his own piece 'The Humpbacked Lover', in which he played George Rattleton, and in a farce by Leman Rede, 'The Old and Young Stagers' -- John Liston, who recited a prologue, being the old stager, and Mathews the young. His performance was fashionable, though his success was not triumphant. 
On 11 January 1836 Mathews joined Madame Vestris ['see 'Vestris, Lucia Elizabeth (1797-1856)] at the Olympic in 'One Hour'; this was the beginning of a celebrated partnership. In their production of 'The Old and Young Stagers', their desire for authenticity led them to place carpets in the rooms on stage for the first time in any theatre. On 18 July 1838, at Kensington church, the couple were married, primarily to placate American sentiment before their forthcoming tour of the USA. None the less, the visit was unsuccessful. Mathews then reappeared at the Olympic in his own 'Patter versus Clatter', which remained a favourite piece. On 30 September 1839 Mathews and his wife opened at Covent Garden with an elaborate, but unsuccessful, revival of 'Love's Labour's Lost'; the company included Robert Keeley, George Bartley, Louisa Nisbett, and Anne Humby. 'Love' by Sheridan Knowles followed, introducing Ellen Tree (later Mrs Charles Kean), with little better result, and Mathews found himself involved in debts from which he was unable to free himself. 'The Beggar's Opera', with William Harrison as Macheath and Madame Vestris as Lucy Lockett, was more successful, and 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', with Mathews as Slender and Mrs Nisbett and Madame Vestris as the wives, proved a draw. During the period in which he held possession of Covent Garden, Mathews produced more than a hundred plays, operas, interludes, farces, melodramas, and pantomimes, including 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', given seventy times. Among the novelties were Leigh Hunt's 'A Legend of Florence' (7 February 1840), performed thirteen times; 'The Baronet', a comedy by Haynes Bayly, hissed from the stage; 'The Bride of Messina' (subsequently known as 'John of Procida'), by Sheridan Knowles (19 September 1840); 'The Greek Boy', a musical afterpiece by Samuel Lover; Boucicault's 'London Assurance', in which Mathews played Dazzle; Knowles's 'Old Maids', a failure; and several farces, some of them (including 'You Can't Marry your Grandmother') his own works. Charles Kemble accepted an engagement and performed at the theatre. On 2 November 1841 Adelaide Kemble appeared as Bellini's Norma, with a success that drew the attention of the proprietors, who pressed Mathews for arrears of rent, and so sealed his ruin. He had incurred many debts and was paying 60 per cent interest, often borrowing from one to make a payment to another. His management finished on 30 April 1842. Arrested for debt and declared bankrupt, he was released under conditions with regard to his creditors that deprived him of all chance of shaking off the burden. A flight to Paris was followed by a fresh bankruptcy. 
In October 1842 Mathews and his wife were engaged for Drury Lane by W. C. Macready, but they soon quarrelled with him, and transferred their services to the Haymarket. There they appeared on 14 November 1842, respectively as Charles Surface and Lady Teazle. On 29 August 1843 Mathews made a great hit as Giles in Planche's 'Who's your Friend?', and on 6 February 1844 a still greater success as Sir Charles Coldstream in Boucicault's 'Used up'. On 22 February 1843 Mathews, with his wife, made his first appearance in Edinburgh, playing Mr Charles Swiftly in 'One Hour' and in 'Patter versus Clatter'. Because of a failed tour of Ireland as a result of the potato losses there, on 8 May 1845 he again found himself in the bankruptcy court, for $28,000. After performing at the Surrey and at the Princess's, and in various provincial towns, Mathews opened at the Lyceum on 18 October 1847 with 'The Light Dragoons', 'The Two Queens', and 'The Pride of the Market'. For seven years the theatre was remuneratively conducted, but without enabling Mathews to get free from debt, and he gave it up on 24 March 1855. The next season saw him in his usual roles at Drury Lane. While playing in the provinces, he was arrested for bad debt on 4 July 1856 and imprisoned in Lancaster Castle. 
On 8 August 1856 Mathews's wife died. A year later, after playing at Drury Lane, where he was acting-manager, he revisited America. There he met and married in 1857 his second wife, Mrs Elizabeth (Lizzie) Davenport, 'nee' Jackson (died 1899), who, formerly married to William West, was also known as Lizzie Weston; she was an actress at Burton's Theatre, New York. He played for sixty nights at Burton's Theatre, the longest star performance ever known in New York at that time. In October 1858, with his wife as Lady Gay Spanker, he reappeared at the Haymarket as Dazzle in 'London Assurance'. He performed a round of his favourite characters, including, for the first time, Paul Pry, and Goldfinch in Thomas Holcroft's 'The Road to Ruin'. In 1860-61 he was again at Drury Lane, where he played Will Wander in a wild melodrama adapted by himself and called 'The Savannah', and on 25 November 1861 he appeared with his wife at the concert room (then called the Bijou Theatre) in Her Majesty's Theatre in an entertainment called 'Mr and Mrs Mathews at Home', illustrated by pictures by John O'Connor, from sketches by Mathews. 'My Wife and I' and a burlesque by H. J. Byron, 'The Sensation Fork, or, The Maiden, the Maniac, and the Midnight Murderers' were also given. In 1863 Mathews was again at the Haymarket, and the same year he played in Paris, at the Theatre des Varietes, in 'Un Anglais timide', his own French version of W. B. Jerrold's 'Cool as a Cucumber'. This experiment was repeated in the autumn of 1865, when, at the Vaudeville, he played in 'L'homme blase' ('Used up'). Both engagements were successful but were not renewed, though Mathews in July 1867 played 'Un Anglais timide' at the St James's, for the benefit of Ravel, and gave 'Cool as a Cucumber' the same night at the Olympic. Between these performances, Mathews had acted at the St James's in 'Woodcock's Little Game' and in 'Adventures of a Love-Letter', his own adaptation of Sardou's 'Pattes de mouche'. A scheme for a journey round the world led to a benefit at Covent Garden on 4 January 1870, in which, in scenes from various plays, the principal actors of the day took part. Mathews himself played his favourite character of Puff in the second act of 'The Critic', with Mrs Mathews appearing as Tilburina. 
On 9 April 1870 Mathews made his first appearance at the Theatre Royal, Melbourne, in 'Patter versus Clatter' and 'Married for Money'. Various parts were played, and Ballarat, Sydney, and Adelaide were visited. The Australian trip ended on 31 January 1871, when Mathews set sail for Auckland. He performed 'Used up' and 'Cool as a Cucumber' at 11 a.m. on 7 February and sailed three hours later for Honolulu, where he acted for one night. On the 12th he arrived at San Francisco, where he performed for one week, then proceeded to New York and fulfilled a six-week engagement. A tour in the United States and Canada followed, and on 1 June 1872 he took his farewell of America at Wallack's Theatre, New York, as Sir Simon Simple in H. J. Byron's 'Not such a Fool as he Looks'. 
On 7 October 1872 Mathews appeared at the Gaiety Theatre, London, in 'A Curious Case' and 'The Critic'. A second engagement at the same house began on 26 May 1873, and a third on 29 September of the same year. In 1874 he was again at the Gaiety, and on 13 September 1875 produced there his own adaptation 'My Awful Dad' ('Un pere prodigue'). This was his last new part. The periods between these performances were spent in the provinces. In November 1875 he went to India, and played at Calcutta before the prince of Wales. In 1876 he was again at the Gaiety, and in 1877 at the Opera Comique, where, in Samuel Foote's 'The Liar' and G. H. Lewes's 'The Cosy Couple', he reappeared on 2 June 1877. The following year he started on a provincial tour with a company under the management of Sarah Thorne. On 8 June he made his last appearance, playing at Stalybridge in 'My Awful Dad'. He died on 24 June 1878 at the Queen's Hotel in Manchester. His body was moved to 59 Belgrave Road, his last London residence, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 29 June. 
Mathews played some 240 characters, very many of them in his own pieces. His most conspicuous successes were obtained in light comedy and farce; passion and pathos seemed wholly alien to his nature. He was, within limits, an admirable comedian. In his early days he was a model of grace, brightness, and elegance. George H. Lewes tells how the youth of the day were wont to worship him, and says of his Affable Hawk in 'The Game of Speculation' that its artistic merit was so great 'that it almost became an offence against morality, by investing a swindler with irresistible charms, and making the very audacity of deceit a source of pleasurable sympathy'. Lewes owns, however, that Mathews was 'utterly powerless in the manifestation of all the powerful emotions: rage, scorn, pathos, dignity, vindictiveness, tenderness, and wild mirth are all beyond his means. He cannot even laugh with animal heartiness. He sparkles; he never explodes.' Mathews had, however, airiness, finesse, aplomb, and, in spite of an occasional tendency to jauntiness, repose and good breeding, and he possessed powers of observation and gifts of mimicry. His popularity was indescribable, and at times embarrassing. His frequent imprisonment and the class of parts he played gained him a character he did not wholly deserve of 'a gay dog'. He was not at all the reckless character popularly supposed, and was a little shy in the presence of strangers. 
Of Mathews's plays, mostly adaptations, no full catalogue seems to be in existence. A list of his own pieces and of those in which he had appeared constitutes an appendix to Charles Dickens's 'Life of Charles James Mathews' (1879). Such of the plays as are printed are included in T. H. Lacy's 'Acting Edition' and Benjamin Webster's 'Acting National Drama'. The British Museum collection is meagre. In 'The Chain of Events', a drama in eight acts, Mathews collaborated with Slingsby Lawrence (Lewes). With the exception of this piece and 'The Savannah', a four-act melodrama, his plays were generally in three acts or fewer. His three-act pieces included 'Black Domino', 'Dead for a Ducat', and 'Soft Sex'. In two acts are 'Aggravating Sam', 'Impudent Puppy', 'Kill Him Again', and 'Who Killed Cock Robin?' He wrote many one-act pieces, including 'Cherry and Blue', 'His Excellency', 'Little Toddlekins', 'Mathews & Co.', 'Methinks I see my Father', 'My Mother's Maid', and 'Paul Pry Married and Settled'. Many of these are trifles, intended to serve a temporary purpose, and most have been long forgotten. Mathews also collaborated on a large number of works, and translated plays both from and into French. 


@@@@@


doc= 18331


Vestris, Lucia Elizabeth (1797-1856), actress and singer, was born on 2 March 1797, probably at 74 Dean Street, Soho, London. She was the granddaughter of the engraver Francesco Bartolozzi and the first child of Gaetano Stefano Bartolozzi, a printseller, engraver, and drawing-master, and his wife, Theresa Jansen, the daughter of a dancing-master from Aix-la-Chapelle. Theresa, a pupil of Clementi, taught music herself and was regarded by Haydn, who dedicated five works to her, as one of London's leading pianists. The Bartolozzis' other child, Josephine, was born in 1807. Lucia probably learned Italian and French at home and was taught singing by masters including Domenico Corri, coach at the King's Theatre. On 28 January 1813 she married Armand Vestris (1787-1825), the third generation in a famous family of dancers of Italian origin; his father, Auguste, was for over thirty years 'premier danseur' at the Paris Opera. Armand was leading dancer at the King's Theatre, London, where in 1814 he became ballet-master. 
Lucia Vestris made her debut on 20 July 1815, under the stage name Madame Vestris, at her husband's benefit night in the title role in Peter Winter's 'Il ratto di Proserpina'. She was greeted with approbation for her performance and especially for her beauty, and continued to appear that season and the next. For her joint benefit with her husband in the summer of 1816 she sang Susanna in 'Le nozze di Figaro'. Peace having opened continental Europe to British travellers, and debts having driven Armand Vestris to leave England, his wife made her Paris debut at the Theatre des Italiens in December 1816. She did not return to England until 1819. Records of her life at this period are unreliable: it is said that she appeared at Paris theatres and sang in Naples. It may be safely assumed that she acquired further training and stage experience. There must also have been developments in her private life, since she returned to England in September 1819 without her husband, who died in Naples in 1825. 
Madame Vestris was engaged by R. W. Elliston for his first Drury Lane season, and met critical approval for her French style. Contemporary opinion commends her mezzo-soprano voice, but it was not good enough to establish her as a leading singer in a period of great operatic performers. Instead she made a name for herself in the period 1820-30 as a scandalous beauty, a career launched by the 'succes de scandale' of her famous breeches performance, the lead role in the musical burlesque 'Giovanni in London' at Drury Lane in May 1820. The role had been created by Mrs Joe Gould in a very masculine style; Madame Vestris's appearances in breeches, while asserting her freedom, always also emphasized her femininity, showing off her fabulously perfect legs. For ten years she was ogled on stage and whispered about off, entertaining a series of lovers with whom she had profitable arrangements that supplemented her rising stage earnings to finance an extravagant lifestyle. Among these the most notable was the radical MP Thomas Duncombe, soon to take a leading part in the reform movement and sit on the 1832 parliamentary select committee whose remit was to reform the antiquated monopoly laws that prevented the legitimate growth of new theatres in London. Vestris's stage career now embraced other breeches roles (including Macheath, over which she fell out with John Anderson, her sister Josephine's husband-to-be) and light comedy acting. She was a fashionable star: she even acquired a signature tune when she introduced the song 'Cherry Ripe' into John Poole's 'Paul Pry' at the Haymarket in 1825. 
The major managements were eager for Madame Vestris's support. But London theatre was approaching a crisis point. Before the select committee on the state of the drama was called for, Covent Garden had bankrupted Charles Kemble and Vestris had joined the minor theatre rebellion as a manager as well as a performer. In December 1830 she leased the Olympic Theatre from John Scott, who had previously built the Sans Pareil Theatre for his daughter Jane. Both these new West End venues were granted annual licences by the lord chamberlain from 1807. Vestris held the burletta licence in her own name. It did not permit the 'classic' drama: all entertainments included music. The Olympic, a few steps from Drury Lane, held an audience only a third as large, but its potential was great. The old theatres had become unfashionable, and were obliged to mount lengthy and expensive bills to cater for their huge audience range. Vestris remodelled her theatre as a modern, feminine, and enjoyable alternative; well decorated, intimate, and tasteful, like a fashionable drawing-room, it attracted an enthusiastic audience. By avoiding the practice of disguising thin houses with free admissions, Madame Vestris segregated the auditorium reliably, defending sensitive patrons from mixing outside their class. She offered light musical pieces and farces, well mounted, often changed, pretty and undemanding, and made a point of finishing by 11 p.m. These apparently simple changes made her theatre fashionable. It attracted the 'beau monde', who amused themselves there before moving on to their night pursuits. Aspiring City men and their families could join them, to see and be seen in fashionable company without taxing themselves intellectually, and get home early enough to be in the office next morning. The standard was reliable, the segregated auditorium offered no threats, and, since tipping was forbidden, there were no disconcerting demands for more money. Plain bills of the play, without the desperate hyperbole of the larger theatres, carried an air of quality and self-assurance that flattered the audience. 
Behind the scenes Vestris copied the practices of the best French boulevard theatres, with fresh -- sometimes innovative -- scenery, good working conditions and contracts, and adequate rehearsal. She attracted loyal workers, including Planche, Liston, and Benjamin Webster, and regularly appeared herself, elaborately costumed and feted in Planche's metatheatrical extravaganzas. While developing this formula she managed successfully from 1831 to 1839, during very difficult years in the theatre. Success brought her profit, but she continued to accept money from admirers, especially Duncombe, to meet her expenses. A large expense, for about four years from 1833, was an affair with Lord Edward Thynne (1807-1884), the reprobate son of the marquess of Bath. He and Madame Vestris's brother-in-law Anderson fleeced her by a series of fraudulent bill transactions that resulted in her bankruptcy in April 1837. 
In the autumn of 1835 Vestris hired Charles James Mathews (1803-1878) as a writer and actor. Brought up as a gentleman, Mathews was now eager to adopt his father's profession of comedian. He made a success at the Olympic, and of his meeting with Vestris; they developed a sophisticated, 'realistic' style of light comedy. On 18 July 1838 they married at Kensington church, having accepted a tour in America, under the management of Stephen Price, to repair their finances. The tour was not a success. There was a mismatch of expectations between audiences and performers, and neither the Olympic society comedies nor the aristocratic manners of the Mathewses were appreciated. They returned home in 1839. The Olympic, no longer the sole leader of fashion, was now heavily in debt. The couple took the bold step of leasing Covent Garden, a theatre large enough to pay the expenses of Vestris's high production values. Mathews was lessee, his wife manager. Despite the disapproval of Macready, Vestris's artistic practices transferred well, and her scrupulous preparation of texts, actors, and scenery was more effective in the revival of 'the national drama' than his hectoring bourgeois moralism had been. Released from the limitations of the burletta licence, for three seasons she staged classic high comedy and sought new comic writing, such as Boucicault's 'London Assurance' (1841), and staged notable Shakespearian productions, including an excellent 'Midsummer Night's Dream' (1840), the previously unrevived 'Love's Labours Lost' (1839), and a 'Merry Wives of Windsor' (1840) set in Shakespeare's time. Such a design decision was unique in a period when cumbersomely correct 'historical' settings for the plays were increasingly regarded as the only proper choice. But the huge expenses of the old theatre meant that there was little or no profit. Three previous managements had all finished bankrupt; Vestris did better than most, until she successfully brought out Adelaide Kemble in 'Norma' (in 1841), and the singer's father, Charles, one of the proprietors, scented a personal opportunity and refused to renew their lease. Mathews declared bankruptcy in May 1842; it was perhaps some consolation that, despite Kemble's bad faith over his daughter, and his having unscrupulously appropriated all the new scenery built for Vestris, his management failed. 
Macready, now leasing Drury Lane, maliciously hired Vestris and Mathews to disable them as competition, and insulted them by casting him in minor roles and billing her as a supporting player. They left and went to the Haymarket, where they did better, with Webster as manager. But Mathews was bankrupt again in December, pressed especially hard by the malignant Anderson. The couple entered into a period of unremitting work, between the Haymarket and provincial touring, to try to meet their debts. Then in 1847 they undertook a lease of the Lyceum. Their company included the writer and comedian Buckstone and Fanny Fitzwilliam. The theatre seated 1800, about 500 more than the Olympic, but Vestris worked to reproduce her previous success, beginning well with the Morton farce 'Cox and Box'. Eleven more Planche extravaganzas followed, with scenery by William Beverley. In 1849, after an unexpected success with his translation 'A Day of Reckoning', G. H. Lewes was enrolled to bring modern French plays to the Lyceum. In these experimental plays Vestris and Mathews further developed their 'realistic' manner of acting, making a cool modern comedy style another of the Vestris innovations. The initial Lyceum team broke up under financial stress in 1853. Vestris took a farewell benefit with Mathews in July 1854, and retired, seriously ill. With good will from the public and assistance from professional friends Mathews continued to run Lyceum seasons until 1855 and to endure a punishing schedule of provincial tours: they were still deep in long-standing debts because Mathews had not renounced all personal liabilities in the 1842 bankruptcy. In July 1855 he was arrested in Preston, on tour, and imprisoned in Lancaster Castle; having finally been made completely bankrupt, he returned to London five days before Vestris died of cancer, on 8 August 1856. She was privately buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 
Madame Vestris was born and bred in the international elite of art and entertainment. It is important in an understanding of her role in the development of the British stage to see her work in this European context, which valued virtuoso talent, ruthlessly perfected training, and the clear-sighted capacity to understand and to please a fashionable audience through perfect taste and unerring elegance. Her alert understanding of the theatre business made her aware of the need to innovate in order to manage the problems that beset the London stage. She found original solutions to a wide range of issues. Her management at the Olympic successfully negotiated the opposition between the antique practices of the theatre under aristocratic patronage and rising middle-class aspiration and its self-definition through propriety. As a performer she exploited and at the same time minimized, excused, and made acceptable her sexual appeal and scandalous reputation. A similar sleight of hand enabled her to exploit her talent as stage manager and artistic director at three theatres, including Covent Garden, turning her femininity into an asset that connoted good taste and an acceptable luxury for the consumer rather than a threat from a woman usurping power. She has appealed in many ways to biographers, from contemporary pornographic scandal sheets to theatre historians of the twentieth century, who have presented her as a theatrical innovator while suggesting that she was reliant on the talents of male assistants. She is now beginning to be recognized, in scholarly work ranging from the gender politics of the theatre to Shakespearian production, as one of the most important practitioners of her generation in her own right. 


@@@@@


doc= 18332


Mathews, Thomas (1676-1751), naval officer, eldest son of Colonel Edward Mathews (died 1700), and Jane, daughter of Sir Thomas Armstrong, was born in October 1676 at Llandaff Court, Glamorgan, the seat of the family for many generations, later the palace of the bishops of Llandaff. His father was a fervent whig convert; his wife's father was a whig martyr, executed for his thoroughgoing complicity in the Rye House plot. Mathews entered the navy about 1690, on the 'Albemarle' with Sir Francis Wheeler. On 31 October 1699 Admiral Matthew Aylmer promoted him lieutenant of his flagship, the 'Boyne'. The promotion was confirmed on 16 March 1700 when the Admiralty appointed him to the 'Deal Castle'. 
Mathews took post on 24 May 1703 in the 'Yarmouth' in the West Indies under John Graydon; he remained with Graydon's squadron as it suffered near ruin from Caribbean summer, chilling September fog off Newfoundland, and a stormy passage home. He commanded the frigate 'Kinsale' in the channel in 1704, and after that the 'Dover' (50 guns), in which he crossed to North America, convoying home the New England trade in late 1706. March 1708 saw the 'Dover' with the squadron under Sir George Byng that was hurrying to Scotland to prevent Forbin's Dunkirk fleet from landing a Franco-Jacobite invasion force. On sighting Byng's ships off the Firth of Forth, Forbin fled northwards. The heavier British ships were unable to close, but the 'Dover' and another clean ship did so. The cannonading, which was plainly audible ashore, began off Montrose at about 4 p.m. on 13 March. Mathews tried to advance to engage 'Le Mars', in which he presumed (correctly) the Pretender was embarked, but French warships blocked his path. The chase continued during the night past Aberdeen, but in the end only the 'Salisbury' was forced to surrender. Byng ordered Mathews to scout further north, a foul-weather mission that found nothing because the invasion force had headed home. After a brief command of the 'Gloucester', Mathews moved to a new ship, the 'Chester' (54 guns), in 1709. In late March he was with Lord Dursley in the Soundings when Du Guay Trouin was sighted. Most of Trouin's ships outsailed Dursley's and escaped, but Mathews caught up with the 'Gloire' (44 guns) and after staying close through the night engaged and captured her. 
In 1710 the 'Chester', under Commodore George Martin, participated in the conquest of Nova Scotia, playing a prominent role in the capture of Port Royal, which was renamed Annapolis Royal. When Martin went home Mathews remained as senior officer on the New England station; he joined the fleet that came to Boston in the following summer under Sir Hovenden Walker for the purpose of attacking Quebec. Cruising at the entrance of the Gulf of St Lawrence in July 1711, Mathews captured a small French warship whose master was subsequently induced by Walker to serve as chief pilot for guiding the fleet up the river. The expedition was terminated after seven of its troop transports smashed upon the north-west shore. A few weeks later the 'Chester' was assigned to convoy home the New England mast ships. When the ship was paid off Mathews settled down to life as a squire at Llandaff Court. Although he had found time for marriage in 1705 to Henrietta Burgess (died 1737), daughter of a physician of Antigua and Shoreditch, he had been much at sea and compiled an enviable record in seamanship, combat, and command. 
Mathews returned to duty in early 1718 and as captain of the 'Kent' (70 guns) went out to the Mediterranean with the fleet commanded by Byng. In the action off Cape Passaro the 'Kent' -- again Mathews commanded a fast ship -- was one of four ordered ahead during the night to catch the Spanish main body. On the next morning (1 August) Mathews engaged and took possession of the 'San Carlos', and then assisted the 'Superb' in engaging and capturing the Spanish admiral. Thus Mathews had a distinguished share in the great victory, and afterwards Byng appointed him commander of the small squadron responsible for blockading Messina. Although he was unable to capture George Camocke, rear-admiral in the Spanish service, who escaped in a small boat, his squadron performed diligently and effectively for over a year. In August 1719 he was ordered to cruise off Palermo to intercept incoming Spanish supplies. The 'Kent' returned to England in 1720. 
Mathews was next appointed commodore of a squadron ordered to assist the East India Company in suppressing piracy in the Indian Ocean. Immediately upon arriving in the 'Lion' (64 guns) at Bombay on 27 August 1721, he quarrelled with the governor over whether the fort or the ship should salute first. Continuing hostility marked subsequent relations between him and the company; such conflicts were not unusual, but Mathews's contentiousness seems excessive. The joint operation of 1721 involving Portuguese troops from Goa against the troublesome Angria on the Malabar coast would probably have failed anyhow. It was the complete failure of Mathews's subsequent cruise against the pirates round Madagascar in 1722 that did greatest injury to his reputation, especially because some of the 'Lion's' movements were evidently designed to generate personal trading profits rather than hunt down pirates. Back in England in 1724 he was court martialled and mulcted four months' pay for misdemeanours, one of the charges being that he had received disallowed merchandise on board a navy ship. The directors of the company sued him in civil court for $13,677 as recompense for his illegal trading, but intercession by the Admiralty in 1728 led to the matter's being dropped. It is very likely that Mathews accepted the East Indies command in order to amass a fortune, and that having made some money -- one need not imagine that he netted the figure calculated by the company -- he sought no further employment at sea. In 1727 and again in 1734 he contested the tory-controlled Cardiff Borough seat on behalf of the whig interest but was unsuccessful on both occasions. 
After refusing an offer to serve in the Russian navy because the empress would not make him an admiral, Mathews, in 1736, became dockyard commissioner at Chatham. His wife died in 1737, and on 9 November 1738 he married Millicent (died after 1751), daughter and coheir of John Fuller, formerly sheriff of London. Mathews was an effective commissioner, popular with the yard workers yet capable of satisfying his Navy Board colleagues and his superiors at the Admiralty. 
With Britain at war with Spain and war with France likely, Mathews, who had been passed over for promotion to flag-rank in the 1730s, was promoted at one step on 13 March 1742 vice-admiral of the red (full restoration of rank), and was also made commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, and plenipotentiary to the king of Sardinia and the states of Italy. Only an acute shortage of capable senior flag officers excused the elevation of someone who had not seen sea service for eighteen years. In favour of Mathews, however, were his performance as a commander at sea before 1720, his experience as a dockyard commissioner, and his knowledge of the Mediterranean theatre. He was well thought of by Sir Charles Wager and was politically connected with William Pulteney (later earl of Bath), who was then in ascendancy. 
Although Mathews comes down to posterity, as Admiral Sir Herbert Richmond remarked, 'with a cheap tag attached to his name that he was stupid' (Richmond, 3.254), his performance both as theatre commander and plenipotentiary displayed sense, foresight, diligence, and a high degree of success. The dual assignment was complex and strewn with pitfalls. Chiefly he was charged with frustrating Spanish military designs on Italy; the inshore waters between Marseilles and Genoa were therefore the primary focus. Yet British warships were needed far and wide, from the coast of Spain to the Adriatic. Mathews's crusty disposition did not please the diplomatic corps but may have materially benefited the cause: when he ordered Captain William Martin to Naples to 'use his utmost to lay the said city in ashes, unless the King of the two Sicilies' agreed immediately to stop assisting the enemy, the threat was believed and the purpose achieved (ibid., 1.212). A similar threat at Genoa was also effective. Above all, for twenty months Mathews managed to maintain a correct balance of concentration and dispersal, not allowing the large Franco-Spanish fleet at Toulon to deter him from deploying most of his ships on the mundane tasks of sea power. Only when he was sure the combined fleet was being readied for sea in December 1743 did he order a concentration. 
Effective intelligence arrangements sped the news of the Toulon fleet's weighing, but it took two days for the British fleet to clear Hyeres Roads and even then, on 10 February 1744, the light, variable winds prevented formation of a line. Fortunately an easterly breeze prevented Admiral de Court (commanding sixteen French and twelve Spanish ships of the line) from taking advantage; instead, he steered away southward in line ahead. Yet he did not flee, which his ships could have done thanks to cleaner hulls. At 3 p.m. Mathews ordered a line abreast and headed downwind towards the combined fleet. The situation, foreseen in his orders, permitted him to treat the French as enemies even though no war between Britain and France was yet declared. When darkness fell, both fleets brought to. Mathews's signal for the line abreast was still flying when he ordered the halt. Vice-Admiral Richard Lestock, whose rear squadron (eight of the line) was separated far to windward, brought to immediately instead of using the favouring wind to achieve the line abreast. Irregular drifting during the night put the rear squadron even further away. 
At 8.30 a.m. on 11 February Mathews signalled for a line ahead. A battle plainly loomed. Rear-Admiral William Rowley attained his station in the van, but despite Mathews's signals to make more sail (reinforced twice by a lieutenant sent in a boat) Lestock's squadron remained far behind. By noon Mathews concluded that the aim of the Franco-Spanish fleet was to lure him away from the coast so that Spanish troops could be embarked for an invasion of Italy. The fleet might also have been trying to join with a Brest squadron known to have sailed, in which case he would be overmatched. In any case, as a British admiral with a superior force he simply had to try to bring on an engagement. 
After a shouted conversation with Captain James Cornewall of the 'Marlborough' next astern, Mathews hoisted the signal to engage and led his centre division towards the Spanish flagship. By isolating the Spanish ships he might induce the French to slow down to assist them and thus bring on a general engagement. Rowley steered for the French admiral. Through all this Mathews kept the signal for the line ahead flying, a proceeding much criticized later, though it may have encouraged three captains of the van to stretch forward to inhibit the half-dozen leading French ships from doubling back. Because gaps developed in the Spanish portion of line and the British van fell upon the rear of the French portion, some British ships lacked opponents. Far in the rear were four Spanish ships -- so far behind that Lestock's squadron could have cut them off. But he chose not to engage and they slowly rejoined their admiral unopposed. 
Only a few ships bore the brunt of the battle. Mathews's flagship, the 'Namur', was substantially disabled aloft and her captain lost an arm. The 'Marlborough' was heavily engaged with the Spanish flagship and suffered severe damage and casualties, including Captain Cornewall, who was killed. All in all Mathews and Rowley and six or seven captains of the van and centre, including Edward Hawke, were in the thick of it. Astern of Mathews four captains of his division kept too great a distance. Lestock's squadron missed the battle. 
In the final phase de Court tacked, realizing that he must shield the Spaniards, and the move was successful. Both sides made repairs during the night. The enemy's course change had placed Lestock in the lead and the next day his undamaged squadron moved out ahead. The chase forced the Spanish to cease towing a disabled warship, which Mathews ordered be burnt. The following morning, 13 February, Lestock was sure, though 12 miles distant, that he would overtake the fleeing Spanish because they were trying to protect some crippled ships. Just before noon, however, Mathews called off the chase. He believed that the Riviera blockade held priority and was also worried that the Brest fleet might be near. It was a bad decision. The Brest squadron was not in the Mediterranean and a strong adverse wind frustrated the attempted return to the Riviera. Although most of the enemy would have undoubtedly escaped, four or five crippled Spanish men-of-war must have been captured had the chase continued. 
Mathews wrote to Lestock straight away, asking why he had brought to on the evening before the battle without achieving a line abreast, the result being that his squadron had fallen astern 'full five Miles..., which is notorious to the whole Fleet'. He further asked why Lestock did not respond to the signal to engage by bearing down on the four Spanish stragglers. In response Lestock pointedly criticized Mathews's inadequate and contradictory signals, and added that there were four unengaged ships of his centre division which could have been ordered to deal with the lagging Spaniards. This provoked an angry reply: 'You would not yourself do it, or order any of your Division to do, what you are pleased to tell me I ought to have done', yet 'it was absolutely in your Power' to oppose those four ships ('Original Letters', 22). 
On 16 March 1744 Mathews suspended Lestock and ordered him home. Next day he sent copies of their correspondence to the duke of Newcastle, then secretary of state for the southern department, and asked to be ordered home to defend himself against Lestock's accusations. Lestock arrived in London three months before Mathews and quickly published his version of the battle in a long pamphlet. Nevertheless public opinion ran strongly in Mathews's favour. It appears that most people accepted the view that the signal to engage plus the example set by the centre and van required Lestock to fall upon the Spanish ships that were within his reach. Lestock defended himself chiefly by conveying the impression that Mathews as fleet commander had been sloppy, reckless, and impatient; the battle, he contended, could have been fought with a complete, well ordered line if only Mathews had waited for him to join. 
An unstable political situation enabled Lestock and his friends to push successfully for a parliamentary inquiry. It was a major political event; hearings occupied the House of Commons on two full days every week from 12 March to 4 April 1745 and these were followed by passionate debates. This inquiry was an extraordinary innovation, never repeated, in which naval operations were examined in the political forum prior to courts martial. During the proceedings Mathews sat as MP for Glamorgan, having wrested the seat from its traditional tory control in a by-election victory in January. This gave him no advantage, however, because it set all tories against him while failing to bring solid allegiance from the faction-ridden whigs. Henry Fox, a rising star in debate, emerged as an outspoken advocate of Lestock. Although Mathews fared well in the pamphlet war, the parliamentary inquiry damaged him severely. Lestock's cool manner of reasoning impressed the MPs. Mathews was perceived as 'a hot, brave, imperious, dull, confused fellow' (Walpole, 19.33), and he harmed his credibility by unwillingness to criticize the four captains of his own division who had failed to engage more closely. 
Hundreds of witnesses were brought home from the Mediterranean for the courts martial. Seven captains and four lieutenants were tried in 1745 at Chatham, where the trials of the admirals were feverishly anticipated. For two days in October the yard was at a standstill as the workers 'assembled at the dock gate, to the number of about eight hundred, and examined everyone that went in or out whether for Mathews or Lestock, and were all strong for Mr Mathews'. The Board of Admiralty, pondering whether there might be riots 'if upon the courts martial it should appear that Mr Lestock has not been so much to blame as thought and Mr Mathews should be found guilty', ordered the venue changed to Deptford (Hattendorf, 522). Key members of the board apparently contrived to ensure that the composition of the court for the admirals' trials would not favour Mathews (Sandwich to Bedford, 22 Oct 1745, Woburn MSS, 10, fols. 110-11). In the event Lestock was acquitted of all charges on 20 June 1746 and, despite his poor health, immediately appointed to an important command. That did not bode well for Mathews. 
During his trial, which lasted four months, Mathews is reported to have 'calmed all his passions', becoming 'sensible of the advantages of an even temper and decent behaviour' ('Du Cane MSS', 135). Nevertheless the court, in spite of overwhelming evidence to the contrary, presumed that a classic line-of-battle action could have been fought. They excused Mathews's decision to attack with only part of his force on the technical ground of superior strength, but rejected his claim that he 'had no chance of bringing the French to action, unless by making the signal for engaging and bearing down' on the Spaniards. More reasonably, the court also faulted him for failing to coerce the four lagging captains of his division into closer engagement and neglecting to stay in close touch with the fleeing enemy during the moonlight night of 12 February. On 22 October 1746 he was deemed to be a principal cause of the miscarriage and was cashiered. Mathews had clearly made many mistakes during and after the battle. The astonishing thing is that Lestock was found completely faultless. 
It is undeniable that Mathews lacked some of the qualities wanted in a commander-in-chief. His imperious temper showed too readily, and not only when talking: his official letters from the Mediterranean were too often disfigured by expressions of wrath. Worse, he allowed a long-developed dislike of Lestock to prevent a discussion of possible tactics before the battle. The Admiralty and the leaders of government must share some responsibility in this regard. The mutual animosity of the two men was well known. Mathews, upon accepting command, had asked for Lestock to be removed, and Lestock himself had asked for a new assignment. The complacent assumption that they would co-operate for the good of the service proved disastrous. 
It is said that Mathews accepted the outcome of his trial with equanimity, at least on the surface. He could take comfort in knowing that his method of attack was the only way to bring on an engagement and that he had risked life and limb while his critic and accuser remained aloof. His bluntness was evidently matched with natural honesty. He readily admitted to the court that under pressure of combat he had made mistakes. All in all there seems to have been a genuine basis for his popular support, and George II remained grateful to him for his services to the allied cause. Though parliamentary opinion still flowed strongly against him he found friends among those who were inclined to perceive his disgrace and Lestock's exoneration as high-handed acts of an increasingly powerful political combination at the Admiralty. 
By arrangement Mathews agreed to give up his Glamorgan seat and accept Carmarthen Boroughs for the election of 1747, and was thus returned to parliament. In 1749, feeling himself in failing health, he settled in Bloomsbury Square, London, and there he died on 2 October 1751. He was buried in St George's, Bloomsbury. His only child, Thomas William, by his first wife, resigned his commission as major in the army upon his father's disgrace in 1746 but sat three years for Glamorgan (1756-9). 


@@@@@


doc= 18333


Mathias, Benjamin Williams (1772-1841), Church of Ireland clergyman, was born on 12 November 1772 in Dublin, the only surviving child of Benjamin Mathias, originally of Haverfordwest, Pembrokeshire, who settled in Dublin about 1760 as a woollen cloth manufacturer; both parents died about 1782. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, from 1791, where he was elected a scholar in 1794, and graduated BA in 1796 and MA in 1799. In 1797 he was ordained to the curacy of Rathfriland, co. Down, and in January 1804 he married a daughter of Mr Stewart of Wilmont, co. Down. They had at least two sons; the second, John Alexander Mathias, became archdeacon of Colombo, Ceylon. 
In 1805 Mathias became chaplain of Bethesda Chapel, Dorset Street, Dublin, and he was soon one of the most popular evangelical ministers in the city, his preaching being considered so powerful that the provost of Trinity College, Dublin, forbade students from attending his services. In 1828 he helped to found the Established Church Home Mission with the aim of reviving the church by evangelizing Roman Catholics; and with Joseph Singer he was a founder of the Hibernian Bible Society. Mathias wrote a number of controversial works, including, 'An Inquiry into the Doctrines of the Reformation and of the United Church of England and Ireland, respecting the Ruin and Recovery of Mankind' (1814), 'A Compendious History of the Council of Trent' (1832), and a volume of 'Twenty-one Sermons' (1838). 
In May 1835 Mathias resigned his chaplaincy because of illness. He died in Merrion Avenue, Dublin, on 30 May 1841, and was buried in Mount Jerome cemetery. His congregation erected a tablet to his memory in Bethesda Chapel and a monument in the cemetery. The memorial tablet was later moved to the porch of St George's, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 18334


Mathias, Thomas James (1753/4-1835), satirist and Italian scholar, was the eldest son of Vincent Mathias ('c'.1711-1782), sub-treasurer in the queen's household, and his wife, Marianne (1724-1799), daughter of Alured Popple, secretary to the Board of Trade and governor of Bermuda. Mathias's uncle Gabriel was an artist, and held a post in the office of the keeper of the privy purse. Another uncle, James, was a Hamburg merchant, well-known amateur singer, and minor enemy of Mrs Thrale. Mathias's brother George, queen's messenger from 1792, was a long-standing friend of Charlotte Burney, who found him 'excessive comical' ('Early Diary', 2.302-12). Andrew, the other brother, became surgeon-extraordinary to the queen. His sister Albinia was (as Mrs Skerrett) the addressee of a poem written in 1805 by Anna Seward. The family lived in Middle Scotland Yard. Mathias once owned a picture of the family by Hogarth. 
Mathias is said to have been educated at Eton College, and he had a strong personal interest in the college; but on his admission as a pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 2 July 1770, aged sixteen, he was recorded as having come from the Revd Richard Woodeson's school at Kingston upon Thames. He was admitted as a scholar of the college on 26 April 1771 and took an 'aegrotat' degree in 1774. In August 1775, as a middle bachelor, he gained one of the members' prizes (15 guineas) for the best dissertation in Latin prose; in 1776, as a senior bachelor, he took a similar prize. These dissertations were printed and survive in signed copies. In 1776 he was elected as a minor fellow of the college (his Latin letter to Dr Lort about the election is in Nichols, 'Anecdotes', 2.676-8); he subsequently became a major fellow. In 1777 he graduated MA and served as third, second, and first sub-lector over the period 1777-80. He became intimate with Spencer Perceval, apparently acting as a kind of private tutor to him. In 1780 he published, anonymously, 'An Heroic Epistle to the Rev. R. Watson', ridiculing Watson's hopes of surveying the deserts of Arabia and Tartary; 'An Answer to the Heroic Epistle' provoked from Mathias a further 'Heroic Address in Prose' of the same year. In 1781 Mathias published 'Runic Odes Imitated from the Norse Tongue', which addressed Icelandic, Ossianic, and Welsh themes 'in the manner of Mr. Gray'. 
Mathias's father died on 15 June 1782 aged seventy-one, and Mathias left Cambridge to become successively sub-treasurer to the queen, vice-treasurer, and treasurer of the accounts of the queen's household. In 1783, aided by Dr Glynn, who had access to some of Chatterton's manuscripts, Mathias produced a somewhat indeterminate 'Essay on the Evidence Relating to the Poems Attributed to Thomas Rowley'. The anonymous 'Rowley and Chatterton in the Shades' (1782), sometimes attributed to Mathias, is probably by George Hardinge. The wide range of Mathias's interests and connections is indicated by his election as fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in January 1795, and fellow of the Royal Society in March 1795. He was 'particularly agreeable & pleasant as well as cultivated and sensible' in social circles, according to Fanny Burney, who mentioned that he 'can't determine upon matrimony' ('Journals and Letters of Fanny Burney', 3.101, 4.31). (He never did marry.) 
Mathias's 'Pursuits of Literature, or, What you will', a wide-ranging satire with extensive notes on the conceit and licence of contemporary authors, appeared anonymously in four dialogues, the first on 7 June 1794, the second and third on 14 July 1796, and the fourth on 19 July 1797. The poem was issued as a whole in a 'fifth edition revised' in 1798, alongside several editions of a translation of the classical passages quoted in the poem. The attacks on Payne Knight's 'Worship of Priapus' and Lewis's 'The Monk' are concerned with obscenity, and Mathias ridicules the 'Black-Letter Kennell' of antiquarians (especially George Steevens), W. H. Ireland, Parr, Darwin, and Gilpin, on literary grounds. There is praise for Gray, Mason, Beattie, Burns, Cowper, Ann Radcliffe, Capell, Johnson, Isaac Reed, and Jacob Bryant, as well as for several of Mathias's own works. But the poem is confessedly of its political moment, declaring openly that literature is an important tool of government. Held up for censure are Sheridan, Fox, Priestley, Paine, Horne Tooke, and Godwin. The vehement distrust of Catholics in the poem was also expressed separately in 'A Letter to the Lord Marquis of Buckingham' (1796). 
The 'British Critic' approved of the poem as a 'strenuous enemy and assailant of democratical principles, and of that monster, French, or Frenchified philosophy' (8.353-6). When the fourth part came out, the 'Monthly Review' accused Mathias of scaremongering: 'our literary Mesmer very successfully magnetizes his readers into a perpetual hysteric, and convulses them with the titillatory spasms of ever-varying fears' (new ser., 24.219). William Cobbett wrote to the anonymous author that 'Your matchless poem... is become very fashionable in the libraries of the Americans' (Smith, 1.244-5). Mathias's comments on the French Revolution and on women radicals were enthusiastically endorsed by Richard Polwhele in 'The Unsex'd Females', addressed to Mathias in 1798, though this did not prevent Mathias from disparaging Polwhele in a later edition. Steevens's perceptive point that the poem was 'merely a peg to hang the notes on' brought a rebuttal in the poem itself (iv.15). Southey commented 'they tell me I am civilly wiped in that stupid poem' ('New Letters', 1.139). The most successful public response was that by William Boscawen, whose translation of Horace had been censured by Mathias in 'Pursuits'. His 'Progress of Satire: an Essay in Verse' (1798) argued that local and topical satire was inferior to general satire and attacked Mathias's arrogance and spite. It was reissued with a supplement in 1799. Reviewers tended to agree with Boscawen. Other responses of 1798 included the anonymous 'Impartial Strictures on the Poem called The Pursuits of Literature', which contained a vindication of 'The Monk'; 'The Egotist', which depicted the overweening author quarrelling with his interlocutor; John Mainwaring, 'Remarks on 'The Pursuits of Literature'', to which Mathias replied in 'A Letter to the Author of a Pamphlet, Entitled, Remarks'; and Thomas Dutton, 'The Literary Census. A Letter to the Executor of the Deceased Author of 'The Pursuits of Literature'' appeared the following year, and William Burdon's 'An Examination of the Merits and Tendency of 'The Pursuits of Literature'' came out in two parts between 1799 and 1800. 
The 'Monthly Magazine', reviewing Dutton, said that there seemed to be 'a train in preparation' for discovering the authorship of the 'Pursuits' (7.505-6). Fanny Burney thought it was by Mason, but Farington recorded in November 1797 that the poem was ascribed to Mathias, with help from Dr Rennell and Mansell, the master of Trinity (Farington, 'Diary', 1.219). Mathias's anonymity was partly removed by 'Andrew Oedipus, an injured author', in 'The Sphinx's Head Broken, or, A Poetical Epistle... to Thomas James M*th**s, Cl*rk to the Q***n's Tr**s*r*r' (1798), though the 'Monthly Review' was not convinced by the 'very angry and scurrilous' pamphlet (new ser., 25.473) and the 'British Critic' asked for more proofs against the 'ingenious and amiable' Mathias (11.677). Samuel Denne, happy with his mention in the poem, guessed Mathias to be the author (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 6.770). Peter Pindar, another victim, referred to Mathias as 'one of the smaller rats of the Queen's Closet' and claimed that he 'giveth the little Animal a good Drubbing' (Pindar, 'Argument'). He abused Mathias as 'human 'toad'' and descanted on the poem's 'enormity of falsehood and impudence' (note to line 108). Mrs Thrale forgave Mathias her mention in the poem because of his 'being a Scholar, and a Christian, and... a firm Aristocrate' ('Piozzi Letters', 2.399-401). 
Alongside the 'Pursuits', Mathias produced a series of conservative topical satires in Popean couplets. 'The Political Dramatist', an attack on Sheridan, complete with adulation for Pitt, appeared in 1795 and was reissued with a postscript attacking the declaration of the Whig Club in 1796. 'The Imperial Epistle from Kien Long, Emperor of China, to George the Third' (1795), using an idea of Peter Pindar, offered a mock invitation to Pitt in a general satire on the state of Europe. In 1796 Mathias also published 'An Epistle in Verse to the Rev. Dr Randolph' and 'An Equestrian Epistle in Verse, to the Right Honourable the Earl of Jersey', both concerned with the embarrassing loss of some private letters of the princess of Wales. 'The Grove', a Popean vision of literature and society, was published in 1798, containing 'abundant abuse of about some ten dozen of his cotemporary wits' and others ('Monthly Review', new ser., 25.472); the 'Monthly Magazine' said it displayed 'the pedantry of a schoolmaster, the vulgarity of a poissard, and the malevolence of a -- ' (5.507). 'The Shade of Alexander Pope. On the Banks of the Thames', an attack on Henry Grattan, followed in 1799, occasioning a further attack by William Burdon ('A vindication of Pope', 1799), and an anonymous riposte, 'An Interview between the Spirit of Pope and the Shade that assumed his Name' (1799); Grattan's own lines on the matter appear in Wrangham's 'English Library' (409-10). 'Pandolfo attonito!', a light stanzaic poem about the removal of armchairs from the Opera House, completed Mathias's satiric efforts in 1800. 
Mathias's mother died on 6 January 1799, occasioning a warm tribute, probably by Mathias ('GM', 1st ser., 69, 1799, 82). She left him $3000. Mathias brought out a quarto edition of his 'Works', and in 1801 published a selection of items from newspapers, 'Prose on Various Occasions, Literary and Political'. Thereafter Mathias, who had apparently studied Italian at Cambridge under Agostino Isola, embarked on a series of editions of Italian texts, and translations into Italian. These included 'Sonetti de piu illustri poeti d'Italia' (1802), critical works by Tiraboschi, Crescimbeni, Menzini, Redi, Monti, and Gravina, an Italian version of Mason's 'Saffo' (1809), and one of Milton's 'Lycidas' (1812). Byron, responding to a letter of praise from Mathias, chided him for being 'too much devoted to a foreign Muse' and hoped that 'some national 'Pursuit' will enable us once again to claim your muse entirely our own' ('Byron's Letters and Journals', 2.176). 
Mathias became librarian at the queen's house about 1813. He continued to revise 'Pursuits', and made many textual changes between the fourteenth edition (1808) and the sixteenth (1812), but the poem still received a mixed reception. Byron called the poetry 'the worst written of it's kind' and thought 'it's sole merit lies in the Notes, which are indisputably excellent' ('Byron's Letters and Journals', 2.86-7). De Quincey saw it as marked by 'much licence of tongue, much mean and impotent spite, and by a systematic pedantry without parallel in literature' ('De Quincey's Works', 142). Ireland contrasted its 'sea of gall' with the 'rivulet narrow of poor praise' in 'Scribbleomania' (p. 96). Mathias made peace with Samuel Parr by sending him several of his later works, and Parr kept seventeen of his letters in a bundle marked 'MOST PRECIOUS'. Among his numerous other correspondents of this period were Sir Walter Scott, Spencer Perceval, and William Roscoe. Mathias derived considerable knowledge of Thomas Gray from the Revd Norton Nicholls, on whose death in 1807 Mathias composed a letter of eulogy. Mathias was a beneficiary of Nicholls's will. In 1814 he published an edition of 'The Works of Thomas Gray' in two quarto volumes, with substantial prose extracts from Gray's manuscripts, under the sponsorship of Pembroke College. At 7 guineas it could not compete with the cheap editions by John Mitford and others and it 'sank with the weight of lead upon the market' (Dibdin, 732), causing Mathias some personal loss. 
In his official capacity Mathias was responsible for the quarterly payments of Fanny Burney's pension from 1794 until 1816. Burney reported that Mathias suffered an 'alarming stroke & attack' in spring 1817 and decamped to Italy for his health ('Journals and Letters of Fanny Burney', 10.773). Southey met him on the way in Paris in May 1817. He fitted effortlessly into expatriate circles in Rome and Florence before settling in an old palace on the Pizzofalcone in Naples. He received a pension from the Royal Society of Literature, of which he was a royal associate. Some of his books and manuscripts were sold by R. H. Evans in 1820. He produced an edition of 'Lyrica sacra, excerpta ex hymnis ecclesiae antiquis' (1818), and translated into Italian poems by Akenside (1821), Mason (1823), Armstrong (1824), Beattie (1824), Spenser (1826), and Thomson (1826). He also produced several editions of 'Poesie liriche toscane' between 1818 and 1825, and revised versions of his lyric poetry. Mathias visited Scott at Naples during his last illness, contributing to his 'comfort and amusement' by helping him collect local ballads (Lockhart, 10.147-8). 
Mathias's death at Naples on 20 July 1835 was noted in 'The Athenaeum' (22 August 1835, 650), which printed some recollections, almost certainly by Lady Blessington. According to her, the litterati of Naples bestowed 'the warmest eulogiums on the purity and precision' of Mathias's written Italian. He 'maintained an independent and respectable station, and was a welcome guest in all the houses occupied by the English residents'. He was 'below the middle size, being scarcely taller than Mr. Godwin. In face he bore a striking resemblance to Sir Francis Burdett. He was particularly neat in his attire, and scrupulously clean in his person.' Among other 'nervous peculiarities' he had a bizarre dread of getting run over in the street; his attempts to cross the highway were a source of amusement to his acquaintances. He was 'a gastronome in the full extent of the word, took a lively interest in the first appearance of green peas, and was a connoisseur of wild boar'. He enjoyed the 'cheapness of the luxuries he liked', and shuddered if anyone mentioned returning to England. 'Any allusion to the 'Pursuits of Literature' was extremely offensive to him', and he persisted in denying his authorship to the end. Dawson Turner, a friend to whom Mathias wrote over ninety letters and who once owned a volume of letters written to the anonymous author, with some replies by Mathias (now BL, Add. MS 22976), wrote that the authorship 'was scarcely made a secret by his family after he went to Italy' ('N&Q', 1st ser., 3.276); but even in 1824 Dibdin was not sure that Mathias was the author. Further anecdotes, from Lady Blessington's 'Idler in Italy', were reprinted in 'The Times' (23 March 1839). 


@@@@@


doc= 18335


Matilda (d. 1083), queen of England, consort of William I, was the daughter of Baudouin (V), count of Flanders (died 1067), and Adela (died 1076), daughter of Robert the Pious, king of France, and his wife, Constance of Aquitaine. She had two brothers, Baudouin (VI) of Mons, count of Flanders (died 1070), and Robert the Frisian, count of Flanders (died 1093). 
In 1050, or at the latest 1051, Matilda married William (II), duke of Normandy ['see 'William I]. Accompanied by her father she travelled from Flanders to Eu on the Norman border where she met her fiance, his mother, Herleva, and his stepfather, Herluin of Conteville, and many others. From there they went to the capital, Rouen, where the wedding ceremony took place. The marriage negotiations had probably started in 1048 and were definitely under way in October 1049 when, at the Council of Rheims, Pope Leo IX forbade the union on unknown grounds. Twelfth-century historians like Orderic Vitalis and the anonymous author of the life of Lanfranc suggest that consanguinity was the problem, but they add that in 1059 Pope Nicholas II retrospectively approved the marriage on condition that the couple founded one monastery each. Subsequently Duke William founded St Etienne, dedicated in 1077, and his wife Ste Trinite at Caen, which was dedicated in June 1066. Matilda is also credited with founding the church of Notre Dame du Pre at Emendreville, a suburb of Rouen. The foundation was expanded by her son Henry and turned into a priory of Le Bec. 
Over a period of seventeen years Matilda gave birth to eight or nine children. She had four sons, of whom Robert Curthose, born in 1051 or 1052, was the eldest. He was duke of Normandy from 1087 to 1106 and died in captivity in England in 1134. The second son was Richard, who died as a youth during a hunting accident between 1069 and 1074. William Rufus, king of England, as William II, from 1087 to 1100, was the third son. Henry I, the youngest child, born in 1068, was the son who ultimately reunited his father's realm of Normandy, Maine, and England; he died in 1135. There were four or five daughters: Adelida (d. before 1113) was the eldest, who after a series of collapsed marriage alliances retired as a nun to St Leger at Preaux; Cecilia was given as an oblate to Ste Trinite in 1066, professed in 1075, became abbess in 1113, and died in 1126; Constance married Alain Fergant, duke of Brittany, in 1086 and died in 1090; Adela was born after her father became king of England -- she married 'c'.1080 Stephen, count of Blois, and died as a nun at Marcigny in 1137. A daughter Matilda is known from a reference in 'Domesday Book', whereas Agatha, who is only mentioned once as a daughter by Orderic Vitalis, may never have existed. Matilda of Flanders was also godmother of St Simon, count of Amiens, Valois, and Vexin from 1074 to 1077, who died at Rome in 1082 and for whose tomb she paid, and of Edith (more often known as Matilda), later the wife of her son Henry I. 
Matilda was on excellent terms with her children of whom her eldest, Robert Curthose, was particularly dear to her. Despite Robert's quarrels with his father and his time in exile, Matilda supported him and remained upset by their disagreement. Once, when St Simon's intervention between William and Robert had failed, Matilda was so upset that she was, according to the biographer of St Simon, 'choked by tears and could not speak' ('Vita B. Simonis', col. 1219). Without William's knowledge, Matilda used to send her son vast amounts of silver and gold. When the king discovered his wife's generosity, he threatened to blind the Breton messenger Samson used for these missions. Through the queen's counsel Samson escaped and became a monk at St Evroult, where Orderic Vitalis heard his story. Samson, too, may have told the story of how Matilda sent messengers to a certain hermit in Germany to ask for his prophecy on the future. The German foretold the dire circumstances of the Norman duchy during the next generation but added that the queen would not suffer because she would be dead before the troubles started. As for her other sons, Richard, while he was still alive, William, and Henry, they appear relatively often in the presence of the king and queen, suggesting a cordial relationship. That none of her sons married during her lifetime, despite Robert's short-lived engagement to Margaret of Maine, is an interesting coincidence, which is perhaps not entirely unconnected with William Rufus's homosexual inclinations. Of her daughters, it seems that Constance and Adela did not leave home until their marriages in respectively 1086 and 1080, while Adelida and Cecilia, despite their life as nuns, stayed relatively close at home in Preaux and Caen. 
Matilda remained in touch with her own country and family. According to Orderic Vitalis she was grieved by her father's death, her mother's bereavement, and her brother Robert's usurpation of Flanders after the battle of Kassel, where her nephew Arnulf died. Before her father's death, Matilda and her husband arranged for Abbess Elisabeth of Montivilliers to pay her mother, Adela, an annual pension of $100 in return for her gift of land in the Pays-de-Caux. Her cousin Beatrix, daughter of Christian de Valenciennes, married Gilbert d'Auffay, a distant cousin of Duke William. Among Matilda's servants was a chamberlain called William the Fleming who became a benefactor of Ste Trinite. She probably introduced Arnulf de Chocques to the ducal court, where he taught Cecilia before she became a nun. Through her he became a chaplain of Robert Curthose and later travelled with Bishop Odo of Bayeux to the Holy Land, where he was promoted to the archbishopric of Jerusalem. 
Matilda acted as regent in Normandy for her husband after 1066, probably in collaboration with her son Robert Curthose and sometimes under the guidance of Roger de Montgomery and Roger de Beaumont. Her first visit to England took place in 1068, when at Whitsun she was crowned queen. Among her followers on that occasion was Gui, bishop of Amiens, who had by then already written the 'Carmen de Hastingae proelio' ('Song of the Battle of Hastings'). She had a share in about one quarter of her husband's gifts: thirty-nine pre-conquest and sixty-one post-conquest charters bear her name. This charter evidence supports the chroniclers who say that she was sometimes left with overall responsibility in Normandy. Her prominence in the government of Normandy was maintained in the 1070s and 1080s. In 1075, for example, she is named at the head of a group who were present when St Simon restored Gisors to Rouen Cathedral, while in late 1080 she was acting on her husband's behalf in Normandy in a land plea when William and Robert Curthose were in England. Alongside her important role in Normandy, she was very often present at the great crown-wearings which were a prominent feature of William's kingship in England. She heard land pleas as well. 'Royal preoccupations', according to Gilbert Crispin, prevented her from attending the dedication of the abbey church of Le Bec in 1077, instead of which she sent a benefaction. There is no evidence of contacts with foreign officials other than the French abbots to whom she sent gifts and the German hermit mentioned above, with the exception of Pope Gregory VII ('r'. 1073-85) who corresponded with her mainly, it seems, to encourage her to use her influence over her husband by quoting the 'Bible', which says that an unfaithful man can only become faithful through his wife. A large quantity of evidence shows Matilda as playing the central political and familial role typical of the most active medieval queens. 
Matilda was the sole donor of two gifts to Ste Trinite at Caen and one each to Malmesbury Abbey and Wells Cathedral. Her pre-conquest income derived from her relatively meagre dowry consisting of estates in the Pays-de-Caux at Bures-en-Bray, Maintru, and Osmoy-St Valery. She gave the monks of Marmoutier a new refectory and a cope. In support of her husband's invasion of England she gave him the ship 'Mora', on the prow of which stood the figure of a small gilded boy who with his right hand pointed to England and with his left hand held a horn to his lips. This description given by the anonymous author of the 'Brevis relatio' comes close to, but is not identical with, the picture of the 'Mora''s stern on the Bayeux tapestry. After the conquest of England, Matilda became a wealthy landowner in England, where she held lands in the counties of Surrey, Hampshire, Wiltshire, Dorset, Devon, Cornwall, Buckinghamshire, and Gloucestershire. The manor of Sandford, Devon, was presented by her to Muriel (perhaps a confidante or servant) upon her marriage to Roger of Bully. She gave the monks of St Evroult $100 to pay for a refectory, a mark of gold, a chasuble decorated with gold and pearls, and a cope for the chanter. Among her other gifts were a vase decorated with gold and precious stones for St Corneille at Compiegne, a golden chalice for St Florent at Saumur, and a chasuble 'that was so rigid because of the metal that it could not be folded' (Musset, 'La reine Mathilde', 193) for the great Burgundian abbey of Cluny. Matilda is also the most likely identification for the anonymous English queen who in the late 1070s approached Abbot Adalelme of La Chaise-Dieu in the Auvergne for a cure for lethargy in return for which she sent a liturgical vestment and $100 towards the cost of the monks' dormitory. The nuns of Ste Trinite at Caen received as her bequest, apart from her regalia mentioned below, a chalice, a chasuble made in Winchester by the wife of Aldred, a mantle of brocade kept in the queen's chamber to be used as a cope, two golden chains with a cross, a chain decorated with 'emblems' for hanging a lamp in front of the altar, several large candelabras made at St Lo, the draperies for her horse, and all the vases 'which she had not yet handed out during her life' (Musset, 'Les Actes', no. 16). In contrast to her generosity there is only one note suggesting greed. Not surprisingly, this comes from England, where in the 1130s the monks of Abingdon remembered her as one of their foreign despoilers who shortly after the conquest demanded a great number of the abbey's treasures. Both Orderic Vitalis and William of Malmesbury state that her English lands and money went after her death to her youngest son, Henry. 
Matilda's relationship with her husband was happy. When, during a stay at Cherbourg between 1063 and 1066, William fell seriously ill, Matilda prayed for his recovery and made a gift at the main altar while wearing her hair loose. Her informal appearance, as a sign of distress, was significant enough for the monks to write it down, presumably as a means to jog people's memory of the gift. William the Conqueror is the first Norman duke for whom no evidence of concubines or illegitimate children survives, an absence on the whole interpreted as a sign that his marriage was a happy one. The only story contradicting such a conclusion comes from William of Malmesbury, who professed himself sceptical about its reliability. He relates the rumour that Matilda had William's mistress, a daughter of a priest, hamstrung by her servant; the perpetrator was disinherited and Matilda, in revenge, was beaten to death with a horse's bridle. In fact the chronicles and charters confirm Matilda's natural death: in the late summer of 1083 she fell ill and died on 2 November. She was buried at her own request at Ste Trinite at Caen, where the original tombstone with inscription carved round the edge has survived. All her epitaphs remember her for her royal descent on her maternal side. That her royal origin and state were important for her is also clear from the protocol to her bequest of land and movables to Ste Trinite, dated to the year before she died. Among the treasures she left to the nuns were her crown and sceptre, a gesture which was imitated by her husband when he left his regalia to St Etienne at Caen. 


@@@@@


doc= 18336


Matilda (1080-1118), queen of England, first consort of Henry I, was a daughter of Malcolm III, king of Scots, and his wife, Margaret, granddaughter of Edmund Ironside (died 1016). She was born probably in the late summer or autumn of 1080, as her godfather, Robert Curthose (died 1134), the eldest son of William I, was in Scotland then, but so far as is known at no other time. She was baptized Edith, but contemporaries knew her only as Matilda (or one of its variants). Her education was entrusted to her maternal aunt Christina, a nun who appears to have spent time at both Romsey and Wilton. The girl was compelled by her superiors to dress as a nun, and since visitors saw her wearing the habit, some assumed that she was a nun. During the summer of 1093 William II, Alan Rufus, count of Richmond, and her father all observed her wearing the veil. Malcolm was so angered that he snatched it from her head, declaring that he would rather see her married to Count Alan than a nun. His enigmatic outburst has created confusion over whether Malcolm had betrothed his daughter to the count, or whether the comment was intended sarcastically. Malcolm evidently took his daughter with him back to Scotland. Before the end of the year, however, Alan, Malcolm, and Margaret were all dead, and Donald (died 'c'.1099), the new king of the Scots, drove most of Margaret's children out of his realm. Matilda found shelter in England with the help of King William and of her uncle, her mother's brother Edgar AEtheling. Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury (died 1109), ordered the bishop of Salisbury to compel the 'lost daughter' of the Scottish king to return to the monastery, but whether action was taken on this order is not known, nor are Matilda's whereabouts from 1093 to late 1100 ascertainable. During these years Earl William de Warenne (died 1138) asked for her hand, but according to a contemporary chronicler, 'it was reserved for a loftier bridegroom' (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 4.272). 

Henry I was no sooner king, in August 1100, than he proposed to marry Matilda. There was, however, the question of Matilda's freedom for marriage, since Anselm considered her a runaway nun. Matilda approached the archbishop and told him her story; he and an assembly of bishops, nobles, and clergy decided, after careful inquiry, that she had never taken vows nor been pledged to the cloister, and was therefore free to marry. She received their verdict 'with a happy expression', and on 11 November 1100 Anselm performed the wedding and crowned her queen at Westminster Abbey. This marriage proved popular with Henry's English subjects, particularly within the city of London, and had the additional benefit of securing England's northern border through an alliance with the Scots. Matilda received a generous dower settlement. No accurate assessment of the wealth she controlled can be gleaned from the existing evidence, but records which include some twenty-five charters issued by the queen, do show that she controlled the abbeys of Waltham, Barking, and Malmesbury, lands in Rutland, and property in London, including the wharf that later became known as Queenhithe, and that she received the tolls of the city of Exeter. Her staff included two clerks who were promoted to bishoprics. One chronicler reports that Matilda was 'in childbed' in Winchester in July 1101, when Curthose invaded England to press his rights to the throne. If so, she must have been in the early stages of the difficult pregnancy that resulted in the birth of a daughter, Matilda, near Abingdon in February 1102. A son, William, was born late in 1103. Unreliable traditions posit the births and early deaths of other children; none of these is likely to be correct. 
As queen, Matilda attended meetings of the king's council; she often chaired these meetings in Henry's absence. By 1103 Matilda had persuaded Robert Curthose to give up the pension from England secured to him by his treaty with Henry in 1101. She corresponded with many leading ecclesiastical figures during the investiture controversy, including Archbishop Anselm, Pope Paschal II ('r'. 1099-1118) and bishops Ivo of Chartres, Marbod of Rennes, and Hildebert de Lavardin. A letter from the German emperor, Henry V, thanking her for efforts on his behalf, presumably refers to negotiations concerning the emperor's marriage to her daughter. Matilda evidently sympathized with the clergy who were taxed harshly in 1105, but declined to intercede on their behalf. On 15 August 1105 she was travelling through the kingdom and stopped for services at Abingdon. When Anselm returned from his three-year exile in 1106, she provided a personal welcome, and then rode ahead along his itinerary to secure comfortable lodgings and lead welcoming ceremonies. She visited Normandy in 1106 or 1107; while there she may have heard a guitar performance by Adelard of Bath. In 1111 she was present at the translation of St AEthelwold's relics at Winchester. In 1112 Matilda travelled to Gloucester to witness the presentation of gifts to the monks there. In 1116, while in London, she ordered the release of an unjustly condemned prisoner. Later that year she chaired a council to deal with the issue of admitting papal legates in England, and on 28 December she attended the consecration of St Albans Abbey church. 
Like her mother, Matilda was pious and practised bodily mortifications, especially during Lent. She was particularly interested in the care of lepers, and on one occasion washed and kissed the feet of a group of sufferers who had been invited into her chamber. She built a leper's hospital outside London and patronized several other institutions dedicated to their care. Matilda's interest in works of practical charity probably led to her patronage of the Augustinian canons. Working with Anselm, she established one of England's first Augustinian priories, Holy Trinity, Aldgate, in London. She was also an early patron of Merton Priory. Her good works included the construction of several bridges in Surrey and Essex and a public bathhouse at London's Queenhithe. Matilda is also known for her literary and musical interests. Several continental bishops addressed poetic elegies to her. She commissioned a biography of her mother, a genealogical account of the royal house of Wessex, and was most likely the patron of the Anglo-Norman version of the life of St Brendan. She may also have inspired and helped to pay for the writing of William of Malmesbury's 'Deeds of the Kings of England'. 
When Matilda died at Westminster on 1 May 1118, the canons of Holy Trinity and the monks of Westminster both claimed burial rights. She was interred in Westminster Abbey near the tombs of her relative Edward the Confessor and his queen. The occurrence of several 'signs and miracles' at Matilda's tomb led to an early interest in the possibility of her sainthood, but the cult waned after the wreck of the 'White Ship' and the accession of King Stephen. Despite William of Malmesbury's complaint that she allowed her bailiffs to fleece her tenants to provide funds for her patronage, she is, in English tradition, emphatically 'Mold the Good Queen'. Not only was the Confessor's prophecy of the regrafting of the 'green tree' fulfilled through her descendants, but chroniclers over and over again ascribe to her a direct, personal, and beneficial influence on the condition of England under Henry I. 


@@@@@


doc= 18337


Matilda (c.1103-1152), queen of England, consort of King Stephen, was the only legitimate child and heir of Eustace (III), count of Boulogne and one of the wealthiest landholders in England. Her mother, Mary, was the younger daughter of Queen Margaret andMalcolm III, king of Scots, whose elder daughter, Matilda, had married Henry I of England. Boulogne, with the port of Wissant, controlled one of the most important channel crossings to England, and the extensive properties of the honour of Boulogne in England, particularly in Essex and the south-east, made the marriage of its heir of paramount importance to King Henry. He approved her union with his favourite nephew, Stephen, already count of Mortain. In 1125, after the marriage, Count Eustace abdicated to retire to a Cluniac monastery, and Matilda became countess of Boulogne in her own right. 
The granddaughter on one side of Margaret of Scotland and on the other of Ida, countess of Bouillon, Matilda was a woman of strong and pious character, and her upbringing prepared her for the tasks of government. When in 1135 Henry I died, and Matilda's husband Stephen seized the English throne in defiance of the claims of Henry's daughter, the Empress Matilda, the new queen (as she was always styled, though there is no evidence of a formal coronation) proved an invaluable help and support to her husband. She used her knowledge of continental politics, and her control of an effective fleet and an important stretch of the channel coast round Boulogne, to the best advantage. She was also instrumental in securing the support of a strong and ruthless troop of Flemish mercenaries, led by her kinsman William of Ypres. Her kinship network was valuable in her work as a negotiator and peacemaker, though, since her cousin and rival the empress shared some close family contacts with her, the advantage was not always on the queen's side in the long run. 
Hostilities between Stephen and the empress (aided by her second husband, Geoffrey, count of Anjou) began immediately; but it was when widespread resistance broke out in England in 1138 that Matilda's practical help was needed. She brought up a land force to besiege Dover, held for the empress by Walchelin Maminot, and sent word to her friends and kinsmen and vassals in Boulogne to blockade the port by sea, so reducing the garrison to surrender. Her next direct interventions in the struggle were through diplomacy. According to Richard of Hexham, she played a leading part in securing peace with her uncle, David, king of Scots, who, though defeated in the battle of the Standard in August 1138, remained a threat to the north of England. The outcome of the negotiations was the peace of Carlisle (9 April 1139), which (as Richard of Hexham notes) was opposed by some English magnates, and (according to Orderic Vitalis) seen by some of King David's counsellors to be to the advantage of the Scots. David was heavily bribed with territory in the north of England, and his son Henry was betrothed to Ada de Warenne, daughter of the earl of Surrey. 
After completing the negotiations Matilda accompanied Henry south to Nottingham, to join Stephen's court for the confirmation of the treaty. Next, relying on her continental connections, she set about brokering the marriage of her son Eustace with Constance, sister of Louis VII of France. After the empress came to England in 1139 and established a centre of resistance with her half-brother, Robert, earl of Gloucester, the importance of France as a bulwark against Geoffrey of Anjou's attacks on Normandy became clearer than ever. Stephen had already taken Eustace on his one visit to Normandy in 1137, and had persuaded Louis to receive Eustace's homage for the duchy. In February 1140 Matilda took her son overseas for betrothal to Constance, and brought his bride back to England. At Whitsuntide she assisted the papal legate, Henry, bishop of Winchester, in an unsuccessful attempt to negotiate a peace between the two contending parties. But it was during the ensuing period of open war, and near disaster for Stephen, that she played her most important role in government. 
After Stephen's defeat and capture at the battle of Lincoln (2 February 1141) and the temporary defection of Henry of Winchester to the side of the empress, the queen acted as regent and kept up the struggle on behalf of her husband. Appeals for his release fell on deaf ears, and she turned her attention to raising troops and working tirelessly by persuasion and purchase to win back Geoffrey de Mandeville and other magnates who had gone over to the empress. By bringing William of Ypres and his Flemish mercenaries to threaten London, she induced the Londoners, already disillusioned by the intransigence of the empress, to rise against her and prevent her coronation. At Guildford the queen met Henry of Winchester, already wavering in his support of the Angevins, and secured his return to the king's cause. When he was besieged by the empress in his cathedral city of Winchester, she brought up her Flemish troops and a strong band of Londoners, as well as the magnates loyal to her, and besieged the besiegers. In the ensuing rout Robert of Gloucester was captured and brought to her castle of Rochester, to be kept in honourable captivity until he could be exchanged for the king. At Christmas 1141 Matilda wore her crown beside Stephen in Canterbury Cathedral. 
In the later stages of the civil war Matilda played an important, if less dramatic part, watching the continental alliances and trying to smooth relations between Stephen and the church, so as to secure the coronation of their son Eustace. When a quarrel between Stephen and Archbishop Theobald in 1148 led to the expulsion of the latter from England, she provided a refuge for him in St Omer until peace could be re-established. Her influence was not strong enough to persuade the pope to permit the coronation of Eustace. But her courage and determination was decisive in enabling Stephen to retain the throne as long as he lived. 
Much of Matilda's energy in her last years went into pious works. Her great wealth had made donations to religious foundations possible from an early age. She had a close friendship with Gervase, abbot of Arrouaise, whom she had known at her father's court, and it was probably she who encouraged the settlement of the first Arrouaisian canons in England. She gave generously to the templars to found the preceptories of Temple Cowley (Oxfordshire) and Cressing (Essex), both in 1136. Perhaps her most important new foundation, made jointly with her husband, was at Faversham, an abbey first colonized by Cluniac monks from Bermondsey, but (like Henry I's abbey at Reading) thereafter freed from dependence on any other Cluniac house; in 1148-9 she spent some time in Canterbury, at St Augustine's, to supervise its foundation. She also established a nunnery at Lillechurch (later known as Higham), to provide for her daughter Mary of Blois, who had been placed as a child in Stratford Priory, but was now made prioress of the new house at Lillechurch. Matilda also founded the hospital of St Katharine by the Tower in London, dependent on Holy Trinity, Aldgate. Support for the Cistercians was shown in her foundation, with her husband, of Coggeshall Abbey in 1140, and in her donations to Mortemer before Normandy was captured by the Angevins. In April 1152 she fell ill at Castle Hedingham, Essex, where she died on 3 May, three days after sending for her confessor, Ralph, prior of Holy Trinity, Aldgate. She was buried at Faversham Abbey. 
Two of her children, Baldwin and Matilda, predeceased her. Eustace, who had assumed the title of count of Boulogne in 1146, died in 1153, and William, who was count of Boulogne from 1153, died during the Toulouse campaign of 1159. Her daughter Mary was then made to return to the world and marry, in order to preserve the Boulogne inheritance. 


@@@@@


doc= 18338


Matilda (1102-1167), empress, consort of Heinrich V, was the elder of two children and only legitimate daughter of Henry I (1068/9-1135), king of England, and his first wife Matilda (1080-1118), the daughter of Malcolm III, king of Scots. She was born probably at Sutton Courtenay on about 7 February 1102. A granddaughter of Margaret of Scotland, marked out from birth for an illustrious marriage, she probably received some early instruction in letters and morals in her mother's circle, which was cultured and religious. When King Henry went to Normandy in the autumn of 1108 he entrusted her and her younger brother William to the spiritual care of Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury and former abbot of Bec: the special devotion to the monks of Bec that she showed to the end of her life may have originated in her childhood memories of Anselm. In 1109 King Henry arranged for her marriage to the German king, Heinrich V (1086-1125); a dowry estimated at 10,000 marks in silver was arranged, and she was betrothed to him by proxy in the Whitsun court held at Westminster on 13 June 1109. She made her first formal appearance in her father's court on 17 October 1109, when she added her cross to a royal charter establishing the see of Ely as 'Matilda, betrothed wife of the king of the Romans' ('sponsa regis Romanorum'; 'Reg. RAN', 2, no. 919). 
In February 1110 imperial envoys, including Burchard, later bishop of Cambrai, arrived to escort Matilda to her future husband. She left with a retinue of nobles and clergy, including Roger, son of Richard de Clare, and Henry, archdeacon of Winchester. Although Orderic Vitalis claimed that her husband sent them all home, it is possible that Archdeacon Henry, later bishop of Verdun, and some Norman knights remained with her. Her education, however, was to be completed in Germany, and it was in her husband's dominions of Germany and northern Italy that she was to spend the next sixteen years of her life. 
Matilda landed at Boulogne and travelled to Liege, where she met her husband, a man about twenty-four years old, and performed the first of her new duties by agreeing to intercede for the disgraced Godfrey, count of Lower Lorraine (whose daughter Adeliza was later to become her stepmother). The royal cortege then moved to Utrecht, and the formal betrothal took place there at Easter (10 April). The dower she received in return for her princely dowry probably included lands in the region of Utrecht. Her coronation took place at Mainz on 25 July, the feast day of St James; she was anointed by Friedrich, archbishop of Cologne, while Bruno, archbishop of Trier, held her reverently in his arms. Bruno, one of Heinrich V's most loyal counsellors, was appointed her guardian when Heinrich himself led an expedition, partly financed by her dowry, to Italy to secure his position there, and to extort coronation as emperor from Pope Paschal II. In his absence she remained at Trier to learn the German language and German customs, so as to be ready to undertake the duties of queen when she reached the canonical age for marriage. 
On 6 or 7 January 1114, shortly before her twelfth birthday, Matilda was married to the newly crowned emperor at Worms and then crowned again at Mainz. The magnificent nuptials were attended, according to one anonymous German chronicler, by five dukes, five archbishops, thirty bishops, and innumerable counts and abbots. The hopes that she would become the mother of an heir to the empire were disappointed; no children survived from this marriage, though one chronicler stated not implausibly that she gave birth to one child who did not live. She proved to be a loyal and able queen consort, who carried out the onerous duties of her office with dignity. From the first she frequently sponsored royal grants and acted as intercessor in presenting petitions to her husband. During a reign in which his realm was torn by civil war, and he himself was excommunicated as a result of quarrels with the pope over investiture, she gave him loyal support, and frequently acted as regent during his absence on campaigns. She accompanied him on his second Italian expedition in 1116, when he went to seek reconciliation with Paschal II and to establish his position in Tuscany by taking up his contested rights under the will of Matilda, countess of Tuscany. The expedition crossed the Alps by the St Bernard Pass in March 1116, and proceeded through Lombardy to the Tuscan castle of Canossa. There feudal vassals of the old Matilda welcomed the royal pair in the hope that the new young Matilda might, with her husband, take the place of the old. Unfortunately it proved impossible to make peace with Paschal II, who withdrew in panic to Monte Cassino when the German army approached Rome in March 1117. Since a formal crown-wearing was customary when an emperor visited Rome at Easter, and neither the pope nor any of the cardinals was willing to participate, the papal envoy Maurice Bourdin, archbishop of Braga (later the antipope Gregory VIII), consented to act; he probably crowned Heinrich and Matilda in the basilica of St Peter at Easter, and certainly did so at Pentecost (13 May), by which time he had been excommunicated. Matilda later claimed to have been twice crowned in Rome with papal approval; a hundred years later her right to the imperial title would certainly have been questioned. But the title was then used more loosely by many chroniclers and in many chanceries: Heinrich V, who had unquestionably been crowned emperor in 1111, sometimes continued to call himself simply king of the Romans. Matilda, his betrothed and crowned wife at that date, assumed the title queen of the Romans and used it on her seal. Whatever the legality of the events in Rome in 1117 she consistently called herself empress in her charters to the end of her life, and the title seems never to have been questioned. 
When her husband returned to Germany in 1117, to deal with rebellion there, Matilda remained with the army in Italy, presided at courts held at Roca Carpineta and Castrocaro, and pronounced judgments. By November 1119 she had rejoined him at Liege. His reconciliation with the church took place, after years of turmoil, at Worms in November 1122; during the negotiations Matilda could have made the acquaintance of the papal legates and made her first contacts with the papal curia. When the emperor died at Utrecht on 23 May 1125 he entrusted the imperial insignia to her, and placed her in the care of his nephew Friedrich, duke of Swabia, who inherited the family lands. She was persuaded to hand over the insignia to Adalbert, archbishop of Mainz, who presided over an imperial election at which not Friedrich, but his rival Lothar, duke of Saxony, was chosen. As a childless widow she had no further duties in Germany, though Friedrich could have arranged a second marriage for her with one of the German princes who, according to William of Malmesbury, sought her hand. However, her father, King Henry, whose only legitimate son, William, had been drowned in the 'White Ship' in 1120, wished to make her his heir and persuaded her to return to Normandy. She appears to have surrendered her lands in Germany; but she was allowed to bring away her magnificent jewels and personal regalia, and one precious relic from the imperial chapel, the hand of St James. Her years as empress had given her valuable experience of European diplomacy; she had also seen the political dangers involved in a quarrel with the church, and had witnessed the change in her husband's formerly devoted chancellor, Adalbert, who after he was rewarded with the archbishopric of Mainz became a leader in the ecclesiastical opposition to his former master. She had been trained in a hard school, where enemies were ruthlessly punished; but she had learned that it was unwise to bear resentment, and that former opponents could become useful allies. 
Matilda's mother had died in 1118, and although her father quickly married Adeliza of Louvain there were no children of the marriage. Henry I wished to secure the succession to England and Normandy in his own line by recognizing her as his heir. She crossed the channel to England in 1126, and in January 1127 he obtained oaths of allegiance to her from all the bishops and magnates present at his Christmas court. Among the latter was his nephew, Stephen of Blois, count of Mortain, who had been brought up at the English court and given the hand of Matilda, the heir of Boulogne. Although Stephen had a hereditary claim to the throne through his mother, Adela, daughter of William I, and his wife was Matilda's first cousin, the claim of the empress was stronger, and he appears to have taken the oath willingly. Shortly afterwards Matilda was betrothed to Geoffrey Plantagenet (1113-1151), son of Foulques, count of Anjou, a youth more than eleven years her junior. Some of the Norman magnates later complained that they had not been consulted about the betrothal. King Henry was anxious to secure the southern frontier of Normandy by an alliance with Anjou; and with that object he had arranged a marriage between his son William and Count Foulques's daughter Matilda in 1119, only a few weeks before William's death put an end to the union. When young Geoffrey of Anjou married Matilda at Le Mans on 17 June 1128, Count Foulques surrendered the county of Anjou to him and left for Jerusalem to marry Queen Melisende. 
Matilda's second marriage, like the first, was purely political; its purpose was to provide a male heir to her father's throne. Unfortunately Geoffrey's position was never made clear, and no oaths were ever taken to him. Matilda herself, as an empress, may have felt disparaged by marriage to a mere count. There was an open rift between her and her husband within a year, and she returned to her father at Rouen. In 1131 he took her to England, though Geoffrey had demanded her return and promised to receive her with the honour due to her station. But at a council held at Northampton on 8 September 1131, after the magnates had renewed their homage to her and recognized her as Henry's heir, she agreed to return to her husband. Her eldest son, who was to become Henry II, was born at Le Mans on 5 March 1133; thereafter the marriage survived as a partnership for the benefit of the couple's joint inheritance. A second son, Geoffrey, was born at Rouen at Pentecost 1134; his birth nearly cost Matilda her life, but she recovered and the inheritance seemed secure. However, Geoffrey of Anjou quarrelled with King Henry over the castles in southern Normandy which were Matilda's dowry, but which Henry continued to occupy. When the king died on 1 December 1135, Matilda was in Anjou and Henry's nephew Stephen of Blois was in his wife's county of Boulogne. He immediately crossed to England, hurried to London, and laid claim to the English throne. He was crowned at Winchester on 22 December by the archbishop of Canterbury, with the encouragement of his brother, Henry de Blois, bishop of Winchester. Shortly afterwards the Norman barons decided not to divide the inheritance, and accepted him as duke of Normandy also. Stephen further secured his position by a successful appeal to Pope Innocent II, whose support was essential if he were not to be charged with violating his oath to Matilda, and by Easter he had won the support of almost all the Anglo-Norman bishops and magnates. 
Meanwhile Matilda, caught at a disadvantage, was asserting her rights. She made straight for the castles of her dowry, and the castellan, Wigan the Marshal, handed over to her as his liege lady the castles of Argentan, Exmes, and Domfront. She established herself in the impregnable fortress at Argentan, where her third son, William FitzEmpress, was born on 22 July 1136. Geoffrey led annual raids into Normandy for the next three years; in October 1136 Matilda brought a troop of men to support him during an unsuccessful siege of Le Sap. There was some support for her in the Cotentin. But not until her half-brother, Robert, earl of Gloucester, renounced his allegiance to Stephen in 1138 were Matilda's forces strong enough to make further inroads into Normandy. She then began a new initiative and directly challenged Stephen's position. 
Early in 1139 Matilda appealed to the papal court. Her case, based on her claim as her father's heir and the oaths sworn to her, was heard at the Second Lateran Council, which opened on 4 April 1139. Stephen's delegation was led by Arnulf, archdeacon of Sees and later bishop of Lisieux, who countered her claim with technicalities, arguing that she could not be Henry's heir because her mother had been a nun and she was therefore illegitimate. This was never proved; and indeed her mother, though educated in a nunnery, was not known to have taken any vows, and Anselm of Canterbury himself had celebrated her marriage. Innocent refused either to pronounce sentence or to adjourn the case, and it was never finally settled by his successors, who preferred to await the outcome of events and hope for a compromise. For the time being, however, Stephen's coronation was not invalidated, and this led to his continued acceptance by most of the English bishops, until his authoritarian treatment of church rights led some to desert his cause. 
Matilda's next step was to carry her challenge to England. Sporadic rebellions in support of her claim had already broken out in the west country, and her uncle, David, king of Scots, had invaded the north; but both initiatives had been halted. On 30 September 1139 she and her half-brother, Earl Robert, landed in Sussex; he immediately slipped away to Bristol with a small bodyguard, and she took refuge in Arundel Castle. Here she was under the protection of her stepmother, the dowager queen Adeliza, who had become the wife of William d'Aubigny, earl of Arundel. Although William was a staunch supporter of Stephen, Adeliza's protection could not be disregarded, and Stephen agreed to grant Matilda a safe conduct to proceed to Bristol, under the escort of Henry, bishop of Winchester, and Waleran, count of Meulan. Miles, castellan of Gloucester, immediately hurried to Bristol to recognize her as his liege lady. As even the hostile 'Gesta Stephani' recorded: 'he was so unquestioning in his loyalty to King Henry's children as not only to have helped them, but likewise to have received the countess of Anjou herself with her men and always behaved to her like a father in deed and counsel. ('Gesta Stephani', 96-7)' Another of King Henry's circle to be equally loyal and fatherly in his conduct towards her was Brian fitz Count lord of Wallingford, one of her most steadfast and eloquent supporters. Matilda joined Miles at Gloucester, a royal castle held by him under Earl Robert, where she probably felt more at home than as a poor relation with Robert in Bristol. When her power increased she rewarded Miles with the earldom of Hereford, and he was one of her chief military commanders until he was killed in a hunting accident at Christmas 1143. 
Although Matilda's position was now strong enough for attempts at mediation to be made, they came to nothing. The situation changed only when King Stephen's army met the combined forces of Robert of Gloucester and Robert's son-in-law Ranulf (II), earl of Chester, in the battle of Lincoln on 2 February 1141, when the king was defeated and captured. With Stephen held a prisoner at Bristol, and with even Stephen's brother, Henry of Winchester, now papal legate, ready to abandon his cause, many of Stephen's vassals began to turn to her. Since her husband, Geoffrey of Anjou, took advantage of her victory to press further into Normandy, those with extensive estates across the channel began to look for reconciliation. On 2 March Bishop Henry met the empress at Wherwell; and after she had given security to consult him on all major business, particularly on the gift of bishoprics and abbeys as long as he preserved his fealty to her, he agreed to receive her as 'lady of England'. On the following day he received her ceremoniously in his cathedral at Winchester, where she walked in procession with six other bishops and a number of abbots. At a legatine council, celebrated on 7 April, she was formally accepted as 'lady of England and Normandy', and arrangements were put in hand for her coronation at Westminster. At this stage she seems to have hoped to rule in her own right until her son came of age. 
In spite of her apparent victory, Matilda's position was more precarious than her adherents were willing to admit. Archbishop Theobald of Canterbury, though a former abbot of Bec who knew her personally and respected her, was a man of principle, who refused to renounce the allegiance he had sworn to Stephen unless Stephen surrendered the crown, which he refused to do. The writs and charters issued by the empress in the summer of 1141 show that her support was mostly in the west of England, the Welsh marches, parts of the Thames valley, and Wiltshire. In the north King David remained loyal and gave her such help as his own Scottish interests allowed, but he had no influence in Yorkshire, and his attempt to force his chancellor, William Cumin, into the bishopric of Durham poisoned Matilda's relations with the church. In East Anglia, Hugh Bigod (died 1176/7) gave nominal support and was rewarded with the earldom of Norfolk. Although Geoffrey de Mandeville, the powerful earl of Essex, came over to her side for a few weeks, he turned back to Stephen in the hour of Matilda's greatest need. William de Mohun, another waverer, supported her just long enough to be made earl of Somerset. Ranulf, earl of Chester, was clearly hesitant; and Ranulf's half-brother, William de Roumare, earl of Lincoln, was still unwilling to offer substantial help to her cause. She alienated the Londoners by refusing to grant the concessions they demanded. Although she succeeded in securing the election of Robert de Sigillo, the former head of her father's writing office and now a monk of Reading, as bishop of London, her support for William Cumin at Durham angered the legate. Hostile chroniclers, in particular the author of the 'Gesta Stephani', attacked her as haughty and intractable; it is likely that she wished to keep up the state she had experienced in Germany, but when she met opposition peremptorily, with all the firmness that had been accepted, however reluctantly, from her father, it was regarded as unwomanly, arrogant, and obstinate in her. The legate, Henry of Winchester, in spite of having accepted her, remained sufficiently hesitant to seek papal approval for his change of allegiance; and Innocent II's reply, when it came, reiterated support for Stephen and ordered Henry to recognize him. Moreover the empress had to contend with a woman as resolute as herself. Stephen's queen, Matilda, never gave up the fight. With all the wealth of her own county of Boulogne and the honour of Boulogne in England behind her, and the support of William of Ypres at the head of a formidable band of Flemish mercenaries, she was in a position to win waverers back to Stephen's side. When the empress reached Westminster at midsummer, hoping to be crowned queen, the rival Matilda was encamped with her army on the south bank of the Thames, threatening the city of London. At the last minute the Londoners poured out of their city to attack the empress, and she was forced to beat a hasty and somewhat ignominious retreat. She reached Oxford, where she rewarded those magnates still loyal to her and reconsidered her position. 
Matilda rallied her supporters, who included King David, Robert, earl of Gloucester, and another half-brother Reginald, earl of Cornwall, Baldwin de Revieres, earl of Devon, William de Mohun, Hugh Bigod, and Geoffrey de Mandeville, to whom she promised concessions similar to those previously made by Stephen. However, since the lands and castles offered to Geoffrey were in Essex, London, Middlesex, and Hertfordshire, which she did not control, Geoffrey decided within a few weeks that his interests would be better served by returning to the side of the queen. Since Henry of Winchester did not come to Oxford, and was already in communication with the queen, Matilda decided at the end of July 1141 to march on Winchester. While her army besieged the bishop's palace, the queen's forces under William of Ypres, supported by the Londoners and Mandeville, advanced to encircle the besiegers and cut off their supplies. In the rout that followed Matilda escaped with Brian fitz Count and Reginald of Cornwall, while Robert of Gloucester, who was protecting her rear, was himself captured on 14 September. Matilda reached first Ludgershall, then Devizes; for part of the way she rode astride like a man for greater speed. Finally exhaustion compelled her to be carried on a litter between two horses, so giving rise to a legend that she escaped hidden in a coffin. Earl Robert was able to negotiate his release in exchange for the release of King Stephen by 3 November; the only lasting advantage he could secure was that the castles and lands seized by the empress after the king's capture should not be restored. These included the castles of Oxford and Devizes, and for the next twelve months she kept her court at Oxford, meeting her adherents on at least two occasions at the more convenient centre of Devizes. 
Matilda's next step was to appeal to her husband, Geoffrey, for military aid. Geoffrey, however, was fully occupied in attempting to establish his authority firmly in Normandy; he replied that he would negotiate only with Earl Robert, whom he knew personally. Leaving his sister in Oxford, where she seemed relatively safe, Robert crossed to Normandy at the end of June 1142, and spent some weeks helping to complete the conquest of the region between Falaise, Caen, and Avranches. He returned bringing some 300 men and Matilda's son Henry, now a boy of nine. But during his absence Stephen's army laid siege to Oxford; and before Robert could arrive with a relieving force the garrison was on the brink of surrender. Matilda was obliged to make the most dramatic escape of her perilous career. Early in December 1142, with only three or four knights, she slipped out of the castle, probably by a postern gate, and crossed the frozen Thames. She and her escort, wearing white cloaks as camouflage, walked through the snow to Abingdon. From there she rode to Wallingford, to reach the protection of Brian fitz Count, and was taken by him to Devizes. There she established her base in the almost impregnable castle which King Stephen had taken from Roger, bishop of Salisbury. She remained there for the next six years, during which time neither side could gain a decisive advantage in England. In Normandy, however, Geoffrey completed his conquest by 1144, and was recognized as duke of Normandy. Young Henry's time was divided between his uncle and mother in England, and his father in Normandy. From 1142 Matilda definitely recognized that her struggle was rather to secure Henry's inheritance than to win the crown for herself. 
Matilda's charters and the coins issued in her name show that she and her party were able to control a limited area, with its solid core in the great lordship of Gloucester, including also parts of Somerset, Wiltshire, and Dorset. Her channel port was at Wareham; she controlled mints at Bristol, Cardiff, and Wareham after Oxford was lost. In Wiltshire her principal military commander, John FitzGilbert, the marshal, held firmly to his castle of Marlborough, though he could never succeed in capturing Malmesbury. Matilda rewarded her knights with gifts of lands from the royal demesne, and provided for adequate castle guard. She made use of royal demesne and forest lands for gifts to churches, so consolidating her power in disputed border lands. Some gifts were purely tokens of thanks, not politically motivated; she gave her laundress, probably when she left England, a substantial hereditary estate in Somerset. During these years there were changes in allegiance among the magnates. Those like Waleran of Meulan and William de Roumare, whose principal estates lay in Normandy, finally abandoned Stephen and became her vassals to preserve their patrimonies. Ranulf, earl of Chester, had, like Geoffrey de Mandeville, supported Stephen for a time; but Stephen did not trust them and both returned to her party when they found themselves threatened by him. A war of sieges followed, in which neither side could achieve a decisive victory. 
Matilda and Geoffrey fared better by diplomacy. Matilda had contacts in Rome, and Stephen's relations with the church deteriorated. Innocent II's successors withheld final judgment on the rights of the claimants, and refused to recognize Stephen's son Eustace as heir to the throne. In Normandy, on the other hand, after Geoffrey's victories in 1144, all the bishops including Arnulf of Lisieux, once a bitter enemy, recognized Geoffrey as duke and Henry as his heir. 
In March 1148 the empress decided to leave England and return to Normandy. Her brother Robert had died the previous year; Brian fitz Count was no longer active and had possibly taken religious vows before his death. Moreover her position in Devizes was becoming difficult. Legally Devizes belonged to the bishop of Salisbury, and Pope Eugenius III was demanding its restoration to the church. Threatened with excommunication if she did not surrender it, she prevaricated as long as possible; after leaving England she instructed her son in somewhat general terms to comply with the pope's mandate. Young Henry adroitly succeeded in evading it. By June 1148 she was at Falaise; within a few months she had moved to Rouen. There on 11 October, together with her husband and her three sons, she made a grant to the abbey of Mortemer. Probably at this time plans were agreed for her future. In March 1149 Geoffrey of Anjou made a grant possibly intended for her support; he gave three prebends in the church of St Etienne at Bures-en-Bray to the priory of Notre Dame du Pre, a cell of Bec at Quevilly, just across the river from Rouen, and it was here that Matilda spent the last nineteen years of her life, either in the royal residence that Henry I had built in his park at Quevilly, near to the priory, or in quarters attached to the priory itself. Her charters were dated either at Rouen or at Le Pre. Her way of life recalls that of her mother at Westminster, where the royal palace stood beside the abbey church. Like her mother she was equally active in the work of government, helping her son in much the same way as her mother had helped Henry I. 
After Matilda's return to Normandy she never used the title 'lady of England' or 'of the English' in her charters, but she retained the title of empress and never called herself countess of Anjou. In April 1149 her son went to England to take control of the struggle for the throne. He was knighted by his great-uncle King David at Carlisle. In the autumn he returned and his father Geoffrey invested him with the duchy of Normandy. In September 1151 Geoffrey took him to Paris and persuaded Louis VII to recognize his claim to the duchy in preference to that of Stephen's son Eustace. There is no indication that Matilda accompanied them; she may have been busy maintaining order in Normandy. Henry did homage to King Louis. On the way home Geoffrey unexpectedly fell ill and died, leaving Henry as count of Anjou and duke of Normandy. England, however, was less than half conquered; and the situation was further complicated in May 1152 when Henry married the former wife of King Louis, Eleanor of Aquitaine, and added her vast inheritance to his own, while at the same time reawakening the hostility of Louis himself. Matilda was to have an important role in Normandy while Henry was forced to campaign elsewhere. 
Although Matilda must have met Eleanor, there is no record of her views on the marriage, or of her relations with her new daughter-in-law. Eleanor came to Normandy only very rarely, whereas Matilda was actively involved there, sometimes acting as Henry's regent and trying to ensure the loyalty of the Norman magnates, in particular the volatile Waleran of Meulan, who had considerable property in France. Her worst moments came during Henry's absence in England in 1153. She had to admit that she was unable to protect the monks of Mortemer who were attempting to settle in her new foundation at Le Valasse, and her second son, Geoffrey, who may have had some responsibility in Anjou, was captured and imprisoned by the lord of Amboise. On Henry's return after a successful campaign in England, during which Eustace of Blois had died and Henry was recognized as Stephen's heir, she persuaded him to secure Geoffrey's release from a harsh imprisonment by dismantling the fortifications of the castle of Chaumont. The years of greatest peril ended when Stephen died on 25 October 1154, and Henry came into the inheritance his mother had helped to preserve for him. 
Thereafter Matilda remained at Quevilly. Rouen was a thriving commercial, judicial, and administrative centre, and Matilda was able to combine active involvement in the business of the duchy with a semi-religious retreat. The monks of Bec in the priory of Le Pre were her friends and spiritual counsellors, and she was warmly praised both by Robert de Torigni, who left Bec to become abbot of Mont-St Michel in 1148, and by the monk Etienne of Rouen, author of the long historical poem 'Draco normannicus'. She helped to finance the building of a new stone bridge over the Seine, linking Rouen with the royal park at Quevilly and the priory of Le Pre. From time to time when Henry II was in Rouen she heard cases with him in his court, particularly if a religious house in her patronage was involved. He always treated her with great respect, putting her name before his in any joint charters. In his absence she sometimes acted on his behalf, confirming the election of a prelate, or issuing a writ to protect monastic property. He was prepared to listen to her advice on matters of policy; when in 1155 he was considering the possibility of attempting to conquer Ireland and give it to his brother William, she made her opposition to the project known. Her motives are conjectural, but she must have realized that Henry's resources were already overstretched. William, who received very extensive estates in England instead of in Ireland, was able to give practical support to his brother in the early years of the reign, up to his premature death in 1164. Her intimate knowledge of Germany may have been useful during the negotiations with the emperor, Frederick Barbarossa ('r'. 1152-90), who wrote to Henry II asking for the return of the hand of St James that she had brought with her from Germany. The precious relic was retained for the abbey of Reading, and Frederick was pacified with magnificent gifts. They included a tent said to have been large enough for a coronation ceremony, which he took on his campaigns in Italy -- a gift probably suggested by Matilda's practical experience of the Roman expedition she had undertaken with her first husband. Only after the death of Archbishop Theobald in 1162, when she advised against the election of Henry's chancellor and close friend, Thomas Becket, as his successor and was overruled, did her influence over her son visibly weaken. 
Matilda may have feared that Becket would act like the emperor Heinrich V's chancellor Adalbert after his election as archbishop of Mainz almost fifty years previously. But she did not raise any objection when in 1163 Becket banned the marriage of her youngest son, William, to Isabel de Warenne, the widow of William de Blois, on the grounds of consanguinity. William's death shortly afterwards was attributed by his friends to his disappointment. But if Matilda resented Becket's action she did not harbour a grudge against him, and when disagreement with King Henry over the constitutions of Clarendon forced Becket into exile in 1164 she was cautiously prepared to attempt mediation. Her views were written down by Nicholas, prior of the hospital of Mont-St Jacques at Rouen, in a remarkable letter describing a private interview, which she had reluctantly agreed to give him when he interceded with her on Becket's behalf. At her request he read the constitutions to her in Latin and explained them in French. Her views were practical and pragmatic. She thought it had been a great mistake on her son's part to write down the constitutions and require the bishops to swear to uphold them; she preferred the more flexible customs that had guided conduct in her father's and grandfather's time. She was less concerned with the legal principles determining the procedure for judging criminous clerks than with the measures needed to prevent the crimes; she blamed the bishops for ordaining too many clerks without benefices, so that poverty drove them to robbery and violence, while on the other hand some wealthy clerks held as many as four or even seven churches or prebends, contrary to the canon law that forbade more than two. Although she claimed that her son did not consult her about his relations with the church because he knew that she rated the freedom of the church more highly than the royal will, she refused to allow any diminution of the royal dignity, and censured Thomas Becket for his rigid opposition and lack of humility. Many thought that she might have been able to bring about a reconciliation, but the task was beyond her. Her genuine respect for ecclesiastical authority appears at this time in her refusal to receive the envoys of Frederick Barbarossa after his excommunication by Alexander III, though the business that brought them to Rouen included negotiating the marriage of her granddaughter Matilda to Henry the Lion, duke of Saxony. Her son had no scruples about receiving them. But if she failed to find a solution for the Becket controversy, she had more success in negotiations with the king of France, when a minor quarrel that nearly led to war broke out about the transmission of money collected at Tours for the Holy Land. And in 1164 King Louis wrote to her, as the person exercising authority in Rouen, on behalf of one of his merchants who had become involved in a lawsuit there. She was known to have some authority in government, and was respected as a peacemaker. 
In 1160 Matilda suffered a serious illness, but after her recovery she remained active in government until she died on 10 September 1167. The statement of Geoffroi de Vigeois that she took the veil as a nun of Fontevrault is unsupported and unreliable; he probably confused her with her sister-in-law, Matilda, who had retired to Fontevrault in her widowhood. The monk Etienne of Rouen describes in detail in the 'Draco normannicus' her solemn funeral rites, conducted by Rotrou, archbishop of Rouen, in the presence of Arnulf of Lisieux and many monks and clergy. She was buried in accordance with her own wishes before the high altar in the abbey of Bec. Two lines of her epitaph became particularly famous: '
Ortu magna, viro major, sed maxima partu, 

Hic jacet Henrici filia, sponsa, parens. 
(Great by birth, greater by marriage, greatest in her offspring, here lies the daughter, wife, and mother of Henry.)' She gave her treasures and regalia to various religious houses; Bec received the richest vestments and church ornaments as well as two crowns, one of which was so heavy that it had to be supported on two silver rods when worn for a royal coronation. Some treasures had already gone to St Denis; and a dalmatic given to the austere hermit monks of Grandmont is still preserved at Ambazac. A beautiful reliquary given to the monks of Le Valasse is preserved at Rouen. Her tomb was damaged by fire in 1263; during the restoration in 1282 her body was found sewn into an ox-skin. When the church was pillaged by the English in 1421 the tomb was again seriously damaged; in 1684 it was restored by the Maurists, who then wrapped her bones in an embroidered silk cloth and enclosed them in a coffin of wood and lead. The abbey church was destroyed by Napoleon, and Matilda's remains were not discovered until 1846, when they were taken to Rouen and reinterred in the cathedral. Ironically the final resting place of the empress was not the one she herself desired, but that chosen by her father. 
Matilda's church benefactions were numerous, and often directed towards the newer religious orders, though she made some gifts to Cluny and was commemorated throughout the Cluniac order. In Germany she granted land at Oostbroek near Utrecht for the foundation of a very strict Benedictine house by a group of knights who wished to retire to the monastic life. During her years in England her gifts were partly politically motivated; she refused to acknowledge Stephen's right to give away royal demesne lands, and took over any lands he had given to religious houses as her own donations. After Waleran of Meulan founded the abbey of Bordesley out of royal demesne received from Stephen, she appropriated the foundation and brought Bordesley into the royal patronage. Her gifts to the Shropshire abbeys of Shrewsbury and Haughmond were partly intended to assert her rights and neutralize Stephen's gifts; but she also regarded Shropshire as territory that could be recovered after 1142. When she took the newly founded house of Arrouaisian canons at Lilleshall under her protection, territorial interest may have been to the fore. The same is true of her work, with her son Henry, in replacing the hermitage of Radmore in Staffordshire with a Cistercian house, which was moved shortly afterwards to Stoneleigh. Wiltshire too was contended territory, and there she and her son established another Cistercian abbey (Drownfront, later Stanley) as a daughter house of Quarr. 
In Normandy, Matilda used part of her wealth and the dower lands she held to favour the Cistercians. At Le Valasse she took over the foundation of a house begun by Waleran of Meulan, whose motives she did not trust, and after a stormy beginning during the disorders of 1152-3 she secured the establishment there of Cistercian monks from the royal abbey of Mortemer, with the assistance of one of her illegitimate half-sisters, Matilda, abbess of Montivilliers. At the end of her life, in 1166, she began the foundation of another Cistercian house at La Noe. She refounded the house of secular canons, Notre Dame du Voeu, which her grandfather William I had established at Cherbourg, and placed there a community of regular canons from the reformed house of St Victor in Paris. She also completed the foundation of a house of Premonstratensian canons at Silly-en-Gouffern, which, according to the chronicle of the abbey, she had begun after the birth of her son William in 1136, partly out of a regard for St Norbert, whom she had known at the court of the emperor, her first husband. Drogo, one of her knights who had returned to Normandy with her, became in time the first abbot. The establishment of full religious life there seems to have been interrupted by wars and disorders; the foundation proper was apparently delayed until some years after her return to Normandy in 1148, for her charters date from 1157-8. She made gifts to Mortemer for the building of two guest houses large enough to accommodate four different categories of pilgrims: rich and poor, monks and knights. Lannoy Abbey also received gifts from her. After recovering from a serious illness in 1161 she gave her silk mattress to be sold for the benefit of the leper hospital of Mont-St Jacques at Rouen. She was a generous benefactor of Bec and its priory of Notre Dame du Pre. Apparently she had a special devotion to the Virgin Mary; although the foundation of the chapel of St Julien at Petit-Quevilly about 1160 was attributed to her son Henry, she may have had a voice in the decoration of the building: the beautiful paintings on the vaults of the choir and apse show scenes from the life of the Virgin. 
Matilda's royal status ensured that writers would seek her patronage. When she was still a young bride in Germany, Hugh of Fleury dedicated his chronicle of the recent Frankish kings ('Liber qui modernorum regum Francorum continet actus') to her, praising her high birth and lofty status. Shortly after her return to England in 1126 the monks of Malmesbury sought her patronage. William of Malmesbury had undertaken to write his 'Gesta regum Anglorum' at the request of Queen Matilda, but her death in 1118 deprived him of a patron. A dedicatory letter was addressed to the empress through her uncle King David; the monks stressed the distinction of her birth, and the value history had always had for kings and queens in the past. When, later, she seemed to have the crown within her grasp, Philip de Thaon dedicated his 'Livre de sybille' to her. If the subject chosen was not merely conventional, it may imply that she shared the fashionable interest of court circles in the prophecies of Merlin and the sibyls. These works all spoke respectfully of her lineage; there is a more personal touch in a poem addressed to her by Hildebert de Lavardin, archbishop of Tours, who implied that learning was one of her virtues. 
A life of the empress said to have been written by Arnulf of Lisieux, a former adversary who became a devoted supporter, has not survived. Arnulf wrote two laudatory epitaphs, praising Matilda's royal lineage and imperial marriage, but claiming that her virtues were even greater than her noble blood, and that though a woman she was without feminine weakness. She was said, whether conventionally or truly is not known, to have been extremely beautiful, and she was remembered in Germany as 'the good Matilda'. Her greatest successes came during three periods: the first during the time when she was consort in Germany before 1125; the second when, from 1142, she helped to secure the claim of her son Henry as heir to the throne of England; and the last when she supported him in the governance of Normandy. She then showed that she had inherited many of her father's talents for government. As herself a claimant to the throne of England in 1139-41 she was less successful; partly, perhaps, through lack of experience in leadership and the inherent weakness of any opposition to a crowned king, or through the handicap of her sex, and the impression she sometimes gave of pride and harshness. Years later Prior Nicholas of Mont-St Jacques, even after the interview in which she said much that pleased him, noted that she was 'of the stock of tyrants', determined to uphold her son's rights. But there were at all times elements of grandeur in her character that attracted and held the loyalty of such men as Miles, earl of Hereford, and Brian fitz Count. The loyalty and affection of the monks of Bec, with whom she spent the last years of her life, never wavered. Her piety was more than conventional; the chronicler of Le Valasse wrote that her devotion to the Lord God came from the heart. Ralph de Diceto considered that her nobility of character and her masculine courage set an example of fortitude and patience to sustain her three granddaughters -- Matilda, duchess of Saxony, Joanna, queen of Sicily, and Eleanor, queen of Castile -- through all the trials and hardships of their lives. 
Although Matilda failed to overcome the difficulties in the way of female succession in early twelfth-century England and Normandy, and never became a reigning queen, she was able to learn from some mistakes made during the early years of her struggle with Stephen. Her lasting achievement in the long run was to secure -- by courage, determination, and shrewd political judgement -- the succession of her son Henry II, and so the establishment of the Angevins in preference to the house of Blois-Flanders as rulers of England. This achievement was recognized by most Angevin historians in the century after her death, and by many others later. Her reputation in later centuries, however, fluctuated according to the sources studied by writers and the conditions governing succession to the throne. The succession question during the Tudor period made writers alive to the problems she had faced, not least the question of the rights of a queen's husband. As long as historians consulted mainly narrative sources their assessments depended on their selection of authorities; the vivid and hostile picture of her failures in 1141-2 given by the author of the 'Gesta Stephani' was responsible for many unfavourable interpretations of her character, including that of Sir James Ramsay. She fared better with those familiar with continental chronicles, notably Kate Norgate, whose balanced narrative has stood the test of time. The publication of charters and financial documents made possible an appreciation of her political skills in government; Leopold Delisle was the first to recognize her positive and important work in the government of Normandy. Her turbulent career shows how much could, and could not, be achieved by a female heir to the English throne in the twelfth century. 
The epitaph on Matilda's first tomb is lost, but possibly the description of her preserved in the chronicle of Bec was taken from it: 'the most noble lady Matilda, empress of the Romans, daughter of the first Henry king of the English, wife first of Henry emperor of the Romans, and then countess of Anjou, queen of England and mother of Henry II king of the English. (Chibnall, 'Empress Matilda', 191)' In 1684 a new inscription for her tomb, composed by Jean Mabillon and printed in A. A. Poree's 'Histoire de l'abbaye du Bec' (2.615), more correctly avoided describing her as queen of England. 
There are two formal representations of Matilda. One on coins struck in her mints shows her in profile. The other is on the only seal she is known to have used all her life; she is depicted sitting majestically with her feet resting on a footstool, wearing a crown of three points and a long garment with full sleeves, and holding in her right hand a long sceptre terminating in a fleur-de-lis. The legend is 'St Mathildis Dei gratia Romanorum regina'. 


@@@@@


doc= 18339


Matilda, duchess of Saxony (1156-1189), princess, the third child and eldest daughter of Henry II, king of England, and his wife, Eleanor of Aquitaine, was baptized in the church of the Holy Trinity, Aldgate, by Archbishop Theobald of Canterbury (died 1161). She had four surviving brothers: Henry (1155-1183), Richard I (1157-1199), Geoffrey, duke of Brittany (1158-1186), and John (1167-1216); and two sisters: Eleanor ('b'. 1161) and Joanna (1165-1199). In 1160 the queen took Matilda to join the king in Normandy; they seem to have brought her back with them in January 1163. Early in 1165 an embassy came from the emperor, Frederick Barbarossa, to ask in marriage two of Henry's daughters, one for Frederick's son, the other for his cousin, Henry the Lion, duke of Saxony. Both couples were betrothed, but while Henry II appears to have dropped the project of a marriage between his daughter and Frederick's son, the marriage between Matilda and Henry went ahead. After visiting Normandy again, Matilda returned in the autumn of 1166. The earliest extant register of English tenants-in-chief and their holdings, still preserved in the 'Red and Black Books of the Exchequer', was probably compiled with a view to the assessment of the aid levied by the king for his daughter's marriage. In 1167 the duke sent envoys to fetch his bride. She sailed about Michaelmas from Dover to Normandy, and thence proceeded, probably after Christmas, to Germany. The duke met her at Minden, and they were married there by Bishop Werner in the cathedral church on 1 February 1168. 
Henry the Lion was twenty-seven years older than Matilda; he had been married long before she was born, and divorced from his first wife in 1162. First cousin to the emperor, he was duke of Bavaria and Saxony. Brunswick was his main residence in Saxony; there the newly married couple held their wedding feast; and there their first child, Richenza, was born during her father's absence on pilgrimage in 1172. Two sons were born in the next eight years, probably in 1173 or 1174 and 1174 or 1175. Henry occupied a quasi-regal position in Saxony, and he laid much stress on the status conferred by his marriage to Matilda, who was referred to on a number of occasions as the daughter of a king and granddaughter of an empress. His power and its ruthless exercise had long aroused opposition among other lay and ecclesiastical magnates. In the late 1160s Frederick had been able and willing to mediate between the two groups, but after the ending of the papal schism in 1177 the opposition to Henry found renewed intensity, and this time Frederick, who had come to have his own quarrels with Henry, was not prepared to intervene. After Henry had refused to obey a series of summonses to assemblies at which charges against him were to be heard, he was outlawed for contumacy at an assembly at Wurzburg in January 1180 and his lands declared confiscated. 
From the spring of 1180 there followed eighteen months of campaigning in Saxony, at the end of which Henry submitted to Frederick at Erfurt in November 1181. He regained his allodial possessions, but had to go into exile, not to return without Frederick's consent; the sources differ on whether a term was set for the exile and if so how long, and on whether Matilda was also exiled or joined Henry in exile voluntarily. The couple left the Reich in July 1182, accompanied by two of their sons; Lothar remained in Saxony, perhaps as a hostage. They reached Argentan in the summer of 1182, and soon afterwards their fourth son was born there. It was probably at this point that the troubadour Bertrand de Born met Matilda; he apostrophized her under the name Elena in two poems and praised her beauty and wit. On 12 June 1184 Matilda travelled to England, and in that year her fifth son, William, was born at Winchester. In November she was in London with her husband; at Christmas both were at Windsor with the king. In 1185 Henry and Matilda were allowed to return to Saxony, in part through the mediation of Henry II. In the spring of 1189 the emperor demanded that Henry the Lion should either accompany him on crusade, or go into exile again until his return. Henry again sought refuge in England, but Matilda remained at Brunswick and died there on 28 June. She was buried at the church of St Blaise and St Giles, Brunswick. Her husband returned to Brunswick after Frederick's death; he died there in 1195 and was buried at her right hand, 'choosing to sleep beside her in death as in life' (Pertz, 231). In the early thirteenth century their tombs were provided with stone effigies, probably as part of a larger project for a family memorial put in hand by their son Otto IV (died 1218). Arnold of Lubeck called Matilda 'a most religious woman, whose memory is of note before God and man, whose good works and sweet disposition enhanced the lustre of the long royal line whence she sprang; a woman of profound piety, of wondrous sympathy for the afflicted, a great distributor of alms, and, being given to prayers, a most devoted frequenter of masses, of which she had many sung' ('Arnoldi chronica Slavorum', 11-12). 
Little is known of the part Matilda played in the government of her husband's territories, although she acted in effect as regent in his absence, for example during his crusade in 1172 and in the last few months of her life. She acted not only as a transmitter of Anglo-French cultural impulses to the court at Brunswick, which, certainly in the reign of her son, Otto IV, was more advanced than most princely courts in the Reich, but was also closely associated with Henry in his efforts to build up Brunswick as a princely residence, with a palace, cathedral-like church, and art treasures. Most prominent of these is the 'Evangeliary of Henry the Lion', now in Wolfenbuttel, in which Matilda appears both in the dedicatory miniature and in a further miniature depicting Christ crowning (in what sense is disputed) herself and Henry the Lion, surrounded by their ancestors. 
Matilda's eldest child, Richenza, is almost certainly identical with the daughter whom the English chroniclers call Matilda, who was left in Normandy with her grandparents in 1185, returned to England with them in 1186, was married, first, in 1189, to Geoffroy, count of Perche, and second, between 1200 and 1205, to Enguerrand (III) de Coucy, and died before 1210. The eldest son, Henry, assumed the title of duke of Saxony on his father's death, became count palatine of the Rhine in 1196, and died in 1227 survived by two daughters, Irmgard and Agnes, his only son, Henry, having predeceased him. His brother Otto, nominated by his uncle Richard I as earl of York in 1190 and count of Poitou in 1196, was elected emperor in 1198 in opposition to the Staufer candidate, crowned at Rome in 1209, excommunicated and declared deposed the following year, and died childless in 1218, having lost all royal power after the defeat of the Welf and Angevin forces at Bouvines in 1214. Lothar died in 1190. The boy born at Argentan in 1182 is never heard of again, and presumably died very young. Matilda's youngest child, the English-born William of Winchester, died in 1213. He and his wife, Helen, daughter of Waldemar I of Denmark, had a son named Otto, who became sole heir male of the family on the death of his uncle Henry in 1227. From him are descended the ducal house of Brunswick-Luneburg, and the British royal house of Windsor. 


@@@@@


doc= 18340


Maton, Robert (b. 1606/7, d. in or after 1646), religious writer, was the second son of William Maton of North Tidworth, Wiltshire, and his wife, Thomazin Hayter of Langford. He entered Wadham College, Oxford, as a commoner at Michaelmas 1623 and matriculated, aged nineteen, on 3 November 1626, graduating BA on 25 October 1627 and MA on 10 June 1630. Very little else is known of his life, although he is reported to have taken holy orders. 
In 1642 Maton published a notable work, 'Israel's Redemption', which predicted the coming millennium. It was clearly much influenced by Joseph Mede, the Cambridge biblical scholar who had sought to systematize and render mutually consistent the apocalyptic prophecies of the books of 'Daniel' and 'Revelation'. Maton was supremely confident that the days of Satan's 'pompous clergy, of his princely and magistracy mastering pontiffs' were numbered, and that those of the millennium approached: for 'it is not to be doubted but that God will have the victory in the end, and the longer, and more eagerly any truth of his hath been opposed and supprest, the more suddenly and more powerfully shall she break forth again, to the amazement and confusion of her adversaries.' Christ would soon return to establish his reign on earth, and the Jews would share in its spiritual riches: 'both Jew and gentile are sick in the same disease... never will the happiness of either receive perfection... till both are folded together' (Maton, 'Israel's Redemption', preface). 
Maton's book was published in London, but his ideas had their greatest initial impact among the independent congregations of the Netherlands: such was their influence that Alexander Petrie, minister of the Scottish church at Rotterdam, felt impelled to launch an attack, signed in August 1644 within a year of his arrival, upon Maton's literalist interpretation of the prophecies. Maton countered in December 1646 with a lengthy response, 'Israel's Redemption Redeemed', later republished as 'Christ's Personall Reign on Earth One Thousand Years' (1652). Maton's ideas were influential during the English Commonwealth. His response to Petrie was republished again in 1655 as 'A Treatise of the Fifth Monarchy', though he is not known to have been associated with the Fifth Monarchists. It may be that he died shortly afterwards, for nothing more is heard of him. 


@@@@@


doc= 18341


Maton, William George (1774-1835), physician, was born in Salisbury on 31 January 1774, the eldest son of George Maton (died 1816), a wine merchant in that city, and his wife, Mary. He was educated at Salisbury's free grammar school (where he showed an early interest in natural history) and entered Queen's College, Oxford, in July 1790. At Oxford he gave much time to botany, and acquired the friendship of the subject's then professor, John Sibthorp (1758-1796). Maton graduated BA in 1794 and was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in the same year. Although originally intended by his father for the church, Maton continued his academic studies. He graduated MA in January 1797, and began medical studies at Westminster Hospital in the spring of that year. He gained his MB (Oxford) in 1798 and his MD in 1801, and was elected FRS in 1800. Elected a fellow of the College of Surgeons in 1802, he was Goulstonian lecturer in 1803, censor (1804, 1813, and 1824), treasurer (1814-20), and Harveian orator (1815). He was physician to the Westminster Hospital in 1800-08. 
While at university Maton published several antiquarian works. He wrote parts of the 'Salisbury Guide', and Hutchins's 'History of Dorset', as well as a paper on Stonehenge in the 'Archaeologia' for 1794. Travels in Dorset, Devon, Cornwall, and Somerset led to his 'Observations relative chiefly to the natural history, picturesque scenery, and antiquities of the western counties of England, made chiefly in the years 1794 and 1796' (2 vols., 1797). In it he concluded that the Cornish language was extinct -- a conclusion based on his inability to find a single person who could speak it. The second volume is also notable for its 'mineralogical map of the western counties of England', which has been identified as the 'first attempt in England to construct a geological map' (Paris, 32). 
After several years of practising medicine in London, Maton took to residing at Weymouth during 'the season'. There he found time to pursue his botanical interests and was often seen rambling in the neighbourhood. Indeed, he was identified to the royal family (spending the season at Gloucester Lodge) as the person to name a specimen of 'Arundo' (later 'Calamagrostis') 'epigejos', which one of the botanically minded princesses had obtained. As a result, he acquired the confidence of the royal family, and in 1816 was appointed physician-extraordinary to Queen Charlotte. In 1820 he attended the duke of Kent in his last illness, and afterwards became physician-in-ordinary to the duchess and to the infant Princess Victoria. His practice increased and between 1823 and 1835 'shared with Sir Henry Halford the best business of the town' (Munk, 'Roll'). 
In 1816 Maton's father had died, deeply in debt. By 1827 Maton had paid off in excess of $20,000. The mayor and corporation of Salisbury, in testimony of his honourable conduct, gave him the freedom of the city in a gold box. He bought a country seat near Downton, Wiltshire, but six months later became very ill and died on 30 March 1835 at his house in Spring Gardens, London. In addition to his antiquarian works, Maton published several papers in the 'Transactions of the Linnean Society' (of which he served as vice-president) and of the College of Physicians. A woodpecker, a shellfish, and a genus of plants were all named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 18342


Matthew, Tobie (1544?-1628), archbishop of York, was born in Bristol, the son of John Matthew of Ross-on-Wye in Herefordshire and his second wife, Eleanor Crofton of Ludlow in Shropshire. The Matthew family had a long connection with the city and Tobie was said to have been born at Bristol Bridge, the heart of the mercantile community. The uncertainty about his birth date stems in part from the conflicting evidence of his own statements in later life -- though his funeral monument before its near destruction recorded 1546, he himself claimed in 1588 that he was just short of his third birthday when Henry VIII died and that his mother, who was still alive at the time, could verify the fact. It seems therefore that a birth date in early 1544 is most likely. 
Matthew's parents are reported by John Strype to have been disaffected in religion, presumably meaning that they were Catholics. During Mary's reign Matthew attended school at Wells before proceeding to Oxford, where he is said to have matriculated as a probationer of University College in 1559. By 1561 he was at Christ Church, where the Scottish protestant James Calfhill, a cousin by marriage and a formative influence on the young Matthew, was a canon. He graduated BA in 1564 and MA in July 1566, by which time he was a student -- a fellow -- of Christ Church, and he was ordained deacon in the same year, apparently at the suggestion of Calfhill and to the dismay of his parents. Christ Church under the former exile Thomas Sampson was a strongly Calvinist college, and in 1565 Sampson was removed from the deanery for his objections to the imposition of the surplice and other vestments. Matthew wrote a lengthy letter to that great patron of godly Calvinists, Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, complaining about the government's action, and he remained a correspondent and friend of Sampson throughout the latter's life. 
At this time Matthew was identified as one of the rising Oxford stars and 'he was much respected for his great learning, eloquence, sweet conversation, friendly disposition and the sharpness of his wit' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.870), qualities which were to play an important part in his subsequent career. More immediately they gained him a part, along with another rising star, Edmund Campion, in the disputation held before the queen in St Mary's Church on 3 September 1566, and he was chosen to make the oration on her departure from Christ Church at the end of her visit. His eloquence and presence attracted Elizabeth's attention, and she continued to show an active interest in his career thereafter, making him a royal chaplain-in-ordinary in 1572, soon after his ordination to the priesthood by John Jewel, bishop of Salisbury, on 10 June 1571. By this time Matthew's Oxford career was becoming well established; he had been chosen as public orator by the university in 1569 and made a canon of Christ Church in 1570, succeeding to the stall held by his cousin James Calfhill. In 1571 he was presented to the rectory of Algarkirk in Lincoln diocese by Bishop Thomas Cooper, a former dean of Christ Church, and on 15 May 1572 he was appointed to the prebendal stall of Teynton Regis in Salisbury Cathedral. On 28 November in that same year he renewed his earlier connection with Wells on his appointment as archdeacon of Bath. 
These promotions were chiefly intended to support Matthew's Oxford commitments, for on 17 July 1572 he was elected president of the recent foundation of St John's College, with which Christ Church was closely connected. He was the fifth president to have been elected in the college's short history and he had to grapple with its poor finances and a divided fellowship, among whom were many sympathizers with the old religion, including his long-time acquaintance the future Jesuit martyr Edmund Campion. Matthew was elected reader in Greek in 1573, in which year he also proceeded BTh. His attempts to improve the fortunes of St John's met with little success: he raised money in an attempt to found a library there but the plans came to nought, and the penury of the college undermined other developments. Matthew continued as a canon of Christ Church, and his work there led the college visitors in 1574 to complain that his cathedral duties prevented him from giving proper attention to St John's. He became DTh in 1574, and was given the stall of Combe IX in Wells Cathedral that same year. His reputation as a theologian committed to the Calvinist position and his links with Leicester's circle led to his admission to the godly legal community of Gray's Inn in London under special dispensation in 1575. 
In 1576 Matthew was appointed dean of Christ Church and subsequently resigned the presidency of St John's on 8 May 1577. His new position at the head of both a chapter and a wealthy college made Matthew a formidable figure in Oxford, and his marriage early in 1577 to Frances Parker (died 1629) ['see 'Matthew, Frances], the widow of the late archbishop's son and the daughter of William Barlow, bishop of Bath and Wells, further strengthened his growing authority. Matthew was a vigorous dean who devoted considerable energy to building up the college library, making several gifts of his own, including a copy of the 1576 edition of Foxe's 'Actes and Monumentes', and encouraging others to follow his example. He was also active in university affairs, being a member of the commission to root out papists from Exeter College in 1578, and was appointed vice-chancellor in 1579, on the recommendation of the earl of Leicester. 
It was through Leicester that Matthew also came into contact with two distinguished foreign scholars at Oxford. He was a patron of the Italian protestant jurist Albericus Gentilis, who had fled from Italy in 1579, welcoming him to Christ Church and subsequently defending his views on the legitimacy of the theatre against the more puritan scholars associated with John Rainolds, president of Corpus Christi College. In recognition of the support he had received from Matthew, Gentilis dedicated to him his 'Commentarius de maleficis et math.' (1593); a copy survives heavily annotated by Matthew. The other visitor, Jean Hotman, arrived in Oxford in 1581 as an alumnus of Calvin's academy and the Genevan church, and was also provided with rooms in Christ Church by the dean. Hotman had a wide circle of Oxford contacts, and, although less closely identified with Matthew in person, was highly influential in introducing the works of Beza to Oxford protestants. It was in 1581 also that the greatest public confrontation at Oxford during Matthew's time took place, when Edmund Campion published his 'Decem rationes' in defence of the Roman church, placing copies on the seats in St Mary's Church at commencements on 27 June. Campion identified Matthew, among others, as one not learned enough in scripture and the fathers to fulfil his office, a barb that Matthew underlined in his own copy of Campion's work. Although William Whitaker was chosen to respond officially to Campion, Matthew's was the first public response, in a Latin sermon based on 'Deuteronomy' 32: 7 preached in St Mary's on 9 October that year. The sermon gained some celebrity and circulated in manuscript until it was finally published as 'Concio apologetica adversus Campianum' in 1638. 
By the time of the sermon against Campion, Matthew was beginning to play an active if minor role in ecclesiastical affairs outside the university. As dean of the cathedral he had ordered the seeking out of papists in the diocese of Oxford (left vacant between 1568 and 1589), and in 1581, as prolocutor of the lower house of convocation, he was among those who unsuccessfully petitioned Elizabeth I to lift Archbishop Grindal's suspension, an act that secured the queen's displeasure. He was a natural candidate for further advancement (a view that he held himself), and when the deanery of Durham fell vacant late in 1581 he let his interest be known. The other candidate for Durham was Robert Bellamy, a member of the chapter and chaplain to Bishop Richard Barnes. Bellamy had the support of the queen's cousin Lord Hunsdon, but Matthew commanded the support of several godly preachers in the chapter, including the Pilkington brothers and Thomas Lever, as well as that of the earls of Leicester and Huntingdon and, most crucially, William Cecil, Lord Burghley. Despite such powerful backing negotiations took over a year and Matthew was not installed until 3 September 1583, resigning from Christ Church early in 1584. Matthew's departure from Oxford was the occasion of a celebrated sermon, and he was accompanied north by his friend Richard Edes who composed a lengthy elegiac poem, 'Iter Boreale', recording the event (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. B.223, fols. 1-16). This was neither the first nor the last time that Matthew was to inspire verse: William Gager, a student at Christ Church, had already dedicated several verses to him (BL, Add. MS 10943, fols. 51, 68-71, 74-76'v'); he was later to be the dedicatee of Barnabe Barnes's 'A Divine Centurie of Spirituall Sonnets' (1595) and of John Ashmore's translations of Horace's odes, published in 1621, while John Earle, the future bishop of Salisbury, composed a private elegy on Matthew's death in 1628 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. poet. e.97, pp. 50-53). 
Matthew did not always view his promotion with pleasure, especially in the early years when his defeated rival proved a focus for opposition within the chapter and Lord Hunsdon's powerful influence still counted against him. He regarded the deanery as merely a stepping-stone to higher things, and his determined pursuit of promotion has left him, somewhat unfairly, with a reputation for ecclesiastical jobbery. Despite the presence of committed protestants in the chapter from the beginning of Elizabeth's reign, large areas of the diocese were still missionary territory, with the added complication of a shared border with a foreign power. Matthew was energetic in sustaining the preaching and pastoral effort required, mostly through personal example by preaching weekly at several churches in the diocese. In addition he exploited the opportunities to embellish the library that he had brought with him from Oxford by astute purchases from the estates of deceased members of the chapter. He made this resource available to local clergy engaged in combating recusancy, and was also assiduous in enforcing the laws against Catholics. As a crown appointee, Matthew was a trusted negotiator on its behalf with the Scottish authorities, and in particular Francis Stewart, fifth earl of Bothwell, in the years following the execution of Mary, queen of Scots. Trusted by the more advanced protestants on the privy council Matthew was hopeful of promotion to the see of Durham when Barnes died in 1587, but in the end Matthew Hutton, dean of York, was preferred, though the dean, still thwarted by his old opponent Hunsdon, was able to resist removal to the diocese of Salisbury and remained in the deanery. His income was subsequently increased when he was presented to the wealthy rectory at Monkwearmouth in 1590, which he held in plurality, but he continued to sue for promotion and was disappointed not to be made bishop of London in 1594. 
The death of John Piers, archbishop of York, on 28 September 1594 occasioned another series of moves on the episcopal bench and Matthew was determined to succeed Hutton, the new archbishop of York, at Durham and not to be fobbed off with a less well endowed see. After some delay he achieved his ambition, being consecrated bishop of Durham on 13 April 1595, whereupon he settled his debts to his old patron Burghley, giving him $100 in gold, with other presents to Burghley's secretary Michael Hickes and to his son Robert Cecil, a transaction that has been described as 'one of the more patently documented cases of simony in the Elizabethan Church' (Collinson, 47). At Durham, Matthew also looked after the interests of his family, most infamously in 1604 when he secured a lease of the extensive episcopal manor of Tunstall for his son Toby. Yet whatever may have been his dealings with his temporal estate, Matthew proved an assiduous bishop to a poorly staffed diocese in which traditional attitudes predominated and where less than half the parishes had preaching ministers and there was a high incidence of non-residence. He himself continued his preaching activity but 'neglected not his proper Episcopal Acts of Visitation, Confirmation, Ordination &c. he confirmed sometimes 500, sometimes 1000 at a Time, yea, so many that he hath been forced to betake himself to his Bed for Refreshment...' (Thoresby, 165). 
In addition to the demands of his spiritual duties, as prince-bishop Matthew played a prominent part in local administration in co. Durham and, following the death of the third earl of Huntingdon in 1595, was the 'de facto' lord lieutenant of the county. As such he was soon engaged on the government's behalf in border affairs where the warden of the middle march, the 95-year-old Sir John Forster, had proved ineffectual in dealing alike with border raids and with recusancy among the local landowners. Forster was removed from office in 1595 with some difficulty, and on 25 September 1596 a border commission was set up with Matthew as its head. He played a key role in the Anglo-Scottish settlement of 5 May 1597, and preached regularly at Berwick while negotiations proceeded. Border affairs continued to occupy the bishop; he did not enjoy good relations with Forster's successor as warden, Ralph, third Baron Eure, who proved equally ineffective in controlling faction among the marcher gentry. Religion lay behind many of these disputes and the diocese contained many gentry with traditional values against whom the magistrates were unwilling to act and whose status rendered them immune from effective discipline by the bishop. Nevertheless it was during Matthew's years at Durham that concerted action was taken both against recusancy and to bolster protestantism. 
Unable to overcome the gentry Matthew was assiduous in pursuit of missionary priests, and a number of them, including an old Oxford associate, John Boste, were executed during the 1590s. Matthew employed a network of spies to hunt down priests, led by the energetic Henry Sanderson, a customs official responsible for the disruption of a system of recusant safe houses, for which he was rewarded with the leases of episcopal coalmines. Matthew also secured the services of former priests to inform on their colleagues, the most famous of them being the prolific polemicist Thomas Bell, who was given access to the bishop's library in pursuit of his work. In order to promote protestantism Matthew successfully used his patronage within the chapter to secure preachers, and rather less successfully tried to make local patrons restore the fabric of churches and install resident preaching ministers in key border parishes after the Anglo-Scottish treaty of 1597. By 1601 this had only produced four licensed preachers in the whole of Northumberland, though almost half the Durham parishes had preaching ministers by that date. His efforts on behalf of the church were widely recognized and Archbishop Hutton thought that, on the death of Whitgift in 1604, Matthew might be promoted to Canterbury. 
As a key political figure Matthew occasionally antagonized local opinion by an over-assiduous attention to his own rights, as when he confiscated the goods of Scottish merchants at Durham in 1597 or when he contested the charter of the city in 1601, but he was a trusted servant of the state, and especially of the Cecils, and played a key role during the arrival of James I in England. Although his earlier negotiations do not appear to have given Matthew a high opinion of his new king, he quickly set out to make amends. He met James at Berwick, where he preached before him, and was in constant attendance as a preacher in the first four months of the reign, then returning north to welcome the new queen. He played a prominent part in the Hampton Court conference, preaching the closing sermon. He also preached before the king on the Sunday following the Gunpowder Plot, and before the English and Scottish commissioners upon the designed union of the two kingdoms. His advice was often sought by James in these crucial months. On 16 April 1606 he was appointed archbishop of York, a promotion that recognized his overall contribution to the national church and his effective administration at Durham where, by the time he moved on, protestantism had made significant inroads beyond the cathedral city, and the bishop had become the effective temporal ruler of the palatinate and the chief source of royal authority in the border regions. 
Matthew's involvement in political affairs increased further through his work as archbishop with the council of the north, many of whose members were already good friends and shared his antipathy for Catholicism. He formed good relationships with the magnates Gilbert Talbot, seventh earl of Shrewsbury, whose funeral sermon he preached in 1616, and Francis Clifford, fourth earl of Cumberland, whom Matthew appointed as keeper of his estate at Scalme Park in Nottinghamshire and who, with his household, was a regular visitor to Bishopthorpe, the archbishop's principal residence. The secretary of the council, Sir John Ferne, was appointed steward of the archiepiscopal manors of Cawood, Wistow, and Sherburn, and his successor, Sir Arthur Ingram, was granted a long lease of the archbishop's house in the cathedral close, building there a substantial 'palace'. Matthew remained on close terms with Sir Thomas Fairfax of Denton, whose lands adjoined the archiepiscopal manor of Otley and whose son Henry was briefly Matthew's household chaplain. Perhaps his closest colleague on the council, however, was Sir Thomas Posthumous Hoby, the strongest defender of protestant interests in that Catholic stronghold, the North Riding. Matthew trusted Hoby's local judgement, asking him to nominate curates to unprovided-for chapelries and supporting his actions in the secular courts with a vigorous campaign against recusants at the visitation of 1615. Hoby's actions did not always endear him to his fellow protestants in the region but Matthew continued to support him and in 1617 appointed him high steward of Ripon. This was an important post as Ripon was a parliamentary borough, which gave Hoby considerable political influence in what was a well-known recusant stronghold where the crown, with Matthew's encouragement, had recently attempted to strengthen the position of the established church through the re-endowment of the minster there. 
During these years, largely through Matthew's efforts, a vigorous and active group of Calvinist gentry took over the effective running of the council, but their ambitions were threatened by the appointment of the pro-Catholic Emanuel, eleventh Baron Scrope, as president in 1619. Matthew, among others, let his disapproval of Scrope be known, with the result that in 1620 he was warned by James I to give the president due precedence at official ceremonies in York Minster. Though now in his seventies Matthew continued to be an active force in the north, but his influence on politics at the national level had waned by this date. He had preached the sermon at the opening of parliament in 1614, during which he indicated his opposition to royal policy over taxation, but his influence had probably already declined with that of his patron Robert Cecil, and dwindled still further with the latter's death in 1612. He entertained James I at Bishopthorpe on the king's journey north in 1617, and in 1622 he exchanged his London residence, York Place, which later became Whitehall, with the crown for the manors of Acomb, Beckhay, and Sancton in Yorkshire, further testimony to his close association with James but also, perhaps, a pointer both to his withdrawal from national affairs and to his tendency, previously noted at Durham, to accommodate lay patrons at the expense of the church's interests. His reputation for wit, too, may well have affected his reputation in temporal matters -- he has often had his own words to Matthew Hutton quoted against him by historians: 'God loveth, and so doe princes, a cherefull gever' ('Correspondence', 95). 
Matthew's influence in ecclesiastical affairs remained crucial to the religious history of the north until his death in 1628. On arriving in his new diocese Matthew was faced with both the anticipated problem of recusancy and the less expected problem of separatism, each of which he addressed immediately. Matthew revived prosecutions against Catholics, using the high commission which in Hutton's later years had been less active, and he was deeply suspicious of the oath of allegiance, tendered to Catholics after 1607. In a sustained drive between 1612 and 1615 the high commission imposed heavy fines on the Catholic gentry, and a number of Calvinist clergy were appointed to confer with obstinate recusants. At his visitation in 1615 Matthew paid particular regard to recusancy, asking especially detailed questions, and his determined thoroughness in uncovering Catholics remained a feature of every visitation up to and including that of 1627. Ambition was not always matched by achievement, however, and despite his efforts many lay Catholics still found it relatively easy to evade the full force of the law, not surprising in a region where many court officers had recusant relations. Indeed, on the eve of his promotion to York, Matthew acquired one of his own: his antipathy to Catholicism was of long standing, but was given an added piquancy by the conversion of his eldest son, Toby (or Tobie) Matthew, in 1606, an event that was a continual source of unhappiness to the archbishop and his wife until their deaths. Matthew also encouraged polemicists like Alexander Cooke and scholars like John Favour to take up in print the intellectual defence of the Reformation, making available to them his extensive library, and he encouraged godly preachers such as Edmund Bunny, who was based during these years at the episcopal residence at Cawood, to preach in towns throughout the province. 
Separatism was a less expected issue. A number of clergy based in parishes on the Nottinghamshire, Yorkshire, and Lincolnshire borders had failed to subscribe to the canons of 1604, and were cited before the ecclesiastical courts. It was against this background that the separatist preachers John Robinson and John Smyth had gained support from some clergy and from members of their congregations by the time of Matthew's arrival in the diocese. The new bishop sought to act against the separatists as swiftly as possible, trying to drive a wedge between them and the puritan clergy who had scruples over the canons. This he did in his primary visitation, adding one of the centres of separatism, Bawtry, to his preaching venues with a sermon specifically against the Brownists. He then placed the clergy of the area directly under his own supervision rather than that of the archdeacon, secured the subscription of the more moderate puritan ministers such as Richard Bernard, vicar of Worksop, whom he subsequently made a canon of Southwell, and picked off the leading lay separatists for prosecution in the courts. So successful was this strategy that in 1608 the congregations removed themselves to exile in Amsterdam. 
Using his authority to deal with the opponents of the church was only one aspect of Matthew's work; he was also active in sustaining the continued vigour of the early Calvinist reformers. By this date he was one of the few men left with direct experience of the struggles of the early Elizabethan church, and this no doubt informed his churchmanship. In addition to his support of godly writers and preachers he was a particular champion of that quintessential element of the reformed ministry, the exercise, in which clergy of a neighbourhood met to hear each other preach and to discuss matters of theology. He himself preached in that held at Mansfield, Nottinghamshire, in 1609 and 1613, while his chaplain John Favour was the leader of the famous exercise at Halifax, which exerted considerable influence upon the religious life of the West Riding in this and succeeding generations. It was during his archiepiscopate that the foundations laid by his predecessors began to bear fruit; a graduate preaching ministry became established in many parts of the diocese, and Matthew played his part in this through careful use of patronage within the minster as well as in the diocese. Only three clergy ordained by him at York were non-graduates, and even these had attended university. 
The touchstone of the ministry as perceived by Matthew was preaching, an activity in which he was both pre-eminent and indefatigable. Matthew's preaching diary has become a standard source for the pastoral objectives of his generation of Jacobean bishops. In it he recorded those sermons preached by him following his appointment to Durham, 721 as dean and 550 as bishop, and then a further 721 as archbishop until 1622 when the diary ceased, though not the preaching. This was a weekly routine, and Matthew recorded his distress if illness prevented him from maintaining a programme of at least forty sermons a year. These included great occasions before court and parliament, and visits to small country churches 'through high waters and foul ways' where congregations were sparse, though the situation he found on his arrival at Acomb on the outskirts of York in 1622 when there were 'neither priest nor people, although they had warning over night' (York Minster Library, Add. MS 18) appears to have been unique. The Pauline epistles often provided him with his text, and his industry was matched by his style, plain but elegant 'In that still voice, that voice that God was in', according to the poem by John Earle, himself a future bishop (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. poet. e.97, pp. 50-53). Both in his audiences and by his example Matthew's preaching extended his influence well beyond his diocese, and this was strengthened further through contacts with other bishops, men like Arthur Lake and James Montague, and with university divines like Samuel Ward. To evangelical divines such as these preaching had to be based on scriptural learning, in the pursuit of which Matthew had acquired an extensive library of almost 3000 volumes by his death. It was acquired by gift, by assiduous purchases from deceased friends and colleagues, and from the Frankfurt book fair whose catalogues were marked up annually by Matthew with his requirements. Many of his books can be identified by his monogram, his motto 'Vita Christus, mors lucrum', and by his copious annotations, suggesting that he used his library regularly in preparing his sermons. 
The collection reveals Matthew as a man of wide theological interests of an evangelical nature who, in addition to scriptural works and studies of the fathers, had a special interest in Italian works and in the troubles of French protestants during the wars of religion. He was clearly one of those who saw the English church as part of the wider protestant communion and as having a responsibility towards co-religionists elsewhere. His library was put at the disposal of other godly ministers, and the public purposes of print were formally acknowledged by him in 1602, when he gave $50 to the Bodleian Library, and in 1615, when he established a library in his home town of Bristol, to which he continued to add from duplicates in his own collection until his death. These volumes can still be identified at Bristol, as can those of his personal library which he had intended to leave to his son Toby; however, having disinherited the latter, he bequeathed them to his wife, Frances, who subsequently gave them to the minster, where they formed the basis of the present library. The library was equipped and the books catalogued following a gift of $40 for that purpose from Matthew's former colleagues on the council of the north. 
Matthew's career had been forged in the reign of Elizabeth, and his ecclesiastical contacts and pastoral priorities reflect that fact. However by the 1620s his brand of evangelical Calvinism was being challenged by the Arminians, whose style of churchmanship was very different. They already had some support in the chapter at York by the time of Matthew's death, when his generation of godly conforming protestants no longer commanded the heights of the established church, and he was followed as archbishop by a succession of Arminian churchmen in George Mountaine, Samuel Harsnett, and Richard Neile. By the time of his death the theological and pastoral priorities that had shaped Matthew's career, and indeed that of the church he served, were being replaced among the hierarchy by those of a younger generation of clerics whose attachment to Calvinism was much less strong, but Matthew's own care in the exercise of his office and of the patronage that it bestowed played no small part in ensuring that the churchmanship he represented continued to be attractive to a significant portion of both the parochial clergy and the substantial laity of the northern province in the decades following his death. That could not have been said of the archdiocese at the time of his arrival in those parts in 1583. 
Matthew and his wife, Frances, had five children, three of whom survived infancy -- Toby and John, who also became a Catholic, and Samuel, who died in 1601 while still a student at Peterhouse, Cambridge. Both Toby and John were great disappointments to their father, who in his will recalled the large sums he had spent on them -- $14,000 in the case of Toby. He bequeathed to each simple tokens of plate worth 20 marks. Perhaps surprisingly, Matthew left no money for public charitable purposes, giving the rest of his estate to the care of his widow, who died on 8 May 1629, 'relying with all confidence upon her care and prudence' (Borth. Inst., probate register 40, fol. 195). Most notable among his effects was the library of 3000 volumes, valued at $600 and said to be the largest private library in England. In addition to his books, Matthew was reputed to have several manuscript pieces at his death and these seem to have passed to Henry Wickham, a canon of the minster and his wife's nephew, eventually coming into the possession of Archbishop John Sharp, but all that survives is an eighteenth-century copy of his preaching diary. The inventory of his Yorkshire residences, whose contents were valued at over $3000, reveal a lifestyle in which hospitality played no small part, and Matthew was as much famed for this as for his preaching by contemporaries. Indeed his eloquence was central to both activities and he was celebrated for his puns, fine examples of which were known as 'Tobys' among his circle in Yorkshire. 
Both preaching and hospitality were prominent features of the epitaph on Matthew's fine classical monument placed in York Minster. The monument was largely destroyed by fire in 1829, but an engraving was published in Francis Drake's 'Eboracum' (1736) where the inscription is also recorded. All that survives is the much restored effigy, now placed on the north side of the lady chapel. Matthew's portraits reveal him as a small man with a thin face, and not the commanding presence described by contemporaries, thus perhaps providing further evidence for the power of his oratory. He died at his residence at Cawood on 29 March 1628 and was buried in York Minster. 


@@@@@


doc= 18343


Matthew, Sir Toby (1577-1655), writer and courtier, was born at Salisbury on 3 October 1577, the first son of Tobie Matthew (1544?-1628), later archbishop of York, and Frances, 'nee' Barlow (died 1629) ['see 'Matthew, Frances], widow of Matthew Parker, son of the former archbishop of Canterbury. On 13 March 1590 he matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, where his father was dean; he graduated BA on 5 June 1594 and proceeded MA on 5 July 1597. He was selected to act in 1595 in a 'device' presented in the queen's presence for which Francis Bacon wrote the dialogue, which was the beginning of their lifelong friendship (Sutherland, 36). In 1598 he went to France to visit one of the Throckmortons of Coughton, but after returning was seriously ill. He showed an interest in politics after being admitted to Gray's Inn on 15 May 1599, and was returned as MP for the Cornish borough of Newport iuxta Launceston in the last Elizabethan parliament in 1601. He fell ill again 'with a long shrewd fit of his old infirmitie' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.144) in May 1602 but later, with Bacon's help, he was returned as MP for St Albans for the first session of parliament in 1604. Before it adjourned his political interest waned for, on 3 July 1604, he secured a licence to travel for three years. 
In April 1605 Matthew went to The Hague to visit his friend Dudley Carleton and then to Italy, contrary to the wishes of his parents. In Florence he associated with resident English Catholics and then proceeded to Rome, where he often met the superior of the English Jesuits, Robert Persons, as well as Cardinal Pinelli. After he returned to Paris in January 1607 a spy informed William Trumbull: 'Mr. Mathew is neither fish nor flesh. He discourseth with priests and hath been at the mass, but of late also at my lord ambassador's sermons' ('Downshire MSS', 2.223). Matthew returned to Florence to attend the Lenten services and, as he wrote later: 'purposed fully to become a Roman Catholic' (Matthew, 'True historicall relation', 156). In late March at the church of the Annunciata a Jesuit preacher, Lelio Ptolemei, performed the traditional rites. 
Upon his arrival in England, by September 1607, Matthew's conversion created a stir in the established church. There were planned serious polemical debates with Launcelot Andrews, bishop of Chichester, Alberico Gentili, professor of civil law at Oxford, Sir Christopher Perkins, and Thomas Morton, bishop of Chester. A tenacious adversary was George Bancroft, archbishop of Canterbury, who after many conferences sent him to the Fleet prison when he refused the oath of allegiance. In February 1608 Matthew was brought before the privy council, where the earl of Salisbury informed him that he was granted six weeks 'to set his affaires in order and depart the realme' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.255). 
In May 1608 Matthew settled down in Florence, where he regaled Dudley Carleton with news that he was in 'an excellent coole terrene' and able to 'eate good melons, drinke wholesome wines, looke upon excellent devout pictures [and] heer choyse musique' (Stoye, 79). However, a hostile visitor, Henry Wotton, ambassador to Venice, disdained him as a leader of 'a certain knot of bastard Catholiques... who with pleasantness of conversation and force of example do much harm' in their hospitality to English visitors (ibid., 76-7). In 1609 Matthew arrived in Madrid, where he joined the entourage of Sir Robert Shirley, who was commissioned by the shah of Persia to negotiate with Philip III a military alliance against the Turkish empire. Since the Spanish court was not ready to do this Shirley left for England but Matthew remained to visit famous sites and read the works of Spanish theologians. Meanwhile, between 1608 and 1614 he was engaged in a major poetical endeavour in which he composed a series of twenty-nine sonnets of high quality, of which eighteen reflected his private devotion to the saints and eleven others some very personal experiences. Apparently he dedicated these poems to George Gage ('c'.1582-1638), his close companion of these years. 
Early in 1611 Matthew returned to Paris, where an informant wrote to Trumbull that he 'appeared stronger in his perversion and professing popery than ever', but in such poor health that 'at first we could scarce know him' ('Downshire MSS', 3.12). In 1612 Gage and Matthew began a two-year tour of Italy, after arriving in Venice by way of Basel and Milan, so that they did not reach Rome until a long itinerary was completed. Here on 20 May 1614 Cardinal Bellarmine ordained Matthew to the priesthood. Later they visited Leipzig, where in March 1615 Matthew confided to the second earl of Arundel that he was there 'to satisfy my curiosity about these northern parts' and had concluded 'they are to be held little less than barbarous' ('Downshire MSS', 5.154). Afterwards they purchased paintings in Flanders on behalf of Dudley Carleton. By this time the burden of travel and poor health forced Matthew to seek help from friends so as to return to England, although there were unfriendly voices at court such as Archbishop Abbot's, who advised Trumbull: 'I have little to say in favour of... Toby Matthew' and gave a long list of grievances ('Downshire MSS', 5.532). Finally, after his parents appealed to Buckingham to influence King James, he was allowed to return to England in May 1617. 
Once again Matthew made an extended visit to Bacon at Gorhambury and as a token of gratitude he translated into Italian a collection of thirty-eight essays by the lord chancellor. In London his first book was printed in 1618 entitled 'Saggi morali... con un altro trato della sapienza', with a dedication to Cosimo (II) de' Medici, grand duke of Tuscany, wherein Matthew praised the high quality of Bacon's learning. More startling to the court was the news that Matthew had guided the conversion of Frances Brydges, second wife of the earl of Exeter, as Chamberlain lamented: 'I heard yt now two several wayes that he hath perverted her to become a Romane Catholique' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.128). Possibly this incident led King James to insist that Matthew take the oath of allegiance which, after his refusal, once again meant exile. 
This, however, proved to be a productive period of writing, since between early 1619 and late 1621 Matthew published six books at St Omer: four translations of well-known Italian and Spanish writers; a fifth was his well-received version of Augustine's 'Confessions'; and a sixth was his original essay in English on the value of private devotions entitled 'The Widdowes Mite'. Published in 1619 this last work included his new poem of 32 pages named 'A Prayer for the Love of God'. The 'Confessions', which appeared in 1620, was the first English translation of Augustine's thirteen books in a text of 800 pages with a long preface and annotations added to help the reader. However, while his prose was elegant Matthew's accuracy was questioned at times, since he had to rely on a flawed Latin text. For his translations from the Italian he chose two unusual biographies: in 1619 he published the text, first translated by 'a dying Freind' of Vicenzo Puccini's 'Suor Maria Magdalena de Patsi', to which he added marginal notes and a preface ('The Life of the Holy and Venerable Mother', sig. *3'r'); and then in 1620 he brought out a version of Giuseppe Biondi's narrative of the repentance of a former bandit called 'A Relation of the Death of... Troilo Savelli'. He commented in the preface that this latter story had already been translated into other languages, 'though not at all into ours, nor yet as carefully into others... as I could have wished' (sig. A1'r'- 'v'). He also chose two leading Spanish writers. In 1620 appeared the 'Audi filia: a Rich Cabinet of Spiritual Jewels' by Juan de Avila, a famous preacher of the Counter-Reformation in Andalusia, who completed this popular tract in 1557. In 1621 Matthew published twenty chapters from the 'Imitacion de Cristo' by Francisco Arias, a Jesuit professor of theology in Cordoba, entitled 'The Judge... how Christ... is to Judge the World'. Meanwhile, when Matthew learned that Bacon had suffered his political downfall Matthew wrote such an eloquent letter to him that Bacon commented that it seemed 'as if it had been in old gold' and it may have been a source for his essay 'De amicitia' ('Letters and Life of Francis Bacon', 7.344-5). 
Although Matthew never received a diplomatic post officially he was asked twice to assist in major negotiations. In 1621 Lord John Digby asked him to be his principal agent and assistant in Vienna when he was ambassador-extraordinary to the court of Ferdinand II to discuss the palatinate crisis. Pleased with Matthew's skill in languages and political advice Digby later pleaded successfully on his behalf with King James and he was allowed to return to England by December. Back in London, Matthew completed 'Of the Love of our Only Lord', a new treatise, which was printed at St Omer in 1622 and contained ninety-six short chapters of his reflections. Of far greater satisfaction to him was the king's reception of him, which Chamberlain duly reported in September 1622. Apparently when Matthew went to visit his father he carried a message that the archbishop should 'now receve him to favour upon his reconciling to his Majestie' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.452). Soon after this Matthew, sensing a danger to the Catholic community, revealed to the duke of Buckingham in a letter of 29 September 1622 that there was a plan by certain 'indiscreet English Catholiques' to ask the pope to appoint five titular bishops for England that 'will much offend the kinge and many poore Catholiques... will yet smart for it in the end' (BL, Harley MS 1581, fol. 82). After his disclosure the plan did not proceed further. 
Matthew's second unofficial diplomatic mission began in spring 1623 when the king asked him to assist Prince Charles and Buckingham in Madrid in the treaty to be negotiated for the marriage to the infanta. As a skilled linguist and friend of Gondomar and Digby, Matthew performed many services but an unusual one was his appeal in a letter to young Philip IV that protested the rigorous terms imposed on the prince by the 'theologi'. He warned that they would break up the treaty and leave the English Catholics 'in a lamentable state' unless their terms were reduced. He advised Philip 'to give the Prince some foot of ground... as whereupon he may with honour stay and perfect the treaty' ('Cabala', 303). Upon Matthew's return to England, King James conferred a knighthood upon him at Royston on 20 October 1623, which was an extraordinary gesture to a Catholic priest. Matthew later wrote, in 1640, that 'a visible marke of particular honour' had been given to him by James, 'at the instance of his Majestie that now is' which implied that this was a reward for unusual services in Madrid (Matthew, 'True historicall relation', 158). 
Matthew's father, having been dismayed at his conversion, now arranged a meeting of Sir Toby with several clergymen who sought to alter his views. Matthew, however, remained unmoved and wrote later: 'It was strange to see how they wrung their hands and their whites of eyes were turned up and their devout sighes were sent abroad' (Matthew, 'True historicall relation', 158). In November 1623 he had the role of chief mourner, 'clad in black cotton or bayes down to the heeles' in the obsequies at the Spanish embassy for the Catholics killed accidentally while attending mass at Blackfriars ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.525). 
Early in the reign of Charles I, Matthew produced a new series of translations. He began with thirty-four chapters from 'The Practice of Perfection and Christian Virtues' (1609) by the well-known Castilian Jesuit, Alfonso Rodriguez (died 1616), which appeared as 'A Treatise of Mentall Prayer' in 1627. Later at St Omer he published in 1630 his second English tract anonymously entitled: 'Charity Mistaken, with the Want Thereof Catholikes are Unjustly Charged', which has been mistakenly attributed to Matthew Wilson. There followed in the same year translations of two different sections of the 'Imitacion de Cristo' of Francisco Arias: 'A Treatise of Patience' and 'A Treatise of Benignity'. Finally, in 1632 he published two other translations from Alfonso Rodriguez: 'The Two First Treatises of... Christian Perfection' and 'A Treatise of Humilitie', that had forty chapters. 
After 1630 Matthew appeared more frequently at the court, as can be seen in his letters to Henry Vane the elder, ambassador to The Hague, where details abound of royal favourites and of his own visits to the residences of notables. He especially admired the countess of Carlisle: 'the highest creature Sir Tobie has known in all kinds of excellency' ('CSP dom.', '1631-3', 437). In June 1634 the marquis de Fontenay-Mareuil, an ambassador who had observed Matthew for three years, considered him 'the cleverest of the Catholic seminarists [secular clergy], a man of parts, active, influential, an excellent linguist', who was able to 'penetrate cabinets' and 'insinuate himself into all kinds of affairs and knows the temper and purpose of those who govern the kingdom, especially of the lord treasurer [Richard Weston]'. However, his sole ambition was 'the relief and benefit of the Catholics' (von Ranke, 5.448). 
The marquis was correct in noting that Matthew had won the confidence of several influential courtiers. He accompanied Wentworth to Ireland for a brief period in 1633 and was a welcome visitor to Lord Cottington, Sir Francis Windebank, and Sir John Winter, secretary to Henrietta Maria. He was also regularly seen in the company of Endymion Porter, Kenelm Digby, and Walter Montague, who were prominent in Henrietta's court at Somerset House. However, many others resented Matthew's presence as the Newport affair in November 1637 proved. The conversion of Anne Boteler, wife of Mountjoy Blount, earl of Newport, enraged her husband, who publicly denounced Matthew and Walter Montague to King Charles for covertly influencing her. The anger of the king against the two men was so intense, although neither had been in fact involved, that Secretary Conway remarked: 'don Tobiah was in such perplexitie that I find he will make a very ill man to be a martyr' (Albion, 213 n. 2). It was later established that Anne Boteler had been influenced by her Catholic sister, her aunt, the duchess of Buckingham, and George Con, the papal representative to Henrietta. 
During the first bishops' war in 1639 a political squib circulated that identified Matthew as an 'abettor' of a popish plot at the court, who encouraged Winter and Queen Marie de' Medici to make a 'laughing stock' of England ('CSP dom.', '1639-40', 246). Later, another squib claimed that Winter and Matthew were 'court papists' who were informants of Rome (Hibbard, 126). In September 1640 a spy named Habernfeld disclosed to William Boswell, ambassador at The Hague, fanciful details of a 'Jesuitical' plot to murder King Charles and Archbishop Laud, wherein Toby Matthew had a leading role, since he was 'a most vigilant man of the chief heads... never quiet, always in action and perpetual motion' (ibid., 158-9). This sensational fiction led some radicals in the Long Parliament to denounce Matthew and others as treasonous 'court papists' who endangered the kingdom (ibid., 190-92). By 17 March 1641 both houses had voted that Matthew and two others must be banned from the precincts of the court at once. With imprisonment also likely Matthew sought protection at Raglan Castle with the earl of Worcester, but left England for the last time in April 1641. 
Escaping the turmoil of the civil war Matthew found safety in the English Jesuit college at Ghent, where he started to write again. In 1642 there appeared 'The Flaming Hart: the Life of the Glorious S. Teresa', a translation of Teresa of Avila's autobiography. His preface noted that although it was translated earlier, that author 'seemed to have lost a little of the puritie of his owne Englishe tongue' but 'not to have acquired enough of the Spanish', and so a new text was called for (Allison and Rogers, 2.154). In 1647 his last book appeared in Louvain entitled 'A Missive of Consolation... to the Catholics of England'. In eleven chapters he offered personal reflections from the 'Bible' and philosophy on the virtue of patience which Catholics needed during their current trials. In the same year he made his last will in which he gave a major part of his personal estate to the English Jesuits and entrusted his manuscripts to Walter Montague. After a grave illness he died unmarried on 13 October 1655 at the English Jesuit college in Ghent and was buried in its chapel's crypt with his coffin inscribed: 'Hic jacet D. Tobias Matthaei'. 
Matthew left unpublished two completed books. On 8 September 1640 he had finished a 234-page manuscript entitled: 'A true historicall relation of the conversion of Sir Tobie Matthew', which remained in private hands until lost in the nineteenth century. Before its disappearance W. C. Neligan selected excerpts at random for a limited private edition that has been used in later printings. In 1651 Matthew had made ready for publication 'The life of Lady Lucy Knatchbull', who died in 1629 after an exemplary career as abbess of the Benedictine convent in Ghent. This text survived unpublished until 1931 when it was edited by David Knowles. 
Toby Matthew's career at the early Stuart court was notable for its striking reverses. Under James I he was exiled twice (1608-17 and 1619-22) but in 1623 was reconciled and knighted. Under Charles I he gained many influential friends but in 1641 suffered demonization as a court papist in parliament and fled to Flanders. His achievement as a writer, despite exile and illness, was significant indeed. His superior linguistic skills enabled him to prepare polished English versions of not only classic autobiographies by Augustine and Teresa, but also translations of two unusual biographies by Italian authors and nine recent treatises on spirituality by leading Spanish contemporaries. He also produced four personal essays of pastoral advice for his beleaguered fellow Catholics in Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 18344


Matthews, Henry (1789-1828), judge and traveller, fifth son of John Matthews (d. 1826), physician and poet, of Belmont, Herefordshire, and Elizabeth (1756/7-1823), daughter of Arthur Ellis of Marcle, Herefordshire, was born in Hereford on 21 June 1789. He was educated at Eton College and at King's College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1812 and MA in 1815. He was a fellow of King's from 1811 until 1821. In 1817 ill health forced him to the continent, where he travelled widely, and on returning he published 'The Diary of an Invalid' (1820), which enjoyed considerable success. In 1821 he was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn, and married Emma (died 1861), daughter of William Blount, of Orleton Manor, Herefordshire, in August; they had a son and two daughters. In November 1821 he was appointed advocate fiscal of Ceylon, an office he held until his promotion in October 1827 to the judicial bench. His contemporaries thought him a fine advocate: quick-thinking and accurate but not unfeeling or unduly harsh. He died in Ceylon on 20 May 1828 and was buried in St Peter's Church, Colombo. His only son, Henry Matthews, was made Viscount Llandaff in 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 18345


Matthews, John (bap. 1755, d. 1826), physician and poet, baptized on 30 October 1755 at Linton, Herefordshire, was the only surviving child of William Matthews (died 1799), of Burton in Linton, and his wife, Jane (died 1768), daughter of Philip Hoskyns of Bernithen Court, Herefordshire. He matriculated from Merton College, Oxford, on 14 February 1772, and graduated BA in 1778, MA in 1779, MB in 1781, and MD in 1782. On 30 September 1782 he was a candidate for the Royal College of Physicians, and a year later he became a fellow. On 9 November 1778, Matthews married at Marcle, Herefordshire, Elizabeth (1756/7-1823), daughter and heir of Arthur Ellis. They had eight sons and six daughters. Among their sons were Charles Skynner Matthews, the friend of Byron, and Henry Matthews (1789-1828), author of 'The Diary of an Invalid' (1820). 
From 20 April 1781 to his resignation in 1783 Matthews was the physician to St George's Hospital, London, and in 1784 he delivered the Goulstonian lectures. He then retired from medicine and returned to Herefordshire. He acquired the estate of Clehonger, near Hereford, and by 1790 had built there the mansion of Belmont. A sapling planted by him in 1788 became famous as Colonel Matthews's oak, and was marked by a cast-iron tablet. For the rest of his life Matthews took a leading part in county affairs. He acted as mayor of Hereford in 1793, and was senior alderman and magistrate for twenty years. He was also colonel of the first regiment of Hereford militia, chairman of quarter sessions, and member of parliament for the county from 31 March 1803 to 1806. 
John Matthews was a man of versatile disposition and generous tastes, which frequently left him at a financial loss. His works were published anonymously. The best-known of them is 'Eloisa en dishabille: being a new version of that lady's celebrated epistle to Abelard, done into familiar English metre by a lounger' (1780), which is a parody of Pope's 'Eloisa to Abelard'. It was reprinted in 1801, and again in 1822, when the bookseller put on the title-page that it was 'ascribed to [Richard] Porson'. Matthews wrote other verse, some of it described as 'contemptible' by contemporaries, and much of it badly received. He died after a long illness at Belmont on 15 January 1826. A monument to his memory was placed in the south aisle of Clehonger church. 


@@@@@


doc= 18346


Mathews, Lemuel (b. 1643/4, d. in or before 1725), Church of Ireland clergyman, was one of at least three sons of Marmaduke Matthews (c.1606-c.1683), clergyman and ejected minister, and his wife, whose name is unknown. On 25 May 1661, aged seventeen, he matriculated from Lincoln College, Oxford. That same year, at the visitation of the diocese of Connor, he was recorded as being a schoolmaster at Carrickfergus, co. Antrim. Some time before 1667 Mathews received the degree of MA and later became DD. It is unknown which universities granted either of these degrees. After leaving Oxford he became chaplain to Jeremy Taylor, bishop of Down, Connor, and Dromore. In 1666 Taylor presented him to the vicarage of Glenavy and the prebendary of Cairncastle in the diocese of Connor. However it appears from the diocesan succession lists that Mathews did not gain possession of the vicarage of Glenavy until 1680. In 1667 he published in honour of his recently deceased patron 'A Pandarique Elegie'. 
Mathews was installed as vicar of Aghagallon, Magherameske, and Aghalee on 7 October 1668. On 2 November 1674 he was appointed archdeacon of Down. In 1689 he was one of the many Anglican clergymen in Ireland attainted by James II's Irish parliament. However, in 1690 he was made vicar-general of the united diocese of Down and Connor. In December 1693 a royal commission was established to inquire into and correct various abuses alleged to have been committed by the bishop and clergy of the diocese of Down and Connor. In February 1694 this commission held an extraordinary visitation at Lisburn, and subsequently Mathews was deprived of all his livings. The articles against Mathews claimed that he had not resided on his livings for the past twenty years but instead had lived at Lisburn. Furthermore he was accused of neglecting his cures by not endowing vicars on any of his livings. Instead it was said that he had appointed unqualified and unfit curates to his parishes and only paid them an insufficient allowance. Other charges brought against him included the maladministration of diocesan business, such as altering the visitation books, issuing blank licences for marriage, and presenting unfit candidates for ordination. Mathews was also charged with simony. It was alleged that he paid $200 for the archdeaconry of Connor to be granted to his nephew, Philip Mathews. 
The day following his deprivation Mathews left for London to appeal against the judgment. For the next ten years he attempted to lodge an appeal against the verdict in the courts. He addressed a series of appeals to lord chancellors Cox, Freeman, and Phipps, the House of Commons, and the House of Lords, both in Ireland and England, King William, and Queen Anne, as well as to one of the commissioners, the bishop of Derry, William King. He set out his arguments in a series of pamphlets which appear to have been issued privately. In 1703 he printed 'The Proceedings Against Lemuel Mathews, at the Regal Visitation Held at Lisburn 1693' and 'A Letter to the Right Reverend William Lord Bishop of Derry'. 'Demonstrations that the lord chancellor of Ireland is bound by the statute and common law and also by his commission and oath as chancellor to grant a commission of delegates to Archdeacon Mathews upon his appeal' was published in 1704, as was 'The Argument for a Commission of Delegates upon his Appeal and Querel of Nullities'. That same year he published his petition, 'To the Honourable the Commons of England in Parliament Assembled', and 'Notes on the case and petition of Archdeacon Mathews to the honourable the Commons of England in parliament assembled'. In his defence Mathews claimed that he was not obliged to reside on his cures but as archdeacon was required to reside at Lisburn, where the cathedral of the diocese was located. Moreover he claimed that as chancellor he was excused from parochial residence by law. He also claimed that the charges against him were general and non-specific, and that the proceedings against him were hasty, speedy, and arbitrary in manner. He argued that the commission had overreached its terms of reference and likened it to the high commission, as there appeared to be no form of redress. He also implied that the real reason for his deprivation was that he prosecuted the rights of the church too vigorously. Furthermore he believed that there was a conspiracy against him formulated by members of the laity who felt threatened by his activities. 
Nevertheless Mathews's repeated attempts to bring his appeal to court were unsuccessful for over a decade. However, in 1705 the Irish House of Lords was receptive to his petition and addressed the lord lieutenant, the duke of Ormond, to intercede with Queen Anne on Mathews's behalf. The lord lieutenant replied that he would take care of it in the most effectual manner he could. Subsequently it seems that Mathews was restored to the prebendary of Cairncastle but not to his other livings. It is not clear exactly when Mathews died. It would appear that he survived into the second decade of the eighteenth century as he continued to petition for the archdeaconry in the 1710s. Moreover, Mathews's successor to the prebend of Cairncastle was collated as late as 1720. Furthermore Walter Harris claimed in 1745 that his death occurred some twenty years previously. On this basis it seems that Mathews, who is not known to have married, died in or before 1725. 


@@@@@


doc= 18347


Matthews, Marmaduke (c.1606-c.1683), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Swansea, the son either of Matthew Matthews of Swansea, or of Matthew Jones of Nydfywch, Llangyfelach, and his wife, Mary. On 20 February 1624 he matriculated from All Souls College, Oxford, graduating BA on 25 February 1625 and proceeding MA on 5 July 1627; a possible brother, Edward Matthews, son of Matthew Jones of Swansea, matriculated at Oxford on 11 July 1634, aged nineteen. Nothing is known of Matthews's life in the decade after his graduation, but in 1636 he was recorded as vicar of Penmain in the Gower by William Laud, then bishop of St David's, in his annual account, which noted further that Matthews expressed puritan sentiments against Laud's wishes and that he was 'preaching against the keeping of all holy-days, with divers other, as fond or profane opinions' (LPL, MS 943). As a consequence, he was 'inhibited' by the bishop, and proceedings were initiated against him in the court of high commission. 
Some time between 1636 and 1638 Matthews emigrated to New England to avoid censure by the state and church authorities. He was perhaps among the 'severall Welsh Gentlemen of Good note... procured' by Edward Winslow of the Pilgrim Church at Plymouth, Massachusetts, to assist Robert Blinman of Gloucester after his acceptance of the pastorate of the branch church at Mansfield in 1639 (Dodd, 30). After a visit to the West Indies, Matthews returned to New England and became a 'teaching-elder' of the church at Maldon. Here he became involved in a dispute about a fast, and as a result his election as a full freeman of the colony was deferred. In 1640 he was appointed as the pastor of Yarmouth, Massachusetts, and in 1649 was a minister at Hull, south of Boston, but again he became embroiled in a dispute with local magistrates. Although Matthews received the support of his congregation, he was denied the privilege of preaching 'untill he hath given satisfaction to the Elders that heard the errors chardged and proved against him' (ibid., 31). He subsequently moved on to two other pastorates within the Boston area. 
During his time in New England, 'whilst I yet lived in the midst of wild men, and wild Beasts, amongst the Lords Exiles', Matthews and his family were sustained financially, as he later acknowledged, by Colonel Philip Jones (Dodd, 35). In 1654 they returned to Wales at Jones's behest, and through his patronage Matthews was appointed in 1655 minister of St John's, Swansea, 'a good living' (Calamy, 2.732). He became a member of the committee for the approbation of public preachers (the 'triers') in Wales, and in 1656 signed the 'Humble Representation and Address from South Wales' to Oliver Cromwell. During the late 1650s there is evidence that he was opposed by radical Quaker preachers, of whom he was described as 'an envious persecutor', for instance pinching Alice Birkett so hard that 'her blood came forth' and threatening to 'box' Robert Coldbeach of Swansea (Gawler, 27). For many years, as Matthews explained in 'The Messiah Magnified by the Mouthes of Babes in America' (1659), he had been trying to convert the ungodly, 'to see their teares trickle, their lips quiver, their hue to change, their joynts to tremble; and to observe... their weeping for the piercing of Christ' (Matthews, 8). That year he also published 'The Rending Church Member Regularly Call'd Back'. 
In 1662 Matthews was ejected, but in spite of financial constraints, 'preached, by the connivance of the magistrates, in a little chapel at the end of the town' (Palmer, 3.504). His 'The Reconciling Remonstrance' appeared in 1670, and on 12 April 1672 he obtained a licence, under the declaration of indulgence, to preach as an Independent. He conducted services at his house in Swansea and was described as 'a very pious and zealous man, who went about to instruct the people from house to house', receiving a mixed reception (Calamy, 2.732). In his later years he 'lived above the world', and was supported by the 'children of God, his own children, and the children of the world' (ibid.). His sons (whose mother's name is unknown) -- Manasseh, Mordecai, and Lemuel ['see 'Mathews, Lemuel] -- also became nonconformist ministers, but later conformed to the established church. Matthews died in Swansea about 1683. 


@@@@@


doc= 18348


Matthews, (John) Thomas (1805-1889), clown, was born on 17 October 1805. As a boy he entered the office of the 'Independent Whig' (later known, after other changes, as the 'Sunday Times'). The stage was popular with those associated with the paper, and after working on it for four years Matthews sought a career in the theatre. He established a reputation at various London theatres during the late 1820s, including the Olympic and Sadler's Wells, and became known as the last of the old-fashioned singing clowns. He had the proper instruction for this pursuit, having learned the trade from Joseph Grimaldi. He went on to appear at Covent Garden for a series of seasons in such pantomimes as 'Puss in Boots', 'Old Mother Hubbard', 'Whittington and his Cat', and 'Grammar Gurton'. At Drury Lane, where he filled the post of principal clown for nearly forty years, he created a sensation by imitating Duvernay in 'La cachuca'. Having been engaged by W. C. Macready in July 1837 at $3 per week, he reappeared at Covent Garden, where he brought out 'Fair Rosamond' and danced a mock bayadere dance. He visited Scotland and played in Edinburgh and other provincial cities, then returned to the Olympic in Nelson Lee's pantomime 'Riddle me, Riddle me Ree'. He crossed the channel in August 1843 to oversee and appear in 'Arlequin' at the Theatre des Varietes in Paris. Theophile Gautier spoke of his costume in this production as a 'rare fantasy' and praised his parody of the 'Cachuca' ('L'histoire de l'Art Dramatique en France', 1859, 2.260). 
Matthews alternated between pantomime and dance when he appeared in a ballet at Vauxhall Gardens alongside the Payne family and Rosina Wright and carried on playing the clown at Drury Lane, the Adelphi, and Covent Garden. On the provincial circuit he was familiarly known for singing such songs as 'Hot Codlings', 'Tippitywitchet', and 'The Life of a Clown', the last of which was composed for him by Michael Balfe. His last appearance was at Drury Lane in 1865 in 'Hop o' my Thumb'. In that year, after forty years in the theatre, Matthews retired and soon afterwards moved to Brighton, where he spent the last two decades of his life. In the months leading up to his death he was bedridden, but was assisted by his daughter, Clara Matilda Lawrence. He died at his home, 28 Walpole Terrace, on 4 March 1889, and was buried in Brighton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 18349


Matthiessen, Augustus (1831-1870), chemist and physicist, was born in London on 2 January 1831, the son of William Matthiessen and his wife, Jane. His father, who died while Matthiessen was quite young, was a merchant. A paralytic seizure during infancy produced a permanent and severe twitching of Matthiessen's right hand. Notwithstanding the taste for chemistry which he displayed as a boy, on leaving school he was sent by his guardians to learn farming with a Dorset farmer, as being the only occupation suited to his condition. He then considered a business career, but became interested in the new subject of agricultural chemistry and, on coming of age, went to the University of Giessen in Germany, where he studied under Will and H. L. Buff, and graduated PhD. From 1853 he spent nearly four years under Professor Robert Wilhelm Bunsen at Heidelberg, and by means of his electrolytic method isolated the metals calcium and strontium in the pure state for the first time. In Professor Kirchhoff's physics laboratory he studied the electrical conductivity of these new metals and of many others, publishing his results in Germany and England. He returned to London in 1857 with a thorough knowledge of the methods of physics and of inorganic chemistry, and studied organic chemistry with Professor August Wilhelm von Hofmann at the Royal College of Chemistry. Work done under Hofmann's direction led the way to Matthiessen's considerable researches on the opium alkaloids of later years. Matthiessen soon fitted up his own laboratory at 1 Torrington Place, where he began a series of investigations on the physical properties of pure metals and alloys which has become a classic. 
The preparation of copper of the greatest conductivity had great practical importance in connection with telegraphy; Matthiessen showed that the discrepancies of previous observations and the low conductivity of certain supposedly pure samples were due to the presence of minute quantities of other elements. He embodied his results in a report presented in 1860 to the government committee appointed to inquire into the subject, and in a paper with M. Holzmann, published in the 'Philosophical Transactions'. In 1861 he became a fellow, and afterwards a member, of the council of the Royal Society. In 1862 he was elected to the lectureship on chemistry at St Mary's Hospital, a post which he held until 1868. During 1862-5 he undertook important voluntary work for the British Association committee on electrical standards, and in the latter year constructed for them ten standards of resistance and several copies of these, made from various metals and alloys. 
In 1867 Matthiessen summarized his work on the constitution of alloys in a lecture given before the Chemical Society. Besides demonstrating that tin, lead, zinc, and cadmium behaved differently in alloys from other metals, he made two general suggestions of great importance: first, that small amounts of impurity in a metal do not produce the remarkable changes in physical properties by their direct action, but by causing the metal with which they are alloyed to assume an allotropic, or different, form; and second, that in most cases alloys must be considered as 'solidified solutions'. In 1868 Matthiessen was appointed lecturer on chemistry at St Bartholomew's Hospital in conjunction with Professor William Odling; on the latter's resignation in 1870 he became sole lecturer. In 1869 he was awarded a royal medal by the Royal Society 'for his researches on the electric and other physical and chemical properties of metals and their alloys'. Besides his other work he had a large private practice as a consulting chemist, and from January 1869 to June 1870 was one of the editors of the 'Philosophical Magazine'. In 1870 he was appointed examiner to the University of London. On 6 October of the same year he committed suicide in his laboratory at St Bartholomew's. He left a note saying that he had been charged with indecent assault on a boy, and that he was innocent, but could not bear to face the proceedings. At the time of his death he was a member of a committee inquiring into the chemical nature of pure cast iron, and he was also experimenting with the construction of a standard pyrometer. 
Matthiessen was a prolific author of scientific papers. His researches showed remarkable acuteness, experimental skill, and conscientiousness, together with a distinct power of generalization. That with his physical defect he should have accomplished so much delicate and exact work is a proof of rare perseverance and his contemporaries thought highly of him. 


@@@@@


doc= 18350


Mattocks, Isabella (1746-1826), actress and singer, was born at 3 Lambeth Street, Whitechapel, London, in 1746, and baptized at St Mary, Whitechapel, on 25 May, the daughter of Lewis Hallam (1714?-1756?) and his wife, Sarah Hallam (d. 1774) ['see under 'Hallam, Lewis]. Both her parents were actors, as were her father's sister Ann and his brothers, Adam, George, and William. Her paternal grandfather, the actor Thomas Hallam, had been accidentally killed by Charles Macklin during a green-room quarrel in 1735, and she was also related to the family of John Rich, the Covent Garden patentee. Her father was in financial difficulties by the early 1750s and in 1752 went to North America as manager of a group of English actors, taking his wife and three older children but leaving Isabella in the care of his sister Ann and her second husband, the actor John Barrington. 
Isabella believed that she took her first acting role at the age of four and a half, when she appeared as the Parish Girl in John Gay's 'The What D'Ye Call It' for her uncle's benefit at Covent Garden. This must have been on 1 April 1752, when she was nearly six and was so small that a gentleman commented 'he could hear her very well, but he could not see her without a glass' ('Biographical sketch of Mrs Mattocks', 323). The Barringtons were members of the Covent Garden company, and during the next six years the young Isabella made a few appearances there each season, acting the Parish Girl, the Duke of York in 'Richard III', and various pages, including Robin in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor'. She later wrote that her aunt and uncle became parents to her in the tenderest sense of the word, and gave her 'an expensive and a finished education' (ibid.). It seems likely that she was at school from 1758 to 1762, when she made very few stage appearances. During the summer season at Jacob's Wells Theatre, Bristol, in 1760 she sang and played the guitar at her aunt's benefit. In April 1761, at Ann Barrington's Covent Garden benefit, she played her first adult role, Juliet, with her aunt as Lady Capulet, and for the Barringtons' joint benefit the following year she again acted Juliet and also sang Laura in William Boyce's musical afterpiece 'The Chaplet'. 
In autumn 1762 the sixteen-year-old Isabella joined the Covent Garden company, where she remained, apart from the two seasons 1784-5 and 1785-6, for the next forty-six years. She took eighteen roles during her first season alone, in both comedies and tragedies, including Dorinda in George Farquhar's 'The Stratagem', Miss Hoyden in John Vanbrugh's 'The Relapse', and Serina in Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan'. 'Having an exceeding good natural voice, improved by a knowledge of music' ('Theatrical Biography', 2.13), she created many roles in English operas and musical afterpieces, beginning with Lucinda, the lively second heroine of Isaac Bickerstaff's 'Love in a Village' (8 December 1762). During the next two seasons Miss Hallam sang Nysa in Kane O'Hara's burletta 'Midas', Sylvia in the nineteen-year-old Charles Dibdin's 'The Shepherd's Artifice', and Theodosia in Bickerstaff's 'The Maid of the Mill'. The handsome tenor George Mattocks ['see below'] was the young male lead in these pieces, and he and Isabella were married in the first few days of April 1765, during the Easter break. They reputedly eloped to France because the Barringtons opposed the match, possibly for economic reasons or because of George Mattocks's earlier love affairs. However, friendly relations with her aunt and uncle were soon re-established. Mr and Mrs Mattocks sang together in Bickerstaff's 'Lionel and Clarissa' (25 February 1768), O'Hara's 'The Golden Pippin' (6 February 1773), Sheridan's 'The Duenna' (21 November 1775), and other less long-lasting works. Isabella Mattocks also sang in Gloucester at the 1769 Three Choirs meeting and in some of the Covent Garden oratorio seasons. Although successful as Ophelia, she was considered too short and not beautiful enough for leading parts in tragedy. Younger sopranos took over her musical roles in the early 1780s, but by then she was firmly established as a favourite comic actress, specializing in pert servant girls, vulgar citizens' wives, old maids, and gossips. 
Both George and Isabella Mattocks were rumoured to have indulged in short-lived infidelities, she with the actor Robert Bensley (1741/2?-1817) and he with Elizabeth (died 1780), the wife of the theatre musician John Abraham Fisher, but their marriage endured. She accompanied her husband to the various summer theatres of which he was the manager and, after the death of John Barrington in January 1773, her aunt acted with them in the Liverpool summer seasons for the next few years. Isabella Mattocks left Covent Garden in June 1784 to work full-time with her husband in his Liverpool and Manchester theatres, but after two years of an over-ambitious programme he was ruined financially. In autumn 1786 she returned to Covent Garden, where, until her retirement twenty-two years later, she played numerous parts every season in revivals and new plays. John O'Keeffe, who called her 'sweet Mrs Mattocks' (O'Keeffe, 2.411), wrote Betty Blackberry for her in 'The Farmer' (1787) and Mrs Cockletop in 'Modern Antiques' (1791). She created Widow Warren in Thomas Holcroft's 'The Road to Ruin' (1792), Mrs Placid in Elizabeth Inchbald's 'Every One has his Fault' (1793), Lady Sarah Savage in Frederick Reynolds's 'The Rage!' (1794), and Miss Lucretia Mac Tab in George Colman the younger's 'The Poor Gentleman' (1801), where she was said to have worn the dress that was made for her when she first played Lucinda in 'Love in a Village'. She was much admired as a speaker of epilogues, particularly those written for her by Miles Peter Andrews. Some critics found her manner and facial expressions too vulgar, and James Boaden commented: 'in her private manners she was rather refined, and had some of the graceful ease of the old school. On the stage she had a taste for the greatest 'breadth' of effect, and excited probably as much laughter as [William] Lewis himself. (Boaden, 'Kemble', 1.84)' In the summer she generally joined her husband in Liverpool, where he was treasurer of the theatre, and she acted in his last benefit there in 1802, two years before his death. Mrs Mattocks gave her final performance at Covent Garden on 7 June 1808, playing Flora in Susannah Centlivre's 'The Wonder', 'with all the freshness and spirit of a woman in her prime' and speaking a simple, affecting farewell, 'having changed her stage dress for the lady-like attire of black silk' ('Mrs Mattocks', 430). 
George and Isabella Mattocks had one daughter, Isabella Anne ('b'. 31 October 1773), 'a very accomplished young lady' ('GM', 1st ser., 74, 1804, 884), who married a barrister, Nathaniel Huson, in 1801. Huson died ten years later, leaving his wife and young daughter unprovided for. John Genest records that Mrs Mattocks, who had given her son-in-law power of attorney, discovered after his death that he had sold her $6000 of stocks and spent the money. On 24 May 1813 a benefit performance was organized for her at the King's Theatre, which raised the impressive sum of $1092. Isabella Mattocks died at her home in High Street, Kensington, on 25 June 1826 and was buried on 1 July at St Mary Abbots, Kensington. 


Mattocks remained at Covent Garden for another twenty-seven years, performing incidental music, taking a few speaking parts, and creating the tenor young-lead roles in many English operas and afterpieces. He was the first Young Meadows in 'Love in a Village' (1762), Apollo in 'Midas' (1764), Lord Aimworth in 'The Maid of the Mill' (1765), Lionel in 'Lionel and Clarissa' (1768), Tom in Joseph Reed's 'Tom Jones' (1769), Ferdinand in 'The Duenna' (1775), and Don Fernando in O'Keeffe's 'The Castle of Andalusia' (1782). 'The Smithfield Rosciad' found 'Miss Molly Mattocks' (p. 18) soft and affected and 'Theatrical Biography' complained of his stiffness and want of feeling, but 'Thespis' praised his 'tender strain, so delicately clear' (Kelly, 2.24) and John Bernard found him, 'with the exception of [Joseph] Vernon, the best acting vocalist I ever saw' (Bernard, 1.3). 
Bernard, a stage-struck boy in Portsmouth in the late 1760s, admired Mattocks walking to morning rehearsal in a gold-laced suit of green and white: 'such a swan-like dignity about him, such a fascinating glitter, and 'stand-out-of-the-way' consequence; his feather floating, his skirts flying, his sword dangling, and his stick thumping, as he proceeded' (Bernard, 1.3). Mattocks acted in the provinces every summer, and in 1771 he became a lessee of the Portsmouth theatre. The following year, in partnership with the Covent Garden prompter Joseph Younger, he leased the newly built Theatre Royal at Liverpool. Then, in 1775, he and Younger also took a twenty-one-year lease on the Manchester theatre, and in 1779 Mattocks was involved with a theatre in Birmingham. Isabella Mattocks made summer appearances at these theatres, returning to Liverpool many times, while George Mattocks concentrated on management. In London he gradually lost his roles to younger singers, and he left Covent Garden at the end of the 1783-4 season, moving with his wife to the north of England. Younger died in September 1784, leaving Mattocks in sole charge of the Liverpool and Manchester theatres. He established a strong company, with an impressive array of visiting stars in the summer, but after two years had sustained heavy losses, so that his wife was forced to return to Covent Garden. The bankruptcy of George Mattocks of Liverpool was announced in May 1788. After his financial ruin he apparently worked for Major John Halliday, a gentleman 'well known through the kingdom for theatrical talent, which he frequently displayed for charitable purposes' ('GM', 1st ser., 64, 1794, 672). Following Halliday's death in 1794, Mattocks was employed by the theatre manager Francis Aickin in a position variously described as treasurer and stage manager, working at Liverpool, at both Edinburgh and Liverpool in 1801-2, and, after Aickin lost the Liverpool lease in early 1803, solely in Edinburgh. George Mattocks died at his lodgings in 5 Shakespeare Square, Edinburgh, on 14 August 1804. His funeral at the Calton burying-ground on 18 August was attended by 'a number of respectable friends and all the theatrical persons in Edinburgh' ('GM', 1st ser., 74, 1804, 884). 


@@@@@


doc= 18351


Maturin, Charles Robert (1780-1824), writer and Church of England clergyman, was born in Dublin on 25 September 1780 (not 1782 as asserted by many previous sources), the last of the six children of William Maturin and his wife, Fidelia, 'nee' Watson. On his father's side Maturin came from a long line of protestant clergymen, beginning with Gabriel Maturin, a Huguenot pastor who emigrated to Ireland in the seventeenth century. Pierre Maturin, Gabriel's son, had been dean of Killala, while Gabriel James Maturin, Charles Robert's grandfather, succeeded Swift in the deanery of St Patrick's. William Maturin departed from family tradition by entering government service where he enjoyed a lucrative career in the Post Office until November 1809 when he was dismissed on a false charge of malversation. Charles Robert Maturin entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1795. An active member of the Historical Society, he was awarded a scholarship before graduating with a BA in 1800. On 7 October 1803 Maturin married Henrietta Kingsbury, a society beauty famous for her musical accomplishments, who was also from a clerical family. According to one memoir, Maturin was 'the most uxorious man living' ('New Monthly Magazine', 11, 1819, 167). The Maturins had four children. The eldest, William Maturin (1806-1887), was also a clergyman, while the second son, Edward (1812-1881), emigrated to the USA where he was a professor of Greek and an author. 
Maturin was ordained and appointed to the curacy of Loughrea, co. Galway, in 1803, returning to Dublin in 1804 as the curate of St Peter's. Although it was a highly fashionable church, the curacy carried a meagre stipend of $80 to $90 per annum. At his own expense Maturin published a Gothic romance, 'The Fatal Revenge' (1807), under the 'vulgar and 'merely' Irish sounding' pseudonym of Dennis Jasper Murphy ('Dublin and London Magazine', 2, 1826, 248), followed by 'The Wild Irish Boy' (1808). His father's dismissal from the Post Office in 1809 increased the financial pressure on Maturin. In that year he rented a house in York Street where he remained until his death, supplementing his income by tutoring students for entrance to Trinity. Maturin sold the copyright of his next romance, 'The Milesian Chief' (1812), to Colburn for $80. In 1810 Sir Walter Scott momentously reviewed 'The Fatal Revenge' in the May issue of the 'Quarterly'. Scott singled out Maturin's work from the 'flat imitations' of Radcliffe, remarking that the evidently youthful author was talented, though wayward. He advised him to seek professional advice, which Maturin did by writing to Scott himself in 1812. Thereafter Scott guided Maturin, doing him innumerable favours, frequently interceding on his behalf, and, on at least one occasion, sending him money ($50 in 1813). The resulting correspondence is the single best source of information about Maturin, with the bulk of it about 'Bertram'. Maturin wrote his play in 1814, inspired by Richard Lalor Sheil's 'Adelaide', which had enjoyed a great success at the Crow Street Theatre, Dublin. Worried that a Dublin production would injure his clerical reputation, Maturin turned to Scott for advice. Scott judiciously excised a scene in which the devil appears bodily on stage, and, after first trying John Kemble, sent the play to Byron, then on the newly formed management committee for Drury Lane. Byron was entranced by the text, and gave it to George Lamb, who also could not put it down. The play opened on 9 May 1816, and was a sensation, running to over forty performances. Murray published the amended version of the play, and even at the exorbitant price of 4's'. 6died it went through at least seven editions within the year. Maturin received $350 from Murray, and $500 for his share of the box office. He visited London for a week in late May 1816 after the committee invited him to the capital to be lionized, but was intensely disappointed by his reception. It was Maturin's only trip outside Ireland. 

'Bertram''s brilliant success brought out the flamboyant side of Maturin's character: 'tradesmen of all hues and callings were ordered to York-Street, to paint, furnish, and decorate, with suitable taste and splendour, the mansion of the great new-born tragic poet of Ireland' ('Irish Quarterly Review', 2, 1852, 161). According to the memoirs he was extremely fond of dancing, especially the quadrille, which he prided himself in doing 'certainly better than any other divine of the Established Church' (ibid., 162). He would even darken 'his drawing-room window', and indulge his passion 'in the day-time' ('Dublin University Magazine', 46, 1855, 448). He was a notorious dandy: 'tall, slender, but well proportioned, and on the whole, a good figure, which he took care to display in a well made slack coat, tight buttoned, and some odd light-coloured stocking-web pantaloons, surmounted in winter by a coat of prodigious dimensions, gracefully thrown on, so as not to obscure the symmetry it affected to protect. ('Irish Quarterly Review', 2, 1852, 160)' Among other eccentricities, he was renowned for pasting 'a wafer on his forehead, whenever he felt the 'estro' of composition coming on him' as a sign to his family that he was not to be interrupted ('Dublin University Magazine', 46, 1855, 448). 
Maturin's next two plays flopped. 'Manuel' (1817) was written for Kean, who wanted the opportunity to act the part of 'aged distress', given that 'King Lear' was off-limits owing to sensitivities regarding George III's mental condition. Unfortunately, Kean lost interest after the first night, and sabotaged the play by walking through his part. 'Fredolfo' (1819) also failed, while Maturin's final play, 'Osmyn', was mislaid by Kean. Maturin could not sustain these failures as after 1810 he was in terrible debt having stood security for a 'friend' whose affairs collapsed. Meanwhile his clerical career had also stalled, owing, Maturin thought, to his novel-writing. After he had broken cover with 'Bertram', an article appeared in the 'Morning Chronicle' alleging his job was at risk, but enough fuss was caused to force Maturin's superiors into denying the rumours. Subsequent evidence suggests that the true reason for Maturin's lack of preferment was the eccentricity of his character and religious views. Maturin styled himself a 'high Calvinist', in opposition to the low Calvinism of nonconformist Methodism that was then popular in Dublin, but it was a stance which irritated the church hierarchy who largely held Arminian views. 
One memoir claims that as a writer Maturin was apt unconsciously to adopt 'something of the last book he read' ('New Monthly Magazine and Literary Journal', 19, 1827, 404); the reviews commented on his undisciplined originality. Both views have substance. 'The Fatal Revenge' reveals Maturin's early love of Ann Radcliffe and Matthew Lewis while adding a new complexity to the genre through its exuberant proliferation of plot. 'The Wild Irish Boy' and 'The Milesian Chief', though inspired by the examples of Maria Edgeworth and Lady Morgan, make significant contributions to the emerging genre of the Irish national tale. The early works up to and including 'Bertram' reflect their Irish obsessions in often coded references to usurpation and dispossession. 'Women, or, Pour and contre' (1818) marks a departure: the plot is once again based upon the story of a dispossessed and scattered family, but its main theme is salvation through faith. A satire on Methodism and depictions of Dublin undergraduate life are among its novelties. 
In 1820 Maturin published his masterpiece, 'Melmoth the Wanderer', the book for which he is chiefly remembered. On the surface it is a return to the Gothic mode of his first romance, where he initially displayed his talent for 'darkening the gloomy, and of deepening the sad; of painting life in the extremes, and representing those struggles of passion when the soul trembles on the verge of the unlawful and the unhallowed' (preface, 'The Milesian Chief', 1812, iv-v). However, it too carries on the religious preoccupations of his last phase. With its Chinese box structure of tales within tales, and its obsessive elaboration of its Faustian theme, it constitutes a high-water mark in the Gothic genre. On the surface its most salient quality is its anti-Catholic paranoia, but its real achievement is to invest the form with a new, poetic intensity. On the whole 'Melmoth' was given a hostile reception on the grounds that Maturin impersonated his wicked characters with immoral eloquence. Maturin's last novel, 'The Albigenses' (1824), was modelled on 'Ivanhoe', and is a historical romance based on the Cathar rebellion, a pre-Reformation setting apparently chosen for its uncontroversial nature. Maturin received $510 for the copyright, $10 more than for 'Melmoth'. In 1819 Constable published Maturin's sermons which were a reasonable success, going into a second edition in 1821. His final work was 'Five Sermons on the Errours of the Roman Catholic Church' (1824). Despite its title, it was equally aimed at the errors of nonconformity. Preached at St Peter's, the sermons were a sensation. 
Maturin died on 30 October 1824 at his home, 37 York Street, Dublin, and was buried in the churchyard of St Peter's. The 'Morning Register' reported that the 'immediate cause of Mr. Maturin's death was... his having taken a lotion, containing a large quantity of laudanum, in mistake for medicine intended for the stomach' (Henderson, 215). Although it has been much repeated, there is no evidence to substantiate the claim. This is typical of Maturin's biographical record; the numerous memoirs that appeared after his death had a tendency to recycle anecdotes and rumours, a situation worsened by the destruction of the Irish Public Record Office in 1922, and by Maturin's own mythopoeic tendencies. He had been particularly fond of relating different versions of the family history, and was notoriously evasive and inconsistent about his own financial difficulties in the early years of the nineteenth century. However, according to his widow, at his death he left his family 'totally unprovided for' ('Correspondence of... Scott and... Maturin', 103). Scott agreed to publish Maturin's collected works, with a biography, but was prevented by his own financial difficulties. There was a rumour that William Maturin was so humiliated by his father's authorial reputation that he burnt all his papers, although this is contradicted by William's assiduity in promoting 'Osmyn' after its discovery in 1825. The play was produced in Dublin for the benefit of the Maturin family by R. L. Sheil and W. C. Macready in 1830. Maturin was widely known throughout Europe, but especially in France, where all the major works were quickly translated. Balzac thought 'Melmoth' 'the greatest creation of one of the greatest geniuses of Europe'. Maturin's descendant Oscar Wilde honoured Maturin by adopting the sobriquet Sebastian Melmoth on his release from Reading gaol. 


@@@@@


doc= 18352


Maturin, William (1806-1887), Church of Ireland clergyman, was born in Dublin, the son of Charles Robert Maturin (1780-1824), novelist and dramatist, and Henrietta, daughter of Thomas Kingsbury of Dublin. He was educated at Dublin University, where he graduated BA in 1831 and accumulated the degrees of MA, BD, and DD in 1866. He took holy orders in 1831 and after serving for some years a curacy in Dublin, Maturin was presented in 1844 by William Le Fanu to the perpetual curacy of Grangegorman, co. Dublin. On 17 August of the preceding year he had married Jane Cooke, eldest daughter of Captain Arthur Beatty; they had two sons, including Basil William Maturin. 
A high-churchman formed by the movement of Pusey and Newman, Maturin was unreserved in the expression of his views. This led Archbishop Richard Whately and others to neglect him, so that, in spite of his great talents as a preacher and his devotion to parochial details, Maturin remained all his life merely incumbent of All Saints, Grangegorman, with an income never exceeding $100 a year, though about 1860 his friends obtained for him the additional post of librarian in Archbishop Marsh's Library, Dublin. In England he would have been considered a moderate churchman, but to the Irish evangelicals he always appeared as little removed from a Roman Catholic and to a large section in Dublin his name was a term of theological reproach. After speaking of the great qualities of his sermons, Sir John Pentland Mahaffy, the provost of Trinity College, Dublin, wrote of Maturin: 'He was a grim Dantesque sort of man, with deep affection for his family and friends hidden under a severe exterior. He was perfectly certain and clear in his views -- a quality rare in modern preachers and fatal to modern preaching; his simple and burning words reflected the zeal of his spirit... I saw him crush by his fiery words a mob of young men, who came to disturb his service on Protestant principles, and drive them cowed and slinking from his church. ('Athenaeum', 54)' Besides several pamphlets, single sermons, and addresses to the Irish Church Society, Maturin wrote 'Six Lectures on the Events of Holy Week' (1860) and 'The Blessedness of the Dead in Christ', a collection of twenty-four of his sermons (1888). He died at 11 Alma Road, Seapoint, co. Dublin, on 30 June 1887, and after lying in state for four days before the altar was buried in All Saints' Church, Grangegorman, on 4 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 18353


Maty, Matthew (1718-1776), physician and librarian, was born on 17 May 1718 at Montfoort, 6 miles south-west of Utrecht, the eldest child of Paul Maty (1681-1773), French protestant minister, and his wife, Jeanne Crottier Desmarets. Both parents were Huguenots. Before moving to the Netherlands the Maty family, which originated in the Ile de Re, had lived in Dauphine, and the Crottier Desmarets family of Amsterdam were refugees from Lyons. After being educated at Utrecht University, Paul Maty was ordained in 1709 and became minister to the Huguenots of Montfoort. As the congregation there was small he moved to The Hague, where he became a teacher. A book on the Trinity which he published in 1729 led to his excommunication by synods at Kampen and The Hague in 1730. Having failed to establish himself in England he moved to Leiden in 1731 and joined the remonstrant church. After Matthew moved to London, Paul lived for much of the rest of his life with him, and died in Matthew's apartments in the British Museum on 21 March 1773. 
Matthew Maty entered Leiden University on 31 March 1732 and studied philosophy and medicine; he submitted dissertations in both fields which gained him doctorates in 1740. He was taught medicine by the noted physician Herman Boerhaave (1668-1738), of whom he published a life in 1747. A French version of Maty's philosophical dissertation (entitled 'Essai sur l'usage') was published at Utrecht in 1741. 
At the end of 1740 Maty and his parents moved to London, where he practised medicine and became a contributor to the 'Bibliotheque Britannique' (The Hague, 1732-47) and the 'Bibliotheque raisonnee des ouvrages des savans de l'Europe' (Amsterdam, 1728-53). He became known in London literary circles as a result of frequenting various coffee houses, and made the acquaintance of notable figures in the medical world, such as Dr Richard Mead (whose life Maty wrote in 1755, expanded from an article in the 'Journal Britannique' of 1754) and Sir John Pringle. Both of these supported his election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1751. As a foreigner he had only a 'bishop's licence' to practise medicine, and in 1765 he was summonsed by the Royal College of Physicians for illegal practice, but in the same year he became a licentiate of the college. He was an enthusiast for inoculation against smallpox (the precursor of Jenner's method of vaccination) and campaigned vigorously against those who opposed it. 
Despite his father's excommunication by the Huguenot church, Maty remained in touch with the Huguenot community in England, and chose his wife from among them. She was Elizabeth de Boisragon (died 1750), the daughter of Louis Chevalleau, seigneur de Boisragon. They were married on 13 December 1743 in Spring Gardens Chapel, one of several small chapels belonging to the Huguenot church of the Savoy. Their first child, Henri Paul (later Paul Henry Maty (1744-1787), was born on 18 December 1744, followed by two daughters, Louise ('b'. September 1746) and Anne Gillette ('b'. March 1748). Elizabeth died in August 1750, soon after the birth in July of their third daughter, Susanne, who also died in August. On 25 July 1752 Maty married again; his second wife was Mary Dolon de Ners (died 1802) of Marylebone, also of Huguenot descent, the daughter of Peter Anthony Dolon, seigneur de Ners. In July 1753 a daughter, Jeanne, and in June 1756 a son, James, were born; both probably died young. In March 1758 Maty's last child, Marthe, was born. 
As the 'Bibliotheque Britannique', which reviewed British publications for the benefit of readers on the continent, came to an end in 1747, Maty decided to found a successor. This was entitled 'Journal Britannique', and the first number appeared in 1750. For the first two years it appeared each month, but from 1752 issues were published every two months. Written in French and published at The Hague, it was successful in publicizing British books and periodicals abroad, and soon gained an authoritative reputation. Many of the contributions were written by Maty himself, but he also enlisted other writers, such as Thomas Birch, John Jortin, Jean Des Champs, and Cesar de Missy. 
An article by Maty in the July-August 1755 issue on Samuel Johnson's 'Dictionary' was probably the cause of Johnson's dislike of Maty. When it was suggested in 1756 that Maty should assist Johnson with a new review which he planned (but which never appeared), the latter's comment was: 'the little black dog! I'd throw him into the Thames' (Boswell, 'Life', 1.284). The review had implied that after dedicating the 'plan' (1747) of the 'Dictionary' to Lord Chesterfield, Johnson had failed to make acknowledgement to Chesterfield when the 'Dictionary' was published in 1755. This ignored the fact that Johnson had, in a letter dated 7 February 1755, criticized Chesterfield's failure to assist him while the work was in preparation. Maty had been on friendly terms with Chesterfield at least since 1745, when he had dedicated to him (as M.L.C.D.C., that is Monsieur le comte de Chesterfield) his 'Ode sur la rebellion de MDCCXLV en Ecosse', in which Maty expressed his hatred of Catholicism. He and Chesterfield were both friends of the mathematician Abraham de Moivre (1667-1754), whose life Maty wrote in the 'Journal Britannique' of September-October 1755, and subsequently published separately. 
At the end of 1755 Maty gave up the 'Journal Britannique', which was rather unsuccessfully continued for two more years by De Mauve, of whom little is known. In 1756 he applied for a post in the British Museum (founded in 1753) to the earl of Hardwicke, who as lord chancellor was one of the three principal trustees responsible for appointments to the new institution. Maty's successful application was supported by Hardwicke's eldest son, Lord Royston, and by John Jortin, later archdeacon of London (whose son in 1776 married Maty's daughter Louise). Jortin said that if Maty were appointed he would be naturalized (apparently he never was), and that he had been elected a foreign member of the Academy of Sciences of Berlin in January 1755. He was elected in 1759 to the Royal Society of Haarlem and in 1765 to the Royal Academy of Sciences of Sweden. 
In June 1756 Maty was appointed one of the three original under-librarians (keepers) of the British Museum and put in charge of the department containing Sir Hans Sloane's books and manuscripts. After the gift of the Royal Library by George II in 1757, Maty took charge of its printed books, as well as the Sloane printed books and those of Major Arthur Edwards, while his colleague Charles Morton dealt with the Sloane, Cotton, Harley, and Royal manuscripts. From 1758 these two departments were called the departments of printed books and manuscripts respectively. The third department, named the department of natural and artificial productions, contained Sloane's collections of natural history and antiquities. 
Maty drew up a scheme in 1757 for arranging the books of the Royal Library, and in 1759 for improving the (very restricted) way in which the public were admitted to view the museum. Both these proposals were approved by the trustees. In 1759 he also put forward a scheme for cataloguing the printed books, but this work did not reach fruition until the 1780s. In 1765, when James Empson, the first under-librarian of the department of natural and artificial productions, died, Maty took charge of that department, relinquishing the control of the department of printed books to Samuel Harper. Maty was particularly interested in the collections of birds and made considerable additions to them. 
In 1760 Maty withdrew his application for the post of secretary of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce because of the disapproval of his patron, Lord Royston, but in 1762 he became assistant secretary for foreign correspondence to the Royal Society. In 1765 he succeeded his friend Thomas Birch (whose executor he became when Birch died in 1766), one of the original trustees of the British Museum, as joint secretary of the Royal Society. In 1750, when visiting the continent, he called on Voltaire, in 1763 he showed Casanova round the British Museum, and in 1766 he met Rousseau. In 1758 he helped Edward Gibbon with his first publication ('Essai sur l'etude de la litterature'), which appeared in 1761. 
Despite his poor health Maty was promoted in July 1772 to succeed Gowin Knight, the first principal librarian (director) of the British Museum. He did not achieve a great deal during his four-year tenure of this post, but he was more energetic than his notoriously idle successor, Charles Morton. Some important acquisitions of books were made during Maty's principal keepership at the sales of the libraries of James West, Anthony Askew, and Cesar de Missy, and of duplicates from the library at Dresden. 
After the death of the earl of Chesterfield in 1773, Maty wrote a biography of him which was published as the preface to Chesterfield's 'Miscellaneous Works' (1777). This work was seen through the press by John Obadiah Justamond, a surgeon who was the assistant librarian of the department of natural and artificial productions, and who married Maty's daughter Anne Gillette in 1767. In 1774 Maty became physician to the hospital for French protestants. 
Maty died at the British Museum on 2 August 1776. In accordance with his instructions a post-mortem examination was carried out by two fellows of the Royal Society, whose report, published in the 'Philosophical Transactions', indicates that he died of cancer of the intestine. He was buried on 8 August at St Anne's, Soho, and a sermon in memory of him was preached on 11 August at Oxendon Street Chapel by the minister there, his nephew Charles Peter Layard, later dean of Bristol. In his will Maty instructed his sole executor, his wife, Mary, who died in 1802, to burn all his papers. He left to the British Museum his portrait, painted when he was aged about thirty-six by the Swiss painter Barthelemy Dupan, and busts of Petrarch, Boccaccio, Machiavelli, and Dante. In 1762 he had presented to the museum seventeen busts which he had bought at Roubiliac's sale after the sculptor's death that year; Maty and Roubiliac had both worshipped at the Huguenot chapel in Spring Gardens. Maty's son Paul Henry Maty, who was on the staff of the British Museum from 1776 until his death in 1787, sold his father's library in 1777. 


@@@@@


doc= 18354


Maty, Paul Henry (1744-1787), librarian, was born in London on 18 December 1744 and baptized on 18 January 1745 at St Anne's, Soho, the son of Matthew Maty (1718-1776), librarian, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1750), daughter of Louis Chevalleau of Sieur de Boisragon. He was admitted a king's scholar at St Peter's College, Westminster, in 1758 before being elected in 1763 to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he became a scholar in 1764 and graduated BA in 1767 and MA in 1770. In 1768 he was nominated to one of the travelling fellowships of his college and spent three years abroad. In 1774 he was appointed chaplain to David Murray, Lord Stormont (afterwards second earl of Mansfield), British ambassador at the court of France. He vacated his fellowship in 1775 on his marriage to Harriet, daughter of Joseph Clerke of Wethersfield, Essex, and sister of Captain Charles Clerke, the successor to Captain Cook. 
In 1776 doubts conceived as to the consistency of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', especially on such points as predestination and original sin, compelled Maty to refrain from seeking any further ecclesiastical appointment; his scruples, which approached Arianism, were printed in full in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for October 1777. Fortunately for him, however, on his father's death in July 1776 he obtained the situation of an assistant librarian in the British Museum, and in 1782 was promoted to under-librarian in the department of natural history and antiquities. He also succeeded in 1776 to the foreign secretaryship of the Royal Society, of which he had been elected a member on 13 February 1772, and on 30 November 1778, on the withdrawal of Dr Horsley, he became principal secretary. In this capacity he became involved in the controversy which raged about the virtual dismissal of Dr Charles Hutton from the post of foreign secretary by the president, Sir Joseph Banks. In a heated pamphlet entitled 'An history of the instances of exclusion from the Royal Society... with strictures on the formation of the council and other instances of the despotism of Sir Joseph Banks, the present president' (1784), he proposed that, as a means of protest against the president, the dissatisfied minority should form themselves into a solid phalanx, and resolutely oppose any admission whatsoever into the society, a proposal from which all moderate supporters of Maty's views dissented. Having tried in vain to organize a regular opposition under Horsley, Maty resigned his office on 25 March 1784, and his resignation helped to restore peace to the society. As secretary and an officer of the society he had not been expected to take any active part in the debate but here, as elsewhere, 'his vivacity outran his judgment'. The loss of his office involved a reduction of income which he could not afford, and he was only moderately successful in making up the difference by giving instruction in classical and modern languages. 
In January 1782 Maty had started the 'New Review', which aimed at giving a bird's-eye view of foreign publications, and he continued this considerable work, almost unassisted, until September 1786. Edward Gibbon referred to him as the 'angry son' who wielded the rod of criticism with but little of 'the tenderness and reluctance' of his father. Horace Walpole spoke of some of his comments as 'pert and foolish' (cf. 'Canons of Criticism Extracted from the Beauties of Maty's Review'). 
Three works by Maty appeared in 1787: 'A General Index to the Philosophical Transactions, vols. i-lxx', which he had prepared some time previously; a translation of the work by Riesbeck as 'Travels through Germany, in a Series of Letters' (3 vols.); and a French translation of the text to the first volume of 'Gemmae Marlburienses', to accompany the Latin of James Bryant. A volume of sermons delivered in the Ambassador's Chapel at Paris during the years 1774, 1775, and 1776, in which some of Secker's sermons were inadvertently included, was published in 1788. Bishop Horsley, Dean Layard, and Dr Southgate were responsible for the editing. 
Maty died of asthma on 16 January 1787 and was buried in Bunhill Fields, London. His wife and only son were left in poor circumstances. Charles Burney undertook the expense of educating Maty's son, but he died while at school. 


@@@@@


doc= 18355


Mauclerk, Walter (d. 1248), bishop of Carlisle, is of unknown origins. It seems unlikely that he is to be identified with a namesake, one of the sons of Girard Mauclerk, active in property transactions at Rouen as early as 1176. He may, however, have been related to another royal clerk, Robert Mauclerk, resident in Nottinghamshire, who in the 1190s had joined the rebellion of John, count of Mortain, the future king. Walter Mauclerk is recorded in 1218 holding the prebend of Woodborough in Southwell Minster, and at a later date as witness to various private charters in Nottinghamshire -- facts which go some way towards substantiating a family link to the north midlands. One of his brothers, named 'R', was prior of Reading Abbey, and in 1214 was proposed unsuccessfully as the king's candidate for the vacant abbey of St Albans. A kinsman or nephew, named Ralph Barri, possibly related to the Barry family of Nottinghamshire, was appointed prior of Carlisle during Mauclerk's years as bishop, and another (unnamed) nephew was seeking promotion to the church of Arnold near Nottingham about the year 1220. Mauclerk's father, named 'W', was later commemorated in gifts to the bishopric of Carlisle. 
First recorded in 1202, as a clerk of King John's chamber involved in financial operations in Normandy, Mauclerk was promoted in the same year to the Norman church of Falaise, but following the collapse of Plantagenet power in France, joined the king in England, where John presented him to the churches of Croxton in Lincolnshire, Kings Nympton in Devon, and Mylor in Cornwall, and to a vicarage at Catfield in Norfolk, a pension in the diocese of Exeter, and the custody of various royal wards. As the king's confidential clerk, he was appointed joint sheriff of Lincolnshire in 1204, and travelled to Ireland in 1210 and 1212, perhaps in the following of John de Gray (died 1214), royal justiciar in Ireland and bishop of Norwich, two of whose charters were witnessed by Mauclerk. In 1214 he accompanied the English military expeditions to Poitou and Flanders, and in the following year he appeared at the papal court, reporting to the king on the progress made by the rival baronial and royal proctors in Rome. In 1218 he served as royal justice in eyre in the east midlands, and in 1221 he was promoted to joint custody of the king's forests throughout England. From 1222 he served as sheriff of Cumberland, and it may be that it was the local power acquired with this office that enabled him, in the following year, to stake a claim to the vacant see of Carlisle. He was elected bishop by the canons of Carlisle before 22 August 1223, when his election received royal assent. Shortly afterwards the king appointed a proctor to oppose Mauclerk before the papal court, suggesting a temporary breach in relations; but on 26 October royal assent was renewed and Mauclerk's temporalities were restored. 
As bishop of Carlisle, Mauclerk remained active in royal service. In 1225 he spent several months in Cologne, attempting to arrange a marriage between Henry III and a daughter of the duke of Austria, a mission in which he claimed to have endured shipwreck and great hardship. While abroad he consecrated a shrine in the collegiate church of the Holy Apostles at Cologne. Two years later he was sent to Poitou, and in the same year he is said to have been engaged in fruitless attempts to persuade the knights of Normandy and Brittany to abandon their allegiance to the king of France. He served as constable of Newcastle in 1228, and in the same year was promoted to be treasurer of the king's exchequer, assuming office on about 13 November. In the summer of 1232, amid the upheaval brought about at court through the influence of Peter des Roches, bishop of Winchester (died 1238), Mauclerk received royal letters guaranteeing him life custody of the treasury, and of the castle and county of Carlisle, but despite this, he was deposed from office in January 1233, deprived of the manor of Melbourne, Derbyshire, which had also been guaranteed to him for life, and forced to fine $1000 to retain his other lands and liberties. Disgraced at court, he sought to go into exile overseas, but was detained by the king's bailiffs at Dover and roughly handled. The English bishops pronounced a sentence of excommunication against his assailants, and Mauclerk was allowed to retire to Flanders, from where he appears to have issued a sentence of his own, placing the cathedral and city of Carlisle under interdict. 
Mauclerk was reconciled to court in the following year and, with the fall of Peter des Roches, assumed a leading role in the king's council. In 1235 he headed an embassy to Flanders, charged with arranging a marriage between Henry III and a daughter of the count of Ponthieu. In 1236 he was restored to custody of Carlisle Castle, and two years later fined 600 marks a year to have the county of Westmorland and the heir of John de Vieuxpont in wardship. During the king's continental expedition of 1242-3 he served as one of the principal members of the regency council set to govern England, and over the next few years he was engaged in peace negotiations with Scotland, and in a lucrative trade in royal wardships. With papal licence, he resigned the see of Carlisle on 29 June 1246, in order to enter the Dominican order at Oxford, a move inspired by piety and by advancing age and decrepitude. None the less, as a former bishop he continued to exercise episcopal functions, being appointed by Robert Grosseteste, bishop of Lincoln (died 1253), to provide the blessing of newly elected heads of houses at Leicester and Godstow, and in May 1248 issuing an episcopal indulgence on behalf of the relics of Westminster Abbey. He died at Oxford on about 28 October 1248, leaving substantial benefactions to the Oxford Blackfriars. As bishop of Carlisle, he did much to improve the finances of his see, purchasing the soke of Horncastle in Lincolnshire together with numerous subsidiary liberties obtained through royal favour. In addition he obtained a life interest in the royal manor of Melbourne and the manor of Dalston in Cumberland as a gift from the crown. Most of this property, together with his houses in London and an estate at Salkeld, near Penrith, he bequeathed in perpetuity to the bishopric of Carlisle. Given his later contacts with the Dominican order, it is possible that it was Mauclerk who in 1233 helped to establish houses of Dominican and Franciscan friars in Carlisle. However, his chief talent appears to have lain in finance, rather than in scholarship or works of piety. 


@@@@@


doc= 18356


Maude, Thomas (1718-1798), poet and essayist, was born in Downing Street, London, in May 1718; he retained this family property and lived in it during visits to the capital throughout his life. A member of an established Yorkshire family, he may be the Thomas Maude, son of Edmund Maude, who was baptized at Otley, Yorkshire, on 8 May 1718. Maude entered the medical profession and in 1755 was appointed naval surgeon on board the 'Barfleur'. During this time he made the acquaintance of another surgeon-writer, Edward Ives. Maude performed duties in the squadron of Admiral John Byng, executed for neglect of duty in 1757. In 1765 Maude took up the position of steward of the Yorkshire estates of Harry Powlett, sixth duke of Bolton; Maude had given evidence for the duke when, as a young naval officer in 1755, he had been court-martialled. 
Maude combined his responsibilities with a career as a poet, achieving local and some metropolitan fame. His best-known poem was 'Wensleydale' (1772), a celebration of the picturesqueness of that particular Yorkshire dale; by 1816 the poem had reached a fourth edition. Maude's other long poems were in a similar vein: in conscious repetition, the subject matter of 'Verbeia' (1782) was Wharfedale and 'Viator' (1782) offered a description of a journey from London to Scarborough by way of York. Maude's poetry enabled him to demonstrate his fondness for the Yorkshire dales and his historical and topographical knowledge, but it was conventional and unmemorable. His last collection of verse was 'The Invitation' (1791), although he later published a volume of essays, 'The Reaper' (1797). 
An amiable man, Maude formed friendships with other scholarly figures of the day, including the mathematician George Gargrave, and William Paley who often visited Maude at the duke's seat, Bolton Hall, in Wensley. After the death of the duke (whom inevitably Maude had eulogized in private verses), Maude moved to his own property, Burley Hall, near Otley. Maude married Cordelia Charlton at St Mary Magdalen, Old Fish Street, London, on 6 August 1746; they had a son and two daughters. He died at his home in December 1798 and was buried in Wensley churchyard in January 1799. Lines from Goldsmith's 'Deserted Village' were inscribed on his tomb. 


@@@@@


doc= 18357


Maudslay, Henry (1771-1831), mechanical engineer, was born on 22 August 1771 at Woolwich, the son of Henry Maudslay 
(sometimes Maudsley; died 'c'.1780)
who was a native of Clapham in Yorkshire who had served in the Royal Artillery and had become a workman at the Woolwich arsenal. Maudslay's father died while he was a boy and this was probably why he himself began work in the arsenal at an early age. He demonstrated considerable skill at the forge and with machinery, and attracted the attention of the engineer and inventor Joseph Bramah (1748-1814). Bramah had already established a successful business as a manufacturer of water closets and locks, and he went on to make important innovations with hydraulic power for the operation of presses and other equipment. When Maudslay joined him in 1789 at the age of eighteen, Bramah was struggling to develop a new type of lock, and it was Maudslay who devised and constructed the machines capable of producing the precisely designed parts for this apparatus. He was probably also responsible for the self-tightening leather collar which made Bramah's hydraulic press work efficiently. In 1790 Maudslay married Sarah Tindale (1761/2-1828), who had been Bramah's housekeeper; and they had four sons and three daughters (see below). 
After nine years with Bramah, Maudslay had a dispute with his employer about his wages and left to set up business on his own in 1798, acquiring premises first in Wells Road, off Oxford Street, and then in Margaret Street, Marylebone. He was brought to the attention of Marc Isambard Brunel (1769-1849), who employed him to build the series of forty-four machines which Brunel had been commissioned to construct at Portsmouth Dockyard for the production in bulk of ships' blocks, indispensable items for the rigging of sails in the naval vessels of the time. A high degree of precision was necessary in manufacture in order to ensure complete interchangeability of parts, and his outstanding success in achieving this makes it possible to represent Maudslay, together with Brunel, as a very early exponent of what was, in effect, a system of mass production. 
The success of this enterprise brought Maudslay a wider reputation and brought increasing prosperity to his workshop. He took out patents (no. 2872 in 1805 and no. 3117 in 1808) for machinery to print patterns on cotton fabrics, and (no. 2948 in 1806, in conjunction with Bryan Donkin) for a differential motion for raising weights, which could be used for driving lathes. In 1807 he patented an arrangement of a steam engine, which became known as a 'table engine' (no. 3050) on account of the compact shape of the framework supporting the cylinder, and which became very popular in applications where only a small amount of power was required. With the expansion of his business, Maudslay sought larger premises and in 1810 he moved to Westminster Bridge Road, where the firm remained until the end of his life. He traded under the title of Henry Maudslay & Co. until he took into partnership Joshua Field and the firm became known as Maudslay, Field & Co. With the inclusion of Maudslay's sons it subsequently became Maudslay, Sons, and Field. 
The firm developed a strong interest in the expansion of steam navigation, producing a number of important improvements in the marine steam engine in the shape of the distinctive 'side-lever' engine, with the heavy overhead beam being replaced by levers alongside the engine, which lowered its centre of gravity and thus made it more suitable for ship propulsion. Maudslay also patented (no. 3538 in 1812, in conjunction with Robert Dickinson) a method of purifying sea water by blowing air through it, for use in marine engines. 
Maudslay's outstanding contribution to mechanical engineering, however, derives less from the goods that he produced than from the machine tools that he devised and the workmen he trained. His machine tools -- that is, the key machines such as lathes, planing machines, slotting and drilling machines, and suchlike, used for making other machines -- were of superlative quality, and provided models for all subsequent mechanical engineers. He realized at the outset of his career that only the very highest standards of precision and accuracy were adequate for the mass replication of the many new machines, such as textile machines and steam engines, which were revolutionizing methods of industrial production in Britain at the turn of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. By insisting on the use of high quality metal for all parts of his machines, by incorporating features such as the slide-rest as a matter of routine into his workshop lathes, and by standardizing the screws and other widely used parts in his workshops, Maudslay effected a transformation in the standards of engineering workshop practice. Above all, by determining exact standards of workmanship through constant application of his micrometer, capable of measuring to within a ten thousandth of an inch (so authoritative was the regime of this instrument that it is reputed to have been nicknamed 'the lord chancellor' in Maudslay's workshop), and by issuing his workmen with standard plane surfaces to test their own workmanship, Maudslay brought what had previously been the standards of scientific instrument makers into commonplace engineering routine. 
Regarding the workmen whom he trained, Maudslay is remarkable for the number of young men who served in his workshop before going on to secure great fame and distinction as engineers in their own right. Joseph Clements, Richard Roberts, James Nasmyth, Samuel Seaward, William Muir, and Joseph Whitworth all served some years with Maudslay and absorbed his passion for accuracy and high quality. They all, moreover, were accustomed to speak of him subsequently with affection and gratitude. The testimony of Nasmyth was typical in this respect: 'The indefatigable care which he took in inculcating and diffusing among his workmen, and mechanical men generally, sound ideas of practical knowledge, and refined views of construction, has rendered, and ever will continue to render, his name identified with all that is noble in the ambition of a lover of mechanical perfection. (Buchanan, 401)' Maudslay was a large man, standing 6 feet 2 inches tall, with, in Smiles's words, a jolly and good-natured temperament. Sarah Maudslay died on 29 March 1828, aged sixty-six, and Maudslay himself died, of complications following a chill, on 15 February 1831 at Lambeth and was buried in Woolwich churchyard. His sons continued the business and two of them made their mark on its development. The eldest son, 
Henry Maudslay's third son, who also had gifts as an engineer, was 


@@@@@


doc= 18358


Joseph Maudslay (1801-1861). Apprenticed as a shipbuilder to William Pitcher of Northfleet, he subsequently joined his father's engineering business at Lambeth and took a prominent position in it. An improved oscillating steam engine, which he patented in 1827, dispensed with a beam or slide-guides by allowing the cylinder to rock on trunnions with each stroke. He was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1833; and with Joshua Field he took out a patent in 1839 for a double-cylinder marine engine, which was widely adopted. He took a great interest in marine propulsion, and in 1841-2 the firm made the engine for 'Rattler', the first screw-propelled steamship built for the Admiralty, which was used for trials of various forms of screw propellers. He also invented the direct-acting annular cylinder screw engine, which formed the subject of a paper read by him to the Institution of Naval Architects in 1860. He died on 25 September 1861 at 21 Hyde Park Square, London. He was survived by his wife, Anna Maria Stamp Maudslay, and they had at least one son. 


@@@@@


doc= 18359


Thomas Henry Maudslay (1792-1864), demonstrated considerable commercial ability, which contributed to the progress of the firm both during and after his father's life. He gave evidence before a select committee of the House of Commons on steam navigation in 1831. Maudslay purchased an estate at Banstead Park, Surrey, was twice married and had at least one son. He died of heart disease at Knight's Hill, Norwood, London, on 23 April 1864 and was buried at Woolwich. 


@@@@@


doc= 18360


Mauduit, Israel (1708-1787), colonial official and political writer, was probably born at Bermondsey, London. He was descended from a French protestant family who settled at Exeter early in the seventeenth century. His father, Isaac Mauduit (1662/3-1718), the first dissenting minister at the chapel of St John's or King John's Court, Bermondsey, died on 8 April 1718, aged fifty-five; his mother, Elizabeth (1671/2-1713), died on 10 March 1713, aged forty-one. Mauduit was educated for the dissenting ministry at the Taunton Academy and he afterwards travelled abroad with several other young men of the same opinions. He preached for a time both at The Hague and in England. His career as a minister was brief, however, for soon he became a partner in a woollen draper's business in Lime Street, London, with his brother Jaspar, and with James Wright, Jaspar's son-in-law. They did an active business in Virginia, North America, and enjoyed substantial commercial success. On 13 June 1751 Mauduit was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. 
In 1763, with the influence of Lord Bute, Mauduit was appointed customer of Southampton. In this period he was also helping his brother, who had been appointed agent for Massachusetts Bay in the previous year but who now suffered from ill health. In this latter capacity Israel acted mainly as a contact man and lobbyist: he obtained for the province partial compensation for military expenditures during the Seven Year's War; he organized resistance to George Grenville's 'Sugar and Stamp Acts'; and he oversaw a bill through parliament for the promotion of whale fishing in Massachusetts. This bill reduced the duty on whale fins to a nominal figure, thereby putting colonial fishermen on a more equal footing with their British rivals. Once the 'Stamp Act' riots erupted in America, Mauduit gradually became an outspoken critic of colonial actions and a firm supporter of George III and, after 1770, the North ministry. Once his brother had been replaced as agent by Richard Jackson, Mauduit ceased to act formally for the colony, but he developed a friendship with and acted as private agent for Thomas Hutchinson, governor of Massachusetts from 1771. Mauduit successfully pleaded Hutchinson's case for a fixed salary out of customs revenues, and in 1774, together with the British solicitor-general, Alexander Wedderburn, he defended Hutchinson against Benjamin Franklin's ill-judged attempt to remove him as governor. 
Mauduit first rose to literary prominence as the author of a pamphlet entitled 'Considerations on the Present German War' (1760), a work that at once established his reputation as a leading polemicist. Selling over 5000 copies in five editions within a few months, 'Considerations' was a compelling attack on the policy of continental intervention promoted by William Pitt, and on the large army and expenditures that this required. The pamphlet stimulated and shaped a fervent press debate on British strategy that continued throughout the remainder of the war and turned many former supporters against the European conflict. Other pamphlets published by Mauduit included 'A letter to the Right Hon. Lord B -- y, being an enquiry into the merits of his defence of Minorca' (1757); 'Occasional Thoughts on the Present German War' (1761); and 'Some thoughts on the method of improving the advantage accruing to Great Britain from the northern colonies' (1765). He also published two histories, one of the New England colonies and one of Massachusetts Bay (both 1769), and he proposed 'The Case of the Dissenting Ministers' with a bill for their relief in 1772. During the American War of Independence he offered 'Remarks upon General Howe's account of his proceedings on Long Island in the 'Extraordinary Gazette' of Oct 10, 1776' (1776) and 'Observations upon the conduct of S -- r W -- m H -- e at the White Plains, as related in the 'Gazette' of December 30, 1776' (1779). By this date Mauduit had provided Governor Hutchinson with a statement supporting American independence. On 6 May 1787 he was chosen to succeed Richard Jackson as governor of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts. Mauduit died, unmarried, at Clement's Lane, Lombard Street, London, on 14 June 1787. 


@@@@@


doc= 18361


Mauduit, William, eighth earl of Warwick (1221x3-1268), magnate, was the son and heir of William Mauduit ('c'.1195-1257), lord of Hanslope, Buckinghamshire, and hereditary chamberlain of the exchequer, and his wife, Alice de Newburgh, the daughter of Waleran, earl of Warwick. Between August 1233 and July 1234, William was held as a royal hostage, in the custody of Herbert fitz Matthew, to ensure the loyalty of his father. In 1242 he was ordered to deputize for his father if necessary and accompany a treasure ship on its way to the royal army campaigning in Gascony, and in 1243 Henry III met the expenses he incurred in crossing to Gascony. In July 1253 William, together with John de Plessis, earl of Warwick, and the royal administrator Gilbert of Segrave, was seized by a mob at Pons, in Poitou, and imprisoned; Segrave, whose daughter Alice was William's wife, died during their captivity. 
The heirs to the earldom of Warwick, William's parents, Alice de Newburgh and William Mauduit, were constrained to acquiesce in the life tenure of the earldom and its lands by John de Plessis, who held it by royal grant for life only, since Margery de Newburgh, the widowed granddaughter of Earl Waleran and the countess of Warwick in her own right, claimed that she had already remarried before Henry III designated John as her husband. In 1257 William succeeded to his father's claims and his barony of Hanslope, to the estate of Barrowden in Rutland, Hartley Mauditt, Hampshire (held by sergeanty of his chamberlainship) and to estates in Warwickshire which had formed the marriage portion of Alice de Newburgh. He also inherited the chamberlainship of the exchequer; the routine work was performed by official deputies, but the chamberlain received robes which were perquisites of office and enjoyed legal privileges. 
William's political activities contrasted with those of his father, who sided with the baronial opposition in 1215-17, as well as in 1233. He was perhaps influenced by John de Plessis, a staunch supporter of the king; certainly Henry III believed him to be a potential supporter when, in February 1261, he summoned a group of the lesser barons, in an effort to shake off the restraints imposed upon him by Simon de Montfort and his supporters. William, like others who supported the king militarily, was granted an annual fee, in his case of 40 marks, payable in half-yearly instalments, which he received until May 1263. Between March 1258 and March 1264 he received regular royal summonses to render military service -- a campaign against Llywelyn, the Welsh prince, was the usual reason given, but these levies helped to strengthen the king's hand against the baronial opposition. 
John de Plessis eventually died in February 1263. Alice de Newburgh predeceased him, and William Mauduit, as her son, succeeded to the earldom of Warwick. In April 1263 he rendered to Henry III his homage as earl, but the comital inheritance had been mismanaged by twelfth-century earls, while the dower entitlement of the long-lived thirteenth-century countesses had further depleted its resources. William probably controlled little more than a third of the total resources of the earldom, and during the unrest in 1264 his activities were largely confined to within a 10 mile radius of Warwick Castle. A Montfortian commander, John Giffard, captured the castle, together with William and Alice. Its fortifications were destroyed, and the earl and countess were imprisoned in Kenilworth, pending payment of his ransom of 1900 marks. On 22 November 1265 William was granted forfeited estates to the value of $100, but at his death on 8 January 1268 he was in debt to the crown. He left no direct heir, and was succeeded by William (IV) de Beauchamp, the son of his deceased sister, Isabel Mauduit. William Mauduit was buried in Westminster Abbey, but his heart was interred at the Cistercian nunnery at Catesby, Northamptonshire, perhaps reflecting a devotion to the cult of Edmund Rich, some of whose relics were there. 


@@@@@


doc= 18362


Maudith, John (d. in or after 1343), ecclesiastic and astronomer, went to Oxford from the Worcester diocese and by 1309 had become a fellow of Merton College, where he remained until 1319 ['see 'Merton calculators]. In that year he was admitted rector of Aston Cantlow, Warwickshire, and in 1320 was ordained subdeacon. He remained there until 1330, when he moved north to hold at least two livings: he was rector of Sandal Magna, Yorkshire, in 1330 and still in 1331; and rector of Hatfield, Yorkshire, 1341-3. In 1341 Maudith was granted leave of absence for a year, to take up service with John de Warenne, earl of Surrey and Sussex (died 1347), and at about this time he became a member of the group of scholars gathered around Richard Bury, bishop of Durham (died 1345). In 1342 he completed a theological treatise, 'Tractatus de doctrina theologica', now in Salisbury Cathedral Library. He was admitted as dean of Auckland, co. Durham, in 1343, and this is the last known record of his life. 
The 'Catalogus vetus' of Merton College describes Maudith as 'a good astronomer who composed astronomical tables and a physician' (Emden, 'Oxf.', 2.1243). He might have regarded astronomy as an ancillary to his medical teaching, although no medical writings by him survive. His astronomical reputation has long rested chiefly on the tables to which the Merton catalogue refers, and here there is much room for misunderstanding. That he assembled a collection of trigonometrical tables in 1310 is not in doubt, but those of sine, semidiurnal arc, tangent, solar declinations and ascensions are substantially taken from, or inspired by, the more famous collections of Toledan tables and of al-Khwarizmi (died 846). Tables of the ascensions of signs for Oxford are an exception to his heavy borrowing. 
Maudith's reputation rests not only on the tables but also on the explanatory canons to them, works by which, according to some over-enthusiastic accounts, trigonometry was introduced to Europe. If anything was responsible for this important step it was the astronomical tables from which Maudith borrowed. The two sets of canons, one lengthy, the other abbreviated, did comprise an important trigonometrical text, written perhaps not long after 1316; and yet they were almost certainly not by Maudith, but rather the work of Richard Wallingford. The writer of one of the texts indeed refers to Maudith in the third person, explaining that he composed his tables to overcome the difficulties inherent in graduating instruments such as the astrolabe and quadrant. 
Richard Wallingford derived one of his own catalogues of stars from an earlier list by Maudith, dated 1316, in which a certain constant is mentioned as being 'according to Profatius in his almanac' (North, 'Richard of Wallingford', 3.157-8). The reference is to a treatise on the so-called 'new quadrant' by Jacob ibn Tibbon 
(Profatius; died 1305)
, a Jewish astronomer of Montpellier. Why Maudith's reference is of interest is that there are independent reasons for believing that he was himself the editor of a version of the Profatius text in its Latin form, namely that surviving in Cambridge University Library, MS Gg.6.3. While it contains no significant revisions, a new star list (of eighty-six stars) with which it is associated was evidently due to Maudith, some of it on the basis of new observations by him. There is also a shorter list of eleven bright stars, which it is said 'John Maudith put on the quadrant' (North, 'Richard of Wallingford', 2.243). There is some ambiguity here as between an actual instrument and a textual recommendation, but none about Maudith's concern with problems of instrumentation, fitting perfectly with the statement by the author of the canons. 
Despite Maudith's concern with astronomy during the first half of his life, during the second he appears to have written nothing whatsoever on the subject. The date of his death is unknown, but in view of his relatively high profile it was probably not long after the last known reference to him, in 1343. 


@@@@@


doc= 18363


Mauger (d. 1212), bishop of Worcester, was of illegitimate birth, the son of a knight and a free woman, both unmarried. The date of his birth is unknown. From 1190 he was in royal service, witnessing charters of Richard I, at first as archdeacon of Evreux, and then, from June 1195, as treasurer of Normandy. He always appears as 'Master Mauger', indicating higher education, perhaps at Paris. He was the king's doctor, and Roger of Hoveden says that Richard gave him the bishopric of Worcester. His election may have taken place after Richard's death (on 6 April 1199); it was certainly before 8 August 1199. On Mauger's admission of illegitimacy, the election was referred to the pope, and he himself went to Rome. Pope Innocent III quashed the election, but allowed the electors to postulate Mauger, and consecrated him on 4 June 1200. Cardinals who had known him in the schools testified to his learning, reputation, and virtuous life; the Worcester chronicler asserts that the pope was influenced by his distinguished appearance. Mauger was enthroned at Worcester on 12 November. Thereafter he devoted himself to ecclesiastical business, and is seldom recorded at court. His predecessor had been interested in the sanctity of Bishop Wulfstan of Worcester; Mauger took the matter up, collected evidence, and travelled to Rome for the purpose, 'not considering his age' (Darlington, 184). Wulfstan's canonization was announced on 21 April 1203. A second purpose of this, or yet another, visit to Rome, was to prosecute a claim to jurisdiction over Evesham Abbey. Mauger did not attend the later stages of the case. The pope gave sentence for Evesham on Christmas eve 1205, largely on the basis of forged papal documents. Mauger's chief opponent, Thomas of Marlborough, subsequently abbot of Evesham, writing his story later, recognized that the bishop was a 'just and Godfearing man' and 'a son of truth' (Macray, 109, 119). 
Mauger's last years were dominated by the dispute between King John and the pope over the election of an archbishop of Canterbury. After lengthy negotiations, Innocent consecrated Cardinal Stephen Langton on 17 June 1207. On 27 August he ordered the bishops of London, Ely, and Worcester to try to persuade the king to accept Langton, and if he refused, to declare an interdict throughout England. The bishops met the king several times in October, but without success. Mauger had already suffered temporary confiscation of property, probably for refusing to support opposition to Langton. Negotiations continued until 12 March 1208. The three bishops then ordered the interdict to take effect on 24 March. Their property was confiscated, and they were soon forced to take refuge abroad, 'enduring harsh exile' ('Ann. mon.', 4.396). The bishops returned briefly in August for more discussions, but without result. Early in 1209, they received new papal orders: if the king did not submit, they were to announce his excommunication. The threat led to more negotiations. The bishops came to Dover in August, met royal envoys, and drafted peace terms. But problems remained, and the terms were never ratified. The bishops, who evidently feared for their own safety, returned to France, where the king's excommunication was published in November, at Arras. Matters had reached a deadlock. In the spring of 1211, the pope sent new envoys to England. 
It was perhaps at about that time that Mauger retired to the abbey of Pontigny, where he died, in the Cistercian habit, on 1 July 1212. He may earlier have stayed at the Parisian abbey of St Victor, where he, Eustace, bishop of Ely (died 1215), and other English clergy were commemorated. During his exile Mauger was sometimes in touch with his diocese, and was able to appoint his nephew to the archdeaconry of Worcester. The writings of Gerald of Wales preserve the only example of a personal letter from Mauger, written in connection with Gerald's attempt to raise the bishopric of St David's to an archbishopric. 


@@@@@


doc= 18364


Maugham, Robert (1788-1862), lawyer and first secretary of the Law Society, was born on 9 March 1788 in Chancery Lane, London, one of four children of William Maugham ('bap'. 1759). About 1805 he entered the office of George Barrow, attorney of Threadneedle Street, but he did not formally become an articled clerk until March 1812. He was admitted in 1817 and by the early 1820s he was working and living at 17 Great James Street. He married in 1822, and his eldest son, Robert Ormond Maugham (1823-1884), also a solicitor, was the father of Frederic Herbert Maugham, first Viscount Maugham (1866-1958), and William Somerset Maugham (1874-1965). 
It is not clear what role Maugham played, if any, in the formation of the Law Institution in 1825 (subsequently the Law Society), but he acted as secretary to the provisional committee in March, and was subsequently appointed secretary to the committee of management on 7 June 1825. In the same year he achieved prominence with the publication of 'A Treatise on the Law of Attornies', an important work of synthesis relating to statutory and case law affecting the profession. In 1832 his position as secretary was confirmed and he was awarded a salary of $400 a year and a set of apartments in the Law Society's hall, Chancery Lane. 
Although he combined his role as secretary with private practice, Maugham's major achievement was the supervision of the institution's successful development after its foundation. As the only permanent official of any significance he played a central part in ensuring the institution, later the Incorporated Law Society, had a sound constitutional and financial basis. He guided the society through its transition from a joint-stock concern to a professional association and helped secure the second royal charter in 1845, which remained the principal constitutional document. 
Maugham successfully oversaw the expansion of the hall and the establishment of lectures and examinations conducted by the society. He orchestrated the passing of the 'Attorneys and Solicitors Act' of 1843, which recognized the place of the society in the profession. The act appointed the society as registrar of attorneys and solicitors, thereby making it responsible for the administration of the roll. Maugham remained secretary until his death, during a period of great importance for the society, in which it was guided through the critical early years and established as the pre-eminent national body for the solicitors' profession. 
Maugham occupied a significant place in the development of the profession and took a keen interest in many professional issues. He continued to publish works on legal subjects and in 1830 he founded and edited the 'Legal Observer', the first legal journal dealing with professional matters, other than the reporting of cases and legislation, to become successfully established. The journal was used to promote the interests of the Incorporated Law Society and the profession, and acted as a voice for the opinions of its editor. Maugham was also a campaigner for improved legal education and higher standards of qualification, believing this would raise the status of the profession. In 1846 he gave evidence before the select committee on legal education. His proposals were far-reaching and those relating to examinations were largely adopted in the 'Attorneys and Solicitors Act' of 1860. 
Very little is known of Maugham's personal life or interests outside the profession. He retired from practice in 1856, when members of the society subscribed $600 as a testimonial, which included a gift of plate. Also in 1856 he relinquished control of the 'Legal Observer', when it merged with the 'Solicitors' Journal and Reporter'. Maugham died on 16 July 1862 at Chancery Lane and was buried on 22 July at Nunhead cemetery. He was survived by his wife, Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 18365


Maule, Fox, second Baron Panmure and eleventh earl of Dalhousie (1801-1874), army officer and politician, was born on 22 April 1801 at Brechin Castle, Forfarshire, the eldest son of William Ramsay Maule (1771-1852), first Baron Panmure of Brechin and Navar, Forfarshire, and second son of the eighth earl of Dalhousie, and his wife, Patricia Heron (died 1821), daughter of Gilbert Gordon from Halleaths in Dumfriesshire. The Maule family claimed eleventh-century Norman origins and were prominent in the Jacobite uprisings. Named after Charles James Fox, a political and personal friend of his father, he had two brothers, Lauderdale (1807-1854), a lieutenant-colonel in the Cameron Highlanders, and William (1809-1859), and seven sisters: Patricia (died 1859), Elizabeth (died 1852), Mary (died 1864), Georgiana (died 1833), Ramsay (died 1884), Christiane, and one unidentified. His father married second Elizabeth Barton in 1822, but had no further children. Two of Fox Maule's uncles, James (1772-1837) and John (1775-1842), became lieutenant-generals, the ninth earl, George (1770-1838), a general. Maule was educated first at a private school in Clapham, then at Charterhouse School in central London between 30 June 1809 and May 1818. While he was at Charterhouse his father and mother separated. Fox Maule supported his mother and never saw his father again, being settled with a $100 annual allowance and an army commission. After briefly attending Edinburgh University, he therefore joined the 79th regiment of foot (or Cameron Highlanders) as an ensign on 3 June 1819, advancing to lieutenant on 29 July 1824, brevet captain on 8 April 1826, and regimental captain on 31 October 1826. During these years Fox Maule served as aide-de-camp to his uncle Lieutenant-General the earl of Dalhousie, then commander of the forces in North America, leaving Canada with him in August 1828. A year later Maule was at the regimental depot in Dublin, and formally retired on 5 April 1831. 
Maule had married Montagu (died 1853), eldest daughter of George, second baron Abercromby, the day before, on 4 April 1831; they had no children. After leaving the army Maule settled at Dalguise in Perthshire but soon entered politics as Liberal MP for Perthshire (1835-7), then Elgin burghs (1838-41), and Perth until he succeeded to his father's peerage on the latter's death, on 13 April 1852. Under Lord Melbourne, except for a short period in 1837-8 when he was not in parliament, he served as under-secretary of state in the Home department (1835-41). In 1841 he became a privy councillor and was briefly vice-president of the Board of Trade. Maule was appointed to the War Office as secretary at war in Lord John Russell's government in July 1846, entering the cabinet in that post in October 1851 and succeeding Lord Brougham as president of the Board of Trade in January 1852. A month later the government fell. Before taking charge of the War Office in 1846, he had shown a close interest in military administration on matters such as the reopening of Kilmainham Hospital to Irish pensioners and ration allowances for troops in the colonies. He wrote, too, several papers about measures to combat Chartist disturbances. Once in office, he dealt with a vast range of issues involving pensions, accounts, contracts, and patronage. 
A mutiny in New Zealand, unrest at the Cape of Good Hope, feared insurrection in Ireland, desertions from regiments in Canada all claimed his attention, too, besides more general governmental concerns about India, the Spanish occupation of Cuba, and the Don Pacifico affair. Prolonged inquiries by a parliamentary select committee on army and ordnance expenditure took up a considerable amount of his time between 1849 and 1851. When Palmerston succeeded Lord Aberdeen as prime minister in February 1855, Panmure became secretary of state for war and as such had ministerial responsibility for the Crimean campaign. He quickly insisted that a chief of staff (Sir James Simpson) be appointed to ensure that the orders of the British commander, Lord Raglan, were 'quickly and implicitly obeyed' and also 'to enquire into the manner in which the Staff Officers perform their duties and to report fully thereon' (Hibbert, 253). Referring to dissatisfaction at home arising from 'the grievances in the camp', Panmure harshly (and wrongly) assailed Raglan for not visiting his soldiers, adding: 'Your staff must be changed, at least that will satisfy the public and that radically' (ibid., 254). Before the end of February 1855 he revealed his transparent preoccupation with personal survival: 'I must do something to satisfy the House of Commons' (ibid., 257). 
The deficiencies in support services, highlighted by use of pensioners to care for the sick and wounded, and of exhausted soldiers to undertake non-military maintenance and construction duties, and the reliance on civilian contractors for land transport led to a number of 'ad hoc' bodies being sent to the theatre of war. Panmure's predecessor (the duke of Newcastle) had dispatched a mounted staff corps to assist with camp policing and a civil engineering corps to build a railway between the port of Balaklava and the trenches. Panmure additionally established a military Land Transport Corps, which evolved into a permanent post-war organization, and the civilian Army Works Corps for manual non-operational work, which foreshadowed the Royal Pioneer Corps. More immediately, he sponsored fundamental, lasting military reform at home. Hitherto, the master-general of the ordnance had commanded the artillery and engineers as a separate corps quite independent from the rest of the army. He had also controlled the civilian Board of Ordnance, which provided military supplies generally and a wide range of financial, supply, and administrative services for overseas garrisons. Within a week of becoming secretary of state, Panmure drew up proposals for 'placing the purely military branch of the Ordnance forces under the C-in-C, and the civil branches under the Minister (Secretary of State) of War' (Sweetman, 'War and Administration', 70). On 6 June 1855 an order in council achieved the desired changes, which were truly fundamental. Panmure had achieved something of a palace coup: the master-general (Raglan), being otherwise engaged in the Crimea, could only belatedly and vainly protest. Brusquely the secretary of state replied: 'The change at the O ['sic'] is effective and I am sorry to hear you anticipate so much confusion from it' (Sweetman, 'Raglan', 316). Seeking to show initiative as complaints mounted of unsatisfactory conditions at the front, Panmure sent Sir John McNeill and Colonel Alexander Tulloch to the Crimea to investigate criticisms of the supply system. Their two reports caused such high dudgeon among those blamed that Panmure appointed a board of general officers under Sir Alexander Woodward to examine their complaints and interview the aggrieved. The board vindicated senior officers such as lords Lucan and Cardigan and was widely dismissed as a whitewash. That was hardly Panmure's fault. He was more culpable over Lord Lucan, recalled from the Crimea following heated objection to Raglan's view that, as the divisional commander who ordered the light brigade up the valley to destruction, he (Lucan) bore responsibility for its fate. Lucan clashed with Panmure once in London, and according to Lord Granville 'Mars [Panmure] had invited the latter [Sir Henry Hardinge, the army commander-in-chief] to break Lucan' (Fitzmaurice, 219). The commander-in-chief refused, believing Lucan had been provoked, whereupon 'Mars had sworn at Hardinge, and threatened to turn the whole press loose upon him' (ibid.). Granville recorded that the prince consort suspected these exchanges had hastened Hardinge's death from a stroke. Frustrated by the failure of the allied forces to advance aggressively against the Russians once the main part of Sevastopol had fallen, Panmure hectored Sir James Simpson into resignation, vigorously defending himself to the queen (11 October): 'In that message [the dispatch containing news of Simpson's resignation] there is not a word which Lord Panmure was not fully justified in using' (Douglas and Ramsay, 1.436). 
Patently, Panmure did not lack self-confidence. In cabinet meetings on 11 and 21 December 1855 Granville whimsically noted that 'Mars then gave us his strategical views of the operations in the Crimea', and after 'an interesting letter was read from Miss Nightingale... Mars said it only showed that she knew nothing of the British soldier' (Fitzmaurice, 130, 133). Visiting Panmure, who was suffering from gout 'in both arms and both legs' on 13 January 1856, Granville found him 'reading a book of Scotch divinity; very pompous and oracular on literature and politics'. The bedridden secretary of state declared that 'Macaulay's History is not a history; it is merely pot-house gossip' and went on to discuss the current diplomatic moves to end hostilities. 'I am neither warlike nor peaceable', he exclaimed, 'but I say that if we cannot have an honourable peace, we must have a bloody war' (ibid., 141). 
Even as peace hopes rose in January and February 1856 a convalescent Panmure composed lengthy memoranda for the duke of Cambridge in Paris and Sir William Codrington, Simpson's successor as British commander in the Crimea, on the future conduct of operations. After the armistice on 29 February, he immersed himself in details of the army's peacetime establishment, celebratory firework displays in the London parks, the strength of coastal defences, and the building of Netley Military Hospital. On 21 February 1856, in the Lords, 'Mars spoke like Apollo' (Fitzmaurice, 167) in arguing that ambiguity in the responsibilities of the secretary of state and the commander-in-chief of the army must be clarified. Five months later, he unequivocally established the authority of his office over that of the commander-in-chief. 
Panmure's energy remained seemingly boundless, but his hot temper (reputedly inherited from his father) caused offence. His nickname the Bison was not wholly due to his unruly mop of hair. He did not serve in any government after Palmerston's first ministry fell in February 1858, and according to Granville was so angry that he threatened to sit on the cross-benches when Palmerston excluded him from his new ministry in 1859. Difficulty in working with colleagues and even the prime minister may explain his exile. Granville thought 'Mars more pompous than ever' over the Indian mutiny (Anderson, 256); Clarendon, though, considered him 'a much more wily creature than he used to be... there is no other single member of the Cabinet who can defy the Prime Minister' (Fitzmaurice, 114). Not unnaturally, perhaps, Newcastle was 'sore and hates Mars' for taking credit for many reforms that his predecessor had set in train (ibid., 161). Panmure's petulant and stubborn refusal in the Lords on 24 July 1857 to countenance a public memorial to Raglan scarcely extended his range of political supporters. Influential military figures also deplored his treatment of Raglan, who had written to a nephew, 'sometimes I think Lord Panmure believes I am either criminally negligent or a lunatic' (Hibbert, 264). Panmure had an unhappy knack of offending too many people. 
Panmure supported the Free Church of Scotland from its formation in 1843, and engaged in years of fractious correspondence about crown patronage in the Church of Scotland. He commented unfavourably on 'the Puseyite principles of Gladstone and Sidney Herbert' (Fitzmaurice, 345). Granville dubbed him 'a Scotch divinity... more fitted to conduct a campaign in the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland than on the shores of the Black Sea' (ibid., 102). He became deeply involved in the efficiency of Scottish universities, and was made lord rector of Glasgow University in 1842. Between 1850 and 1871 he served as the first non-Catholic governor of Charterhouse since Cromwellian times, being 'particularly industrious in the work he found fixed upon him... and always took a pleasure in promoting the true interests of the School' ('The Carthusian', 135). On 19 December 1860 he succeeded as eleventh earl of Dalhousie to the Scottish estates of his cousin James Andrew Ramsay, governor-general of India (1847-56). By royal licence in 1861 Maule added Ramsay to his own name. He was a knight of the Scottish Order of the Thistle, knight grand cross of the Bath, keeper of the privy seal of Scotland, lord lieutenant of Forfarshire, and a commissioner of the royal military asylum. The barony of Panmure became extinct when he died without issue on 6 July 1874 at Brechin Castle, his birth place. He was buried at Panbride, Forfarshire, on 14 July. His cousin Admiral George Ramsay succeeded him as earl of Dalhousie. 


@@@@@


doc= 18366


Maule, Harry, styled fifth earl of Panmure (1659-1734), Jacobite army officer and scholar, was born on 18 October 1659, the sixth son of George Maule, second earl of Panmure (1619-1671), and his wife, Lady Jean Campbell (1624/5-1703), eldest daughter of John, earl of Loudoun, lord high chancellor of Scotland. His brothers included John, who was born in January 1650 and died young; George, third earl of Panmure ('c'.1650-1686); and James Maule, fourth earl of Panmure (1658/9-1723). Although he does not appear to have had any formal education, his early and extensive travels in England and on the continent developed the keen interest in politics, religion, and scholarship for which he later became famous. In his home county of Forfarshire he acquired the lands of Kelly from his father and his brother James. He also bought additional lands of Arbirlot and Cuthlie from the archbishop of St Andrews so that he was able to obtain a charter for the whole estate of Kelly in 1687. In the tradition of the Maules he was a firm supporter of the Stuart dynasty and, as a consequence, he and his brother James were both fined considerable sums of money when they walked out of the Scottish parliament for refusing to recognize the convention of estates' decision to declare that James VII of Scotland had forfeited his crown (1689). In addition he was fined for refusing to recognize the authority of William and Mary by taking the oath of allegiance. His seat was declared vacant and eventually filled by Francis Mollison in 1694. He was also at this time a commissioner of supply for Forfarshire. On 7 March 1695 he married Mary Fleming (died 1702), daughter of William, fifth earl of Wigtown; they had five children, three sons (including William Maule) and two daughters. Following Mary's death he married Anne Lindsay (died 1729) in 1704. The couple had six children, all of whom died young except John Maule (1706-1781), who was later to become one of the barons of the court of exchequer in Scotland. At the time of the union he was closely allied both personally and politically to his nephew the earl of Mar. 
In 1715 Maule came out for the Jacobites at the battle of Sheriffmuir but, perhaps significantly, preferred to ride out with several other gentlemen volunteers rather than join the Forfarshire regiment raised by his brother James. John Sinclair, in his 'Memoirs of the Insurrection in Scotland in 1715', quotes Harry Maule as saying 'never were men so idly brought in for their lives and fortunes as we were' (Sinclair, 52). Whatever his private feelings, his involvement in the battle became both personal and heroic when he rescued his wounded brother from the bothy prison close to the battlefield in which he was being held by government troops. This stirring incident is commemorated in the Jacobite ballad on the battle: 'With brisk men about / Brave Harry retook / His brother, and laughed at them a' man'. The Maules' involvement in this uprising led to the forfeiture of their titles and lands in Forfarshire and, in the case of the earl, continuous exile on the continent until his death in 1723. Harry was less persecuted by the government and enjoyed more freedom in Scotland during his lifetime, although he was not allowed to purchase the forfeited estates of his family when they were offered for sale by the government (he offered $60,300 but the York Buildings Company $60,400). While living in the Netherlands in 1718 he wrote to Mar expressing his view about his prospects of returning to Scotland: 'expecting but little satisfaction in Scotland... [I] cannot think of the insolent usage I might meet with from the man who has management there, who threatens extirpation and, I am told, regrets that Harry Maule was not forfaulted' ('Stuart Papers', 7.507). 
Only Jacobite sympathizers referred to Maule as the fifth earl of Panmure after the death of his brother. Denied political office he devoted his time to the study of feudal and canon law, and was seen in his old age as a kind of umpire between the different schisms of the Scottish Episcopal church that were developing during this period. His correspondence with James Greenshields, an Episcopalian clergyman of Edinburgh who had been thrown into prison for using the English prayer book, illustrates the depth of his religious knowledge. His scholarship and judgement, as revealed in the many personal, political, and religious letters that have survived, were fully recognized by his contemporaries. While living on the continent Harry and his eldest son, James, carried out extensive research into the history of the Maules, tracing back the family pedigree over 700 years, and in the process accumulated valuable manuscripts relating to the early history of Scotland. In 1874 John Stuart was commissioned by the earl of Dalhousie to edit this collection into two volumes entitled 'Registrum de Panmure'. This magnificent work, of which only 150 copies were privately printed, is a lasting tribute to Maule's scholarship. A portrait of the author in armour, copied from the original, is reproduced in this work. His principal residence in Scotland was Kelly Castle in Forfarshire, although he also owned property in Edinburgh from 1711 near the Nether Bow. Maule's second wife died on 12 August 1729 and Maule himself died in Edinburgh on 23 June 1734. He was buried in the abbey church, Holyrood, on 25 June, an honour that reflects the high esteem he was eventually accorded. 


@@@@@


doc= 18367


Maule, James, fourth earl of Panmure (1658/9-1723), Jacobite sympathizer, was the fifth son of George Maule, second earl of Panmure (1619-1671), and his wife, Lady Jean Campbell (1624/5-1703), eldest daughter of John Campbell, first earl of Loudoun; Patrick Maule, first earl of Panmure, was his other grandfather. His first significant public appointment was as an excise commissioner in Forfarshire in October 1680. On 27 July 1681 he had a charter of the lands and mains of Ballumbie, Forfarshire. Maule of Ballumbie, as he was known, travelled abroad and in 1684 served as a volunteer at the siege of Luxembourg. On 1 February 1686 he succeeded the third earl, his brother George ('c'.1650-1686), as fourth earl of Panmure (the third earl's only son having died before May 1685). He took the oaths in the Scottish parliament on 29 April 1686 and on 13 May he was sworn a member of the Scottish privy council. On 5 February 1687 Panmure was contracted to marry Lady Margaret Hamilton (died 1731), youngest daughter of William Douglas, third duke of Hamilton ['see 'Hamilton, William] (all the children of this marriage took their mother's name). They had no children. In March 1687 he was 'laid aside' (Maule, 2.344) from the privy council for refusing to support James II's declaration of indulgence. 
In January 1689 Panmure left Scotland to travel to London, presumably in an attempt to influence the revolutionary settlement in Scotland, in which his father-in-law played a crucial role. On 1 March he was given a pass to return to Edinburgh. By 14 March he was attending the Scottish convention, and on 16 March he signed the declaration that it was a free and lawful meeting. However, he opposed the recognition of William and Mary and retired to his estates. He refused the oaths to the new king and never sat in parliament again, although he held local office as a commissioner of supply in Forfarshire and Aberdeenshire in 1689-94 and again in 1704. During Queen Anne's reign Panmure crops up in Jacobite correspondence as a man to be relied upon: in 1705 his name appeared on a list of those 'who have distinguished themselves for their loyalty since the Revolution' (Hooke, 1.229). He opposed the union with England in 1707, and it was probably his nephew John Erskine, earl of Mar, who protected him from arrest in 1708. In 1709 Panmure's extensive reconstruction of Brechin Castle was completed, a project begun in the 1690s. His name was included on a list of non-juring Scottish peers in July 1713. 
In August 1715 Panmure was still adding to his extensive estates, purchasing property from the Lindsays of Edzell for over $16,000. After some initial hesitation, and much to the surprise of those such as the lord justice clerk, he left Edinburgh in 1715 and sailed to his northern estates. He proclaimed the Pretender (James Stuart) as James VIII and III at Brechin and raised a regiment of foot which numbered 415 men and fought at the battle of Sheriffmuir on 13 November. Panmure was wounded in the battle, captured 'so very ill cut in the head that he was left for dead in a house by the enemy' (Sinclair, 227), and then rescued by his brother Harry Maule (1659-1734). In January 1716 he entertained James at Brechin Castle, and following the collapse of the rebellion in February he escaped to France. In consideration of his services James made him a knight of the Thistle on 8 April 1716 (the same day as the duke of Ormond). He was duly attainted by act of parliament for not surrendering himself to justice by 30 June 1716. Panmure joined the Jacobite court at Avignon and travelled with it into Italy. By May 1717 he was 'in a dismal way, and full of his old splenetic notions' ('Stuart Papers', 4.253), feeling neglected and kept out of secrets. By February 1718 he was 'en route' for France via Venice, in the hope that judicious bribery would enable him to return to Britain. The earl of Mar put his disillusionment down to his doctor, who had cured his wounds but not his mind, and 'to his natural temper and want of knowing the world, having never been much in business nor conversed much with those that were' (ibid., 6.90). 
Once in Paris, Panmure made contact with the British ambassador, the earl of Stair, but found the way to a pardon blocked 'unless I would make engagements never to act according to the principles I have all my life been of' ('Stuart Papers', 7.669-70). He settled in Paris and made a trip to Maule in France, where he established a family connection to the Maules and Valoniis of Normandy. Panmure died of pleurisy in Paris on 11 April 1723, aged sixty-four. He was survived by his wife, who died on 6 December 1731. In 1717 she had been the beneficiary of an act of parliament which provided maintenance for her as if her husband was already dead. After a determined rearguard action by Lady Panmure, in which she enlisted the aid of two lords of session, the family estates, valued at $3456 per annum, were sold to the York Building Company for $60,400 in October 1719. The company leased them back to Lady Panmure and Harry Maule in 1724. The family regained the estates when William Maule (1699/1700-1782), son of Harry, purchased them in 1764. 


@@@@@


doc= 18368


Maule, Patrick, first earl of Panmure (1585-1661), courtier, was born on 29 May 1585, probably at Bolshan, Forfarshire, the son of Patrick Maule (1548-1605), fiar of Panmure, and Margaret (died 1599), daughter of Sir John Erskine of Dun. In March 1600 his father succeeded Thomas Maule as laird of Panmure. By 1603 the seventeen-year-old Maule was serving as page to James VI, who had been impressed by his 'cariage' in royal hunting expeditions (MacFarlane, 2.153). In April he accompanied the king to England and served as groom of the bedchamber under Sir George Home, who arranged for his livery and annual payment of $20. On 1 May 1605 Maule succeeded his father as thirteenth laird of Panmure, but remained at Whitehall, where he was then earning $65 per annum as one of the king's servants. On 7 March 1610 the king granted him the lands and barony of Panmure. In 1616 Maule married Frances, daughter of the late Sir Edward Stanhope of Grimston, Yorkshire. Before her death in January 1624, the couple had four children: George Maule, Lord Brechin (1619-1671); Henry Maule ('bap'. 1621, died 1667) of Balmakellie; Jean (died 1685); and Elizabeth (died 1647). Maule was appointed to supervise repairs at Eltham Park on 28 March 1621, and by early 1625 was made its keeper. 
Retaining his personal popularity with King Charles, on 4 May 1625 Maule was given the manor of Collyweston in Northamptonshire (which he sold to Attorney-General Sir Robert Heath in 1631). His inoffensive personality gained him the support of the duke of Buckingham, who wrote to the king while on campaign in France (August 1627), recommending that Maule be appointed gentleman usher. It was during this period that he married his second wife, Mary Waldrum (died 1637), a maid of honour to the queen. Maule maintained his Scottish connections with his receipt of Downie barony in March 1629 and through his personal appearance at Holyroodhouse on 5 September 1632 to accept the principal sheriffship of Forfar. This was soon followed by his honorary appointment as burgess of Dundee 'for the innumerable benefits which he has conferred on the said Burgh' (Millar, 144). He expanded his business interests in the 1630s, obtaining a special grant of British exports to Africa (13 October 1634) and a thirty-one-year monopoly on soap manufacture (6 November). After his grant of the baronies of Brechin, Navar, and Balmakellie on 15 October 1634, he began to take a keener interest in Scottish affairs, serving as JP for Forfar and depute of the admiralty between Southwater and Bruchtie, in addition to asserting his rights over appointments to the magistracy of Brechin, over those claimed with equal vehemence by the bishop. Maule also happened to be present in Scotland during the prayer book riots of 1637. 
On 15 July 1639 Maule married his third wife, Lady Mary Erskine (died 1672), widow of William Keith, fifth Earl Marischal, and daughter of John Erskine, eighteenth earl of Mar. Throughout this period he expressed sympathies with the supplicants and later with the covenanters, as shown in his correspondence with his nephew Alexander Erskine of Dun and the earl (later marquess) of Montrose, though he never wavered in his personal loyalty to the king. From 1642 to 1643 he attended Charles at York and Oxford, and was eventually elevated to the peerage on 2 August 1646 as the earl of Panmure, Lord Maule of Brechin and Navar. He was one of the few bedchamber servants to remain with the king, and reputedly the last to leave him at Carisbrooke Castle, though there is no evidence to suggest that he followed the king from Hampton Court to the Isle of Wight in 1647. His reputation for loyalty led to a place on the commission of war for Kincardine and Forfar on 15 February 1648, and by 2 March he was in attendance at parliament in Edinburgh, listed thirtieth among thirty-two earls. 
Oliver Cromwell seems to have distrusted Panmure, perhaps resenting his implication in Charles's escape from Hampton Court on 11 November 1647 and his subsequent gift of $2000 to the exiled Charles II in 1651. In April 1654 the protector fined him $10,000 under the 'Act of Grace and Pardon', a massive sum which was reduced to $4000 in March 1655. After issuing payment on 26 June, Panmure spent his last years trying to secure revenues, such as that of the Irish customs, and serving as commissioner to collect assessments in Forfar. Throughout his bedchamber career he had been able to revitalize his family's estates which had reached a low ebb in the late sixteenth century under his grandfather Thomas. Panmure himself died on 22 December 1661, probably at Panbride, and was soon afterward buried in the family vaults at Panbride. His widow died in December 1672. 


@@@@@


doc= 18369


Maule, Sir William Henry (1788-1858), judge, was born on 25 April 1788 at Edmonton, Middlesex, the son of Henry Maule, a medical practitioner, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Rawson, a Quaker from Leeds. Maule was educated at a private school run by his uncle, John Maule, rector of Greenford, Middlesex, who was described by Charles Greville, a fellow pupil at the school, as 'an excellent scholar and a great brute' (C. Greville, 'Memoirs', 1885, 2.101). Greville described Maule himself as 'a very clever boy'. In October 1806 Maule matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was senior wrangler in the mathematical tripos of 1810 and also won the first Smith's prize. In October 1811 he was elected a fellow of Trinity. After taking his MA degree he stayed in Cambridge for some time, working as a mathematical coach. Among his pupils was Edward Ryan, afterwards chief justice of Calcutta, who remained a lifelong close friend. Another of his Cambridge friends was Charles Babbage, the mathematician. 
In the autumn of 1810 Maule became a student at Lincoln's Inn. While still a student there he was offered, but declined, the professorship of mathematics at East India College, Haileybury. In 1814 he was called to the bar, took chambers at 3 Essex Court, Temple, and joined the Oxford circuit. His progress at the bar was slow at first, but he gradually obtained a reputation and business as a commercial lawyer, becoming an authority on marine insurance. He became king's counsel in Easter term 1833 and in 1835 was appointed counsel to the Bank of England in succession to Sir James Scarlett, who had been appointed chief baron. Not only did this position earn him a good deal of money but it also enabled him to act as leading counsel for the sitting member in the county Carlow election petition. His success in the case led to his being returned for Carlow borough as a Liberal MP at the general election in August 1837. 
In March 1839 Maule was appointed a baron of the exchequer in succession to Baron Bolland and was knighted. In Michaelmas term 1839 he was transferred to the common pleas on the death of Mr Justice Vaughan. He continued a member of that court until June 1855, when he resigned because of ill health. Shortly after his resignation, Maule was sworn of the privy council, and acted as a member of the judicial committee until his death. 
Maule was considered by his colleagues to be an excellent judge who combined common sense with legal knowledge, and was affectionately remembered for his humorous irony. At the Warwick assizes, for instance, while sentencing to one day's imprisonment a poor man convicted of bigamy, whose first wife had deserted him and lived with another man, Maule outlined at length to the bemused prisoner the various legal steps which he must take in order to obtain a divorce at the cost of about $1000. 
Maule died unmarried on 16 January 1858 at the home he shared with his widowed sister, Emma Maria Leathley, and his unmarried niece, Emma Leathley, at 22 Hyde Park Gardens, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 18370


Maule, William Ramsay, first Baron Panmure (1771-1852), aristocrat, second son of George Ramsay, eighth earl of Dalhousie (died 1787), and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Andrew Glen, and niece and heir of James Glen of Longcroft, Stirlingshire, was born on 27 October 1771. His father's maternal uncle, William Maule, earl of Panmure of Forth, died unmarried in 1782, and left his property to the eighth earl of Dalhousie, with remainder to Dalhousie's second son, William. Dalhousie died in 1787, when William succeeded to the valuable Panmure estates and adopted the name of Maule. He was twice married: first, on 1 December 1794, to Patricia Heron (died 1821), daughter of Gilbert Gordon of Halleaths; they had three sons and seven daughters. On learning of his dissolute activities in London, his wife left him and returned to her family in Ireland. When his eldest son, Fox Maule (later eleventh earl of Dalhousie), took his mother's part, Maule cut him off with only $100 a year and never saw him again. Maule's second wife, whom he married on 4 June 1822, was Elizabeth Barton (died 1867), daughter of John William Barton of Hospitalfield, Forfarshire; they had no children. 
In 1788 Maule purchased a cornetcy in the 11th dragoons, and afterwards raised an independent company of foot, which was disbanded in 1791. He was MP for Forfar, in April-May 1796, and in 1803-31. He joined the Whig Club in 1798 and was a steady adherent of Fox, after whom his eldest son was named. He virtually never spoke in the Commons, but supported the whigs on most major divisions until 1813. He was a founder member of the Hampden Club and helped secure Joseph Hulme's election for Aberdeen burghs. 
On 9 September 1831 Maule was raised to the peerage as Baron Panmure. As a young man he was one of the most dissipated and extravagant, even of the Scottish gentry of his younger days, and survived them, thanks to a constitution of extraordinary strength and a fortune of vast resources. He did not alter his manner or morals as he grew older, and scandalized Victorian observers. He was devoted to his friends so long as they remained complaisant, and violent and implacable to all who thwarted him. His uncontrollable temper eventually alienated him from nearly all his family in his latter years, yet he performed many unostentatious acts of charity. In politics he was a liberal, and his views were invariably humane; in private life he was an immovable despot. He died at Brechin Castle, Forfarshire, on 13 April 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 18371


John Mauleverer (c.1610-1650), army officer, was the eldest son of John Mauleverer of Letwell, Yorkshire, and his second wife, Margaret, daughter of John Lewis of Marr, Yorkshire. He married Dorcas, daughter of John Matthew and granddaughter of Toby Matthew, archbishop of York. In the civil wars he sided with the Fairfaxes, who commissioned him as colonel. He headed the list of prisoners taken by the royalists in Bradford in July 1643 but escaped or was exchanged, because by 1644 he commanded Hull's garrison regiment. The Fairfaxes nominated him as Hull's lieutenant-governor, and the town's MP, Peregrine Pelham, informed the corporation on 15 April 1645: 'I p'ceive by your Northerne Burgesses that they have noe desire that Mr Malleveror should command at Hull. They say he is strange to them, and soe he is to most of the House. He would not have been nominated in the House without much difficulty. (T. Tindall Wildridge, ed., 'The Hull Letters: Documents from the Hull Records, 1625-46', 1886, 63)' On 14 April 1646 Mauleverer was admitted as an elder brother to Hull Trinity House, and on 13 June Fairfax thanked him for refusing Mrs Hotham's demands to search Sir John Hotham's townhouse for property Fairfax had confiscated. In 1648 Mauleverer's regiment helped besiege Pontefract and in 1650 they were allotted to Cromwell's army invading Scotland. He died from fatigue at Edinburgh in December 1650, and Cromwell recalled: 'he had a spirit very much beyond his natural strength of body, having undergone many fits of sickness during his hard service in the field' (T. Carlyle, 'Letters and Speeches of Oliver Cromwell', ed. S. C. Lomas, 3 vols., 1904, 3.272). 


@@@@@


doc= 18372


Sir Richard Mauleverer, second baronet (bap. 1623, d. 1675), politician, was born at Allerton Mauleverer and baptized there on 28 September 1623. He was admitted to Gray's Inn on 12 July 1641, and on 10 August the next year married Anne ('b'. 'c'.1622), daughter of Sir Robert Clarke of Pleshey, Essex. His father granted him an annuity of $500, which was subsequently removed for his disobedient royalism. He was knighted for his royalist service at Christ Church, Oxford, on 27 March 1645. After the war he petitioned that he declared himself to the committee for compounding, and owing to his debts of $1500 he was fined only $4 6's'. 6died until his annuity could be recovered. Declared an outlaw in 1654, he was captured during a royalist rising in Yorkshire the following year. He made a daring escape from Chester Castle on 26 March, reaching The Hague in June. Imprisoned on his return to London in 1659, he was released on bail in September. He joined the king at Breda and was appointed a gentleman of the privy chamber in June 1660. He was commissioned as colonel of militia, and his baronetcy and estates, valued at $1200 per year, were restored. He was elected MP for Boroughbridge on 8 April 1661 and was commissioned as captain in Lord Gerard's regiment in 1666. He remained an inactive court MP, and was granted $200 royal bounty on 30 April 1675. He was buried in Westminster Abbey on 25 July 1675. 


@@@@@


doc= 18373


Mauleverer, Sir Thomas, first baronet (bap. 1599, d. 1655), politician and regicide, was born at Allerton Mauleverer, Yorkshire, and baptized there on 9 April 1599, the eldest son of Sir Richard Mauleverer of Allerton Mauleverer ('c'.1528-1603), high sheriff of Yorkshire in 1588, and his second wife, Katherine, daughter of Sir Ralph Bourchier of Beningbrough and his first wife, Elizabeth. He matriculated from St John's College, Cambridge, in 1616 and was admitted to Gray's Inn on 22 October 1617. His first wife was Mary, daughter of Sir Richard Hutton, justice of the common pleas. In 1622 he married his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1653), daughter of Thomas Wilbraham of Woodhey, Cheshire. In 1630 he was prosecuted for failure to compound in distraint of knighthood and during the 1630s he served regularly as a West Riding JP alongside Ferdinando Fairfax. In July 1640 he signed the Yorkshire gentry's petition against the king's billeting of soldiers, and he was elected MP for Boroughbridge that November. The king created him a baronet on 4 August 1641, but his association with the Fairfaxes led him to sign their anti-royalist declaration at Otley on 29 August 1642. Ferdinando, now Baron Fairfax and parliament's general in Yorkshire, appointed him to negotiate the neutrality treaty concluded at Rothwell on 29 September, but the truce soon collapsed and Mauleverer was besieged by royalists in his home at Allerton Mauleverer. On 23 October, Fairfax sent a troop of horse to rescue him, and Mauleverer was subsequently appointed a colonel, raising a troop of horse and regiment of foot. 
In January 1643 Mauleverer appeared sixth on the royalists' list of Yorkshire traitors and he has been described as 'one of the most zealous parliamentarians in Yorkshire' (Cliffe, 338). Thomas Gent defamed him as 'one of those Black-Guards of Usurpation', alleging that his unruly soldiers 'in a sacrilegious Manner, broke the windows and defac'd the Monuments' in the collegiate church of Ripon (T. Gent, 'Ancient and Modern History of the Loyal Town of Ripon', 1733, 118). By May 1643 he was a sequestrator and a member of parliament's county committee. He was among Fairfax's army routed at Adwalton Moor on 30 June, but escaped with Fairfax on a boat from Selby to Hull. With the royalists about to besiege Hull, on 27 August Fairfax appointed him to seek out traitors and spies in the town. In January 1644 Mauleverer accompanied Sir Thomas Fairfax into Cheshire to relieve Nantwich. During his absences Allerton Mauleverer was plundered, and he later accused Sir William Ingram of seizing corn valued at $500 in his tithe barn. 
On 7 November 1645 Mauleverer informed Speaker Lenthall that the parliamentarian forces refused to reduce Skipton Castle, urging their immediate payment, the removal of the Scots from Yorkshire, and that excise money be used locally. On 3 May 1647 he submitted his pay accounts, and his son-in-law, Thomas Scot, brought his petition before the Commons for reimbursement of his $15,000 war expenses. Both houses voted $1000 from the excise and ordered the committee for northern affairs to organize further repayments. Mauleverer attended the king's trial and signed the death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. He remained as a West Riding JP, but his public career ended when the Rump Parliament was dismissed in 1653. He had died by 9 June 1655, but was exempted from the Restoration 'Act of Pardon'. 
His eldest son, 




@@@@@


doc= 18374


Mauleverer, Sir Thomas, third baronet (c.1643-1687), politician and army officer, was the eldest son of Sir Richard Mauleverer (bap. 1623, d. 1675) ['see under 'Mauleverer, Sir Thomas (bap. 1599, d. 1655)], the second baronet, and his wife, Anne ('b'. 'c'.1622), daughter of Sir Robert Clarke of Pleshey, Essex. He succeeded his father to the title on the latter's death in July 1675. He first attempted to enter parliament for the seat of Aldborough at a by-election in July 1678, in the court interest, but was unsuccessful. He then represented Boroughbridge, Yorkshire, near his family seat at Allerton, in the parliaments of March and October 1678, 1681, and 1685. He remained in the court interest throughout the exclusion crisis: Shaftesbury marked him as 'base' in 1679, and he was listed as one who 'abhorred' the campaign of petitioning the king to meet his prorogued parliament in 1680. His support was not particularly active, however, since he may not even have attended the second Exclusion Parliament or the third Exclusion Parliament of 1681. 
Mauleverer held a commission as major in a regiment of foot from 1678, probably until his death. As the second to the colonel of his regiment, he ran his opponent through in a duel in November 1678, and three years later he received a cut to the face when he tried to separate two fellow officers in a quarrel. He was a commissioner for the (taxation) assessment for the West Riding from 1673 to 1680, and in the latter year was appointed deputy lieutenant and JP for Yorkshire, positions he held until his death. 
In January 1684 Mauleverer and some other Yorkshire gentry tried to show their diligence for the king's service, and at the same time discredit the local potentate Sir John Reresby, by claiming that the latter was protecting the town of York from 'quo warranto' proceedings which would have led to the forfeiture of the town's charter, but the more politically adept Reresby frustrated them by showing that the town was being run very much in the court's interest. On news of the death of Charles II in February 1685 Mauleverer took action to stifle rumours that the king had been poisoned, and during the duke of Monmouth's rebellion four months later he raised an independent troop of horse to help secure the north. James II's Catholicizing policy, however, strained his loyalty. Danby marked him among the parliamentary opposition in 1685, and he resolutely resisted inducements by the king during the latter's 'closeting' campaign in 1687; but he died suddenly in that year before the king could punish him by removing him from his offices. 
Mauleverer had married Katherine, the daughter and heir of Sir Miles Stapleton of Wighill, Yorkshire, but the marriage was not a success and they had no children, though Mauleverer fathered at least one illegitimate child. He was buried in Westminster Abbey on 13 August 1687, and the baronetcy passed to his younger brother Richard. His widow then married her cousin John Hopton of Ingerskill, Yorkshire, and died, still without children, in 1704. 


@@@@@


doc= 18375


Maulay, Peter (I) de (d. 1241), knight and royal councillor, took his name from Maulay in France, in the border region separating the provinces of Poitou and the Touraine. The identity of his father and mother remains unknown. By contemporaries it was said that he had risen from relatively humble origins, and that he abandoned his estates in France to his younger brother, Aimery de Maulay. Peter de Maulay is first recorded in 1202, granted land in the region of Loudun by King John. According to the chronicler Walter of Guisborough (likely to be a good source, though late, thanks to Guisborough's proximity to Maulay's castle at Mulgrave), it was Maulay, acting on royal orders, who carried out the murder of the king's nephew, Arthur, duke of Brittany, last heard of in 1203. Certainly Maulay enjoyed the close confidence of the king and came to be numbered among John's evil counsellors by the chronicler Roger of Wendover. Following the loss of Normandy in 1204 he joined the king in England. There he received a series of royal escheats, including the manor of Upavon in Wiltshire. In 1213 he travelled as royal ambassador to Rome, and in the following year played a leading role in the king's expedition to Poitou, where he took command of the garrison of La Rochelle. In the same year, in return for a proffer of 7000 marks, he was granted the marriage and lands of Isabella, sole daughter and heir of Robert of Thornham (d. 1211), a former royal seneschal of Poitou. The fine was later pardoned in return for Maulay's services to the crown. By his marriage Maulay rose to a leading position among the Yorkshire baronage, with control over the Fossard barony, with its 30 knights' fees and its honour divided between Doncaster in the West Riding of Yorkshire and Mulgrave in Cleveland. 
With the outbreak of civil war in 1215 Maulay was appointed constable of Corfe Castle in Dorset, with custody of the king's treasure and of King John's youngest son, Richard, the future earl of Cornwall. At Corfe, Maulay acted as gaoler to many state prisoners, including Eleanor (died 1241), the sister of Arthur of Brittany, and several barons captured during the civil war, from whom he extracted heavy ransoms and whom he retained in prison long after the end of hostilities, an action that earned him widespread dislike. Appointed sheriff of Dorset and Somerset in 1216, he failed to respond to the orders of the royal exchequer and instituted a regime of profiteering at the expense of the local gentry. In 1220 he was forced to relinquish custody of Richard of Cornwall, and in the following year, in a coup orchestrated by the justiciar, Hubert de Burgh (died 1243), Maulay was accused of treasonably plotting with the French, and was stripped of his offices. He retired to his estates in Yorkshire, where from around 1220 he was engaged in building a new castle at Mulgrave. In 1230 he served on the king's expedition to Brittany, and returned to court in 1232 as a protege of his fellow alien, Peter des Roches, bishop of Winchester (died 1238). 
In the following year Henry III restored him to possession of the manor of Upavon, seized back by the crown following Maulay's disgrace, and since conferred upon Gilbert Basset by royal charter. Maulay's restoration to Upavon was widely considered an illegal exercise of royal power, and precipitated a revolt by Basset and his overlord, Richard Marshal, earl of Pembroke (died 1234). Despite temporary disgrace Maulay survived the ensuing storm, and in 1236 was briefly appointed sheriff of Northamptonshire. Having taken the cross as long ago as 1220, in 1241 he set out on crusade together with his former ward, Richard of Cornwall. He died, probably in the Holy Land, later that same year. Although mistrusted as an alien by the native English baronage, his marriage to Isabella of Thornham, who predeceased him, established Peter de Maulay and his descendants as major Yorkshire landowners. Maulay himself bestowed land upon several local monasteries, including Meaux, where he founded a chantry in memory of his wife. He was succeeded by his eldest son, Peter (II) Mauley (died 1279), the ancestor of a succession of Mauley lords of Mulgrave ['see 'Mauley family]. The Mauley coat of arms, recorded by Matthew Paris, combined a maunch, probably Peter's original coat, with the Fossard arms: or, a bend sable. 


@@@@@


doc= 18376


Maund, Benjamin (bap. 1790, d. 1864), botanist and horticulturist, was born at Terrills in Tenbury, Worcestershire, and baptized on 7 November 1790, the middle son of Owen Maund ('c'.1753-1813), a farmer, and his wife, Mary ('c'.1761-1848). His published works testify to his having had some formal education before he was apprenticed, on 5 December 1806, to Thomas Griffiths, stationer, printer, and bookseller in Ludlow, then at its fashionable height. Griffiths's work was sometimes careless, an ironic start for Maund whose taste and standards were later so widely praised. On Christmas day 1813 -- the day his father was buried -- Maund bought the Market Place printing and bookselling business of Sarah Thompson in Bromsgrove, moving by 1818 to the High Street where he prospered as a bookseller, stationer, printer, bookbinder, publisher, and chemist in a combination normal for the time. He specialized in veterinary medicines, preparing some -- like 'Drench for Staggers' -- to his own formulae. In his large garden to the rear he experimented with seeds and plants obtained from around the world and with varieties of wheat which he exhibited in London. On 30 January 1817 he married Sarah Green (1792-1857). A deeply religious man, 'of gentlemanly appearance, quiet, modest and unassuming' (Humphreys), Maund was active in the town's affairs as churchwarden, member of several parish committees, director of a bank, and prime mover in the building of a new town hall and cattle market. He was also a keen freemason, appointed provincial grand steward in 1852. 
'Man, by nature, inherits the love of flowers', Maund wrote in the preface to volume one of the 'Botanic Garden' (13 vols., 1825-51). He sought to share his lifelong passion by producing an interesting and useful publication affordable to everyone. Each monthly issue contained a plate with four engraved and hand-coloured figures of hardy ornamental flowering plants and eight pages of text. The principal artist was Edward Dalton Smith, of Chelsea, and the engraver, S. Watts. Maund, it is claimed, started the fashion for inserting additional material at the end of monthly numbers of botanical periodicals. With the 'Botanic Garden' he issued 'The Auctarium' (1833), a miscellany of practical advice and information; the 'Floral Register' (1834), a source for newly introduced plants; and 'The Fruitist' (inserted into the last three volumes), a forum for disseminating knowledge through notes and readers' questions. In 1827 he became a fellow of the Linnean Society and by the 1830s widespread favourable reviews -- and a gold snuffbox from an admiring king of Prussia -- had earned him a reputation sufficient to enlist several distinguished contributors, including the professors of botany at Cambridge and Edinburgh, and leading artists, such as Mrs Withers, 'Flower painter in ordinary to Queen Adelaide', for his second periodical, 'The Botanist' (5 vols., 1836-42), a more ambitious work issued monthly with four plates and descriptive letterpress. Again, Maund published additional material, a short yearly supplement, a basic introduction to botany with volume two, and a 'Dictionary of English and Latin Terms', meant to accompany the large quarto edition but instead published separately in 1850. In 1837 Maund and William Holl, proprietor and editor of the 'Worcester Herald', edited volume one of 'The Naturalist' (5 vols., 1837-9), a Worcestershire-based enterprise. 
Two of Maund's daughters, Elizabeth and Sarah, began helping their father in their teens, together contributing over 200 illustrations. John Maund (1823-1858), his middle son, had a short but illustrious medical career in Australia. In 1851 Maund took Alfred Palmer into partnership and in 1859 he retired with his three daughters, to Leamington Spa, then Folkestone, and in 1862 to Sandown in the Isle of Wight where he died, at Clapton Villa, Sandown, on 21 April 1864. He was buried in Brading. In 1928 a memorial tablet was unveiled in St John's parish church, Bromsgrove. It is of Maund's head surrounded by a wreath. 


@@@@@


doc= 18377


Maunder, Samuel (1785-1849), compiler of reference works, belonged to a Devon family settled near Barnstaple. His sister Ann married William Pinnock, well known in his time as the promoter of the educational 'Catechisms', published in eighty-three parts between 1837 and 1849. Maunder took part in their preparation, although Pinnock's name alone appears on their title-page. The two were also partners in a publishing business in London, and published for two or three years the 'Literary Gazette'. Pinnock's rash business speculations led to his financial ruin, and Maunder, under his own name, then compiled and issued numerous dictionaries and compact encyclopaedias, chiefly for educational purposes. They were very popular, had large sales, and were frequently revised and reprinted. William Jerdan, who knew Maunder, wrote of 'his indefatigable, painstaking and diligent research, his absence of ambition and contentment with accuracy and solidity of information... an honourable and worthy man' (Jerdan, 343). 
Maunder's first book was 'The Little Lexicon, or, Multum in parvo of the English Language' (1825). His next book, 'The Treasury of Knowledge and Library of Reference' (1830), sold over 200,000 copies. 'The Biographical Treasury' (1838) was frequently revised and reprinted and was brought up to date by W. L. R. Cates (1873, 1882). An interesting feature, used elsewhere, is the snippets of information and moral maxims printed in the four margins of each page. Other 'Treasuries' were devoted to belles lettres (1841), history (1844), natural history (1848), and geography (1856 and 1860). 
Maunder also prepared a school edition of R. Montgomery's 'Omnipresence of the Deity', a revised edition of Shakespeare's plays (1851), and one of 'Geography and History' by E. R. (22nd edn, 1859). 
Maunder died at his home, 67 Gibson Square, Islington, on 30 April 1849. 


@@@@@


doc= 18378


Maundrell, Henry (bap. 1665, d. 1701), Church of England clergyman and traveller in the Middle East, was the son of Robert Maundrell of Compton Bassett, near Calne, Wiltshire, where he was baptized on 23 December 1665. In the register of Exeter College, Oxford, his father is described as 'pleb', but the family had previously been important locally. He matriculated on 4 April 1682, at the age of sixteen, and entered Exeter College, Oxford, as commoner on 27 September. He graduated BA on 15 October 1685 and MA on 19 June 1688. He was elected Sarum fellow at Exeter College on 30 June 1686 and became a full fellow of the college on 28 June 1697, the day on which he also graduated BD by decree. 
Maundrell was appointed curate of Bromley, Kent, in 1689, where he remained until 1695. A tombstone in Richmond churchyard suggests that he had also been a curate there. On 15 December 1695 he preached a sermon to a body of the Levant Company's merchants at the church of St Peter-le-Poer in London (published in 1696), and on 20 December he was elected by their general court as chaplain to the Levant Company's factory at Aleppo in Turkey. The chaplains to the Levant Company's factories were often distinguished scholars, interested in holy places and in classical sites and civilizations. Their pay was normally 400 dollars (about $100) per annum, plus travel to the Levant and additional payment towards equipment, including books. Maundrell was granted $20 on 15 January 1696 for books for its library. His reasons for taking up this new appointment are not entirely clear, and there is indication that he did so with some reluctance. He seems to have had a romantic involvement in England from which he was reluctant to allow his mentors, notably his uncle Sir Charles Hedges, to extricate him by encouragement to the Aleppo post. 
Maundrell arrived in Aleppo in 1696, having travelled via Frankfurt am Main to discuss aspects of the history and topography of the Holy Land with the German scholar and orientalist Job Ludolphus (Hiob Leiutholf). His daily work included the saying of the Anglican office for the factors in Aleppo. He stated in a letter to the bishop of Rochester, published as a preface to his 'Journey', that 'it is our first employment every morning to solemnize the daily Service of the Church; at which I am sure to have always a devout, a regular and full Congregation'. While in Aleppo he suffered from ill health, and he died there of fever early in 1701. The vacancy caused by his death is recorded in the Levant Company's minutes on 15 May 1701. 
Maundrell is best-known for his account 'A Journey from Aleppo to Jerusalem at Easter A.D. 1697', published in Oxford in 1703, two years after his death. This scholarly narrative describes in detail the journey from Aleppo to Jerusalem and back, made by Maundrell and fourteen others in 1697. His motive was to undertake an Easter pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and the company departed at 3 p.m. on Friday, 26 February 1697. Their route took them across northern Syria to Latakia, down the coast to Acre, then to Jerusalem for the Latin Easter, then inland to the valley of the Jordan and Bethlehem, returning to Jerusalem for the Eastern churches' Easter. They returned to Aleppo via Damascus, Tripoli, and the earlier part of their outward route, returning to Aleppo on 18 May. 
The 'Journey' was partially intended to bring up to date George Sandys's account of 1610, 'Relation of a journey begun an. dom. 1610. Foure bookes. Containing a description of the Turkish empire, of Aegypt, of the Holy Land, of the remote parts of Italy and llands adioyning'. In fact, Maundrell's account is quite different from that of Sandys, and is a major work in its own right, giving detailed descriptions of the life and landscapes of Syria, Lebanon, and Palestine, including the agricultural practices of the regions and places encountered, in addition to descriptions of places of religious significance. The factual accounts of the relict features of the ancient worlds are of interest and value, and they are accompanied by careful measurements and plans of major sites such as Baalbek. Maundrell is critical of much of what he and his companions saw and experienced, but his accounts are well informed from contemporary and much earlier, classical and biblical sources, and written in an economic but witty and informative style. Later writers valued this work. Curzon, in his 'Visits to Monasteries in the Levant' (1849), says that he 'was struck with the superiority of old Maundrell's narrative over all the others, for he tells us plainly and clearly what he saw' (Curzon, 168), and Howell, in a preface to a 1963 reprint of the 'Journey', says that 'it is taut, disciplined writing from which every wrinkle of ambiguity has been ironed away' (Howell, xi). Most of the nineteenth-century writers on the Holy Land, including Henry Robinson, Dean Stanley, Carl Ritter, and George Adam Smith, comment positively on Maundrell's account. 

'A Journey from Aleppo to Jerusalem' went through twelve editions by 1810 and it appeared in full and condensed form in later compendia of travels in the Levant and the Holy Land, including Thomas Wright's edited 'Early Travels in Palestine' (1848). It was translated into French in 1705 and 1706, into Dutch in 1717, and into German in 1737, and remains an important account of the places and peoples of the region. 


@@@@@


doc= 18379


Maunsell, Andrew (b. c.1560, d. in or after 1604?), bookseller and bibliographer, was made free of the Drapers' Company by John Wight, himself active in the book trade, on 6 December 1574. The dates and circumstances of his birth, marriage, and death are unknown. Although never a member of the Stationers' Company, Maunsell was active as a bookseller and publisher from 1576, when there were printed for him, by Thomas East, 'Jehovah. A Free Pardon. First Written in Spanish', translated by J. Danyel, and, by John Charlewood, Thomas Rogers's 'A Philosophicall Discourse, Entituled, The Anatomie of the Minde'. At least five other works by Rogers, chaplain to Archbishop Bancroft, were later published by Maunsell, whose investments were chiefly in theological works and in elementary textbooks. 
Between 1576 and 1596 Maunsell financed the printing of some fifty-five imprints and was listed as selling seven others, and he bound his apprentices to freemen of the Stationers' Company. Among his more ambitious enterprises was the publication in folio in 1583, with Henry Denham, Thomas Chard, and William Broome, of a translation by Anthony Martin of Peter Martyr's 'Common Places'. He occupied premises in St Paul's Churchyard from 1576 to 1589, first at the north-east quarter, at The Parrot, from 1576 to 1581; then at the West End from 1582 to 1583. In 1583 he returned to the north-east quarter, trading at the Brazen Serpent from 1584 to 1589. He then removed to a shop at the south entrance of the Royal Exchange, where he is found in 1592, and from there to Lothbury in 1594 to 1595. His device, formerly that of Richard Jugge, was a pelican with its young, rising phoenix-like, out of the flames, surrounded by the motto: 'Pro lege, rege, grege', expanded below in English as 'Love kepyth the lawe, obeyeth the kynge, and is good to the commen welthe'. 
In 1590 many of Maunsell's copies were transferred to Robert Dexter. There are no copies entered to him in this and the following year, and from 1592 to 1596 he appears on the title pages of only eight works, and chiefly as a bookseller rather than a publisher. It is reasonable to infer that it was at this time that he embarked on the compilation of the 'Catalogue of English Printed Bookes', which was to be his chief claim to fame. This catalogue, of which Maunsell himself completed only the first two parts, bore a triple dedication: to the Queen; to divines, 'for some soare so hie that they looke not so low, as on theire owne countrie writers'; and to the Stationers' Company. This was something like the first attempt since John Bale's 'Scriptores' to construct an English national bibliography. The plan was for the first volume to contain divinity; the second, science in all its branches, and music; and the third, literature, logic, law, and history. 
The first two parts appeared in 1595, printed by John Windet and James Roberts respectively. The first part, devoted to divinity, expressly excludes 'Popish' books printed overseas and books against the 'present government'. It is arranged, like the second part, chiefly in alphabetical order of authors' surnames, where earlier models such as Gesner, Simler, and Bale had listed authors under their forenames, and it also contains thematic sections, devoted, for example, to sermons, catechisms, primers, and commentaries on books of the 'Bible'. The second part, dedicated to Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, is also prefaced by letters to the 'professors' of mathematics and physic, to the Stationers' Company, and to booksellers in general. Both parts profess to contain only books that Maunsell has seen, and ample spaces are provided for additions. 
Maunsell's catalogues provide confirmation of the existence at that time of a number of books of which no known copy survives and which are otherwise recorded only occasionally, if at all, in documentary sources. At the same time it falls short of completeness and several copies survive in which books unknown to Maunsell have been entered, among them one acquired, already sparsely annotated, by Thomas Baker, into which Baker has entered additions copied from Archbishop Harsnett's copy (Colchester, H.f.35) and added a few of his own up to 1602 (CUL, Adv.b.52.1); and another, now in the library of Trinity College, Cambridge (VI.3.60), which supplies many of the papist books omitted by Maunsell and also Latin books, arranged indiscriminately together, and copious other additions to 1595. There are several others substantially annotated (including Hunt., 54169, Harvard UL, B. 2076.1*, CUL, Syn 4.59.16, and University of Michigan, SPEC\Z\2002\451), but unfortunately no comprehensive census of annotated copies exists. 
The promised third part of the catalogue ('Humanity') did not appear under Maunsell's hand, and the want was not supplied until the appearance of the 'Catalogue' of William London in 1658. It was at one time supposed that it was Maunsell's death that prevented the appearance of the third part of his 'Catalogue', but he was certainly still alive on 19 April 1596 when, in response to his petition to them, and on account of his 'paines in collectinge and printinge the Catalogue of bookes', the Stationers' Company granted him a 'benevolence' in money and books 'the particulars of whiche money & bookes appere in a Booke [no longer to be found] conteyning the names of the particular persons that contributed the same' (Greg and Boswell, 54), and almost certainly on 15 October 1604 when 'Andrewe Manssell, son of Andrew Mansell, citizen and stationer of London' was apprenticed to Edmund Weaver, stationer, to serve with Thomas Wight (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 2.285), without any indication that his father was deceased. 


@@@@@


doc= 18380


Mamesfeld, Henry (c.1270-1328), ecclesiastic, belonged to a family that may have come from Mansfield in Nottinghamshire. He was ordained deacon and priest during 1296 in Lincoln diocese, the same year that he secured Flintham rectory, Nottinghamshire, in the diocese of York. He received licences of absence from successive archbishops to study for one year in 1297 and 1299 and for three years in 1306. Between 1288 and 1296 he was a fellow of Merton College. An MA of Oxford, he had incepted as a doctor of theology by 1309 when, on 27 October, his election as chancellor of the university was confirmed. In 1311, during his tenure, new statutes were drawn up for the 'scholars of Master William of Durham' -- that is, University College. By December of the following year Mamesfeld had vacated the office. 
Mamesfeld was one of those who attended the provincial council summoned to York in 1311 by Archbishop William Greenfield (died 1315) for the examination of the templars in the northern province. A canon of Lincoln, he was collated on 22 May 1311 to the Sanctae Crucis prebend, and in 1316 to that of Asgarby. In 1315 he was elected dean of Lincoln and in January 1320 bishop, but he declined to accept the latter office. He died in the second half of 1328; probate of his will (the details are not extant) followed on 6 December. 
The early fourteenth-century painted glass in twelve and possibly all fourteen side windows of the choir of Merton College was given by Mamesfeld. These windows depict saints in central panels beneath elaborate pinnacled canopies. All but two of those on the south-east have the saints flanked by kneeling figures of the donor -- also beneath canopies -- in gown, hood, and cap with the inscription: 'Magister Henricus de Mamesfeld me fecit'. To Oriel College he gave a copy of Peter Lombard's 'Sentences', but his principal gift was of eight volumes to Merton College, one of which, the 'Quodlibeta' of Godfrey de Montibus, is now Balliol College MS 211. The others comprised glossed versions of the gospels, the epistles of St Paul, the book of 'Exodus', and of the psalter, together with copies of St Thomas Aquinas's 'De veritate' and 'Contra Gentiles', and Gregory's 'Moralia'. William Wheatley, a master at the schools of Stamford and Lincoln, his contemporary at Oxford, included him in his dedication of a commentary on the 'De consolatione philosophiae' of Boethius, which John Pits and Thomas Tanner, following him, attributed to Mamesfeld himself. 


@@@@@


doc= 18381


Maurice (d. 1107), bishop of London, rose in the service of William the Conqueror as royal chaplain and chancellor. He was appointed bishop of London at the royal court in Gloucester, at Christmas 1085. Once, in 1082, he appears as archdeacon of Le Mans, an office he surely also owed to the king. Although there is no positive evidence, there is no reason to doubt his Norman or continental origin. As chancellor from 1078 to 1085, Maurice would have been in regular attendance on the king. Supervising the production of royal writs and charters, he had a central position in royal government. Ranulf Flambard, the leading minister of William Rufus and later bishop of Durham, is said to have served under Chancellor Maurice as keeper of the king's seal. 
The event in Maurice's career which is most widely recorded by the chroniclers is his anointing and crowning of Henry I at Westminster on 5 August 1100, three days after the sudden death of William Rufus. His lasting achievements, however, were the beginning of a new cathedral and the reorganization of his cathedral chapter. Anglo-Saxon St Paul's completely burned down in June 1087, and even though no visible trace of Maurice's building remains, enough is known to show that he successfully entered the competition of Anglo-Norman cathedral builders to rival the grandeur of Winchester Cathedral. A need to restructure the temporalities of his church to sustain his ambitious building programme and the wish to provide the new cathedral with a representative body of clerics may well have been factors in the reorganization of the chapter, but there was also a general concern among the Anglo-Norman bishops with the organization of cathedral chapters. Maurice established a chapter of thirty secular canons, including a dean at their head and four archdeacons. To each of them Maurice assigned a prebend as an individual source of income. With his reforms he combined a respect for Anglo-Saxon traditions. At Chich (later called St Osyth) on the Essex coast he instituted four priests to serve the church of the Anglo-Saxon saint Osgyth. 
Maurice's reputation was that of an efficient administrator and conscientious bishop. William of Malmesbury rebuked him for being too fond of women, reporting maliciously that he claimed to have to have intercourse on his doctors' prescription. But St Paul's remained a home for married clergy long after Maurice's death in late September 1107. 


@@@@@


doc= 18382


Meurig (fl. 1210), Welsh-language poet, was probably also the treasurer of the diocese of Llandaff. The date of his activity is apparently determined by a passage in Gerald of Wales's 'De principis instructione' (SS3, chap. 28). This work states that a long-deceased soldier-poet appeared in a vision to Meurig (Mauricius) and invited him to complete a poem prophesying the interdict imposed on England in the reign of King John. Gerald asserts in the same work that Meurig, whom he describes as 'vir bonus et copiose litteratus', was a Glamorgan man and a brother of Clement, abbot of Neath. John Bale confirms his origins in calling him Mauricius Morganensis and, like Gerald, refers to his literary talents, attributing to him a book of Latin epigrams and several volumes in Welsh. It has therefore been concluded that this Mauricius may reasonably be identified with the Meurig who was treasurer of Llandaff in Gerald's time. 
In the Iolo manuscripts Meurig is said to have been the author of 'Y cwta cyfarwydd', a history of the whole island of Britain, a book of proverbs, works on Welsh poetry and theology, and a translation of the gospel of 'St John' from Latin into Welsh, with commentaries. No trace of these works has been found, probably because they did not exist. The extant manuscript called 'Y cwta cyfarwydd' was written in the first half of the fifteenth century, somewhere in west Glamorgan or the Gower, possibly by a certain 'Dauyd', whose name is recorded on one of its pages and who may have been a monk at Neath Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 18383


Maurice, prince palatine of the Rhine (1621-1652), royalist army officer and naval officer, was the fourth son of Frederick V (1596-1632), elector palatine of the Rhine, and his wife, Elizabeth (1596-1662), daughter of James VI and I of Great Britain and sister of Charles I. Maurice was born in the castle of Kustrin, on the Oder, on 16 January 1621 NS. There George William, the elector of Brandenburg, the husband of Frederick's sister, had offered temporary refuge to Elizabeth on the flight of her family after the battle of the White Mountain, which two months earlier had ended their short-lived occupation of the Bohemian throne and residence in Prague. The new baby, baptized four days after his birth, was named after Maurice of Nassau (died 1625), the hero of the Dutch resistance to Spain. He was sent to Berlin for safe keeping, while the family found protection in the Netherlands at the hands of the stadholder Frederick Henry, prince of Orange, Nassau's younger brother. Maurice stayed in the care of his Brandenburg kin in Berlin for seven years, and only joined his parents in Holland in 1628. 
In the years that followed the White Mountain the exiled palatines at their court at The Hague were the object of international protestant conspiracy and intermittent military activity, designed to recover their patrimony. After the death of Frederick V, Elizabeth (still styled queen of Bohemia) brought up a large family, which included her eldest surviving sons, Charles Lewis (elector after 1632), Rupert, and Maurice, and her youngest daughter, Sophia. While Rupert attracted attention by his angelic appearance and devilish ways, Maurice was distinguished, at least in his mother's eyes, only by his great height. With her family in exile, and their homeland under military occupation, Elizabeth had few illusions about their future prospects. She wrote to Archbishop William Laud in May 1637 that Maurice (then sixteen) would be joining the prince of Orange in the forthcoming campaign in Germany 'to learn that profession I believe he must live by' ('CSP dom.', '1637', 138). Laud approved. She may also have wished him away from The Hague, where he had got into scrapes and had even fought a duel. With Rupert at the siege of Breda in 1637, he was commended for his courage. Military service was mixed with study at a French university (perhaps at Paris, as he was in the city in 1638-9) and, possibly, Leiden. In 1640 he entered the Swedish general Banier's army. In spite of a pension provided by the English government, money was desperately short at The Hague, and Charles I, concerned for his sister's welfare, had lavishly entertained her two eldest sons at Whitehall. He now promised assistance to Maurice, to 'go to what army he pleaseth' (Bromley, 124). 
But before Maurice could do so, the political crisis in the British Isles, and the uprising in Ulster, turned into civil war in all three kingdoms. When Charles I sent his queen to The Hague -- ostensibly to bring their daughter Mary to join her newly married husband, the son of the stadholder, but also to seek recruits, arms, and money from the Dutch -- Rupert and Maurice sprang to her side. They sailed to the north of England in August 1642 in time to appear at the raising of the royal standard, the signal for war, at Nottingham. No doubt arrangements had already been made for Rupert to be given command of his uncle's cavalry. For his part Maurice became colonel of a regiment of horse. As might be expected from his closeness to the king and his brother, the general, Maurice's regiment was a favoured unit. It was officered by professional soldiers and supported by wealthy gentlemen; many of its junior officers went on to high command in the war. It was an early and effective presence in the first skirmish, at Powick Bridge, near Worcester, on 23 September 1642. Maurice was wounded at this engagement. His regiment of four troops fought in Rupert's right wing of horse at Edgehill. 
When the king's cavalry quartered around the royalist capital, Oxford, Maurice was called on to attend the council of war on six of the sixteen recorded meetings which took place between November 1642 and May 1643. The youngest of the royal counsellors (he was twenty-two), he did not impress the chancellor of the exchequer, twelve years older. Sir Edward Hyde later wrote that 'he was not qualified with parts of nature, and less with any acquired... He understood very little more of the war than to fight very stoutly when there was occasion' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.67). Maurice rode with his brother in the successful assault on Cirencester in February 1643. On 2 March that year he was given his first independent command, as general of horse and foot in Gloucestershire and south Wales, with the objective of shadowing Sir William Waller, whose rapid progress in the west was causing alarm at Oxford. His little army skirmished with Waller's larger force in the Forest of Dean (Little Dean, 11 April), and the following day, at Ripple Field, near Tewkesbury, inflicted some damage. 
Maurice showed flair and skill in taking his forces across the Severn and outmanoeuvring his much more experienced opponent on this narrow site. His growing reputation further recruited his cavalry unit, as it was 'accounted the most active regiment in the army'. One of his new officers reckoned that six months' service with it in summer 1643 'gave me more proficiency as a soldier... than generally in the Low Countries in 4 or 5 years' ('Military Memoirs', 8). It was heavily involved in the unsuccessful attempt by the king and Oxford forces to relieve Reading at the end of April. 
William Seymour, marquess of Hertford, had been given supreme command of the western counties by the king at the beginning of the war, but had been forced to retire and go to Oxford. A fragment of his forces under Sir Ralph Hopton, however, had prospered in Cornwall, and had been encouraged by the king to march east. Maurice was to return to the west to assist him and supplement his largely infantry force with a strong body of horse, as well as foot and munitions, under Hertford's nominal command. Rupert had wanted his brother to command in chief, and intrigued with the king to this effect. But Hertford, although no soldier, was of great political importance in the west country; and Maurice consented to serve under him, as lieutenant-general. Unfortunately, as Hyde commented, there were in the king's camp 'no two men of more contrary natures and dispositions', and the basis was laid for further quarrels in the high command (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.67). 
At the first skirmish with Waller's men at Chewton Mendip, near Wells, Somerset, in June 1643 the prince was wounded with 'two shrewd hurts in his head' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.87) and briefly taken prisoner. Although the Cornish stormed Waller's strong position at Lansdown on 5 July, the parliamentarian general was able to withdraw in good order, interrupt vital supplies, and pen Hopton's forces into Devizes. It was left to Maurice's cavalry to summon further help from Oxford, covering 44 miles in a desperate night ride. Wilmot, with fresh horse, brought Waller to battle at Roundway Down (13 July), shattered his wings of cavalry, and, joined with the Cornish issuing out of Devizes, put his foot to flight. 
Bristol was left in a vulnerable position by Waller's defeat, in which some of the city garrison had been involved, and his army's withdrawal. The Oxford and western forces combined to storm the city on 26 July 1643. While Rupert's attack on the north-west sector of the defensive line was successful, Maurice's men and the Cornish suffered heavy casualties on the other side, which was strongly held. In the appointment of a governor of the conquered city the rivalry between the princes and Hertford erupted again. Hertford, as regional commander, nominated Hopton. Rupert claimed it for himself. The king confirmed this but made Hopton his deputy, and recalled Hertford to Oxford. Maurice was made sole general of the western forces. 
With a largely infantry army Maurice followed the earl of Carnarvon's cavalry sweep through the Dorset countryside, which had been successful in persuading several formerly parliamentarian towns to make terms. But as Hopton had already noted, the Oxford horse and the Cornish foot did not mix well, and often came to blows. The prince's men were unpaid and disorderly; they now breached agreements made, and resorted to plunder. There was another quarrel, this time with Carnarvon, over a new appointment, and the earl resigned his commission. Maurice turned west to quicken the siege of Exeter. It surrendered on 4 September. Dartmouth fell to his troops in October, by which time most of the ports vital to hopes of supply from the continent were in the king's hands. 
Only Plymouth remained of any significance, and Maurice was about to assist the siege there when he fell seriously ill. William Harvey and other royal physicians were sent to treat him and diagnosed 'the ordinary raging disease of the army, a slow fever with great dejection of strength' (Warburton, 2.307). As others in his entourage fell sick at the same time, the common contagion of that summer, a form of typhus, can be identified. 'The disease of the camp' ('morbus campestris') had decimated the armies of both sides in the Thames valley earlier. Maurice survived after a month's convalescence, but the siege of Plymouth was impeded. The town could be supplied from the sea, the defences were strong, and the garrison and townsmen resolute. Initial attacks were beaten off, and it also became clear that with the loss of so many of their old leaders the Cornish foot were less effective in this and the campaigns which followed. 
The king's concern for his nephew was shown not only in the dispatch of royal doctors to his side, but in his plans for Maurice to marry a rich French heiress. 'Though Mars be now most in voag', he wrote in July 1643, 'yet Hymen may sometimes be remembyred' (Scott, 32). Rupert had spurned the favoured bride, and Charles I did not want to lose a lady whose wealth might be tapped for the royalist cause. But in spite of his uncle's pleas, Maurice remained unmarried. 
In the new year Maurice was commissioned to command all the southern counties except Hampshire, where Hopton's new army was active. His first task was to besiege Lyme Regis, which threatened the royalist supply lines from the western ports to Oxford and Bristol. With a considerable force of Cornish, Devon, and Irish foot, and twelve well-equipped siege guns, he opened the assault in April 1644. He built new batteries and poured shot, including 'hot iron', 'fire-arrows', and other forms of wildfire, into the little town, burning wooden houses, and barges in the harbour. But as with Plymouth, the besieged could be reinforced from the sea, sailors fought alongside the defenders, and Robert Blake conducted a skilful resistance. Several attacks were bloodily repulsed. In a wet season, and suffering heavy casualties, Maurice's troops wasted away. When forced to raise the siege, on the approach of Essex's army in mid-June, only half his force remained. 
Nevertheless, when his army was reviewed by the king, marching west on the tail of Essex's army, at Crediton on 26 July 1644, it was 2500 horse and 5000 foot strong, with a full complement of general staff. Its commander now possessed a troop of mounted lifeguards. Maurice provided the advance guard of the royal forces that pursued the parliamentarians into Cornwall and eventually compelled their surrender. For the prince, however, the Lostwithiel victory was a turning point. He found that his Cornish troops would not leave the county to follow him east with the main Oxford army, and his attempts to surprise Taunton and Bridgwater, and drive in Waller's outposts, were all repulsed. He did have some success at the second battle of Newbury, where his much reduced force held Speen Hill against the odds, and by means of a complicated manoeuvre managed to draw off the guns, placed in Donnington Castle, after the battle. 
The situation was altered with the appointment of Rupert as supreme commander in November 1644. Maurice replaced him as lieutenant-general in Wales and the marcher counties, without, however, the title of president. He set up his headquarters at Worcester in mid-January 1645, and energetically reorganized the royalist war effort in the region. He agreed articles of co-operation with the local commissioners, imposed a loyalty oath, and gathered recruits, munitions, and draught horses, in short supply at Oxford. But the local parliamentarians were increasingly confident and active; in meeting the threat to Chester the garrison of Shrewsbury was weakened, and it fell to a surprise assault. With it Maurice lost his base magazine. Other set-backs followed. Several of his leading supporters were killed or captured and their houses destroyed. His men deserted, and their conduct deteriorated to the extent that public opinion, formerly favourable, turned against them. The clubman movement in Worcestershire and Herefordshire began to take shape. 
Maurice played a crucial role in spring 1645, however, in the preparations for the coming campaign. Most of the royalist-controlled munitions industry lay in the region he commanded, and Rupert joined his brother to make full use of it in March and April. Early in May they brought these essential supplies to Oxford, and provided a cavalry screen, to allow the king's army to take the field. Maurice was present at the sack of Leicester, and at the battle of Naseby on 14 June. With his regiment of horse and his own troop of lifeguards, he fought alongside his brother in the right wing of horse. 
In the dispersal of the royal forces after this disaster Maurice returned to Worcester. A source hostile to him admitted that he was 'in himselfe cyvyll to all and wel beeloved of the cytyzens', though too tolerant of the undisciplined and disbanded soldiery who crowded into the city at this stage of the war (P. Styles, 'Studies in Seventeenth Century West Midlands History', 229). The presence of the Scots army, its siege of Hereford, and its threat to Worcester put Maurice on the defensive. But with the aid of the king's remaining forces he raised the siege in mid-September, and brought 600-700 horse to the king in north Wales after his defeat at Rowton Heath, outside Chester. 
Rupert had surrendered Bristol on 10 September, however, much to the king's indignation. In dismissing his nephew instantly he compromised the position of Maurice and many other of Rupert's appointees. While Maurice had not been named in the wild rumours of plots that reached the ears of the king, and he received a friendly letter from Charles, he left his post and joined his brother. Together with about 200 followers they challenged their uncle at Newark, on 26 October 1645. Although a council of war cleared Rupert of any treachery in his surrender of the city, both brothers applied to parliament for passes to go abroad. In the interim they stayed at Oxford, and before the fall of the royal headquarters (June 1646) the king and Rupert were reconciled. 
The brothers separated on leaving England, Rupert travelling to France, Maurice returning to Holland. He took service with the prince of Orange's army in 1648, as he had before. The revolt of the English fleet altered prospects again for the exiled royalists in summer 1648, providing an opportunity for direct action against the parliamentarian authorities and the chance to win prizes for the impoverished court of Prince Charles at The Hague. Rupert and Maurice took the revolted ships (January 1649) to assist the royalists in Ireland; they raided commerce from their base at Kinsale, until Robert Blake's arrival with the main fleet and Oliver Cromwell's conquests on the mainland. They then accepted the protection of the king of Portugal, and sailed to Lisbon. But Blake followed and the brothers were forced to seek refuge in the Mediterranean, until -- in the hope of further booty -- they sailed to the coast of west Africa, where on 2 March 1652 Maurice raised his flag as vice-admiral on a captured English ship, renamed the 'Defiance'. From there the brothers took their little privateering fleet, reduced to four ships, to the West Indies. 
Disaster struck in mid-September. A hurricane caught the flotilla as it sailed close to the Virgin Islands, and continued for four days (13-16 September). Only Rupert's flagship survived. Maurice and the rest disappeared on the second day of the storm, no doubt wrecked on one of the extensive reefs of Anegada or Sombrero Islands. Rumours persisted for years that he was still alive, possibly a prisoner of the Spanish on Puerto Rico. This myth was disposed of when Sir Robert Holmes, Rupert's follower and former subordinate of Maurice, questioned captured Spanish seamen with local knowledge before the Second Anglo-Dutch War in 1664. They had heard of no survivors, and had seen among the wreckage on Puerto Rico's shores 'a great quantitie of pipestaves markt MP as all prince Maurice his cask[s] were' (Ollard, 125). 
As a general and admiral Maurice was overshadowed by his elder brother, to whom he was very close, sharing his good and bad fortune unhesitatingly during the civil war and after. Like Rupert he was personally brave, and was loved and respected by his immediate followers as both a dashing cavalry leader and a good organizer. He was equally ignorant of English politics and lacking in diplomatic and debating skills, with the result that, despite his high connections, he contributed little to the overall direction of the war. Hyde accused him of being too familiar with his subordinates, which the frequent indiscipline of his troops might confirm, and not giving due respect to the leading figures of the court (Hyde no doubt included). He lacked his brother's intellectual and artistic interests. His failures before Plymouth and, particularly, Lyme lessened the reputation he had acquired earlier. His competent and popular government in the Welsh marches in 1645, however, indicated that he might have pursued a successful career had he lived to enjoy the restoration of the royalists' fortunes later. 


@@@@@


doc= 18384


Maurice, (John) Frederick Denison (1805-1872), Church of England clergyman and theologian, was born at Normanton, near Lowestoft, on 29 August 1805, the fifth child and only son of Michael Maurice and his wife, Priscilla, 'nee' Hurry, daughter of a Yarmouth merchant. Michael Maurice was preparing for the dissenting ministry at an academy at Hackney, Middlesex, when a shift in his opinions led him to Unitarianism, a decision which cost him the inheritance of an estate. In 1792 he was elected evening preacher at the Unitarian chapel in Hackney where Joseph Priestley preached in the mornings. Two years later he married, residing at Normanton until 1812, when he moved first to Clifton, and then, in the following year, to Frenchay, near Bristol. Besides Frederick, the family now consisted of seven sisters, three older and four younger than he, as well as a nephew and a niece of Mrs Maurice. The deaths of the two latter, on 18 October 1814 and 3 January 1815 respectively, greatly affected the elder sisters, to the extent indeed of bringing about a change in their religious convictions from Unitarianism to Calvinism. The eldest, Elizabeth ('b'. 1795), joined the Church of England, whereas the third, Anne ('b'. 1799), became a Baptist. Eventually their mother also embraced the Calvinistic doctrine. Unfortunately the religious persuasions which thus divided the family gave rise to vehement disagreement. That the young Frederick was confused and distressed by these disputes is of little wonder, and as he came to understand how matters stood he began to sense that need for religious unity which was to be a guiding principle of all his subsequent thinking. It likewise left him with the impression that, as he afterwards put it, 'a society merely united in opinion has no real cohesion' ('Life', 2.276). 
Maurice's education and upbringing by his father were on puritanical lines: reading novels was not, in the main, allowed; 'Bible' study was insisted upon. He appears to have been an exemplary child, responsive to teaching and always dutiful. He read a good deal on his own account, but had little inclination for games. Serious and precocious, he even at this time harboured ambitions for a life of public service. 
In 1821 Maurice's mother finally left the Unitarian body, her son also having found its tenets and its narrowly sectarian outlook on life unappealing ('Life', 1.175). No longer the dissenting ministry but the legal profession was his preferred option now. But in order to enhance his general education he judged a course at a university to be necessary, and chose Cambridge, where no religious test was imposed on entrance. Accordingly, in the October term of 1823, he took up residence at Trinity College, attending Julius Hare's lectures on the Greek drama and on Plato. Hare had little personal contact with Maurice, but sufficient to recognize in him an aptitude for philosophy. Maurice's official tutor was Frederick Field. He joined eagerly in university activities, spoke at the union, and was among the founders of the Apostles, another original member being Alfred Tennyson, whose lifelong friend he became. He also formed a close companionship with John Sterling (1806-1844), a favourite pupil of Hare's and a great admirer of Coleridge, whose talk at Hampstead had fascinated him. With Sterling he transferred in October 1825 to Trinity Hall, where fellowships were tenable by barristers and awarded for a good degree in law. Here he read for the LLB course. He moved to London to study for the bar in the long vacation of 1826, returning to Cambridge the following term for his final examination, gaining a first class in civil law. On the strength of this he stood an excellent chance of a college fellowship, but felt himself unable to subscribe to the Church of England's 'Thirty-Nine Articles', then still requisite for proceeding to a degree. He would not, he said, 'hang a bribe round his neck to lead his conscience', and removed his name from the college books. 
While still at Cambridge, Maurice revealed a capacity for intellectual leadership, although by nature he was far from self-assertive. With the help of a friend he started the 'Metropolitan Quarterly Magazine', which ran for four issues, he himself contributing a fair proportion of the articles, including appreciative pieces on contemporary authors. Highly critical of Jeremy Bentham's views, his readiest praise was reserved for Coleridge, whose influence upon his thinking was already marked. In 1827 and 1828, and now living in London, he contributed to the 'Westminster Review' and made the acquaintance of J. S. Mill. With Sterling he also edited the lately founded 'Athenaeum', to which he gave a clearly reformist tone. Unfortunately it did not pay, and he was disturbed by troubles at home. His father had lost money through unsound investments and was no longer able to take in pupils. The family moved to Southampton and to a smaller house, where Frederick joined them. In the meantime his religious beliefs had undergone change; the Unitarianism of his upbringing was rejected and he resolved on ordination in the Church of England. Preparation for this meant a return to university life, and he now chose Oxford, entering Exeter College in 1830, where a friend of Sterling's, as college tutor, was able to arrange for his Cambridge terms to count as residence. But his funds were severely limited, and although he hoped to meet his expenses by means of a novel he was trying to get published, his position proved difficult. In the end he was saved by a small legacy that happened to come his way. 
At Oxford, Maurice joined an essay society in which he came to know William Ewart Gladstone and James Bruce, afterwards eighth earl of Elgin. It was the latter who introduced him to the writings of the theologically minded Scottish laird Thomas Erskine (1788-1870) of Linlathen, whose ideas, like those of Coleridge, were to prove a guiding influence on his thought, and who became a firm friend. He admitted that one of Erskine's books -- 'The Brazen Serpent' -- was of 'unspeakable comfort' to him ('Life', 1.108, 121). Many years later he dedicated one of his own volumes, 'The Prophets and Kings of the Old Testament' (1853), to Erskine. He was also interested, as Erskine was, in the activities of Edward Irving and his congregation at the Regent Square Chapel in London. On 29 March 1831 he was baptized, thus becoming formally a member of the Church of England. In November of the same year he graduated, with a second class. The death in July 1832 of his favourite sister, Emma, at whose bedside he had attended for months, caused him much sadness. 
Maurice's ordination by the bishop of Lichfield took place on 26 January 1834, to an assistant curacy at Bubbenhall, near Leamington. Shortly afterwards his novel, 'Eustace Conway, or, The Brother and Sister', at last saw print, but although it won Coleridge's esteem it was not a commercial success. His first theological publication was his pamphlet 'Subscription No Bondage' (1835), appearing under the pseudonym Rusticus, in which, somewhat paradoxically in view of his own experience, he undertook to defend the obligation of subscribing to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' on matriculating at the University of Oxford. His contention was that such subscription was no more than a declaration of the terms on which the institution professed to teach its students and they in turn agreed to learn. It was, he considered, fairer to state those terms openly than to conceal them. Later (1853) he changed his mind and advocated the abolition of tests. It was while a curate at Bubbenhall that he set to work on composing an article, 'Moral and metaphysical philosophy', for the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana', a task which, with its successive revisions for later editions, was to occupy him on and off for the rest of his life. 
In January 1836 Maurice accepted the chaplaincy of Guy's Hospital in London, where in addition to his ordinary pastoral duties he lectured the students twice weekly on moral philosophy. His sister Priscilla kept house for him, and he also received a pupil, Edward Strachey (1812-1901), whose friendship he retained over the years. He saw much of Sterling and came to know Thomas Carlyle, with whom, however, he found a good deal to disagree on, especially his alleged pantheism ('Life', 1.276-82). If the Scottish sage judged, even then, that Maurice's ideas were 'mainly moonshine and 'Spitzfindigkeit'', Maurice could be equally caustic on Carlyle's own 'silly rant about the great bosom of nature' (ibid., 282). In 1836 the master of Downing College, Cambridge, offered him a lectureship there, but he declined the post. Soon afterwards he allowed himself to be named as a candidate for the chair of political economy at Oxford, a move supported by Newman and Pusey, who approved of his opinions on subscription. Maurice, on the other hand, was not drawn to the Tractarian theology -- at least as represented by Pusey's doctrine of baptism as an instantaneously transforming act, instead of, as he himself saw it, a witness to the truth of the continuing presence of Christ in the life of humanity. On perceiving how Maurice really stood on this matter the two decided to vote against him, and his name was withdrawn. 
In June 1837, when staying with Julius Hare at his Herstmonceux rectory, Maurice met not only Sterling, who for a short time was Hare's curate, but Sterling's sister-in-law Anna Barton, whose acquaintance he had already made. He became engaged to her, and the couple were married at Clifton on 7 October 1837, Sterling himself officiating at the ceremony. 
It was in this year that Maurice published certain letters addressed to his friend Samuel Clark, at that time a member of the Society of Friends but afterwards an Anglican clergyman. They subsequently appeared as 'The Kingdom of Christ' (1838), one of his most significant works. A second edition, considerably revised, with a dedication to the Revd Derwent Coleridge, was published in 1842. The subtitle of 'The Kingdom of Christ' was 'Hints on the principles, ordinances, and constitution of the Catholic church', and like the contemporary 'Oxford Tracts' it expounds a firmly ecclesiastical theology grounded in scripture and tradition, while seeking to avoid what its author regarded as the dogmatic rigidity and party spirit of the Tractarians. It examines in turn the beliefs of a Quaker, an orthodox protestant, a Unitarian, and a rationalist philosopher, revealing notable insight and understanding in each case. Maurice's aim is to affirm the positive principle in the position criticized, but to show also how its overemphasis and systematic development generate error. He then looks for those signs of 'a spiritual and universal Kingdom' by which one-sidedness could be transcended. Indeed Christ's kingdom, he claims, already exists, since it is constituted by the whole body of those who witness to Christ. The signs of this spiritual society are the sacraments of baptism and the eucharist, to which must be added the creeds, the liturgy, the episcopate, and the scriptures -- in fact, all the marks of catholicity as exemplified in the Church of England. However, the book was not well received by the religious press, and was to prove the ground of a sustained criticism that lasted throughout Maurice's career; to his great regret, he felt misunderstood and misrepresented, both personally and as a writer. Unfortunately his views were not easily grasped by the average reader, who was apt to find him obscure and confusing. 
In September 1839 Maurice assumed part editorship of a new periodical, the 'Educational Magazine', his concern for national education having been heightened by the growing social unrest of the time, spearheaded, in the next decade, by Chartism. The following year he became sole editor, continuing to press the argument that the responsibility for schools should remain the church's, through agreement by the government with the National Society for Promoting the Education of the Poor. But the magazine was short-lived, ceasing publication in 1841. In June 1840 Maurice was elected to a professorship in English literature and history at King's College, London. The work appealed to him strongly, and his manner of lecturing was undoubtedly impressive from all accounts, but the effect of his discourses, it seems, was to elevate more than inform. Some of his students perhaps were able to understand him, though for the most part his lofty generalizations were inaccessible. That he was a man of distinction none would have questioned. 
Maurice was fully alive to the ecclesiastical issues of the day. The joint Anglican-Lutheran bishopric in Jerusalem, a proposal which greatly offended Newman and his associates, he found good reason to support, as he explained in his 'Three Letters to the Rev. William Palmer' (1842). He saw it as a token of the true catholicity of the church, a wider conception than that of strict institutional unity. On the other hand, when E. B. Pusey was suspended by the vice-chancellor's court from preaching in Oxford because of his sermon at Christ Church extolling a high eucharistic doctrine, which his critics deemed heterodox, he protested vigorously in a letter to the evangelical leader Lord Ashley (afterwards earl of Shaftesbury), who had presided over a meeting to denounce the Tractarian teachings. And again, in 1844, after W. G. Ward's 'Ideal of a Christian Church' had caused such a stir in Oxford, he likewise protested, in 'Two Letters to a Non-Resident Member of Convocation', against a statute which permitted the author to be deprived of his degree. 
John Sterling's wife died on 18 April 1843, and Sterling himself, whose health had been failing, on 18 September 1844. Anna Maurice's own death was to follow on 25 March 1845, leaving two sons, one of whom, John Frederick Maurice, was to compose, many years later, his father's biography. This succession of bereavements affected Maurice deeply. He also blamed himself for having been, as he thought, unsympathetic to Sterling in the loss of his religious faith. 
At the end of 1843, when both the principalship of King's College, London, and the preachership of Lincoln's Inn were rendered vacant by the appointment of their existing holder, Dr John Lonsdale, to the see of Lichfield, Julius Hare was hopeful that Maurice would succeed him. Maurice himself was less sanguine. Ecclesiastically he was no party man, and he was regarded with suspicion by both evangelicals and Tractarians; he feared too that the other professors would by no means welcome him as their head and might even resign. He did not, in fact, desire any sort of prominence in the church, nor was he academically ambitious. The post therefore went to R. W. Jelf. In July 1845 he was nominated Boyle lecturer by the archbishop of York, and in August Warburton lecturer by the archbishop of Canterbury. The lectures he delivered at Lincoln's Inn on the latter foundation contained the substance of his book on the epistle to the 'Hebrews'; when this was published in 1846 it carried a preface in which Newman's theory of doctrinal development came under very critical review. The Boyle addresses appeared in 1847 as 'The Religions of the World in their Relation to Christianity', and in his lifetime were to be the most popular of his works. The choice of Maurice for these lectureships by the two archbishops seemed, in spite of what he himself might have apprehended, to indicate ecclesiastical favour, and when, in 1846, a theological department was established at King's, Jelf made him one of its professors. 
In June of the same year Maurice was elected chaplain of Lincoln's Inn with a stipend of $300 a year, thus affording him an opportunity to resign from his Guy's Hospital duties, which some felt to be putting a strain on his health ('Life', 1.361). His new responsibilities comprised the reading of morning prayers at the Inn, with a full service on Sunday afternoons. His sermons at once proved a draw and were consistently well attended, especially by the younger barristers. Among his hearers were Thomas Hughes and J. M. Ludlow, soon to be associated with him in the Christian socialist movement. He had already in 1844 made Charles Kingsley's acquaintance, and the two men were by now on very friendly terms. In 1846 he and other members of the staff at King's founded Queen's College for the higher education of women, particularly of intending governesses, in whose needs his sister Mary, herself a teacher, was interested. 
On 12 November 1844 Julius Hare had married Maurice's younger sister Esther. Some five years later, on 4 July 1849, Maurice himself remarried, taking as his wife Georgina Hare-Naylor, Julius Hare's half-sister. 
The year 1848 brought repeated news of revolutionary movements on the European continent and of Chartist agitation in England, the latter reaching its climax on 10 April with the much feared, but in the event abortive, march on parliament. Maurice's thoughts turned more and more to what he beheld as the 'spiritual destitution' of the times, and to the need, as he perceived it, of moral and social regeneration. Indeed, until the twentieth-century revival of interest in Maurice as a theologian he was chiefly remembered as the protagonist of Christian socialism, supported by his friends Charles Kingsley, parson, novelist, and publicist, and John Malcolm Ludlow (1821-1911), a barrister he had come to know at Lincoln's Inn and who, through his upbringing in France, had acquired first-hand knowledge of socialist and revolutionary groups in Paris. Moreover Ludlow possessed what Maurice lacked, an understanding of the requirements of effective political action. Others who joined them with a view to some kind of reformatory effort were Edward Vansittart Neale (1810-1892), who devoted a considerable part of his personal fortune to the cause, and Thomas Hughes, the future author of 'Tom Brown's Schooldays'. Maurice was from the first recognized as the spiritual leader of this group of Christian socialists, as they came to be called, and was looked to even for its necessary practical direction. With Ludlow, he edited a newspaper, 'Politics for the People', which managed to survive for some months despite financial loss. It began publication on 6 May 1848 and rose to a circulation of about 2000 copies. The contributors included Kingsley who, choosing the pen-name of Parson Lot, assumed the role of fire-eating journalist, happy to proclaim himself a Chartist too ('Life', 2.101). But the articles were most effective when Ludlow, radical and clear-headed, was their author. He cared nothing for the susceptibilities of the established political parties, believed in a large extension of the franchise -- although he was opposed to universal suffrage -- and favoured big increases in direct taxation. 
In 1850 Maurice publicly accepted the designation Christian socialist for his movement. It committed him, he declared, 'to the conflict we must engage in sooner or later with the unsocial Christians and the unchristian Socialists' ('Life', 2.35). The same year (12 November) saw the publication of another periodical, carrying the name 'Christian Socialist', Ludlow being both founder and editor. Maurice was somewhat dubious about it, however, and left Ludlow with a free hand. Its aim was to present a view of society at once Christian and socialist, since Christianity, it was claimed, had by its very nature a social mission, and as things were, the alternative to a Christian socialism was a godless one. But whereas by socialism Ludlow meant socialism as he understood it -- collective control of the economy -- Maurice's ideal was vaguer and more utopian. He himself was no democrat in the populist sense, and certainly no egalitarian: hierarchy he thought essential to society -- a token, it could be said, of his instinctive Platonism. He disliked competition as fundamentally unchristian, and wished to see it, at the social level, replaced by co-operation, as expressive of Christian brotherhood. But politically he was a long way from radicalism, and his attitude more nearly approximated to a mild tory paternalism. He was, by disposition, impractical, and he disliked organizational activity. Basic principles were his terrain. As he once wrote to Ludlow: 'Let people call me merely a philosopher, or merely anything else... my business, because I am a theologian, and have no vocation except for theology, is not to build, but to dig, to show that economics and politics... must have a ground beneath themselves, and that society was not to be made by any arrangements of ours, but is to be regenerated by finding the law and ground of its order and harmony, the only secret of its existence, in God' ('Life', 2.137). Ludlow shared Maurice's high moral aspirations, but doubted whether the existing churches were capable of promoting them. 
Maurice held 'Bible' classes and addressed meetings attended by working men who, although his words carried less of social and political guidance than moral edification, were invariably impressed by the speaker. But the actual means by which the competitiveness of the prevailing economic system was to be mitigated was judged to be the creation of co-operative societies, a conviction reinforced by what Ludlow had learned of French 'associations ouvrieres' from a recent visit to Paris. Maurice saw in them a modern application of primitive Christian communism. Twelve workshops were to be set up in London for builders, tailors, shoemakers, and other artisan trades, liberally subsidized by Vansittart Neale and helped by the subscriptions of middle-class sympathizers. The workers' own efforts were also salted by teaching on the duties of citizenship and the responsibility of the franchise. For a time the societies thrived and gained the widespread approval of working-class sentiment. Regrettably, market profitability did not match social idealism, with the inevitable result, and personal friction brought discord to the fraternal harmony. In any case, Maurice's own interest really lay in education rather than economics. Kingsley's ebullient Chartist rhetoric, moreover, did not strengthen confidence in Christian socialist objectives among his fellow churchmen, as witness the public denunciation of his views on 22 June 1851 by the incumbent of St John's, Charlotte Street, G. S. Drew (1819-1880), immediately following the sermon delivered there by Kingsley as guest preacher. This event caused a sensation and compromised Maurice's own reputation. The principal of King's College wrote to him hoping that he would disown Kingsley's utterances, which he deplored as 'reckless and dangerous'. Indeed Maurice's leadership of the movement was no insignificant factor in his eventual dismissal from King's. But by then the movement itself was in decline, those who had created it feeling an increasing divergence in their personal concerns and goals. Maurice, for all his high-mindedness and attractiveness of character, was hardly fitted to head a venture dependent above all on practicability of aim. By 1854 its course was run. 
Christian socialism did not, however, deflect Maurice from his vocation and tasks as a 'pure' theologian. In 1853 he published his 'Theological Essays', a work which, it has to be said, even his admirers have found less than satisfactory. Not well written -- R. W. Church complained of its 'tormenting indistinctness' -- it none the less is of first importance as a statement of Maurice's views, and in particular of his convictions on the doctrine of the eternal punishment of impenitent sinners, one which theological orthodoxy, protestant as well as Catholic, held to be indispensable for belief. Maurice denied it; at least he denied that 'eternal' and 'everlasting' are synonymous terms. His own conception, he explained, was founded on 'John' 17: 3, 'This is life eternal, that they should know thee, the one true God, and him who thou hast sent, even Jesus Christ.' Eternal life is therefore a quality of life attainable in this world. Not to know God is to forfeit that quality, to suffer the alienation from him which is spiritual death. The notion of duration in time is irrelevant. 'I cannot', he said, 'apply the idea of time to the word eternal. I must see eternity as something altogether out of time.' Not that Maurice was a universalist, holding that in the end all would be saved: 'I dare not pronounce what are the possibilities of resistance in a human will to the loving will of God.' 'But', he added, 'I know that there is something which must be infinite in the abyss of love beyond the abyss of death' (F. D. Maurice, 'Theological Essays', 1853, 406; cf. 'Life', 2.15). He could not bring himself to believe that impenitence at death necessarily meant the soul's damnation and consignment to everlasting torments. 
These scruples and hesitations failed to satisfy the many, especially among evangelicals, who, further offended by Maurice's ideas on the atonement, feared that tampering with the former doctrine would have grave practical implications in weakening the sanctions of personal morality. Jelf was perturbed. A lengthy correspondence ensued between himself and Maurice, from which he could only conclude that if his professor of theology did not believe in eternal punishment then it was unsuitable that the future training of clergymen should remain in his hands. He confronted him therefore with the choice of either resignation or dismissal. At a meeting of the college council on 27 October 1853 the bishop of London, C. J. Blomfield, had to consider a motion duly thanking Maurice for his past services but requiring his departure. Gladstone moved an amendment that 'competent theologians' should be asked to examine the 'Essays', but he lost it, and on 11 November the council, poorly attended, declared Maurice's offices vacant. It grieved him that he was not even allowed to finish his lecture courses. But he received many and warm expressions of sympathy, and Alfred Tennyson marked the occasion with a poem addressed to him in January 1854. Even if to the majority of the public who had at all considered the matter his teachings remained unclear, it was widely felt that he had not been well used. The benchers of Lincoln's Inn declined to accept his offer to resign his chaplaincy, and although he did resign his chairmanship of the committee of Queen's College, he resumed it in 1856 at the unanimous request of its members. 
Disappointed as he was at this abrupt termination of his own academic career, Maurice's concern for the education of the artisan class was nevertheless undiminished. In February 1854 he drew up a scheme for a working men's college, to some extent on the model of a 'people's college' established in Sheffield back in 1842. It opened on 31 October 1854 in Red Lion Square, London, with some 120 students and with Maurice as its principal. Later it moved, first to Great Ormond Street and then to Crowndale Road. Besides Maurice's friends Vansittart Neale and Tom Hughes, the Tudor historian J. S. Brewer helped with the teaching, as too did John Ruskin and the Pre-Raphaelite painter and poet Dante Gabriel Rossetti. It was a product of Christian socialism and an expression of its ideals. 
Maurice himself deemed the most important controversy of his life to be his clash with Henry Longueville Mansel (1820-1871), Waynflete professor of moral and metaphysical philosophy at Oxford and later dean of St Paul's. At issue was the fundamental theological question of the nature of man's knowledge of God. In 1858 Mansel delivered the Bampton lectures on 'The limits of religious thought examined', in which, with incisive clarity, he sought to defend the idea of divine revelation by means of a philosophical agnosticism. The finite mind, he contended, cannot comprehend the infinite. The revelation embodied in the dogmas of orthodox Christianity affords no knowledge of God as he is in himself, such being inaccessible to the speculative reason, but a knowledge which is 'regulative' only, as adapted to the limitations and needs of the human condition. Revelation must therefore be accepted by believers simply as it is, on the substantiating evidence of miracle and prophecy, and attempts to rationalize its content on philosophical grounds are as vain as the claim to know God directly. To not a few of Mansel's hearers his arguments sounded like a final answer to all rationalist assaults on Christianity. But it stung Maurice into a quite violent rejoinder, published as 'What is Revelation?' (1859). To him revelation was not oblique talk about God but a disclosure of God himself, in his love and mercy. He believed Mansel's procedure was a total misrepresentation of the real nature of both revelation and faith. To describe God's personal action merely as an imparting of propositions that can be used but never properly understood was, he objected, a travesty of the divine purpose. Unfortunately Maurice weakened his case by his blustering indignation. Even his friends were disconcerted. Mansel countered Maurice's strictures in a characteristically skilful 'Examination' of them, which Maurice in turn answered with his 'Sequel to the Inquiry, What is Revelation?' This restates his position in more moderate language but without showing any clear conception of what Mansel was about. The truth is that he failed to grasp the metaphysical problems inevitably raised by the claim to know God by immediate apprehension. Maurice may have had a deeper mystical sense, but Mansel was the better philosopher. 
In July 1860 Maurice was presented to the living of St Peter's, Vere Street, which he was to occupy over the ensuing decade. But the appointment displeased the evangelical organ 'The Record', and an address signed by twenty-two clergymen was sent to the bishop of London, A. C. Tait, protesting against his institution. This move, however, was countered by another address, promoted by J. M. Ludlow, W. F. Hook, dean of Chichester, and others, bearing 332 clerical and 487 lay signatures, congratulating him on this 'tardy recognition' of his services to the church. Among the signatories were Gladstone, Tennyson, and Connop Thirlwall, the learned and liberal-minded bishop of St David's. 
Nevertheless a new difficulty soon beset Maurice. William Colenso, bishop of Natal, and a friend of Maurice's, consulted him when working on his book on the 'Pentateuch'. Maurice was much disturbed by the bishop's radical conclusions and suggested that people could even deem it right, in view of them, that he should resign his bishopric -- to which Colenso retorted that they might well think a like course to be appropriate for Maurice himself. The latter, alarmed by the outcome of the 'Essays and Reviews' (1860) furore, sensed that his own position could indeed become untenable, and judged that resignation, despite the protests of his sympathizers, would be preferable to deprivation. Although Tait would have been reluctant to accept the resignation, Maurice himself came to feel that his own insistence on it might be unfair to Colenso, whose personal confidence he had received. He therefore decided to hold on to his benefice, even though some members of his congregation were critical of what seemed to them a fussy scrupulosity ('Life', 2.553) and took themselves elsewhere. In 1863 he replied to Colenso's newly published work, in which the bishop, in his own rather idiosyncratic way, not only denied the Mosaic authorship of the first five books of the 'Bible' but also their compositional unity and, in some respects, their historical authenticity in a series of open letters published as 'The Claims of the Bible and of Science', an act which led to some estrangement between the two men ('Life', 2.485). 
On 25 October 1866 Maurice was elected to the Knightbridge professorship of casuistry, moral theology, and moral philosophy at Cambridge, on the vacancy caused by the death of John Grote. The electors, who were all but unanimous in their decision, had evidently as much assurance of Maurice's theological orthodoxy as of his competence as a philosopher. He remained principal of the Working Men's College, though he attended there less often, as he likewise retained the Vere Street cure. But the journey to London each week for the conduct of the services proved too taxing and in October 1869 he resigned his charge on medical advice. All the same, he accepted the offer of St Edward's, Cambridge, in the gift of Trinity Hall. No stipend was attached to it and pastoral work was minimal, but it provided an opportunity for preaching to an intelligent audience. He was assiduous in his academic duties, and notwithstanding his natural shyness did his best to get to know the undergraduates personally. Besides completing his 'Metaphysical and Moral Philosophy' (2 vols., 1871-2), he published his university lectures as 'The Conscience: Lectures on Casuistry' (1868) and 'Social Morality' (1869). His health, however, was visibly declining. Even so, he did not refuse the bishop of London's offer of the Cambridge preachership at Whitehall, delivering sermons there in the winter months of 1871-2, as well as two university sermons in Cambridge. On 30 March he resigned from St Edward's, being very weak and mentally depressed. Two days later he lost consciousness, regaining it sufficiently to murmur a blessing before he died, on 1 April 1872 at 6 Bolton Row, Piccadilly. 
A proposal was made that Maurice should be buried in Westminster Abbey, but it was the unanimous view of his family that he would not have wished it. He was, accordingly, interred at Highgate cemetery, in the vault where the remains of his parents and sisters lay. 
Maurice was a man whose presence impressed all who met him. Of slightly less than medium height and somewhat reserved in manner -- if always markedly courteous -- his bearing was not only dignified but, by all accounts, expressive of the spiritual and moral integrity which was felt by his friends and acquaintances to be the defining quality of his character. Kingsley thought him 'the most beautiful human soul' he had known. Others did not hesitate to describe him as 'saintlike'. Yet he was certainly a controversial figure. He would not retreat before an issue that stirred his convictions, as in his famous but mainly unfortunate dispute with Mansel. In the last decade of his life, however, his public esteem was high, especially among laymen. Thus Sir Thomas Acland wrote to him: 'For more than a quarter of a century you have been helping Englishmen to see through the theories and systems which have been invented to prop up, restore, develop or narrow the ancient edifice of their national Church' ('Life', 2.541). He was also prescient, with little of the complacent Victorian optimist about him: 'Are we to live', he asked, 'in an age in which every mechanical facility for communication between man and man is multiplied ten-thousandfold, only that the inward isolation, the separation of those who meet continually, may be increased in a far greater measure?' (F. D. Maurice, 'The Lord's Prayer: Nine Sermons', 5.24). 
As a theological thinker Maurice had depth and unquestionable originality. By his own admission his aim was 'to dig', to penetrate to the spiritual roots of human life. He had no time for mere eclecticism, but he distrusted and disliked system building. As he described it, 'dexterity is shown, not in detecting facts, but in cutting them square' ('Lectures on the Ecclesiastical History of the First and Second Centuries', 1854, 222). His cast of mind was naturally Platonist. In addition to the influence of Plato's dialogues, that of the seventeenth-century Cambridge Platonists, and of Coleridge, is obvious. His Platonizing view that 'Christ is in every man' as the head of redeemed humanity, and that salvation is essentially the recognition of this, together with its corollary that a theology whose starting point is the fall and sin, rather than grace and redemption, is misdirected, offended evangelical belief -- one of his sharpest critics was the Wesleyan Methodist divine Dr J. H. Rigg -- just as it distanced him also from the Tractarians, whose exclusivist doctrine of episcopacy likewise he would have wished to qualify. Yet he firmly declined to regard himself as broad church, a position which, in its attempt to commend religious faith to contemporary thought, he considered to involve a dilution of the church's formularies, on adherence to which he, as a committed Anglican, would not compromise. He believed firmly in the role of the Church of England as a national church, at once Catholic and protestant, which he did not see as incompatible principles but as complementary aspects of the faith, with their respective truths as constitutive elements in a vital unity. What he might have learned from the broad-churchmen was a keener appreciation of the significance of historical criticism for biblical exegesis, while the possible implications of Darwinism for religious belief, which much concerned them, seemed scarcely to interest him. 
Although the eminent Unitarian thinker James Martineau held that Maurice had no superior among contemporary theologians in consistency of thought and precision of language, many of his readers found his ideas somewhat mystifying, with distinctions urged where they themselves could discern no differences, or unity 'revealed' where they saw only contrariety. Lucidity, it has to be conceded, was not the prime virtue of his literary style. It may well be judged that he published too much, and with insufficient discrimination. Again, despite the fact that he was the author of a copious work entitled 'Metaphysical and Moral Philosophy' (1871-2), he was not a philosopher in the sense that connotes rigorous intellectual analysis. Even as a theological thinker it was less the elucidation of principles that interested him than their application to the needs and opportunities of life. Yet his influence on later nineteenth-century Anglican thought, as the instances of F. J. A. Hort and his Cambridge associates testify, was pervasive. Even the post-Tractarians did not escape it, as the publication in 1889 of 'Lux mundi', or the foundation in the same year of the Christian Social Union, also demonstrate. He was indeed a seminal figure in this respect. After some decline in his reputation in the first half of the twentieth century, revival of interest accelerated, thanks to the studies of A. R. Vidler, Bishop Michael Ramsey, and others, as the centenary of his death approached. He is now recalled as one of the outstanding contributors to the English, and especially the Anglican, theological tradition. 


@@@@@


doc= 18385


Maurice, Henry (1647?-1691), Church of England clergyman, was the son of Thomas Maurice, perpetual curate of Llangristiolus, Anglesey, and grandson of Henry Perry (or Parry), the linguistic scholar. After attending Beaumaris grammar school he matriculated on 20 May 1664 from Jesus College, Oxford, aged sixteen; he graduated BA on 28 January 1668 and proceeded MA in 1671; he was created BD in 1679 and DD in 1683. His ability as a student attracted the attention of Sir Leoline Jenkins, then principal of the college, and he was elected to a fellowship. After 1669 he became, at the request of the college, the curate of Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, where, according to Anthony Wood, he answered some 'malapert Socinians' so successfully 'that he gained himself a great reputation' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', new edn, 1813-20, 4.326). In 1671 he returned to the college, but in 1673 he left again to accompany Jenkins as his chaplain to the congress of Cologne, where the latter was an English representative in the attempts to settle a peace between the belligerents in the Third Dutch War. Jenkins returned to England in May 1674 but Maurice again accompanied him as chaplain on his mission at the treaty negotiations at Nijmegen between 1676 and 1679. During his years abroad Maurice developed his skills in modern languages and established lasting contacts with French protestant divines. In England he lived for a while with Jenkins's family at Doctors' Commons, London, and in college until 1680. Jenkins's contacts were essentially in the law, and it needed an ecclesiastical patron in the person of William Lloyd (made bishop of St Asaph in 1680) to get Maurice appointed as domestic chaplain to William Sancroft in that year. 
Maurice continued in this post until 1691, and published frequently during the 1680s. He was involved in a controversy with the nonconformists Richard Baxter and David Clarkson over the existence of diocesan episcopacy in the primitive church. Maurice's 'A Vindication of the Primitive Church and Diocesan Episcopacy' (1682) proved the necessity of episcopacy from primitive practice, defending John Tillotson's historical view of its creation as not being defined by Christ but emerging from the diocesan model used by the apostles. He believed that it was essentially episcopal government that had saved the Church of England from the internecine conflicts that plagued other European reformed churches. According to his biographer, Robert Wynne, the controversy with Baxter and Clarkson considerably raised Maurice's profile among the London clergy. He also attacked the duke of Buckingham's proposals for religious toleration, arguing like many Anglican divines that it was a neglect of their duty to look after the cure of souls to permit the 'errors' of dissent, stating that 'Penalties in matters of Religion' were designed 'to remove such evil obstructions as lie in the Passage to a man's right Reason' (H. Maurice, 'The Antithelemite, or, An Answer to Certain Quaeres by the D. of B.', 1685, 41). Wood alleged that Maurice was the author of 'Animadversions on Dr Burnet's 'History of the Rights of Princes'' (1682), but this seems to have been by Thomas Comber. Maurice was also acknowledged as an eloquent extempore preacher. However, his verbal brilliance seems to have masked an apparent aversion to the act of writing itself, notwithstanding his polemical interventions in the 1680s. He only ever published one sermon (given before the king at Whitehall in 1681 on the anniversary of Charles I's death) and Wynne claims that he had to act as an amanuensis for him to produce his anti-Catholic work 'Doubts Concerning the Roman Infallibility' (1688). 
Under the patronage of Sancroft, Maurice received the treasurership of Chichester on 7 January 1681, the rectory of Chevening, Kent, which he held from 1681 to 1685, and, in 1685, the sinecure rectory of Llandrillo-yn-Rhos, Denbighshire. In the same year he was presented to the richly endowed rectory of Newington, Oxfordshire. Despite his closeness to Sancroft, Maurice did not support his patron's decision to refuse the oaths of allegiance to William and Mary. He wrote in favour of recognizing the new monarchs, arguing that Princess Mary was, in any case, a blood heir, and that having William as joint monarch represented only a 'small deviation' from the right line (Maurice, 'The Lawfulness of Taking the New Oaths Asserted', 3). However, like many tory jurors, he used something of a hotch-potch of arguments to press taking the oaths, insisting that as he was the nation's 'de facto' protector William was owed the natural duty of obedience, and hinting at contract theory by suggesting that James's actions might have violated his coronation oath. Maurice is often cited as the author of 'A Letter to a Member of the House of Commons Concerning the Bishops' (1689), which argued for leniency towards Sancroft and the other nonjuring bishops. In fact, he was the author of a reply to this pamphlet which insisted that the bishops should take the oaths or lose their places. At the very least, he contended, they should make some public declaration of loyalty. George Hickes, who seems to have guessed the pamphlet's authorship, wondered whether Maurice's apparent vindictiveness was born out of a desire to see his metropolitan 'cap and cringe' before him (Hickes, 2). It seems more likely, though, that Maurice's loyalty to the Williamite regime stemmed from his virulent hatred of popery (for which he was attacked in print in 1688 by an anonymous Catholic writer) and that he saw the Church of England as best defended by the new government. None the less, he continued to write in opposition to further alterations to the Anglican liturgy to appease protestant dissenters after the revolution. 
Maurice's opposition to such compromises helps to explain his influential position within resolutely anti-comprehensionist Oxford, both diocese and university. He was chosen by the clergy of the diocese of Oxford in October 1689 to be their representative in the convocation held at Westminster. He was elected Lady Margaret professor of divinity at Oxford on 18 July 1691 (Wynne states by only six votes) and was installed in the prebend of Worcester which went with the post. He died suddenly on 30 October 1691 at the age of forty-four (according to the funeral monument to him in Jesus College chapel), probably of a heart attack at his house in Newington, and was buried in the chancel of the church there on 6 November. He was unmarried and his estate was administered by his sister, Elizabeth Clancey, a widow. He donated his library to his college. He was renowned for his generosity and saved little, keeping only a sum of $200 with his college. Wynne testified to his convivial character, saying that there 'was no man alive more capable of conveying instruction over a moderate Bottle than Dr Maurice' (Wynne, 23). 


@@@@@


doc= 18386


Maurice, James Wilkes (1775-1857), naval officer, was born at Devonport on 10 February 1775. He entered the navy in August 1789 as able seaman on the sloop 'Inspector', and in 1793 was midshipman on the 'Powerful', which convoyed a fleet of Indiamen to the Cape of Good Hope. He afterwards served in the 'Cambridge', 'Concorde', and 'Royal George', all in the channel and off Brest, and on 3 April 1797 was promoted lieutenant of the 'Glory'. In 1799 he was moved to the 'Canada'. Having been appointed in September 1802 to the 'Centaur', he went out to the West Indies with Commodore Samuel Hood (1762-1814) and was present at the capture of St Lucia, Tobago, Demerara, and Essequibo. He was landed at the destruction of a battery at Petite Anse d'Arlet on Martinique on 26 November 1803, when he was severely wounded by the explosion of the magazine. He was awarded a sword valued at $50 by the Patriotic Society. 
When the Diamond Rock, near the south-west end of the island, was occupied, armed (with three 24-pounders and two long 18-pounders), and commissioned as a 'sloop of war' on 3 February 1804, Maurice was appointed to the command, and his promotion to commander was confirmed by the Admiralty to 7 May 1804. For more than a year Maurice held this rock, a thorn in the sides of the French at Martinique, and yielded to an attack in force by a detachment of Villeneuve's fleet (31 May-2 June 1805) only when his ammunition and water were exhausted. In the three days the British lost two men killed and one wounded; the loss of the French, on the other hand, was severe, but has never been exactly stated. Maurice estimated it at seventy killed and wounded of the landing party alone, exclusive of those on board the ships and gunboats. Maurice was tried by court martial for the loss of his post, but was honourably acquitted and highly complimented on his conduct. 
Maurice returned to England in August 1805 and was immediately appointed to the brig 'Savage', which after two years in the channel was sent to the West Indies. There, in the autumn of 1808, he was appointed by Sir Alexander Cochrane governor of Marie Galante, which had been seized in the previous March. On 18 January 1809 he was advanced to post rank. 
In October 1809 Maurice was compelled by ill health to return to England, and in July 1810 he was appointed governor of the island of Anholt, in the Baltic, which had been captured, without difficulty, in May 1809 by a small squadron under the command of Captain Aiskew Paffard Hollis. The island had been found most useful as a trade depot and as a base for communicating with the continent, and when Maurice was appointed it was understood that neither Napoleon nor the Danes would lose any opportunity of recapturing it. It was garrisoned by about four hundred marines, commanded by Captain Torrens. As long as the weather remained open the British cruisers secured it from attack, as, afterwards, did the severity of the winter. As soon as the water was open an attempt was made by the Danes to retake it. Twelve gunboats convoyed the Danish transports, and in the early morning of 27 March 1811, in darkness and fog, a force of a thousand men was landed about 4 miles from the fort. The enemy were ignorant that the frigate 'Tartar' and brig 'Sheldrake' had arrived from England the day before; the Danish troops advanced to the assault, driving in the British advanced parties, while the gunboats fired on the coast defences. The 'Tartar''s approach made the gunboats withdraw. A small schooner attached to the island took up a position on the enemy's flank and drove them from behind the sandhills, while the direct fire from the fort was well sustained and deadly. Finding no retreat open, the Danes on the north side, to the number of 543, surrendered; the rest fled to the west end of the island, where, temporarily guarded by the reefs, they managed to board the gunboats and transports. These, however, were pursued and scattered by the British ships; four were captured and one was sunk. The loss to the Danes was heavy, but Maurice's conduct was much exaggerated in popular estimation. The decisive support of the 'Tartar' and 'Sheldrake' was ignored or unknown and the Danes' strength was much magnified. Maurice retained his governorship until September 1812. He had no further employment, and was retired with the rank of rear-admiral on 1 October 1846. 
Maurice married, in October 1814, Sarah Lyne of Plymouth; she died in June 1815. Maurice died at his residence, East Emma Place, Stonehouse, Plymouth, on 4 September 1857, aged eighty-two. His career was unusual in that his two principal commands were islands. 


@@@@@


doc= 18387


Maurice, Thomas (1754-1824), oriental scholar and librarian, was born at Hertford on 25 September 1754, and claimed descent from an ancient Welsh family. His father, Thomas, on retiring from West Indian commerce, opened an academy at Clapham, and married an elderly lady with some property. In 1753, shortly after the death of his first wife, Thomas married her eighteen-year-old maid; Thomas was the eldest of six children of this second marriage, although only he and one brother, William, survived to maturity. After his father's death in 1762, Thomas's mother converted to Methodism and was 'trepanned into a clandestine marriage' (Maurice, 1.4) with Joseph Wright, an Irish Methodist preacher, who mistreated her and from whom she was legally separated in 1771. Thomas was sent to Christ's Hospital, thence to Ealing, and subsequently, through his mother's influence, to the Methodist school at Kingswood, near Bath. He took chambers in the Inner Temple, but found the study of classical and English literature more attractive than that of law, and, under the tuition of Dr Samuel Parr at Stanmore, he devoted himself to the classics. 
On 6 May 1774 Thomas Maurice matriculated from St John's College, Oxford, migrating after a year to University College, where he graduated BA in 1778 and MA in 1808. While at Oxford he published some poetry and a translation of Sophocles' 'Oedipus tyrannus', for which Samuel Johnson wrote a preface (Boswell, 'Life', 3.370 n.2); this was the last extended preface he wrote for anyone else, and one of his best. Maurice also studied 'practical astronomy' there. He was ordained by Bishop Lowth on leaving Oxford and became curate of Woodford, Essex; in 1779, through Johnson's influence, he was also offered the curacy of Bosworth. In 1783 he began work on his 'History of Hindostan', which was nearly completed by 1789. In 1784 he relinquished his curacy for the chapel of Epping, but about the same time a legacy from a wealthy relative enabled him to buy a chaplaincy in the 97th regiment, which was disbanded later in the same year. Maurice received half-pay for the rest of his life. On 10 August 1786 he married Hannah, the daughter of Thomas Pearce, a captain in the service of the East India Company; she died childless in 1790. 
In 1789 Maurice interrupted work on the 'History of Hindostan' for the more polemical 'Indian Antiquities', with a view to defending the 'Pentateuch' from the attacks of sceptical French mythographers such as Baillie, Volney, and Dupuis, who sought to interpret religious myths, whether Hindu or Christian, as astronomical and natural allegories. Maurice was encouraged in this apologetic project by Sir William Jones, whom he had known at Oxford, and whose mythographical syncretism profoundly influenced his work. In 1795 Maurice published an elegiac poem on Jones's unexpected death. The first two volumes of 'Indian Antiquities' were published in 1792; volume 3 appeared in 1793, 4 in 1794, 5 in 1795-6, and 6 in 1796. 'A Dissertation on the Oriental Trinities', extracted from the fourth and fifth volumes of 'Indian Antiquities', was published in 1800, arguing that the Hindu triads, like the Christian Trinity, were vestiges of a universally revealed monotheism. Meanwhile, Maurice set about publishing his 'History of Hindostan': volume 1 appeared in 1795, volume 2 in 1798, and volume 3 in 1799. He went on to supplement his massive study of ancient Indian history with the 'Modern History of Hindostan' (2 vols., 1802-10) which brought his account up to the late eighteenth century. A staunch anti-Jacobin, he also reviewed works on oriental mythology for the tory high-church 'British Critic'. In 1798 he was presented by Earl Spencer to the vicarage of Wormleighton, Warwickshire, and in the following year he was appointed assistant keeper of manuscripts in the British Museum. In 1804, on the presentation of the lord chancellor, he became vicar of Cudham, Kent. All these offices he retained until his death. In 1800 he obtained, through Bishop Tomline, the pension which had been enjoyed by William Cowper. In 1812, abandoning his earlier syncretist project of defending the historicity of the 'Bible' from Hindu mythographical sources, he published 'Brahminical Fraud Detected'. A second edition, entitled 'The Indian Sceptic Refuted', was published in 1813. Another work of apologetics, 'Observations Connected with Astronomy and Ancient History', appeared in 1816. Maurice's final publication was the uncompleted 'Memoirs of the Author of 'Indian Antiquities'' (1819-22), which contains recollections of contemporary men of letters and casts new light on the composition of Johnson's 'Lives of the Poets'. Maurice died on 30 March 1824 in his apartments at the British Museum. 
Maurice was on intimate terms with many leading contemporary scholars and men of letters; his poetry and drama were widely read, although Lord Byron, in 'English Bards and Scotch Reviewers', described him as 'dull' and his poem 'Richmond Hill' as 'the petrifaction of a plodding brain'. He was a voluminous author, but his researches in Asiatic history and myth were hampered by ignorance of Asiatic languages, and by his overriding polemical concern to refute French scepticism. His syncretist approach to mythology was of the school of Jacob Bryant, confident in comparing and contrasting different cultures on the basis of superficial etymological resemblance, without any understanding of grammar, syntax, or sound change. This etymological approach was rejected and discredited by Franz Bopp and other German comparative grammarians in the 1810s, rendering Maurice's scholarship largely obsolete. Today his work is largely of interest to students of Romantic literature and antiquarianism on account of its influence on Coleridge, Shelley, and other contemporary writers. 


@@@@@


doc= 18388


Maurice, William (1619/20-1680), antiquary, was the son of Lewis Maurice of Cefn-y-braich, Llansilin, Denbighshire, a man of literary interests, descended from the house of Moelyrch, and Jane, daughter of John Holland, vicar of Cegidfa. His education is unrecorded. He married first Lettice, daughter of Roger Kynaston of Cefn-y-carneddau, Ruabon; they had three sons who died young and two daughters: Ann, who married David Williams of Glan Alaw, brother of Sir William Williams (1634-1700), speaker of the House of Commons, and Lettice. From his second marriage, to Elizabeth, daughter of George Ludlow of Morehouse and widow of Thomas Gethin, he had a daughter, Elizabeth. He resided at Cefn-y-braich and Ty Newydd, Llansilin. 
By 1638 Maurice was making copies of Welsh poetry. He became the best-read Welsh antiquary of his generation, with interest in literature, history, and law. Helped by amanuenses, he was an assiduous transcriber. His collection of manuscripts, known from copies of his own catalogue, amounted to over a hundred. His transcripts are notable for his care in recording exemplars and sources. A young associate of Robert Vaughan, he catalogued the Hengwrt manuscripts in 1658; his coarse hand appears in scores of manuscripts which survive in the Hengwrt and other collections. He is said to have built himself a three-storey library. 
Maurice's scholarly virtues can best be appreciated in his 'Deddfgrawn' or 'Corpus Hoelianum' (Wynnstay MSS 37-38), his compilation of Welsh law: his analysis laid the basis of the modern classification of the texts. His detailed, matter-of-fact chronicle of events in north Wales from 1638 to 1647, which betrays no obvious sympathy with either side, was printed from his manuscript in 1846 before its destruction. However, in religion Maurice was radical and in 1653 he wrote a forceful tract against 'altar-worship'. His style, when polemical, as in this and his antiquarian tracts (none was printed), whether writing in Latin, English, or Welsh, is florid and bombastic. The scholarly Humphrey Humphreys, referring to a tract on British coins, described Maurice as 'a very injudicious man' (NL Wales, MS 2029, no. 2, p. 34); other contemporaries regarded him as eccentric. 
Maurice made his will on 11 March 1680, 'somewhat crasie and infirme in body', leaving his books, both printed and manuscript, to his daughter Lettice. He died on 27 March 1680 and was buried at Llansilin on 31 March. His manuscript collection was bought after his death by Sir William Williams and descended to the Williams-Wynns of Wynnstay. The greater part was lost in the fire which destroyed the Wynnstay library in 1858. Fewer than ten of Maurice's manuscripts survived the fire; a few more, and a number of his annotated printed books, survive in other collections. 


@@@@@


doc= 18389


Mavor, William Fordyce (1758-1837), author and educationist, was born on 1 August 1758 at New Deer, Aberdeenshire, the elder son of John Mavor (1726-1786), farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth Low (1735-1791). His family, which had numbered judges and exchequer officials in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, had, by Mavor's time, 'dwindled' to being small farmers, who further risked their fortunes by coming out for the Stuarts in the rising of 1745. He was educated at New Deer and Turriff, and at the age of seventeen set out, with only a competency in Latin, to make his fortune in England. After staying for a time in London with a Jacobite cousin, who had become a prosperous city merchant on his release from the Tower, he obtained a post as assistant master at Thomas Hunter's private school at Burford in Oxfordshire. Here, while apparently giving satisfaction since he remained in Burford for seven years (1775-82), he commenced his writing career. 
At nineteen Mavor brought out 'Parnassian Springs' (1777), a youthful collection of poetry. Two years later he published 'Universal Stenography' (1779), a system of shorthand which ran to ten editions. Meanwhile he was ghost-writing guides and histories for Harrison, a London publisher. Considered 'remarkably handsome' (Blagdon, 23), he was already making contacts at Oxford -- with the Balliol Scots, and the Jacobites and high tories at the King's Arms. He was also preparing to take holy orders, and in October 1781 was made deacon by the bishop of Oxford at Christ Church Cathedral. Plans were already afoot to start a school of his own, and in the following year Mavor opened the Woodstock Academy, where 'Youth' were to be 'genteely boarded and carefully educated' ('Jackson's Oxford Journal', January 1782). The school was a success, and on 17 October 1782 Mavor married, at Shipton under Wychwood, Ann Harris (died 1822), daughter of the host at the Royal Oak, Loughborough corner; they had seven children by 1789. 
At the outset Mavor's Woodstock career was largely dependent on patronage from members of the Marlborough family and their friends. He was ordained priest in 1784, and in time curacies became available, notably at Kiddington, where Thomas Warton, the poet laureate, was rector. Presentations followed: the vicarage of Hurley (1789), Tysoe in Warwickshire (1790), and later Bladon-with-Woodstock (1810), along with private chaplaincies to the earl of Dumfries and the earl of Moira. In 1787 Mavor was made an honorary freeman of Woodstock, and two years later he became a member of the city council and master of Woodstock grammar school; he was awarded an honorary LLD by Aberdeen University in the same year. 
Mavor was an extraordinarily industrious author and published a spate of guides, grammars, miscellanies, a sequence of admirably abridged tours, travels, and histories, a women's magazine, and a newspaper, the 'Oxford University and City Herald' (1806), as well as numerous essays on education. A few of his works were published under his pseudonyms, W. F. Martyn and Numa. His ideas on education were liberal; 'Dry lectures seldom leave any lasting impression,' he wrote, 'but convey the moral you wish to inculcate through an interesting story... and the effect is seldom lost' (W. F. Mavor, 'A Father's Gift to his Children', 1807, x). In 1787 he brought out 'The British Nepos', which consisted of short, lively biographies of famous Englishmen from Alfred to John Howard; it ran to fifteen editions. The following year his eldest son, who was at Charterhouse, fell ill, and to entertain him Mavor wrote 'The Lady's and Gentleman's Botanical Pocket Book' and 'Elements of Natural History', both published in 1799; they were written in a suitably genteel style so as to bring no blush to the youthful cheek. The 'Elements' went through several editions and was translated into French as 'Le buffon des enfants'. 
In 1801 Mavor published his most famous work, 'The English Spelling Book'. To appeal to children it had fine woodcuts by Thomas Bewick, and simple and amusing moral stories for them to read. It ran to 500 editions, was translated into French and Hindi, and by 1823, at its 284th edition, had sold over 2 million copies. In 1806 the board of agriculture asked Mavor to write a survey of Berkshire. Undertaken at a time of great agrarian unrest as a result of low wages and high corn prices due to Napoleon's blockade of the English ports, his 'General View of the Agriculture of Berkshire' (1809) is remarkable as much for its sympathetic attitude to the agricultural poor as for its interest in modern farming methods. As a farmer's son, Mavor was well acquainted with the sufferings of agricultural workers. 
Meanwhile civic honours accumulated. In 1808 Mavor was elected mayor of Woodstock, and in 1811 the duke of Marlborough appointed him rector of Woodstock, a position he had long desired. He celebrated his success by having his portrait taken by James Saxon, who had recently painted Sir Walter Scott. His appearance was 'intelligent, strongly impressed with lines of thought', though he had a florid complexion and a figure 'somewhat inclined to corpulency' (Blagdon, 23). This was perhaps unsurprising, for though a 'sworn foe to licentiousness', detesting 'every species of slavery', he also 'gloried in liberty' and was 'extremely social in his habits' (ibid.). 
In 1822 Ann Mavor died. The marriage had not been happy, and the following year Mavor married Harriet Segrave (1788-1875), and started a second family. In the years that followed he continued as rector, founded the Woodstock Floral and Horticultural Society and a lending library, introduced free vaccination for the poor, planted trees, and in 1834 became mayor of Woodstock for the tenth time. He died at Woodstock rectory on 19 December 1837, active to the last. His library, which was a fine one, was sold in Oxford, and he left $9000 to his wife and daughters. He was buried at Woodstock church where he is celebrated by a commemorative plaque. 


@@@@@


doc= 18390


Mawbey, Sir Joseph (1730-1798), politician, was born at Ravenstone House, Leicestershire, on 2 December 1730, the fourth son and youngest child of John Mawbey (died 1754) and his second wife, Martha (died 1737), the daughter of Thomas Pratt. When he was about ten years old he was taken to Surrey by an uncle, Joseph Pratt, the chief owner of a vinegar distillery at Vauxhall, to be trained for the ministry of the English church. At the age of seventeen, however, he joined the family business on account of the serious illness of a cousin who was a partner in the distillery. Together with his brother John, Mawbey carried on the business, and became joint owner on his uncle's death in 1754. The firm made him a wealthy man, and it was estimated that its profits were 'sufficient to yield more than $600,000 per annum to government in subsidies' (Burke, 347). Mawbey also inherited considerable property in Surrey from his uncle and established himself as a landed proprietor; he served as sheriff of the county in 1757. On 21 August 1760 he married Elizabeth Pratt (died 1790), the only surviving daughter of his cousin Richard Pratt of Vauxhall. He bought the estate of Botleys in Chertsey in 1763, and commissioned Kenton Couse to build a large Palladian house. He retired from business in 1775, having inherited another large estate upon the death of his brother-in-law Joseph Pratt in 1766. In 1770 he became chairman of the Surrey quarter sessions, a position he held for twenty-seven years. He acted in this role on the whole successfully, although he was unpopular with the gentry of the county, who considered him something of an upstart. 
On 1 April 1761 Mawbey was elected MP for Southwark, a seat which he held until the general election of 1774, when he contested the county of Surrey. Through the coalition of the interests of four other candidates he was defeated, even though 1390 votes were given for him, but he went on to win the seat at the by-election in June 1775. He topped the poll again in 1780, when he incurred the odium of some of his whig supporters through his refusal to coalesce with the opposition candidate, Admiral Keppel. In April 1784 he was returned without a contest. 
Mawbey was associated with the Rockingham whigs in the early part of his political career, and he was rewarded by the Rockingham ministry with a baronetcy on 30 July 1765. But he increasingly gave his support to Wilkes and the radical cause. He presented Wilkes's petition on 14 November 1768, protesting about the treatment he had received in the 'North Briton' no. 45 case. He was a founder member of the Society of Gentleman Supporters of the Bill of Rights and a leading light in the petitioning movement of 1769-70, which sought to press the injustice with which Wilkes was treated in being expelled by the Commons as a member of parliament. He was an instigator of the petitions from his own county of Surrey and from his seat in Southwark, and was also heavily involved in organizing the petitions from Essex, Berwick, and York. 
Mawbey played a role in the 'Printers' case' which exercised parliament the following year. Wilkes, now an alderman of the City of London, wanted a confrontation with parliament, and Mawbey moved to have him summoned before the House of Commons to answer charges of falsely imprisoning a messenger of the house. The Commons wisely resisted this trap, despite Mawbey's later assertion that Wilkes had a right to attend the Commons 'in his place' (Almon, 9.251-6). 
Later in his career Mawbey continued on the radical side of politics and was a leading figure in the Association movement, which sought to press major reform measures on the government. He did not follow the Foxite strand of whiggism after 1783, and instead became a supporter first of Shelburne's ministry and then of Pitt's. He left politics in 1790, feeling betrayed by Pitt's administration, which had failed to support his unsuccessful election campaign of that year. 
Mawbey was a frequent speaker in the Commons, and so attracted the attention of the wits. Because he professed to be above party, he was ridiculed by speakers and writers on both sides. Walpole called him 'vain, noisy, and foolish'. Among the best-known lines in the 'Rolliad', a popular prose piece of the time, are those referring to Speaker Cornwall's 'unhappy fate' who hears Fox, North, and Burke, but hears Sir Joseph too. Wraxall was more charitable in his assessment, remarking that Mawbey 'could never obtain a patient... hearing in Parliament', yet 'spoke, nevertheless with great good sense though not with brilliancy'. 
For many years Mawbey was a contributor in verse and prose to the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. He wrote on both political and personal subjects; he published a poem mourning the death of his wife, who died after a long illness on 19 August 1790. Mawbey died at Botleys on 16 June 1798 and was buried beside his wife and several of his children in the family vault in the chancel of Chertsey church, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 18391


Mawe, John (1766-1829), mineralogist and dealer in minerals, was born in Queen Street, Derby, the younger surviving son of Samuel Maw (1735-1783), baker, and his first wife, Elisabeth Massey (died 1777), originally from Leeds. He became a mariner in the late 1770s, and in 1790 he was appointed commander of the merchant vessel 'Trent', trading to St Petersburg. By 1821 he had visited Morocco, Jamaica, Bombay, and Tellicherry and once 'sounded on a coral reef in... Mozambique' (Mawe, 'Companion', 23). However, with the coming of the Napoleonic wars, he began 'finding a sea-faring life hazardous' and 'after a favourable voyage... left off going to sea, and with other business, commenced collecting minerals and shells' (ibid., v). 
In 1793 Mawe was briefly apprenticed to the Derby marble mason Richard Brown (1736-1816), whose daughter, Sarah, he married in London on 1 November 1794 ['see below']. They settled at 5 Tavistock Street, Covent Garden, trading as Brown, Son, and Mawe, mineral dealers, in a new 'petrifaction warehouse' partnership. 
The business's first surviving catalogue was issued about 1798. By 1799 Mawe was reported by a rival dealer as having 'been very successful... [and] a very busy man' (Elizabeth Forster to Philip Rashleigh, 9 Aug 1799, Rashleigh MSS). Certainly his activity in this period appears to have been frenetic. In 1800 he collected stratigraphically arranged specimens from Derbyshire for the cabinet of Charles IV (1748-1819) of Spain, advised on the mineral exploration of New South Wales, and undertook a long mineral-hunting tour of the Scottish highlands. In 1802 the business moved to St Helens, Derby, where technologically advanced machinery for grinding and polishing stone and marble was installed. In the same year Mawe published his 'Mineralogy of Derbyshire', and visited Paris during the brief peace of Amiens. There he attended lectures at the Ecole des Mines and visited many of the leading French mineralogists, but struggled with the language, recording that he 'would rather go an East India voyage as a sailor... than... learn French' (Turner, 2.209). By 1804 Mawe claimed that collectors would 'find the largest Variety of Minerals and Shells in Europe' (Mawe, 'Catalogue', 1804) at his Covent Garden shop. In that year he also issued 'A short treatise addressed to gentlemen visiting the south seas... with a view to encouraging the collecting of natural history', which in later editions appeared as the entertaining 'Voyager's Companion' (1821). 
On 1 August 1804 Mawe set off on an ambitious voyage of commercial experiment to South America. In 1809 he was allowed by the prince regent of Portugal, later John VI (1769-1826), to travel inland to the gold and diamond mining districts of Brazil, which were at the time closed to other Europeans by the Portuguese government. Mawe's many crises and adventures there were recorded in his best-selling 'Travels in the Interior of Brazil' (1812), which went through several English editions, was translated into eight other European languages, and was on board the 'Beagle' with Charles Darwin. However, the book caused later problems for other European visitors: members of the Portuguese government thought that many of the facts revealed should have remained unrecorded and so once again restricted access to the mining districts. 
Mawe returned to London in 1810. In 1812 he opened a new shop at 149 Strand, close to Leigh and Sothebys auction rooms -- an important source of specimens. From this shop Mawe issued a series of publications, some in many editions, including 'A Treatise on Diamonds' (1813), 'Descriptive Catalogues of Minerals' (1815), 'Familiar Lessons on Mineralogy and Geology' (1819), and 'An Introduction to the Study of Conchology' (1822). He also opened a 'museum' as a retail outlet in Matlock in 1815 and, following the death of his partner, another at Cheltenham in 1816, this time in partnership with his new son-in-law, Anthony Tissington Tatlow (1789-1828). Nevertheless, Mawe still found time to travel in search of new specimens, as to Devon and Cornwall in 1817, and exchanged mineral specimens with Goethe in 1817-18. He was elected a member of the Royal Geological Society of Cornwall in 1814 and was awarded the diploma of the Jena Mineralogischen Gesellschaft in 1817. He was involved both in mining lead and in abortive attempts to set up the Derbyshire Mining and Peak Mining associations in 1825. Mawe died on 26 October 1829 at his shop in London, having helped establish commercial mineralogy in Britain. The identity of the executor of his will, Walter MacDowall (1796-1865), London printer of his books, suggests that Mawe's publications were as important to him as his commercial success. Mawe was buried at St Mary-le-Strand on 2 November 1829. 


Sarah Mawe continued the business long after her husband's death. She was appointed mineralogist to Queen Victoria on the queen's accession in 1837 and continued to run the shop until 1840, when her old assistant James Tennant became sole proprietor. She died on 10 September 1846 in her Strand house, leaving a considerable estate, and was buried at St Giles's Church, Northampton. The Mawes had two children but their only son, John Saint Mawe (1797-1820), died aged only twenty-two; Sarah requested in her will that she should be buried alongside him. 


@@@@@


doc= 18392


Mawe, Leonard (d. 1629), bishop of Bath and Wells, was born in Rendlesham, Suffolk, the fourth son of Simon Mawe, gentleman, and his wife, Margery, daughter of Thomas and Alice Wyld. He went up to Cambridge at Easter 1588, a pensioner at Peterhouse. He quickly attracted attention from influential friends and, in May 1594, secured a royal mandate for election to the next vacant fellowship. He was admitted a fellow of Peterhouse in 1595 and proceeded MA the following year. He was bursar for a year in 1599 and incorporated at Oxford in the same year. Further privilege followed. In 1604 he was granted royal dispensation to hold his fellowship in plurality with the benefice of Mildenhall, Suffolk, and in 1611 the king instructed the vice-chancellor and heads of house at Cambridge to admit Mawe as DD, dispensing with the statutes for the degree and the requirement that he should first have proceeded BD. Not all the attention he received was, however, welcome. Proctor from 1609, his speech at the commencement in 1610 was an attack on the further reformation of the church which enraged the House of Commons. None the less, he became master of Peterhouse in November 1617. In 1621 he served as vice-chancellor and added the rectory of Cottenham, Cambridgeshire, to his preferments. 
Mawe also held a prebend at Wells, and was chaplain to Charles, prince of Wales. When Charles was in Spain in 1623 King James sent Mawe and Matthew Wren, afterwards bishop of Ely, along with other officers and attendants, to join him, charging the chaplains to set up a chapel and to hold prayers twice a day, in an attempt to commend the Anglican faith to the Spanish. Mawe and his companions set sail on 3 April. During his journey through Spain he had a fall from his mule, 'lighting on his head and shoulders' (Wynn). The prince was obliged to send orders that the greater part of the company was to return to England without going on to Madrid, and Mawe returned through France. 
As a reward for his services Mawe was appointed master of Trinity College, Cambridge, by patent in 1625. Although as master he did much towards freeing that foundation from a heavy debt, his primary loyalty remained with Peterhouse, 'my ancient nurse from which I received so many blessings and favours', to which he left in his will $300 towards the leading of the chapel roof (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/156, fol. 152). He used all his influence to secure the election of the duke of Buckingham as chancellor of Cambridge in 1626, summoning the fellows of Trinity one by one to browbeat them into voting for the duke. 
In 1628 Mawe received the see of Bath and Wells in succession to William Laud, being elected on 24 June and consecrated at Croydon on 7 September. 'A good scholar, a grave preacher, a mild man, and one of gentle deportment' (Fuller, 2.333), with an extensive library (he left 'books of all sorts', including Spanish works and history), he seems to have been reluctant to leave Cambridge for Wells, 'unworthy of that high honor and calling' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/156, fol. 152). Although in 1629 he issued a conventional set of episcopal visitation articles, he was absent from the visitation itself in July and August. By 11 August he had received letters from the king desiring him to quit Cambridge, but dispensing him from residence in episcopal houses owing to ill health. Mawe may never have reached Wells for he died in Chiswick, home of his sister's family, on 2 September 1629. Apparently unmarried, he bequeathed to his cousin, nephews, and nieces his 'worldly goods which are not many (for I never hadd, nor cared to have much)' (ibid.), but amounting none the less to over $1400 and including property in Lincolnshire and Suffolk, inherited from his father and his brother Charles. He was buried in Chiswick parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 18393


Mawson, Matthias (1683-1770), bishop of Ely, was born in Chiswick, Middlesex, one of at least two sons of Thomas Mawson, a prosperous brewer, and his wife, Elizabeth, of Fleet Street. He was baptized on 19 July 1683 at St Dunstan-in-the-West, London. Mawson attended St Paul's School, then Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, from 1701, where he proceeded BA in 1704, MA in 1708, BD in 1716, and DD in 1725. He was made a fellow in 1707, moderator in 1708, and taxor in 1709, and became master of the college in 1724 and vice-chancellor in 1730. Mawson was known as a reformer while he was in the latter post. He tightened up academic requirements, reduced unnecessary transference from college to college, and stopped the practice of exhuming bodies from nearby graveyards for use as cadavers. Between 1727 and 1730 he was a royal chaplain. He took his first parish, Conington in Cambridgeshire, soon after completing his DD, and became rector of Hadstoke in Essex in 1733. Barely a year after he accepted the latter living, Mawson was offered the bishopric of Gloucester, a post he turned down. However, in 1738 he accepted an appointment to the see of Llandaff at the urging of his friends, and went on to become bishop of Chichester in 1740 and bishop of Ely in 1754. He died on 23 November 1770, aged eighty-seven, at his home in Kensington Square, London. He was buried in Ely Cathedral. He never married. 
Mawson seems to have been a latitudinarian. Politically he was a whig, arguing for limitations on the power of the crown. He aligned himself with the duke of Newcastle, and, while at Chichester, worked assiduously for the duke's interest in Sussex. Religiously Mawson was a low-churchman. He urged toleration and unity over doctrinal precision, and preached reconciliation rather than prosecution. He believed that many of the divisions in religion came from 'enthusiasm', which caused men zealously to guard doctrines and worship practices arising out of narrow formulations of Christianity, and to coerce others to accept them. He was tolerant of most protestant sects, but could not feel the same about Catholicism. Particularly in the wake of the Jacobite rising of 1745, Mawson urged greater controls over Catholics since they continued to pose a significant political threat. 
Mawson gained great wealth both from his official income and from his inheritance (the latter of which he received when his brother, who ran the family business, died), but was an extremely generous benefactor. During his lifetime he lent some $6000 or $7000 for new buildings at King's College, Cambridge, and donated thousands of pounds of his own money for improvements at Chichester and Ely cathedrals. In 1754 he presented Corpus Christi College with lands sufficient to endow twelve scholarships. Further, he gave significant sums to governments for improving lands and renovating civic buildings. At his death, he bequeathed $9000 to his old college for scholarships and building projects. The balance of his fortune went to a nephew, a niece, and two grandnephews. 
As bishop and churchman, Mawson garnered respect and appreciation. In 1749 William Clarke, rector of Buxted in Sussex and prominent antiquary, observed that he was 'a better sort of man than most of the mitred order. He is indeed awkward, absent, &c., but then he has no ambition, no desire to please, and is privately munificent, when the world thinks him parsimonious' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 4.459). A number of his sermons, preached to the House of Commons, the House of Lords, and to other institutions on anniversary occasions, were published separately. 


@@@@@


doc= 18394


Muller, Friedrich Max (1823-1900), Sanskritist and philologist, was born on 6 December 1823 in Dessau, the capital of the small duchy of Anhalt-Dessau in Germany, the only son of the popular lyric poet Willhelm Muller (1794-1827), and his wife, Adelheid (1799?-1883), elder daughter of Prasident von Basedow, the prime minister of the duchy. 
Muller was named after his mother's elder brother Friedrich, and after Max, the leading character in C. M. von Weber's opera 'Der Freischutz', Weber being his godfather and a close friend of his parents. In later life, after his final settlement in England, he adopted Max as part of his surname, Muller alone 'being as distinctive a name as Smith without a prefix' (G. Max Muller, 1.2). 
His father died suddenly in October 1827, when Muller was not yet four years old. Muller was devoted to his mother, and her grief cast a gloom over his childhood. In his 'Autobiography' he describes how day after day his mother would take him and his sister to their father's grave, where she would stand for hours, sobbing and crying. Nevertheless, the 'depressing atmosphere' at his home failed to have a lasting effect on Muller, who remained 'brimful of fun and mischief'. 
At the age of six Muller entered the 'Gymnasium' or high school in Dessau, where he was remembered as a lively boy, popular among his schoolfellows. At Easter 1839, following the death of his maternal grandfather, he was sent to the Nicolai School in Leipzig, where he received a sound grounding in the study of the classical authors. He stayed in the household of a family friend, Dr Carus, and there continued a musical education which had begun before he was six, when a neighbouring musician had secretly taught him to play the pianoforte as a surprise for his mother. Muller joined in the Carus family's musical soirees, and saw much of Felix Mendelssohn, who was at that time conductor of the Gewandhaus concerts in Leipzig. 
In order to qualify for a small scholarship from the Anhalt government, Muller found that he had to pass his examination for admission to the University of Leipzig not at Leipzig but at Zerbst in Anhalt. The schools in Anhalt laid a greater stress on mathematics, the sciences, and modern languages than Muller's school in Leipzig, so it was necessary for him to become proficient in these subjects in a very short time. However, he passed the examination with a first class, and obtained the scholarship, worth about $6 per year, without which he would have been unable to attend the university. 
On entering the University of Leipzig in the summer term of 1841 Muller decided to concentrate on Greek and Latin. However, he began to find study of the classical languages insufficiently challenging, since he could read Greek and Latin at sight, and could even speak the latter with ease, Latin being still a language of instruction in German schools and universities at that time. He attended lecture courses on a wide variety of topics, which, besides the classical languages, covered such subjects as Hebrew, Arabic, aesthetics, anthropology, and psychology. Attracted by the 'charm of the unknown', he began to attend the lectures of Professor Hermann Brockhaus who had come to Leipzig in the winter of 1841 as the university's first professor of Sanskrit. In the winter term of 1843-4 he heard Brockhaus lecture on the 'Rig Veda', the study of which was to be Muller's life work. In September 1843, at the age of nineteen, he passed the examination for the degree of doctor of philosophy. Too poor to buy the dress coat necessary for the occasion, he wore a borrowed one. While at Leipzig, he began to work on what was to be his first book, a German translation of the Sanskrit collection of didactic fables, the 'Hitopadesa', which was published in March 1844 and dedicated to Brockhaus. Naturally gregarious, Muller found time to participate fully in the student life of Leipzig, even to the extent of fighting three duels. 
Muller went to Berlin in March 1844, having decided to spend a year at the university studying comparative philosophy with Franz Bopp and, more especially, philosophy with Friedrich Schelling, the idealist philosopher. He also wished to examine the Chambers collection of Sanskrit manuscripts which had recently been acquired by the king of Prussia. Bopp's lectures he found a disappointment, the great pioneer of the science of comparative philology then being prematurely infirm, but Schelling received him kindly, and Muller continued to attend his lectures, even though their expense was a burden to him. Muller eked out his small stipend by translating and copying Sanskrit manuscripts. At that time he wrote in his diary, 'I 'cannot' give up Sanskrit, though it holds out no prospect for me' (Chaudhuri, 43). Short of funds, he nevertheless mingled in Berlin society, and was a welcome guest at several musical and artistic households. 
In December 1844 Baron Hagedorn, a boyhood friend, invited Muller to stay at his expense in his apartment in Paris. Muller had long felt that a stay in Paris was indispensable for the continuance of his Sanskrit studies, so he accepted the offer, arriving in that city in March 1845. During the fifteen months he stayed in Hagedorn's rooms, his host never once appeared. This caused much hardship to Muller, who was consequently forced to live at his own expense, supporting himself by copying manuscripts and assisting other scholars. Muller's chief object in visiting Paris was to meet and study with the eminent French Sanskritist Eugene Burnouf. The two rapidly became close friends. At the time of their first meeting, Muller's interest lay mainly in the philosophy of the 'Upanisads', but Burnouf encouraged him to undertake instead what was to be his 'magnum opus', the preparation of the first printed edition of the 'Rig Veda'. Muller began copying and collating manuscripts of the text of the work, which consists of some 1028 hymns. At Burnouf's prompting, he decided to publish it with the commentary of the fourteenth-century Vedic scholar Sayana, itself a voluminous work, filling about four thousand pages of folio manuscript. 
Among Muller's fellow students at Paris were the Sanskrit scholars Rudolf Roth and Theodore Goldstucker. He was on friendly terms with the latter, but between Roth and Muller there was a coolness dating from an occasion when Roth helped himself too freely to a dish of oysters which the two were sharing. This incident was trivial enough in itself, but it was not to be entirely unconnected with some of the academic controversies of Muller's later life. Roth was to become co-author with Otto von Bohtlingk of the great Sanskrit lexicon the 'Sanskrit-Worterbuch', and in late 1845 Muller received an offer from Bohtlingk to go to St Petersburg, where Bohtlingk was a member of the Imperial Russian Academy, and there print his edition of the 'Rig Veda', in collaboration with Bohtlingk and at the expense of the academy. Muller, dissatisfied by guarantees given by the academy, rejected the offer. Bohtlingk and his associates, displeased by Muller's eventual success in finding a publisher for the 'Rig Veda' in England, were to become hostile critics of Muller and his works. 
While working in Paris, Muller felt the need to consult certain manuscripts which were held in London at the library of the East India Company, and by June 1846 he had saved enough money for a short visit to England. He had intended to stay in England for three weeks but the country was to be his home for the rest of his life. On the voyage from Boulogne he met the famous correspondent of 'The Times', William Howard Russell. The two became lifelong friends. 'So simple, so straight, and so learned; kindly and grave, but with a keen sense of humour, and a most bright and joyous disposition' (G. Max Muller, 1.51): such were Russell's later recollections of Muller. Another lifelong friendship begun at that time was with the Prussian minister in London, Baron von Bunsen. Bunsen, a diplomat and a man of the world, was able to provide his younger friend with patronage and an entree into London society. It was at the persuasion of Bunsen and of Horace Hayman Wilson, Boden professor of Sanskrit at the University of Oxford and librarian of the East India Company, that the board of directors of the East India Company agreed to underwrite the considerable expense of printing and publishing Muller's edition of the 'Rig Veda'. Bunsen provided the invitation that resulted in Muller's first visit to Oxford, where in 1847 he lectured to the British Association on 'the relationship of Bengali to the Aryan and aboriginal languages of India'. The few days he spent in Oxford delighted him, and he felt 'a silent love' for the city which was to be his home. 
In February 1848 Muller was visiting Paris, collating manuscripts in the Bibliotheque Royale, when the revolution broke out. Bullets came through the windows of his lodgings. Managing somehow to safeguard his manuscripts, he hurried back to London, where he was the first to report to Bunsen at the Prussian legation the news of Louis Philippe's flight from Paris. Bunsen immediately took him to see Palmerston, to whom Muller related the events he had witnessed in Paris, illustrating his account with one of the bullets that he had retrieved from his room. 
Muller's edition of 'Rig Veda' was being printed in Oxford at the university press, and in May 1848 he decided to settle there in order to give closer attention to the project. The kindness and hospitality he met with in Oxford did much to assuage his homesickness. In late 1849 the first volume was published, after four laborious years spent in what were often very trying conditions. The chief difficulty was in collating and understanding the manuscripts of Sayana's commentary, which had been made by scribes who did not fully understand its meaning, and were consequently full of errors which had to be emended by Max Muller as he was thenceforward known. Furthermore, Sayana's commentary abounds in quotations taken without reference from many other works, most of which had not then been edited or published; all these quotations had to be checked and explained. It was a gigantic undertaking. For the subsequent volumes, which appeared at regular intervals, Max Muller was able to pay assistants who helped with the more mechanical aspects of the work. The sixth and final volume was published in 1874, Max Muller having presented the last sheet of the last volume to the first international congress of orientalists held in London in September of that year. 
Max Muller's lively personality soon made him a popular figure in Oxford society, particularly in the more musical households, where his skill as a pianist made him a very welcome guest. His future in Oxford was secured in early 1851 when he was appointed deputy Taylorian professor of modern European languages, in place of Francis Henry Trithen, the incapacitated holder of the chair. On Trithen's death in 1854 Max Muller succeeded to the full professorship. The first course of lectures he gave was on the history and origin of modern languages, the second on the 'Nibelungen'. The lectures were a great success and attracted large audiences, since he had the gift of interesting a non-specialist audience. He prepared a textbook consisting of extracts from German literature, which was published as 'German Classics' in 1858. As Taylorian professor, the main focus of his teaching was on the development of the modern European languages; his lecturing on Sanskrit was mostly confined to the illustration of comparative philology. Nevertheless, his 'History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature' published in 1859 showed that he was still able to find time for active research into Vedic literature. For the later dramas and lyric poems of Sanskrit's classical period, he had little appreciation, regarding them as mere 'pretty ditties'. As teaching aids for the language, in 1866 he published a 'Sanskrit Grammar' and an annotated edition of the 'Hitopadesa'. 
In 1851 Max Muller had been made an honorary MA of the university and a member of Christ Church through the sponsorship of his friend and patron Dean Gaisford, and in 1854 he became a full MA by decree of convocation. In 1855 he became a naturalized British citizen. He was appointed a curator of the Bodleian Library in 1856, resigning in 1863. He held the post once again between 1881 and 1894. In 1858 he accepted the offer of a fellowship of All Souls. 
On 3 August 1859 Max Muller married Georgina Adelaide (1834/5-1916), the elder daughter of Riversdale William Grenfell, a copper smelter, and his wife, Charlotte. Their marriage was happy, and four children were born: Ada in 1860, Mary in 1862, Beatrice in 1864, and John in 1867. Both parents were devastated by the death of Ada at the age of fifteen in 1876. Mary also predeceased her parents, dying in 1886, having married F. C. Conybeare in 1883. 
In May 1860 Wilson, the professor of Sanskrit at Oxford, died suddenly. Max Muller was the best-qualified candidate to fill the vacant chair, but Monier Williams, who had been professor of Sanskrit at the East India College at Haileybury until its closure in 1858, stood as an opposing candidate. At that time the holders of many Oxford chairs were elected by the entire body of Oxford MAs, of whom most were country clergymen. Elections to chairs resembled parliamentary elections, far more regard being paid to the political and religious views of the candidates than to their academic qualifications. The burning question in mid-nineteenth-century Oxford was whether the university should be a religious or a secular institution. Max Muller's Christianity was grounded in a liberal Lutheranism, and he had no empathy for the theological and ecclesiastical struggles of contemporary Oxford, which he regarded with detached amusement. Williams, who was the candidate of the evangelical party, was no more than a competent scholar, unable to rival Max Muller in terms of ability or achievement. Williams's supporters waged a press campaign against Max Muller, in which they urged that his religious views and German birth rendered him unworthy of the chair. These considerations weighed heavily with the country clergy, who at best had a minimal understanding of the nature of Sanskrit, and who flocked to Oxford in large numbers for the election, which was held in December 1860. Williams was elected with 833 votes, against 610 for Max Muller, whose bitter disappointment at this defeat rankled for many years. 
After 1860 the focus of Max Muller's career changed. He continued his work on the 'Rig Veda', but most of his energy was devoted to the preparation of popular books and lectures, mostly in the fields of comparative philology and comparative mythology. The need to compensate for his rebuff at Oxford, where he remained Taylorian professor, led him to seek acclaim among a wider audience. His lectures on the science of language, given at the Royal Institution, London, in 1861 and 1863, were a great public success. The published lectures were reprinted fifteen times between 1861 and 1899. Max Muller became one of the leading figures of Victorian public life, engaging in public debates on topical questions, chiefly through the medium of letters to 'The Times'. 
Despite some opposition, in 1865 Max Muller was elected oriental sub-librarian of the Bodleian Library, but his health broke down under the strain of holding this post together with the Taylorian chair, and he resigned the sub-librarianship in 1867. In the following year the university abolished the Taylorian chair and in its place created a new chair of comparative philology, specifically for him. This relieved him from the necessity of lecturing on modern languages and added to his salary. Max Muller was thus the first occupant of a chair founded by the university itself, all previous chairs having been established by royal or private benefactions. In December 1875, the final volume of the 'Rig Veda' having been published in the previous year, he decided to resign this chair and to return to Germany. His ostensible reason for resigning was to make himself free to concentrate on Sanskrit studies, but pique at the university's decision to make Monier Williams an honorary doctor of civil laws appears to have been the underlying motive. However, he was prevailed upon to change his mind; the university allowed him to retain the title and salary of professor of comparative philology while a deputy was appointed to do the work. He held the chair until his death. 
The last thirty years of Max Muller's life were chiefly devoted to writing and lecturing on comparative religion. His 'Introduction to the Science of Religion' was published in 1873. Lectures on this topic were given at the Royal Institution in 1870, in 1873 at Westminster Abbey, where in 1878 he inaugurated the annual Hibbert lectures on the science of religion, and at the University of Glasgow, where he was Gifford lecturer from 1888 to 1892. The most important project of these years was his founding and editing of a series of English translations of Indian, Arabic, Chinese, and Iranian religious texts. The 'Sacred Books of the East' were intended for a general readership, and were translated by various scholars, Max Muller himself contributing translations of selections from the hymns of the 'Rig Veda', the 'Upanisads', and the 'Dhammapada', a Buddhist text. The volumes were published by Oxford University Press. The university and the government of India underwrote the cost of their production. Of the forty-nine volumes of translation in the series, only one remained to be published at the time of Max Muller's death. In 1887 the maharaja of Vijayanagara offered to underwrite the cost of a second, corrected edition of the 'Rig Veda', and to pay the salary of an assistant. The new edition, published in 1892, was largely the work of Max Muller's assistant, Maurice Winternitz, who corrected the text and checked the proof sheets. In 1897 Max Muller published a large work, 'Contributions to the Science of Mythology'. 
Despite poor health in the last two years of his life, Max Muller continued to write, publishing in 1899 'The Six Systems of Hindu Philosophy', as well as producing essays and material for his autobiography. He died at his home, Parks End, 7 Norham Gardens, Oxford, on 28 October 1900, and was buried in the Holywell cemetery, Oxford, on 1 November 1900. His wife survived him. 
Max Muller was a pioneer in the fields of Vedic studies, comparative philology, comparative mythology, and comparative religion, which he was chiefly responsible for introducing and popularizing in Britain. However, owing to the rapid advance of knowledge in these fields in the latter half of the nineteenth century, many of his ideas and a large part of his methodology had become obsolete long before his death. His work in comparative mythology and comparative religion was largely based on philological identifications which were later demonstrated to be untenable, and his philological methodology was replaced by the nascent science of anthropology. His strange theory that mythology is a 'disease of language' is taken from Sayana. Initially, he believed that languages were linked to race, being the expression of the thought of the races who spoke them, and he freely wrote of 'the Aryan race' and the 'Semitic race'. He modified his views in the 1880s, but he continued to write of an 'Aryan blessing' and a 'spiritual succession which began with the first apostles of that noble speech'. Such romanticism informed his support for German nationalism and Prussian expansion, and he engaged in a public controversy with Gladstone in which he championed the German cause in the Franco-Prussian war. 
In India, Max Muller was regarded as a great and learned pandit. In 1862 an assembly of Brahmans met near Poona to correct their manuscripts of the 'Rig Veda' by the first three published volumes of his edition. He never visited India, and his view of the country was idealized. His writings on India were an important element in the formation of western ideas about Indian religion and also in India's opinion of itself, particularly in their dissemination of the myth of India's spirituality. 
Max Muller was largely responsible for the revival of Buddhist scholarship in Japan, through his encouragement of young Japanese scholars with whom he came into contact from the 1870s. After his death, his library was acquired by Tokyo University. 
Max Muller was a gifted literary stylist, producing a large number of articles and books on a variety of topics. His 1881 translation of Kant's 'Critique of Pure Reason' demonstrates his mastery of English and German prose. Though philosophers have tended to prefer Norman Kemp Smith's 1929 translation, Max Muller's stylish version of the 'Critique' has continued to be well regarded. He even wrote a romance, 'Deutsche Liebe' (1857), which went through thirteen editions and was translated into English, French, Italian, and Russian. Collections of his articles and reminiscences were published as 'Chips from a German Workshop' (1867-75) and 'Auld Lang Syne' (1898-9). He was dictating his 'Autobiography' (1901) to his son at the time of his death. However, the sheer volume of his literary production was not compatible with the production of original research, of which he did little in the latter part of his life. 
Naturally gregarious, Max Muller enjoyed great social acclaim, mixing with many of the royal families and leading figures of Europe. Dapper in appearance, he took a childlike pleasure in the many awards that he received: he was a privy councillor, he held Prussian and Italian knighthoods, the northern star of Sweden, the French Legion d'honneur, the Bavarian Maximilian, the German Albert the Bear, and the Turkish Mejidiye. He held several honorary doctorates, and was honoured by many learned societies. 
His social acclaim, the honours he received, and the fact that he did little original research in his later years, led other, more austere scholars, such as Roth and the American Sanskritist W. D. Whitney, to attack Max Muller. There may have been some justification in their assessment of his later career, but their attacks should not detract from the importance of his pioneering achievements, especially in the fields of Vedic studies and comparative philology. 


@@@@@


doc= 18395


Maxey, Anthony (d. 1618), dean of Windsor, was probably a member of the Maxey family of Bradwell juxta Coggeshall, Essex. Educated as a queen's scholar at Westminster School, on 18 April 1578 he was elected to Trinity College, Cambridge. He graduated BA in 1582, proceeding MA in 1585, BTh in 1594, and DD in 1608, but failed to win a fellowship. Ordained deacon and priest in the diocese of Lincoln on 7 May 1589, Maxey was rector of Hackford, Norfolk, from that year until 1602. In 1591 he acquired the rectory of Horham, Suffolk, and held it until 1595, by when he had been installed rector of Reepham, Norfolk. He is also credited with the rectory of Winterton in the same county. He resigned from Reepham in 1612, at about the same time that he acquired yet another rectory, that of Horton in Buckinghamshire. 
By the beginning of 1605 Maxey had become a chaplain-in-ordinary to James I, and frequently preached before the king. On Ascension day 1605, for instance, he eulogized James's court as 'the most religious court... that is in Christendome' (McCullough, 130). Another court sermon of that year suggests he may have sympathized with the nonconformists recently deprived of their livings, but he was none the less careful to praise the ceremonies which had been their undoing. Maxey's incomes spiralled and honours multiplied, and on 21 June 1612 James appointed him registrar of the Order of the Garter and dean of Windsor; he was instituted on the 25th. He usually attended meetings of the Windsor chapter, which on 30 March 1614 resolved to present him to the rectory of West Isley, Berkshire. Several sermons preached before the king were published soon afterwards, all of them appearing in the posthumous editions of 'Certaine Sermons Preached before the King's Majesty' (1619, 1634). These also include his address given at the marriage of Ralph Sadler to Anne, daughter of Sir Edward Coke, at the Savoy on 14 September 1601, and another given before the lords of the council in Lent 1618. 
Aptly described as 'an unblushing simonist' ('Old Westminsters', 2.634), Maxey offered money to Sir Henry Hobart, attorney-general between 1606 and 1613, in the hope of gaining preferment, while in April 1618 John Chamberlain reported that he had made the highest bid for the vacant see of Norwich, topping the offer of Valentine Carey, dean of St Paul's. But the prize eluded him. Maxey died on 3 May 1618, the day on which he made his will; probate was granted on the 18th, his executor being his kinsman Amyas Maxey. He mentions several other relations but no children, referring to his wife only as having died at least ten years earlier. He left eighty books to the library of the chapter at Windsor, and sums of money to relatives and servants; two faithful servants each received $10 and a horse, 'but unto Roger my cooke, beinge verye lewde in his tongue, and besides corruptinge my clarke Roberte Berrye with tobacco and drinkinge, nothinge' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/131, fol. 369'r'). Maxey held the lease of a house in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, and it was in St Martin's Church that he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 18396


Macclesfield, Thomas (1585-1616), Roman Catholic priest and martyr, was probably born at Chesterton Hall in Staffordshire, the seventh of the eleven children of William Macclesfield ('c'.1553-1610), gentleman, of Chesterton and Maer, Staffordshire, and his wife, Ursula ('c'.1557- 'c'.1607), daughter of Francis Roos of Laxton, Nottinghamshire, and Chapel Chorlton parish, Swineshead, Staffordshire. An elder son, Simon, also became a priest. The family's two main residences were Chesterton Hall, Chesterton, in the parish of Wolstanton, and Maer Hall, Maer, the family seat. The estate at Maer Hall consisted of land comprising some 3000 acres. Thomas Macclesfield's father, William, 'was Catholike, a man of worthy pietie... and who under the reign of two princes was much renowned for his patient sufferance of a long imprisonment, confiscation of all his goods' ('Miscellanea', 33). In July 1587 he was condemned to death with Erasmus Wolseley of Wolseley Hall and other gentlemen at Stafford assizes for aiding a recusant priest, Robert Sutton. They were also caught attending mass in gaol. The judge reprieved them. William Macclesfield was convicted at least nine times for recusancy, and is said to have spent nineteen years in prison in total. 
Thomas Macclesfield 'was nurst and brought into the world, both parents being in prison' ('Miscellanea', 33). He attended a Staffordshire grammar school. On 16 March 1603 he entered the English College, Douai, with his elder brother Simon. They adopted the alias Field. Thomas also used the alias John Cleaton, probably emanating from the Clayton family of Maer. However, he was sent home for health reasons in 1610. In 1612 he was readmitted to the English College, Douai, and ordained at Arras on 29 March 1614. He was sent to England on 17 July 1615. On arrival he took lodgings in the Strand and went to visit Father Harries, a friend, at the Gatehouse prison in Westminster where he celebrated his first mass in England. He carried out missionary work for three months and was then arrested. He confessed to being a priest and was put in the Gatehouse prison. On 14 June 1616 'a barr of the windowe being broken, he attempted to escape, but alas, whilst he was descending... by a rope... a fellow caught him' (ibid., 33). On recapture he was put in a tiny cell in such a position that he could not stand upright, lie down, or turn over. On 17 June he was moved to Newgate prison. As a result of converting two of his fellow prisoners to his religion, he was put with other recusants. 
At the Old Bailey, Macclesfield was indicted under the statute of 27 Elizabeth for having been ordained overseas and acting as a priest in England. At the trial he was convicted of high treason and condemned to death, 'yet had his pardon offer'd, if he would submit to the oath of allegiance, which he... refused' (Dodd, 2.378). In prison he was visited by many persons of distinction and by his mother, his brother Peter, and his sisters. His letters to some of them and to Matthew Kellison were preserved and later given to St Edmund's College, Ware. Despite the intercession of the Spanish ambassador, the count of Gondomar, with James I, he was executed at Tyburn on 1 July 1616. On the night before his execution people decorated the gallows with flowers. When, at his execution, he tried to explain that seminary priests were not traitors, he was silenced and the cart was drawn from under him. He was then hanged, drawn, and quartered. After his death his bones were taken to Spain, where they were venerated as those of a martyr in the family chapel of the count of Gondomar in Galicia. The relics are currently at Downside Abbey, Somerset. An engraving dated 1621, with a Spanish inscription, shows him with the attributes of martyrdom. Thomas Macclesfield was one of the 136 martyrs beatified by the pope in 1929. He was beatified as Thomas Maxfield. 


@@@@@


doc= 18397


Maxfield, Thomas (d. 1784), Methodist preacher, hailed from Bristol, but nothing is known of his parents or his early life. He was converted by John Wesley's preaching at Bristol on 21 May 1739, and, despite his youth, was soon appointed leader of a Methodist band -- a small group for fellowship and mutual confession. In 1740 Charles Wesley took Maxfield to London, where he was given further responsibility as an assistant leader in the Methodist society. In the winter of 1740-41 John Wesley put him in charge of the society at the Foundery Chapel, London, while he himself returned to his Bristol ministry. Maxfield's brief was to pray with the members and give them informal exhortation. Encouraged, however, by Selina, countess of Huntingdon, and others he began to preach, which, as a layman, he was not authorized to do. John Wesley, informed of this new development, rode post-haste from Bristol to London, and at the Foundery was met by his mother, Susanna. To his curt 'Thomas Maxfield has turned preacher, I find', she replied: 'John, you know what my sentiments have been. You cannot suspect me of favouring readily any thing of this kind. But take care what you do with respect to that young man, for he is as surely called of God to preach, as you are. Examine what have been the fruits of his preaching, and hear him also yourself.' Having done so, Wesley acknowledged, 'It is the Lord. Let him do what seemeth him good' (Moore, 1.506). 
Maxfield's preaching gifts made such a profound impression on Lady Huntingdon that, in a letter to John Wesley of 31 January 1742, she described Maxfield, bearing in mind his humble origins, as 'One of the greatest instances of God's peculiar favour that I know. He has raised from the stones one to set among the princes of his people' ('Works of John Wesley', 26.73). In early 1741 Wesley appointed Maxfield as a full-time lay itinerant preacher, the first of his many 'sons in the Gospel'. In 1745 Wesley made him an assistant -- a preacher with responsibility for overseeing a circuit, a collection of Methodist societies scattered over a wide area. In June 1745, while Maxfield was preaching in Cornwall, he was press-ganged for the navy, but, having been rejected by the captain of the ship to which he was taken, was put in prison at Penzance. He was about to be freed when, by the intervention of William Borlase of Ludgvan, a clerical magistrate and avowed opponent of the Methodists, he was conscripted for military service instead. John Wesley, on a preaching tour of Cornwall, heard of these events. He rode at once to Marazion with George Thomson, in whose church Wesley had been invited to preach, to confront the justices and contend for Maxfield's release. They were not allowed into the court room until late at night, by which time Maxfield had been sentenced to military service and the justices had dispersed. 
Maxfield did eventually obtain his release, however, as he was present at the Bristol annual conference of Methodist preachers in 1746. He became one of Wesley's most trusted lieutenants, and in the minutes of conference for 1758 he is listed immediately beneath the Wesleys themselves. This placing both underlines his seniority and also may well indicate that by this date he had, at Wesley's request, been ordained an Anglican clergyman. Maxfield was ordained priest by William Barnard, bishop of Derry, on John Wesley's recommendation. Barnard, who for reasons of health was then living in Bath, received Maxfield with the words, 'I ordain you, to assist that good man, that he may not work himself to death' ('Works of John Wesley', 21.409). Maxfield combined his Methodist itinerancy with the office of chaplain to Lady Huntingdon, and also had a pronounced influence on Thomas Coke, who was to become one of John Wesley's most loyal Anglican colleagues. 
The 1760s saw the development of a painful rift between Maxfield and John and Charles Wesley. John felt it particularly strongly, since he admired Maxfield's gifts and had sought to give him the fullest scope for their exercise. Moreover, the dispute touched Wesley at a sensitive point, in that it involved the understanding of Christian perfection, a doctrine on which he placed prime emphasis. In 1760 Wesley appointed Maxfield to meet weekly with a select group of Methodists who professed to have reached a state of 'entire sanctification'. They began to claim direct divine inspiration through dreams and visions. Maxfield, according to Wesley, far from exercising a sobering influence, encouraged their 'enthusiasm'. In October 1762 Wesley recorded 'I found the society in an uproar and several of Mr. M[axfield]'s most intimate friends formed into a detached body. Enthusiasm, pride, and great uncharitableness appeared in many who once had much grace' ('Works of John Wesley', 21.410). The dispute involved claims by Maxfield's followers that Christians should expect absolute sinless perfection in this life, as against Wesley's insistence on continuing weaknesses and infirmities, 'sin in believers'. Some of the Maxfield group claimed they would never die, and one, George Bell, prophesied that the world would end on 28 February 1763 -- a prophecy which Maxfield endorsed. Wesley reacted strongly against these extravagances, and in his journal for 7 January 1763, recorded: 'At this time I did not want information that Mr. M.[axfield] was at the bottom of all this; that he was the life of the cause; that he was continually spiriting up all with whom he was intimate against me; that he told them I was not capable of teaching them and insinuated that none was but himself; and that the inevitable consequence must be a division in the society. ('Works of John Wesley', 21.403)' Eventually, some 200 Methodists left Wesley's London society and Maxfield severed connection with his erstwhile leader on 28 April 1763. Contemporary evidence suggests that Maxfield's growing consciousness of his considerable gifts, his enhanced status as Wesley's lieutenant and an ordained clergyman, together with the large fortune brought him by his wife Elizabeth Branford (died 1777) may have enhanced his sense of independence of the Wesleys. He had certainly outgrown the status of a 'son in the gospel', and appears to have been reluctant to accept the role of 'fellow-labourer'. Wesley, deeply hurt by Maxfield's conduct, recorded in his journal for 23 April 1763: 'From this time, he has spoke all manner of evil of 'me', his father, his friend, his greatest earthly benefactor' ('Works of John Wesley', 21.411). In his 'Vindication of the Rev. Mr Maxfield's conduct' (1767) Maxfield rebutted Wesley's charges, though the evidence against him does not derive solely from Wesley. Among others John Fletcher, the saintly vicar of Madeley, corroborates the charges of spiritual pride against Maxfield and Bell. Fletcher wrote of Maxfield, in a letter to Wesley dated 9 September 1763: 'I believe him [Maxfield] sincere; and, though obstinate and suspicious, I am persuaded he has a true desire to know the will, and live the life of God' (Tyerman, 2.464). 
Maxfield became minister to a society in Snow's Fields, London, and then moved to a meeting-house in Ropemakers' Alley, Moorfields, where he had a large congregation. His final preaching place was at Princes Street, Moorfields, where he ministered until about 1767. In the following decade he published a 'Collection of Psalms and Hymns Extracted from Various Authors' (1778) and several accounts of pious deaths, including that of his wife, who died on 23 November 1777. In February 1770, at Lady Huntingdon's house in Portland Row, Wesley met Maxfield, who preached against Christian perfection, the doctrine he had previously so earnestly advocated. There were attempts at reconciliation from both sides, but the breach was never healed. There was, however, in time some softening of attitude on both sides. Charles Atmore records of Maxfield that, 'For some years before his death, he became very friendly with the Methodists; the preachers frequently supplied his chapel and preached to his congregation' (Atmore, 269). Wesley recorded a later visit in his journal for 21 December 1782 after Maxfield had been struck with a violent stroke of palsy: 'He was senseless and seemed near death. But we besought God for him, and his spirit revived, I cannot but think, in answer to prayer.' On 2 February 1783 he noted, 'Mr. Maxfield continuing ill, I preached this afternoon at his chapel. Prejudice seems now dying away. God grant it may never revive' ('Works of John Wesley', 23.261-2). Maxfield died at his home in Moorfields on 18 March 1784. 


@@@@@


doc= 18398


Maxse, Frederick Augustus (1833-1900), naval officer and radical, was the second son of James Maxse (1792-1864), a wealthy landowner, hunting man, and yachtsman, and his wife, Lady Caroline Fitzhardinge (1803-1886), the eldest daughter of Frederick Augustus, fifth earl of Berkeley. Sir Henry Berkeley Fitzhardinge Maxse was his elder brother. After schooling at Brighton, Hampton, and Paris he entered the navy, and obtained his lieutenancy in May 1852. As naval aide-de-camp to Lord Raglan after the battle of the Alma (20 September 1854) he showed conspicuous gallantry in carrying dispatches, which caused his promotion to commander in December 1855. At the end of the war he was the youngest captain in the navy. From 1859 he was the friend of George Meredith, who based the hero of 'Beauchamp's Career' (1875) on him. He retired from the service in 1867 and became rear-admiral in 1875. 
The Crimean War was apparently for Maxse a formative experience. He returned contemptuous of what he perceived as the conservative, aristocratic establishment's bungling, and also a strong Francophile. Emotional, impulsive, and idealistic, he became an 'aristocratic democrat' (Garvin, 156), an idiosyncratic political radical who was a freethinker, anti-Christianity, vegetarian, and teetotal. He condemned aristocracy and 'laissez-faire' capitalism and advocated co-operation, free secular education, land redistribution, and electoral reform, but -- like his fellow wealthy radical Henry Labouchere -- opposed women's suffrage. His friends included John Morley and Joseph Chamberlain, whom he introduced to each other in 1873. He was an unsuccessful radical parliamentary candidate at Southampton in 1868 (when Meredith helped him) and at Tower Hamlets, London, in 1874. Patriotic and imperialist, he broke with the Gladstonians over home rule and continued his friendship with Chamberlain. He represented Dorking on the new Surrey county council from 1889 to March 1895. 
Restless, Maxse travelled much, kept a 'pied-a-terre' in Paris, and spent much time buying and building houses. He finally resided at a house he had built, Dunley Hill, near Dorking. From 1868 he published articles and pamphlets on topical political issues, including 'Objections to Woman Suffrage' (1874) and his defence of Chamberlain, 'Judas! A Political Tract' (1894). In 1899 he published in the 'National Review' articles on the Crimean War which are of historical value. 
In 1861 Maxse married Cecilia (died 1918), the daughter of Colonel Steel of the Indian army. They were incompatible, the marriage failed, and in 1877 they separated. They had two sons and two daughters. (Frederick) Ivor Maxse (1862-1958) had a military career, Leopold James Maxse (1864-1932) became the owner-editor of the 'National Review', which his father paid for in 1893, and the younger daughter, Violet Georgina (1872-1958) ['see 'Milner, Violet Georgina], married first Lord Edward Cecil and second Alfred, Viscount Milner. 
Maxse died at 2 South Place, Knightsbridge, London, on 25 June 1900. 


@@@@@


doc= 18399


Maxse, Sir Henry Berkeley Fitzhardinge (1832-1883), colonial governor, was the son of James Maxse (1792-1864), a wealthy landowner, and his wife, Lady Caroline Fitzhardinge (1803-1886), the daughter of the fifth earl of Berkeley. Frederick Augustus Maxse was his brother. Henry Maxse entered the army on 1 June 1849 as a lieutenant in the Grenadier Guards, but changed on 11 June 1852 to the 13th light dragoons and on 6 July to the 21st foot. He became captain in the Coldstream Guards on 29 December 1854, and in the same year was ordered to the Crimea. He served throughout the Crimean War as aide-de-campe to Lord Cardigan, was present at the battles of Alma and Balaklava (where he was wounded) and at the siege of Sevastopol, and won the Crimean medal and clasps, besides Turkish medals and the decoration of the fifth class of the Mejidiye. In 1855 he became a major. In 1863 he was promoted to be lieutenant-colonel, but he bought himself out of the army on 22 December 1873. 
In 1863 Maxse went to Heligoland as lieutenant-governor, and was appointed governor there on 6 February 1864. His long tenure as governor coincided with an eventful period in the island's history. The reformed constitution was established in 1868, the gaming tables were abolished in 1870, and Maxse had to face the consequent financial difficulties and complaints of the islanders. During his administration Heligoland was also linked by telegraph cable to the mainland. He was made CMG in 1874, and KCMG in 1877. 
In 1881 Maxse became governor of Newfoundland, but he never really settled there. He was interested in Germany: he married the daughter of a Herr von Rudloff, spent a part of every year in Germany, and translated into English Bismarck's letters to his wife and sisters from the period 1844 to 1870. He was also fond of acting, and took part in amateur dramatics. He died at St John's, Newfoundland, on 10 September 1883. Leopold James Maxse was his nephew. 


@@@@@


doc= 18400


Maxwell, James (b. 1581?, d. in or after 1635), scholar and theological controversialist, is said to have been the sole son of William Maxwell of Little Airds. He frequently expressed pride in being the grandson of William Maxwell of Kirkconnel ('fl'. 1540-1567), who had served James V, Mary of Guise, and Mary Stewart. 
A student at the University of Edinburgh, Maxwell early distinguished himself as a scholar, at the age of nineteen compiling commentaries on 'Daniel' and the 'Revelation' in what subsequently became an enormous collection of prophecies, understood as detailing the rise, rule, and eventual overthrow of the papal monarchy -- the great prophesied Antichrist that would be destroyed at the end of days. Maxwell immediately impressed contemporaries and, he relates, was invited to preach in various Edinburgh pulpits. Immersed in Edinburgh's rich Calvinist intellectual culture, dominated by mathematicians, astrologers, and apocalyptic exegetes such as Robert Pont and John Napier of Merchiston, Maxwell initially intended to travel to Denmark and study mathematics and astrology with Tycho Brahe. But the university's sometime principal, Robert Rollock, persuaded him to stay on at Edinburgh, and Maxwell completed his master of arts degree in 1600. 
In 1601, the year of Brahe's death, Maxwell travelled to France; for several years he pursued his prophetic researches in libraries at Limoges and Cluny, then at Florence and Venice, and probably elsewhere as well, possibly even as far south as Naples. Through these researches he assembled an extraordinary and perhaps unique collection of prophetic material: Joachite, pseudo-Joachite, Galfridian, Paracelsian, Merlinic, prophecies identified with Hildegard of Bingen, Thomas the Rhymer, Wilhelm Aytinger, Paul Grebner, Nostradamus, materials collected out of John Bale, John Foxe, Flacius Illyricus, the Magdeburg centuriators, and much else. While abroad he completed his book on the papacy, the 'Tyrannidi-graphia ecclesiae militantis', as well as several allied works. The 'Tyrannidi-graphia', dedicated to his university, was sent back to Edinburgh, where it was apparently widely read and eventually came into the hands of the prominent minister at Ayr, John Welsh. Unfortunately Welsh took the manuscript volume with him when he was banished to France in November 1606, and it is now lost -- a fate, tragically, that would await the bulk of Maxwell's writings. 
By 1607 Maxwell had settled in London, where he renounced his former 'puritanisme and Geneuisme' and dedicated the rest of his life to promoting James VI and I's British project and the episcopal church that was integral to it (Maxwell, 'A New Eight-Fold Probation', 1617, 35). In London he associated with conservative protestant scholars like the royal librarian Patrick Young, the well-known antiquary Sir Henry Spelman, and the Exeter dean Matthew Sutcliffe, and for nearly fifteen years he pleaded and petitioned, continuously and unsuccessfully, for an appointment to the fledgeling Chelsea College, the projected intellectual seat of the new Britain. Constantly writing, Maxwell rushed to the crown's defence with massive replies to the fanatical counter-reformers Jacques Davy du Perron (1556-1618), Martin Becanus 
(van der Beeck; 1561-1624)
, Jacob Gretser 
(Gretscher; 1562-1625)
, and Caspar Schoppe 
(Scioppio; 1576-1649)
. But, drawing from his researches while on the continent, his central concern remained focused upon the apocalyptic promise of the new British era that James's rule appeared to be initiating. 
Although most of this writing has now disappeared and can only be known through Maxwell's quaint verse summaries and relatively brief occasional pieces, his beliefs and extraordinary expectations are still abundantly clear. The new Britain was nothing less than the prophesied last world empire that would reunite Europe, the Middle East, and presumably the globe within the true Christian faith in the age immediately preceding the return of Christ. James 'the Concorder' would reconcile divided Europe into this final order -- seemingly through both his diplomatic efforts and his writings, and still more through the spirit and the writings emerging from the new British church. As his religious conservatism deepened Maxwell became increasingly convinced that Rome's conversion might be accomplished without violence: 'The reforming king... shall not intend the destruction and devastation, but only the purgation and purification of the Temple' (Maxwell, 'Admirable and Notable Prophecies', 1615, 88). If the faith initially had reached Rome from Britain by means of the sword it might do so in the latter days simply by means of the Word. As he urged James: '
Play David's part, our curer and our king, 

In Saul's behalf, e'en the musician, 

With your sweet Harp, cease not to play and sing! 

Till you prove Pope Paul's physician. 
(Maxwell, 'The Laudable Life and Deplorable Death... of Prince Henry', 1612, sig. D4'r')' From this perspective Maxwell easily saw the Austrian Habsburgs, despite their Catholicism, as a rampart against the Ottoman empire, the 'common enemies of the Christian name' (Maxwell, 'Admirable and Notable Prophecies', 1615, 120). 
The overthrow of the Ottomans, however, was an imperative, and Maxwell expected Prince Henry and, on his death, the suitably named Charles to retake Constantinople, thus restoring the eastern Roman empire under British aegis. The huge wealth of prophecy associated with Charles V in the previous century and with Charles VIII in the century before that, Maxwell maintained, actually applied to Britain's Charles Stuart, whose role was in fact prefigured by a line of famous individuals with that name reaching back, perhaps inevitably, to Charlemagne. The destruction of Islam (anticipated to occur about the year 1630, a millennium after its advent) would be accompanied by still other eschatological events, notably the conversion of the Jews. There in the British Middle East would emerge a community of Christian Jews, possibly, Maxwell hoped, under the guidance of James himself. '
Oh happy sight to see great Britain's king 

One day descending from Mount Olivet! 

O happy song, to hear the Hebrews sing! 

For joy of heart James to congratulate. 
('Laudable Life', sig. E2'r')' Maxwell is Scotland's closest counterpart to such contemporary or near contemporary figures as Italy's Tommaso Campanella, France's Guillaume de Postel, England's John Dee, Sweden's Johannes Bureus, and Germany's authors of the Rosicrucian manifestos. Like them he was deeply concerned to reconnect a world now religiously, politically, and intellectually fragmented, he anticipated eschatological spiritual and social renewal, and he looked to prophetic world empire. Like them he rejected Aristotelian scholasticism for a putatively more profound wisdom in Neoplatonism, astrology, and a range of magical traditions. Like Campanella -- and also Francis Bacon -- he sought to elevate the status of the mechanical arts in relation to the liberal arts. At once archaic and forward-looking, medieval and yet also anticipating the British imperial experience, Maxwell, like so much in Europe at the turn of the seventeenth century, is profoundly Janus-faced, exotic but curiously familiar. 
By 1617 it seemed that at last a fellowship as one of the two historians at the Chelsea College, the only positions open to laymen, was within Maxwell's grasp -- or so he announced in his 'A New Eight-Fold Probation of the Church of England's Divine Constitution', itself a controversial piece, hastily written in response to the Scottish Presbyterian ministers' petition to James in July of that year (sigs. B2'v'-B3'r'). But it was not to be. Worse still, three years later his religious conservatism led to disaster when he produced a tract rejecting Frederick V's claim to the Bohemian crown. The argument in the now untraceable work, probably entitled 'Turba-Austriaca', is discernible from a summary appearing in yet another pamphlet published several months earlier: the Turkish threat and eschatological moment required 'that the imperial dignity be continued yet a while in the most glorious and augustious house of Austria, and not transferred unto another, especially of smaller power than it' (Maxwell, 'Carolanna', 1619, sig. F3'r'). Maxwell had always claimed that the house of Stuart was genealogically close to the house of Habsburg, and this circumstance, too, necessarily figured in his thinking. Not surprisingly a protest was lodged, and the 'scribbler' found himself gaoled in the Tower on 27 June 1620. During the autumn and winter he made a series of increasingly abject recantations to the privy council, and was eventually released on 9 February 1621 (TNA: PRO, SP 14/115/176; SP 14/117/155; SP 14/118/65; SP 14/119/69; 'Acts of the Privy Council of England, 1619-1621', 230, 344). 
This event cut off any chance of a Chelsea College appointment and effectively marks the end of Maxwell's career in Britain. Thereafter he is rarely heard of, his remaining published works being limited to translations. Following his humiliation he travelled to the continent, first to France, and then settled in the Spanish Netherlands. Political disaster continued to dog him. He was briefly detained in Calvinist France for his 'Eight-Fold Probation' and then imprisoned at Brussels for over a year as a heretic and a British spy; he obtained his release from 'perpetuall prison', he claimed, only after falsely promising to 'turne Catholicke in the highest straine and go live in Rome'. His scholarship nevertheless impressed the Habsburgs and the counter-reformers well enough for Emperor Ferdinand II (died 1637) to offer him 'spiritual preferment and the office of Imperial Antiquary and Genealogist', as well as a pension of 1000 crowns upon the death of the long-time court librarian, Sebastian Tengnagel (1573-1635). Or so he wrote to Archbishop Laud in 1631, making what was probably his last and again unsuccessful appeal for a place within the Church of England -- hoping also to return home and finally publish his many works. As he told Laud, any imperial appointment of course would require his conversion to Roman Catholicism, adding that as a protestant his life itself was constantly under threat from several English Catholic exiles (TNA: PRO, SP 16/189/124-127). 
Maxwell probably ended his days in France, seeking the patronage of Cardinal Richelieu -- not unlike Campanella himself. His final publication, a translation of 'morall discourses' attributed to Richelieu, appeared in 1635. In the preface he noted that there existed in the world three kinds of men: natural, moral, and divine. In what was surely a reference to himself he described the last flying: 'a higher pitch than all, his soul is mounted on the wings of contemplation... he soars with the eagle to attain those heavenly mysteries that God Himself hath revealed, and never leaves till he hath seated himself... in the high tribunal of that Holy of Holies (Maxwell, 'Emblema animae', 1635, sig. A3'v')' Maxwell never found a place within the British order that he so wished to serve. Appeals to James, 'an academic man to an academic king', went neglected; Laud dismissed him as 'Mountebank Maxwell' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/84/59; SP 16/189/127'v'). Prophecy had come to play poorly within the late Jacobean and Caroline church. In that environment Maxwell's extraordinary claims (which extended even to determining the season of the year and the day of the week when the world would likely end, which found eschatological significance in the putatively Scottish place names he located in the Middle East, and which saw Merlin's prophecies indicating James's Irish policies) found themselves drastically out of place. Yet, for all its extravagance, much within Maxwell's thinking -- his apocalyptic expectations, his sense of imperial mission, his philosemitism, even his concern to reclaim 'British' Constantinople -- developed and articulated attitudes which were surprisingly widespread in both England and Scotland, and which extended to powerful members of the court, like Sir William Alexander, if not to the Laudian elite. Many of these perceptions would fire the mid-century revolution and thereafter more generally underwrite British achievement. 


@@@@@


doc= 18401


Maxwell, James, of Kirkconnel (1708-1762), Jacobite army officer and writer, was the son of William Maxwell of Kirkconnel ('c'.1675-1746) and Janet ('c'.1675-1755), eldest daughter and heir of George Maxwell of Carnsalloch, and widow of Colonel John Douglas of Stenhouse. His family is one of the oldest in Scotland, the site of Kirkconnel House having been occupied since the days of Malcolm III Cean Mor ('r'. 1057-93), and the Maxwells there figuring prominently in the history of Scotland since the thirteenth century. At the Reformation the Maxwells remained Catholic, and James, like many of his family, was educated at Douai (1721-8). In 1758 he married Mary, daughter of Thomas Riddell of Swinburne Castle, and they had three sons, James (later of Kirkconnel), William -- a republican who commanded 'the guard escorting Louis XVI to the guillotine' (Lenman, 89), and Thomas. 
Maxwell, acting with the support of his father, joined Prince Charles (Charles Edward Stuart) at Edinburgh on 18 October 1745, and was commissioned in Lord Elcho's Lifeguard squadron, then newly formed. His exact rank and position in the Jacobite forces remains in doubt: various sources describe him as lieutenant, captain, major, and even lieutenant-colonel. Whatever his military position (captain subsequently promoted major is most likely, probably combined with some unrecorded aide-de-camp role on the general staff), he appears to have had privileged access to the innermost counsels of the Jacobite leadership, being 'in the council, though not a member of it' ('DNB'). As a result, he was able to leave, in his 'Narrative of Charles Prince of Wales' Expedition to Scotland', one of the most useful primary sources on the Jacobite rising of 1745. In hiding after the battle of Culloden, he subsequently escaped to France, where he resided at St Germain: it was here that he composed his 'Narrative' between 1746 and 1750. Its literary style and quality are noteworthy. He succeeded his father as laird of Kirkconnel in 1746, and was able to return to Scotland in 1750; subsequently he built the modern portion of Kirkconnel House in brick. After his mother's death in 1755, he sold the estate of Carnsalloch, which he had inherited from her, to Alexander Johnstone, a London merchant. He died on 23 July 1762, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 18402


Maxwell, James (1720-1800), poet and essayist, was born at Auchenback, parish of Mearns, Renfrewshire, on 9 May 1720. At the age of twenty he went to England as a packman, became a weaver, and was at various times clerk, usher, schoolmaster, and stonebreaker. In 1787 he became the recipient of a charity in the gift of the town council of Paisley, which he enjoyed until his death (Motherwell, 1828, citing council records of 11 Oct 1787). Maxwell was one of the most prolific rhymers of his day, usually designating himself Poet in Paisley, and on some of his title-pages adding to his name the letters 'SDP', meant to signify 'student of divine poetry'. He represents the terminus of the virile strain of poetry of Calvinist pietism in eighteenth-century Scotland. His work, however, rarely rises above doggerel. A bibliography of Maxwell's works, comprising fifty-two separate publications, is given in Brown's 'Paisley Poets' (1.17-22). The main interest in Maxwell today follows from his vocal antagonism to Robert Burns and Thomas Paine. His essay 'On the Ayrshire ploughman poet, or poetaster, R. B.' was published in his 'Animadversions on some Poets and Poetasters of the Present Age' (1788). Of some interest also, for its observation of economic history, is his poem 'The great canal, or, The Forth and Clyde Navigation' (1788). His chief works are: 'Divine Miscellanies' (1756), 'Hymns and Spiritual Songs' (1759), and 'A New Version of the Whole Book of Psalms in Metre' (1773), in which he exemplifies his objection to the employment of the organ in church by paraphrasing all of the references to instrumental music in worship so as to suit his own views. In 1795, on his seventy-fifth birthday, Maxwell published an autobiographical poem entitled 'A Brief Narrative, or, Some Remarks on the Life of James Maxwell, Poet, in Paisley'. From this the reader learns that Maxwell had married, and had had at least one son, though no more is known of his family. He died nearly five years later, in March or April 1800. 


@@@@@


doc= 18403


Maxwell, John, fourth Lord Herries of Terregles (c.1512-1583), nobleman, was born in Dumfriesshire, the second son of Robert Maxwell, fifth Lord Maxwell (c.1494-1546), and his wife, Janet, daughter of Sir William Douglas of Drumlanrig. The Maxwells were one of the most powerful border families, and normally provided the wardens of the Scottish west march. Through ties of kinship and marriage, and also through bonds of manrent, they had created a sphere of influence which included the baronies of Caerlaverock and Granane, the hereditary stewardships of Annandale and Kirkcudbright, and the ecclesiastical lordships of Dundrennan, Tongland, Sweetheart, and Holywood abbeys. Their jurisdiction as wardens extended not only over the sheriffdom of Dumfries and the two stewardships but also over some parts of the sheriffdom of Wigtown. 
When his father died in 1546 John Maxwell succeeded him as warden. He immediately came under conflicting pressures from the government of the earl of Arran, the Scottish regent, and from English officials, led by Thomas, Lord Wharton, who were endeavouring to bring the Scottish borders under their own control. Wharton was anxious to secure the Maxwell strongholds of Lochmaben and Caerlaverock, and he also looked for Maxwell's support against the powerful Douglas family, led by the earl of Angus. But he found that though Maxwell was prepared to accept an English pension, he could not be trusted to carry out the undertakings which justified its payment. In February 1548 an English expedition up Nithsdale was severely mauled near Drumlanrig, leading to suspicions that Maxwell had changed sides and warned Angus of Wharton's plans. The English warden responded by hanging a number of Scottish hostages. 
Maxwell may well have been influenced in his manoeuvrings at this point by the offer made to him by Arran of the hand in marriage of his ward Agnes ('c'.1534-1594), eldest daughter of William, third Lord Herries. The marriage took place in March 1548 and produced twelve children: William Maxwell of Terregles, who succeeded as fifth Lord Herries, Robert, Edward, James, and John; and Elizabeth, Margaret, Agnes, Mary, Sarah, Grizel, and Nicola. Maxwell's courtesy right under Scottish custom to represent his wife's peerage was recognized only in December 1566, when he finally came into complete possession of the territorial barony of Herries, having purchased the lands and eliminated the claims which the Hamiltons had acquired from his wife's sisters. 
Maxwell's casting in his lot with Arran led to his remaining march warden until March 1550. He held that office again several times, with short terms in 1552-3 and 1554-5; after his reappointment in 1557, at a time of great confusion (for much of 1559 the wardenship was unoccupied), he finally secured in 1560 an appointment which lasted until at least October 1567. The warden's office was a difficult and sometimes dangerous one, and came to be rewarded accordingly. In 1552 Maxwell became the first official to receive a supplement of $500 to his basic annual salary of $100. His being appointed several times as a border commissioner for negotiations with his English counterparts, together with a short spell as keeper of Liddesdale in 1554, indicates that his services were appreciated by both his own and the English governments. Indeed, when he returned briefly to office in 1579, Queen Elizabeth, informed by Lord Scrope of his endeavours, personally congratulated him on 'the administrations of justice and repairing and punishing on his side the disorders of those that seek to disturb the peace between England and Scotland' ('CSP Scot.', '1574-81', 335). Earlier that year Maxwell, now Lord Herries, had presented a programme for administrative reform of the borders to Morton and his council. Its proposals included the suggestion that an armed force should be permanently based in the region, and the recommendation that the wardens should be assisted in their duties by representatives of the principal families within each march. This inevitably implied that the Maxwells would have to co-operate with the Johnstones, their great rivals in the west, and in January 1579, in acknowledgement that Herries was at least prepared to contemplate such a situation, Morton dismissed the existing warden, Lord Maxwell, and replaced him with his uncle. But the appointment was short-lived, for Herries was superseded by John Johnstone of that ilk in August, having presumably found that his advancing years made him unsuitable for such a demanding job. 
Maxwell's loyalty to the Marian cause was an important aspect of his later career. This allegiance, like that of many other noblemen, flourished despite his own preference for the reformed religion, which in 1559 had resulted in his being incarcerated in Edinburgh Castle. Following his release he was a signatory of the treaty of Berwick, whereby English aid was forthcoming for the beleaguered lords of the congregation. Later in 1560 he subscribed to the first 'Book of Discipline'. Maxwell was highly regarded by John Knox at this time; even when Maxwell began to display his Marian sympathies, Knox could still refer to him as 'a man stout and wittie' ('Knox's History', 1.459) and of 'great judgment and experience' (ibid., 2.351). 
At the time of the chaseabout raid in 1565, Maxwell attempted to mediate between the earl of Moray and the queen, and when his efforts failed he encouraged Moray to retreat to England. Following Mary's enforced abdication his position was at first ambivalent. Initially he was prominent as the outstanding representative of the queen's party, and the English ambassador Sir Nicholas Throckmorton referred to him as 'the cunning horse-leech and the wisest of the whole faction; but, as the Queen of Scots says of him, there is nobody can be sure of him' ('CSP for.', '1566-8', 324). This equivocal judgement must have seemed justified when in December 1567 Herries spoke out in favour of those who, following Mary's refusal to separate from Bothwell, had imprisoned her at Lochleven, and let it be known that he had allied himself to the party of the infant James VI. But soon afterwards he emerged as one of the queen's staunchest supporters. On 13 May 1568, following the queen's escape from Lochleven, Herries commanded Mary's cavalry at the battle of Langside where, despite being numerically superior, the Marian forces were decisively defeated. Subsequently Herries emerged as the key figure in the events surrounding Mary's flight into exile. While the queen rested at Terregles he contacted the English commander in Carlisle for permission for the refugees to enter England, while Mary's last night in Scotland was spent at Dundrennan Abbey, where one of Herries's sons was commendator. On 16 May Herries and a few other loyal followers accompanied Mary across the Solway Firth to Workington, where she placed herself at the mercy of Queen Elizabeth. The latter, concerned about Mary's presence in England but reluctant to appear to be sanctioning her overthrow in Scotland, conceived the idea of an Anglo-Scottish conference to discuss the possibility of restoring the Scottish queen. Not surprisingly, when Mary's supporters assembled shortly afterwards at Dumbarton, Herries was nominated to be one of her representatives at the forthcoming conference. 
When the enquiry got under way at York in October 1568, the two main spokesmen for the Marian cause were Herries and John Lesley, bishop of Ross. Similarly when the proceedings were moved to Hampton Court in December it was principally Herries and Lesley who acted in defence of the queen against the allegations presented by the earl of Moray, leader of the king's party. But despite their efforts Elizabeth delivered a judgment in January 1569 which, though ambiguously phrased, meant in effect that Mary remained a prisoner in England. In the civil war between the king's and queen's factions which broke out in 1570 and lasted until May 1573, Herries, like so many of Mary's allies, was initially very active on her behalf, so much so that he was arrested by Moray's government in April 1569 and confined within Edinburgh Castle, where he remained until after the regent's assassination on 23 January 1570. In April of that year he joined such other leading Marians as the earls of Huntly, Argyll, and Atholl, when they gathered in Edinburgh, and he attended the parliament which they held in the capital two months later. One repercussion of their activities, and also of their sheltering English refugees from the northern risings of 1569-70, was that the king's party gave its approval to a retaliatory raid in the summer of 1570 by the earl of Sussex on the properties of Herries and other border families. 
By 1571, however, Herries was becoming less involved in the Marian cause, though he continued to contact Elizabeth's government regarding the possibility of Mary's restoration, and warned the English queen that if she failed to adopt a more positive line he and his associates might look overseas for assistance. A year later he had recognized the inevitable; and while he was not himself present when Morton was elected regent, in November 1572, his son William, master of Herries, was. Shortly afterwards Morton's government repealed a number of statutes directed against Herries and his fellow Marians. Throughout Morton's regency Herries generally kept a low profile, and it was only when Morton lost office in 1578 that he reappeared on the scene. He was a member of the Argyll-Atholl faction which forced the regent's resignation, being one of those who demanded the surrender of Edinburgh Castle. Herries became a privy councillor in the short-lived administration which replaced Morton, and was also a commissioner representing the new government in talks with the church over proposed reforms. The latter appointment was made despite his having been cited for non-payment of his thirds of benefices and his also being in receipt of a comfortable pension from the bishopric of Galloway. Following Morton's return to power in the summer of 1578, Herries was one of eight nobles nominated on 8 September to assist the king in working towards 'the repose and quietness of the troubled commonwealth' ('Reg. PCS', 26). 
In 1581, unlike his nephew Lord Maxwell, who was a member of the jury which sentenced Morton to death, Herries took little part in the events which led to the ex-regent's execution. But he was a leading supporter of the duke of Lennox's faction, which briefly controlled Scottish affairs in the early 1580s, and, following the Ruthven raid of August 1582 which effectively ended the Lennox regime, he was a member of the delegation to James VI which sought (unsuccessfully) a meeting between the king and the fallen duke. It was one of his last recorded actions. Herries died in Edinburgh on Sunday, 20 January 1583, in 'an upper chamber of William Fowler's lodging', where, feeling too unwell to attend the afternoon's sermon, he had gone 'to see the boys bicker' (Calderwood, 3.232). He was buried in Terregles church. The house in which he died had once belonged to a prominent Edinburgh councillor who had also been a supporter of Queen Mary. His widow died at Terregles on 14 March 1594, and in her will asked to be buried beside her late husband. 
Herries was the author of a text published in 1836, from a seventeenth-century abridgement, as 'Historical Memoirs of the Reign of Mary Queen of Scots, and a Portion of the Reign of King James the Sixth'. Covering the years 1542 to 1571, it is a work of considerable value, despite its Marian perspective, as one of the comparatively few contemporary accounts of this period. But although his writings assure Herries of a niche in Scottish historiography, there is no doubt that his greatest importance lay in his activities as an administrator of the borders, where he faithfully served both Mary of Guise and Mary, queen of Scots, for more than twenty years. Even his opponent the earl of Morton recognized his talents in that capacity, for not only did Morton in 1579 adopt many of the proposals put forward by Herries for the reform of border government, but he also gave him a final stint as march warden, when he was in his late sixties. 


@@@@@


doc= 18404


Maxwell, John, earl of Morton (1553-1593), magnate, was born on 24 April 1553, the posthumous second son of Robert, sixth Lord Maxwell (died 1552), and Beatrix (died in or after 1583), second daughter of James Douglas, third earl of Morton. His father having died on the previous 13 September John Maxwell was raised by his uncle, Sir John Maxwell of Terregles, the future fourth Lord Herries. 
On the death of his elder brother, Robert, on 16 January 1555, Maxwell inherited the family properties of Maxwell and Caerlaverock, and the bailieries of Sweetheart, Dundrennan, Holywood, and Lincluden. His early devotion to Mary, queen of Scots, alarmed the English ambassador Thomas Randolph, who in a statement of May 1565 (which may in fact refer to Herries) observed that Maxwell 'weighs more his mistress's will than her danger', being 'loth to attempt against her mind' ('CSP Scot.', '1563-9', 169). After Mary's demission of the crown on 24 July 1568 in favour of her son, James, Maxwell joined twenty-four other disaffected nobles on the 30th in writing to the duke of Alva, the governor of the Netherlands, asking for money, thereby establishing his first contacts with Spain. In July 1569 he attended the Perth convention, voting in favour of Mary's divorce from Bothwell. Following Regent Moray's assassination on 21 January 1570, Elizabeth instructed her west march warden, Henry, Baron Scrope, to ravage Maxwell's lands in Dumfriesshire, on the grounds of his association with the English rebel Leonard Dacre. The real purpose of the sustained attacks was to prevent Maxwell and Herries from taking Edinburgh on Mary's behalf. After a pause Scrope renewed his raids and between 22 and 28 August 1570 he demolished Lord Maxwell's principal strongholds, including his castles at Dumfries. 
Maxwell and Herries could not prevent Regent Lennox from occupying Paisley, in early 1571, but they allied themselves with Sir John Gordon of Lochinvar and marched on Edinburgh on 14 April. After taking the capital for the queen, Maxwell attended the queen's parliament of 12 June 1571. By 20 November his kinsmen had signed an unusual bond of manrent, pledging both their support for, and confidence in, their young leader. On 17 February 1572, however, Maxwell married Elizabeth Douglas (died 1637), youngest sister of the eighth earl of Angus, and in so doing was thought 'to acknowledge the kingis auctoritie', indicating an apparent swing in loyalties (Thomson, 'Diurnal', 259). They had seven children: John Maxwell, later ninth Lord Maxwell; Robert Maxwell, created first earl of Nithsdale in 1620; James of Kirkconnel; Elizabeth, wife of John, sixth Lord Herries; Margaret, wife of John Wallace of Craigie; Jean; and Agnes, who married her brother John's supporter William Douglas of Greenlaw. 
Maxwell proved outwardly amenable to the triumphant king's party under Morton, whom he personally helped to select in a special convention of earls and lords in November 1572. Having attended the king's parliament (of 30 April 1573), only weeks before the fall of Edinburgh Castle, Maxwell was confirmed in possession of Lochmaben Castle on 26 October and appointed warden of the west march. In that office he proved remarkably conscientious. He complained to the general assembly about the poor condition of the kirks of Annandale and Nithsdale in March 1574 and amazed Scrope with his judicious administration. In November 1576 Maxwell delivered forty-two bills at a single border truce day, leading the English warden to enthuse that 'the like example of justice done in one day has not been seen or heard of in these borders' (Fraser, 1.231). Even so, Maxwell found it difficult to secure the support of the lieges of Dumfries, and on 12 December that year Morton arranged to enforce an act of 1564 requiring all nobles and property holders to attend the warden at truce days. Relations between Maxwell and the regent had up to this time been cordial (Morton hosted Maxwell's wedding celebrations at Dalkeith Palace), even though Morton suspected that Maxwell would attempt to press a claim to the earldom of Morton derived from his mother. On 25 May 1577, however, a disagreement between them led to Maxwell's resignation as warden and his replacement by his brother-in-law, the eighth earl of Angus. Warded at Edinburgh in July, and removed to St Andrews in September, Maxwell finally obtained his release on the regent's resignation in early March 1578, and on the 25th he was reappointed warden. In June he attempted to block Morton's recovery of power by voting against his membership of the king's council, and, when that failed, questioned the legitimacy of the parliament held at Stirling in July. Raising a force of 7000 men with the earls of Argyll and Erroll, Maxwell engaged to free the king from Morton's 'captivity', but was prevented by the army of 5000 raised by Angus and the last-minute arbitration of the English ambassador Robert Bowes. On 23 January 1579 Herries replaced Maxwell as warden, leading to tension between the kinsmen and Maxwell's refusal to surrender Lochmaben Castle. With Morton now back in power, Maxwell found caution to ward himself in Dundee (on 13 July 1579) and Blackness (on 27 October); he was finally released in December. By this time he was regarded as a political firebrand, widely trusted neither by the Morton regime nor by the English. 
Maxwell inherited a conflict with John Johnstone, laird of Johnstone, which was worsened by the latter's appointment as march warden on 24 August 1579. Their rivalry protracted a bloody struggle for regional dominance that had lasted since at least the 1520s and which had reduced Dumfriesshire to a well-nigh permanent state of war; latterly the feud between the two families had been intensified by the participation of client surnames such as the Irvines and Armstrongs. On 4 May 1580 Maxwell was forced to appear before the privy council for withholding vital bills and scrolls which Johnstone required in order to conduct truce days with Scrope. On 2 September each signed an assurance of responsibility for the continuing good behaviour of his family members and retainers. However, his developing friendship with the king's new favourite, Esme Stewart, earl (later duke) of Lennox, led to Maxwell's nomination as an extraordinary gentleman of the king's chamber on 24 October. As early as December he and Herries undertook to pacify the west marches, an assertion of their family's power and also a direct insult to Morton's nominee Johnstone, who relinquished his wardenship to Maxwell in April 1581. 
On 5 June 1581, only four days after sitting on the assize that condemned Morton for his alleged involvement in Darnley's assassination, Maxwell was granted the regent's forfeited estates as a free earldom and regality, though the lands of Aberdour, Dalkeith, and Caldercleir were reserved to his ally Lennox. On 29 October Maxwell was officially created earl of Morton and Lord Carlyle and Eskdaill. He secured his new properties by parliamentary ratification on 28-9 November 1581. Controversy followed when he criticized Scrope's refusal to punish Englishmen who took part in burning Langholm Castle and abducting its captain Herbert Maxwell in September, and threatened 'to revenge yt with burninge in like maner in England' (Bain, 1.77). Following the Ruthven raid of August 1582, Lennox was removed from power and his friend Maxwell was again ousted as warden on 19 November, ostensibly for his inability to control his Armstrong and Graham adherents in Ettrick Forest; Maxwell was succeeded once more by Johnstone. His political influence suffered serious setbacks when he failed to capture Edinburgh and Holyrood castles with Lennox on 30 November, and when Herries, his mentor and chief adviser, died on 20 January 1583. Hopeful of gaining support from the continental Catholic powers, Maxwell left for France in late May. He was back in Scotland by 4 September, having landed at Pittenweem with a store of gold and correspondence, carefully observed by English authorities, who now considered him one of the 'chief countenancers' of Border malefactors (ibid., 111). 
By 1585 Maxwell's Roman Catholic sympathies had become obvious. His formal conversion in that year probably owed something to the influence of his cousin William Maxwell, fifth Lord Herries, who had converted by 1584, as well as to his own travels in Europe. He may also have been moved by political considerations, since in January 1585 he broke with James Stewart, earl of Arran, who had been in control of government since the previous summer, in dispute over the Maxwell territories of Pollok and Maxwellhaugh. Arran subsequently (on 29 January 1586) revoked the attainder on the earldom of Morton with a view to bestowing it upon Angus, a move that seriously threatened the claim by Maxwell. The latter was himself outlawed for a series of minor offences against Warden Johnstone on 26 February, and was ordered to surrender the keys of his houses to the king on 10 March. In response to an earlier Johnstone raid, Maxwell's retainers Robert Maxwell of Castlemilk and David Maxwell led a troop of 120 men to destroy Johnstone's chief residence at Lochwood on 6 April 1585. These hostile measures against the absent warden precipitated Maxwell's enforced surrender of the earldom of Morton on 10 April. Undeterred, he continued his attack on Johnstone's interests in Dumfriesshire, invading Lockerbie on 27 April, seizing two fortified stone houses within the town on 7 May, and finally capturing Johnstone himself on 21 August. Although superficially reconciled with Arran, on 1 November Maxwell joined Angus and the banished earl of Mar and master of Glamis in expelling Arran from Stirling Castle, having assembled 1300 foot soldiers and 700 horse for the expedition. Maxwell's supporters were particularly exuberant in pillaging the burgh's public buildings, with a 'great reaf of horsse and guidis' being seized by Kinmont Willie Armstrong and his sons (Moysie, 54). The subsequent political revolution caused by Arran's defeat was a personal triumph for Maxwell on all fronts: on 18 November he was reappointed warden, and he sat in parliament at Linlithgow as earl of Morton in December, when he was also granted a retroactive indemnity excusing all acts committed since April 1569. But the fact that he was discovered celebrating Christmas mass at both Lincluden College and in his own lodgings at Dumfries suggests that Maxwell misjudged his new ascendancy. After freely accepting trial he was questioned by the king and warded in Edinburgh Castle; his imminent release was announced on 14 February 1586. 
On 13 April 1586 Maxwell provided caution of $1000 to appear before the general assembly and submit to an investigation of his religious life, promising on 14 May to remain within a 4 mile radius of Edinburgh. By 21 August he was once again serving as warden, though his relations with Scrope deteriorated when he demanded the return of a Captain Case who was then an English prisoner; Scrope in turn continued to gather intelligence on Maxwell's suspected papist activities. Yet neither Scrope nor even Sir Francis Walsingham's spy network managed to detect Maxwell's plot with the sixth earl of Huntly and Lord Claud Hamilton to oust James's protestant advisers with the help of troops subsidized by Spain. Maxwell refused to sign the reformed articles presented to him at Dumfries on 16 January 1587 and, owing also to his unequivocally hostile reaction to the execution of Queen Mary on 18 February, was banished by the king on 14 April with instructions not to return without royal warrant. In his absence the Morton earldom was transferred to the earl of Angus by act of parliament on 29 July 1587. On 9 June the west march was entrusted to his cousin, the politically reliable Lord Herries. 
Maxwell spent the bulk of his exile in Portugal and Spain, negotiating personally with Philip II over the possibilities of Scotland's deep-water ports being used by the Armada. However, Philip refused to commit himself to overthrowing the Scottish government, wishing instead to destabilize Anglo-Scottish relations and thus distract England from interfering with his policy of reconquest in the United Provinces. In April 1588 a disillusioned Maxwell returned to Scotland without licence, in a bid to launch an insurrection in conjunction with his fellow Catholic nobles. In response the king personally led an expedition against Maxwell, who after a dramatic boat chase was apprehended by Sir William Stewart (the brother of Arran) on 5 May and warded in Blackness in August, before being returned to Stewart's care in September. Maxwell was still lodging 'in a burghers house' at Edinburgh on 15 September 1589 ('CSP Scot.', '1589-93', 155). He was released in advance of the king's wedding voyage in October, and assigned to replace Sir John Carmichael as warden of the west march, but the appointment did not take effect. Maxwell's subsequent behaviour impressed Bowes, who nevertheless reported in August 1590 that the lord had 'retorned to his old papistrie far contrary to his former protestation', though not in such a way as threatened the king politically (ibid., 841). Indeed, Maxwell had moderated his conduct, in that although he remained Catholic in faith he became in practice a 'politique', who never again betrayed the king's interest. He was rewarded by an alliance with Chancellor Maitland and by readmission to the privy council in January 1591. On 9 March Maxwell appeared with the ninth earl of Erroll to subscribe articles on faith before the kirk commissioners of Edinburgh, and he attended parliament at Edinburgh on 6 August. Despite English fears of his dominance on the frontier, he was again made warden of the west march on 28 July, though the king withdrew his 'unusually ample justiciary powers' on 19 September 1592 in response to the concerns of the noblemen of Nithsdale and Galloway (Fraser, 1.287). 
Maxwell signed the confession of faith at Edinburgh on 26 January 1593, though this was followed on 2 February by a farcical skirmish with William Douglas over seating arrangements in an Edinburgh kirk: Douglas had succeeded his father as ninth earl of Angus, and also claimed to be earl of Morton. Maxwell had continued to style himself earl, and disputes over the title between rival earls of Morton continued until 1620, when Robert Maxwell was made earl of Nithsdale instead. However, John Maxwell's attention was soon turned elsewhere by his conflict with the Johnstones after the escape from Edinburgh Castle on 10 June 1593 of James Johnstone, who had succeeded his father in June 1587. Maxwell needed little persuading to join with the barons and lairds of the west march against Johnstone as 'he loved above all things to be followed' (Spottiswoode, 2.445-6). He was granted a royal commission to apprehend Johnstone -- who had been charged with assisting the first earl of Bothwell in his recent raid on the king -- and in early December Maxwell marched on Annandale with 1500 men to engage Johnstone's force of 800. On the 6 December Maxwell himself crossed the River Annan with a detachment of troops, only to find Johnstone on the other side, placed atop a slope with an obvious strategic advantage. The Johnstones charged downhill into Maxwell's army, killing those who could not escape and forcing the remainder to retreat back across the river. Maxwell himself was killed in the rout on Dryfe Sands the following day, though traditions differ as to how and by whom: William Johnstone of Kirkhill, the wife of James Johnstone of Kirkton (who was said to have stabbed him with a set of tower keys), Gideon Murray of Elibank, and the laird of Johnstone himself are all reported as striking him down. One account stresses the savage nature of his death at the hand of the Johnstones, who apparently 'did cut af baith his hands, and careit the same with thayme on speir points, as a memorial of his perfidie, and for ostentatioun of ther awin glore' (Thomson, 'James the Sext', 299). Maxwell's body lay unburied until 16 February 1598, when the privy council ordered its interment within twenty days. He was then buried in Lincluden College church, as was his widow, who died in February 1637 after two further marriages. 


@@@@@


doc= 18405


Maxwell, John, ninth Lord Maxwell (b. in or before 1586, d. 1613), nobleman, was the eldest son of John Maxwell, earl of Morton and eighth Lord Maxwell (1553-1593), and Lady Elizabeth ('c'.1568-1637), daughter of David Douglas, seventh earl of Angus. He was placed under the guardianship of his father's cousin William Maxwell, fifth Lord Herries, and appears to have been brought up in Edinburgh. He was served heir to his father on 10 March 1597 and on 9 August that year he married Lady Margaret ('c'.1580- 'c'.1608), daughter of John Hamilton, first marquess of Hamilton (1539/40-1604). The couple had one son (who died young) but by 1601 were estranged. Several years later Margaret Hamilton died during divorce proceedings (instigated by Maxwell). 
One of the most prominent landholders in the south-west of Scotland, Maxwell inherited a long-running feud with the Johnstone family, particularly significant as a result of the killing of his father by James Johnstone at the battle of Dryfesdale Sands. On 22 March 1599 Maxwell's father-in-law undertook a $5000 bond to ensure that Maxwell did not enter Nithsdale to confront Johnstone. In spite of this, on 15 September the privy council decided that Maxwell would be controlled better under ward in Edinburgh Castle. Maxwell was not warded as he failed to attend the council in November (and again the next June). Consequently, he was denounced as a rebel. In July 1600 a further caution for $10,000 was lodged for Maxwell not to enter Annandale, Nithsdale, or Galloway but to reside at the house of Hamilton. On 16 July 1601 he again endured warding in Edinburgh Castle but on 12 January 1602 he escaped. In February 1602 the Johnstone-Maxwell feud was heightened when Maxwell attacked and killed William Johnstone of Eschieshiels. Then, as James Johnstone of Briggs took shelter in the house of James Bratten at Dalfibble, Maxwell burnt him alive. The feud continued intermittently but was seemingly reconciled before the privy council in June 1605, when Maxwell issued a 'letter of slains' forgiving his father's killer (now styled Sir James Johnstone of Dunskellie) for his part in the murder. 
Maxwell also feuded with the Douglas earls of Morton, who he felt had deprived him of his right to be earl of Morton in succession to his father. Within Dumfriesshire, Maxwell did hold local courts using the style 'earl of Morton' but he was never formally recognized as such by the government. As Lord Maxwell he attended the parliaments of March and May 1606 but in the intervening period the privy council had to intervene to prevent him duelling with William Douglas, heir to the laird of Drumlanrig. On 23 May 1607 Maxwell and Morton subscribed a band that there was no feud existing between them but on 8 August Maxwell was again denounced rebel for challenging Morton over his title. On 24 September he was placed back under ward in Edinburgh Castle and on 4 December, with the assistance of fellow inmate James McConnell, he escaped from the castle for a second time. Two weeks later he was again denounced rebel. 
Maxwell was regularly out of favour with the central government because of both his volatility and his Catholicism. While in ward for the first time in Edinburgh Castle he was attended by a minister in an (unsuccessful) attempt to convert him to protestantism. In December 1606 a convention of the clergy again suggested that Maxwell undertake instruction in the reformed faith and he was warded in Leith for his beliefs. On 12 January 1608 a summons of forfeiture was issued against him. Despite strenuous efforts to capture him, he remained at large in Dumfriesshire but in April 1608 arranged to meet the laird of Johnstone finally to settle their differences. During the conference a quarrel erupted between the servants of the men and, when Johnstone attempted to find out the cause, Maxwell shot him in the back. On 28 April a proclamation was issued to capture him dead or alive. Thereafter he fled to France. In his absence, he was found guilty in parliament of three counts of treason, the murder of two Johnstones (in 1602), the breaking of ward from Edinburgh Castle in 1607, and the murder under trust of Johnstone in 1608. He was condemned to death and forfeiture of his estates and honours. 
In March 1612 Maxwell returned to Scotland under the protection of George, fifth earl of Caithness. The government reissued warrants for his capture and in September he was arrested in Caithness. He was transferred to prison in Edinburgh Castle and on 10 May 1613 an order was passed in council to carry out the previously agreed sentence. On 21 May, at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, he was beheaded. Thereafter his body was removed by Mark Ker and buried at Newbattle Abbey. Five years later his brother Robert Maxwell (b. after 1586, d. 1646) was restored to the Maxwell peerage. 


@@@@@


doc= 18406


Maxwell, John (d. 1647), Church of Ireland archbishop of Tuam, was the son of John Maxwell of Cavens in Nithsdale, Kirkcudbrightshire. He entered the University of St Andrews, where he graduated MA on 29 July 1611. In 1615 he was called and ordained minister of Mortlach parish church in Banffshire, which lay in the patronage of the crown. From 1622 he held four successive pastoral charges in Edinburgh. On 18 July 1622 he was chosen by the town council to be minister of St Giles but was translated to Trinity College Church on 25 November 1625. Three weeks later, on 14 December, however, he was nominated by the burgh magistracy to the second charge in St Giles and officially admitted on 27 January 1626. Later that year he was finally promoted to the first charge in the same incumbency. At an unknown date he married Elizabeth Innes; they had four sons, John, David, James, and Robert, and five daughters, Anne, Janet, Elizabeth, Rachel, and Bethia. 
Maxwell was initially brought to the king's notice through the recommendation of his cousin James Maxwell of Innerwick (afterwards earl of Dirleton), who as a gentleman of the king's bedchamber was ideally placed to promote the interests of his kinsman. In July 1629 John Maxwell was sent to court in London, ostensibly to discuss how best the Scottish church should combat Roman Catholicism. In reality, however, his trip south had been arranged with a view to discussing the introduction of a new Scottish liturgy which conformed to, and imitated, the English prayer book. Fearful of an adverse and possibly violent reaction from Scottish public opinion Maxwell conveyed to Bishop William Laud of London the Scottish hierarchy's view that it was inexpedient simply to transpose wholesale the English liturgy to Scotland. Nevertheless Maxwell made a favourable impression on the future archbishop, and became his chief acolyte in Scotland. He returned from court in November 1629 reputedly bearing the king's instructions that the Church of Scotland was to prepare for conformity with its southern counterpart. As an enthusiast for the ceremonial and liturgical changes, he preached to his congregation in Edinburgh on Christmas day 1629 with 'not only bitter invectives, but curses also, aganis all such as would not keep such holie days' (Row, 350). In 1632 he was involved in the suspension and deposition of the Scottish presbyterians Robert Blair, John Livingstone, George Dunbar, and Josiah Welsh from office in the Church of Ireland. He also played a conspicuous part in the trial of John Elphinstone, second earl of Balmerino, in 1634 for his opposition to the crown's religious programme. 
Maxwell's endeavour to suppress religious dissent was not merely predicated on loyalty to the king, however, but sprang from deeply held doctrinal convictions. Unlike the previous generation of Scottish churchmen Maxwell was a 'jure divino' episcopalian. Preaching in Edinburgh on 22 and 31 July 1631 he sought scriptural justification for this belief, but it earned him a swift rebuttal from the Scottish hierarchy who wanted to distance themselves from an inflammatory and widely discredited doctrine that appeared to repudiate the biblical ideals of the protestant Reformation. Nevertheless his strident attitude and forthright courage gained him the plaudits of the growing constituency of Anglican sacramentalists who found favour with the king. 
For his service to crown and church, on 23 April 1633 Maxwell was elevated to the bishopric of Ross and was consecrated in the presence of the king at some date between 15 June and 18 July that same year. He also took part in Charles's Scottish coronation. On 23 June he caused a stir at a service in St Giles attended by the king when he peremptorily dismissed the ordinary reader and replaced him with two English chaplains dressed in full ecclesiastical vestments, who, with the aid of others present, including the bishops, conducted divine worship in accordance with English practice. From as early as October 1634 he is known to have used and promoted the English liturgy in his cathedral at Fortrose in Easter Ross. 
Maxwell continued to be rewarded for his stalwart service. On 19 March 1634 he gained an annual pension of $166 while his patrimony was enlarged on 22 October that year by a crown grant of the priory at Beauly in Inverness-shire and on 26 March 1636 by the addition of a number of charges and chaplaincies. His political and social ascendancy was enhanced when he was made a privy councillor and an extraordinary lord of session in December 1633 and a justice of the peace in 1634. Henry Guthry in his 'Memoirs' pertinently noted that Maxwell was 'a man of great parts; but the mischief was, they were accompanied with unbounded ambition' ('Memoirs of Henry Guthry', 16-17). His failure to secure the office of Scottish treasurer that went to John Stewart, the first earl of Traquair, in 1636 was the cause of resentment and future animosity between the pair. 
Maxwell's ascendancy in Scotland was, however, cut short by the covenanting revolution of 1637-8. The Glasgow assembly excommunicated him in his absence on 13 December 1638. He signed a declinature against the assembly and in August 1639 was signatory to a protestation that declared the assembly's proceedings unlawful. He had already departed for the safety of the king's court in March 1639 after being interrupted in the course of conducting worship by a party of covenanters who swiftly requisitioned all the offending prayer books before hurling them into the Moray Firth. His wife initially took refuge with the children in the home of her brother Alexander Innes, the minister of Rothiemay, but they left Scotland in August to join Maxwell in England. 
From his enforced exile Maxwell emerged as a highly effective polemicist for the royalist and episcopal cause. In 1640, his 'Epistle congratulatorie of Lysimachus Nicanor of the Societie of Jesu, to the covenanters of Scotland, wherin is paralleled our sweet harmony and correspondency in divers materiall points of doctrine and practice' made his name anathema to the new regime in Scotland. He began by congratulating the covenanters as 'most worthy Brethren of the holy League', rejoicing 'in behalfe of our Mother Church of Rome at your begun returne from your former errors and heresies' and taunting them with an ironic expectation that, having 'forsaken the former erroneous Doctrine of the Protestants concerning the 'Civil Magistrate', and... happily joyned with us, you will also betimes abjure all that yet remaineth' (J. Maxwell, 'The Epistle Congratulatorie', 1641, 1). He made no secret of his contempt for and opposition to the political philosophies of John Knox and George Buchanan, readily accepted and promulgated by the covenanters, that had challenged the notion that kings ruled by divine right and were therefore unaccountable to the law of the land and her people. The Scottish parliament declared him an incendiary in July 1641 and proclaimed him guilty of treason in November that same year. However, Maxwell continued to publish on the same themes as before in 'Episcopacy not Abjured in his Majesties Realm of Scotland' (1641), 'An answer to a gentleman who desired of a divine some reasons by which it might appear how inconsistent presbyteriall government is with monarchie', and most notably, 'Sacro-sancta regum majestas, or, The Sacred and Royall Prerogative of Christian Kings' (1644), a trenchant call for the restoration of royal authority indebted to Jean Bodin. Samuel Rutherford responded to the latter in 'Lex rex'. Finally in 'Burden of Issachar, or, The tyrannical power and practices of the presbyteriall government in Scotland' (1646), Maxwell defended Erastian episcopacy. 
Meanwhile, Maxwell had continued high in the king's favour. On 12 October 1640 he was appointed bishop of the Irish see of Killala and Achonry by royal patent after the deposition of his fellow Scot, Patrick Adair, for his commitment to the national covenant. Trinity College, Dublin, conferred on Maxwell the title of DD the same year. On the outbreak of the Irish rising in 1641 he was forced to flee for his life from his episcopal residence at Killala. Intercepted at the bridge of Shrule, co. Mayo, he was stripped naked, beaten, and left for dead. Only the intervention of Barnabas O'Brien, sixth earl of Thomond, saved his life. After a short spell in Dublin, Maxwell made his way to the royal court at Oxford where he served as a chaplain to Charles I. On 30 August 1645 he was elevated to the archbishopric of Tuam by letter patent and returned to Ireland to take up his prestigious post. On receiving news that the king had surrendered to the Scottish army on 30 January 1647 he retired to his private chambers, where he was found dead upon his knees at prayer on 14 February. He was interred in Christ Church, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 18407


Maxwell, John Hall (1812-1866), agriculturist, eldest son of William Maxwell of Dargavel, Renfrewshire (died 1847), and Mary, eldest daughter of John Campbell of Possil, near Glasgow, was born in Queen Street, Glasgow, in February 1812, and called to the Scottish bar in 1835. He practised law until 1845, when he succeeded Sir Charles Gordon of Grimkin (also a lawyer) as secretary to the Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland. He remained in this position until his retirement after the Inverness show of 1865 and during this period the society's influence and status greatly increased; membership rose from 2620 to 4200 and the reserve funds grew from $34,000 to $50,000. The shows under Maxwell's meticulous management expanded considerably and became annual events; he also edited the society's 'Transactions' between 1853 and 1860. In the early 1850s Maxwell was involved in a pioneering attempt to collect agricultural statistics on a systematic basis, and for this and his other works he was created CB on 5 February 1856. 
Maxwell married Eliza Anne Margaret, eldest daughter of Thomas Williams of Southwick Crescent, Hyde Park, London, in 1843. He invested in a range of improvements on his own estate at Dargavel, including the reclamation of wasteland. His services to the agricultural community were recognized by a presentation of 1000 guineas and a service of plate on 17 January 1866. Although suffering from heart disease, he again acted as secretary to the Highland Society until May 1866 because of the sudden illness and death of his appointed successor, Alexander Macduff. Maxwell died at his residence, Torr Hall, near Paisley, on 25 August 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 18408


Maxwell, Sir Murray (1775-1831), naval officer, the third son of James Maxwell ('b'. 1724), a captain in the 42nd regiment (himself the third son of Sir Alexander Maxwell of Monreith, Wigtownshire, second baronet) and his wife, Elizabeth, the daughter of William Maxwell of Ardwell, was born in the parish of Penninghame, near Newton Stewart, Wigtownshire, Scotland, on 10 September 1775. On 10 September 1790 he entered the navy on the 'Juno', with Captain Samuel Hood, where he served until March 1794, when he followed Hood to the 'Aigle'. In November 1794 he was moved to the 'Nemesis', and was still with her when she was captured at Smyrna on 9 December 1795. He afterwards joined the 'Blenheim', and a few months later the 'Princess Royal', on which he returned to England. On 10 October 1796 he was promoted lieutenant. He married on 9 September 1798 Grace Callander (died 23 June 1857), the daughter of Colonel Waugh of the 57th regiment; they had one daughter and one son, John Balfour (1799-1874), who died an admiral on the retired list. 
On 15 December 1802 Maxwell was promoted commander of the sloop 'Cyane' in the West Indies, with which he was present at the reduction of St Lucia. He was then appointed by Hood acting captain of the 'Centaur' (74 guns), bearing his broad pennant. He had thus an important part in the capture of Tobago, Demerara, and Essequibo in July and September 1803, and of Berbice and Surinam in April 1804. His commission as captain was confirmed to 4 August 1803. In 1805 he commanded the 'Galatea' in the West Indies, and in 1807 was appointed to the 'Alceste', a 38-gun frigate, with which from 1807 to 1810 he served with distinction in the Mediterranean, attacking coastal forts and convoys and, in April 1808, with two brigs, a flotilla of gunboats. 
In the spring of 1811 Maxwell was in the Adriatic under the orders of Captain James Brisbane, and in the autumn had for some months a semi-independent command there. On 29 November, off Lissa, his force -- 'Alceste', 'Unite', and 'Active' ['see 'Gordon, Sir James Alexander] -- fought three French frigates, capturing two (one was the 'Pomone'). 
In 1812 Maxwell was appointed to the 'Daedalus' (38 guns), with which he sailed for India in charge of a fleet of Indiamen. On 2 July 1813 the 'Daedalus' was wrecked off the coast of Ceylon. Maxwell returned to England, and, being acquitted of blame, was made a CB in 1815. 
In October 1813 Maxwell was again appointed to the 'Alceste', at the desire of Lord Amherst, going out as ambassador to the emperor of China. The 'Alceste' sailed from Spithead on 9 February 1816 and anchored off the Peiho (Beihe) on 28 July. Lord Amherst landed on 9 August and directed the ship to meet him at Canton (Guangzhou), whither he proposed to travel overland from Peking (Beijing). Maxwell took the opportunity of exploring the Gulf of Pecheli (Beizhili), the west coast of Korea -- until then unknown except by hearsay, and drawn on the chart by imagination -- and the Loo-Choo Islands. The results were afterwards ably described by Captain Basil Hall of the brig 'Lyra', then in company with the 'Alceste', in his 'Account of a Voyage of Discovery to the Western Coast of Corea and the Great Loo-Choo Island' (1818). The 'Alceste' arrived off the mouth of the Canton River on 2 November, and Maxwell, unable to get any satisfactory answer to his application for a pass, determined to go up the river without one. As he approached the Bocca Tigris, a mandarin came on board and ordered him to anchor at once; if he attempted to go on, the batteries would sink the ship. Maxwell sent back an angry answer, and the 'Alceste' passed on, scattering the war junks which attempted to stop her, and silencing the batteries for the time by a single well-directed broadside. Without further molestation she arrived at Whampoa (Huangpu), where Lord Amherst re-embarked on 21 January 1817. The 'Lyra' was sent to Calcutta with dispatches for the governor-general, and the 'Alceste', continuing her voyage by herself, entered the Strait of Gaspar on the morning of 18 February. 
These straits were then little more than explored, and the charts were very imperfect. About eight o'clock the ship struck on a rock about 3 miles from Pulo Leat and sustained fatal injuries. Everyone was landed on the island, together with such stores as time permitted, but on the third day the wreck was taken possession of by Malay pirates, who threatened the encampment on shore. On the morning of 19 February Lord Amherst and his staff had been sent on to Batavia in two boats under the command of Lieutenant Henry Parkyns Hoppner, a son of John Hoppner the artist. Some 200 men remained on this inhospitable island, without clothes, with little food, and beset by ferocious enemies. They were relieved on 3 March by the arrival of the East India Company's ship 'Ternate', sent by Amherst from Batavia. On his arrival in England in August 1817 Maxwell was tried by court martial, fully acquitted, and specially complimented for his conduct before and after the wreck. Lord Amherst appeared as a witness on his behalf. On 27 May 1818 Maxwell was knighted. He was elected FRS on 18 February 1819, and on 20 May 1819 was presented by the East India Company with $1500 for his services to the embassy and in compensation for his losses in the wreck. In the July 1818 general election Maxwell was the last Admiralty (ministerial) candidate for the mass-electorate City of Westminster. He 'sustained severe personal injury from the vile rabble with which the hustings in Covent Garden is on such occasions surrounded' ('GM', 274) and was unsuccessful, defeated by Sir Samuel Romilly and Sir Francis Burdett. Also defeated was Henry Hunt. 
In 1821-2 Maxwell was captain of the 'Bulwark' (74 guns), flagship of Sir Benjamin Hallowell (afterwards Carew) at Chatham, and in 1823 of the 'Briton' on the South American station. In May 1831 he was appointed lieutenant-governor of Prince Edward Island, and was preparing for his departure when he died suddenly on 26 June 1831. 
Of Maxwell's six brothers, three were in the army, two in the navy. Of these last, John, a captain of 1810, died in command of the frigate 'Aurora' in 1826. Keith ('b'. 'c'.1774), a lieutenant of 1794, was specially promoted commander in 1801 for cutting out the French 20-gun corvette 'Chevrette' from under the batteries of Camaret Bay on the night of 21-2 July. He was promoted captain in 1804 and died in 1823. 


@@@@@


doc= 18409


Sir Peter Benson Maxwell (1817-1893), colonial official, who became chief justice of the Straits Settlements, and his wife, Frances Dorothea, the only daughter of Francis Synge of Glanmore Castle, co. Wicklow. His father, who was the fourth son of Peter Benson Maxwell of Birdstown, co. Donegal, was born in January 1817 and educated at Paris and at Trinity College, Dublin (BA 1839). He entered the Inner Temple in 1838, moved to the Middle Temple two years later, and was called to the bar on 19 November 1841. In 1855 Peter Maxwell published 'Whom Shall We Hang? The Sebastopol Enquiry', and the following year he was knighted. He was recorder of Penang (1856-66) and of Singapore (1866-71), and chief justice of the Straits Settlements from 1867 to 1871. In 1883-4 he reorganized the judicial tribunals of Egypt. He published two legal works of some importance, 'An introduction to the duties of police in the settlement of Prince of Wales Island, Singapore and Malacca' (1866) and 'On the Interpretation of Statutes' (1875). He died in France, at Grasse, Alpes-Maritimes, on 14 January 1893. 


@@@@@


doc= 18410


Maxwell, Robert, fifth Lord Maxwell (c.1494-1546), magnate, was the eldest son of John Maxwell, fourth Lord Maxwell (d. 1513) ['see under 'Maxwell, Herbert, first Lord Maxwell], and Agnes, daughter of Sir Alexander Stewart of Garlies. He was married after 4 July 1509 to Janet Douglas (died 'c'.1520), daughter of Sir William Douglas of Drumlanrig, and knighted before 29 November 1510. He became hereditary steward of Annandale on 10 June 1513 on his father's resignation, and held the office of admiral of the fleet when the royal army suffered its crushing defeat at Flodden on 9 September 1513, his father being among those killed. Robert was served heir on 4 November following and received the wardenship of the west march in 1515 in return for helping the duke of Albany to deprive Alexander, third Lord Home, of the latter's march wardenships. He also benefited from the distribution of Home estates following their forfeiture. 
Maxwell remained loyal to Albany, and he was on the council which in 1517 established procedures for the government of the realm during Albany's absence in France. Albany returned in November 1521, and in the following autumn led a large army to attack the English west march. Maxwell served as a hostage in Carlisle during the meeting on 11 September 1522 between Albany and Thomas, Lord Dacre, warden of the English march, which led to a truce being agreed. Maxwell and Dacre subsequently stood surety for the maintenance of the truce, which was extended until March 1523, when open war was resumed. In the meantime Maxwell turned his attentions to expanding his influence in south-west Scotland, not least by securing a large measure of control over the lands of monasteries there. In 1523 his brother John became abbot of Dundrennan. Maxwell was quick to exploit his increased importance during periods of cross-border tension, especially as the government distrusted Andrew Kerr of Cessford, warden of the middle march. When hostilities resumed, Maxwell prepared resistance to an expected English invasion of south-west Scotland. 
Queen Margaret had worked hard to have Albany's pro-French policies rejected, and her ascendancy brought Maxwell further rewards as he pledged his political allegiance to her, becoming one of her closest supporters. She helped him to extend his influence into Galloway, and on 9 September 1524 granted him the castles of Threave and Lochmaben as hereditary patrimony; she also appointed him steward of Kirkcudbright for nineteen years and made him principal captain of the royal guard. In addition to this she intervened directly in the burghal privileges of Edinburgh in order to secure the election of Maxwell as provost of Edinburgh. The instability of administration in the years which followed, as the queen competed for power with her estranged second husband, the sixth earl of Angus, had little effect on Maxwell's position, thanks to his indispensability on the west march, where his wardenship was repeatedly renewed. In July 1525 parliament devised an arrangement for the custody of the young king whereby four groups of prominent men would take turns to hold James for three months each; Maxwell was a member of the fourth group, along with the earls of Lennox, Montrose, and Glencairn. 
The scheme foundered because the first group, led by Angus himself, refused to relinquish control of the king's person at the end of its term. Angus subsequently alienated Maxwell by the support he gave to John Johnstone of that ilk, a potential rival in the west march whose family had recently initiated what would prove to be an exceptionally long-lasting and bloody feud with the Maxwells by killing one of the Armstrongs, a powerful family on the Scottish west march who were clients of Maxwell's. The two men fell out further over the latter's attempts to stabilize the borders, where the Armstrongs had embarrassed the Scottish government by providing shelter for English rebels and by raiding across the border. Repeated complaints by Lord Dacre that no efforts were being made either to prevent such attacks or to give redress conveyed the humiliating impression that Angus was able to control neither Maxwell nor his followers. Hence, perhaps, Lady Dacre's report in May 1528 that Maxwell was in trouble with the king and dared not go to Edinburgh, but had sent his wife instead. 
James V, chafing under the tutelage of Angus, viewed the inability of Angus to deal with border lawlessness as a perfect excuse to challenge his authority and condemn his actions. It is possible that Lady Maxwell was able to inform her husband of a rift between the king and Angus, as Maxwell was with the king at Stirling later in May 1528, and on 4 July he was appointed chief carver to the king in the royal household. Maxwell accompanied the king from Stirling to Edinburgh, where on 6 July he took part in a session of the lords of council and was confirmed as warden of the west march, with Lord Home replacing Angus in the east march. As James V began his personal rule, Maxwell was appointed once again to the office of provost of Edinburgh, replacing Archibald Douglas of Kilspindie. He arrived in Edinburgh in August with an armed force and surrounded the provost's house while Kilspindie and his nephews were at dinner. They were forced to flee to Tantallon and Maxwell proceeded to apply himself assiduously to royal service. 
The problem of lawlessness on the borders preoccupied James V at the end of 1529, and a series of justice ayres was held in the south-west at which the king and Maxwell presided. However, the problems were far from resolved and in May 1530 it was ordained that the king should ride to the borders and execute justice, while the chief border magnates, including Maxwell, remained in ward. Maxwell appears to have accepted his warding in Edinburgh Castle, as direct royal initiative on the border was preferable to the threat of the earl of Moray assuming the lieutenancy of all three marches. Maxwell also appreciated that he had to demonstrate his loyalty to the king in order to retain his favour, and he even countenanced the execution of his tenant John Armstrong of Staplegordon or Gilnockie -- the famous gang-leader Johnnie Armstrong -- with whom he had a bond of manrent. A clear message of strong royal authority having thus been delivered, Maxwell's bond for good rule was accepted by the king, and he received royal sanction for the marriage of his son Robert with Beatrice Douglas, daughter of the earl of Morton. Robert was taken to be brought up in the king's household, and Maxwell was even the recipient of some of Armstrong's escheated goods. 
Maxwell's position was strengthened further when in 1536-7 he was appointed one of six vice-regents of the realm when the king was in France. In 1537 he intercepted his erstwhile patron Queen Margaret as she was fleeing to England and returned her to Stirling. He served as juror on the three major treason trials of the period 1537-40, including that of Janet Douglas, Lady Glamis. In 1538 he was entrusted with the task of travelling to France and acting as the king's proxy in his marriage to Mary of Guise; the ceremony took place on 9 May at the castle of Chateaudun, when Maxwell placed the ring on the new queen's finger and then distributed 40 crowns among the officials and minstrels in attendance. After a few weeks he escorted Mary to Rouen and then to Le Havre, where on 10 June they embarked on a ship bound for Fife. In 1540 Maxwell accompanied the king on his expedition to the isles, and on 6 June he received royal confirmation of his charters, uniting his possessions into the free barony of Maxwell, with Caerlaverock Castle as its centre. 
Late in October 1542 Maxwell was ordered to bring the men of the west march to Selkirk, to join there with those of Liddesdale to meet or cut off the advance of the duke of Norfolk. The latter withdrew, however, and Maxwell and his men went back to the west march for a raid into England. The issue of who commanded the Scottish forces that came to grief at Solway Moss on 24 November has given rise to controversy. Some sources name Maxwell himself as the defeated commander, but it seems more likely that it was Oliver Sinclair of Pitcairn, of whom Sir George Douglas of Pittendriech reported on 16 December that he 'was chief captain of the army and lost the King's banner there' ('LP Henry VIII', 17, no. 1209). There is at any rate no doubt that the Scots, caught between a river and a bog, fought valiantly before surrendering. Maxwell was the richest magnate to be taken prisoner, with landed revenues valued at 4000 marks and 3000 marks in goods. 
To secure his release Maxwell became one of the 'assured lords' who at the end of December signed a bond pledging themselves to assist Henry VIII in his Scottish policies. It may have been in compliance with this undertaking that he introduced into parliament the bill enacted in March 1543 which permitted the possession and reading of the scriptures in the vernacular, though he was also alleged to have Lutheran sympathies. But although he appears to have been on bad terms with the francophile Cardinal Beaton, he made no further efforts to promote the English cause. Indeed, so lukewarm was Maxwell on King Henry's behalf that when he was arrested by the Scottish government in Edinburgh on 1 November 1544 there were rumours that he had been taken with his own connivance, and when he was released on 15 May 1545 he was swiftly taken into custody by the English forces in and around Edinburgh and carried back to London. He secured his release by placing his castles of Lochmaben and Caerlaverock in English hands, but late in November they were recaptured by the earl of Arran, and Maxwell himself was taken prisoner. Mary of Guise accepted his plea that he had acted under duress; she pardoned him and on 12 January 1546 appointed him justiciar of Annandale, Kirkcudbright, Wigtown, and Dumfries. Maxwell attended meetings of the privy council and on 3 June resumed his former office of warden of the west march. He did not hold it for long, however, for he died at Logan on 9 July 1546. 
Maxwell's heir Robert was the eldest son of his marriage to Janet Douglas. They also had another son, John Maxwell (later Lord Herries), and a daughter. Janet died about 1520 and by 1525 Maxwell had married Agnes, illegitimate daughter of James Stewart, thirteenth earl of Buchan; they had no children. Maxwell also had an illegitimate son, said to have been ancestor of the Maxwells of Logan. 


@@@@@


doc= 18411


Maxwell, Robert (1695-1765), agricultural improver and writer, was born at Arkland, Kirkpatrick-Durham, Kirkcudbrightshire, the eldest child of James Maxwell and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Robert Neilson of Barncaillie. The Maxwells had been landowners at Arkland since the beginning of the seventeenth century, and the Neilsons, descended from the house of Craigcaffie, Wigtown, had owned Barncaillie since 1537. After receiving an education 'becoming his rank', Maxwell engaged in agriculture, and about 1723 he leased a farm of 130 acres, all arable, at Cliftonhall, near Edinburgh, for a rent of $50. In 1728 he married Margaret, daughter of Bailie Montgomery of Edinburgh; she predeceased him, leaving six daughters. 
Maxwell devoted himself to the improvement of agriculture, and during the first half of the eighteenth century he probably did more than any other person in Scotland to encourage the practice of new methods. He was one of the earliest and most active members of the Society of Improvers in the Knowledge of Agriculture in Scotland, which was established at Edinburgh on 8 June 1723. In 1739 he proposed to the Scottish Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge a scheme for the application of funds in their possession to the education of boys in the new principles of agriculture. The society invited him to give a full account of the uses of the root crops which he proposed to grow, and the Society of Improvers encouraged him, but the scheme fell through. Meanwhile Maxwell had taken the main share of the work of the Society of Improvers and dealt with inquiries which were sent in from all parts of the country. 
On his own farm, Maxwell paid more attention to experiments than to making a profit, and he supervised improvements on the estates of the great land proprietors. Among those who availed themselves of his advice and assistance was John, second earl of Stair. In 1743 he published at Edinburgh a book, 'Select Transactions of the Society of Improvers'. A large portion of this work stemmed from Maxwell himself, and it contained many suggestions which were then new to Scotland, such as the efficacy and the mode of burning clay or subsoil, the method of cutting seed potatoes and of planting them, and the rotation of crops and root crops, in addition to information on the agriculture and manufactures of Scotland. On the dissolution of the Society of Improvers (because of the death of nearly all its founders) Maxwell transferred his energies to the Edinburgh Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Sciences, Manufactures, and Agriculture, which took its place. 
In 1745 Maxwell succeeded his father in the estate of Arkland, but by this time he had exhausted his resources. Like many other improvers he was better at theory than practice. He had to surrender the lease of his farm at Cliftonhall, and in 1749 he became insolvent. At the instance of his creditors Arkland was sold on 9 January 1750, for $10,304, to John Coltart of Areeming. 
After this Maxwell earned his living by acting as land valuer and supervisor of improvements, while his wife probably became a shopkeeper 'betwixt James's and Wardrop's Courts in the north side of the Lawn Market at Edinburgh' (advertisement in the 'Practical Beemaster', 2nd edn, 1750). Maxwell continued his efforts for the improvement of agriculture. He had tried to obtain the establishment of a lectureship in agriculture at Edinburgh University, and Lord Stair and the Society of Improvers had supported the scheme. Failing in this design, Maxwell, without the patronage of any public body, gave public lectures on agriculture in Edinburgh in 1756. His lectures, probably the first of the kind delivered in Great Britain, were attended by many of the farmers and landowners in the district, and he was strongly urged to publish them. Two of them were printed in 'The Practical Husbandman, being a Collection of Miscellaneous Papers on Husbandry' (1757), much of which was copied from his 'Select Transactions'. He also published a number of other works on husbandry, including one on bee keeping, entitled 'The Practical Beemaster' (1747), which went through a number of editions. Maxwell died at Renfrew, in the house of his son-in-law, James King, on 17 May 1765. 


@@@@@


doc= 18412


Maxwell, William, of Terregles, fifth Lord Herries of Terregles (c.1555-1603), politician and landowner, was probably born at Hoddom, the eldest son of Sir John Maxwell of Terregles, later fourth Lord Herries of Terregles (c.1512-1583), and his wife, Agnes Herries ('c'.1534-1594). He was the first cousin of John, eighth Lord Maxwell, head of the senior line of the family and the Maxwell surname. His father reunited and added to the established Herries estates during the 1560s, so that William eventually inherited extensive estates centred on Hoddom in Dumfriesshire. Like his father he may have received some education at Sweetheart Abbey. 
In May 1568 William Maxwell accompanied his father to the battle of Langside which he watched with Queen Mary. He was present during Moray's suppression of the queen's followers in Dumfriesshire later that year and during the English raids of 1570. He submitted to ward to secure his father's release by the king's party on at least one occasion, but did not himself finally submit until late 1572. The attacks on Dumfriesshire, and the kirk's support for these, may have contributed to William's subsequent hostility to England, and his disaffection from the kirk. He had been raised as a protestant, but may have been influenced by Dumfriesshire Catholics in the 1570s and had converted by 1584. He married Katherine Ker (died 1600), the daughter of Mark Ker, commendator of Newbattle, whose heir, the first earl of Lothian, married William's second sister, Margaret. Ker of Newbattle had a record of support for religious reform but Katherine's religious views, and the date of her marriage, are unknown. Maxwell and his wife had five sons and four daughters. 
William Maxwell became a gentleman of the chamber on 15 October 1580. On 20 January 1583 he succeeded to his father's peerage, being appointed to the privy council six days later. That summer Lord Scrope, the warden of the English west march, listed Herries as hostile towards England and accused him of countenancing cross-border reiving. In April 1584 Scrope thwarted Herries's efforts to support James VI against the Ruthven rebels. Herries attended the parliament which forfeited the latter, but he and Lord Maxwell were infuriated when the crown intervened to have John Johnstone elected provost of Dumfries. This re-initiated the long-running feud between the Maxwell and Johnstone families over pre-eminence in the Scottish west march, and in May 1585 Herries took part in a raid on Johnstone lands at Moffat. However, his conduct was usually less extreme. By July he was attempting to persuade Maxwell to submit, and in September he was commissioned to investigate the death of Lord Russell, killed at a day of truce on the Northumbrian border. On 9 June 1587 Herries was appointed warden of the Scottish west march. In Maxwell's absence he brought a temporary end to the feud with the Johnstones, marrying his sister to Sir James Johnstone. However, he failed to act impartially and in January 1588 was outlawed for failing to hand over offenders from his surname. He submitted in February, but was charged by the general assembly with attending mass in Dumfries. Released from outlawry in March, he was ordered by the council to suppress Catholicism. Herries had resigned his wardenry by 9 July 1588, but in August he became a commissioner for resisting the Spanish Armada. 
Herries assisted Maxwell's political rehabilitation in 1589 but the Maxwell / Johnstone feud soon re-erupted. Maxwell was killed in battle with the Johnstones at Dryfe Sands on 6 December 1593, and on 22 December, Herries, who had not been present at the battle, was appointed head of a commission of local lairds to whom the wardenship was entrusted for two months. Herries subsequently acted as warden in his own right but was replaced by 21 July 1594. He was reappointed in December that year or January 1595, but by 8 November had been dismissed for attacking Johnstone settlements around Lockerbie. He came to an assurance with Johnstone, but this was broken. Brought before the council in March 1596 Herries successfully defended his conduct, but in July he was outlawed for failing to appear when summoned. He submitted and was briefly warded in Edinburgh Castle. He then co-operated with royal justice ayres to Dumfries in April and November 1597. 
In March 1599 Herries again failed to appear before the council when summoned and was subsequently imprisoned in Tantallon Castle until September. He agreed to submit the Maxwell / Johnstone feud to arbitration in November, and was re-appointed warden on 17 June 1600. On 13 August, however, he was replaced by Sir James Johnstone. This re-ignited the feud and in May 1601 Herries was charged with plotting to undermine Johnstone. He had also returned to Catholicism and in November 1601 was summoned to appear before the council for attending mass and sheltering Jesuits. He appeared in December and was warded in Edinburgh Castle. He was released in January 1602 on condition that he remain in Edinburgh where ministers of the kirk could attempt to reform him. In February Herries agreed to support the kirk but once home he swiftly returned to Catholicism. In May 1602 the general assembly again sought to have him placed in the charge of a minister in Edinburgh. He returned to the capital but did not stay there for long. Herries died on 10 October 1603; his place of death and burial are not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 18413


Maxwell, William, fifth earl of Nithsdale (1676-1744), Jacobite army officer and courtier, eldest son of Robert, fourth earl of Nithsdale (1627/8-1683), and Lady Lucie Douglas (died 1713), daughter of William, first marquess of Douglas, was probably born at Terregles Castle, near Dumfries. The early death of his father ensured that he was raised by his mother, the dowager countess, who educated him to be a faithful and conventionally devout Roman Catholic and a partisan of the Stuart cause. A series of private tutors endowed him with those social accomplishments thought necessary, by his class, for a great nobleman and courtier. He was confirmed in his titles on 26 May 1696, and shortly after reaching his majority he was dispatched to the exiled court at St Germain to pay his respects to James II. While there, he met and courted Lady Winifred Herbert ['see 'Maxwell, Winifred (1672-1749)], the youngest daughter of William, first marquess of Powis, and Lady Elizabeth Somerset. The couple married in Paris on 2 March 1699. On returning to his seat at Terregles, Nithsdale was careful not to present any outward show of his religion that might enrage any of his staunchly Presbyterian lowland neighbours. However, this was to no avail, and on the night of 24 December 1703 a crowd of more than 100 armed men, led by four local ministers, broke open the castle's gates and ransacked his property in search of Jesuit agents and Roman Catholic priests. Summoned to appear before the magistrates in Edinburgh on 21 February 1704, he was acquitted of harbouring foreign priests but was still stripped of his office as hereditary steward of Kirkcudbright, a title which was conferred instead upon James, duke of Queensberry. 
Long suspected by the authorities of Jacobitism Nithsdale was placed under surveillance and a bond as a security for his future good conduct was demanded of him by the government, to be paid no later than 8 November 1708. Fear of the total confiscation of his lands may well have prompted him to bequeath all of his estate to his eldest son on 28 November 1712, while retaining only a life-rent for his own maintenance. However, it appears that this was only a secondary consideration, and that his utter inability to manage his own affairs, and to handle money, was the real reason behind the transference of his properties. 
The Jacobite rising of 1715 placed Nithsdale in a very difficult dilemma, and he initially temporized before, refusing a government summons, he joined the insurgents. Though his faith had effectively barred him from high command, he was entrusted with the unenviable task of raising the old covenanting districts of Dumfries and Galloway for the Jacobite cause. Having proclaimed James III (James Francis Edward Stuart) king at Moffat and Jedburgh, he rendezvoused with the main Jacobite forces of General Forster at Rothbury, near Hexham, on 19 October 1715. At Penrith on 2 November he brought up the main body of the troops, who pushed aside the small and dispirited militia companies which had barred the road south. He accompanied the army on its march through Kendal and Lancaster, and was placed in joint command of the gentlemen volunteers at the battle of Preston, on 12-13 November 1715. He was stationed in the parish churchyard throughout the fighting and saw his forces drawn upon as a reserve at times of crisis. However, he appears to have been one of the Scottish lords who advocated surrender once it became clear that the town was thoroughly enveloped by government troops, and his sword was delivered to generals Wills and Carpenter on Monday 14 November without the promise of any sort of favourable terms from his captors. 
On 5 December Nithsdale was led into London along with the other Jacobite prisoners. Confined to the Tower, he was impeached on 9 January 1716 and was among the six Jacobite lords tried for treason at Westminster Hall over the following month. Pleading guilty to the charge, he begged George I for mercy, and argued that he had been forced into joining the rising by his compatriots who now stood accused beside him at the bar. However, his appeal was unsuccessful and he was sentenced on 9 February to be hanged, drawn, and quartered on Tower Hill. In contrast to his earlier behaviour, once this sentence was delivered Nithsdale acted with great composure and set down his 'last' testament which stressed both his commitment to Roman Catholicism and the claims of the Pretender. 
Nithsdale was fortunate indeed that Winifred, Lady Nithsdale, was a woman of fortitude, intelligence, and bravery. On hearing of his capture she immediately rushed to London to be close by him and to lobby hard for his release. Combining a skilful propaganda campaign with frequent visits to the gallery of the House of Lords, she made such a favourable impression upon those she met that rumours began to circulate that her husband was about to be granted a reprieve and a full pardon. However, given the continuing opposition of George I to all such moves, it is most likely that Nithsdale would almost certainly have gone to the gallows had not his wife planned and accomplished a daring rescue. The guards at the Tower were bribed to allow Nithsdale to receive gifts and visitors, and they became confused by the frequent visits of the countess, her maid, and her friends. Under the cover of one of these visits, on the evening of 22 February -- the day before his scheduled execution -- Nithsdale was able to disguise himself as a woman and slip out of the Tower dressed as his wife's maid. He sought refuge in the Venetian embassy in the City of London and travelled to Dover disguised in the ambassador's livery coat. From there the Venetians helped him to charter a small boat which took him safely to Calais. The full details of his escape, which delighted partisans of the Jacobite movement and became something of a 'cause celebre', are to be found in a letter sent by the countess to her sister, Lucy Herbert, the prioress of the English convent at Bruges, which has been extensively reprinted ('Letter', ed. Grace; Tayler, 46-58; Maxwell Stuart, 163-70). 
Shortly after arriving in Paris, in the spring of 1716, Nithsdale fell dangerously ill but recovered. Having secured a loan from Mary of Modena, he attended the Pretender at his court in Avignon and was reunited with his wife at Lille in September 1716. On his departure for Italy in late March 1717, he chose the cheapest form of transport and consequently was almost drowned when the boat he was sailing in foundered in heavy seas. On 26 May 1717, together with the viscount of Kilsyth, he welcomed the Pretender to Rome and officiated at his court as a lord-in-waiting. The following year his wife was appointed lady-in-waiting to Clementina Sobieska, and during 1727-9 she served as governess to Henry Benedict, the titular duke of York. 
Although these appointments brought with them considerable financial relief, and despite receiving (from 1717) a pension of approximately 200 livres a month from the exiled Jacobite court, until his death Nithsdale was continuously in debt. His correspondence with his brother-in-law, Charles, fourth marquess of Traquair, makes constant requests for money to be drawn from the estates of his son, while his wife lamented the raggedness of her dress and the poverty of their existence. Unable or unwilling to control his spending, Nithsdale continued to add to their difficulties and wrote of his dislike of, and boredom with, life at Rome. After 1724 the records appertaining to him tail off, and it would seem that apart from arranging the marriage of his daughter, Anne, to John, fourth Baron Bellew, in 1729, he became no more than a half-forgotten cipher at the exiled court. Nithsdale's death in Rome in 1744 obliged his son to settle $200 per annum upon the dowager countess in an attempt to fend off their creditors: Nithsdale was buried in an unknown grave in Rome. 
Of his five children, only two reached adulthood; Anne, Lady Bellew, and William, commonly called Lord Maxwell. Maxwell was able to hold his family estates together as the Lords, on 21 January 1723, finally ruled that his father had forfeited only his life-rent through his part in the rebellion and not the Nithsdale lands which were held in trust for his son. The riding cloak in which Nithsdale fled the Tower is on display at Traquair House, Innerleithen, Peeblesshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 18414


Maxwell, William (1732-1818), Church of Ireland clergyman, born on 24 August 1732, was the eldest son of John Maxwell, of Falkland, in Donagh parish, co. Monaghan, archdeacon of Clogher (1762-83), and his first wife, Isabella, daughter of the Revd John Leavens of Ardee, co. Louth. He was admitted a pensioner at Trinity College, Dublin, where he was elected scholar in 1750 and graduated BA (1752), MA (1755), and BD and DD (1777) (Todd, 381). His health suffered through study, and he travelled abroad with his relative Lord Farnham, until it improved. About 1754 he was introduced to Samuel Johnson by George Grierson, the government printer at Dublin. For several years he was assistant preacher at the Temple Church, London, when the Revd Gregory Sharpe was master; in 1775, through the influence of his relative Henry Maxwell, bishop of Meath, he obtained the rectory of Mount Temple, co. Westmeath. On his return to Ireland, Johnson, who had been for many years his 'social friend', and always 'spoke of him with a very kind regard', took an affecting leave of him. Maxwell's house at Falkland was of considerable size, with a good library, the relics of which were preserved at Trough Lodge, the seat of the Ancketills. When Maxwell was required to reside more regularly on his benefice, he resigned the rectory, and about 1780 moved to Bath, allowing the house at Falkland to fall into ruins. 
Maxwell's first wife was Anne, eldest daughter of William Burrell Massingberd, of Ormsby, Lincolnshire, whom he married on 6 December 1777, and with whom he had four children. Three of them died childless; the youngest, Anne, married Henry Francis Lyte at Queen Square Chapel, Bath, on 21 January 1818, and died at Berry Head, Brixham, Devon, on 7 January 1856. Maxwell's first wife died at Bath, and some time later he married in Ireland Miss Jane Ellis; they had no children. Maxwell died at his home in Bennett Street, Bath, on 3 September 1818, and was buried in Walcot church, where his widow erected to his memory an enormous monument, with the family escutcheon and the motto, 'Je suis pret'. She died, aged eighty-two, on 21 May 1847, and was buried by her husband's side. Maxwell left by his will bequests for the better education of the poor at Donagh; on the old schoolhouse at Glaslough in that parish was placed an inscription to the effect that it was built in 1821 from his last designs. 
Maxwell was very proud of his friendship with Johnson, copying him 'in wig, general appearance, and in manner'. He furnished Boswell with considerable collectanea (in which some of the doctor's best sayings are embodied) on Johnson's life before 1770. The greater part of them were inserted in Boswell (1st edn, 1.336-45), but some further anecdotes were given by him in the additions to the second edition. He is said to have written some political pamphlets, one on the Falkland Islands, and another addressed to Pitt on taxation as it affected Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 18415


Maxwell, Sir William Edward (1846-1897), colonial governor, was born on 5 August 1846, the younger son of 
William Edward Maxwell was educated at Repton School (1860-64) and was employed from 1865 to 1869 in the supreme court at Penang and Singapore. In 1867 he qualified as an advocate at the local bar, and in September 1869 he was appointed a police magistrate and commissioner of the court of requests at Penang. In 1870 he married Lillias Grant Aberigh-Mackay (1846-1925), the daughter of James Aberigh-Mackay, a chaplain in the Indian service. In February of that year he was placed in the same offices in Malacca, in August 1871 at Singapore, and in 1872 in Province Wellesley. In May 1874 he was nominated a temporary judge of the supreme court of Penang, and in September he was appointed assistant government agent for Province Wellesley. In November 1875 he accompanied, as deputy commissioner, the Larut field force in their retributive expedition against the murderers of James Wheeler Woodford Birch, the British resident at Perak. He was mentioned in dispatches and received a medal. Maxwell became assistant resident in Perak and a member of the state council in February 1878. In 1881 he was called to the bar by the Inner Temple, and in the following year he was commissioned to visit the Australian colonies and report on the Torrens land registration system, which resulted in 'The Torrens System of Conveyancing by Registration of Title in the Straits Settlement' (1883). 
On returning to the Straits Settlements Maxwell became commissioner of land titles, and in 1883 was gazetted a member of the executive and legislative councils. The following year he was employed by the Foreign Office on a successful mission to the west coast of Atchin to obtain the release of the survivors of the British ship 'Nisero', who had been in captivity for ten months; for this he was created CMG. From 1884 to 1889 he was acting resident counsellor at Penang, and in 1889 became British resident at Selangor. In 1892 he was nominated colonial secretary of the Straits Settlements, and from September 1893 to January 1895 he was acting governor. 
In March 1895 Maxwell was nominated governor of the Gold Coast. He found the colony on the brink of a war with the Asante, who made frequent slave raids, and refused to pay the balance of the war indemnity due to the British government. On 17 January 1896 an expedition under Sir Francis Scott entered Kumasi without resistance, and made prisoner the Asante king, Prempeh. Maxwell, who was nominated KCMG in 1896, visited England in the summer, and addressed large meetings at Liverpool and Manchester on the future of the Gold Coast and the Asante kingdom. He returned to the Gold Coast in October, but contracted blackwater fever. Before he could reach England he died and was buried at sea on 14 December 1897, off Gran Canaria. He was survived by his wife, with whom he had six sons, the eldest being (William) George Maxwell, who became an administrator in the Malay states. 


@@@@@


doc= 18416


Maxwell, William Hamilton (1791-1850), writer, was born at Newry, co. Down, on 30 June 1791, the son of James Maxwell, a merchant, and his wife, a daughter of William Hamilton, of a good, respected family. He went to school at Dr Henderson's academy in Hill Street, Newry. On 7 December 1807, when he was only fifteen years old, he entered Trinity College, Dublin. Although he wasted a good deal of time there, he graduated with some distinction as a BA in 1812. 
It is difficult to establish the events of Maxwell's life in his early manhood. He was keen to follow a military career but this ambition was strongly opposed by his family, who wanted him to enter the church or the legal profession. As these arguments persisted, he spent his time in his favourite pursuits of hunting, shooting, and fishing, though he also read military history, poetry, and romances. All these activities provided him with material for his writing in subsequent years. It is sometimes said that he joined the army during this period of his life. The writer of his obituary in the 'Illustrated London News' (25 January 1851, 51) claimed that he attained the rank of captain in the 88th regiment, that he participated in the last stages of the Peninsular War, and that he was present at the battle of Waterloo. But this claim is untrue, and it is possible that he gained his knowledge of recent military campaigns from talking and drinking with officers of regiments successively stationed in co. Mayo. As a young man he spent lavishly, anticipating his future income by confirming for ready money certain leases which his father had granted to tenants and by expecting to inherit money from an aunt. When the latter funds failed to materialize because of legal difficulties, he thought of taking a military commission in South America, but this plan came to nothing. 
Finally, in accordance with his family's wishes, Maxwell took holy orders. He was ordained deacon at Carlow on 25 July 1813 and became a curate at Clonallan in the same year. In 1817 he married Mary Dobbin ('b'. 1796), the second daughter of Thomas Dobbin, JP for co. Armagh. In 1820 the archbishop of Armagh, who was friendly with his wife's family, appointed him to two benefices in the area of Ballagh, Connemara, a place destitute of a congregation but abounding in game, and therefore a situation congenial to Maxwell. While living in a shooting lodge at Ballycroy he wrote his first novel, 'O'Hara, or, 1798', which was published anonymously in 1825 but which was unsuccessful. He seems once again to have become unsettled, but the marquess of Sligo, with whom he was on friendly terms, gave him a house rent-free to retain him at Ballagh. 
In 1829 Maxwell achieved recognition as a writer when Henry Colburn published his 'Stories of Waterloo', for which he paid him $300. Three years later one of his most popular books appeared: 'Wild Sports of the West' (1832). This contained lively tales and legends together with colourful descriptions of Irish people, sporting activities (such as salmon fishing and deer hunting), and the Connaught countryside. An edition of this book appeared in 1916 with an appreciative introduction by the earl of Dunraven. Maxwell had thus become a progenitor of two kinds of fiction which became popular in the 1830s and 1840s: the military novel and the rollicking story of Irish life. 
Maxwell was over 6 feet tall, distinguished in appearance, and elegantly dressed. In the words of one of his friends, William Maginn, he was 'a fine, dashing-looking, long, well-knit fellow' (Maginn, vii-xii). He was vivacious and an entertaining conversationalist. Sir William Wilde thought that as a raconteur he was second only to Sheridan. Maxwell became friendly with Charles Lever in 1835, encouraging him to write novels of adventure and exchanging with him experiences and stories of Irish life and characters. As a result, it was not always possible to say who was the original author of certain incidents in their books. His easy-going temperament and fluency are reflected in his fiction, which was enthusiastically described by Maginn: 'he flings off his tales as they were so many tumblers of punch, hot and strong, pleasant and heart-cheering, hastily mixed, and hastily disposed of' (ibid.). 
Maxwell contributed to periodicals, including 'Bentley's Miscellany' and the 'New Monthly Magazine'. Although Dickens had a poor opinion of some of his contributions to 'Bentley's Miscellany', he put a story of Maxwell's ('The Expedition') in 'The Pic-Nic Papers' (1841), the compilation he edited to raise money for the widow of John Macrone, the publisher. Maxwell was a prolific writer, producing some twenty books in about twenty years. Most of them were popular, and a staple of the circulating libraries. Typical novels are 'The Fortunes of Hector O'Hallaran and his Man, Mark Antony O'Toole' (1842-3), illustrated by John Leech, and 'Captain O'Sullivan, or, Adventures, Civil, Military and Matrimonial of a Gentleman on Half-Pay' (1846), which are picaresque narratives, as their titles indicate. In 1844 he wrote 'Wanderings in the Highlands and Islands', a sequel to 'Wild Sports of the West'. He also wrote non-fiction, including the 'Life of Field-Marshal His Grace the Duke of Wellington' (1839-41), which reappeared in many later editions, and a 'History of the Irish Rebellion in 1798' (1845), illustrated by George Cruikshank. 'The Irish Movements' (1848) was an outspoken attack on Chartism and on Irish campaigns for independence: 'Away with agitation: conciliate your best friend, England, if you can.' 
According to the records of the Royal Literary Fund, Maxwell was declared bankrupt in 1840 but later paid off these debts. His situation worsened in 1844 when he was apparently deprived of his living for non-residence. By May 1847, when he applied to the fund, he was in the queen's bench prison. After spending several years in ill health and distress, he retired to Inveresk, Musselburgh, near Edinburgh, where he died aged fifty-nine on 28 December 1850. He was buried at the strangers' burial ground on either 29 or 30 December and was survived by his wife and eight dependent, unmarried children, two of whom had been born after June 1847. 


@@@@@


doc= 18417


Maxwell, Winifred, countess of Nithsdale (1672-1749), Jacobite courtier, was the last of the six children of William Herbert, marquess and Jacobite duke of Powis (c.1626-1696), and Lady Elizabeth Somerset ('c'.1634-1691), daughter of Edward, second marquess of Worcester. She was the sister of Lady Lucy Herbert, devotional writer and superior of the English Augustinian convent at Bruges, Flanders, and Lady Carrington, who was active in Jacobite plots. Her parents, prominent in the court of James II, moved to St Germain-en-Laye after the revolution of 1688. There she met William Maxwell, fifth earl of Nithsdale (1676-1744), the son of Robert and Lucie Maxwell, fourth earl and countess of Nithsdale. Lady Winifred married the fifth earl in 1699. Two children survived to adulthood, William, Lord Maxwell, and Anne, Lady Bellew. Lady Nithsdale raised her granddaughter, Frances Maria Bellew, after Anne died giving birth to her second child. 
When Lord Nithsdale was imprisoned and sentenced to death for his part in the 1715 Jacobite rising, Lady Nithsdale travelled to London to attempt to secure a pardon for him. She completed her journey on horseback when deep snow stopped the stagecoaches. In London she asked those with power for assistance and attempted to present a petition in person to George I. He refused to accept it, and when she clutched at his robes, he dragged her to the end of the room where a guard stopped her. This incident sparked criticism of the king's rudeness and encouraged popular sympathy for Lady Nithsdale. Though Lord Dorset eventually had the petition read to the king, Lady Nithsdale believed that her husband's Catholicism would prevent any leniency. When this and other petitions failed, Lady Nithsdale organized her husband's escape from the Tower of London on 22 February 1716. With the assistance of her maid Cecilia Evans and two friends, Mrs Morgan and Mrs Mills, Lady Nithsdale confused the guards and smuggled in an extra cloak and paint to disguise Lord Nithsdale. Lady Nithsdale conducted her husband outside and then returned to his cell and pretended to converse with him for a while. When she departed, she told the guards he was at prayers and should not be disturbed. Once Lord Nithsdale was safely out of the Tower, Mrs Evans placed him with one of her friends. When the escape became known, Lady Nithsdale remained quietly in London, but once Lord Nithsdale was safe on the continent, she undertook a risky journey to Scotland to secure the family papers and arrange for the care of their property. She suffered a miscarriage during her journey to join her husband, but she recovered and became active in the exiled Jacobite court, residing first at La Fleche, in France (March 1717-July 1718), and then from 1718 to 1726 at Rome. 
Lady Nithsdale's only official position at court was governess to Henry Benedict Stuart, but she also served as unofficial lady-in-waiting to Clementina Sobieska and cared for Charles Edward Stuart when Clementina moved to a convent. Many of Lady Nithsdale's letters from this period plead for money and assistance in curtailing her husband's expenditures. Despite the hardships of her later years, her devotion to James Edward Stuart and his children never wavered. She died in Rome in May 1749. 
The romantic story of the earl's escape made Lady Nithsdale a popular heroine in early Jacobite writing. In a letter to her sister Lucy describing the escape, she writes that George I, whom she calls 'the Electour', said 'that I had done him more mischeif than any woman in Christendom' (Tayler, 56). Her story provided the basis for numerous popular historical accounts, plays, most notably Clifford Bax's 'The Immortal Lady' (1931), and a highly romanticized historical novel, 'Winifred, Countess of Nithsdale: a Tale of the Jacobite Wars' (1869), by Barbarina Olga Brand, Lady Dacre. Lady Nithsdale also became a recurring figure in books of distinguished women, where she is praised for her intrepid actions and her devotion to her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 18418


May, Baptist (bap. 1628, d. 1697), courtier, was baptized on 4 November 1628, and was the sixth and youngest son of Sir Humphrey May (1572/3-1630), privy councillor, and his second wife, Judith ('bap'. 1598, died 1661), daughter of Sir William Poley (1562-1629). He took his first name from his uncle, Baptist Hicks, first Viscount Campden. May later told Gilbert Burnet that he had been 'bred about the king [Charles II] since he was a child' (Burnet, 2.465), and by 1648 he was one of the duke of York's pages. It is likely to have been through the influence of his mother's cousin, Henry Jermyn, Lord Jermyn, later earl of St Albans, that he had entered royal service. He was probably back in England in February 1652 when he submitted a petition to the council of state. At the Restoration he and St Albans together obtained the sinecure post of registrar of chancery, and from 1665 he and the poet Abraham Cowley were partners with St Albans in the scheme to develop St James's Square, London. An adjacent street was named Babmaes Mews after him -- the use of his nickname in this context having the appearance of a private joke. Between 1662 and 1665 he served as a groom in York's bedchamber. 
May is remembered as one of Charles II's most trusted servants. The office of keeper of his privy purse, to which he was appointed on 28 July 1665 on the death of Charles Berkeley, earl of Falmouth, required him to manage the king's private hoard of cash. The key influence behind his appointment seems to have been the royal mistress Barbara Villiers, countess of Castlemaine, who realized that an ally in this office would make the payments due to her his priority. In October 1666 York nominated him as a candidate for Winchelsea, only for the electors to reject him because 'they would have no court pimp to be their burgess' (Pepys, 7.337). A courtier with a talent to amuse rather than to conspire, May had an unfortunate habit of making tactless remarks. A comment by him welcoming the great fire, because it would make the City easier to control, shocked even the king ('Life of... Clarendon', 3.101). His alliance with Castlemaine in 1667 against Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon, was the most public of secret court intrigues. There was in truth little that someone in May's position could do to undermine the lord chancellor except mock him. When Clarendon was brought down in November 1667, Pepys reported that May 'fell upon his knees and ketched the king about the legs and joyed him, and said that this was the first time that ever he could call him King of England' (Pepys, 8.525). Two years later he was one of those who amused the king by ridiculing Henry Bennet, Lord Arlington. The trick failed to work a second time. It was only Castlemaine's support which discouraged Arlington from seeking reprisals against him. For all his privileged access to the king, May showed little skill whenever he attempted to meddle directly in high politics. On being elected MP for Midhurst in 1670, he had plans to promote a bill to allow the king to divorce the queen, but Charles made clear his disapproval as soon as he discovered what May was up to. In 1681 when the king suspended those gentlemen of the bedchamber who persisted in supporting exclusion May came close to being suspended as well. In early 1685 he was involved with Louise Renee de Keroualle, duchess of Portsmouth, and York's other enemies at court in plotting to have the duke sent back to Scotland. They could not have foreseen just how big a miscalculation this would prove to be. 
May never enjoyed a monopoly on the king's secret finances. The French pension was paid instead through William Chiffinch, the secret service fund was controlled by the secretary to the Treasury, and Sir Stephen Fox also acted as a conduit for secret payments. The sole surviving set of late seventeenth-century privy purse accounts, which cover the years from 1666 to 1669 and which are known only from a copy transcribed by Edmond Malone (1741-1812), confirm that most of the payments made by May were very mundane (Bodl. Oxf., MS Malone 44, fols. 100-111). The privy purse may have been most important during the final years of the reign, when Charles used it to channel the surpluses from the Irish revenue to the building of his new palace at Winchester, and when, paradoxically, May was least secure in his favour. That favour was always ambiguous. Burnet thought that May: 'had the greatest and longest share in the king's secret confidence of any man in that time; for it was never broke off, though often shaken, he being in his notions against every thing that the king was for, both France, popery, and arbitrary government: but a particular sympathy of temper, and his serving the king in his vices, created a confidence much envied, and often attempted to be broke, but never with any success beyond a short coldness. (Burnet, 1.481-2)' His real secret was understanding that Charles least wanted to see those who came to him on official business. His favour, like all the other confidential servants, depended on his resisting the temptation to become too obviously involved in the political affairs his master found so tiresome. 
In 1685 James II removed May as keeper to make way for James Graham. May was allowed to retain his office as ranger of Windsor Great Park, having held it since May 1671, and he continued to use the Great Lodge (later Cumberland Lodge) as his principal country seat. An attempt to become MP for New Windsor in 1690 (in partnership with Sir Christopher Wren) resulted in a double return, and he had instead to sit for Thetford. He was considered a supporter of the court throughout that parliament. He died on 2 March 1697 and was buried in St George's Chapel, Windsor. He had never married, but his will confirmed that he had had an illegitimate son, Charles, probably with Dorothy Broke of Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/444, fols. 128'v'-132). 


@@@@@


doc= 18419


May, George Augustus Chichester (1815-1892), judge, was born in Belfast, the son of Edward May, rector of Belfast, and Elizabeth, the eldest daughter of William Sinclair of Fort William, co. Antrim. He was educated at Shrewsbury School and then at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in classics in 1838, was granted an MA in 1841, and was afterwards elected a fellow. Called to the Irish bar in January 1844, he built up a considerable chancery practice. He became QC in 1865. In 1853 May married Olivia Barrington (died 1876); they had one son. 
In 1867 May edited the first volumes of the Irish 'Law Reports'. He was elected a bencher of the King's Inns, Dublin, in 1873, and in the following year he was appointed legal adviser at Dublin Castle. On 27 November 1875 he was appointed attorney-general by Disraeli, and on 8 February 1877 he was created lord chief justice of Ireland and sworn of the privy council. On 1 January 1878 he was transferred to the High Court of Justice as president of the Queen's Bench Division and made an 'ex officio' lord justice of appeal, retaining the title of lord chief justice of Ireland. As lord chief justice May would normally have presided over the trial of Charles Stewart Parnell and his allies in the Land League conspiracy of 1880-81, but, having dismissed a motion for the postponement of the trial on 6 December 1880, he was accused of political bias and removed from the court proceedings. May resigned his post in 1887, and died on 15 August 1892 at Lisnavagh, Rathvilly, co. Carlow. 


@@@@@


doc= 18420


May, Sir Humphrey (1572/3-1630), politician and administrator, was the fourth son of Richard May (died in or before 1592), citizen and merchant tailor of London and of Mayfield, Sussex, and his wife, Mary Hillersden, possibly daughter of Andrew Hillersdon of Memland, Devon. Humphrey's father was probably the Richard May in receipt of foreign intelligence as secretary to the merchants in September 1586. Humphrey May matriculated at St John's College, Oxford, on 25 October 1588 aged fifteen. After graduating BA on 3 March 1592 he studied at the Middle Temple later that year. By February 1604 he was at court and had been appointed groom of the privy chamber. 
May was MP for Bere Alston, Devon, from 1605 to 1610, and on 26 November 1607 he was granted the clerkship of the council for the court of Star Chamber, in reversion after William Mill and Sir Francis Bacon. Before 23 May 1611 he married Jane (died 1615), sister of Sir William Uvedale of Wickham Market, Suffolk: on that date May and his wife were granted a pension of 16's'. a day. A pension of 200 marks a year followed on 5 August, and on 10 December a grant of the clerkship of the signet, in reversion after Robert Kirkham. May was knighted in January 1613 at Newmarket and represented Westminster in the 1614 parliament. John Cusack complained of May's influence on 11 November 1615: 'Sir Hum. May can make any suit or suitor, be they ever so honest, disliked by the king' ('CSP dom.', '1611-18', 327). 
In May 1615 Jane May died in giving birth to a son, Richard, and on 3 February 1616 Sir Humphrey married again at St Mary's, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk. His second wife was Judith ('bap'. 1598, died 1661), daughter of Sir William Poley (1562-1629), of Boxted, Suffolk, and his wife, Ann (died 1658), daughter of Sir Robert Jermyn of Rushbrooke, Suffolk. Their youngest son was the renowned courtier Baptist May. 
In January 1618 May was appointed surveyor of the court of wards. His next objective, the chancellorship of the duchy of Lancaster, was said to have forty-three suitors. By 6 March May had provoked the duke of Buckingham's displeasure by promising the reversion of his surveyorship to both Benjamin Rudyerd and Mr Packer to secure their support. May applied for the duke's favour, but offended him by also approaching William Herbert, earl of Pembroke. Through the mediation of Pembroke and Lucy Russell, countess of Bedford, May eventually received the appointment, securing Buckingham's agreement only after he offered the lease of the duchy house in London to the duke's mother and his post in Star Chamber to the duke's brother. May himself was also made to grovel that losing Buckingham's favour was a 'matter of extreme grief and discontentment' (Lockyer, 39). He was MP for Lancaster in the parliament of 1621-2. He represented Leicester in 1624 and 1625, praising the former parliament on 11 March 1624 for their 'clear and plain dealing' (Cogswell, 194). On 10 May 1624 May's testimony was used in the impeachment of Lionel Cranfield, earl of Middlesex. May was among his debtors, and his participation signified that the court had deserted Cranfield. 
By 1624 May owned the manor and abbey of Carrow, Norfolk, in which county he accumulated church patronage. He also reportedly bought the manor of Froyle, Hampshire. He was admitted to Gray's Inn on 6 March 1625 and became a privy councillor on 28 March. Later that year he was returned for Lancaster again, and in early July endeavoured to prevent the royal decision to demand tonnage and poundage in the absence of a parliamentary grant: 'Sir Humphry May, then Chancelor of the Dutchie, who, having travaild with much industrie in that service, but in vaine,... importund to a new attempt & triall for staie or diversion of that worke' (Thompson, 177). Having failed to persuade Buckingham himself, May sent Sir John Eliot to remonstrate with him. Nevertheless, in the House of Commons he strenuously defended Buckingham's foreign policy and urged parliament to vote the king money so they could not be blamed for future failures. He also argued against the committal of Richard Mountague for his controversial book 'Appello Caesarem'. He represented Leicester again in the parliaments of 1626 and 1628-9. By May 1626 he probably maintained hopes of a barony. On 15 September 1626 he was appointed a commissioner for the sale of the king's lands and by January 1627 he was a commissioner for the forced loan. On 20 March that year Lady Hericke claimed he was 'a great favourite with the king' ('CSP dom.', '1627-8', 120). 
On 7 October 1627, with Buckingham's forces on the Ile de Re in a rapidly deteriorating position, May reassured the duke of the continued favour of the king and privy council, but emphasized difficulties in supplying him, entreating him not to attempt too much: 'It is easy for us to set down on paper ships, and money, and arms, and victual, and men, but to congest these materials together, especially in such a penury of money, requires more time than the necessity of your affairs will permit. (Gardiner, 6.191)' Buckingham's campaign ended in disaster but in the parliament of 1628 May asked the House of Commons to forgive and forget, urging MPs: 'you cannot resolve too soone for the kinge, neyther can you indeede give enough. But lett our harts joyne. Let forrane states knowe wee are united. Wee have here in towne six embassadors and they every day aske after us. (C. Russell, 'Unrevolutionary England, 1603-1642', 1990, 47)' On 3 June Sir John Eliot argued that the French war had led to the sacrifice of the Palatinate and that the whole policy of the government looked pro-Spanish. When May interjected, 'If he goes on I hope that I may myself go out', the members cried, 'Begone! begone!' (Gardiner, 6.299). On 11 July 1628 May was named a commissioner for compounding with recusants in the northern counties, whose forfeitures were to maintain six warships to guard the east coast. 
May defended the government on the tonnage and poundage issue on 19 February 1629, orating that he had never heard until now that an MP 'should have his goods privileged against the king' and that 'God forbid that the king's commands should be put for delinquency. When that is done his crown is at stake' (Gardiner, 7.61-3). During the ensuing debates over whether the House of Commons had the right to adjourn itself, on 2 March 1629 the speaker, Sir John Finch, was held down in his chair. May was among the privy councillors who rushed to assist him, but was overpowered. After the dissolution in April 1629 May resigned his chancellorship and was appointed vice-chamberlain. On 27 January 1630 he was also appointed commissioner for fining gentlemen that had not presented themselves for knighthood at Charles I's coronation. 
Often placed in the awkward position of having to defend the government's unimpressive record, May was 'a man of some ability and of a very conciliatory disposition' (Gardiner, 5.319). He was a significant royal agent in nearly all the schemes that later came to characterize 'Thorough'. May held the reversion of the mastership of the rolls, but did not live to enjoy it. He died at his house in St Martin-in-the-Fields, Middlesex, on 9 June 1630. Rowland Woodward wrote: 'Sir Humphrey May died last night. The common speech has been that he was mad; none of his friends for a great while were suffered to speak with him' ('CSP dom.', '1629-31', 287). He was buried on 11 June 1630 on the north side of the chapel of kings in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 18421


May, John (d. 1598), bishop of Carlisle, was allegedly a native of Suffolk. William May, who died in 1560 as archbishop-elect of York, is commonly described as John's elder brother, but in the light of his bequest of divinity books 'to Mr John Meye my nephew' (Searle, 293) seems more likely to have been his uncle. John May was educated at Cambridge, matriculating in 1544 at Queens' College, where he was a scholar from 1545 until 1550, when he graduated BA. He subsequently proceeded MA in 1553, BTh in 1560, and DTh in 1564. Elected a fellow of Queens' in 1550, he was college bursar in 1554-5. He is also recorded as staging plays in the college, where in the late 1550s he was accused of being overfond of cards and dice. That he remained in Cambridge during Mary's reign does not seem to have been held against him afterwards, for in 1559 he was appointed master of St Catharine's College. He was remembered there a century later as a model of prudence and integrity, probably thanks to his efforts to improve the management of the college finances. He was vice-chancellor of the university in 1569-70, a time of great theological controversy in Cambridge. His firm stand against Thomas Cartwright earned him the wrath of the godly, but doubtless stood him in good stead with their opponents, led by John Whitgift. 
May was ordained deacon and priest in the diocese of Norwich in 1557. Shortly afterwards he became rector of Aston Sandford, Buckinghamshire, adding the rectories of Long Stanton St Michael, Cambridgeshire, in 1560, North Creake, Norfolk, in 1562, and St Dunstan-in-the-East, London, in 1565. At an unknown date he became a prebendary in Ely Cathedral. In 1565 he preached at court on 22 March and at Paul's Cross on 26 August; notes taken from the latter address suggest a lucid and effective preacher, proclaiming a straightforward scriptural divinity -- 'the gospel oure certen salvation' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 50, 33). In 1569 he became archdeacon of the East Riding in the diocese of York on the queen's presentation, and in 1570 rector of Darfield in the West Riding. There is no evidence for his being active in Yorkshire, however; rather he appears to have continued to reside in Cambridge. 
Elevation to the episcopate came in 1577. Following the death of James Pilkington of Durham on 23 January 1576, Richard Barnes of Carlisle was moved east across the Pennines, and May was promoted to replace him. His patron in this was George Talbot, sixth earl of Shrewsbury, who lobbied the earls of Leicester and Sussex on May's behalf. The queen's 'conge d'elire' was granted on 17 May 1577, he was formally elected by the Carlisle chapter on 12 June 1577, the royal assent was given on 9 August, and he was consecrated at Fulham by the bishop of London on 29 September. Enthroned by proxy in his cathedral on 2 January 1578, he resigned his Cambridge mastership. 
May was not personally rich. He was allowed five years to pay his first fruits, estimated at $478 2's'. 53/4died, but his hopes of having them remitted altogether were disappointed, and they helped to create a burden of debt and financial anxiety which dogged his entire episcopate. The diocese was poor, and, when he arrived in it, afflicted by famine, so that he faced great demands on his charity -- in May 1578 he told Walsingham of 'the extraordinary charge he has been at by the miserable and lamentable scarcity in this country' ('Salisbury MSS', 2.179). He seems to have made some effort to exploit his episcopal estates, for instance by raising entry fines. He also held his Ely prebend until 1582, his Yorkshire archdeaconry until 1588, and Darfield rectory until he died; these helped to keep him afloat financially, but always in low water. 
May involved himself in local government as convention required, as JP and member of the council of the north, and sometimes worked with the warden of the west march to keep the peace on the borders. Occasionally he received news of Scottish affairs which he passed on to Shrewsbury. He seems to have been a conscientious bishop who resided at his episcopal residence of Rose Castle almost without interruption; occasionally recorded at York or Durham, he never attended parliament. His primary visitation of his chapter was conducted with notable thoroughness, and he dealt effectively with routine matters like dilapidated buildings and disputes over stalls in parish churches. His greatest problem, the low quality of the resident ministry, arose from the poverty of his see, its distance from centres of learning, and the great size of many of the parishes, which were often subdivided into poorly endowed chapelries. In 1580 May himself granted parochial rights to the chapel of Matterdale in Greystoke parish. His successor, Henry Robinson, criticized 'the great facility of my predecessor in committing the charge of souls to such as were presented by those who care not how silly the clerk be, so themselves may enjoy the fat of the living' ('CSP dom.', '1598-1601', 362-3). The charge of carelessness seems to have been less than fair. Although graduate ministers remained a minority, and would long do so, the number of university-trained incumbents (including some from the bishop's own former college of St Catharine's) certainly increased during May's episcopate, and their distribution was not limited to the wealthier livings. 
May waged a continuous campaign against recusancy. He was examining die-hard Catholics early in 1584, while in 1590 he revived the constableship of Rose Castle and employed its holder to pursue seminaries. A year later he is recorded as examining the Douai-trained priest James Clayton, who subsequently died in prison under sentence of death. Early in 1597 it was May himself who feared death. About to set out to arrest another seminary, Christopher Robinson, he completed his will on 5 March in terms giving vivid expression to his fears -- 'purposing tomorrow... to take a journey to Johnbie with god's favour there to apprehend a notorious Jesuite or seminarie lodged there as I am crediblie advertised and fearing that thorough the malicious dealing of such traitors I maie be wounded to death or slaine by a gunne unles by god's mightie providence I shalbe defended. (Borth. Inst., reg. 31, fol. 136'v')' Robinson was captured and executed, after rejecting May's efforts to convert him to protestantism. The number of reported recusants in his diocese was always low, suggesting that the danger from Catholicism was less than May feared. 
May's episcopate was not ended suddenly by gunshot but petered out in misery amid famine and pestilence. For four consecutive years (1594-7) the harvest failed, and in 1597-8 Carlisle diocese was also visited by plague. On 21 November 1597 Bishop Tobie Matthew of Durham wrote on May's behalf to Archbishop Whitgift telling of the distress caused by extreme dearth, exacerbated in the bishop's case by Scottish raids which robbed him of all his oxen and most of his sheep and horses; under such pressure 'the good olde fathers merrie hearte is quite kilde & starke dead' unless Whitgift helped him (LPL, MS 3470, fol. 198'v'). No effective relief was forthcoming. None the less May toiled on despite failing health -- he was doing business in his bedchamber on 5 December 1597 and again on 4 February 1598. He died at Rose Castle at 8 a.m. on 15 February following, and was buried at 8 p.m. the same day in Carlisle Cathedral. 
No monument to May survives, and it seems unlikely that one was commissioned. The inventory of his goods taken at Rose Castle immediately after his death suggests that he may not have been quite as impoverished as his will implies, but its record of mostly old and shabby clothes and furnishings hardly points to riches either. Probably about 1560 he married Amy, widow of John Cowel of Lancashire and daughter of William Vowel of North Creake, Norfolk; they had a son, John, and three daughters. His daughters were left 'an ould Edward' apiece 'for a remembraunce', his wife his last new year's gift from the queen. His residuary legatee was his son, who seems to have inherited little but debts. His successor at Carlisle, Henry Robinson, found both Rose Castle and the diocese generally in a poor condition, but the extent of May's responsibility should not be exaggerated, some shortcomings notwithstanding. A stranger to his diocese, he was inclined to make up for his lack of local allies by advancing the interests of his son and sons-in-law. His epistolary style suggests a man overapt to stand on his dignity, a trait commented on (along with the bishop's small stature) by the litigant who referred to him as 'Litle divine providence' (TNA: PRO, E 134/10 JAS I/MICH 17 m6). But he was diligent and hospitable -- 'vere hospitalis' according to Matthew -- and in a letter to Burghley of 1594 denied that he was ambitious for a wealthier diocese, describing himself as 'well content to end my dayes here, where (I thanke God) I have served with credyt these xvii yeres' (BL, Lansdowne MS 76, fol. 197'v'). His record suggests that the claim was not without substance. 


@@@@@


doc= 18422


May, John (fl. c.1606-1613), writer on aulnage, whose origins are obscure, was appointed deputy aulneger about 1606. He published 'A Declaration of the Estate of Clothing now Used within this Realme of England' with an 'Apologie shewing the necessarie use of his office' (London, 1613). This treatise was written to reveal to the duke of Lennox, recently appointed aulneger-general, the 'deceits and abuses of the law' used by the manufacturers to evade statutes relating to the wool trade. The deceits occurred at every stage of manufacture, and although the law had provided for 'searchers' to look for faulty workmanship in the clothmaker's place of work, this too was abused; the searchers were frequently the clothiers themselves or else their servants. May thus presents a very grim picture where 'because of falsehood -- everyone in England striveth to wear anything but cloth and the Infidel brusheth bare his garment to count the threads' (May, 28), but he claims the principal cause 'to brede these deceits' is the scattering into the countryside of these very clothiers 'where the eye of the officer is not upon their doings' (ibid., 42). To resolve the situation he urges the duke that the industry should be restricted to towns where suitable places for inspection should be provided, for searching and sealing the cloth. Nothing is known of May's life beyond this publication. 


@@@@@


doc= 18423


May, Thomas (b. in or after 1596, d. 1650), writer and historian, was the eldest son of Sir Thomas May (died 1616) of Mayfield, Sussex, and Barbara (died 1601/02), the daughter of Edward Rich of Horndon on the Hill, Essex. His grandfather, George May, had set up business as an iron-founder in Burwash, Surrey. George's son Thomas made a socially advantageous marriage into the Rich family; three years after his son's birth he purchased the manor of Mayfield; he was knighted in 1603 and seems to have had court connections, though there is no record of a formal office. His son was admitted to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, on 7 September 1609 as fellow-commoner, and took the degree of BA in 1613. On 6 August 1615 May was admitted to Gray's Inn. Despite this pattern of advancing family prosperity, however, his father seems to have encountered financial difficulties, perhaps heightened by a new marriage which brought four young daughters, and he steadily sold off his estates. He died in July 1616, the inquisition post mortem giving the younger Thomas's age as 20 years 6 months at most. After his death the remaining properties were sold. 
Left with a small annuity, and handicapped by a stammer which equipped him badly for a legal career, May turned to literary activities. He began with the drama. The first of two comedies, 'The Heir', which may have initially received a college performance, was acted at the Red Bull and published in 1622; 'The Old Couple' was not published until 1658 but there is a record of a court performance in 1636 and it may have been written earlier. Both comedies dealt with the difficulties of young heirs in gaining their inheritance, though the theme was so conventional that the plays do not necessarily reflect his own experience. Their synthesis of Jonsonian satirical comedy with the more romantic conventions of Fletcher's comedy and tragicomedy was characteristic of the drama of the time, though May refrains from the bawdy language and risque situations which were also in fashion. 
May's chief literary interest soon showed itself as the culture and politics of ancient Rome. The first among a series of distinguished translations from Latin was a rendering of the verse in John Barclay's neo-Latin 'roman-a-clef', the 'Argenis', in Kingsmill Long's version of 1625. In the following year there appeared the first three books of his translation of Lucan's 'Pharsalia', a work which also strongly influenced his tragedy 'Cleopatra', acted in an unknown venue in the same year. The turn to a politically sensitive moment of Roman history may have been influenced by the rising political temperature in the last years of James I and the opening of his son's reign. When May published the full ten books in 1627, he dedicated individual books to figures like the earls of Warwick and Essex who were associated with patriotic independence, at a time of great anxiety about the king's apparent subservience to the unpredictable Buckingham. May's stance was politically sensitive: the dedications were excised from most copies. His tragedy of 'Julia Agrippina', acted in 1628, drew on Lucan in a stark portrayal of imperial corruption. His Latin tragedy of 'Julius Caesar', now lost, is likely to have shared these political concerns. His 'Antigone' (published in 1631) is unusual among the dramas of the period in turning directly to Greek themes and tragic models, but this play too draws on Lucan as it pits universal justice against tyrannical wilfulness. Like May's earlier comedies, the plays followed a Jonsonian precedent, in this case his rigorously scholarly Roman tragedies, but again introduced more romantic elements of love-intrigue and pathos. 
John Aubrey traced May's later republicanism to his early enthusiasm for Lucan ('Brief Lives', 2.56). He was certainly not regarded as a republican during the 'king's peace', however; on the contrary, Sir John Suckling's 'A Sessions of the Poets' implies that he became a credible candidate for succeeding Jonson as 'de facto' poet laureate. In the aftermath of the Lucan translation the anti-imperial tone of his writings became somewhat muted. His verse translations were reused in Sir Robert Le Grys's new translation of the 'Argenis' (1629), whose dedication emphasized that it had been commissioned by the king. Translations of Virgil's 'Georgics' (1628) and some of Martial's epigrams (1629) introduced a more regal vein to his translated texts, and in 1630 he published a 'Continuation' of Lucan which offered a more sympathetic view of imperial power. This he dedicated to the king, and it was at the king's command, noted on the title-pages, that he now turned to English history in verse narratives of the reigns of 'Henry II' (1633) and 'Edward III' (1635). These poems, while they do not follow an obvious Caroline propaganda purpose, are sympathetic to the dilemmas of royal power. His version of Barclay's 'Icon animorum' (1631) was dedicated in fulsome terms to Lord Chancellor Weston, and courtly connections are also shown in verses addressed to Queen Henrietta Maria. His plays were dedicated to figures with courtly and Catholic associations: 'Antigone' to the leading courtier Endymion Porter, 'Cleopatra' and 'Julia Agrippina' to Sir Kenelm Digby, for whose wife he composed an elegy. He wrote commendatory verses to a pastoral by Digby's friend Joseph Rutter, 'The Shepherd's Holiday' (1635), and was praised by the court wit Thomas Carew. When May attended a court masque in 1634 he accidentally jostled the lord chamberlain, the earl of Pembroke, who angrily broke his staff across his shoulders, but Charles himself came to his rescue, calling him 'his poet'. (The fact that he was unknown to Pembroke, however, suggests that he was not a great frequenter of the court -- where he never held any formal office.) Clarendon looked back to the May of the 1630s with some affection, praising his continuation of Lucan as 'for the learning, the wit, and the language... one of the best dramatic poems in the English language'. He found in his friend no trace of the future parliamentarian: 'since his fortune could not raise his mind, he brought his mind down to his fortune, by a great modesty and humility in his nature, which was not affected, but very well became an imperfection in his speech, which was a great mortification to him, and kept him from entering upon any discourse but in the company of his very friends. (Hyde, 924)' May kept company with the wits and scholars of Great Tew, and, persistent rumour had it, drank as convivially as any of the 'sons' of Ben Jonson. Clarendon's strong moralism might have been expected to express open disapproval if later rumours of May as a promiscuous womanizer were true; all that is known of his personal life is that he died unmarried. 
It was Sir William Davenant, not May, who succeeded Jonson as laureate in 1637. This event was said by Clarendon and other royalists to have poisoned May with resentment and led to his change of political allegiance. It is true that a poem possibly dating from this time, lamenting the effect of his stammer on his fortunes, indicates a sense of grievance at princes who favour the showy at the expense of reticent virtue; but there was no major withdrawal of royal favour, for in the same year the post of chronologer to London fell vacant and the king, Pembroke, and the earl of Dorset wrote in his support. Though he failed to obtain this post too, the failure could not be blamed on the king. His next major publication, a Latin version of his continuation of Lucan (1640), may show signs of a heightening of anti-courtly sentiment, but it was also dedicated to Charles. 
In the political crisis of 1640-42, however, May sided with parliament. Like many of the former Great Tew circle, he was divided in his loyalties. According to Aubrey, he had a long political discussion with his friend Sir Richard Fanshawe in the summer of 1642 before the two men parted to take up their respective parliamentarian and royalist allegiances. Rather than venting personal bitterness against the king, the treatise in which he justified his decision, 'A Discourse Concerning the Success of Former Parliaments', offers a dark view of the general tendency of monarchical institutions to threaten liberty whatever the character of the individual ruler. May's firm yet temperate style won him favour as a propagandist for parliament in pamphlets and newsbooks. 'A True Relation from Hull' (1643) is the only work from this period to have been signed by May, but contemporaries assumed that he was involved in many other writings, and there is evidence for his association with 'The Character of a Right Malignant' (1645), 'The King's Cabinet Opened' (1645), and 'The Lord George Digby's Cabinet and Dr. Goff's Negotiations' (1646). By 1645 he had gained enough notoriety both to be the object of satire in royalist newsbooks and to receive a defence in the moderate 'The Great Assizes Holden in Parnassus'. In January 1646 May, along with John Sadler, was appointed secretary to parliament at a salary of $200 per annum and awarded $100 for work already undertaken. The charge to vindicate parliament's honour was fulfilled with the publication in May 1647 of 'The History of the Parliament of England which Began November the Third, 1640'. May traced the origins of the civil war back to Elizabeth's reign and carried his story through to the siege of Gloucester, thus being able to end on a note of triumph. His brief as an official historian, at a time when growing divisions were emerging on parliament's side, necessitated a tone of careful impartiality despite the work's evident tendentiousness. He seems to have retained pre-war contacts with royalist poets: in 1646 he contributed commendatory verse to James Shirley's 'Poems'. As political divisions widened in the post-war settlement, May sided with the emergent independent party. Charged to continue his 'History', in 1650 he produced as first instalment a Latin 'Breviarium', quickly translated into English, which condensed the 1647 volume and took the story up to the king's execution, offering a much more critical view than the 'History' of the presbyterians and the Scots. He continued to work as a propagandist for parliament ('The Changeable Covenant', 1650, may be his work), and his death on 13 November 1650 was marked by a state funeral and a memorial in Westminster Abbey. 
It was also the occasion for the most vivid statement of the case against May's ingratitude, Andrew Marvell's satire 'Tom May's Death', which alleged that he choked to death in a drunken revelry. This poem's concluding vision of his expulsion from the abbey was prophetic: in September 1661 May's body was one of those exhumed by the triumphant royalists and reburied in St Margaret's, Westminster; six years later his former rival Sir William Davenant was buried in his place in the abbey. Marvell's poem perhaps spoke to suspicions of May that were found among some of the godly as well as among royalists: shortly after his death the puritan William Rowe linked him with a 'gang' of atheists including Thomas Chaloner and Henry Neville. Aubrey much later claimed that he would 'speak slightly of the Trinity' when in his cups, and that the obese poet had died when drunk by choking, because the string of his cap was too tight. Whatever substance this image of the unfaithful debauchee may have had, its later currency -- as considerably amplified by Anthony Wood -- can be explained by its offering a common denominator of familiar royalist and conservative parliamentarian stereotypes of the republican and the atheist. Though his translation of Lucan may have aroused suspicion, his original writings do not overtly challenge a mainstream protestantism. 
Despite, or perhaps in part because of, his controversial reputation, May's writings continued to wield influence for some time after his death. Even Wood conceded the merits of his continuation of the 'Pharsalia', which continued to be regularly reprinted in continental editions of Lucan, though his English translation was superseded by Nicholas Rowe's more vigorous if less faithful version. 'The Heir' was reworked in Susanna Centlivre's adaptation as 'The Stolen Heiress' (1703). His 'Breviary', and the Lucan translation, were reprinted at the time of the exclusion crisis. When Clarendon's 'History of the Rebellion', which originated as a response to May, first appeared, whig writers championed May's superior truth and his less ornate style, and May's 'History' held its own with such readers as William Warburton and the earl of Chatham, and down to a reissue in 1854. Thereafter, however, he fell from favour until a late twentieth-century revival of interest in classicizing historiography, in which his undoubted partisanship is recognized but more attention is paid to his qualities as a writer. His adaptation of Roman republican discourse to the circumstances of an early modern ideological civil war, his attempts to reconcile historical truth with the claims of the imagination, and his subdued sobriety of tone have earned him a new respect. 


@@@@@


doc= 18424


May, Thomas Erskine, Baron Farnborough (1815-1886), clerk of the House of Commons, was born in Kentish Town, London, on 8 February 1815, the son (according to the baptismal record) of Thomas May, attorney, and his wife, Sarah. A connection with the former lord chancellor Thomas Erskine, however, was accepted by part of Erskine's family, claimed by one of May's relatives, and hinted at by May himself, and rumours long persisted in the clerk's department. Its precise nature has not been established. May had three sisters (or half-sisters). After a private education as a pupil of Dr Brereton, headmaster of Bedford School, May was offered an Oxford exhibition, which his diary, without explanation, records his inability to accept. He was called to the bar, from the Middle Temple, in 1838. 
Instead, in 1831, May became assistant to Thomas Vardon, librarian of the House of Commons. In that post May laid the foundations of his wide procedural knowledge by re-indexing the Commons 'Journals'. He married (on 27 August 1839) Louisa Johanna, daughter of George Laughton of Fareham: there were no children. For most of his life May lived in an official residence in the Palace of Westminster or in Chester Square, Belgravia. In 1847, at the height of parliamentary activity on railway bills, he was appointed one of the first examiners of petitions for private bills in an effort to devolve to officials the troublesome proof of compliance with standing orders, previously the concern of committees of members. Speaker Shaw Lefevre described the office as 'by far the most laborious duty about the House'. The speaker pressed May's claim to the clerkship in 1850, but pressure from the prime minister (Russell) secured the appointment for Sir Denis Le Marchant. May had to wait until 1856 before becoming clerk assistant, and it was not until May 1871, having supported the ill-suited Le Marchant for fifteen years, that May became clerk. 
May received contemporary, including prime ministerial, acclaim for his published works on constitutional history, notably 'The Constitutional History of England since the Accession of George III' (2 vols., 1861-3) and 'Democracy in Europe: a History' (2 vols., 1877). But it is his contribution to the modernizing of the Victorian House of Commons which has better stood the test of time. Even before 1832 successive governments had laid increasing claim to the time of the house for their legislative and financial business. The procedural forms devised to accommodate this had to avoid damaging the ability of private members to criticize and control the executive. The most prolific source of solutions was May. His approach was one of whiggish caution. Obsolete forms were rarely without mischief, but what replaced leisurely and elaborate procedures had to respect the dignity and merit of old custom. In advice to successive speakers, in evidence to select committees (not all of which were anxious to take up the challenge), and in published articles May's fertile procedural imagination shaped the house's new practice: rules for questions to ministers were elaborated; relevance in debate was insisted on; the number of potential divisions, particularly on legislation, was drastically pruned. In order to make best use of limited time available on the floor of the house, it was essential to devise procedures for handling business which could sensibly be remitted to smaller bodies. During his career May put forward a number of solutions to this particular problem, though the preferred option, standing committees, was not originally his idea. His later years were devoted to devising schemes to enhance the powers of the chair in the face of growing unruliness, and to permit the majority to bring the house to a decision, despite the objections of the minority. Early in 1882 May twice attended the cabinet, to advise it on procedure. 
These developments were recorded in May's 'Parliamentary Practice', first published in 1844 when May was aged twenty-nine and not yet a clerk. He admitted to intending a straightforward account of parliament, though he was aware of the commercial possibilities of meeting the more detailed needs of those interested in railways bills. The work was an instant success, hailed by 'The Times' as 'a popular work... compact and compendious'. May edited a further eight editions, as the work deepened into an authoritative guide to procedure which, in succeeding generations, has helped to shape the development of Westminster practice, perpetuating its editor's name. At a very early stage in its career, 'Parliamentary Practice' was used overseas. In 1851 the speaker of the New South Wales legislative council told May that it was 'quite impossible... to overrate the advantages which have resulted from the employment of your work in the colonial legislatures'. The text was translated for the perhaps more problematical benefit of two German diets and the Hungarian parliament. There were also French, Spanish, Italian, and Japanese versions. 
With the increasing complexity of Commons procedures went the need for professional development in May's department. For all his personal ability May was ambivalent about such a change. The principle that men were promoted to the table of the house, in effect as May's successors, on merit and experience alone was enunciated by Speaker Denison and not by May. Entrance to the department depended on the clerk's nomination, and May used his powers in the interests of the sons of men already in the service of the house, of predominantly Liberal politicians, and of court officials. He resisted even limited competition for nominations. As a result, while socially, and to some extent educationally, the background of clerks changed, May's attitude delayed the development of the service of the house. Even the clerkship itself, on May's retirement, was first offered to men without departmental experience. None of these limited perspectives, however, impairs May's position as the man whose tireless professionalism at a time of political and procedural change shaped the modern clerk's department. 
May's diaries bear witness to the relatively humourless ambition and hard work of their author. The impression is relieved only by a story told by Speaker Gully that as a good-looking flirtatious young man May compromised himself with a married lady and had to fight a duel with her husband at Boulogne. His preferment owed much to energy and ability, but these were assisted by the ease with which May moved in Liberal political society. Usually when promotion offered, the Liberals were conveniently in power. When in 1875 and 1885 May considered the possibility of becoming clerk of the parliaments in the Lords, they were not in power, and his ambition went unrealized. At the same time, neither May nor his department was drawn into any spoils system. In 1883 the retiring speaker, Brand, wrote to May of his legacy to the man who was to succeed him in the chair: 'the sum and substance of my advice to Peel will be to trust you and the house'. 
May was created CB in 1860 and KCB in 1866 (after some discreet agitation), and became a privy councillor in August 1885. The last was an unusual, though not unique, honour for a serving official. He retired in April 1886 and on 11 May 1886 was created Baron Farnborough. He died at Speaker's Court in the Palace of Westminster on 17 May 1886 and was buried at Chippenham, Cambridgeshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 18425


May, William (c.1505-1560), college head and archbishop-elect of York, is said to have been a native of Suffolk. Nothing is known of his parentage, and his date of birth is unrecorded, but the course of his early career suggests a date about 1505. The John May who was bishop of Carlisle between 1577 and 1598 is often stated to have been his younger brother, but seems more likely to have been the nephew of that name mentioned in his will. William May entered Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in the early 1520s, advancing to the degree of BCL in 1526. In 1531 he was awarded his DCL and elected a fellow of Trinity Hall. In the following year he began his career as an ecclesiastical lawyer, becoming chancellor to Bishop Nicholas West of Ely. Following West's death that year he served as Archbishop Cranmer's vicar-general during the vacancy of the see, though securing his position was not easy, since the privy council had to intervene to wrest the register from the hands of the previous chancellor. Following the election of Thomas Goodrich as bishop in the spring of 1534 May became chancellor once more, and entered upon a career as a professional ecclesiastical bureaucrat. In 1534 he was Cranmer's commissary for the visitation of the diocese of Norwich, and in 1536 he was one of the king's commissioners for the visitation of Ely. 
In 1535 May began to reap the rewards of his services. On 27 March 1535 he was instituted rector of Bishop's Hatfield, Hertfordshire, on condition that he take holy orders within fifteen months of his institution. On 2 April he was dispensed to take two holy orders in one day, which he presumably did, and on 20 May 1538 was dispensed to hold a benefice with the rectory at Hatfield, or two without it, to the value of $9, so that he could hold the sinecure rectory of Littlebury, near Saffron Walden, to which he had already been admitted. Meanwhile his skills as an administrator had not been lost on his Cambridge community, and in 1537 he was elected president of Queens' College, beginning a long career as an academic leader. 
There is no information about May's early religious opinions, but it is clear that Cranmer and Thomas Cromwell found him useful for reforming purposes. In 1537 he was one of the twenty-five hand-picked men called to meet with the bishops of the realm to prepare the 'Institution of a Christian Man', or 'Bishops' Book'. His own contribution to this corporate effort is unidentifiable, but his evangelical sympathies and his effectiveness on a committee continued to advance him. In 1539 he served in the lower house of convocation, where he voted for clerical marriage and for the repudiation of transubstantiation, auricular confession, private masses, and communion in only one kind. 
Although there is no evidence that May served as a commissioner for the dissolution of the monasteries, he benefited from it. When the Benedictine priory of St Peter and St Etheldreda was reconstituted as the secular chapter of Ely Cathedral on 10 September 1541 May was appointed to the third prebendal stall, joining Richard Cox and Matthew Parker. He had become rector of Balsham, a few miles east of Cambridge, in the previous year. 
The early 1540s was a quiet time for the president of Queens', but in 1545 May was nominated by Henry VIII to be dean of St Paul's, London. Although the cathedral chapter was sent the order for his election on 29 October 1545, he was not formally elected until 15 February following. There seems to have been some legal quibbling by the chapter about May's appointment, but an order from the privy council forced the election. Meanwhile May, who also held the prebend of Chamberlainwood in St Paul's from 1 November 1545, became very busy in government service. 
On 16 January 1546, along with Matthew Parker and another head of a college, May was appointed to a commission to report on the possessions of the Cambridge colleges. A statute of 1544 had given Henry VIII the power to dissolve chantries attached to colleges. Not only was he contemplating doing so, but land-hungry courtiers were hoping that he would also dissolve the colleges themselves. Parker and May delivered the resulting survey to the king, having carefully crafted it so as to prove that every college was underfunded. It so impressed the king that he was persuaded to let the colleges keep their property. 
In August 1546 May was sent on a diplomatic mission to France as the junior to Sir William Petre. They were to claim the arrears on 512,000 crowns in pensions owed by France to England under an agreement of 1529. The French arrived after the treaty had expired and the negotiations failed, but Petre's report includes a description of May: 'who... is of honest sort, wise, discreet, and well learned... Meet to serve his majesty in many ways' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 11.293, n. 1). The mission of 1546 did indeed begin a period of intense government service for May, in which his legal expertise was to the fore. In 1547 he served as a commissioner examining debtors imprisoned in Ludgate who wished to compound with their creditors, and he was appointed to two commissions to hear divorce appeals. In one, William Parr, first marquess of Northampton, wanted to remarry after his divorce, even though his former wife was still living. In the other Dr Robert Huick was appealing against a decision that held that he could not divorce his wife. 
The accession of Edward VI brought May many new responsibilities. He was clearly thought trustworthy to carry out the protestant agenda of the new establishment, and by late 1547 he was heavily involved in reforming St Paul's, overseeing the destruction of the high altar and the abolition of obits and chantries. In November he was appointed a royal visitor to the dioceses of Salisbury, Exeter, Bristol, Bath and Wells, and Gloucester, where he and his fellow commissioners forbade the use of black copes and scapulars because they were monkish. They also tried to end ringing for the dead, and instructed that prime and the hours need not be said in Wells Cathedral in order to make time for a divinity lecture immediately after high mass. Present at the convocation at the end of 1547, May subscribed the ordinance for taking communion in both kinds and voted in favour of clerical marriage. Late in 1552 or 1553 he himself married Joan Heynes, 'nee' Walron, the widow of Dr Simon Heynes, the previous president of Queens' and also May's close colleague. 
In November 1548, still president of Queens', May was placed on the commission to visit Cambridge University and Eton College, enforcing the dissolution of obits and chantries. As he went up to the university in March 1549 he assured Matthew Parker, now vice-chancellor, that the visitation would be orderly and moderate. It is not clear whether he favoured the proposed union of Trinity Hall and Clare College to create a college of civil law, but he was willing to vote for expelling the master and fellows of Clare for their resistance to the plan. 
Over the next few years May was fully engaged in enforcing Edwardian reforms. A commissioner to search for heretics, Anabaptists, and libertines every year from 1549 to 1552, he sat on the panel that found the martyr Joan Bocher guilty of Arianism. When Bishop Bonner of London was accused of contempt of the king's order for reformation, May was appointed to the commission to try him. And after Bonner was deprived, May, as dean of St Paul's, officiated at the installation of Nicholas Ridley as the new bishop of London. 
By the 1550s May had become a noted ecclesiastical lawyer, performing major tasks for the crown. Most notably he was named to the committee of thirty-two for drafting (abortively) a new canon law for the church in England. He was one of the subcommittee that drafted the 'Reformatio legum ecclesiasticarum' in 1551 and 1552. He was also involved in creating the 1552 'Book of Common Prayer', though in what capacity is not clear. He served on other government commissions, too, while being actively involved in St Paul's and Queens'. 
All of this ended with the accession of Queen Mary in 1553. Deprived on the grounds of his marriage of the presidency of Queens', the deanship of St Paul's, and his prebend at Ely, May none the less conformed enough to keep his rooms at Queens' from 1554 until 1558. In 1557 moreover he became rector of Pulham Norfolk, and of Stanton St Michael, Cambridgeshire. 
The accession of Elizabeth brought May back into the public arena. He was named in the 'Device for alteration of religion', prepared late in 1558, as one to be consulted about revising the 'Book of Common Prayer' in preparation for the restoration of protestantism, though the committee probably never met, and in June 1559 he resumed the presidency of Queens' College, and was readmitted as dean of St Paul's, now with the prebend of Wenlocksbarn. Later that year he was appointed a commissioner to impose the Elizabethan settlement on Cambridge, and also proctor for archbishop-elect Matthew Parker. 
On 25 July 1560 May was nominated to become archbishop of York, but on 7 August, feeble and sick, he made his will. He died in London on 8 August, the same day that he was elected archbishop. Buried in St Paul's on 12 August, May left a considerable estate to his wife, Joan, to his children, William and Elizabeth, and to his stepchildren. In his will he mentions lands and bequests worth more than $732, as well as plate, horses, and uncollected debts of unspecified value. The executors of his estate were Richard Coxe, bishop of Ely, and Richard Goodrich. He named Edmund Grindal, bishop of London, John Mullens, archdeacon of London, and Thomas Yale, supervisors of his will. 


