@@@@@


doc= 18426


Mayart, Sir Samuel (b. 1587, d. in or after 1646), judge, was the son of Gilbert Mayart of Ipswich (died in or before 1607) and was of Flemish extraction. He matriculated from Merton College, Oxford, on 18 May 1604 and entered the Middle Temple on 16 February 1607, being called to the bar on 8 July 1614. He was admitted to King's Inns, Dublin, in 1616. In 1624 he was reported to have offered $300 to secure the place of second justice of the common pleas in Ireland. Chief Baron Sir Richard Bolton, and his son Sir Edward, solicitor-general, 'strongly' recommended the appointment of this 'man of learning and honesty', despite the fact that 'aspersions are being cast upon him' ('CSP Ire.', '1625-33', 18). Mayart received a patent for the office on 19 January 1626. He was knighted on 5 November 1631 and lived at Oxmantown, Dublin. He was named treasurer of King's Inns in 1633. 
In April 1644 the Irish parliament took notice of an anonymous treatise 'A declaration how and by what means the laws and statutes of England... came to be of force in Ireland', sometimes attributed to Sir Richard Bolton. Mayart was involved in the discussion of the document and appears to have drawn up a manuscript response, approximately five times the length of the original text. Drawing heavily upon legal records stretching back over several centuries he sought to reject the notion that English made law was only valid in Ireland upon re-enactment by the Irish parliament. He was confident that 'in divers respects 'Ireland' is a separate and distinct kingdom,... yet the Dominion and Government thereof is not separate from 'England'' (Harris, 2.127) but rather that Ireland was under the jurisdiction of the English parliament. Though his case was based firmly upon precedent he admitted that he believed the recent rising had shown the 'inconveniency, mischief and prejudice' (Harris, 1.73) that would result if curbs were not placed upon Irish autonomy. It is unclear what response the document generated, though its arguments were addressed by Sir William Domville in 1660. The manuscript was published in 'Hibernica', a collection of sources on Irish history edited by Walter Harris under the title 'Serjeant Mayart's Answer to a Book Intitled, A Declaration'. The manuscript was presented to Trinity College, Dublin. 
Despite the fact that Mayart's stance on the powers of the Irish parliament was out of step with the Dublin royalist political establishment he was among the legal figures consulted by Ormond during the lord lieutenant's negotiations with the confederate Catholics in 1645. He continued to fulfil his functions in the Irish parliament, being recorded there as late as February 1646. Little is known of his family -- he is sometimes reported as having married thrice, although the name of his first wife is unknown; his second wife, Mary Smith (died in or before 1631?), was twice a widow already. In 1631, and again in 1638, his wife's name is given as Dorcas (died 1644?), on the latter occasion the name also given to their daughter, baptized on 9 January 1638. He had at least one other daughter, Letice (died 1641), and a son, Roger (died 1668). He is last heard of in 1646 and his date of death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 18427


Mayer, John (bap. 1583, d. 1664), biblical commentator, was baptized on 16 June 1583 at Long Melford, Suffolk, the son of John and Elizabeth Mayer. He had two brothers and five sisters, all younger than himself. He matriculated from St John's College, Cambridge, about 1597, but migrated to Emmanuel College, where he matriculated on 2 March 1598. He graduated BA in 1602, and proceeded MA in 1605, BD in 1612, and DD in 1627. He was rector of Little Wratting in Suffolk from 1609 until 1631, when he became rector of Raydon, near Hadleigh. About 1613 he married Anne, with whom he was to enjoy a partnership lasting fifty years. They had one surviving son, John. 
Mayer produced over the course of a number of years an entire commentary on the 'Bible', drawing extensively on the work of other commentators and adding notes of his own. The publication of the work was delayed by what Mayer described as 'the Hierarchicall Government that then was' (J. Mayer, 'Dedicatorie', 'A Commentary upon the Whole Old Testament', 1653). It was published in seven volumes: 1, on the 'Pentateuch', 1653; 2, on the historical books, 1647; 3, on 'Job', the 'Psalms', 'Proverbs', 'Ecclesiastes', and the 'Song of Solomon', 1653 and again in 1659; 4, on the prophets, 1652; 5, on the gospels and 'Acts', 1631; 6, on the epistles of St Paul, 1631; 7, on the so-called catholic epistles and 'Revelation', in 1627 and 1631. Mayer believed in the saying 'Bonus textuarius, bonus theologus' and produced the commentaries so that 'Students in Divinity may sooner become good Textmen, to give light into any place of Scripture' (ibid.). 
Mayer's works are scholarly in tone and content, but aimed at an intelligent rather than necessarily educated audience. He wrote for those who 'not being professed Divines, yet, are studious of the Scriptures' (J. Mayer, 'To the reader', 'A Commentarie upon the Foure Evangelists and the Acts of the Apostles', 1631). Mayer flouted the convention of publishing works of this nature in Latin to restrict their audience to those with the education considered a prerequisite to comprehend such matters. He declared it desirable that the people become as well versed in the fathers and learned doctors of the church as the clergy. 
Mayer was a determined opponent of both popery and forms of protestant extremism. His most popular publication was 'An Antidote Against Popery', which appeared in 1625 and was republished in 1627 and 1630. In 1647 he published 'Christian Liberty Vindicated from Grave Mistakes, Occasioning so Great Divisions in England'. He denounced licentious behaviour conducted under the cloak of religion, declaring that Christian liberty was 'not a liberty to any evill or sinne, because this is no liberty, but servitude to corruption' (J. Mayer, 'Christian Liberty', 1647, 4). He also rejected the suggestion that the believer's best guide to the truth was his own conscience, affirming that a lawful assembly was the surest means of resolving contentious issues. 
At the Restoration, Mayer published a work dedicated to Charles II: 'Unity Restored to the Church of England'. There he was bold enough to suggest to the new king the manner in which he should settle religious division in the country. He also took the opportunity to advertise another work, 'The history of the world from the creation to the year 1648', never published. His memorial stone in Raydon records that he also left in manuscript 'The topography of the three parts of the world, and the countries and most famous cities therein'. 
Mayer died at Raydon on 5 March 1664 and was buried there three days later. He left most of his estate to his wife and son, but also made provision for the extended members of his family and for the poorest families of Raydon. He left detailed instructions for a black marble memorial stone, with an inscription celebrating his ministry and his writings. 


@@@@@


doc= 18428


Mayer, Joseph (1803-1886), collector of antiquities and works of art, was born on 23 February 1803 at Thistlebury House, Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire, fourth son and the sixth of eleven children of Samuel Mayer (1767-1838), tanner, currier, and mayor of Newcastle under Lyme, and his wife, Margaret (1773-1859), daughter of John Pepper, architect. 
Having attended Newcastle under Lyme grammar school, Mayer moved to Liverpool in October 1821 at the age of eighteen. He commenced an informal apprenticeship as a silversmith under his brother-in-law, James Wordley ('fl'. 1817-1861), entering into partnership with him in 1834, and setting up on his own as a jeweller and goldsmith in 1844. He demonstrated a remarkable flair for business and the financial success he achieved enabled him to indulge a passion for archaeology and collecting which he had had since childhood. This had first manifested itself when he was eight when he acquired a small hoard of Roman coins and pottery sherds whose unearthing he had witnessed -- a minuscule foreshadowing of the scale and comprehensiveness of the collections he later amassed, displayed to the public, and finally bestowed on the city of Liverpool. 
Born into a radical and nonconformist family, Mayer was a natural patriot, and realized the value of cultivating learning and the arts among all classes in Britain. From his twenty-fifth year he contributed readily to loan exhibitions and made gifts to mechanics' institutes. He was an exhibitor at the Great Exhibition of 1851 and at the 1857 Manchester Art Treasures Exhibition. He was sustained in his endeavours by the support of a wide circle of friends, distinguished by their contributions to archaeology, to historical studies, and as influential moulders of opinion in the decorative arts. The development of his collection was greatly furthered by a close collaboration, in particular, with Charles Roach Smith and Augustus Wollaton Franks. Mayer's acquisition, in 1854, of the collection of Kentish antiquities excavated by the Revd Bryan Fausset was an outstanding event in the history of British archaeology, and his purchase in 1855 of the Byzantine and medieval ivories of Baron Gabor Fejervary was an equally invaluable contribution to art collecting in Britain. 
Mayer regarded his collections as a public resource which he willingly made available to those able to employ them to positive ends, and also funded several scholarly publications and sponsored archaeological excavations. His own contributions to literature were more modest, constituting a series of articles in the 'Transactions' of the Historic Society of Lancashire and Cheshire, of which he was one of the three founding members, on 20 March 1848. In 1855 he contributed a paper, 'History of the art of pottery in Liverpool' (revised edn, 1873), which remains fundamental to the study of the subject. Mayer was one of the earliest systematic collectors of ceramics, with important holdings of Liverpool porcelain and pottery, and a notable collection of Wedgwood wares. His most striking achievement in this connection was his discovery and acquisition of the vast hoard of documents of Josiah Wedgwood, the foundation deposit of the Wedgwood archive collection now at the University of Keele. Mayer generously put these papers at the disposal of Eliza Meteyard and advised, and assisted financially, in the completion of her 'Life of Josiah Wedgwood' (1865). Mayer's collection was first made accessible to the general public in May 1852, when he opened an Egyptian Museum (later the Museum of National and Foreign Antiquities) in Colquitt Street, Liverpool. In 1867 he presented the collection, then valued at $75,000, to the Liverpool Free Library and Museum. In recognition of the munificence of his gift and other services to the town, the corporation of Liverpool commissioned the life-size statue of Mayer by Giovanni Fontana in St George's Hall, Liverpool. As with other surviving portraits, it reveals him to have been throughout his life a person of distinguished appearance, with an authoritative but sympathetic bearing. The Mayer collection continues as a significant constituent of the collections of the National Museums and Galleries on Merseyside. 
The honour which Mayer most valued, however, was the fellowship of the Society of Antiquaries of London, awarded in 1850. In 1860 he was appointed captain of the Liverpool volunteer borough guard, and in 1864 captain of the 4th Bebington company of the 1st Cheshire rifle volunteers, a unit he had raised at his own expense. He had moved in 1860 to Pennant House, Bebington, Cheshire, where he continued his benefactions, endowing the borough with a well-stocked lending library, public gardens, and a lecture hall and picture gallery. Retiring from business in 1873, he applied himself, inconclusively, to writing a history of art in England, amassing more than 20,000 drawings, prints, and autograph letters, as well as continuing to collect works of art and antiquities. This collection, with an estimated value of $10,000, was dispersed by auction in Liverpool on 15-16 December 1887. He also collaborated with his nephew Frederick Boyle in the publication of two works which remain of permanent value in the study of the life and work of George Stubbs (1724-1806): 'Early Exhibitions of Art in Liverpool with some Notes for a Memoir of George Stubbs RA' (1876), and 'Memoirs of Thomas Dodd, William Upcott, and George Stubbs RA' (1879). In his retirement he pursued an interest in gardening, having in 1870 successfully cultivated in the open air the giant Victoria Regia water lily. He died unmarried at Pennant House on 19 January 1886, aged eighty-two, and was interred on 23 January 1886, at St Andrew's Church, Bebington. 
Mayer's benevolence and commitment to public enlightenment ensure his position as an important civic figure of the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 18429


Mayer, Samuel Ralph Townshend (1841-1880), founder of the Free and Open Church Association and writer, second son of Samuel Mayer, solicitor, of Gloucester, was born at Gloucester in August 1841. As he grew up he is said to have borne a remarkable resemblance to the poet Keats, not least in his poor health. He was for several years a frequent contributor to the Gloucester newspapers, and to many serial publications. In 1859 he published a novelette, 'Amy Fairfax'. Moving to London, he founded and, from 1866 until February 1872, was secretary of the Free and Open Church Association, advocating the abolition of pew-rents. He edited the 'Churchman's Shilling Magazine', the 'Illustrated Review' from January to June 1871, the 'Free and Open Church Advocate' (3 vols., 1872-7), and was proprietor and editor of the 'St. James's Magazine' for a short period in 1875. In 1868 he was the editor of the first report of the Metropolitan Conservative Working Men's Association, and in 1870 he established the Junior Conservative Club, in conjunction with J. B. Payne. In 'The Origin and Growth of Sunday Schools in England' (1878), and 'Who Was the Founder of Sunday Schools? Being an Inquiry' (1880), he attempted to prove that whatever credit belonged to Robert Raikes as the founder of those institutions should be shared with the Revd Thomas Stock. With J. C. Paget he published 'Afghanistan' in 1878, examining its history, geography, and ethnography. 
Mayer died at his home in Crown Terrace, Mortlake Road, Richmond, Surrey, on 28 May 1880 and was buried in Gloucester cemetery. His wife, Gertrude Mary (1839-1932), daughter of John Watson Dalby, whom he married in 1868, was a friend of Leigh Hunt and B. W. Procter (Barry Cornwall). She wrote a number of novels, including 'Sir Hubert's Marriage' (3 vols., 1876), and in 1894 she published 'Women of Letters' (2 vols.), essays which had previously appeared in 'Temple Bar'. She and Mayer had been contributors to the journal, of which she subsequently became the editor. 


@@@@@


doc= 18430


Mayerne, Sir Theodore Turquet de (1573-1655), physician, the eldest son of Louis Turquet and his wife, Louise, daughter of Antoine le Macon, treasurer-at-war to Francois I and Henri II of France, was born at Geneva on 28 September 1573. He was christened Theodore after his godfather, Theodore Beza. The family had long been settled at Chieri in Piedmont; his grandfather, Etienne Turquet, had emigrated to Lyons and founded a silk industry there. In 1572, when the St Bartholomew's day massacre spread to Lyons, Louis Turquet, who had become a protestant, fled with his wife to Geneva. Louis Turquet was an active supporter of Henri of Navarre, afterwards Henri IV of France. He assumed the name of de Mayerne-Turquet, allegedly from a former property in Piedmont. Under that name he published translations of Latin and Spanish works, and political pamphlets, one of which, 'De la monarchie aristo-democratique' (1611), was banned as seditious by the regency of Marie de Medici. 
After school in Geneva, Theodore Turquet studied philosophy at the University of Heidelberg and then medicine at the University of Montpellier, where he graduated MB in 1596. While a student at Heidelberg he compiled a handbook for travellers in Europe which his proud father published in Geneva as 'Sommaire description de la France, Allemagne, Italie et Espagne' (1591). In his doctoral thesis at Montpellier (1597), he defended chemical remedies. This reflected, above all, the influence of his father's friend, a fellow Huguenot, who had also emigrated from Lyons to Geneva: Joseph du Chesne, alias Quercetanus, the most famous Paracelsian and Hermetic physician of the time. From Montpellier Turquet moved to Paris and joined du Chesne, who was now established there as 'medecin ordinaire' to Henri IV, working under the king's 'premier medecin', Jean Ribit, sieur de la Riviere, another Huguenot from Geneva. Through them he entered the royal service as 'medecin ordinaire par quartier' -- that is, on duty for three months in the year. In 1599 the king assigned him as physician to his kinsman Henri, duc de Rohan, who, with other young Huguenot nobles, was making a grand tour of Europe. Turquet accompanied Rohan through Germany and Italy as far as Naples. Rohan remained, for the rest of his life, Turquet's friend and hero, his model of austere, aristocratic, Huguenot virtue. 
Back in Paris, Turquet rejoined la Riviere and du Chesne, becoming an enthusiastic alchemist in du Chesne's esoteric Hermetic circle. The medical successes of this trio -- three Paracelsian Huguenots from heretical Geneva, none of them a doctor of the University of Paris -- alarmed the orthodox Galenists of the faculty of medicine, which in 1603 formally and intemperately condemned du Chesne and Turquet as charlatans, and forbade them to practise in the city. The ban was completely ineffective, but led to a long and bitter controversy, to which Turquet contributed a restrained 'Apologia' (1603). 
Meanwhile Turquet achieved a spectacular success. In 1605 Lord Norreys of Rycote, a young kinsman of Robert Cecil, earl of Salisbury, returning from a special embassy to Spain, had been struck down in Paris by an epidemic then raging. Several other physicians having failed, the king sent Turquet to treat him and he recovered. Next spring, with the king's permission, Norreys took Turquet to England to treat Queen Anne, wife of James I. There, on a visit to Oxford, he found himself welcomed as 'the queen's physician' and suddenly made a doctor of the university. He also made other useful contacts which, on his return to Paris, he improved. 
In 1611 Turquet decided to use them. By then the Paris partnership had broken up. La Riviere had died in 1605, du Chesne in 1609. Henri IV had wished in 1609 to make Turquet his 'premier medecin', but under clerical pressure had insisted that he become a Roman Catholic, which he refused to do. The king was assassinated the following year, the Catholic 'devots' took over, and Turquet decided to act. Having negotiated excellent terms, he accepted the post of chief physician to James I. At the same time he contrived to keep his formal appointment and pension at the French court, relying on periodic visits and a deputy. Having been recognized as 'noble' in 1609, he now dropped altogether the plebeian name Turquet, and would sign himself only as Theodore de Mayerne. 
Despite initial jealousies -- the death of Prince Henry in 1612 was particularly exploited against him, but the king supported him throughout -- Mayerne soon became the most successful (and the most expensive) physician in London. In 1616 he was elected fellow of the College of Physicians and supported the now resumed project of a London pharmacopoeia which some members of the college, and particularly the Paracelsian Thomas Moffett, had advocated under Elizabeth. He acquired Moffett's papers, including his unpublished compilation on insects ('Insectorum theatrum'), which he would publish, and dedicate to the college, in 1634. This project was now completed: the 'London Pharmacopoeia' was published in 1618, with an introduction by Mayerne, and a special section on chemical and metallic remedies. Mayerne also supported the London apothecaries in the campaign which led to their separation from the grocers and their incorporation under charter in 1620. Although he seldom attended the regular meetings of the college and was to decline the position of elect in 1627, he had by now won the respect and friendship of the fellows. King James knighted him in 1624. 
Mayerne served James I as a confidential agent in various literary, diplomatic, and political affairs. Through his marriages and his cosmopolitan family he had contacts in the Netherlands, the Palatinate, Switzerland, and Savoy. Almost all British and several foreign ambassadors were his patients; so were the Huguenot leaders Bouillon, Rohan, and Soubise. Recognizing his influence, the city of Geneva and the canton of Bern, the head of the Swiss confederation, appointed him their agent at the English court. In 1620 he bought the barony, castle, and estate of Aubonne in the Pays de Vaud -- subject to Bern and conveniently close to Geneva. He spoke of retiring there to write a great work on medicine and hoped to plant a noble dynasty in Switzerland. Meanwhile it was useful as a listening post in the early years of the Thirty Years' War. 
The French court was very suspicious of these activities, and especially of Mayerne's connections with the malcontent Huguenot grandees. It therefore watched him closely. In 1618 -- a delicate time in both internal and international affairs -- he arrived in Paris, only to be summarily, and without explanation, ordered out of the country. This caused great umbrage, loud expostulations, and a breach in diplomatic relations. During the Anglo-French war of 1627-9 the French court seized the opportunity to cancel his office and his pension; which caused further umbrage and expostulation. 
Mayerne was abroad, visiting Aubonne, when James I died in March 1625. Before leaving England he had written, for the other royal doctors, a valuable psychosomatic portrait of the king. On his return he found a changed court. His appointment and privileges were continued, but the new king clearly preferred William Harvey, and Mayerne became, in effect, the queen's doctor only. Fortunately she became devoted to him and resisted Richelieu's attempt to have him replaced by another French physician, to be nominated by himself, who would certainly have been a spy. There were other ominous changes too. The following year, when Mayerne sought permission to revisit Aubonne, it was refused: his services at court, he was told, were too valuable. Year after year he tried again, with the same reply. Finally he was told never to raise the matter again: the ban on all foreign travel was permanent; and he was ultimately compensated (together with the queen's other doctor, Sir Thomas Cadyman) with a patent for distilling (1636). Meanwhile, his frustrated energies were redirected into potentially lucrative chemical and mineral experiments, and a new interest (appropriate to the aestheticism of the new court) in the technology of the arts. He patronized the medallist Nicolas Briot, cross-examined Rubens while sitting for his portrait, supplied colours for the enamels of Jean Petitot, and encouraged Edward Norgate to write his treatise on miniatures. His house in St Martin's Lane, London, became the resort of immigrant artisans, whom he found more congenial than English courtiers. 
Why did Charles I so firmly forbid Mayerne to travel? After all, he would allow Harvey to accompany the earl of Arundel to Austria, Bohemia, and Italy. But Mayerne was a political doctor, perhaps a political busybody, deeply involved in the protestant interest in Europe and the Huguenot cause in France, both of which Charles I would decisively abandon. Mayerne did not abandon them. During the 1630s he intervened in favour of Palatine or Vaudois refugees, the protesting ministers of Geneva, and the Dutch and French churches in England, now harassed by Archbishop Laud. Laud was not his patient, and their relations, understandably, were cool. 
So, behind the mask of courtly deference, the fashionable court physician moved mentally away from the court. The ban on travel was a standing grievance. Aubonne, Mayerne complained, had become 'a hole' in his enforced absence, and his prodigal son, who lorded it there as 'Henry d'Aubonne', the young baron, was wasting his father's hard-earned substance with riotous living and harlots. An overbearing father, Mayerne worked off his resentments in furious letters to his son, who had reacted against the Huguenot austerity of his father and of his godfather, the duc de Rohan, and would soon die of his dissipations. In private letters to foreign friends Mayerne complained that the life at court to which he was now committed was one of servitude: how different from his happy association with the easy-going King James, 'mon bon maistre', whom he always remembered with affection. 
In the summer of 1642 the mask fell. The king, having left London to prepare for civil war, then summoned the royal doctors to join him at York. Harvey obeyed; Mayerne did not. Pleading age and corpulency, he stayed in London to concentrate on his private practice and his chemical experiments in his new house in Chelsea. Royalists regarded him as a deserter. In fact, he maintained his Huguenot independence and self-sufficiency. He received no salary from the king after 1642, but in March 1644 the parliament entrusted him with the health of those of the king's children who had been left in London; and in May 1644 -- age and corpulency notwithstanding -- he obeyed an urgent appeal from the king in Oxford to travel to Exeter and attend the queen, then ill and expecting her youngest child, Henrietta, afterwards duchess of Orleans. 
Throughout the civil wars Mayerne hoped for a 'Presbyterian' compromise, and it was even suggested that, through his influence in Switzerland, he could mediate it. But in 1643, and again in 1645, when the parliament proposed to tax him, he ostentatiously prepared to emigrate, with his whole family, to the Netherlands. The threat sufficed: the parliament agreed that 'a man whose extraordinary abilities would make him welcome in any part of Christendom' deserved special treatment; and he stayed in London until his death. 
Mayerne was twice married: first, in 1606, to Margaretha Elburg van den Boetzelaer, of a noble Dutch family, who died on 17 November 1628; secondly, on 14 August 1630, to Isabella, daughter of Albert Joachimi, Dutch ambassador to England from 1625 to 1651. She survived him by seven months only, dying early in November 1655. Of the four sons and five daughters of these two marriages, all but the two youngest daughters died young and unmarried. Of these two, the elder, Elizabeth, married in 1652 Pierre de Caumont, marquis de Cugnac, son of the Huguenot duc de la Force, but died childless on 10 July 1653; the younger, Adriana, who alone survived her father, married Cugnac's brother Armand de Caumont, marquis de Montpouillan, in 1659, but died childless at The Hague in 1661. 
Mayerne died at Chelsea on 22 March 1655, aged eighty-two, in full possession of his faculties and fortune. He was buried with his wife, mother, and five of his children, at the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, where a monument was erected on the north wall of the chancel, with a Latin inscription written by his godson and former amanuensis Sir Theodore de Vaux. Thomas Hodges' funeral sermon for Mayerne, 'Inacessible Glory', was published in 1655. 
Mayerne's reputation as a physician, in his own time, was immense throughout Europe, but he was not, like his colleague Harvey, an original thinker. He and Harvey had indeed little in common, Harvey being as dismissive of chemistry as Mayerne was of the doctors of Padua. He was essentially an eclectic, who sought to incorporate Paracelsian and Hermetic ideas in a basically Galenic system. He was far more tolerant of the Galenist doctors of Paris than they of him, and sent his second son, James, to Paris to learn 'the solid foundations of medicine' from the men who had previously vituperated him. His proclaimed masters were, among the ancients, Hippocrates and Hermes Trismegistus; among the moderns, Fernel and du Chesne. His great contribution lay in his therapeutic practice, his careful and continuous observation of his patients, and his flexible response to their condition. This is recorded in his 'Ephemerides', a regular record, which shows him as an open-minded, rational, objective practitioner, not tied to any theoretical system. 
On one occasion during the personal reign of Charles I Mayerne came forward as a constructive medical reformer. In 1631, alarmed by the great plague of 1630, the privy council solicited advice from both the College of Physicians and the royal doctors. The recommendations of the latter (written in French) were clearly the work of Mayerne. He proposed the establishment of a centralized 'office of health' with wide coercive powers to prevent and control outbreaks of plague, a corps of trained officials, and special hospitals modelled on those which he had known in France and Italy. The government at first took this bold and costly project seriously but afterwards allowed it to lapse. 
Mayerne was a colourful personality, larger than life in all respects. Though he lived for forty-four years in England, he never became English. He refused to own land in England or, unless pressed, to speak or write English. His letters, written in a majestic, sometimes flamboyant hand, are lively and robust; though sometimes grandiose and self-important, they are never dull and often humane. Though notoriously fond of money, he kept a liberal and hospitable table, at which he indulged himself freely: in his last years he was immobile through obesity, which he did nothing to correct. To Lord Conway, who sent him a recipe 'to make fat men lean', he replied that the recipe was good, but that he would never use it, 'having been long aware that an evil soul never -- or rarely -- dwells in a fat body'. He compiled a cookery book, collected foreign recipes, kept deer, and grew medicinal herbs at Horne Park, near Eltham in Kent, of which he was ranger. He invented a cordial, the secret of which remained the valuable property of his sister's family in Geneva and which would be offered to Napoleon when he entered Geneva as conqueror. 
After his death, and protracted litigation, Mayerne's books and papers passed to his niece, Aimee de Frotte, and her husband, his long-serving Genevan assistant, Jean (afterwards Sir John) Colladon; and then to their son, Mayerne's godson, Sir Theodore Colladon, physician of Chelsea Hospital. Since the Colladons had published nothing Sir Theodore de Vaux, using his own copies and supported by the Royal College of Physicians, published his 'Praxis Mayerniana' in two volumes (1690-96). This roused Sir Theodore Colladon to supply the originals to Joseph Browne, a bookseller's hack, who then published 'Mayernii opera medica' (1700), a hasty and inaccurate compilation prefaced by attacks on Vaux and the Royal College. 


@@@@@


doc= 18431


Mayers, William S. Frederick (1831-1878), Sinologist, was born on 7 January 1831 in Van Diemen's Land, the son of the Revd Michael John Mayers, colonial chaplain. After being educated at Marseilles, where his father became consular chaplain, Mayers spent some years as a journalist in New York. On 7 February 1859 he gained a position as a British Foreign Office student interpreter and was sent to Canton (Guangzhou) on 13 June 1859, after travelling with Lord Elgin to Peking (Beijing). He was interpreter to the allied commission administering Canton from January 1860 until October 1861 and acting interpreter at Shanghai from June 1863 to April 1864. He was acting vice-consul at Canton from May 1870 to March 1872. He was appointed vice-consul at Kiukiang (Jiujiang) in August 1871, and Chinese secretary of legation at Peking in November 1871. He returned to Britain for a short period in 1872 and presented various papers to learned societies on Chinese subjects. Mayers was an accomplished Chinese scholar and wrote many lengthy works on Chinese government and society. His official report on the famine in the northern provinces of China was published as a parliamentary paper in 1874 ('Parl. papers', 1874, 68). In 1861 he became a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society; he was also a member of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland. He was a constant contributor to periodical publications, especially the 'China Review'. He died on 24 March 1878 at Shanghai of typhus fever. He was survived by his wife, Jannie Cecilia. 


@@@@@


doc= 18432


Mayhew, Augustus Septimus (1826-1875), writer, was born in London on 27 September 1826, the seventh and youngest son of Joshua Dorset Joseph Mayhew (died 1858), attorney, of 26 Carey Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London, and Mary Ann Fenn, about whom nothing else is known. When the sons were living at home, the family lived at 7 Fitzroy Square. Augustus was the brother of Henry Mayhew (1812-1887) and Horace Mayhew (1816-1872). Like his brothers Augustus devoted himself to literature and journalism from an early age, and he collaborated with Henry in several literary projects. As 'the brothers Mayhew' they produced six comic novels between 1847 and 1850 illustrated by George Cruikshank, Kenny Meadows, and Hablot Browne or 'Phiz'. Most of these satirized the pretensions of the middle classes, the best-remembered being 'The Greatest Plague of Life, or, The Adventures of a Lady in Search of a Good Servant' (1847), which displays strong powers of social observation. It apparently sold more copies than any other serial since 'Pickwick'. Other titles include 'Whom to Marry and How to Get Married' (1848) and 'Fear of the World, or, Living for Appearances' (1850), which includes a very effective portrayal of a family going bankrupt. 
During the 1840s and 1850s Augustus Mayhew was also involved with his brother Henry in several other projects: he did illustrations and some writing for the 'Comic Almanac' from 1848 to 1850, when Henry was editing it, and the two collaborated in several schemes to make money, one of which was a scientific lecture tour in 1849 which failed and resulted in Augustus being imprisoned for debt in Jersey. Indeed, the two shared rustication to avoid creditors several times in the 1840s and 1850s. Augustus also spent a few years in Paris as an art student. 
More importantly, between 1849 and 1852 Augustus assisted Henry in the investigations both for the 'Labour and the poor' series in the 'Morning Chronicle' and the subsequent 'London Labour and the London Poor'. He served as one of Henry's stenographers when Henry interviewed various workers and street sellers, but Augustus did some interviews himself and also wrote them up, in particular the section on crossing-sweepers, in volume 2 of 'London Labour and the London Poor', and 'The night at rat catching' in volume 3. These interviews led to his best novel, 'Paved with Gold, or, The Romance and Reality of the London Streets', in 1858, which began as a joint project with Henry but which, after four numbers, was Augustus's alone. This novel traces the life of a young boy from the streets to a respectable life. His other novels include 'Kitty Lamere, or, A Dark Page in London Life' (1855), another product of his contributions to 'London Labour and the London Poor', and 'Faces for Fortunes' (1861); 'The Finest Girl in Bloomsbury', a comic tale of ambitious love (1861); and 'Blow Hot, Blow Cold', a love story (1862). 
With Henry Sutherland Edwards Mayhew was joint author of six convention farces and comic dramas, among them 'The Poor Relation' (1851), 'My Wife's Future Husband' (1851), 'A Squib for the Fifth of November' (1851), 'The Goose with the Golden Eggs' (1859), and 'The Four Cousins' (1871). He was on the staff of the 'Illustrated Times' in the 1850s, and served as a somewhat unconventional special correspondent for the William Palmer poisoning trial in 1856. 
In 1858 Mayhew made a trip to Germany with George Augustus Sala and Henry Vizetelly, as charmingly recounted by Sala in 'Make your game, or, The adventures of the stout gentleman, the slim gentleman, and the man with the iron-chest' (1860) and illustrated with several sketches of Mayhew as 'the stout gentleman'. Sala also wrote an affectionate dedication of his 'Twice around the Clock' (1864) to Mayhew. In fact, all contemporary accounts of Mayhew are affectionate -- he was known as 'the dear child' -- noting his high spirits, his light-heartedness, and his sense of fun, qualities that did not appear to lessen as he grew older. He was, Vizetelly said, 'the merriest of men and pleasantest of companions' (Vizetelly, 2.48). 
When his father died in 1858 Mayhew was left financially secure, though contemporary accounts indicate that he ran through much of his money fairly thoroughly. He married Laura Stanton, daughter of George Stanton, at St Giles and St George on 15 July 1858, almost immediately after his father's death in January -- though according to Mayhew's will his family remained opposed to his wife. They had one son, Reginald Frederick, born on 15 December 1861. 
At the time of his marriage Mayhew lived at 8 South Crescent off Tottenham Court Road, and at his death at 7 Montpelier Row, Twickenham. He died aged forty-nine on 25 December 1875 in the Richmond Infirmary, where he had gone for an operation for a hernia. He was buried in Barnes cemetery on 30 December and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 18433


Mayhew, Henry (1812-1887), author and social reformer, was born in London on 25 November 1812, the son of Joshua Dorset Joseph Mayhew (died 1858) and Mary Ann Fenn. He was educated at Westminster School from 1822 to 1827, and began his writing career shortly thereafter, at the age of sixteen, according to his son Athol. 
One of seventeen children and the fourth of seven sons (among his siblings were Horace Mayhew and Augustus Mayhew), Mayhew failed to live up to his father's expectations; a prominent solicitor and a rigid patriarch, Joshua Mayhew apprenticed each of his sons to the law, and each, except one, eventually pursued other interests. Almost all of them, including Henry, were disinherited as a result (after his father's death, Henry received a legacy of $1 per week). Henry was particularly ill-suited to legal study, and nearly caused Joshua's arrest by neglecting to file some important documents. This debacle led to expatriation in Paris for a period, where he formed a close circle with Douglas Jerrold and William Thackeray. 
Back in London in the late 1820s Mayhew and his friend Gilbert A Beckett conceived and edited the popular weekly 'Figaro in London', a journal based on the French 'Le Figaro'. About this time Mayhew also began to explore writing for the stage; he is responsible for the well-received -- and, even by today's standards, funny -- farce 'The Wandering Minstrel' (1834), and he co-wrote plays with Henry Baylis ('But However' --, 1838), and others. In fact, Mayhew may be considered a significant contributor to the Victorian theatre, although little critical attention has been paid to his plays in the twentieth century. 
In 1841 Mayhew embarked on one of his most important journalistic ventures: the hugely successful magazine 'Punch'. Co-edited by Mayhew, Mark Lemon, and Stirling Coyne, 'Punch' solicited and printed articles by talented young writers such as Jerrold, Thackeray, Henry's brother Horace Mayhew, and A Beckett. In 1842 Lemon became sole editor, and Mayhew increasingly drifted away from the magazine. That same year he began serial publication of 'What to Teach, and How to Teach It', followed in 1844 by 'The Prince of Wales's Primer'. Neither serial was completed. 
This faltering energy was typical of Mayhew, who was indolent and undirected, if prolific. Even his marriage, on 20 April 1844, to Douglas Jerrold's daughter Jane Matilda (1825-1880) was uneven, interrupted periodically by separations, and ended, practically speaking, by a final separation in the late 1860s, at which point Jane moved in with their daughter, Amy. The first of these separations may well have been instigated by his 1846 bankruptcy, a result of lavish housekeeping and the failure of the journal devoted to railway news, 'Iron Times', he had started with the publisher Thomas Lyttleton Holt. 
In spite of the personal and financial difficulties which plagued him throughout his life, Mayhew produced some important work. His 'London Labour and the London Poor' (2 vols., 1851; reissued with additions, 1861, 1862, 1864, 1865) remains a seminal study of London street life in the middle of the century, and has been often reprinted. It is required reading for anyone interested in the minutest details of Victorian lower-class life, such as what kinds of foods were sold on the streets, how financial transactions with street-sellers were conducted, and how vendors 'cried' their wares. Mayhew provided 'in embryo at least... a theory of the specificity of the London economy which in turn made intelligible the economic behaviour of the London poor' (Jones, 263). The study had its origin in a series of eighty-two articles, published from October 1849 through December 1850, entitled 'Labour and the poor', in the 'Morning Chronicle' (Mayhew was its metropolitan correspondent). The series was hugely popular, attracting enthusiastic letters from readers and resulting in the establishment of a special Labour and the Poor Fund. 
In late 1850 Mayhew left the 'Chronicle' over a political dispute; according to a recent biography, the magazine strongly supported free trade, while the radical Mayhew, probably as a result of his two years among the working class, opposed it on the grounds that international competition compromised workers' wages. When the 'Chronicle' published articles promoting its position, Mayhew walked out. His friend H. Sutherland Edwards tells a different story: that, according to Mayhew, the 'Chronicle's' editor refused to expose the sub-standard working conditions in a Regent Street tailor's establishment on the grounds that the business advertised regularly in the 'Chronicle'. In any case, it was only after leaving the newspaper that he developed his earlier work and produced, initially as a serial from December 1850 to February 1852, the study that became 'London Labour and the London Poor'. 
Mayhew's journalistic achievements were considerable. He edited several publications, including 'Figaro in London' (1835-8), 'Punch' (1841-2), the 'Comic Almanack' (1850-51), and the 'Morning News' (1859). He also, of course, contributed to the periodical press, writing articles for the 'Morning Chronicle', 'Bentley's Miscellany', and the 'Edinburgh News and Literature Chronicle'. Among his fiction works are several novels, co-authored with his brother Augustus and published under the name the Brothers Mayhew. These include the notably titled 'Whom to Marry and How to Get Married, or, The Adventures of a Lady in Search of a Good Husband' (1848) and 'The image of his father, or, One boy is more trouble than a dozen girls, being a tale of a young monkey' (1848). He also wrote travel literature, including several titles on Germany that achieved wide contemporary notice, and children's books, such as 'Young Benjamin Franklin' (1861). 
Mayhew's work influenced contemporary literature and popular entertainments as readily as it helped to shape Victorian social theories. Many literary representations of the working class were indebted to Mayhew's sketches; Dickens's certainly were, and the same might be said for any number of novels with lower-working-class characters produced during and after the 1840s. Equally indebted was the stage: plays such as J. B. Johnstone's 'How we Live in London' (1856) and J. Elphinstone's 'London Labour and the London Poor, or, Want and Vice' (1854), to name only two, drew liberally on Mayhew's characterizations, as did legions of music-hall patter singers and songs. It is also possible, however, that Mayhew himself drew on English popular entertainments as well as on the testimonies of his subjects in creating the personae in 'London Labour'. Lower-class characters had been represented on the stage as comic, loose, or slick talkers for centuries prior to Mayhew's day, and this at least complicates his affiliation of street folk with these eccentric idioms. However he derived them, the subjects of 'London Labour' are vivid and unforgettable. 
Mayhew's corpus of published works was extensive. He wrote to instruct and entertain, producing not only popular farces and comic novels but educational children's books and serious journalistic prose as well. He contributed richly to the Victorian cultural scene, continuing to write well into his later years. He died at 8 Tavistock Street, Holborn, London, on 25 July 1887, leaving a very modest personal estate, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 18434


Mayhew, Horace (1816-1872), writer, was born in London, the son of Joshua Dorset Joseph Mayhew (died 1858) and Mary Ann Fenn, and the brother of Henry Mayhew (1812-1887) and Augustus Septimus Mayhew (1826-1875). Like all the seven Mayhew brothers, he was articled to his father, a London attorney, but he chose to pursue other professional interests. He had a lengthy career in journalism, serving as sub-editor of 'Punch' with Douglas Jerrold and William Makepeace Thackeray and as editor of the 'Comic Almanac'. In 1845 he was on the staff of contributors to George Cruikshank's 'Table Book', and was an early contributor to the 'Illustrated London News'. He was the author of one play, 'Plum Pudding Pantomimes', which was produced at the Olympic Theatre, London, in December 1847. His publications include the humorous sketches 'Change for a Shilling', 'Model Men', and 'Model Women and Children' (all 1848; published in 1872 in one volume entitled 'Wonderful People'); 'Whom to Marry and How to Get Married' (1848); 'A Plate of Heads', with drawings by Gavarni (1849); 'The Toothache' (1849); 'Guy Faux' (1849); and 'Letters Left at the Pastry-Cook's' (1853). A good-natured man, Ponny (as he was called) is said to have been deeply hurt by harsh criticism of his work. The death of his father in 1858 left him in easy circumstances and he wrote little in later years. He had been engaged to one of Douglas Jerrold's daughters -- his brother Henry's sister-in-law -- but Jerrold is reported to have ended the affair, stating that 'one Mayhew in the family is enough' (Spielmann, 329). He was married late in life, on 7 September 1868, to Emily Sarah Fearon (1823-1876), the widowed daughter of William Slade, an army officer. 
Mayhew was a handsome, captivating man -- though reputedly the model for Sir John Tenniel's not-so-handsome white knight in the illustration for Lewis Carroll's 'Through the Looking Glass'. He was also a bon vivant and, according to Spielmann, 'scorned to seek repose before the milkman started on his rounds' (Spielmann, 328). His politics, at least in the context of the important 'Reform Bill' of 1867, were Conservative, and in a reputed debate at 'Punch''s table he firmly rejected the premises of the bill, noting that as many working writers as labourers were suffering from want of work and money. On 30 April 1872 Ponny Mayhew died suddenly of a ruptured blood-vessel at his home, 33 Addison Gardens, South Kensington, London. He was survived by his wife, who died in October 1876. 'Punch' published a moving obituary shortly after. 


@@@@@


doc= 18435


Maynard, Edward (1654-1740), Church of England clergyman, was born on 23 August 1654 at Daventry, Northamptonshire, the son of William Maynard of that town. He matriculated from Wadham College, Oxford, on 21 October 1670, aged fifteen, and became a demy of Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1672. He graduated BA in 1674 and proceeded MA in 1677. 
In 1678 Maynard became a fellow of Magdalen, and was college bursar in 1687-8. He was inevitably involved in the conflict between the fellows and the crown which followed the death of the college president, Henry Clerke, on 24 March 1687. When the fellows chose John Hough as president in defiance of the king's nomination of the Catholic Anthony Farmer, Maynard stood as the second candidate required by the college's election process and formally presented the successful Hough to the college visitor. During the assault on the autonomy of the college which ensued Maynard took refuge at Coleshill, the Warwickshire seat of William Digby, fifth Baron Digby of Geashill. When in November 1687 most of the fellows refused to submit to the king's new choice, Samuel Parker, Maynard escaped expulsion because he had formal leave of absence to serve as Digby's chaplain. In August the following year Maynard and the handful of remaining Anglican fellows were expelled by Parker's Catholic successor Bonaventure Gifford on the formal grounds of non-residence but in reality because of their refusal to acknowledge him as their lawful president. Maynard was restored with his colleagues to his fellowship in October 1688, following the beleaguered James's reversal of policies. Maynard proceeded BD in 1688 and DD in 1691. 
However, Maynard does not seem to have spent much time at his college following his restoration, continuing to spend much of his time at Digby's. In November 1691 he was appointed preacher at Lincoln's Inn, a position which required his attendance in London except during the four summer months of the long vacation. He finally resigned his fellowship in July 1694 following his marriage on 10 April to Barbara Harris (1661/2-1704), daughter of Thomas Harris of Worcester, who had been a judge on the Welsh circuits. In 1696 Maynard was presented by the earl of Sunderland to the rectory of Boddington, Northamptonshire, a living which he held until his death forty-four years later. He continued to serve at Lincoln's Inn during term time until relinquishing the post in May 1699 for health reasons. 
In 1738 Maynard looked back on his Northamptonshire pastorate in 'Memoirs Concerning Parsons and the Parsonage of Bodington', which combined an account of his predecessors with elements of autobiography and in particular of the tangible aspects of his four decades in the parish. He discussed, for instance, tithes, his repairs to the chancel of the church and to the rectory, and the causeway that he had built out of his own pocket because the village's roads were so dirty and broken 'that I could not see how they could safely bring up corpses to Church' (Maynard, 'Memoirs', 13). He recalled how he decided against challenging the dubious claim of the parishioners of the lower part of the town that they only owed him 9's'. a year for the tithe on milk. Considering both the legal advice of his friends at Lincoln's Inn and 'my great love to peace added to all, I was not long in concluding not to make my whole life uneasy and my ministry most unprofitable amongst them by engaging in an endless suit' (ibid., 19-20). 
From 1701 until his resignation in 1706 Maynard was also rector of Passenham, Northamptonshire. From 1700 until his death Maynard was canon and precentor of Lichfield Cathedral. There his first wife, who died on 25 March 1704, aged forty-two, was buried. By licence dated 10 April 1705 he married at Woodford, Northamptonshire, Elizabeth Archer, 'nee' Hastings (1664/5-1736), daughter of William Hastings of Hinton, in Woodford. From 1719 until his death Maynard was master of the hospital of St John, Lichfield, undertaking repairs and alterations to the then derelict buildings, which improvements remained for the next 240 years. 
Maynard maintained his connection with the Digby family, and it was a meeting at Lord Digby's house which led Maynard to edit and publish a second edition of Sir William Dugdale's 'History of St Paul's' in 1716. In the preface Maynard explained how Dugdale's grandson had shown him there the manuscript that Sir William had been preparing for a second edition at the time of his death. Maynard undertook to find a printer and to have some of the worn plates restored. In the preface Maynard prided himself on having 'done a service acceptable to the Publick, and obliged the Lovers of Antiquity'. Maynard's edition included a continuation of the history of the cathedral down to 1685 and an addition concerning cathedrals and collegiate churches in the province of York. In 1722-24 Maynard published some of the sermons that he had preached at Oxford and Lincoln's Inn many years before, including 'two discourses on natural and reveal'd religion'. The latter, he claimed, were the first sermons he had preached at Oxford, heavily revised during his Warwickshire sojourn in 1687-8 in the light of the 'Ancient Moralists' he had then been studying so that they now read more like tracts than sermons (Maynard, 'Sermons', preface). He had developed a sermon which he had first delivered in Oxford in 1686 on the resurrection into four which he had preached at Lincoln's Inn in the 1690s, 'with a particular Eye to the Socinians' (ibid.) -- now published over a quarter of a century since the council of Lincoln's Inn had urged him to publish one of them. 
Maynard died on 13 April 1740 at Boddington and was buried in Boddington church. With no surviving children his will mixed bequests to kin and friends, including portraits of the late Lord and Lady Sunderland and of St Peter left to Lord Digby, and to charitable purposes. He left his library and $500 to Magdalen, 'the beloved place of my Education'; those books not absorbed into its library were to be sold towards its rebuilding fund (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/703, fol. 123'v'). The Lincoln's Inn flagon given to Magdalen is not mentioned so must have been given during his lifetime. Any of his unpublished writings were to be destroyed -- except for the accounts. He left money to the poor of Boddington ('choosing not so much those that are most wanting, but chiefly those that are and have been most deserving') and of Lichfield (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/703, fol. 124'r'). He gave shirts and money to the men of St John's and money to the women of a sister hospital. To Daventry he left $300 to found a charity school and $200 to augment the living, and he left a further $200 to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. On hearing of the death his old friend John Hough, now bishop of Worcester, wrote that, 'He was a learned man, a sincere Christian, unblameable in the whole course of his life, who lived inoffensively and died quietly' (Maynard, 'Memoirs', 21). 


@@@@@


doc= 18436


Maynard, John (bap. 1577, d. in or before 1633), lutenist and composer, was baptized on 5 January 1577 at St Albans Abbey, Hertfordshire, the third son of Ralph Maynard (died 1614) of St Julian's, a former leper hospital in St Michael's parish, St Albans, and his wife, Margery, daughter of Robert Seale. In March 1600 he was one of two commissaries appointed by his uncle Henry (later Sir Henry) Maynard, surveyor of musters in Ireland. Perhaps the Irish position was a sinecure; a bass singer, Johan Meinert, and a bass violist, Daniel Norcum, possibly Dowland recruits, were at the Danish court in 1599, but absconded without leave in 1601. Unsuccessfully pursued, they were spotted in Venice a year later; an extradition request was refused and they were never caught. A bass singer, John Miners (Mynars), was active in England between 1607 and his death in 1615. However, Meinert is a common surname in north Germany and the confusion of dates and names makes certain identification of these two men with John Maynard impossible. None the less, although he was in Ireland at the time his father drew up his will (proved in 1614), the will hints at his having lived or having intended to live elsewhere abroad. 
Maynard's only known publication, 'The XII Wonders of the World' (1611), describes him as 'Lutenist at the most famous Schoole of St Julians in Hertfordshire'. His dedication to Joan, Lady Thynne, of Caus Castle in Shropshire, states: 'This poore play-woorke of mine, had its prime originall and birth-wrights in your own house, when by nearer service I was obliged yours', and mentions her daughter Dorothy, 'who once laboured me to that effect', implying that he once taught music in the household. The words of 'The XII Wonders' were written about 1600 by Sir John Davies, then solicitor-general for Ireland. Published in the 1608 edition of Davison's 'Poetical Rhapsody', the poems poked fun at stock figures of the time. Maynard's music is for voice, lute, and bass viol, 'all three ioyntly, and none seuerall', and treats the two instruments more independently than was usual at the time. Six duets for lute and bass viol follow, the first three forming a thematically related suite: pavan, galliard, and 'An almond to both'. The following pavan and galliard require special tunings for both instruments, but the final 'Adew' returns to normal. The book concludes with seven pavans in tablature for the lyra viol with optional bass viol 'to fill up the parts'. 
Maynard may have had a London house: 'Joane, wife of John Maynard', was buried on 6 June 1619 at St Dunstan-in-the-West, a parish where many musicians lived at that time. However, for some periods at least he lived at St Julian's, apparently inherited from his elder brother Robert: in 1611 he paid tithes there, and in 1633 the property was described as 'late' in his occupation. Maynard died before November 1633. 


@@@@@


doc= 18437


Maynard, Sir John (1592-1658), politician, was the second son of Sir Henry Maynard (b. after 1547, d. 1610) of Little Easton, Essex, secretary to Lord Burghley, and Susan (died in or after 1612), second daughter of Thomas Pierson (or Pearson), gentleman usher of Star Chamber. His elder brother was William, first Lord Maynard ('b'. in or before 1589, died 1640). There is no certain record of him attending a university, but it is known that he entered the Inner Temple in 1610. 
By 1619 Maynard had come to the notice of the marquess of Buckingham and had become a member of his circle at court. His participation in court masques in January 1619 and January 1620 was noted by John Chamberlain, who commented on the first occasion that 'young Maynard... beares away the bell for dauncing, and were otherwise a very proper man but that he is extreme poreblind' ('The Letters of John Chamberlain', ed. N. E. McClure, 1939, 200). Maynard reported to Buckingham from the siege of Bergen-op-Zoom in July 1622, and sent him news from the English court when the duke was with the prince of Wales in Spain in 1623. In October that year he was chosen to carry the king's condolences to the French ambassador following the collapse of the chapel at the latter's residence, and in the following November his masque congratulating Prince Charles on his return from Spain was performed at York House. The masque was reported to have offended the Spanish ambassador, in whose presence it took place. A masque of Maynard's was also performed at Burley on the Hill in August 1624. 
Maynard served as member for Chippenham, Wiltshire, in the 1624 parliament, and represented the borough again in 1625. In the 1628-9 parliament he sat for Calne in the same county. At the coronation of Charles I Maynard was made knight of the Bath and a servant of the privy chamber. On 25 November 1624 he married Mary (died 'c'.1680), daughter of Sir Thomas Myddelton (1549x56-1631) of Stansted Mountfichet, a former mayor of London, through whom he gained significant political contacts in the City. Maynard made his principal home at Tooting in Surrey, but also acquired estates at Isleham in Cambridgeshire and Bradford in Yorkshire. 
By 1628 Maynard had become an effective agent and propagandist for Buckingham, working to advance his patron's interests in parliament and the City while defending him against the charge that he favoured Arminianism and popery. One product of this work for Buckingham was a forged letter, widely circulated before parliament sat in 1628, which purported to be written by an English Jesuit to the father rector in Brussels and which identified Buckingham as the Jesuits' most formidable enemy in England. The letter angered Buckingham, however, as did Maynard's speech in parliament attacking the use of foreign mercenaries by the English crown, and it is possible that Maynard was still out of favour when the duke was assassinated in August 1628. His involvement in court affairs was much reduced following the death of his patron, and an incident in 1637, when he attacked John Craven on the bowling green at Whitehall over a debt, and struck Lord Powis when he tried to intervene, cannot have helped his ambitions. 
Maynard sided with parliament on the outbreak of civil war. He lent at least $700 to parliament on the propositions in the autumn of 1642, and in November he was appointed a Surrey deputy lieutenant. In the following August he was involved in moves to secure the arrest of MPs close to the earl of Northumberland who were suspected of planning to go over to the king. In the same month he emerged as a leading figure on the committee for the safety of Surrey, a new committee set up by parliament to take over the control of military affairs from the county's deputy lieutenants. Maynard used his influence on this committee to support his kinsman Colonel Samuel Jones, who had been appointed governor of Farnham Castle in August 1643. Between April 1644 and April 1645 Maynard was engaged in a series of disputes with the Surrey politician Sir Richard Onslow and his allies, who sought to reduce the costly Farnham garrison and return the control of the Surrey forces from the committee to the deputy lieutenants. Although Maynard benefited from the support in print of the poet George Wither in his conflicts with Onslow, and from the support of militant parliamentarians in London and the south-east, it was Onslow who won the backing of parliament in April 1645 when a new county committee was established from which Maynard and his supporters were excluded. Maynard continued to serve on the Surrey subcommittee of accounts, which clashed regularly with the county committee, but his involvement in Surrey affairs had ceased by December 1646. 
Sir John was elected as MP for Lostwithiel, Cornwall, in January 1647, and quickly became identified as an outspoken opponent of the army and ally of the presbyterian leadership in the Commons. He had, two years before, supported the creation of the New Model Army, but his doubts about the trustworthiness of leading Independents were evident as early as June 1645, when he was suspected of spreading rumours that the earl of Northumberland, Viscount Saye and Sele, Sir Henry Vane, Oliver St John, and Oliver Cromwell were engaged in secret negotiations with the king to end the war and 'bring in all manner of religions' (House of Lords RO, main papers series, 1645, 24 June-9 July, fol. 211). Maynard was an active member of parliament, being appointed to several committees including the indemnity committee and committee for the fens. On the latter committee, before which he had appeared on behalf of fenland inhabitants in June 1646, he soon became known as a vigorous opponent of drainage undertakings. In June 1647 he was one of the eleven members singled out for impeachment by the army. When details of the particular charges were published it was clear that no specific charge could be levelled against Maynard, whose name was included only in the general charges laid against the group as a whole. His hostility towards the army leadership was no doubt the main reason why he was accused with the rest, but at least one commentator suggested that his name was on the list only because he had opposed the fen drainage schemes in which Cromwell was 'so deeply engaged' (W. Prynne, 'A Declaration of the Officers and Armies illegall, Injurious Proceedings & Practices Against the XI impeached Members', 1647, 5). 
Maynard withdrew from parliament after 26 June 1647, when the Commons granted the eleven members leave of absence. Although reports from London in early July suggested that he was openly accusing the army of being all 'rebelles and traytors' (C. H. Firth, ed., 'The Clarke Papers', 1891, 1.150), there is no evidence that he was involved in planning the apprentices' assault on parliament on 26 July. After the speakers and several members of both houses fled to the army following the riots Maynard resumed his seat in the Commons, and by 3 August he was signing warrants as a member of the revived committee of safety. In an intercepted letter he reiterated his earlier claims about the duplicity of Independent politicians, on this occasion accusing Lord Saye and several of his allies in the House of Commons of being the true authors of the army's 'Heads of Proposals'. 
Maynard was, with John Glynn, one of only two of the eleven members to obey the summons to attend the House of Commons following the army's march on London and the return of the speakers and fugitive members. On 7 September 1647 he appeared before the house and, having refused to answer the charges against him, was committed to the Tower. On 28 October articles of impeachment against him were read in the house and assented to. By 3 November he had made contact with his fellow prisoner in the Tower, John Lilburne, who became an important friend and ally. When Maynard was brought before the House of Lords on 5 February 1648 he refused to listen to the charges made against him or to answer them, and was fined $500. His insistence that the Lords had no right to proceed against him drew comparisons in the press with Lilburne, and in the following two months not only Lilburne but his allies John Wildman and John Harris published pamphlets in support of his cause. 
Maynard's impeachment was discharged on 3 June 1648 and he was allowed to resume his seat in the Commons. On 27 June he spoke in favour of the City of London petition for an accommodation with the king, and denounced those he called 'Royal Independents' and 'Royal Presbyterians', terms which had first appeared in print in February in 'The Royall Quarrell', the pamphlet published on his behalf by John Harris. On 1 August his persuasive speech in the Commons in favour of Lilburne helped secure the latter's release from imprisonment. 
Sir John supported the treaty of Newport and was secluded from the Commons at Pride's Purge. Although his name does not appear alongside those accused of involvement in presbyterian plots against the new regime, he continued to act with Lilburne in opposing the activities of drainage undertakers in the fens, who in the Great Level included several prominent supporters of the government. In 1649 he argued before the parliamentary committee for the Great Level that the drainage scheme was chiefly the work of courtiers whose disregard for property rights in the 1630s had been a principal cause of civil war. His continuing activities in 1653 against the scheme led to complaints about the interference in these matters of 'discontented busy persons' (BL, Add. MS 25302, fol. 130), and one supporter of the scheme suggested to Secretary Thurloe that 'we are in the same danger of him that the State is of Lilburne' ('CSP dom.', '1653-4', 120). 
Little is known of Maynard between late 1653 and his death in Tooting on 29 July 1658. He was buried at Tooting; he was survived by his wife and was succeeded by his son John, who was knighted on 7 June 1660 and died on 14 May 1664. 


@@@@@


doc= 18438


Maynard, John (1600-1665), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Rotherfield, Sussex, and baptized at Mayfield in the same county, on 8 March 1600, the son of a wealthy yeoman. He entered Queen's College, Oxford, on 21 June 1616, and graduated BA on 3 February 1620 as a 'grand compounder'. He transferred to Magdalen Hall, and proceeded MA on 26 June 1622. 
At that time Maynard owned 19 acres in the manor of Sharendon, Mayfield. On 12 August 1624 he took up the living there, and on 9 February the next year married Margaret, daughter of the previous incumbent, John Luck. Together they had seven children -- two sons, John and Richard, and five daughters, most of whom died young. Margaret died on 2 October 1635 after giving birth to twins. Maynard then married, on 28 June 1637, the widowed Mary Withers of St Edmund's parish, Lombard Street, London. Mary was buried at Mayfield on 6 May 1640. She too may have died following childbirth, since a tablet in Southwark Cathedral records the death of her daughter, Margaret, on 14 March 1653, aged thirteen. On 1 April 1642 at St Margaret Moyses, Friday Street, London, Maynard was again married, this time to Mary Wood, of Hackney, Middlesex. 
At the opening of hostilities between the king and parliament, according to Wood, Maynard 'preached with more liberty' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 3.892). He took the covenant and on 14 September 1643 was selected as a representative of Sussex to the Westminster assembly of divines, which he regularly attended. On 26 February 1645 he preached before the House of Commons on a fast day and his sermon was subsequently published. At another fast on 28 October 1646 Maynard again addressed the Commons. In this sermon, entitled 'A Shadow of the Victory of Christ' (1646), he professed his belief that 'we are under the seventh trumpet [of 'Revelation']... Now is the time when Christ shall conquer Kingdoms... to reign over them, forever' (p. 10). 
Maynard was appointed vicar of Camberwell, Surrey, on 21 November 1646. His parishioners petitioned against him on account of his having another living in Sussex, but they were overruled in December. In an undated entry Maynard recorded in the Mayfield parish register that he had offered to give up the tithes of the parish for the maintenance of a minister in his absence, but since no fit person was appointed, 'there was no constant minister for sometime, and afterwards divers changes, so that the register was neglected for divers years' (Lower, 234). However, Maynard deputed Elias Paul D'Aranda, later pastor of the Walloon church in Canterbury Cathedral, to act as a curate with full benefit of the parish tithe. In 1654 Maynard was appointed one of the assistants to the commissioners of Sussex for the ejection of scandalous ministers and schoolmasters. In the late 1650s Maynard is said to have preached out of his home in Camberwell and to have erected a meeting-house there in 1657 after apparently resigning his living. 
In 1662 both Maynard and his curate were ejected from Mayfield. He subsequently lived at Cranesden, a farmhouse in Mayfield, until his death on 7 June 1665. He was buried in the churchyard in Mayfield. He was survived by his fourth wife, Ann, daughter of Henry Engham, whom he had married before 7 June 1665; she died on 7 September 1670, and was buried beside her husband. Maynard's 'The Young Man's Remembrancer and the Old Man's Monitor' had appeared the previous year and a number of his Mayfield sermons were published in 1674, with the encouragement of his son-in-law. 


@@@@@


doc= 18439


Maynard, Sir John (1604-1690), lawyer and politician, was born on 18 July 1604 at the Abbey House in Tavistock, Devon, eldest son of Alexander Maynard ('b'. 'c'.1567) and Honora, daughter of Arthur Arscott of Tetcott, Devon. Maynard followed his father's profession and entered his father's inn, the Middle Temple, after taking his BA from Exeter College, Oxford, on 25 April 1621. He came to the bar in 1626 and became a bencher of his inn in 1648. 
Maynard married Elizabeth (died 1654/1655), daughter of Andrew Henley of Taunton, by 1631, by which time he was well advanced in his legal career. He first appears in the records and reports of the courts at Westminster Hall in 1628, where he continued to plead in the 1630s, aided in part by the patronage of Attorney-General Sir William Noy. He represented Totnes in both parliaments seated in 1640. Throughout the controversies of that decade Maynard remained close to his native county. Plymouth made him their recorder in 1640, as did Totnes in 1645, and he served in various county commissions during those years. But it was at Westminster that he made his name. Maynard, with John Glynn and his old friend Bulstrode Whitelocke, served as counsel prosecuting the earl of Strafford in parliament in 1641. Maynard later played the same role in the impeachment of Archbishop William Laud. Though he helped to destroy the king's servants, as late as Hilary term 1642 Maynard continued to present briefs for the crown in king's bench, as he had done for years. 
In parliament Maynard actively engaged in the regulation of the church, reporting the work of a committee in 1641 to examine irregularly composed church canons. In the debate on the grand remonstrance later that year, Maynard spoke in favour of requiring privy councillors to receive parliamentary approval. Maynard remained at Westminster throughout the civil war. He participated in the Westminster assembly of divines and took the covenant. His commitment to presbytery and his willingness to work with the Scots put him in league with those who sought a peaceful resolution of the conflict. In February 1648 Maynard argued that parliament's decision to make no more addresses to the king in effect dissolved the parliament. He then withdrew from parliament and remained at a distance during the trial and execution of the king. 
Maynard may have withdrawn from Westminster Hall as well during the second half of 1648 and early 1649: he made no appearances in king's bench, in which he had pleaded often during the previous twenty years. But he took the engagement to the Commonwealth, returned to his lucrative practice, and maintained an active public presence. In December 1650 Maynard was one of the principal defenders of the corporation of London against the Leveller Major John Wildman, who argued that the City's government should be re-established by popular assent. Maynard condemned 'popularity': 'certainly the experience of all generations in the world evidences this truth, that there may be just subjection without assent' ('London's Liberties', 13). Perhaps this helps explain Maynard's initial reluctance to provide counsel to John Lilburne in 1653. When he at last did so, he helped Lilburne undermine the indictment against him. Much of Maynard's legal work in the 1640s and 1650s came on writs of habeas corpus and mandamus, related devices used to constrain the actions of lesser courts and administrative officers. Having pleaded numerous times in habeas corpus cases since the 1630s, the conflicts of civil war and interregnum created only more chances for Maynard to do so. In 1655 Maynard argued the habeas corpus for a London merchant imprisoned by the council of state for refusing to pay a duty. Maynard and his co-counsel were committed when they argued that the duty was illegal; they were soon released after making their submission to the council. Maynard played an even more important role in cases on mandamus, by which people purged from local office during the recent turmoil could win back their places. In 1643 he used the writ to try to regain a schoolmaster's lost place, and in 1647 he argued successfully for the restoration of two London common councilmen. 
According to Bishop Burnet, Maynard had become one of a handful of prominent lawyers desiring a restoration of monarchy as early as the mid-1650s. In 1656 Maynard was chosen to parliament for Plymouth, though he was not allowed to sit. Otherwise he continued to enjoy preferment. In 1654 he was made serjeant-at-law, and in May 1658 he became a protector's serjeant. In 1659 he was again chosen as a member of parliament, for Newtown, Isle of Wight. Maynard prospered during the 1650s: by 1654 he had purchased the manor of Bere Ferrers, between Plymouth and Tavistock, from the royalist earl of Newport. His wife died around this time, but by 1658 he was building a new house at Gunnersbury, Middlesex, on a property once belonging to the bishop of London. This project may well have been connected to his second marriage, in February 1657, to a Kent widow, Jane Selhurst. Maynard would marry twice more after her death in early 1668. Margaret (died 1679), daughter of Edward, Lord Gorges and twice widowed herself, became his third wife by 1671. Mary Upton (died 1721), daughter of a canon of Christ Church, Oxford, and widow of Dr Charles Vermuyden, married Maynard on 2 June 1680. Maynard had seven children with his first wife, though no children followed from his later marriages. 
Both Plymouth and Exeter chose Maynard for the Convention of 1660, though he ultimately sat for Exeter. Like many, Maynard was ready to do everything possible to help the nation forget the preceding two decades. The Commons asked Maynard and William Prynne to see that all orders relating to the engagement were expunged. Maynard sat on the committee charged with promoting Charles II's tolerationist declaration of Breda and on another that prepared the bill for continuing judicial proceedings; he took the lead in preparing the 'Indemnity Bill' and helped to draft the acceptance of the king's pardon. The king too seemed ready to forget recent events; among other acts of forgiveness, he again made Maynard a serjeant-at-law. In November 1660 Charles knighted him and promoted him to king's serjeant. 
In 1661 Maynard was seated for Bere Alston, his own pocket borough given his ownership of the manor of Bere Ferrers. He chaired or sat on numerous committees, especially those concerned with proposed changes to the law. He thus assisted with an unsuccessful bill for setting up a land registry and another concerning delays in legal process. In December 1666 Maynard served on the committee that drew up the charges on which Lord Mordaunt was impeached, and he helped to manage the conference with the Lords on the same matter. Maynard took the other side in the impeachment of the earl of Clarendon in 1667, and made a valiant attempt to fend off his attackers: 'where life is concerned, you ought to have a moral certainty of the thing' ('State trials', 6.330). Saying this in a proceeding so like the impeachments of Strafford and Laud must have started tongues to wag against the now venerable lawyer. 
Maynard was widely seen as a supporter of the crown throughout the 1660s, particularly in matters affecting royal revenues. The privy council and royal officers turned to him for legal advice and for help mediating disputes. As a king's serjeant, Maynard pleaded often for the king as he continued his practice as one of the leaders in the courts at Westminster. He maintained his prominence in arguments on mandamus, including those used in efforts to restore dismissed university fellows, cases that proved crucial for defining king's bench's purview on the writ. Similarly, Maynard presented the king's case in a 1663 mandamus sent to the New River Water Company, successfully contending that a dismissed company officer should have the writ because expulsions from companies with royal charters 'concerned the king' (1 Levinz 123, 83 ER 329). Maynard premised his arguments on the idea that the king should superintend the conduct of all lesser authorities; acting through this court and using these writs, the king protected his subjects' liberties and privileges. Maynard applied much the same reasoning in 1668 during the Commons' dispute with the House of Lords in the case of 'Thomas Skinner v. the East India Company'. When the Lords heard the matter and found for Skinner, the Commons complained that the Lords had exceeded their jurisdiction. As Maynard explained at a conference with the Lords, 'all justice flows from his Majesty' (Hart, 246). Conflict between the two houses continued until the king intervened, ordering the proceedings of both houses to be erased from their journals. 
Among those who had been imprisoned and fined by order of the Lords in 'Skinner's case' was Sir Samuel Barnardiston, the company's deputy governor. In 1674 Maynard served as one of Barnardiston's counsel against Sir William Soame, who as sheriff of Suffolk in 1674 had, according to Barnardiston, wrongly made a double return in his contest for a parliamentary seat. This was another crucial test of the Commons' privilege to decide disputed elections. Maynard now took the other side, arguing that this was not properly a parliamentary matter since the events in question occurred outside the house. More important was the legal device Maynard employed: an action on the case for a false return, the same device used in testing the propriety of returns to writs of mandamus. Maynard admitted in court that this was a novel way to proceed, but successfully argued that only with this most flexible of procedural instruments could one have a wrong righted when it involved circumstances that were new to the law. The decision went for Barnardiston, though it was later reversed in exchequer chamber when it was presided over by Sir Francis North, who had earlier represented Soame. In 1679 Maynard would serve on a committee charged to propose electoral reform and to consider a parliamentary reversal of the judgment in 'Barnardiston's case'. 
As one of the kingdom's most important lawyers, Maynard consistently took centre stage in parliamentary discussions of changes to the workings of the law. Thus he sat with other prominent lawyers on a committee appointed in February 1677 to consider the inroads made by courts of equity on common law jurisdiction. Perhaps owing to his experience arguing writs of habeas corpus, he was also among those charged in 1668 and again in the mid-1670s with preparing a bill to improve the writ's effectiveness. On the other hand, in 1670 Maynard had argued unsuccessfully for the king in 'Bushell's case' that habeas corpus might not be used to free jurors imprisoned for returning a verdict against the evidence. And for Maynard, the writ did not extend to the inspection of commitments by parliament. Thus when the earl of Shaftesbury was imprisoned by the House of Lords in 1677, it was Maynard who argued against his release. Astonishingly -- given his contentions in 'Skinner's case' -- Maynard contended in 'Shaftesbury's case' 'that the House of Lords is the supreme court of the land' ('State trials', 6.1290); thus the writ could not run from king's bench to a superior court. Maynard's view now prevailed. Despite these courtroom appearances in which he argued to limit the writ, Maynard proved one of the central figures when the 'Habeas Corpus Act' -- which dramatically expanded the writ's ambit -- finally passed in 1679. 
Maynard served for Plymouth in the parliaments of 1679-81, where he eagerly joined his Commons colleagues in believing the tales of a 'popish plot'. Depending largely on the evidence of Titus Oates, Maynard prosecuted Edward Coleman; he participated in other trials of accused plotters throughout 1679 to destroy what he called the 'abominable conspiracy against the king, the nation, the religion, and the law' ('State trials', 7.768). He also helped to manage the Commons' evidence against Viscount Stafford. Many sympathetically noted Stafford's advanced age, suspecting that this explained why he was the first of the five 'popish lords' to be tried in parliament. But Maynard, his prosecutor, was ten years older; he could look back now on a lengthy career in parliamentary impeachments. In 1667, while defending Clarendon, Maynard had argued that 'when a case comes that is the sheet-anchor of life, and estate, you should be wary; for by wit and oratory that may be made treason which is not' (ibid., 6.345). But with the attack on Stafford and on the earl of Danby, Maynard argued for a dramatically expanded reading of the law of treason; he later served on the committee which drew up the articles for Danby's impeachment. Likewise, Maynard justified impeaching Chief Justice Sir William Scroggs by broadening treason to include anything the Commons might choose: 'Whatever offence deserves the punishment of a traitor, the Parliament may impeach' (ibid., 8.202). 
Maynard also argued for impeaching Edward Fitzharris. When the House of Lords refused to try him, Maynard insisted that this was a breach of the Commons' privilege to impeach. None the less, Maynard joined the team of prosecutors once Fitzharris was brought for trial in king's bench. Fitzharris pleaded against king's bench's jurisdiction, claiming that an impeachment still pended against him in parliament, thus barring process in a lesser court. Ironically Maynard, who had previously defended parliament's jurisdiction, now tossed Fitzharris's complaint aside. After convincing the court that it could proceed to trial, Maynard then helped manage the evidence which ultimately produced Fitzharris's execution for treason. 
Maynard joined in some of the other prosecutions of plotters and libellers of the early 1680s, but, given his prominence in court and Commons, Maynard slipped surprisingly far from view in the years after 1682. He played no part in formulating London's defence against the 'quo warranto' adjudged against the City in 1683, though in 1684 he advised Plymouth against giving up its charter when threatened by a 'quo warranto', saying that the charter was 'a trust that could not be surrendered' (M. Landon, 'The Triumph of the Lawyers', 1970, 128). He thus promoted a view that had been demolished by the London judgment, a view that would not be revived after 1688, and one Maynard himself had condemned in his 1650 debate with John Wildman when he observed that 'no doubt but there is forfeiture of charters' ('London's Liberties', 38). Maynard lost his recorderships when Plymouth and Totnes received new charters in 1684, and he fared worse in the next reign when he was put out of the many county commissions of the peace on which he had served. But Maynard sat for Bere Alston in James II's parliament, where he opposed the grant of supply on grounds that it might be used to build a royal army officered by Catholics. 
In October 1688 Maynard was one of the legal luminaries appointed to the special commission for investigating the birth of the prince of Wales. In December the provisional government consulted Maynard about how to proceed in the king's absence; later he helped to draw up the address of thanks to the prince of Orange. Maynard represented Plymouth in the convention in 1689 and again in the parliament convened in 1690. Though in 1650 he had argued that 'to say that no man nor people shall be governed but by assent, we deny' ('London's Liberties', 13), he now provided a remarkably contractarian explanation of the meaning of James II's departure. 'I am of opinion that the King has deposed himself.... All government had at first its foundation from a pact with the people: & here no one can say but that pact has apparently been broken by the king's invading and violating our laws, property, liberty, and religion. (Lewis Jones, 242)' In the weeks following Maynard helped draft the declaration of rights and supported further restrictions against Catholics. As one of England's most eminent and long-lived lawyers, Maynard was appointed with two others in February 1689 to serve as commissioner of the great seal, a post he retained until late May 1690. By September of that year, Maynard was reportedly on his deathbed. He died on 8 October 1690 at his magnificent home at Gunnersbury, in Ealing parish, where he was buried on 25 October. Having survived nearly all his family, Maynard left his property to his grandchildren in a will so tangled by the remainders he appointed that it required a private act of parliament and litigation to unravel. 
Maynard demonstrated strong presbyterian commitments throughout the 1640s and 1650s. Though he later moderated these tendencies, he employed at least three chaplains ejected from their livings after 1660, gave financial support to other nonconformist clergy, and permitted them to preach in Tavistock Abbey, whose lease he held. But Maynard might be best characterized as an Anglican who retained dissenting sympathies. By at least 1680, his views were even more clearly of a conforming variety. In the debate on a bill for uniting protestants in December 1680, Maynard spoke eloquently against the dangers of permitting innovations in liturgy or in clerical vestments. But Maynard continued to promote the acceptance of presbyterian methods of ordination. He also favoured elimination of the oaths of allegiance and supremacy and the requirement that urban office-holders subscribe the declaration against the covenant, which oaths and subscription Maynard himself would have performed in order to retain his various local offices. As one Devon cleric noted, he 'never failed to conform to all things required of him in public, as oaths and tests' (Croissette). 
The dissenter Roger Morrice thought Maynard 'the greatest lawyer in England' (Lacey, 423), and many agreed. Roger North suspected Maynard of presbyterian loyalties, calling him 'an anti-restoration lawyer... true as steel to the principles of the late times' (North, 1.237); but North also admired him for his professional ability, calling him 'the best old book-lawyer of his time' (ibid., 27). A constant reader of yearbooks, Maynard gathered an impressive collection of manuscript law reports and readings which was deposited in Lincoln's Inn; he edited a large body of yearbook reports, which he published in 1678. For one of his learning and ability, it is remarkable that he reached the bench only when he was in his eighties. Presiding in chancery as one of the great seal commissioners for just over a year, Maynard's time there was too brief to have any effect on that court's doctrine and practice. 
As Maynard noted, 'laws are edged tools; those that understand them, make good use of them; and those that do not understand them, will find that they are sharp, and will cut' ('London's Liberties', 14). One area of the law Maynard understood better than anyone concerned impeachments. From Strafford's trial to Stafford's, there was not a significant impeachment in which Maynard was not directly, and controversially, involved. One of his last recorded speeches in the Commons, in 1689, concerned his opposition to the impeachment of Sir Adam Blair for publishing a paper proclaiming James II. Perhaps for his support of the Commons' power to impeach and for his charity to nonconformists, Maynard is often labelled a whig. But though he felt sympathy for dissent and bigotry against Catholics, his support of monarchy was just as clear. Maynard saw the king standing at the heart of the law he knew so well. Thus he could join with notable supporters of the prerogative such as Sir George Jeffreys and Sir Robert Sawyer in some of the major prosecutions of the 1680s. In 1673 he spoke in parliament in support of the king's power to dispense with statutes, if not to suspend them altogether, and in 1667 he made the strongest defence of the king's embattled minister the earl of Clarendon. Thus Maynard rejected simplistic juxtapositions of 'the king's prerogative and the people's liberty', and was always more suspicious of the latter than he was of the former (HoP, 'Commons, 1660-90'). 


@@@@@


doc= 18440


Mayne, Cuthbert (bap. 1544, d. 1577), Roman Catholic priest and martyr, was baptized in Youlston, near Barnstaple, north Devon, on the feast of St Cuthbert, 20 March 1544, the son of William Mayne, a farmer employed by Sir John Chichester. He was educated at Barnstaple grammar school. Under Chichester's patronage, he was installed as rector of Huntshaw, Devon, on 11 December 1561. At the time he was only seventeen 'not knowing what religion and ministry meant' (Boyan and Lamb, 39). His uncle sent him to St Alban Hall, Oxford, in 1565. Having graduated BA in 1566 he was appointed a chaplain at St John's College and he proceeded MA in 1570. 
At St John's College Mayne met two scholars, Gregory Martin and Edmund Campion, who persuaded him to embrace the Roman Catholic faith. He was forced to leave Oxford, and set sail from Cornwall to the English College at Douai, where he was admitted in 1573. He was ordained priest in 1575 and was awarded his BTh at Douai in 1576. That same year he returned to England and became chaplain to Francis Tregian of Golden Manor, Probus, Cornwall. Acting as steward to Tregian, Mayne was able to celebrate the mass freely throughout Cornwall on the extensive family estates. At the same time the bishop of Exeter, William Bradbridge, had been instructed to deal severely with the Catholics in Cornwall. He met the sheriff of Cornwall, Richard Grenville, in nearby Truro and endorsed Grenville's wish to search Golden Manor. On Corpus Christi day, 8 June 1577, Grenville surrounded Golden with a hundred armed men and at least eight JPs. After forcing their way in, they arrested Cuthbert Mayne who was wearing the waxen Agnus Dei, prohibited under Elizabethan law. Mayne's books and papers, which included a papal bull, were rushed to the bishop waiting in Truro. 
Mayne was humiliatingly paraded through the villages of Cornwall to Launceston Castle. He was clapped in irons and held in a filthy dungeon for three months. At the Michaelmas assizes he was tried before Sir Roger Manwood and Sir John Jeffreys. There were six charges. He was accused of traitorously obtaining a bull from Rome on 1 October 1576, and of publishing this bull at Golden. The third charge was that he had strongly defended the authority of the bishop of Rome on 14 February at Launceston. The next two charges related to his purchase of Agnus Deis; he was accused of delivering one to Tregian and a second to eleven other people in September 1576. The final charge was that he had celebrated mass in the papal manner, assisted by Francis Tregian, on 1 June 1577. Although Judge Jeffreys argued that Mayne had never been to Rome and that the jubilee bull was out of date, Manwood declared Mayne a traitor and sentenced him to death. Tregian was to forfeit all his property and lands and was sentenced to imprisonment for life. 
On 29 November 1577 Mayne was examined from early morning until dusk. He was assured of his life if he would swear on the 'Bible' that the queen was the supreme head of the church in England. 'Upon this he took the 'Bible' into his hands. Made the sign of the cross on it and said, 'The Queen neither ever was, nor is, nor ever shall be the head of the Church in England'' (Boyan and Lamb, 58). Following this admission a form was drawn up for him to sign where he asked for clemency for his servant John Hodges, refused to name any of his friends, and admitted that he believed that if a Catholic prince should invade the realm to restore the Catholic faith then the Catholics in that realm should assist and help them. The document is signed in his own hand, 'These things affirmed by me Cuthbert Mayne I think to be trewe' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/118, 46). Mayne was sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered at Launceston on 30 November 1577. He was dragged through the streets on a hurdle and was hanged in the market place. While still alive he was cut down, falling with such force that his eye was driven out. His members were severed and his heart held up to the people. His head was placed on the gate of Launceston Castle, and quarters of his body were sent to Bodmin, Barnstaple, Tregony, and Wadebridge. His skull is still publicly displayed in Launceston on a special pilgrimage day each June. 
The first seminary priest to be martyred, Cuthbert Mayne was canonized by Pope Paul VI on 15 October 1970 as one of the forty martyrs of England and Wales. His saint's day is 30 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 18441


Mayne, Jasper (1604-1672), Church of England clergyman and poet, was born in Hatherleigh, Devon, in November 1604, and baptized in the parish church there on 23 November, the fourth of five children of Jasper Maine and his wife, Mary (died 1632). Cuthbert Mayne, the Roman Catholic seminary priest executed in 1577, came from Youlston, about 10 miles away, but Jasper Mayne's family cannot definitely be connected to the martyr. However, the Hatherleigh Maynes were local prominent Roman Catholic gentry, their once considerable property gradually wasted away by recusancy fines during the first half of the seventeenth century. By 1648 Jasper's eldest brother, John, suffered sequestration of the family's estate and was listed with other Devon papists as 'delinquent, notorious, poor' (Abell, 260). 
Mayne himself conformed, if not when he was admitted to Westminster School, at least in 1623 when he proceeded to Christ Church, Oxford, as a servitor. When he matriculated on 10 October 1624 it was as a student: his election that year was for him the defining achievement of his career; ever after his signature was 'Jasper Mayne, Student'. He graduated BA on 21 October 1628 and proceeded MA on 18 June 1631. Favoured by deans Richard Corbett and (from 1628) Brian Duppa, he became 'a quaint preacher and a noted poet' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.971). Among his contemporaries at both Westminster and Christ Church were the poet Thomas Randolph, John Donne the younger (son of the dean of St Paul's), and the poet William Cartwright, with whom Mayne joined in an effort to retain threatened privileges traditionally enjoyed by Westminster scholars at Christ Church, the Westminster suppers. With Cartwright and others Mayne also contributed his earliest poems to collections of Latin and English commemorative verse instigated by Corbett and Duppa, verses chiefly composed on various occasions in the lives of the royal family. In such trivial academic flattery Mayne showed himself no worse and sometimes better than other contributors. 
Mayne applied his poetic talent to much better effect in several commendatory poems contributed to editions of poetry by some of the finest English writers of his time. Earliest among these was 'On Worthy Master Shakespeare and his Poems', prefaced to the second folio edition of the plays (1632), in which Mayne, with critical originality, praised the playwright for his ability to make ancient and medieval history vibrant on the stage. Mayne also wrote 'On Dr. Donne's Death' for the 1633 edition of John Donne's 'Poems'. Here Mayne recalled being present when Donne preached, contrasting Donne's sermons to those of puritan divines. 'To the Memory of Ben. Jonson' was Mayne's contribution to 'Jonsonus virbius', the 1638 collection of poems by various hands published after Jonson's death. Mayne praised the runic toughness of Jonson's poetry, faithful to classical models. In all three poems Mayne honoured his subjects with discriminating parody of each characteristic style, a wit of imitation combining poetic skill with critical acumen. Mayne's reputation as a poet is virtually nil; he has been best known for his plays, which are amusing. His more noteworthy poems and translations, rarely republished, have on insufficient grounds been slighted, ignored as misattributions, or branded as forgeries. But if some of his work was mediocre, Mayne was capable and did on several occasions rise to first-rate poetry. 
Diversifying his literary production, in 1639 Mayne published (anonymously) his play 'The Citye Match', which had been performed before the king and queen at Whitehall the same year. His translation of some dialogues of Lucian in 1638, under the patronage of William Cavendish, earl of Newcastle, remained unpublished for years, Newcastle having turned from patronage of the arts to defence of the monarchy in the civil war. It was eventually published in 1664, dedicated to Cavendish as, by then, duke of Newcastle. Mayne also preached a Good Friday sermon at Christ Church in 1638, evidently without sufficient regard to royal regulations, an offence for which he submitted to censure by Archbishop William Laud, chancellor of the university. 
In 1639 Mayne succeeded Richard Corbett as vicar of Cassington, a Christ Church benefice near Oxford, and on 1 or 2 November 1642 he proceeded BD. He continued to publish occasional poems in Oxford collections of commemorative verse through the 1640s, but the circumstances of civil war gradually prompted his withdrawal from literary pursuits to take part in ideological struggle for the cause of royalism. Following the king's arrival in the city in October 1642 and the setting up of his headquarters at Christ Church, Oxford became a garrison. It is not clear whether, like his fellow student Cartwright, Mayne formed part of the band of 'loyal schollers' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 1.55) who took up training in arms for the defence of the university, but he certainly engaged in the propaganda war. Having proceeded DD on 17 June 1646 during the last weeks of royalist occupation, following the city's surrender to the parliamentarian army Mayne preached 'shortly after' at St Mary's 'A Sermon Against False Prophets' (not published until 1647) and on 9 August at Carfax church 'A Sermon Concerning Unity and Agreement' (1646); peacemaking was the avowed intent of his other publication of that year, 'The Difference about Church Government Ended', which argued for civil rather than ecclesiastical governance of the church. 'Ochlo-machia, or, The Peoples War' (1647) opposed the taking up of arms against the king. 
Having failed to answer a summons to appear before the parliamentary visitors to the university in May 1648, Mayne abandoned Oxford and Cassington for a second Christ Church living at Pyrton, given to him just two months previously. In November he was expelled from his scholarship at Christ Church. While living at Pyrton, Mayne again anonymously published a play -- 'The Amorous Warre' (1648), a very complicated piece of plotting that apparently was never produced on the stage. In 1651 he published another of his commemorative elegies on deceased poets, this time for a posthumous edition of Cartwright's poetry. 'To the deceased author of these poems' is as much an elegy for Mayne's own career in literature as for Cartwright, who emerges here the lamented embodiment of Mayne's aspirations as a poet, scholar, and preacher. The desolation Mayne felt, surrounded by the evident demise of his own war-torn career, is here assimilated to his grief for Cartwright. 
In 1652 Mayne was ejected from his Cassington living. His predicament under the Commonwealth is illustrated by an incident when, about this time, he engaged in a futile disputation at nearby Watlington parish. Wood records that one John Pendarves, whom he describes as an Anabaptist 'preaching in houses, barns, under trees, hedges, &c.', but who was at that time actually vicar of St Helen's, Abingdon and minister of Wantage, had provoked Mayne to preach at Watlington to a largely hostile congregation. Mayne's eloquent and learned sermon addressed the needs of that small portion of the auditory who felt inundated by the followers of Pendarves and craved the traditional ministrations of the Church of England. However, the sermon was brutally interrupted, Wood alleged, by 'a great party of anabaptists and the scum of the people' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.419). Mayne published his full text as 'A Sermon Against Schisme, or, The Separations of these Times' (1652); preached in the style of Cartwright and Donne it bemoaned the losses for English society caused by the civil war. The same year he also published his translations of Donne's Latin epigrams in a volume of Donne's fugitive prose and poetry edited by Mayne's college friend John Donne the younger. The Latin epigrams seem to have been translated earlier, probably before 1632, although no earlier edition of the poems is extant. Since the original Latin poems have been lost, Mayne's translations constitute the only surviving record of Donne's earliest work as a poet. 
In 1653 Mayne published 'Certaine sermons and letters of defence and resolution, to some of the late controversies of our times' and wrote a prose letter to preface Richard Whitlock's 'Zootomia, or, Observations on the Present Manners of the English', published in 1654. In his letter he explained why he could no longer muster commendatory verse: 'the 'Rudeness' of the 'place' where I dwell, and my weekly 'Thoughts' compelled to 'size themselves' to a plain 'Countrey Congregation', have abated much of that 'Fancie' which should do honour, either to your 'Book' or my self'. He went on to complain in addition that 'all my 'publike Poetry' hath and still is, 'objected' to me as a piece of 'Lightnesse', not befitting the 'Profession' or 'Degree' of' a clergyman (R. Whitlock, 'Zootomia', 1654, sig. A4'v'). 
Finally deprived of his Pyrton living, before 21 May 1656, Mayne retreated to Chatsworth, the estate of a second William Cavendish, third earl of Devonshire, where he served as a chaplain and renewed his old acquaintance with the earl's secretary, the philosopher Thomas Hobbes. According to Wood, 'between them there never was a right understanding', presumably in theological if not in political discussions (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.972). 
At the Restoration in 1660 Mayne was reinstated in his college benefices at Cassington and Pyrton and was also appointed canon of Christ Church Cathedral, archdeacon of Chichester, and a chaplain-in-ordinary to the king, in which capacity he preached at the consecration of Herbert Croft as bishop of Hereford a sermon which was later published. He could never reconcile himself to the changes a decade of parliamentary domination had brought to Oxford. In 'Concio ad academiam Oxoniensem', preached on 27 May 1662, he blasted the faculty as dull, leaden politicians: '''plumbeos aldermannos'' and ''aldermannos plumbeos'' all one' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 1.441). Nevertheless he supported the activities of students, such as a play of 1664 after which the actors seem to have caroused excessively with the encouragement of Mayne and some other dons. According to Wood 'Dr. Mayne spoke them a speech commending them for their ingenuity, and told them he liked well an acting student' (ibid., 2.2). 
Mayne now became a rich man, and contributed money for restoring a building at Christ Church. At his death in Oxford, unmarried, on 6 December 1672 he willed a large sum for the rebuilding of St Paul's Cathedral and additional bequests to the poor people of his parishes at Cassington and Pyrton, but he left nothing to Christ Church, whose atmosphere and administration on the whole he had come to find offensive. A related gesture perhaps was Mayne's promise to one of his servants at the college of ''Somewhat' (as he said) 'that would make him Drink after his Death'' (Langbaine, 338). The bequest turned out to be a salted herring (not mentioned in the will). Mayne was buried in Christ Church Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 18442


Mayne, John (1759-1836), poet, was born at Dumfries, on 26 March 1759. Having been educated in the local grammar school he became a printer in the office of the 'Dumfries Journal'. In 1782 he accompanied his family to Glasgow, where he was engaged for five years in the publishing house of the brothers Foulis. In 1787 he settled in London, first as a printer and then as proprietor and joint editor of 'The Star', an evening paper in which he inserted several of his poems. He married, but it is unclear when or to whom. He had written poetry while in Dumfries, and after 1777 he occasionally contributed poems to 'Ruddiman's Weekly Magazine' in Edinburgh. Sher notes that 'Robert Fergusson was certainly a great influence. It is said that they met in Dumfries when Mayne was just 14... and Fergusson at most 23' (Sher, 193). Between 1807 and 1817 several of Mayne's lyrics appeared in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. 
Mayne's 'Siller Gun' (1777) describes the celebration of an ancient Dumfries custom, first instituted by James VI and revived in 1777, of shooting for the prize of a silver gun on the king's birthday. Enlarged to two cantos in 1779, and to three and four in 1780 and 1808 respectively, it took final shape in five cantos, with notes, in 1836. Scott considered it superior to anything of Fergusson's and approaching the excellence of Burns ('The Poetical Works of Sir Walter Scott', 1894, 307). Mayne's 'Hallowe'en', published in November 1780, probably stimulated Burns's brilliant treatment of the same theme. 'Logan braes', which appeared in 'The Star' (23 May 1789), fooled Burns into thinking it a vagrant of an early master and he appropriated two of its lines in a 'Logan braes' of his own. 'Glasgow', a poem of description and characterization published in the 'Glasgow Magazine' in December 1783, is described by Sher as 'subtle and genuine' (Sher, 199); it was enlarged and issued, less successfully, in 1803. In the same year Mayne published a patriotic address entitled 'English, Scots, and Irishmen'. Though Mayne expressed a desire to revisit Dumfries he never realized this ambition and he died at his home 2 Lisson Grove, Marylebone, Middlesex, on 14 March 1836. He was buried in Paddington churchyard. Much admired by contemporaries, on his death he was (surely over-) praised by the 'Gentleman's Magazine' as being second only to Burns among Scottish poets. 


@@@@@


doc= 18443


Mayne, Perry (bap. 1697, d. 1761), naval officer, was the son of Covill Mayne ('c'.1675-1746), captain in the navy, and his wife, Martha Perry. Baptized at St Dunstan's, Stepney, Middlesex, he was probably a pupil at King's School, Canterbury, between 1710 and 1711. He entered the service in August 1712 in the 'Dolphin', then commanded by his father, and served, according to his passing certificate, briefly in the 'Lynn', and then (again with his father) in the 'Prince Frederick', in the Baltic, and the 'Guernsey'; a John Mayne also accompanied them and was probably a relation. Perry passed for lieutenant on 21 June 1720 and was soon appointed to the 'Ipswich'; in June 1721 he moved to the 'Falkland', going out to Jamaica with the broad pennant of Commodore Barrow Harris, who, on 22 March 1725, promoted him to command the sloop 'Spence'. He was with her until appointed captain of the 'Dragon' on 24 September 1725. 
On his return home Mayne was appointed in March 1727 to the 'Seaford', going to the Sound with Sir John Norris's fleet, and in 1729, after home service, he went to Jamaica. In December 1730 Mayne exchanged with Captain Berkeley of the 'Lion', in which he returned home in June 1732. His next appointment was to the 'Worcester' in July 1738, and he joined Edward Vernon's fleet for the West Indies, taking an important part in the attack on Portobello, bombarding the Gloria Castle. Later, as one of the senior captains of the fleet, he was put in charge of such important tasks as the landing at Cartagena. He moved to the 'Princesa' in 1742, and later to the 'Orford', but she was wrecked on the voyage home, though without loss of life. 
Mayne reached flag-rank on 23 April 1745, and was employed in the Channel Fleet until ordered to be a member of the court martial of Vice-Admiral Richard Lestock, and later at that of Admiral Thomas Mathews. Although appointed commander-in-chief at the Nore on 10 March 1746 he was engaged for much of that year, and for most of 1747, with Lestock's and Mathews's courts martial, of which he became president after the withdrawal through illness of Sir Chaloner Ogle. During Lestock's trial Mayne was himself accused of false imprisonment by a Lieutenant Frye who had been sentenced by a court martial on which Mayne had sat. The accusation brought the members of Lestock's court martial into confrontation with the chief justice of common pleas, and alarmed the Admiralty, who feared the collapse of order and government in the navy. Mayne's position was further complicated since his presidency required him to try officers of greater seniority; the final verdicts were very controversial, and were clearly heavily influenced by political pressure. 
Although he seems to have been in good standing, and was mentioned for possible commands, Mayne did not serve again. He was superannuated in 1757 and died at home at Mortlake on 5 August 1761. Mayne apparently never married, leaving bequests to a sister and the residue to a schoolmaster friend. He was evidently in comfortable circumstances. 


@@@@@


doc= 18444


Mayne, Sir Richard (1796-1868), police officer, fourth son of Edward Mayne, a judge of the court of king's bench in Ireland, was born in Dublin on 27 November 1796. He graduated BA from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1818, proceeding to Trinity College, Cambridge, from where he received his MA in 1821. He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 9 February 1822, and practised on the northern circuit for seven years. In the summer of 1829 Robert Peel, the home secretary, was looking for a barrister to serve as joint commissioner of his planned Metropolitan Police. Prompted by the home secretary's cousin, also a barrister on the northern circuit, Mayne applied for the position. He was offered it without interview and accepted with alacrity. He had fallen in love with Georgina Marianne Catherine, eldest daughter of Thomas Carvick of Wyke, Yorkshire; his salary of $800 as police commissioner enabled him to propose, and the couple were married in 1831. Mayne first met his fellow commissioner, Colonel Charles Rowan, in the home secretary's office on 6 July 1829; twelve weeks later, on 29 September, the first Metropolitan Police constables began patrolling the streets of London. 
Rowan and Mayne had the formidable task of recruiting, training, and organizing the new force, whose principal task, according to the instructions written by the commissioners, was 'the prevention of crime'. Mayne was the more articulate and imaginative of the two; but he was, as later events were to prove, less skilled at managing men. The commissioners dealt carefully and conscientiously with criticism from parliament, the press, and the public. However, they shared the prejudices of early nineteenth-century Englishmen against spies, and this impeded growth of a detective branch. Mayne's services were rewarded on 29 April 1848 when he was created a CB; on 25 October 1851, at the close of the Great Exhibition, he was promoted to KCB. When Rowan retired on 5 January 1850 Mayne expected to assume sole command of the force, but Captain William Hay was appointed joint commissioner. Hay and Mayne differed seriously over a variety of issues, and the situation was resolved only with Hay's death in August 1855; the following February a short 'Police Act' was passed establishing one commissioner with two assistants. 
Mayne's period as sole commissioner was increasingly unhappy. He grew more and more remote from his men, issuing pettifogging orders and insisting on the enforcement of trivial street regulations. At the same time the police had little success against violent street robbers known as 'garotters'. All this prompted a critical press campaign, which worsened following the Hyde Park riot of June 1866 and the failure to act on information which might have prevented the explosion at Clerkenwell prison on 13 December 1867. Mayne offered his resignation on these occasions, but it was refused on the grounds of his long public service. He died while still in office, at his London residence, 80 Chester Square, on 26 December 1868, and was buried four days later in Kensal Green cemetery. Initially tributes were muted, but his widow was granted a civil-list pension of $150 on 21 April 1870, and a monument to Mayne's memory was unveiled in Kensal Green cemetery on 25 January 1871. 
Mayne's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 18445


Richard Charles Mayne (1835-1892), naval officer, was educated at Eton College; he joined the navy in 1847. He served in the three naval theatres of the Crimean War (1854-6), in Vancouver Island and British Columbia (1857-61), about which he wrote a memoir, and in New Zealand (1863-4), where he was wounded. Between 1866 and 1869 he commanded the survey expedition to the Strait of Magellan, subsequently publishing sailing instructions for the region. In 1870 he married Sabine, the daughter of Thomas Dent. He retired from the navy on 27 November 1879 with the rank of rear-admiral, and was made a CB; on 26 November 1885 he was gazetted a retired vice-admiral. In 1885 he contested Pembroke and Haverfordwest as a conservative, but was narrowly beaten; the following year, as a Liberal Unionist, he was successful. He died suddenly, at his home, 101 Queen's Gate, London, after attending a banquet at the Mansion House, London, on 29 May 1892. 


@@@@@


doc= 18446


Mayne, Symon (bap. 1612, d. 1661), regicide, was baptized at Dinton, Buckinghamshire, on 17 February 1612, the son and heir of Symon Mayne (1576/7-1617) of Dinton Hall, near Aylesbury, and his wife, Coluberry (died 1629), daughter of Richard Lovelace of Hurley, Berkshire, sister of the first Lord Lovelace and widow of Richard Beake of Haddenham, who died in 1606. The elder Symon Mayne died on 13 July 1617, aged forty, and was buried in Dinton church, where a large monument was erected in his memory. His will reveals a prosperous and generous man: it includes legacies of $20 each to a niece and a nephew, to his two godsons and to seven stepchildren, with smaller sums to all his servants and to poor people in three parishes. His wife inherited the Dinton estate, with reversion to their son on her death, which occurred on 10 January 1629; she too was buried in Dinton church. The family's long lease from the dean and chapter of Rochester for the nearby parishes of Haddenham, Cuddington, and Kingsey was left to their daughter, another Coluberry (or Celiberry), who married Thomas Boulstrode (or Bulstrode) of Upton, Buckinghamshire, with reversion to her young brother after fifteen years. 
In November 1630 Mayne enrolled as a student at the Inner Temple. His first marriage, on 23 May 1633, was to Jane Burgoine (1613/14-1641), then aged nineteen, eldest daughter of John Burgoine of Sutton, Bedfordshire, and his wife, Jane, daughter and heir of William Kempe of Finchingfield, Essex. After her death he married Elizabeth ('nee' Woodward), perhaps the widow of someone called Tow, of Essex. They had three sons, Symon, Edward, and Samuel, a mercer. Mayne was related to many families who supported the cause of parliament in the civil war, including his near neighbours Arthur Goodwin and Sir Richard Ingoldsby. He threw in his lot with them and served on the grand jury of Buckinghamshire, which apparently presented an address to Charles I for the dismissal of his army in 1642. On 14 June 1645, after the battle of Naseby, Cromwell is said to have stopped at his house, Dinton Hall. About September 1645 he was returned as a recruiter MP for the nearby borough of Aylesbury. He was a prominent figure in the parliamentarian government of Buckinghamshire, the author of the 'Mystery of the Good Old Cause' (1660) describing him as a 'great committee man, wherein he licked his fingers'. Certainly, as early as October 1643 he had secured the sequestered lands he had formerly held under lease from the dean and chapter of Rochester. In 1648 he helped sponsor a petition from Buckinghamshire in support of the radical vote of no addresses ending parliament's approaches to Charles I for a settlement. Local power was emphasized when, in September 1648, he and his cousin Henry Beake, George Fleetwood, and others signed a defiant reply to the treasurers of sequestration, following demands for a speedy account of profits from sequestrations for the county in their charge. In 1649 he was appointed one of the judges for the trial of Charles I, attended on most days, and signed the warrant for the king's execution ['see also 'Regicides]. Not active in parliament, he served during the protectorate on the committee for Buckinghamshire. 
After the Restoration Mayne, as a regicide, was excepted from the general act of pardon. What is believed to have been his temporary hideout was discovered in 1804 during restoration work on Dinton Hall. In June 1660 he surrendered to a serjeant-at-arms and was tried at the Old Bailey on 13 October. Bulstrode Whitelocke recorded that Mayne's wife retained him as counsel to prepare a petition to the king. At his trial Mayne made an inaccurate and incoherent defence: 'I knew not of the King's bringing up [to London], I was never at any Committee'. When asked, of the death warrant, 'see if your hand and seal be not upon it', he replied 'I acknowledge it is my hand,... there was a gentleman told me I should be sequestered as a delinquent... saith he, you will rather lose your estate than take away the king's life' ('State trials'). He was found guilty and sentenced to death. 
Mayne's health may never have been robust. As early as 1635 and 1636 he and his wife had received licences 'for notorious sickness' to eat flesh on fish days. After his committal to the Tower his illness became fatal and he died there on 13 April 1661 'from gout, with fever and convulsion-fits'. An inquest was held next day, and Sir Edward Nicholas gave the lieutenant of the Tower a warrant for delivery of the corpse to the widow 'for interment in the country without ostentation'. Mayne was buried in Dinton church on 18 April 1661. The lands sequestered from the dean and chapter of Rochester had been restored to them (and leased to a member of the royal household) but the Dinton estate, forfeited by Mayne, was regained by his widow in 1664, the conveyance being made by Christopher Egleton of nearby Ellesborough, who had known Mayne, and George Goswell of Beaconsfield. Elizabeth Mayne died in 1694 and was buried at Dinton on 10 August. The Dinton estate remained in the family until well into the next century. 


@@@@@


doc= 18447


Mayne, William (1818-1855), army officer in the East India Company, was born on 28 October 1818, the second surviving son of the Revd Robert Mayne of Limpsfield, Surrey, and his wife, Charlotte Cuninghame Graham, daughter of Colonel Graham of St Lawrence House, near Canterbury. William Mayne, Baron Newhaven, was his father's brother. He attended Addiscombe College in 1836 and 1837, and was appointed ensign on 15 December 1837, serving with the 4th and later the 49th Bengal native infantry. 
In November 1838 Mayne was appointed to serve in the invasion of Afghanistan by the army of the Indus, and was appointed detachment adjutant to the detachments of the 27th and 37th Bengal infantry. He distinguished himself at the unsuccessful attack on the fort of Jalgah on 3 October 1840, and became lieutenant on 2 November 1841. As lieutenant in command of a 'ressalah' (squadron) of the 2nd Shah Shuja's irregular cavalry, or Anderson's Horse, he fought in various actions under Brigadier John Shelton and Sir Robert Sale. He went with Sale's brigade to Jalalabad, where he distinguished himself in the siege and was mentioned in dispatches. Following General Pollock's relief of Jalalabad he served with his quartermaster-general's department and at the capture of Istalif on 29 September 1842 by Major-General McCaskill's division. Lord Ellenborough, who favoured the 'illustrious garrison' of Jalalabad, praised Mayne and appointed him adjutant of the governor-general's bodyguard. While second in command of it he had a horse killed under him at Maharajpur on 31 December 1843. He was not engaged in the Anglo-Sikh wars, being in command of the 5th irregular horse at Bhawanipur during the first war, and commandant of Lord Dalhousie's bodyguard at the time of the second. In 1844 Mayne married Helen Cunliffe, daughter of Thomas Reed Davidson, Bengal civil service, and niece of Lieutenant-General Sir Robert Cunliffe. 
In 1851, while still a captain in the 37th Bengal infantry, Mayne was selected by Lord Dalhousie to command the Hyderabad contingent of the nizam's forces, and retained this command until his death. With 6000 of these troops he suppressed disturbances in the Deccan. The rapidity of his marches and the success of his operations attracted favourable notice. He was repeatedly thanked by the governor-general in council, particularly for the defeat of a large force of Arabs near Aurangabad on 20 September 1853 and for his conduct on 22 September 1854 when, while besieging the fort of Saila, near Hyderabad, he charged and annihilated a force of Rohillas, who sallied out at night. 
On his return to England at the close of 1854 Mayne was made a brevet colonel and aide-de-camp to the queen. He had just returned to India when an attack of dysentery sent him home again. He died at Cairo on 23 December 1855, survived by his wife and one son. 


@@@@@


doc= 18448


Mayne, Zachary (1631-1694), religious writer, son of Richard Maine, was born at Exeter and baptized at St Petrock's Church there on 1 January 1632. He entered Christ Church, Oxford, on 15 October 1649, but by favour of the parliamentary visitors was soon made a demy of Magdalen College. On 6 May 1652 he graduated BA, although his period of residence was less than the regulations required. The indulgence was granted him at Oliver Cromwell's request on the recommendation of Thomas Goodwin, then president of Magdalen College. Mayne was described by Cromwell as 'eminently godly, of able parts, and willing to perform all his exercises' (Wood, 4.411). He was senior student in his class the following Lent, elected fellow of Magdalen in 1652 and proceeded MA on 6 July 1654. 
A member of the Independent church gathered at Magdalen by Goodwin, Mayne preached regularly in and around Oxford, and became lecturer at Abingdon, Berkshire, on 3 April 1657. He regarded Goodwin as a very good friend and it was through the latter's influence that he was appointed lecturer at St Julian's Church in Shrewsbury on 24 March 1658. Here he was received very favourably by both the church and the town, and was inclined to accept ordination from the bishop of Bangor, but Cromwell's death in 1658 interrupted the plan. 
On preaching 'Concerning the salvability of the heathen and of universal redemption' in St Mary's Church, Oxford, in February 1660, Mayne was summoned before the vice-chancellor and threatened with expulsion, whereupon he retired to London until the following May. His religious opinions vacillated, but he is said to have been an Arian with leanings towards Socinianism. His published works show him to have held Arminian views. Scruples as to authority prevented him from administering the sacraments when he was an Independent preacher. 
At the Restoration Mayne was ejected from his fellowship and retired to Dalwood in east Devon. However, he did not renounce controversy; his 'St Paul's Travailing Pangs... or, A Treatise of Justification' appeared in 1662. Having expounded at length in a letter of 8 October 1669 to John Newburgh of Wooth Francis, near Bridport, his views on education -- 'I doe look upon teaching to be the highest work upon earth' ('GM', 1.11) -- by about 1671 he had become a schoolmaster, and in 1672 was licensed at his house. About this time he married Katharine; the couple had a daughter, Elizabeth, and three sons, Gabriel, Samuel ('c'.1677-1750), who, after graduating from Exeter College, Oxford, in 1698, proceeded BM from New Inn Hall in 1708 and practised medicine in Northampton, and Joel. 
In another letter to Newburgh of 3 May 1671 Mayne revealed that he was raising money in his parish to fund a preaching minister, and about to hear a candidate preach, but some time before 19 January 1690, when he was made master of Exeter grammar school, he had conformed to the Church of England, probably as a layman. He enthusiastically welcomed the revolution of 1688-9. In his 'The Snare Broken', published anonymously in Oxford in 1692, and written several years previously, he recanted Socinian and Arian views, and tried to confute various calumnies. This was reinforced by 'Sanctification by Faith Vindicated' (1693), which contained a preface by the rector of Totnes and conformist controversialist Robert Burscough. 
On 7 August 1694 Mayne witnessed a waterspout at Topsham near Exeter, and sent a description to the Royal Society. Four months later, on 11 November 1694, he died in Exeter, and was buried in the north aisle of St Peter's Church, Dalwood, Devon. 


@@@@@


doc= 18449


Maynwaring, Everard (b. 1627/8), physician, born at Gravesend, Kent, was the son of Kenelm Maynwaring, rector of Gravesend, and was educated at Gravesend grammar school, his tutor being a Mr Chandler. On 21 June 1645 he was admitted a sizar at St John's College, Cambridge, at the age of seventeen, and graduated MB on 1 July 1652. In 1652 Maynwaring practised at Norton, near Sheffield, Yorkshire, and from 1653 until the end of the decade was practising in Chester, Cheshire. In the mid-1650s Maynwaring travelled to America, where he developed a lasting friendship with Christopher Lawrence MD of Dublin. On 17 August 1655 Maynwaring was created MD of the University of Dublin, 'after performing such exercises as the Statutes of the University required', as his diploma reads. By 1663 Maynwaring had moved to London, where he established himself next to the Blue Boar, on Ludgate Hill as a 'doctor in physic and hermetick phylosophy'. An advocate of chemical medicine, Maynwaring dedicated his first works to two prominent patrons of Helmontian medicine: 'Tutela sanitatis' (1663) to Prince Rupert, and 'Solamen aegrorum, sive, Ternarius medicamentorum chymicorum' (1665) to George Villiers, duke of Buckingham. 
In 1665 Maynwaring was entrusted with the care of the pest-house of the society for employing the poor in Middlesex. His treatment of patients seems to have been successful, as he claimed that out of the eighty patients in his care, fifty-six recovered. In the same year Maynwaring was among the proponents of the Society of Chymical Physicians, which was meant to challenge the authority of the College of Physicians. Maynwaring adopted Jean Baptiste van Helmont's medical theories, favourably quoted from the works of Helmontians such as George Thomson, and became acquainted with George Starkey. He accepted van Helmont's view that the 'archeus' or vital spirit was responsible for the main functions in the human body, and endorsed the Helmontians' criticism of the doctrine of the chemical principles. He singled out Thomas Willis's version of this theory as his target. An anonymous pamphlet (possibly written in 1668-9) attacked Maynwaring together with Robert Boyle and Christopher Merrett as enemies of learned medicine and of the College of Physicians. None the less Maynwaring never participated in the Helmontians' violent attacks on traditional medicine, and often censured unlearned chemists as well as empirics. In addition, unlike most of the Helmontians, he did not entirely rule out the use of phlebotomy. Like other advocates of chemical medicine Maynwaring defended the respectability of chemistry by arguing that it was part of the ancient learning which originated in Egypt with Hermes Trismegistus. 
Maynwaring also engaged in a series of polemics against apothecaries, claiming that physicians should prepare their own medicines, and not have them made up by apothecaries. In the dispute between members of the College of Physicians and the Society of Apothecaries Maynwaring in his 'Praxis medicorum' (1671) explicitly supported Christopher Merrett's attacks on apothecaries. Throughout his career, Maynwaring took an interest in the cure of scurvy, which he regarded as a disease endemic in northern countries. He made and sold his own remedies against scurvy and recommended oranges and lemons as antidotes against this disease. He condemned tobacco smoking as one of the causes of scurvy. In his late works Maynwaring advertised his pills and a 'catholic' (that is, universal) medicine. As an answer to those who regarded him as an empiric, Maynwaring published a copy of his academic diplomas in his last work, 'Ignota febris' (1698). There is no evidence that Maynwaring was married, and the date of his death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 18450


Mayo, Charles (1750-1829), historian and Church of England clergyman, was born on 7 December 1750 at Beechingstoke, Wiltshire, the son of the Revd John Mayo, rector of Beechingstoke and vicar of Wilcot, and grandson of the Revd John Mayo, vicar of Avebury, brother of Charles Mayo of Hereford. He was the second cousin of Paggan William Mayo (1766-1836), physician, and of the Anglo-Saxon scholar Charles Mayo (1767-1858). He was educated at the Queen's College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 27 April 1767 and graduated BA (1771), MA (1774), and BCL (1779). Mayo later provided funds for two sons of Wiltshire clergymen to study at any Oxford college. He held the livings of Huish in Wiltshire from 1775, and of Beechingstoke from 1779, and was chaplain to the Somerset Hospital in Froxfield, Wiltshire, in whose trustees he vested the patronage of his Oxford benefaction. Mayo was the author of 'A Chronological History of European States, 1678-1792' (1793) and a 'Compendious View of Universal History, 1753-1802' (1804). In addition he published two theological discourses, one on principles of religious worship (1818) and the other on the internal evidence of Christianity (1824). He died, unmarried, at Beechingstoke on 27 November 1829. 


@@@@@


doc= 18451


Mayo, Charles (1792-1846), educational reformer, was born at 1 Hammett Street, Aldgate, London, on 9 June 1792, the eldest son in the family of four sons and one daughter of Charles Mayo (1754-1814), a solicitor who practised in London, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1837), daughter of William Knowlys and sister of Newman Knowlys, recorder of London. Elizabeth Mayo was his sister; Charles Mayo (1767-1858), the Anglo-Saxon scholar, was his cousin. Educated at Henley-on-Thames grammar school and Merchant Taylors' School, he proceeded to St John's College, Oxford, where he held a scholarship from 1810 to 1813. Taking second class honours in classics, he was elected to a law fellowship in 1813, graduating BA in 1814, BCL in 1817, and DCL in 1822. He was admitted at Gray's Inn in 1814 but deafness forced him to give up his intention to read for the bar. In August 1817 he became headmaster of Bridgnorth grammar school, Shropshire. He was ordained deacon by the bishop of Oxford later in that year and priest in June 1819, resigning from his headmastership in July 1819. 
A friendship with John Synge of Glanmore Castle, co. Wicklow (1788-1845), an Irish landowner and, like Mayo, an evangelical in religion, was to be crucial in forming Mayo's life's work. Synge's favourable impression of the model school run by the Swiss educationist Pestalozzi, which he had visited during his grand tour, encouraged Mayo to see the establishment for himself. In 1819 he joined Pestalozzi at Yverdun, near Lake Geneva, as English chaplain, bringing with him a number of pupils. Although Pestalozzi's school was then past its peak, the experience convinced Mayo of the value of both the man and his methods. He returned to London in 1822 determined to promote Pestalozzi's ideas in England. An early subscriber and committee member of the London Infant School Society (founded in 1824), he delivered two lectures at the Royal Institution in May 1826 on the life of Pestalozzi (later published as a memoir, 2nd edn 1828) and on infant schools, 'Observations on the Establishment and Direction of Infants' Schools' (1827). In the latter he commented that 'infancy is a rich but unclaimed waste'; learning began with the child's own experiences and could be developed before children entered the monitorial schools which at that time provided elementary education. Object lessons, a method widely popularized by his sister, were central to his principles for teaching young children, which he later described in a treatise produced in collaboration with his sister, 'Practical Remarks on Infant Education for the Use of Schools and Private Families' (1837). 
In 1822 Mayo opened a school in Epsom, which his mother helped him to run, to demonstrate how Pestalozzi's ideas could be applied to the teaching of children from the upper classes. In September 1826 he became headmaster of Cheam School, a well-established private boarding-school for boys aged between seven and eighteen, in succession to James Wilding (1781-1863). Mayo initially ran the school in association with his mother and sister as a family enterprise; the creation of a domestic environment, headed by a father figure, was regarded as a necessary aspect of moral education. In the early years of his headmastership he was remembered as a kindly figure who maintained affectionate, informal relations with the boys, admitting them to his family circle. 'The method of Pestalozzi is, in essence, the application of Christianity to the business of education', Mayo stated (Mayo, 'Memoir of Pestalozzi', 1828, 28), and religious instruction was an essential part of the curriculum. During the late 1820s and early 1830s Cheam School enjoyed notable patronage from aristocratic parents of evangelical views, who disliked the absence of vital religion in the traditional public schools. Among those who sent sons there were the Glyn, Pakenham, Ryder, and Waldegrave families. Opposing the mere mechanical inculcation of factual knowledge, Mayo tried to carry out Pestalozzi's ideal of developing all the faculties. Gymnastics, which he considered essential to physical health, were part of the curriculum. A school magazine established in 1832 testified to the self-expression which was encouraged among the boys. Charles Reiner, a German and former assistant to Pestalozzi, who taught at Cheam until 1849, was mainly responsible for the innovative teaching of mathematics and natural sciences. 
In June 1831 Mayo married Mary Shepheard (1799-1877), who with her younger sisters ran a school for girls in Notting Hill after the death in 1824 of their father, Edward Walwyn Shepheard, left them in straitened circumstances. Soon after his marriage Mayo's mother and sister left Cheam, the latter going on to run the Home and Colonial Infant School Society's training college, in which Mayo took a close interest. Either through poor health or, it was said, the influence of his wife, Mayo presented a sterner figure to the boys in the later years of his headmastership. There had always been an inherent conflict between Pestalozzi's optimistic view of young children and the evangelical sense of their sinfulness. Mayo's free use of the cane was remarked upon by later generations of his pupils; and Hugh Childers, who entered the school in 1836, remembered a regime whose obsession with the wickedness of boys promoted sneaking and spying among them. It was suggested that he was not always a good judge of assistant masters. The choice of his brother-in-law, Henry Shepheard (1809-1878), as his successor was not a fortunate one. Mayo died at Cheam on 23 February 1846, leaving a widow, daughter, and two sons. He was buried at Cheam, and a tablet erected by his pupils and friends described his work as illustrating 'both in theory and practice, the blessings of an education based upon Intellectual Development, Scriptural Teaching, and Christian Influence'. 


@@@@@


doc= 18452


Mayo, Charles (1767-1858), Old English scholar, born in London on 24 March 1767, was the younger son of 
Charles Mayo was admitted to Merchant Taylors' School in 1776, and was elected to St John's College, Oxford, in June 1785, becoming a fellow in 1788. He graduated MA in 1793 and BD in 1796. In 1795 he was elected by the university as professor of Old English (a chair founded by Dr Rawlinson); he was the first to hold that office, which he occupied for the allotted period of five years. According to Dr Samuel Parr his lectures were well received. Mayo was ordained in 1791 and was Whitehall preacher in 1799-1800. On 2 June 1801 he married Louisa (1774-1852), the youngest daughter of James Landon; they had no children. Mayo also served as morning lecturer at the old chapel of St Michael, Highgate, from 1803 to 1833. He was elected FSA in 1820, FRS in 1827, and a governor of Sir Roger Cholmeley's School in Highgate in 1842. He was proud to be an examiner of his old school, Merchant Taylors'. He lived for most of his life at Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, where in 1824 he inherited the manor of Andrewes and Le Motte from his grandmother Rebecca, daughter of Sir John Shaw, baronet. Charles Mayo died on 10 December 1858 at Cheshunt, where he was buried. 
Charles's elder brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 18453


Mayo, Charles (1837-1877), army medical officer, born at Winchester on 13 January 1837, was the elder son of Charles Mayo (1788-1876), senior surgeon at Winchester County Hospital. He was elected on the foundation of Winchester College in 1847, and of New College, Oxford, where he became fellow in 1858. He graduated BA in 1859, BM in 1865, and DM in 1871; and he became MRCS in 1861 and MRCP in 1869. In October 1862 he travelled to the United States, where he was staff surgeon-major and medical inspector of the 13th US army corps with Grant's army at the siege of Vicksburg. He later published an account of his experiences in America, in Francis Galton's 'Vacation Tourists' (1864). 
The next few years Mayo spent partly at Oxford, where he was coroner of the university (1865-9) and dean of New College, and partly in London as physician to the General Dispensary in Bartholomew Close. On the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War in 1870 Mayo joined the medical service of the German army as staff surgeon-major, and he was appointed director of the Alice Hospital at Darmstadt, which was built under his supervision. In the nine months of its existence, about 700 German and 250 French soldiers were treated, and only fifty-one died. At the close of the war Mayo received five decorations, and the thanks of the German ministry of war. He was also made a knight of the Hessian order of Philip the Generous. During the campaign in Atchin he served with the Dutch medical service, and he went with the expedition from the Netherlands to Sumatra in 1873-4, his account of which appeared in 'The Times' of 19 October 1874. 
Being unwilling to settle in England Mayo sailed for Fiji as one of the government medical officers in 1875. Here, he had an acute attack of dysentery, and he died on the voyage to Sydney. Mayo was buried at sea on 15 July 1877. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 18454


Mayo, Daniel (1672-1733), Presbyterian minister, was born probably at Kingston, Surrey, the son of Richard Mayo (c.1630-1695), the ejected vicar of Kingston, and his wife, Jane Smyth (died 1713). His father was the Presbyterian minister at Kingston, and Daniel was 'strongly inclined to the ministry from early youth, but was diverted from it, for some years, by the difficulties of the times' (Harris, 34-5). His elder brother took orders in the Church of England, but Mayo maintained his father's Presbyterianism all his life. His early education was probably undertaken by his father. He obtained the degree of MA, probably from Glasgow, and finished his studies at the University of Leiden under Hermann Witsius. On his return he preached occasionally in and about London. He was appointed assistant minister at the Tothill Street meeting, Westminster, in 1696, but moved in 1698 to Kingston, where he became the pastor of the Presbyterian congregation formerly served by his father. He was married about this time to Honour, who outlived him. 
The congregation increased greatly under Mayo's care, and he was a popular preacher. He kept a school for dissenters at which Philip Doddridge was a pupil from 1712 to 1715. In his 'Sermons on the Education of Children', Doddridge acknowledges with gratitude the excellent instruction he received from Mayo. Mayo's 'heart and soul was in his preaching which was practical and serious, with great gravity and warm affection' (Harris, 36). He was a lively conversationalist and was considered 'a minister of considerable talents and exerted them with great success, both from the pulpit and the press' (Wilson, 3.62). He was one of the group of scholars who continued Matthew Henry's 'Exposition', contributing the notes on '2 Corinthians' and '1 and 2 Thessalonians'. 
Mayo candidated in 1714, on the death of Matthew Henry, for the important Presbyterian pulpit at Mare Street, Hackney, in competition with John Barker. Barker was appointed, but this caused a split in the congregation. The seceders built a new meeting-house for Mayo at the Gravel Pit, Hackney. He preached alternate weeks at Kingston and Hackney, with George Smith as his colleague in both places. He was a subscriber at the Salters' Hall debate in 1719 but is said later to have disowned his subscription. In 1723 he resigned from Hackney to become one of the two ministers at Silver Street meeting in London, where he remained until his death. 
Mayo was recognized as one of the leading Presbyterians of his time, and his sermon 'The Necessity of Regular Mission to the Ministry', delivered at Chertsey in 1705, expressed its traditional principles by deploring a drift to radical thinking on the one hand and extreme Calvinism on the other. He affirmed the right to private judgment, which must be open to all. He died at Kingston on 13 June 1733, his son Daniel later succeeding him as minister at the church where he had followed his own father. Another son became a vicar in the established church, so the family split between the two denominations continued in succeeding generations. 


@@@@@


doc= 18455


Mayo, Elizabeth (1793-1865), educational reformer and evangelical writer, sister of the educationist Charles Mayo (1792-1846), was born at 1 Hammet Street, Aldgate, London, on 18 June 1793, daughter of Charles Mayo (1754-1814), a solicitor, and his wife, Elizabeth Knowlys (died 1837). In 1822 Elizabeth joined her brother to help run an evangelical school, first at Epsom and later at Cheam, based on ideas Charles had acquired from the Swiss educationist Pestalozzi. 
Under Charles's influence Elizabeth acquired a lifelong interest in infant education, with a particular concern to develop teacher training. She adopted the Pestalozzian method of developing observation through the examination of objects. At Cheam Elizabeth produced her two most successful works, 'Lessons on Objects' (1830) and 'Lessons on Shells' (1832). The first books of their kind in England, they popularized the use of the object lesson, influencing generations of teachers. They were frequently reprinted, both in England and abroad, with 'Lessons on Objects' reaching a sixteenth edition by 1859. However, although Elizabeth was keen to counteract the dullness of contemporary teaching styles, her lesson plans tended to be artificial and mechanical. 'Lessons on Objects' is a simple analysis of the properties of 100 common objects and shows a limited understanding of Pestalozzi's claim that good observation can lead to verbalization and subsequent concept formation. 
In 1834, following her brother's marriage, Elizabeth moved to Hampstead, where she continued to write about infant methodology, both separately and with Charles. The Mayos differed from other infant school pioneers, Robert Owen, David Stow, and Samuel Wilderspin, because they attempted to combine Pestalozzian philosophy with a passionate religious conviction. They became the most widely known contemporary evangelical writers on early years education. Both stressed the importance of making infant education a 'sacrifice to the Lord', and of ensuring children were on 'the side of religion and morality' (C. and E. Mayo, 'Practical Remarks on Infant Education', 1837, 47). Elizabeth was, if anything, more zealous and single-minded than Charles. Teachers had a duty to inculcate religion in the next generation simply because 'it is written' (E. Mayo, 'Lessons on Objects', 1852, v). 
In 1843 Elizabeth became the first woman in England to be employed in teacher training. She undertook supervisory work at the Home and Colonial Infant School Society in Gray's Inn Road, London, the first specific institution dedicated to the training of infant teachers. Her exact position is unclear, but it is evident she devised and presented model lessons, supervised and reviewed programmes of work, and acted as a general consultant. Students were trained to teach grammar, arithmetic, geography, drawing, singing, physical education, and sensory discrimination through the examination of objects. Priority was given to the inculcation of religious and moral beliefs. Members of the public were invited into the institution to observe the teaching process for themselves. 
Under Elizabeth's guidance the Home and Colonial Society provided not only teachers but lesson plans, pictures, and objects specifically designed for young children (see her 'Model Lessons for Infant School Teachers', 1838). By 1846 Joseph Fletcher, an inspector of schools, reported that the society was supplying teachers for nearly all the country's infant teaching vacancies. In 1848 and 1849 Elizabeth also edited the society's 'Quarterly Educational Magazine and Record'. Although ill health forced her to relinquish this post, she continued to make regular contributions to society publications (see 'The Educational Paper of the Home and Colonial Society', vols. 1-5, 1859-63) until her death. 
Elizabeth's emphasis on structure, at a time when early years teaching tended to be unsystematic, secured her importance in the history of infant education. A plaque at the Home and Colonial Society buildings commemorated her 'hearty sympathy, wise counsel and friendly aid', and praised her attempts to combine the 'principles of Pestalozzi... with evangelical truth'. A $500 bequest from Elizabeth was subsequently used for a Mayo Schoolroom in Gray's Inn Road. In 1861 her approach was adopted at Oswega, America's foremost teacher training institution. Elizabeth Mayo died at Great Malvern, Worcestershire, on 1 September 1865, and was buried on 8 September in her mother's grave in Kensal Green cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 18456


Mayo, Henry (1733-1793), Independent minister, was probably born in Plymouth; nothing is known of his parentage. He moved to London in 1756, when he was admitted to the Independent academy at Mile End Road. Having preached for a short time at Philip Doddridge's former chapel at Castle Hill, Northampton, he became, on 30 November 1762, the pastor of the Independent congregation in Nightingale Lane, Wapping, where he remained until his death. He was awarded the degree of MA by King's College, Aberdeen, in 1764, and LLD by Marischal College in 1772. He was twice married, first in 1764 to Jane Marder (died 1766), a member of a Dorset family and the widow of Mr Martin, a West India merchant; they had one daughter. Mayo married again on 17 June 1766 at St George-in-the-East, London; his second wife was Jane Belpur, who died in or before 1796. They had three daughters. In 1785 he was chosen tutor in oratory and elocution at the Homerton Academy on the death of Thomas Gibbons, a post he held until his death, when it was discontinued. 
Mayo took a prominent, if controversial, part in the dissenters' attempts to alter the terms of subscription required by the 'Toleration Act' between 1772 and 1779. The London dissenting ministers, under the leadership of Edward Pickard, were prepared to accept a declaration of belief in scriptures as an alternative to subscription to the doctrinal part of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' required by the act. Mayo took the view that a government did not have the right to lay down religious tests as a condition for toleration and preferred a complete repeal of the penal laws against dissenters. He was in a minority of one, and so resigned as secretary of the committee charged with the application and became a vociferous critic of the campaign, suggesting that the ministers had been bought off with the promise of a partial relief acceptable to the administration. He was especially critical of the involvement of some of them in the administration of the 'regium donum', an annual grant to poor ministers and their widows, partly on the grounds of its secrecy but principally because he saw it as a means of ensuring that the ministers involved did the government's bidding. His anonymous accounts of these matters in the 'London Magazine' in 1774 and 1775 are important, if partisan. 
Mayo was the editor of the 'London Magazine', in which Edward Dilly and James Boswell were partners, from about April 1775 until the ownership changed about June 1783, and used the position to give extended coverage to a radicalism that was not confined to dissenting politics. He was interested in literary matters and was closely involved with Edward and Charles Dilly, the radical booksellers in the Poultry, at whose dinners he was a frequent guest and for whom he seems to have acted in an editorial capacity. Boswell, who had disapproved of Mayo's alterations to his 'Account of Corsica', first met him in this context in 1768 and records a number of subsequent encounters, including several with Samuel Johnson, at one of which in 1773 the two had a heated argument on toleration which led Boswell to dub him Johnson's literary anvil. 
Mayo appears to have been a dogged, no-nonsense character, intolerant of compromise or evasion but nevertheless sociable. Boswell records that he gave a dinner for his friends once a week and dined abroad the other days. Theologically he was an orthodox Calvinist: he wrote against John Gill on infant baptism in 1766 and published an abridgement of a work of John Owen in 1768. He died at his house in Wellclose Square, London, 'after a long and painful illness' ('GM', 379) on 4 April 1793, and was buried in Bunhill Fields. 


@@@@@


doc= 18457


Herbert Mayo (1720-1802), Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Mary (1732/3-1824), daughter of George Coldham, surgeon-extraordinary to the prince of Wales. Herbert Mayo was the son of Charles Mayo of Hereford; he matriculated in April 1739 at Brasenose College, Oxford, and was elected fellow in 1740 (BA, 1742; MA, 1745; DD, 1763). After curacies in the east of London he was presented in 1764 to the living of Middleton Cheney, Northamptonshire, but left the same year to return to the East End of London as rector of St George-in-the-East, Stepney. He married Mary Coldham on 15 January 1765, and served as JP for Middlesex and treasurer of Raine's Hospital. Herbert Mayo was an exemplary parish priest, and cared for the poor and took an interest in the welfare of black people. He died in London on 5 January 1802, and was buried in the churchyard of St George-in-the-East on 13 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 18458


Mayo, Herbert (1796-1852), physiologist and anatomist, third son of John Mayo (1761-1818), physician, and his wife, Ann, daughter of Thomas Cock, was born in Queen Anne Street, London, on 3 April 1796. His brother, Thomas Mayo, became president of the Royal College of Physicians. Mayo entered the Middlesex Hospital, London, as a surgical pupil on 17 May 1814. He was also a pupil of Charles Bell between 1812 and 1815. He studied medicine at Leiden; his MD thesis, 'De urethra ejusque constrictione', was published in Leiden in 1818. In 1818 he became house-surgeon at the Middlesex Hospital; in 1819 he became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons. He was a surgeon at the Middlesex Hospital from 1827 until 1842, was professor of anatomy and surgery at the Royal College of Surgeons in 1828 and 1829, became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1828, was a professor of anatomy at King's College in 1830, became professor of physiology and pathological anatomy at King's College in 1836, and became a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1843. He is credited with founding the medical school at Middlesex Hospital. He married Jessica Matilda, daughter of Samuel James Arnold, dramatist. They had a son and two daughters. 
Mayo discovered that the seventh cranial nerve is the nerve the activity of which causes the muscles of the face to move -- that is, it is the motor nerve of the face. He also discovered that the fifth cranial nerve is the nerve that conveys sensation from the face to the brain -- that is, it is the chief sensory nerve of the face. Beyond that, he showed that the fifth cranial nerve has two connections to the brain (roots), and that one root is motor and that the other, sensory, root has a ganglion (a collection of nerve cells). In his report of those findings ('Anatomical and Physiological Commentaries', 1822, 107-20), Mayo remarked that he had been led to perform his experiments by reading Charles Bell's report of similar experiments, and added eight pages of unsparing criticism of Bell's methods and conclusions. Bell was later to claim that he had correctly described the function of the nerves of the face and that he had shown that only sensory nerves have a ganglion. 
In 1823 Mayo published the second part of the 'Anatomical and Physiological Commentaries', in which he reported that stimulation of the optic nerve (the nerve that conveys visual sensation from the eye to the brain) resulted in narrowing of the pupil of the eye, even if the optic nerve and the nerve to the pupil were connected only by that small part of the central nervous system to which the optic nerve travels and from which a nerve travels to the pupil ('Commentaries', 1823, 1-21). In a later generalization he said that 'an influence may be propagated from the sentient nerves of a part, to their correspondent nerves of motion, through the intervention of that part alone of the nervous centre, to which they are mutually attached' ('Commentaries', 1823, 135). Mayo was thus not only the first to discover what we would now call reflex action, but also the first to point out its general significance for the function of the nervous system. Charles Sherrington, perhaps the greatest neurophysiologist of all time and certainly the greatest authority on the reflex, referred to 'Mayo's celebrated experiment', and said that it went far 'to draw attention to the fractional powers of the cerebro-spinal organ' (Sherrington, 786). 
Mayo's 'Commentaries' also contain useful translations from the German of the anatomical studies of the brain by J. C. Reil, as well as reporting other important findings made by Mayo, including his discovery that the walls of arteries contain muscle fibres, the contraction or relaxation of which changes the diameter of the artery. Mayo published several other books and pamphlets, including 'Outlines of Human Pathology', which was published in London in 1835, in Philadelphia in 1841, and in translation in Germany in 1838-9. 
Following in the footsteps of James Braid, James Esdaile and John Elliotson, Mayo became convinced of the reality and clinical usefulness of mesmerism. His views, like those of his predecessors, were often greeted with scorn and contempt; the author of the entry on Mayo in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' spoke of Mayo as having 'thrown himself in the hands of the mesmerists'. In his 'Letters on the Truths Contained in Popular Superstitions' (1849) Mayo wrote that 'As it is certain that there is no disease, which the nervous system is not primarily or secondarily implicated in, it is impossible to foresee what will prove the limit of the beneficial application of mesmerism in practice' (Mayo, 'Letters on the Truths', 138). By 1842 Mayo was disabled by rheumatic gout, sought and found relief in hydropathy, and ended his career as a physician at Bad Weilbach, Germany, where he died on 15 May 1852. 
Mayo was a distinguished scientist who made discoveries of great importance and was a major figure in British medicine during the nineteenth century. During his lifetime his reputation unquestionably suffered from Charles Bell's temporarily successful effort to claim that he had made certain discoveries that were in fact made by Mayo and by Francois Magendie. Mayo's later reputation was not enhanced by his entry in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' which is curiously defensive and ambivalent. 


@@@@@


doc= 18459


Mayo, John (1761-1818), physician, son of Thomas Mayo, was born in Hereford on 10 December 1761. He matriculated at Oxford in 1778 from Brasenose College, graduated BA in 1782, was elected fellow of Oriel College on 16 April 1784, and proceeded MA in 1785, MB in 1787, and DM in 1788. He became FRCP on 30 September 1789, and was censor in 1790, 1795, 1804, and 1808; he was Harveian orator in 1795, elect on 10 April 1807, and resigned this last position on 6 October 1813. He served in London as physician to the Foundling Hospital from July 1787 to 1809 and as physician to the Middlesex Hospital from 6 November 1788 until 11 January 1803, and he was also physician-in-ordinary to the princess of Wales. At a meeting of the board of the Middlesex Hospital in December 1802, it was resolved that Mayo, 'who had been physician to this hospital with equal advantage to the charity and honour to himself for fourteen years, be solicited to attend the cancer ward as physician extraordinary' (Wilson, 200). With his first wife, Ann, daughter of Thomas Cock of Tottenham, whom he married on 5 February 1789, he had three sons: Thomas Mayo (1790-1871), subsequently president of the Royal College of Physicians; John, who took holy orders; and Herbert Mayo (1796-1852), physiologist. His second wife was Frances Lavinia, daughter of William Fellowes of Ramsey Abbey, MP for Ludlow and Andover. 
Mayo habitually divided his time between London and Tunbridge Wells, practising at the latter during the summer months. There he enjoyed 'the undisputed lead in medical business and emoluments' (Munk, 395). After resigning his hospital appointments in 1817, he lived wholly at Tunbridge Wells, where he died on 29 November 1818; he was buried at Speldhurst, Kent. His eldest son published 'Remarks on Insanity, Founded on the Practice of J. Mayo, M.D.' (1817). 


@@@@@


doc= 18460


Paggen William Mayo (1766-1836), physician, was born on 11 January 1766, and was baptized on 7 February at St George-in-the-East, Stepney, his father's parish. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School and St John's College, Oxford, and was elected to a medical fellowship at St John's on 6 July 1792; he graduated DM in 1795. Having been elected physician to the Middlesex Hospital on 23 August 1793, he was admitted FRCP on 30 September 1796, and was censor in 1797, Goulstonian lecturer in 1798, and Harveian orator in 1807. He resigned his hospital appointment in 1801, and moved from Conduit Street, Hanover Square, London, to Doncaster, and eventually to Bridlington. He married on 8 February 1798 Charlotte (died 1828), daughter of the Revd Stephen Buckle LLD of Norwich. They had six children. Paggen William Mayo died at Bridlington on 6 July 1836, and was buried in the churchyard there. 


@@@@@


doc= 18461


Mayo, Richard (c.1630-1695), clergyman and ejected minister, was the son of Richard Mayo (died 1660) of St Giles Cripplegate, London. His father was said to be a man of some property, and Richard was educated in London under the puritan Thomas Singleton. On 2 December 1652, after serving a few months as ship's chaplain aboard the 'Sovereign' and perhaps attending Wadham College, Oxford, Mayo was ordained by the fourth London classis as lecturer at Whitechapel. By the time of his marriage to Jane Smyth (died 1713x15), of St Mary, Somerset, in January 1654, Mayo had begun to officiate at Kingston, Surrey, in the absence of the vicar, Dr Edmund Staunton, whom the parliamentary visitors had appointed president of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in 1648. Staunton eventually resigned the living to Mayo in 1658. His ministry at Kingston, long a hotbed of radical agitation, was not without its trials. While he succeeded in having the Quaker missionary Edward Burrough imprisoned and fined $100 for slander in 1658, Burrough and his supporters published two pamphlets decrying Mayo's 'damnable doctrine', and denouncing the 'priest's' cruelty in prosecuting him 'for speaking the truth' (Cooke, 8; Burrough, 5, 3). 
Following his ejection for nonconformity in 1662 Mayo continued to preach in conventicles. In 1669, according to episcopal returns, he preached not only at Kingston, but at Guildford, 'to sometimes one-hundred Anabaptists', and at Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, to former 'officers and soldiers in the parliamentary army' (Gordon, 310-11). In April 1672 he obtained a licence as presbyterian teacher at Kingston but by the early 1680s he had settled in Upper Thames Street, London, as pastor of a presbyterian congregation. About 1689 his people built him a new meeting-house in Salters' Hall Court. An advocate of the 'Happy Union' (1691) between city Independents and presbyterians, Mayo served as one of the original managers of the Common Fund, which supported deserving candidates for the ministry, and himself contributed $100 to the fund in 1690. When the union collapsed in 1694, the presbyterians John Howe, William Bates, Vincent Alsop, and Daniel Williams withdrew from the merchants' lecture at Pinners' Hall and set up their own at Salters' Hall, to which Samuel Annesley and Mayo were added. 
In the midst of this rancour Mayo urged dissenters to seek peace in two sermons, published as 'The Cause and Cure of Strife and Division' (1695). But he had first established his reputation as an author three decades earlier, with his best-selling 'Plain Answer' (1664), which encouraged readers to attend to the 'neglected duty of secret prayer'. He offered practical 'hints' so that Christians would go to prayer 'not as sick persons to their meals, because they must', but with a suitably 'quickened and enlarged heart' ('Plain Answer', foreword). Under the initials N. H., Mayo published 'A Conference betwixt a Papist and a Jew' (1673) and 'Two Conferences' (1677); the latter enjoyed at least six editions, that of 1754 bearing the title 'Two Disputations Concerning the Messiah'. In both Mayo argued that the Church of Rome, with its 'lying wonders and feigned miracles', gave a 'stab to the Christian Faith' by discrediting the best evidence that Jesus was the Messiah, the miracles he and his immediate followers performed ('Two Conferences', 1679, 28). His 'Life' of his predecessor, Edmund Staunton, (1673), was reprinted in Clarke's 'Lives' (1683). In addition to several sermons published in the 'Morning-Exercise' collections, Mayo also wrote the commentary on 'Romans' in Matthew Poole's 'Annotations' (1683-5). 
Mayo and his wife, Jane, had six children. Of their three sons the eldest, Richard ('b'. 1661), became vicar of Great Kimble, Buckinghamshire, through the patronage of the presbyterian Richard Hampden. Mayo's youngest son, Daniel Mayo (1672-1733), was pastor of his father's congregation in Kingston and of the Gravel-Pit meeting in Hackney, Middlesex. After a six-week illness, Richard Mayo died on 8 September 1695 and was buried three days later on 11 September at Kingston. His assistant, Nathanael Taylor (died 1702), preached his funeral sermon, in which he stated that Mayo was about sixty-five on his death. He left property worth almost $1000 to his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 18462


Mayo, Thomas (1790-1871), physician, eldest son of John Mayo (1761-1818) and his wife, Ann, the daughter of Thomas Cock, was born in London on 24 January 1790. He was the brother of the physiologist Herbert Mayo (1796-1852). He began his education under the Revd John Smith of Eltham, and then after eighteen months at Westminster School he was transferred to the private tuition of the Revd George Richards, vicar of Bampton, Oxfordshire. He entered Oriel College, Oxford, in 1807, and obtained a first class 'in literis humanioribus' in 1811. He was elected a fellow of Oriel on 23 April 1813: 'to the attainment of which honour I had pledged myself to my father, provided he would permit me to escape the Foundation of Westminster and its peculiar training, which combined with a very fair proportion of Latin and Greek occasional aerostation in a blanket. (Munk)' Mayo graduated MA in 1814, BM in 1815, and DM in 1818. 
On his father's death Mayo succeeded to his lucrative practice at Tunbridge Wells. In 1835 he settled in London, where he lived at 56 Wimpole Street. He became FRCP in 1819 and censor of the Royal College of Physicians in 1835, 1839, and 1850. He delivered the Lumleian lectures in 1839 and 1842, the Harveian oration in 1841, and the Croonian lectures in 1853, and he was named an elect in 1847. In 1835 he became FRS, and in 1841 physician to the Marylebone Infirmary. He was also physician-in-ordinary to the duke of Sussex. On 5 January 1857 he was elected president of the Royal College of Physicians, a post to which he was annually re-elected until 1862. Mayo was therefore president during the passing of the 'Medical Act' of 1858, and in his colleges offices had been closely concerned with questions of reform for a number of years. 
Mayo was the last president chosen by the ancient system, and the last elect chosen by his brother-elects (Clark, 725). In his pamphlet 'Medical Examinations and Physicians' Requirements Considered' (1857), published soon after his election as president, Mayo stressed the value of a classical education and warned against competitive examinations 'as likely to produce a knowledge which was neither lasting nor sufficiently wide' (Clark, 725). 
Mayo was also something of an authority on mental illness, and he published 'An Essay on the Relation of the Theory of Morals to Insanity' (1831) and 'Elements of Pathology of the Human Mind' (1838). His Croonian lecture, 'Medical testimony in cases of lunacy' was published in 1854. Mayo repeatedly rejected medico-psychological attempts to reform the law and opposed the insanity plea. After one case 'The Lancet' criticized him for propounding 'not evidence but metaphysical speculations; and to apply to a living fellow-creature his famous doctrines of abstract mental disease, of insane responsibility, and the propriety of making madmen the subject of criminal punishment' (Smith, 138). In 1860 Mayo delivered a remarkable address at the Royal Institution, entitled 'Relations of the public to the science and practice of medicine'. 
Mayo was twice married; first, to Lydia, daughter of John Bill MD of Farley Hall, Staffordshire; and second to Susan Mary, widow of Rear-Admiral Sir William Symonds, and daughter of the Revd John Briggs, fellow of Eton College. He had seven children (by his first marriage only), including Augustus Frederick Mayo, barrister; the Revd Robert Mayo; and Charles Thomas Mayo of Corsham, Wiltshire. In 1862 Mayo retired from practice, to live first at Yarmouth, on the Isle of Wight, and then with his son Charles at Corsham, where he died on 13 January 1871, and where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 18463


Mayow, John (bap. 1641, d. 1679), physiologist and chemist, was born in the manor house of Brae, in the parish of Morval, near Looe, Cornwall, and baptized at Morval on 21 December 1641, the second son and third child of Phillip Mayow, gentleman, and Frances, daughter of John Stuckley of Afton. He was received as a commoner at Wadham College, Oxford, on 2 July 1658 (under the name John Mayouwe), and admitted scholar on 23 September 1659. On the recommendation of Henry Coventry, a former fellow of the college, he was elected on 3 November 1660 to a jurist's fellowship at All Souls College from which he resigned in 1678. He graduated BCL on 30 May 1665, and DCL on 5 July 1670. Mayow obtained the further privilege of studying medicine, which exempted him from taking holy orders. Although he never took a medical degree he practised as a physician, his knowledge probably being acquired through his friendship with the physician Thomas Millington. Other important scientific contacts at Oxford included John Castle, Thomas Guidott, Robert Plot, John Ward, and Christopher Wren, all of whom were interested in anatomy, physiology, chemistry, and the new experimental philosophy. He almost certainly knew Richard Lower, a fellow Cornishman, who was working on the function of respiration with Thomas Willis, Sedleian professor of natural philosophy. His writings indicate a close familiarity with the mechanical philosophy of Rene Descartes. Mayow took his facts from great observers like Robert Boyle, Marcello Malpighi, Nicolaus Steno, Willis, and Lower, but above all from his personal dissections, observations, and experiments. 
The details of Mayow's career between 1670 and 1679 remain in shadow. He visited London on several occasions, where he shared with Robert Hooke his interest in respiration and combustion, but spent most of the teaching year in residence at All Souls. During the summer season he practised medicine at Bath, where he made a careful study of the spa waters, and published the results in a tract 'De sal-nitro'. In his 'Discourse of Bath' (1676), Mayow's former Oxford colleague Thomas Guidott denounced his chief conclusion that there was no nitre (potassium nitrate) in Bath waters, and suggested jealously that Mayow 'ploughed with my Heifer' (T. Guidott, 'Discourse of Bath', 1676, 6). Mayow was elected FRS on 30 November 1678 on the recommendation of Hooke, who clearly thought highly of his experimental talents. 
Mayow began the study of chemistry about 1667 with the Oxford chemist William Wildan, with whom he learned to prepare mineral acids, the art of distillation, the purification of metals, and the preparation of medicines. At the same time he appears to have acted as an occasional assistant to Boyle and Lower in their pneumatic experiments, some of which were devoted to the possibility of blood transfusion. In October 1667 Hooke and Lower performed a pulmonary insufflation procedure whereby an incision was made in the lungs of a dog while it was kept alive by air being artificially pumped into the lungs with bellows. Hooke believed this to be a crucial demonstration disproving the mechanical theory of respiration in favour of a chemical particulate theory that something extractable from the air powered the normal motions of respiration. The success of this brutal experiment in London inspired Mayow to write an essay on the mechanism of respiration, to which he coupled a medical essay on rickets. The 'Tractatus duo, de respiratione et de rachitide' was published at Oxford in 1668 and was favourably received by contemporaries. The second tract on rickets complemented Francis Glisson's comprehensive treatise on the disease published in 1650. It provided a clear clinical description of the disease and attributed the deformed limbs and pointed chests of victims to muscles failing to grow in the same proportion as the bones to which they were attached. The subject of the first essay, respiration, determined the work of Mayow's life. Both essays were republished at Leiden in 1671, and an English translation of 'De rachitide', by W. Sury, appeared under the title ''Rhachitidologia'' at Oxford in 1685. The two tracts were meanwhile revised and republished at Oxford in 1674 (with the vice-chancellor's imprimatur, 17 July 1673), together with three new essays ('De sal-nitro', 'De motu muscularis', and 'De respiratione foetus') under the title 'Tractatus quinque medico-physici'. This contains the only known portrait of Mayow. The book was dedicated to his patron, Coventry, and republished at The Hague in 1681 under the title 'Opera omnia', and at Geneva in 1685. They were also translated into Dutch (1684), German (1799), French (1840), and English as 'Medico-Physical Works', by A. Crum Brown and L. Dobbin for the Alembic Club of Edinburgh in 1907. 
In the tract on respiration (1668, revised 1674) Mayow described perfectly its mechanism, with the movement of ribs and diaphragm. He understood that the lungs were moved by the action of the diaphragm, and suggested that the internal and external intercostal muscles brought about the inspiration of air, which then expanded naturally into the enlarged space produced in the chest cavity. The function of breathing was not to cause the lungs to expand or to cool the blood, as William Harvey had thought, but to bring air in contact with the blood, to which it gave up its 'nitrum hoc aerium' ('aerial nitre'), and from which it carried off the vapours produced by the heating of the blood. He argued that the heart could not possibly be dilated by the blood fermenting in its cavity (as Descartes had suggested in 'L'homme', 1664), but that it is a muscle, whose function is to drive the blood through the lungs and over the body, a view proved experimentally the following year by Lower ('Tractatus de corde', 1669). The blood carried the aerial nitre constituent to the muscles, and their motion resulted from the chemical reaction (fermentation) with the combustible matter (sulphur) contained in them. The heart, like any other muscle, ceased to act when the nitro-aerial particles were no longer supplied to it. Air deprived of aerial nitre necessarily produced death. The tract clearly demonstrated awareness of ideas current in chemistry as well as physiology, especially those of Willis, but does not appear to be based on personal experiments. 
Experiments with the new air pump in the early 1660s with birds, mice, and candles had led Boyle to conclude that the air acted as a transporting agent to remove impurities from the lungs to the external air. In the 'Micrographia' (1665), Hooke developed a theory of combustion that owed much to a widely known contemporary meteorological theory that was based upon a gunpowder analogy. According to this nitro-aerial theory, thunder and lightning were likened to the explosion and flashing of gunpowder, whose active ingredients were known to be sulphur and nitre. Since it was also known that nitre lowered the temperature of water and fertilized crops, it could be supposed that the nitrous particles of air were probably responsible for snow and hail and the vitality of vegetables. Such ideas can be traced directly to the work of the Polish alchemist Michael Sendivogius, especially his 'Novum lumen chymicum' ('New Light of Alchemy', 1604), in which he had identified 'sal nitrum' (nitre) as a universal salt and a component of the atmosphere. It was Mayow who developed this nitro-aerial theory to its fullest extent in 1674 in the tract 'On sal nitrum and the nitro-aerial spirit' in which he explored the physico-chemical properties of this 'vital, igneous and highly fermentative spirit' (Mayow, 1). He used the theory to explain a very wide range of phenomena, including respiration, the heat and flames of combustion, calcination, deliquescence, the maintenance of body heat, the scarlet colour of arterial blood, plant growth, and, once more, meteorological phenomena. He recognized saltpetre as containing a base and an acid, and that (following Sendivogius), the acid part was formed from one of the air's constituents, the air being composed of these nitrous particles and other materials that were left behind after respiration and combustion. He showed that when a candle burned in an inverted round bottomed glass flask submerged in water, it consumed the nitrous part of the air, which thereupon lost its elasticity, causing the water to rise. The same thing happened when a live mouse replaced the candle. 'Hence', he concluded, 'it is manifest that air is deprived of its elastic force by the breathing of animals very much in the same way as by the burning of flame' (Mayow, 75). Calcination involved the mechanical addition of nitro-aerial particles to a metal (such as antimony) which, he knew from some of Boyle's findings, brought about an increase in weight. This explanation seemed confirmed by the fact that antimony produced the same calx when it was heated in air as when it was dissolved in nitric acid and heated. The rusting of iron and the conversion of iron pyrites into vitriol (sulphuric acid) were due to the same cause. Combustion was possible only when sulphurous (that is, inflammable) matter came into contact with nitro-aerial particles. 
The older tract, 'De respiratione', revised, followed 'De sal-nitro' and Mayow next extended his explanation of respiration to the foetus in the uterus and the chick in the egg. The maternal blood supplied the foetus not only with nutrition but also with nitro-aerial particles. The egg, he believed, contained 'pure or vital air', and not ordinary air (Mayow, 219). Moreover, as the egg is kept warm and the chick itself does little work, it needs little respiration. In the tract 'Muscular motion and animal spirits' he modified Descartes's explanation of muscular action, and his own account of 1668, by suggesting that animal spirits were the nitro-aerial particles that, separated from the blood in the brain, travelled along the nerves to the muscles, where they combined with sulphurous matter and caused the muscles to contract by the vehement motion set up in the fibres. Although divided into tracts, the 'Tractatus quinque' is given unity of form by the way the nitro-aerial particles are deployed to develop a coherent physiological system. While he carefully qualified his assertions when they were not fully rooted in experience and logic, the book was less favourably received than the 'Tractatus duo'. Henry Oldenburg, secretary of the Royal Society, and a friend of Boyle's, was particularly hostile -- no doubt because Mayow seemed closer to Hooke than Boyle in the debates over combustion and respiration. 
Mayow died in an apothecary's house bearing the sign of the anchor in York Street, Covent Garden, 'having a little before been married, not altogether to his content' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1119). Mayow's will, dated 24 May 1679, leaves bequests to his wife and son, John, as well as to his mother, brother, and sisters. He was buried in the church of St Paul, Covent Garden, on 10 October 1679. 
Mayow's two books were widely read and quoted both by contemporaries and by later writers. Early historians of chemistry liked to find a close resemblance between Mayow's aerial nitre and the late eighteenth-century oxygen theory of combustion and respiration, and this interpretation caused much controversy among twentieth-century historians of science concerned with Mayow's originality. But it is only the transference properties that are similar. Quite apart from different theoretical entities being used by Mayow and Lavoisier, Mayow's theory was essentially a Cartesian mechanical, not chemical, theory of combustion and respiration. It also remained locked into a dualistic and panvitalistic world of powers and principles. Nevertheless, despite the speculative character of the nitro-aerial theory, there is much to admire concerning Mayow's experimental ingenuity. Although he did not develop the pneumatic trough for collecting gases, he devised a method for capturing the 'wild spirits' (gases) that his contemporaries found so elusive by arranging for pieces of iron to be lowered into nitric acid inside an inverted cupping glass. His method of transferring an air (gas) from one vessel to another was original and influential. He must be classed with Hooke and Boyle, possessing the scientific imagination of the one, the tenacity of the other. Mayow was a major figure in the Restoration school of Oxford experimentalists who took Harvey's discovery of the circulation of the blood as the basis for further experimental investigations. Mayow had the genius to perceive exactly the problems that had to be solved before any great advance in chemistry or physiology could be made; to guess at and partly to discover their solutions; and he showed a critical faculty in theory and experiment that was not to be met with in these two sciences until the time of Lavoisier. 


@@@@@


doc= 18464


Mazzinghi, Joseph, Count Mazzinghi in the papal nobility (1765-1844), composer, descended from an ancient Florentine family, was born, probably in London, on 25 December 1765, the eldest son of Tommaso Mazzinghi, a wine merchant who played the violin at Marylebone Gardens and, in 1763, had published six solos for that instrument. Tommaso went bankrupt in 1771 and died in 1775. Joseph was trained as a musician by his mother's sister, Cassandra Frederich (or Friedrich; afterwards Mrs Wynne), and later by Johann Christian Bach. At the age of ten he became organist to the Portuguese Chapel. 
In 1779 Mazzinghi was apprenticed to Leopoldo De Michele, chief copyist to the Italian Opera at the King's Theatre, and acted as orchestra librarian. This led to his appointment, from the 1784-5 season, as composer, arranger, and concertmaster (directing rehearsals and playing continuo from the harpsichord) under the management of John Gallini. The London system of presenting most operas as pasticcios meant that he 'became nearly as important a member of the company as the foreign [visiting] house composers' (Price and others, 'Italian Opera', 1.336). Even though recognition of recent continental opera as an integral whole was beginning to creep in, he adapted works by Sarti, Cimarosa, and Paisiello, sometimes adding arias of his own. He was not above publishing as his two of the most popular pieces in Martin y Soler's 'Una cosa rara'; on the other hand a substitute aria for Cimarosa's 'L'Olimpiade' improved on the original. He also composed original music for at least nine ballets, some of them by the innovative choreographer Jean-Georges Noverre. This, however, was regarded as a task for a second-rate composer, and some of the music has been judged 'frankly dull'. 
Mazzinghi remained at his post until the King's Theatre was burnt down on 17 June 1789. He was then taken on at a salary of $300 as director of the 1790-91 season at the Pantheon, the aristocratic managers of which had secured the one licence granted for Italian opera. His appointment may have been influenced by his closeness to the prince of Wales, who entrusted him with running the Carlton House concerts; he later taught the princess the piano. The Pantheon was, in its turn, destroyed by arson on 14 January 1792. Mazzinghi's duties were wide and included the composition of an opera; he apparently set out to write yet another pasticcio, but it was never performed. He and the company finished the 1792 season at the Little Theatre in the Haymarket, but when the rebuilt King's Theatre opened for Italian opera under new direction in 1793 Mazzinghi was no longer employed. 
Meanwhile Mazzinghi had taken advantage of the wide terms of his contract to compose English operas for Covent Garden, and went on doing so until 1810. Among them was 'Ramah Droog' (1798), written in collaboration with William Reeve, with a 'spirited and inventive' overture (Fiske). Mazzinghi's miscellaneous piano compositions were popular; he was a fashionable teacher and arranged the 'nobility concerts', established in 1791 and held on Sunday evenings at private houses. 
Mazzinghi had married, at an unknown date, a woman with whom he had a son. After her death he married a daughter of the distiller Benjamin Hodges, who also predeceased him; they had a daughter. During a trip to Italy in 1834 he was made a count by Pope Gregory XVI, and recognized as a patrician of Florence by the grand duke of Tuscany. In his last years he retired to Bath while keeping on a house in Cadogan Place, Chelsea. He died on 15 January 1844 of a cerebral haemorrhage while on a visit to his son at Downside College, and was buried in the vault of the Chelsea Catholic church on the 25th. 
Besides his stage pieces, Mazzinghi published between seventy and eighty piano sonatas, upwards of 200 other works for piano and as many for harp and other instruments, as well as about thirty-five vocal trios and a number of songs. Much of this mass of work, produced with apparent ease, was musicianly, but the flowing melodies were seldom strikingly original. 


@@@@@


doc= 18465


Mede, Joseph (1586-1638), Hebraist and biblical scholar, was born in October 1586 at Berden, Essex, of unknown parents 'of honest rank', according to the 'Life' contained in his collected works, and was related through his father to Sir John Mede (or Mead) of Wenden Lofts, near Bishop's Stortford. When Mede was ten his father died of smallpox, and his mother married a Gower of Naseing, Essex, by whom he was sent to school, first at Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire, and later at Wethersfield, Essex. While at Wethersfield, and on a trip to London, he purchased a copy of Bellarmine's 'Institutiones linguae Hebraicae' and by the time he left school had, without any instruction, obtained a considerable working knowledge of Hebrew. In 1603 he matriculated as sizar at Christ's College, Cambridge, where he studied first under Daniel Rogers and then under William Addison, before graduating BA in 1607 and proceeding MA in 1610. In 1613 he was elected to succeed Hugh Broughton to the King Edward VI fellowship through the influence of Lancelot Andrewes, then bishop of Ely, after having been passed over several times on suspicion of having 'too much... tenderness to the Puritan faction' (Mede, 850). Valentine Cary, master of Christ's, may eventually have been disposed to view him more favourably on account of his friendship with Sir Martin Stuteville of Dalham, who was also a friend of Mede. In 1618 Mede was appointed Mildmay Greek lecturer, holding both fellowship and lectureship for the rest of his life. He did not marry, and lived modestly in a chamber at ground level beneath the college library. 
Mede was a man of wide interests and considerable attainment. In addition to his skills in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin and his knowledge of the biblical text in English and the original languages, he was proficient in several other disciplines. His early biographer describes him as 'an acute logician, an accurate philosopher, a skilful mathematician, a great philologer, and an excellent anatomist' (Worthington, ii). By invitation he frequently attended dissections at Gonville and Caius College. He was also proficient in botany, physics, and history, and was interested in astrology. He is said to have been as deeply versed in ecclesiastical antiquities and knowledge of the Greek and Latin fathers 'as any man living' (Brook, 429). His pursuit of knowledge and his scholarly achievements, including his biblical studies, were marked by a love of truth for its own sake. 'I cannot believe', he is reported as saying, 'that truth can be prejudiced by the discovery of truth' (ibid., 431). A period of scepticism early in his reading of philosophy, which led towards Pyrrhonism, gave way to devout belief. As has been observed, 'escaping the jaws of atheism, he fled towards faith' (Firth, 214). 
Despite his profound erudition, Mede was a man of great modesty and humility. John Worthington, who is generally credited with the 'Life' of Mede prefixed to later editions of his 'Works', says he was 'studiously regardless' of formal academic attainment, ecclesiastical preferment, and worldly advantage (Worthington, xv). He eschewed higher degrees beyond the BD, which he took in 1618, and in 1627 and again in 1630 declined the provostship of Trinity College, Dublin, an opening made possible on the recommendation of Archbishop James Ussher, who is said to have sought Mede's assistance in the determination of his own great work on sacred chronology. Among Mede's pupils, whom he treated with great consideration, were several who achieved distinction, including John Milton and Henry More. Although his income was meagre Mede regularly gave one-tenth to charitable causes. He maintained good personal relationships and was known for his openness and generosity towards those who opposed him. He suffered throughout life from a speech impediment which, particularly in the early years, led him to decline many invitations to speak in public. He persevered with the defect, however, and was able to preach without noticeable hesitation. 
Mede's theological and ecclesiological allegiance was finally settled in favour of moderation and episcopacy, although he was included in Benjamin Brook's 'The Lives of the Puritans' (1813) and had some puritan sympathies. Worthington notes his 'reverential regard to the established government and discipline of the Church' (Worthington, xxx), and Ussher's support and, more strikingly, Andrewes's invitation to him to become his chaplain cannot be ignored. Brook refers to Mede's correspondence with several eminent nonconformists and his fear that Roman rites would prevail again in the Church of England. Mede's view of Rome as the Antichrist and his conviction of the necessity of a godly life were both puritan emphases. They were balanced, however, by his concern that some puritan arguments opened the door to Socinianism and by his condemnation of a book by John Bastwick in a letter to Samuel Hartlib. He also opposed presbyterian discipline and practice. It would be incorrect to denominate him a party man in any strict sense, since a spirit of fraternal ecumenicity marked his outlook. He sought charity and mutual forbearance, 'the owning of each other as brethren and members of the same body whereof Christ is the head' (ibid., xvii). Remaining loyal to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' and prayer book liturgy, he expected that more would be achieved from mutual respect and toleration than by any attempt to legislate or impose uniformity. 
Mede is notable for his works on biblical eschatology, and especially for 'Clavis Apocalyptica' (1627), translated into English posthumously by Richard More and published as 'The Key of the Revelation' (1643). It enjoyed the almost universal praise of contemporaries in England and on the continent and deeply influenced the development of eschatological thought in seventeenth-century England. Despite being intended originally only for private circulation among a select academic audience, it was published three times in Latin and in English between 1627 and 1650. The second Latin (1632) and subsequent English editions included Mede's 'In sancti Joannis Apocalypsin commentarius', a commentary on the 'Apocalypse', and the 'Key' and the commentary, together with his other eschatological works, sufficiently emphasized the coming millennium to justify Mede being regarded as the father of English millenarianism. Given the radical nature of much of the ensuing millenarian activity, it was a reputation that Mede would have sought to avoid almost at any cost. He claimed to have reached his own moderate millenarian convictions with reluctance, having honestly endeavoured to locate the millennium in the past as had other interpreters, including Thomas Brightman and Hugo Grotius. His study of the biblical text, however, would not permit that conclusion. In anticipating a future millennium Mede did not consider that he was proposing extreme or heretical doctrine, but rather a return to the belief of the early church. The view that Mede derived his millenarianism from continental sources, particularly Alsted and Pareus, is outweighed by his own testimony and that of contemporaries. His biographer comments, 'He proceeded upon grounds never traced by any, and infinitely more probable than any laid down by those who before him undertook that task' (Worthington, vii). Fuller remarked that the Fifth Monarchists had driven the nail 'which Master Mede did first enter further than he ever intended it' (Fuller, 335). It remains fair comment on Mede's own millenarian position, and is supported by the later view that it was due to the efforts of others after his death that Mede was 'transformed from scholar to prophet' (Firth, 228). Most of his works were first published posthumously. 
The distinctive element of the 'Clavis Apocalyptica', and Mede's unique contribution to contemporary and subsequent prophetic studies, was the noted synchronisms, which he argued were essential to a correct understanding of the book of 'Revelation'. Within the context of the prevailing historicist interpretation of apocalyptic prophecy, the thesis underlying the synchronisms was that the major prophetic outlines in the books of 'Daniel' and the 'Revelation' were inter-related, contingent on each other, and that at many points they overlapped in scope, depicting the same era or events with different emphases. This was Mede's 'Law of Synchronistical necessity' (Mede, 583). It proposed to unlock the mysteries of apocalyptic prophecy making them accessible and relevant to the present age. Mede's standing as a careful scholar ensured that it was to have a profound effect on the religious life and outlook of the time and on the immediate course of English history over the next three decades. In addition to placing the millennium firmly in the future, thus opening the way for speculative interpretations and extreme millenarianism, Mede's exegetical scheme had at least two further consequences: it confirmed historicism as the fundamental principle of prophetic interpretation in English eschatological thought for several succeeding generations, and it unhesitatingly identified Rome as the Antichrist and the predicted latter-day apostasy. In an age which vividly remembered the Gunpowder Plot and its associated fears, Mede's considered and clearly articulated view of Rome as 'the unfaithful and treacherous spouse, the Christian Jezebel' (J. Mede, 'The Apostasy of the Latter Times', 1641) was staple diet for English minds which cherished protestantism and valued their religious freedom. Mede's work underpinned such intrinsic aspects of the religious outlook which prevailed in English post-Reformation thought for another 300 years or so. 
Chronology and eschatology formed the basis for much of Mede's extensive correspondence, published in the later definitive editions of his works, edited by John Worthington (3rd edn, 1672; reprinted, 1677). Between 1626 and 1638 Mede's correspondents included Samuel Hartlib and John Durie, and his friends William Ames, professor of theology at Franeker in the Netherlands, and Sir William Boswell, ambassador to The Hague, each of whom was instrumental in bringing Mede and the 'Clavis Apocalyptica' to the attention of potential readers abroad, and conveyed to Mede the comments and criticisms of some of his overseas readers. He also corresponded with James Ussher, William Twisse -- later prolocutor of the Westminster assembly, who provided the preface for 'The Apostasy of the Latter Times' -- and Samuel Ward, master of Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge. Between 1620 and 1631 Mede also wrote regularly and at length to his friend Sir Martin Stuteville. This extensive series of letters, filling two folio volumes in the British Library (Harleian MSS 389 and 390), deals largely with current university issues and matters of local and public interest in England and abroad, throwing additional light on Mede as a man of his time, willing and able to comment on contemporary issues. The correspondence was brought to an end by Sir Martin's death in 1631. 
Mede himself died prematurely, and in some discomfort, on 1 October 1638 at Christ's College, his death precipitated by the application of inappropriate medication which caused an internal blockage. His will, drawn up the day before his death, reveals that he was a man of only modest means, worth in all no more than $500. He left $100 to 'the master and fellows' of Christ's College, $100 to the poor of Cambridge, and, after various smaller bequests to his sister and her children, to the children of a deceased sister, and to a pupil, the residue of his estate to Christ's College, 'towards the adorning of the College Chapel', where he was buried on 2 October. A delayed memorial service was held at Great St Mary's in February 1639 at which the preacher was John Alsop, also a fellow of Christ's and Mede's executor. A monumental inscription to Mede in Christ's College chapel, preserved in Latin (Mede, 35) and English, recalls his interest in philosophy, mathematics, chronology, history, and Near Eastern antiquities, and contains the words, 'He studied all languages, cultivated all the arts,... and above all things, theology, the queen of all sciences.... He was a bigot to no party, but loving truth and peace, he was just to all; candid to his friends, benignant to others: holy, chaste, and humble in his language, wishes, and habits. (Brook, 433)' It remains a fitting tribute to one of the more notable English scholars of the seventeenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 18466


Meade, Matthew (1628/9-1699), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Leighton Buzzard, Bedfordshire, the second son of Richard Meade of Mursley, Buckinghamshire, and his wife, Joane. After studying at Eton College (1645-8), he was elected a scholar at King's College, Cambridge, where he was admitted as a fellow on 6 August 1649. He resigned on 6 June 1651, possibly to avoid expulsion for refusing to take the engagement to the Commonwealth. Between 1653 and 1657 he was involved in a dispute over the rectory of Great Brickhill, Buckinghamshire, which (despite support from within the parish and from the triers, who dispatched a troop of horse to back up their presentation of him to the living) he ultimately lost. 
Meade married Elizabeth Walton (died 1707) of All Hallows parish, Lombard Street, London, on 3 January 1655 at St Mary Woolnoth, London. The same year he became morning lecturer at St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney, where he associated with William Greenhill, the vicar, and on 28 December 1656 he joined the gathered congregation of which Greenhill was pastor. About August 1656 Meade wrote to Richard Baxter, whom he did not know, expressing his admiration for 'Gildas Salvianus' and asking Baxter's advice on which books of philosophy and divinity to read, subjects where he admitted his knowledge did not match his competence in Hebrew, Latin, and Greek. Meade became an assistant to the Buckinghamshire commission on 29 September 1657 and the Middlesex commission on 24 October 1657. Cromwell appointed him curate of New Chapel, Shadwell, near Stepney, in January 1658, and on 1 February 1659 he became a lecturer at St Bride's, Fleet Street. After the army dissolved the restored Rump Parliament in October 1659, on the 31st, Meade, Greenhill, John Owen, and sixteen other Independents sent a delegation to ascertain George Monck's intentions. Appointed preacher to the council of state on 16 January 1660, Meade was assigned lodgings at Whitehall on the 31st. 
Ejected from his positions at the Restoration, Meade continued to preach. In his prefatory epistle to 'Spiritual Wisdom Improved Against Temptation', a sermon preached at Stepney on 16 September 1660, he indicated he had been accused of sedition for having averred that worship according to the 'Book of Common Prayer' was sinful. Following Thomas Venner's Fifth Monarchist uprising in January 1661, Meade and Greenhill had to take out recognizances of $300 each for their good behaviour. With William Dell, George Cokayne, and five other nonconformist ministers, Meade published 'An English-Greek Lexicon' in the same year. That summer, as lecturer at St Sepulchre, Holborn, he preached seven sermons on 'Acts' 26: 28, seeking to unmask hypocrites and awaken 'the formal sleepy professor'; the sermons were published as 'En oligoi Christianos': 'the Almost Christian Discovered' (1662). The informer Edward Potter deemed Meade one of the 'Chief Ringleaders' among London nonconformists (TNA: PRO, SP 29/43/107). Ejected from his lectureship at St Sepulchre in 1662, Meade preached his farewell sermon, 'The Pastors Valediction' (1662), on '1 Corinthians' 1: 3, exhorting his audience to suffer rather than conform. 
Meade subsequently visited the Netherlands, but he was apparently back by 1665. In 'Solomon's Prescription' (1666) he depicted the plague as 'Medicine for a distempered Nation' (sig. A3'r') and vowed to preach despite the government's efforts to silence him. The following year, in 'An Appendix to Solomon's Prescription', he blamed England's calamities on the restraints imposed on dissenting clergy and called for an indulgence and protestant unity. On 21 February 1669 he became Greenhill's assistant at Stepney, and the same year they preached to a conventicle of 300 in Meetinghouse Alley, Wapping. Archbishop Gilbert Sheldon's survey also linked him to an Independent church at Woburn, Bedfordshire, and a congregation of presbyterians, Independents, and Baptists at Sibson, Leicestershire. His reputation reached to Massachusetts, where on 21 August 1671 a group of magistrates and clergy wrote to him, Greenhill, Owen, and sixteen others seeking help for Harvard College. 
Following Greenhill's death the Independent church at Stepney called Meade as its pastor on 13 October 1671, and on 14 December Owen, Joseph Caryl, George Griffith, and John Collins ordained him. The church inaugurated a new meeting-house on 13 September 1674, complete with four pine columns donated by the Dutch states general. Earlier that year he preached the first of what would become annual May day sermons for young people. Found guilty in king's bench of violating the 'Five Mile Act' and fined $40 in 1678, he filed a writ of errour, which the court rejected because the judgment had not been entered on the plea roll. When he sought relief from the king, the House of Lords upheld the verdict on 10 July. 
Undeterred Meade continued to preach and in November 1681 he, Owen, and nine other dissenters were fined a total of $4840 for recusancy and violating the 'Five Mile Act'. At Tunbridge Wells in July 1682 the printer Henry Hills heard Meade, Griffith, and other nonconformist ministers denounce popery and arbitrary government. For preaching to five conventicles at his house in October and November 1682, Meade was fined $180 at the Middlesex sessions, and in December a magistrate and his guards damaged Meade's meeting-house and distrained his goods, though Meade escaped. In the ensuing days he completed an expanded version of his 1681 and 1682 May day sermons, 'The Good of Early Obedience' (1683), with an epistle, dated 15 November 1682, to Lady Diane Alington. 
Following the disclosure of the Rye House plot the government issued a warrant for Meade's arrest on 27 June 1683. With the dissenting minister Walter Cross and the conspirator Zachary Bourne he was apprehended as he attempted to flee the country; one E. M. provided an account of his capture in 'A Copy of a Letter' (1683). Examined by the privy council in July, Meade admitted having used the alias Matthew Richardson to avoid arrest, acknowledged that John Nisbet, an agent of the radical covenanters known as the United Societies, had lived in his home eight or nine months, and confessed having had contact with the plotter Robert Ferguson. Meade was suspected of having administered a 'sacramentall Oath of Secrecy to diverse persons in Wapping' (U. Nott. L., MS PwV95, fol. 250), but he almost certainly knew nothing of the conspiracy of Robert West and others to assassinate Charles and James, a point confirmed by Bourne. Meade claimed he had criticized Ferguson for writing in opposition to the government. However, he apparently knew about the plans of the Monmouth cabal for an insurrection, as the duke, West, and (under torture) William Carstares testified. In mid-July Meade, suffering from a stone, petitioned Charles for pardon and release, expressing remorse for having opposed the government. A warrant for his release dated 27 July stipulated that he appear in king's bench in Michaelmas term, and he was freed on the 30th after being bound over on his recognizance of $2000 and providing two sureties. 
Following Owen's death, Meade succeeded him as lecturer at Pinners' Hall, London, in September 1683, a position which he held until his own death. Charged at the Middlesex sessions in December 1683 with recusancy and attending conventicles, Meade was ordered to conform and publicly confess. In October 1684 he was among 111 dissidents in London and Westminster targeted for arrest. The following year Ferguson recruited him to help raise London for Monmouth. The duke wanted Meade, John Wildman, and Henry Danvers to launch an insurrection as soon as royalist troops left for the south-west but Meade, now increasingly cautious, was dilatory in returning from Essex and failed to assist Monmouth. He evaded arrest by fleeing to the Netherlands in October with the help of Sir John Thompson, the former whig MP. 
At first Meade was openly hostile to James's regime, proclaiming in Amsterdam 'that Babylon might be destroyed in England & her brats dasht against the walls' (BL, Add. MS 41818, fol. 125'v'). However, by April 1686 he had repudiated his militancy and was defending the royal prerogative and dissuading English merchants from settling abroad. This probably explains why the exiled Monmouth rebel Joseph Tiley opposed his appointment as minister to the English clothworkers in Leeuwarden. Before moving to Utrecht in June, Meade preached a farewell sermon in Amsterdam criticizing the use of violence to oppose princes or reform the church. That summer he sought the assistance of the English envoy Bevil Skelton in obtaining a pardon, manifesting his loyalty by praying for James II so fervently 'that all the whiggish auditory were amazed' (BL, Add. MS 41813, fol. 233'v'). 
Pardoned on 19 March 1687, Meade returned to England, and in November preached before the lord mayor at Grocers' Hall. On 31 January 1689 he preached thanksgiving sermons for William's victory in the merchants' lecture at Broad Street and to the Independent church at Stepney. Published as 'The Vision of the Wheels' (1689), the sermons described the revolution as a work of providence. His return to Stepney prompted the congregation to add galleries to their meeting-house in March 1689 and give him an adjoining house and garden in July. He wrote an epistle for Cotton Mather's funeral sermon commemorating his brother, 'Early Piety, Exemplified in the Life and Death of Mr. Nathanael Mather' (1689). 
Meade devoted his final years to the cause of nonconformist unity. In 1690 he joined the presbyterian minister John Howe in promoting the Happy Union of Independents and Presbyterians, and the Common Fund to assist needy ministers, subscribing $100 and serving as correspondent for Bedfordshire, Gloucestershire, Kent, Leicestershire, Middlesex, Oxfordshire, and Lancashire. On 6 April 1691 he preached the inaugural sermon for the Happy Union in his meeting-house on 'Ezekiel' 37: 19. Published as 'Two Sticks Made One' (1691), it included his argument that 'Divisions are very dishonourable to Jesus Christ' (p. 15). His ecumenical outlook was also reflected in the fact that two of the young men who had lived and studied with him, John Nesbit and James Peirce, became Independent and presbyterian ministers respectively. In 1692 Meade published 'A Funeral Sermon' for Thomas Rosewell, minister at Rotherhithe. Theological differences led to the disintegration of the Happy Union in 1694, but in December 1695 Meade helped found the Congregational Fund Board to aid needy clergy. With Howe, he wrote an epistle to David Clarkson's 'Sermons and Discourses' (1696), and he preached the funeral sermon for the London minister Timothy Cruso, published as 'Comfort in Death' (1698). 
Meade died on 16 October 1699, aged seventy, and was buried in Stepney churchyard -- Howe's sermon on the occasion was published as 'A Funeral Sermon for... Matthew Mead' (1699). Meade was survived by his widow and seven of their thirteen children, Matthew, Samuel, Robert, Richard Mead (a physician), James, Rebecca (Shrimpton), and Elizabeth. In his will, dated 28 September 1699, he bequeathed more than $2800, houses in London, property in Buckinghamshire, stock in the East India Company, and part-ownership of a ship to his wife, children, grandchildren, and three servants. An anonymous elegy also marked his death: 'Tristiae Christianae' (1699). Several of his works were posthumously published: 'The Young Man's Remembrancer, and Youth's Best Choice' (3rd edn, 1701), his last two May day sermons, and 'Original Sermons on the Jews; and on Falling into the Hands of the Living God' (1836). An uncompromising nonconformist for nearly four decades, Meade was deeply concerned for protestantism's future in England. His support for Monmouth, his enthusiastic embrace of William, and his efforts on behalf of nonconformist unity were manifestations of that concern. 


@@@@@


doc= 18467


Mead, Richard (1673-1754), physician and collector of books and art, was born at Worcester House, Stepney, Middlesex, on 11 August 1673, the eleventh child of thirteen of Matthew Meade (1628/9-1699), a nonconforming minister, and his wife, Elizabeth Walton (died 1707). Matthew Meade had been ejected for nonconformity in 1662, but apparently had a private income. He educated his children at home, hiring John Nesbitt, another dissenter, to tutor them in Latin. Matthew Meade's involvement in the Rye House plot in 1683 led to his temporary exile to the Netherlands, at which time he sent his son Richard to the private school, in Clerkenwell Close, of the dissenter Thomas Singleton, a former second master at Eton. Richard Mead excelled in the classics, and in 1689 he followed his elder brother Samuel (1670-1734) to the University of Utrecht, where he studied with Johann Georg Graevius (1632-1703), a noted scholar of classical culture, whose 'Thesaurus antiquitatum Romanorum' helped form Mead's taste for collecting antiquities. 
Mead decided to study medicine, and registered on 18 April 1693 at the University of Leiden. It is likely that he arrived in Leiden several months earlier because he became a close acquaintance of Archibald Pitcairne, who had arrived in Leiden as professor in the spring of 1692 and left abruptly in the summer of 1693. Mead lived in Pitcairne's house for a time, along with Hermann Boerhaave, then also a student. Pitcairne's iatromechanics strongly influenced Mead, as his subsequent works in physiology attest, and the two remained friends. Mead also studied botany with Paul Hermann. 
Mead left Leiden early in 1695 without taking a degree, and accompanied his brother Samuel, David Polhill, and Thomas Pellett, another medical student, on a tour of Italy. Their first stop was Turin, where a plausible story about Mead (with some variations) later arose. According to the story Mead inquired about the so-called Tabula Isiaca, a bronze tablet inlaid with silver depicting the Egyptian goddess Isis. It had been found in Rome in 1525 and eventually reached Turin, where it was then lost. Mead asked permission to search for it and found it in storage (some versions of the story say he found it in Florence), and it was duly put on exhibit at the royal museum in Turin. Although at the time the tablet was believed to originate in ancient Egypt it has since been proved to be a Roman forgery. The story is notable for indicating Mead's early interest in antiquities. 
From Turin the party travelled to Florence and then Padua, where Mead received the degree of MD on 26 August 1695 after a short period of residence. The tour continued to Rome and Naples, and the group returned to England in the summer of 1696. Mead set up a medical practice out of his father's house in Stepney. He did not obtain a licence from the Royal College of Physicians of London, but a dissenting physician in Stepney was probably below the consideration of the college. Certainly Mead made no effort at concealment, and his father, Matthew, who had returned from the Netherlands in 1687, promoted his son's practice to his congregation. In July 1699 Mead married Ruth Marsh (1683-1720), the daughter of a Bristol and London merchant, and his father gave him the Stepney house (which he had been given by the trustees of the Stepney meeting-house). Matthew Meade died on 16 October 1699, and soon after his death Richard Mead left the Stepney meeting-house (of which he was a deacon) and joined the Church of England. Mead had eight children with his wife Ruth, of whom three daughters and a son reached adulthood. 
In 1702 Mead published his first work, 'A Mechanical Account of Poisons', which fully displayed his commitment to Pitcairne's style of iatromechanics, stating that mathematical learning would soon distinguish a physician from a quack. However, Mead was never known as a mathematician, and his book contained very little mathematical analysis. His emphasis was rather on mechanical chemistry, which explained phenomena in terms of particles of differing sizes and shapes. Mead added an attractive force to this chemistry which he identified with gravity, thus placing himself among the Newtonians. His most original contribution was his discussion of venomous snakes, which had been instigated by his studies with Paul Hermann at Leiden. Mead dissected several vipers and accurately described the mechanism of the fang and its operation. He also confirmed Galen's observation that a puncture wound was necessary for the venom to take effect, in part by swallowing a sample of venom without ill effect. 'A Mechanical Account of Poisons' also discussed, among other topics, noxious airs, citing the Grotta de' Cani near Naples, which Mead had visited in 1695. For therapies he recommended either a substance to neutralize the excess acidity of the poison or an external stimulant such as a cold bath which would keep the blood moving and prevent the formation of coagulated clusters of blood which he believed caused the symptoms in poisoning cases. 
The 'Mechanical Account' was a success, and it placed Mead at the centre of a highly competitive group of young physicians and natural philosophers who sought the approbation of Isaac Newton. Mead was ambitious, and his combination of Newtonian (but not mathematical) theory, classical allusion, and practical therapies won him attention. He was elected to the Royal Society in 1703, and the 'Philosophical Transactions' favourably summarized his book. In the same year the 'Transactions' published his translation of a letter from Giovanni Cosimo Bonomo to Francesco Redi of 1687, in which Bonomo described his discovery of the mite, 'Acarus' or 'Sarcoptus scabiei', which caused the common skin disease known as scabies or 'the itch'. 
Mead was elected physician to St Thomas's Hospital in Southwark on 5 May 1703, and left Stepney with his young family to settle in Crutched Friars in the City of London, where he lived until 1711. A hospital physician, while not usually paid, gained clinical experience with a wide variety of patients as well as access to the wealthy and influential individuals who formed the governing board of the hospital and whose patronage could significantly advance a medical practice. At about the same time Mead was appointed one of the readers in anatomy by the London Company of Barber-Surgeons. The readers delivered the lectures which accompanied the annual public dissection for the benefit of the surgical apprentices. Each reader commented upon one part of the body but did not himself perform the dissection. It is not known where Mead might have gained his knowledge of dissection and anatomy. The professorship of anatomy was vacant at Leiden during his time there, but Boerhaave held private dissecting sessions and Mead may have joined him. The readership paid well, and Mead continued in this position until 1715. 
Mead continued his efforts in Newtonian physiology with his next publication, 'De imperio solis ac lunae in corpora humana et morbis inde oriundis' ('On the Influence of the Sun and Moon on Human Bodies and the Diseases Arising Thence'), published in 1704. Here Mead joined Hippocratic climatic theory with Newton's theory of the tides, claiming that a tidal flux of the air caused many ailments. This account has variously been termed the last gasp of astrological medicine and one of the first works of Newtonian medicine. The lack of any mathematical foundation makes Mead's claims to Newtonianism unconvincing, but the case histories he cites, many from Pitcairne, are of interest. Mead's puritan upbringing is evident in his accounts of providential interventions in the weather, such as the storms which accompanied Cromwell's death in 1658. This work was also a great success: Halley reprinted it in his 'Miscellanea curiosa' (1708), and an English translation appeared in 1712. 
Mead was elected to the council of the Royal Society in 1705, and again in 1707, serving continually from the latter date until his death nearly half a century later. He was appointed a vice-president by Newton on 17 December 1713. On 4 December 1707 Mead was made DM at Oxford, and the Royal College of Physicians admitted him as a candidate on 25 June 1708. He was elected a fellow on 9 April 1716, the same day as his close friend Dr John Freind, and they 'ate sweet cakes together as censors' ('DNB'). Despite their differences in politics, for Mead was as strong a whig as Freind was a tory, they remained the best of friends, sharing interests in classical literature as well as in Newtonian natural philosophy. 
As Mead progressed in his profession his residence moved west: from Stepney to Crutched Friars, and then to Austin Friars in 1711, where he occupied the house of the recently deceased physician George Howe, inheriting many of his patients. Here he made the acquaintance of John Radcliffe, one of the most successful physicians of his generation. An anecdote relates that Radcliffe, encountering Mead reading Hippocrates in Greek, commented, 'When I am dead, you will occupy the throne of physic in this town,' Mead is said to have replied, 'Sir, your empire, like Alexander's, will be divided among many successors' (Macmichael, 23), an answer which well pleased Radcliffe and which reveals something of Mead's character. While Radcliffe prided himself on his lack of theory, on the model of Sydenham, Mead had made his mark in part by writing about theory. None the less, Radcliffe chose Mead as his successor, bequeathing to him not only his gold-headed cane but his house in Bloomsbury and his substantial medical practice. Mead attended Queen Anne on her deathbed in 1714 and accurately predicted her imminent demise, although this was not a politically expedient view. Radcliffe died a few months later. Mead resigned as physician at St Thomas's on 5 January 1715 and was named a governor. While at St Thomas's he had devised a method of tapping for dropsy which involved applying pressure to the abdomen while tapping occurred. This greatly reduced the incidence of syncope during the procedure. Mead's patients included Gilbert Burnet, Robert Harley, and the princess of Wales. 
The publication in 1717 of John Freind's 'Commentarium novem de febribus' ('Nine Commentaries on Fevers'), appended to his edition of Hippocrates' 'De morbis popularis', engaged Mead in a long controversy about smallpox therapy. Freind included a letter from Mead about his use of purgatives in confluent smallpox. Mead's letter was attacked by John Woodward in his 'State of Physick and Diseases' (1718), leading to a pamphlet war which lasted for several years. Mead did not write any pamphlets, but he was ably supported by Freind and others. According to 'Mist's Journal' for 13 June 1719 Mead and Woodward came to blows on the night of 10 June in front of Gresham College. Various accounts of the so-called duel exist, and Woodward and Mead are said to be the figures by the gate of the stable yard in the engraving by Vertue of Gresham College in John Ward's 'Lives of the Professors of Gresham College' (1740). Mead maintained a lifelong enmity toward Woodward. 
Mead's wife, Ruth, died on 31 January 1720, and shortly thereafter Mead moved to a house on Great Ormond Street in Bloomsbury later occupied by the Hospital for Sick Children. He lived in this house for the rest of his life. He also owned property in Chelsea, and is said to have lived between 1715 and 1718 at Gorges House there. 
The outbreak of plague in Marseilles in 1719 led Craggs, the secretary of state, to ask Mead to draw up a statement concerning its prevention. Mead's 'Short Discourse Concerning Pestilential Contagion and the Methods to be used to Prevent it' appeared in 1720, and seven editions appeared within a year. An enlarged eighth edition was published in 1722. Mead argued that plague was contagious, caused by a 'volatile active spirit' (p. 11) which acted chemically to corrupt the blood. He had no notion of living contagious particles, however. He recommended separating the sick from the well (against the usual practice of quarantining entire households), and noted especially the role of soft goods such as fabrics in the transmission of plague, which would indeed provide transport for plague-carrying fleas. Mead's 'Discourse' was credited with alleviating local panic, and in 1721 he, Sloane, and Arbuthnot were ordered by the privy council to investigate measures to be taken in case of an outbreak of plague. 
Mead also joined Sloane in 1721 to conduct trials of smallpox inoculation among some condemned prisoners at Newgate. While Sloane instigated the trials Mead enthusiastically supported them, and described them two decades later in his 'De variolis et morbillis liber' ('Discourse on the Small-Pox and Measles', 1747). Mead was especially interested in the Chinese method of introducing the infectious material nasally, and this was tried on one prisoner. All recovered, and this success helped to establish the practice of inoculation, although it remained controversial. 
In the spring of 1723 John Freind was confined to the Tower for his role in the Atterbury plot, and Mead was instrumental in securing his release (according to one story, by threatening to withhold his services from Robert Walpole). Mead brought Freind, while in prison, a copy of Daniel LeClerc's history of medicine, which inspired Freind to write his own history. He is said to have presented Freind upon his release with the fees he had received from Freind's patients, although the sum usually given of $5000 is wildly exaggerated, since Freind had been in prison for only three months. Mead also helped obtain a pardon for George Kelly, an Irish clergyman implicated in the plot. Despite his whig politics Mead seems to have enjoyed aiding the opposition; he also helped the nonjuror Thomas Hearne regain his position at Oxford, and he helped secure the release from prison of Pitcairne's son, who had participated in the 1715 Jacobite rising. 
On 18 October 1723 Mead delivered the Harveian oration at the Royal College of Physicians, combining his antiquarian and medical interests in an address on the status of physicians in ancient Greece and Rome. Mead, himself very conscious of status, concluded that physicians held a high place in ancient society. This view was attacked by Conyers Middleton, and a pamphlet war ensued, with John Ward defending Mead's position. Mead was elected a censor of the College of Physicians in 1716, 1719, and 1724. 
Mead married Anne, daughter of Sir Rowland Alston of Odell, Bedfordshire, on 14 August 1724. The union produced no children. Mead was now at the height of his profession. He was named a governor to Bridewell, Bethlem, and St Bartholomew's hospitals in 1720, and was instrumental in persuading Thomas Guy, one of his patients, to use some of his enormous profits from South Sea stock to endow a new hospital. In 1727 Mead was appointed physician to George II, and in the same year he attended Sir Isaac Newton in his final illness. Mead's income surpassed even that of his mentor Radcliffe, amounting to $5000 or $6000 a year. From his post at a coffee house -- usually Batson's near the Royal Exchange, or Tom's on Great Russell Street -- he received reports in the mornings from apothecaries about patients, and wrote up prescriptions which the apothecaries would then fill. This service was by no means uncommon among physicians but it subjected Mead to some criticism and satire. At other times of the day he might be found at Rawthmell's Coffee House in Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, or Child's in St Paul's Churchyard. He owned a coach, and his wealth is indicated by the six horses he used to drive out to his country house near Windsor. Through his second wife he also had possession of Harrold Hall in Bedfordshire. 
To his contemporaries Mead was as well known a patron and collector as he was a physician. He subscribed to an enormous number of books from 1710 onward, including such varied titles as Burnet's 'History of his Own Time' (1724), Henry Pemberton's 'View of Sir Isaac Newton's Natural Philosophy' (1728), John Quinton's 'Treatise of Warm Bath Water' (1733), and John Ward's 'Lives of the Professors of Gresham College' (1740; Mead took ten copies, five on large paper). A number of books were dedicated to Mead, including William Cheselden's 'Anatomy of the Humane Body' (1713), Michael Maittaire's edition of Lucretius (1713), William Baxter's 'Glossarum antiquitatum Britannicarum' (1719), John Blackbourne's edition of the works of Francis Bacon (1730), a volume of Eleazar Albin's 'Natural History of Birds' (1738), and Robert James's 'Medicinal Dictionary' (1742). Others were dedicated to him without his consent in the hope of gaining his patronage, which he dispensed generously to natural philosophers, naturalists, and antiquarians. He sponsored the elaborate new edition of William Cowper's 'Myotomia reformata' which appeared in 1724 with a new introduction by Mead and Henry Pemberton who explained muscular motion in Newtonian terms. Hearne called it 'the most beautiful book... ever printed in England' ('Remarks and Collections of Thomas Hearne', 7, Oxford Historical Society, 48, 1906, 271). Mead gave financial assistance to the naturalists George Edwards and Mark Catesby, the latter of whom named a flower, the 'Dodecathon meadia' or American cowslip, after him. 
Mead championed the invention for ventilating ships of Samuel Sutton over the rival invention of Stephen Hales and read a paper on Sutton's principles to the Royal Society on 11 February 1742. Mead wrote his 'Discourse on the Scurvy' (1749) to support Sutton's cause. Mead based much of his argument on the evidence of Lord Anson's voyage around the world between 1740 and 1744, during which 90 per cent of his men succumbed to scurvy, which Mead attributed in part to corrupted air. Mead's work was soon superseded by James Lind's 'Treatise of the Scurvy' (1753). While Sutton's invention enjoyed the favour of the navy for a time, Hales's invention ultimately was adopted in 1756. 
Mead sponsored the printer Samuel Palmer to write his 'History of Printing' (1732), and between 1722 and 1733 he provided the means to publish a complete edition of Jacques-Auguste de Thou's 'Historia sui temporis'. He supported the research in France of the Jacobite exile Thomas Carte, purchasing Carte's materials from him in 1724, and hired the printer Samuel Buckley to edit and print de Thou's work, which appeared in seven folio volumes in 1733. Mead also assisted the Shakespearian scholar Lewis Theobald and the physician Samuel Jebb, whose edition of the works of Roger Bacon appeared in 1733, as well as the forger William Lauder, who wrote Mead a letter defending himself on 9 April 1751. Mead was also one of the subscribers to the Society for the Promotion of Learning, founded in 1736 to assist in the publication of scholarly works deemed unprofitable by publishers. He was a noted scholar of the classics, and Richard Bentley, his closest friend after Freind, often consulted him about classical texts. John Davies DD bequeathed to Mead his papers on Cicero, which Mead gave to Bentley's nephew Thomas to complete an edition of the 'Offices'. The papers were destroyed in an accidental fire at Thomas Bentley's lodgings, as Mead stated in a letter prefixed to the third edition of Davies's 'Cicero de natura deorum'. Mead also sponsored the translation from Arabic into Latin of the treatise on smallpox of the medieval Arabic physician Rhazes 
(Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Zakariyya al-Razi 850-923)
. He procured a copy of the Arabic version from Boerhaave in Leiden, and Thomas Hunt, the professor of Arabic and Hebrew at Oxford, edited the final translation from two versions by Solomon Negri (a Greek Orthodox priest from Damascus) and John Gagnier (reader in Arabic at Oxford). The essay was appended to Mead's 'De variolis et morbillis liber'. 
A number of individuals, including Martin Folkes and Nathaniel Cotton, consulted Mead about antiquities. Mead was a major collector of both books and art. He had a separate room built at the foot of the garden of his house on Great Ormond Street which housed his library and collections, which were among the largest of his time. The room also served as a meeting place for physicians, natural philosophers, and men of letters. Mead had an extensive collection of antique medals and coins (some of which had provided evidence for his Harveian oration), as well as other antiquities, including an Egyptian mummy and other Egyptian and Etruscan pieces. His collection of antique paintings had been acquired at great expense, the most famous being the 'Court of Augustus', which had been brought to Mead from Rome by Sir Alexander Dick in 1737. In keeping with the style of the cabinets of the time, Mead's collection also included a miscellaneous assortment of fossils, scientific instruments, anatomical specimens, and curiosities. 
Mead owned about 150 paintings, including landscapes by Rembrandt, Claude Lorrain, and Brueghel, and architectural pictures by Nicolas Poussin and Canaletto. He had many portraits, including the physicians Mayerne (by Rubens) and Vesalius (by Titian), scientists such as Boyle (by Kerseboom) and Halley (by Kneller), and the famous Holbein portrait of Erasmus, as well as portraits of contemporary men of letters, including Swift and Richardson. His collection of miniatures was especially noted. He also owned thousands of engravings and drawings by such artists as Durer, Holbein, Michelangelo, and Raphael, as well as Hogarth and Vertue. Mead was a patron of art as well as a collector. He commissioned the bust of William Harvey by Peter Scheemakers, later displayed at the Royal College of Physicians, and the French artist Watteau, who came to consult Mead in the early 1720s, painted for him 'L'amour paisible' and 'Italian Comedians'. Mead opened his gallery to interested artists to copy, and he even loaned paintings for copying. In this era before public galleries Mead played an important role in the advancement of art. He was one of the promoters of the Foundling Hospital, which housed the first public gallery in London in the 1740s. 
Mead's collection of books and manuscripts was second only to that of Hans Sloane. His books numbered some 10,000 volumes, including 146 incunabula and many fine bindings. His library was especially rich in the classics and in works of medicine and natural philosophy. Mead aimed to find the best editions of canonical works. One example is his fine collection of medical works, dominated by anatomy. This included a first edition on vellum of Vesalius's 'Epitome' of his 'De fabrica' (1543), which is now in the British Library, as well as several editions of Mondino de' Luzzi and Berengario da Carpi. Mead possessed a very rare copy of Michael Servetus's 'Christiani restitutio' (1553), in which Servetus explained the pulmonary circulation. Mead gave this book to M. de Boze, secretary of the Academy of Inscriptions and Belles-Lettres in Paris, with whom he shared a long correspondence; de Boze gave him in turn some medals. The book, one of only three copies in the world, is now at the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris. Mead's anatomy books also included an extensive collection of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century authors. He also owned most of the canonical works of the scientific revolution. Mead collected books on fine art and architecture, and owned a second-folio Shakespeare which had once belonged to Charles I (and is now in the Queen's Library at Windsor). However, he was little interested in contemporary fiction, and only one novel, Fielding's 'Tom Jones' (1749), was in his collection. He owned a fine collection of Latin and Greek manuscripts which he sold to his friend Anthony Askew for $500. 
When Mead's first wife, Ruth, died in 1720 he was left a widower with six children in their teens or early twenties: four daughters, Sarah, Bathsheba, Elizabeth, and an unnamed daughter who died of smallpox in 1725 aged fifteen; and two sons, John and Richard. John died in the Canary Islands in 1721. Another son had died in 1716. Sarah Marsh Mead, the eldest daughter, born about 1702, married the physician Edward Wilmot. Probably through the influence of Mead he was named a physician to St Thomas's in 1729. They had three children. Sarah Wilmot died on 11 September 1785, aged eighty-three. The second daughter, Bathsheba, married Charles Bertie of Uffington, Lincolnshire, and had four children; she died before 1754. The youngest daughter, Elizabeth, born about 1705, also married a physician, Frank Nicholls. They had five children. Elizabeth Nicholls was still alive in 1798, aged ninety-two; her grandson was John Nicholls, the literary historian. Little is known about Mead's son Richard. 'Biographia Britannica' stated that he inherited $30,000 from his uncle, Samuel Mead, who died in 1734, but this is not corroborated by Samuel Mead's will. Richard did receive an income of $800 per annum from the estate of Sir Thomas Reeves, lord chief justice of the common pleas. The younger Richard Mead married Anne, daughter of William Gore of Tring, Hertfordshire, in 1741. They had a daughter in 1742 who did not reach adulthood, and he died in 1762 without heirs. 
Mead wrote little in the later 1720s and 1730s, but in the 1740s he seems to have been compelled to establish his intellectual legacy. He rewrote many of his earlier works, discarding the Newtonianism of attracting particles in favour of the new Newtonian orthodoxy of ethers. New works in this period included the books on smallpox and scurvy already mentioned. He also published in 1749 'Medica sacra', a commentary on diseases in the 'Bible', which he explained in naturalistic rather than supernatural terms. From the intense puritan piety of his youth Mead seems to have travelled to a more deistic religion. His later edition of 'De imperio solis ac lunae' omits mention of the storms on Cromwell's death or any supernatural intervention. Mead's final work, 'Monita et praecepta medica' (1751) consisted of aphorisms drawn from his medical practice. Mead did not keep detailed case records, and while celebrated in its time, the book's lack of specificity makes it less interesting now. 
Mead was visibly declining in health by the early 1750s, as he neared eighty. He outlived many of his friends and contemporaries, including Freind, Arbuthnot, and Bentley. He took to his bed on 11 February 1754 and died on 16 February in his house on Great Ormond Street, of unknown causes, but without visible pain. On 23 February Mead was laid to rest in the Middle Temple vault of the Temple Church, next to his brother Samuel. His son Richard erected a monument to him in the north aisle of Westminster Abbey, consisting of a bust of the doctor by Scheemakers above a long Latin epitaph by John Ward. 
In the last years of his life rumours circulated that Mead was in financial difficulties, and the sale of his ancient manuscripts to Askew only fanned the flames of rumour. Although his income during the years of his greatest success was high, he was known for his extravagance, both as a patron and in his household: Horace Walpole claimed that Mead spent $70 a week on his table. His charities were also notable. Mead's financial legacy was less than might have been expected for someone of his eminence. His will, written on 16 August 1753 and proved on 26 February 1754, is relatively modest in its bequests. Mead's widow, Anne, is given $5000, some plate, jewels, portraits, and household goods. A few particular books and manuscripts are bestowed on Mead's son, his son-in-law Nicholls, and grandson Robert Wilmot, and the younger Richard Mead is given the use of the house at Windsor and its contents. He set up modest trust funds for the benefit of his Mead, Nicholls, and Wilmot grandchildren, and directed that a debt owed him by his third son-in-law, Charles Bertie, become, if paid, a trust fund for the Bertie children. But most of Mead's assets were in his collections. Unlike Sloane, to whom he is often compared, Mead desired that his collections be scattered. The auction of his goods over several weeks in 1754-5 was a major event. The books were auctioned in November 1754 and April 1755, and the catalogue, 'Bibliotheca Meadiana', is itself an important source for Mead and for eighteenth-century collecting. Bidders came from across Europe; Louis XV of France acquired Mead's copy of the 1469 Pliny 'Historia naturalis'. Anthony Askew purchased many volumes. The book collection sold for over $5500, and the pictures, medals, and antiquities (catalogued in 'Museum Meadianum'), auctioned at the same time but in a different location, produced almost $11,000. When Mead's debts were paid he left a total of about $20,000 to his son Richard -- a handsome sum, but not a fabulous one. 
Samuel Johnson said of Mead that he 'lived more in the broad sunshine of life than almost any man'. He had many friends; Woodward, his chief antagonist, was known to be a contentious person, and although Mead disliked George Cheyne, his enmity was not returned. Mead was the subject of satires and pamphlets, but this was itself an indication of his fame. A popular practitioner in an age when bedside manner was at least as valuable as medicines, he was successful both professionally and financially. He loved the life of the intellect, and relished books and pictures and learned conversation. Mead was a good classical scholar but was less skilled in natural philosophy. His practical works, such as the 'Short Discourse Concerning Pestilential Contagion', are clear and straightforward in advice, but muddled in theory, while his purely theoretical works are highly derivative. Mead was very ambitious, and sought to enter the community of Newtonians as a way to advance his career. His stratagem worked, but he did not leave a lasting intellectual legacy as a medical theorist. Mead's main legacy in the eighteenth century was as a collector, an activity perfectly suited to his temperament. 


@@@@@


doc= 18468


Mead, Robert (1615/16-1653), poet and playwright, was born at the Black Lion, Fleet Street, London, the son of Robert Mead (died 1658), who was later four times master of the Stationers' Company (1644-5, 1645-6, 1649-50, and 1656-7). The younger Mead was educated at Westminster School, where he became a king's scholar in 1630. In 1633 he contributed a commendatory sonnet to his schoolfellow Abraham Cowley's 'Poetical Blossomes'. In the following year, at the age of eighteen, he was elected to Christ Church, Oxford, from where he graduated BA on 11 April 1638 and proceeded MA on 22 May 1641. 
While at Oxford Mead wrote a comedy entitled 'The combat of love and friendship'. The play was acted by the students at Christ Church, but was not printed until after Mead's death. The address to the reader prefixed to the 1654 edition indicates that Mead wrote the play 'when his youth was willing to descend from his then higher Contemplations' (Mead, sig. A2'r'), which implies a date of composition between 1634 and 1638. The comedy details the struggle of Lysander to remain loyal to his best friend and faithful to his mistress. Forced to choose between the two, the hero opts to deceive his mistress, but is then betrayed by his friend. The play ends happily when the hero himself proves unfaithful, allowing a series of pragmatic marriages to take place. In 1638 a poem by Mead was included in 'Death Repeal'd', a volume of verse published by Christ Church students in remembrance of Viscount Bayning of Sudbury. The same year Mead contributed a further elegy, 'Our bayes (me thinks) are withered', to 'Jonsonus virbius', a poetical miscellany published as a tribute to the late Ben Jonson. 
From 1639 Mead appears to have relinquished literature. In 1640 he was made a captain in Charles I's army. He later distinguished himself at the siege of Oxford, took part in the assault on Abingdon in the spring of 1646, and was one of the commissioners for negotiating the surrender of Oxford to parliament in May 1646. He was created MD on 23 June 1646, the day before the surrender, but was later expelled from his studentship by the parliamentary commission of 1648. Eager to continue in the king's service, Mead travelled to Ireland, where he served briefly in the Munster forces under Lord Inchiquin. Following the defeat of Inchiquin's troops, Mead travelled to Jersey, and soon afterwards proceeded to Goteborg in Sweden as Charles II's agent. From there he wrote to Sir Edward Nicholas in February 1650, expressing Queen Kristina's dissatisfaction at hearing so little of the king's activities. He subsequently submitted a diplomatic note from Charles to the queen, and entered into Charles's project of visiting Stockholm. In 1651 Lord Inchiquin appears to have appointed Mead his son's tutor. In 1652 Mead travelled up the Rhine into Switzerland, and then via Strasbourg, Speyer, Heidelberg, Frankfurt, and Mainz to Cologne. In a letter to Edgeman dated September 1652, but wrongly transcribed as 1654 in the Clarendon state papers, Mead offers a brief account of his travels. He next sailed from Amsterdam to England, where he lodged at his father's house in Fleet Street. There Mead himself fell victim to a malignant fever. He died on 21 February 1653 and was buried two days later in the church of St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street. 
Mead's friends attempted to secure for him a posthumous reputation as a gifted poet and playwright. Removed from the historical context of late Caroline England, Mead's published writings fail to substantiate this claim. However, for his contemporaries at Oxford, Mead's reputation for talent and discernment may well have owed as much to his political allegiance as his literary ability. As the anonymous publisher of Mead's 'The Combat of Love and Friendship' (1654) explains, Mead was 'a stout and learned man, and excellent in the faculty of poetry and making plays. His eminent general abilities were also such that they have left him a character precious and honourable to our nation' (Mead, sig. A2'r'). 


@@@@@


doc= 18469


Mead, William (c.1627-1713), Quaker patron and merchant, lived in London, where he became a prosperous linen draper and merchant; he was also a member of the Company of Merchant Taylors. He served as captain of a trained band and was a Seeker in religion, joining the presbyterians and Independents among others before finally becoming a Quaker early in 1670. Later that year, on 14 August, he was present at a large and crowded meeting in Gracechurch Street at which William Penn was the chief speaker. Soldiers arrived with orders to break up the meeting, and in order to keep the peace Penn volunteered to give himself up when the meeting had ended. When he did so, Mead accompanied him; both were arrested and committed to Newgate. Accused of unlawful assembly and disturbing the peace Penn and Mead were tried at the Old Bailey, and when the jury found them not guilty the jury were imprisoned by the judge without food or water until they returned a verdict with which he agreed. However, the jury refused to be intimidated, and so the case, and in particular the jury's foreman, Edward Bushell, became famous in legal history. Eventually all parties were released, and a detailed account of the trial under the title 'The Peoples Ancient and Just Liberties Asserted' was published by Penn and Mead later the same year. 
Mead now put his energies and his wealth at the disposal of London Friends and the Quaker leadership. He bought flax which poor Friends were employed to spin and was involved in buying land on which to erect workhouses for the poor. He often advanced money for Friends' projects, although he was careful to claim it back again in due course. He gave hospitality to travelling Friends, and his house was often used as an address to which Friends' letters could be directed. George Fox, who had no permanent home in London, often stayed with him in Fenchurch Street and later in Highgate. Mead was not averse to using his position in London society to advance the Quaker cause and to assure those in power that Quakers were respectable and posed no threat. In 1672 he is quoted as being 'confident his Majesty cannot be safe from any of the Dissenters but the Quakers' ('Present state of the nonconformists'). 
Mead was of mature years and a settled and prosperous position when he first married in 1679, but his wife, Mary Lawrence, died the same year, and their son, Jonathan, died in 1680. In 1681 William Mead married Sarah Fell (1643?-1714), the fourth daughter of Margaret Fell, the wife of George Fox. Sarah was confident, capable, and well educated, a prominent member of Quaker women's meetings and the efficient manager of the large household at Swarthmoor Hall. In 1684 William Mead bought an additional country property at Gooses, near Romford in Essex, and in the same year their only son, Nathaniel (died 1760), was born. Mead was now at the centre of the Quaker leadership in London. His house, his coach, and his business acumen were at the service of his father-in-law, George Fox. He looked after Fox's business papers and his library of more than 300 books, and in time became his literary executor. It was Mead's money that ensured the printing of Fox's 'Journal' in 1694, but this also gave Mead the power to object to William Penn's preface which, as a result, was printed only in later editions; Mead and Penn had become estranged over politics, Penn appearing to be too much of a friend to James II while Mead remained a staunch whig. 
Mead was a man of strong opinions and quick decisions, downright in speech and behaviour. His wealth made it possible for him to help Friends and to keep in contact with London society, but some accused him of a lack of Quaker simplicity, and there may be some grounds for this. William and Sarah's son, Nathaniel, was sent to the Middle Temple at sixteen, a 'worldly' employment which caused some unease to his relatives if not to his parents: he prospered, was knighted, and did not remain a Quaker. 
William Mead died at his house, Gooses, on 3 April 1713, when he was said to be aged eighty-six, and was buried in the Quaker burial-ground at Barking. His wife, Sarah, died on 9 June 1714 and was buried with him. William's grave is marked by a headstone which, most unusually for a Quaker, describes him as 'William Mead Esq.'. 


@@@@@


doc= 18470


Meade, Richard Charles Francis Christian, third earl of Clanwilliam (1795-1879), diplomatist, was born in Dublin on 15 August 1795, the only son of Richard Meade, second earl of Clanwilliam (1766-1805), and his first wife, Caroline (died 1800), third daughter of Joseph, Count Thun, and his wife, Wilhelmina. He succeeded to the title in September 1805. After education at Eton College he entered the diplomatic service at an early age. In August 1814 he attended Lord Castlereagh, plenipotentiary at the Congress of Vienna, and in February of the following year was there with Castlereagh's half-brother, Lord Stewart. He was private secretary to Castlereagh at the Foreign Office from 5 January 1817 to 11 July 1819, and acted as under-secretary for eighteen months before being formally appointed to the office on 22 January 1822. On 12 August of the same year he resigned in order to become 'chef de chancellerie' to the mission at the Congress of Verona of the duke of Wellington, with whom he became quite closely associated. Clanwilliam served as envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary at Berlin from 1 February 1823 to 25 December 1827, and was created grand cross of the Royal Guelphic Order (GCH) in 1826. In a letter dated 14 August 1827, from Sir Henry Hardinge to the duke of Wellington, Clanwilliam was described as 'up to his neck' in the preliminary arrangements for the formation of the Goderich ministry, but incredulous as to its duration. On 28 January 1828 he became a peer of the United Kingdom by the title of Baron Clanwilliam of Tipperary. He took little part in public affairs after this date, though he followed Wellington in supporting Catholic emancipation in 1829. The degree of DCL was conferred on him by Oxford University on 11 June 1834, at the start of Wellington's chancellorship. 
Clanwilliam married, on 3 July 1830, Lady Elizabeth Herbert (1809-1858), daughter of George Augustus Herbert, eleventh earl of Pembroke; they had four sons and one daughter. The eldest son, Richard James Meade (1832-1907), succeeded to the peerage, and was a distinguished naval officer; another son, Sir Robert Henry Meade (1835-1898), was an eminent civil servant. Clanwilliam died at his house, 32 Belgrave Square, London, on 7 October 1879, having lately returned from Deal Castle, of which he was captain. 


@@@@@


doc= 18471


Meade, Sir Robert Henry (1835-1898), civil servant, second son of Richard Meade, third earl of Clanwilliam (1795-1879), and of his wife, Lady Elizabeth (died 1858), daughter of George Herbert, eleventh earl of Pembroke, was born on 16 December 1835, and educated at Harrow School and at Exeter College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 7 December 1854, graduating BA in 1859 and MA in 1860. On 1 June 1859 he entered the Foreign Office with the encouragement of his uncle, Sidney Herbert. He was dispatched to Syria with Lord Dufferin's special mission on 31 July 1860; on his return in September 1861 he was selected to accompany the prince of Wales in his tour through Palestine and eastern Europe in 1861-2. In the autumn of 1862 he accompanied Earl Russell to Germany in attendance upon the queen. On 27 November 1862 he was appointed a groom of the bedchamber to the prince of Wales. In 1863 he accompanied Earl Granville abroad with the queen. 
In June 1864 Meade became private secretary to Earl Granville as president of the council, and was with him until July 1866; he then resumed his work in the Foreign Office. When Lord Granville became, on 10 December 1868, secretary of state for the colonies, Meade accompanied him as private secretary to the Colonial Office. On 21 May 1871 Meade was appointed to an assistant under-secretaryship of state in the Colonial Office; from this time he devoted himself to the duties of his post which chiefly concerned colonies not possessing responsible government, the supervision of the West Indian and Eastern department, as well as financial and defence issues. In March 1883 he was offered, but declined, the position of permanent under-secretary at the Irish Office. He was a British delegate to the Berlin conference in December 1884. He there entered into negotiation with the German foreign ministry and with Prince Bismarck over African and Pacific issues. In 1885 he helped establish the interdepartmental colonial defence committee and later served on and sustained it. 
In February 1892 Meade became permanent under-secretary for the colonies under Lord Knutsford, and subsequently served under Lord Ripon and Joseph Chamberlain. Later his health became indifferent; he was anxious to retire in 1895, but stayed on at the request of the secretary of state for a year longer. This was the period of the Jameson raid in South Africa which caused much work and worry. However, towards the end of 1896 he fell and broke his leg one evening while boarding a bus after leaving his office. He never returned to his work. Ill health and the sudden death of his daughter, Mary, in 1897 broke him down completely. She was the only child of his first marriage, on 19 April 1865, to Lady Mary Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Lascelles, third earl of Harewood. Mary Elizabeth died on 7 February 1866. Meade was married again, on 13 April 1880, to Caroline Georgiana, daughter of Charles William Grenfell MP, of Taplow Court, Maidenhead. She, too, died within a year of their marriage, on 5 March 1881, following the birth of a son, Charles Francis. Meade died on 8 January 1898 at the Grand Central Hotel, Belfast. He was buried at Taplow, near Maidenhead. He became CB on 21 March 1885, KCB in 1894, and GCB in 1897. 
Meade had considerable practical common sense and much tact, and was also a man of peculiar charm, greatly liked by all who knew him. He was one of a knot of official Liberals who formed a little coterie in the service of the crown from about 1870 to 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 18472


Meadley, George Wilson (1774-1818), biographer, was born at Sunderland, co. Durham, on 1 January 1774, the only son of Abraham Meadley and Alice Wilson. His father died in 1775, and his mother soon afterwards moved with her five children to the adjoining town of Bishopwearmouth where Meadley resided for the rest of his life. In 1783 he was placed at the grammar school of Witton-le-Wear, under the Revd John Farrer; he had a remarkable memory and a turn for rhyme, which he cultivated until 1791. At the end of 1788 Meadley was apprenticed to a Mr Chipchase (afterwards alderman), a banker and general dealer at Durham, where he spent his spare time writing poetry (some of which was published in provincial papers), and became involved in debates about abolition of the slave trade and the French Revolution. These inspired him to become an ardent liberal in politics. 
After leaving Durham in 1793 Meadley remained at home, learning Italian, improving his French, and founding a subscription library at Sunderland (1795) with the help of his old schoolmaster, now rector of Sunderland. In March 1795 he made the acquaintance of William Paley DD, then made rector of Bishopwearmouth. Next year Meadley went on a mercantile voyage to the Levant. He visited Naples, Smyrna, and Constantinople, collected a library of books, fell into the hands of the French on his return voyage, and was for some time a prisoner in Spain. On his return to England he learned German, and made further mercantile voyages to Danzig (1801) and Hamburg (1803), travelling thence on foot with a friend through north Germany (see accounts in 'Monthly Magazine', 14, 127 ff., 218 ff., 412 ff.). By now disgusted with trade he devoted himself to a literary life. 
Three years after Paley's death (1805) Meadley began to collect materials for his biography, applying, among others, to John Disney DD, who introduced him to Thomas Jervis. His association with these men led to his adoption of Unitarian views. The first edition of his 'Memoirs' of Paley was entirely rewritten before publication, on the advice of a friend who criticized its florid style. When bringing out a second and amended edition he spent the winter (1810-11) in Edinburgh to see it through the press. Here he attended the moral philosophy lectures of Thomas Brown. In 1812 he published 'A Sketch of... Proposals for... Reform in Parliament', which was printed without his knowledge and with some amendments in Wooller's edition of Bentham's catechism. A biography of Algernon Sydney, a work in keeping with his political principles, followed. He also produced short memoirs of his friends Mrs Jebb and the Revd Robert Waugh, and of Robert Clark, a Sunderland surgeon, for the 'Monthly Repository'. In 1814 Meadley publicly announced his secession in 'A Letter to the Bishop of David's'. He wrote a second letter in 1816 after he was mistakenly thought to be becoming a deist. 
In 1818 Meadley returned from literary researches in London and the south of England suffering from a 'hepatic affection'. It was said that he was a large man, and that his 'natural inactivity and his studious habits had led him to indulge' ('Monthly Repository', March 1819, 141). He was working on biographies of John Hampden and Disney, and had ready for press a sketch of the political character of Sir William Jones, and a parallel between Bonaparte and Rienzi when he died at Bishopwearmouth on 28 November 1818. He had never married. He was buried in the churchyard of Holy Trinity, Sunderland, and a marble tablet to his memory was placed in the Sunderland Subscription Library. An attempt at the annual meeting (2 February 1819) to have this tablet removed, because of Meadley's religious views, led to an angry local controversy. 
Meadley is remembered as unprepossessing but 'cheerful... and affectionate' with strong ethical and religious convictions ('Monthly Repository', March 1819, 142). His immediate posthumous reputation suffered; a reader of the 'Monthly Repository' felt that Meadley's 'claims to literary eminence' had been overemphasized and some critics judged his memoirs as 'not abundant in novelty' ('Monthly Repository', August 1819, 465; January 1819, 121). But he has recently been praised by Paley scholars (see LeMahieu) and his biography of Paley served as the basis for subsequent work. 


@@@@@


doc= 18473


Meadowcourt, Richard (c.1695-1760), Church of England clergyman and literary critic, the son of Richard Meadowcourt, was born at Worcester. He matriculated at Merton College, Oxford, on 9 March 1710, graduated BA in 1714, and proceeded MA in 1718. He was also elected one of six whig fellows at Merton College in 1718. This happened at a time when there was great pressure to elect tories as fellows (Ward, 99-100). 
Meadowcourt's university experience included membership of the whig-orientated Constitution Club, in which he served as the club steward. Founded by students with whig proclivities, the club sought to oppose perceived treasonous attitudes at the university on the part of the tories, then dominant at Oxford. Meadowcourt's involvement with the group led to a two-year delay in the granting of his MA. Nicholas Amhurst's 'Terrae filius' (1726) alleged that Meadowcourt was disciplined for fomenting rebellion against the university. He was fined 40's'. for being out after 9.00 p.m., and also had his name placed in the proctor's black book, which meant that he would not receive his degree until giving satisfaction to the proctor. Allegedly these actions were taken because he drank to the health of King George I. He finally received his degree in 1718 on the basis of a royal decree of grace (Amhurst, 116-20, 130-1, 284). 
Meadowcourt's political and religious positions, including his flirtation with Bangorianism, delayed his long-sought preferment in the church. His ecclesiastical career began only in 1727, when he was appointed vicar of Oakley, Buckinghamshire. He was passed over for the nomination as warden of Merton College in 1734, but on 15 October 1735 he was instituted a canon of the cathedral at Worcester. Following this appointment Meadowcourt was able to add to his preferments the vicarage of Quinton, Gloucestershire, in 1738 and the rectory of St Martin's, Worcester, in 1738. In 1751 he received his final preferment, as vicar of Lindridge, Worcestershire. He resided at Lindridge until he died, apparently unmarried, on 8 September 1760. 
Meadowcourt's literary career was marked by the publication of eleven sermons, including 'The Nature of Truth Defin'd, and it's Definition Apply'd to the Holy Scriptures' (1724; 2nd edn, 1725), and 'Popery disarmed of those weapons of force, and those instruments of fraud, in which it chiefly trusts' (1740). The latter sermon was preached at the cathedral at Worcester on 5 November 1739. He also devoted attention to the literary world, especially John Milton. His 'Critique of Milton's 'Paradise Regain'd'' (1732; 2nd expanded edn, 1748) is considered by modern scholars to be the first critical study of Milton's epic poem, precipitating a 're-evaluation of the brief epic' (Wittreich, vi, xiv). In Bishop Thomas Newton's edition of 'Paradise Regain'd' (1752), Meadowcourt provided manuscript remarks and explanations for several difficult lines in the poem. Although he was an early Milton scholar, modern scholars have questioned his insight into the work. One has suggested that 'there is little penetration in Meadowcourt's analysis of the characters of the poem', and has concluded that the 'frankness and outspokenness of this artistic utilitarianism and classicism is that of a clergyman apparently more intent on professional sermonizing and instruction than on the study of literary subtleties' (Oras, 221). 


@@@@@


doc= 18474


Meadows, Alfred (1833-1887), obstetric physician, was born at Ipswich on 2 June 1833, the fourth child of Charles Meadows. After attending Ipswich grammar school Meadows began his medical career as an apprentice to Mr William Elliston, of Ipswich. In 1853 he matriculated at the University of London and entered King's College medical school, where he was first associate, and then fellow. In 1856 he became MRCS and LRCP; he also obtained the midwifery licence of the Royal College of Surgeons. In 1857 he graduated MB of the University of London; he became MD in 1858, MRCP in 1862 and FRCP in 1873. On 29 April 1858 he married Sara Stirling Davidson ('b'. 1832/3), daughter of Major James Davidson; they had one daughter. 
On qualifying Meadows was appointed to the posts of house physician and resident midwifery assistant at King's College Hospital, and he spent the winter of 1857 in Paris. He subsequently held a large number of appointments, achieving a degree of celebrity which earned for him a long list of honorary memberships of foreign societies. The more important appointments were at King's College Hospital, where he was elected assistant physician for diseases of women and children in 1860, and at the Hospital for Women, Soho Square, to which he was physician from 1865 until his resignations in 1874; he was also physician accoucheur to the General Lying-in Hospital. His career reached its zenith in 1871, when he was elected physician accoucheur and lecturer on the diseases of women and children at St Mary's Hospital; he held this post until his death. 
Meadows was an active fellow of the Obstetrical Society of London: he held several of the various appointments on council and won general praise for his work as secretary. However, he left the society after failing to be elected president in 1884 as a result of his belief that ovariotomies ought to be performed by obstetricians rather than left to general surgeons. Meadows considered that the removal of healthy ovaries was a useful sterilization procedure in cases where childbirth would endanger a woman's life. He also thought it preferable to mechanical methods of contraception. The dispute over ovariotomy led to the establishment of the British Gynaecological Society in December 1884, and Meadows was elected its first president. He was also corresponding member of the German, Swedish, and Boston gynaecological societies. In 1878 he attended the crown prince of Sweden while he visited England: in recognition of his services, the king of Sweden in 1881 made him a commander of the second class of the order of Vasa. 
Meadows was the author of the 'Prescriber's Companion' (1864), a work that went through many editions, and of a 'Manual of Midwifery' (1870), well known to a generation of students and teachers; the second edition of this text was translated in 1875 into Japanese. He revised and enlarged Thomas Hawkes Tanner's 'Practical Treatise on the Diseases of Infancy and Childhood' (1870) and published 'Clinical Memoirs on the Diseases of Women' (2 vols., 1866-7), translated for the New Sydenham Society from the work by Gustave Bernutz and Ernest Goupil, thus making accessible to the British profession one of the most important contemporary works on inflammatory and other diseases of the pelvic peritoneum in women. He also founded and edited the short-lived 'London Medical Review' in 1860. 
Meadows was a skilful practitioner and had a kindly nature, and was much respected by patients and colleagues alike. His personal and professional qualities ensured his professional success, and he built up a lucrative private practice. A Conservative in politics, he held his religious beliefs with conviction and actively promoted the Guild of St Luke, of which he was provost. He was JP for Buckinghamshire, where he owned a house, Poyle Manor, near Colnbrook. A well-known and energetic freemason, Meadows took a leading part in founding the University of London lodge and was an officer of the grand lodge of England, of which he became master. 
Meadows died suddenly on 19 April 1887, of enteritis, at his home, 27 George Street, Hanover Square, London, and was buried at Colnbrook on 23 April. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 18475


Meadows, Drinkwater (1793x9-1869), actor, is said to have been born in Yorkshire in 1799, though his gravestone suggests that he was born in 1793 or 1794. He was intended for the navy but joined a theatrical company established in Kendal, and played in various towns in Westmorland and Yorkshire. Subsequently he became a member of another company, playing in Lincoln, Leicester, Peterborough, and Birmingham, in which town he was seen and engaged by Charlton, the manager of the Bath theatre. Meadows made his first appearance at Bath in November 1817 as Fogrum, in Morton and Bishop's musical drama 'The Slave'. He later played a wide variety of roles, including Scrub in 'The Beaux' Stratagem', Adam Winterton in 'The Iron Chest', Solomon Lob in 'Love Laughs at Locksmiths', and in 1819-20, Ratcliffe in 'The Heart of Midlothian', First Gravedigger in 'Hamlet' to Kean's Hamlet, and Slender in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor'. In September 1821 he made his first appearance in London, at Covent Garden, as Scrub. Here he played his old characters, and was also seen as Crabtree in 'The School for Scandal' and Filch in 'The Beggar's Opera'. In following seasons he was given plenty of opportunities to play original roles, such as Timothy Quaint in Howard Payne's 'The Soldier's Daughter' and Raubvogel in Planche's 'Returned Killed', as well as such parts in revivals as Launcelot Gobbo in 'The Merchant of Venice', Shallow in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', Stephen in Jonson's 'Every Man in his Humour', and Squire Richard in Cibber's 'The Provoked Husband'. 
Meadows remained at Covent Garden until 1844, being the original Fathom in Sheridan Knowles's 'The Hunchback' in 1832 and the following year the original Bartolo in 'The Wife' by the same author. In 1836 he was the original Philippe in George W. Lovell's 'The Provost of Bruges' at Drury Lane, but then returned to Covent Garden, where in September 1842 he made a success as a miserly old clerk in Lovell's 'Love's Sacrifice' and played one of the witches in 'Macbeth'. On 18 July 1842 he married, at the British embassy in Paris, Georgina Caroline Pridham, the youngest daughter of Admiral Pridham; they had two sons. In 1844 Meadows acted under the management of the Keeleys at the Lyceum (1844-7), and remained there under the succeeding management of C. Mathews. After joining the Kean and Keeley management at the Princess's he was Boaz in Douglas Jerrold's 'The Prisoner of War', first given at Windsor Castle, under Charles Kean's direction, in January 1851; and the original Joe Harrup, a toothless old huntsman, in Boucicault's 'Love in a Maze'. He remained at the Princess's under Harris until his retirement in 1862. He died at his home, Prairie Cottage, The Green, Barnes, on 12 June 1869, and was buried in Barnes cemetery on 17 June. A careful, retiring man, shunning publicity, he was much respected but little noticed. While he was a careful, conscientious, and trustworthy actor, he was lacking in inspiration, homely, dry, and quaint in style. He was seen to most advantage in eccentric comedy. For thirty-four years he was secretary to the Covent Garden Theatrical Fund. He occasionally contributed some recollections and other articles to the press. 


@@@@@


doc= 18476


Meadows, John (1622-1697), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Chattisham, near Ipswich, Suffolk, on 7 April 1622, the second son of Daniel Meadowe (1577-1651) of Chattisham and his wife, Elizabeth Smith of Wickham Market (died 1678); Sir Philip Meadows (bap. 1626, d. 1718) the diplomat was his younger brother. On 26 February 1640 he was admitted at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and graduated BA early in 1644. He moved to Christ's College on 23 December that year, taking up one of the fellowships made vacant there by the parliamentary commissioners, and proceeded MA in 1647. Following the death of his father in 1651 Meadows inherited substantial property, including the manor and advowson of Witnesham, and that year he resigned his fellowship. 
In 1653 Meadows married Anne, daughter of Roger Rant of Swaffham Prior, Cambridgeshire, who brought him an estate at Exning, Suffolk. On 26 August that year he settled at Ousden Hall, the home of his patron Humphrey Mosely, where he was provided with a study. Meadows was ordained to the ministry at Ousden on 17 April 1657 by three ministers of the county, William Pickering of Denham, Jonathan Jephcot of Swaffham Prior, and Abraham Wright of Cheveley, and was approved by the commissioners for approbation (or triers) at Whitehall on 7 May 1658. Ejected on 24 August 1662 under the 'Act of Uniformity', he was soon forced to vacate the parsonage, recording on 1 October that his wife had gone to live at Ousden Hall. The death of his patron did not result in any abrupt change for Meadows, and John Greene, his successor in the rectory, inducted on 8 August 1663, was friendly (or circumspect) enough to store property for him as late as July 1665. Meadows was joined at Ousden Hall by his mother, who was permitted to stay until her death, aged almost eighty, in 1678. Meadows himself lived there (at a rent of $3 per annum paid from 1665) only until 21 October 1670, when he and Anne went to lodge with a Mr Crane, Anne Meadows died soon afterwards. 
By 1672 Meadows had moved to Stowmarket where the sympathetic merchant Thomas Blackerby had his business. There, under the indulgence of that year, he took out licences as a presbyterian teacher, both at his own house and that of Elizabeth Nelson. In 1675 he married Sarah (1654-1688), daughter of Benjamin Fairfax (died 1708) of Halesworth, Suffolk, and granddaughter and niece of three ejected ministers, Benjamin Fairfax (1592-1676), John Fairfax (1623/4-1700), and Nathaniel Fairfax (1637-1690). 
In 1680 Meadows was prosecuted for nonconformity and bound over by the judges of the sessions. About 1688, perhaps on the death in that year of his wife, Sarah, he moved to Bury St Edmunds, where (it must be supposed) he married his third wife, Hannah Beaumont (died 1707). At Bury he was an occasional conformist and friend of Samuel Bury, the Presbyterian minister. Meadows used part of his considerable wealth to assist less fortunate Independent and Presbyterian ministers. He died at Bury St Edmunds in 1697 and was buried in the churchyard at Stowmarket on 1 March. In his will (proved 7 April 1697) he left property in fourteen Suffolk parishes, including the advowsons of Witnesham and Exning. His second marriage had produced seven children, notably Philip (1679-1752), mayor of Norwich in 1734, and 


@@@@@


doc= 18477


John Meadowes (1675/6-1757), Presbyterian minister, who was born at Stowmarket and attended schools at Stowmarket and at Bury St Edmunds before being admitted, aged eighteen, to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, on 25 May 1694. Although a scholar between 1694 and 1698, there is no record of his taking a degree. He married Sarah, daughter of Robert Chaplin. Ordained to the Presbyterian church at Needham Market, Suffolk, on 26 August 1702, he served there for the rest of his life. His 'The Apostolic Rule of Ordination' appeared in 1738. He died on 10 April 1757 and was buried at Barking. 


@@@@@


doc= 18478


Meadows, (Joseph) Kenny (bap. 1790, d. 1874), illustrator and caricaturist, was born at Cardigan in south Wales and baptized on 1 November 1790, the son of James Meadows, a retired naval officer. He grew up living simply in a lighthouse; always hungry, he 'used to devour [his] food like a ravening wolf' (Dalziel and Dalziel, 38). His family's slender means prevented him from obtaining much education. Self-taught and learning from the 'wishy-washiness' of the likes of Finden's 'Book of Beauty' (Linton, 72), he was handicapped by his poor training and sometimes resented it. Like many other black and white artists of his day, Meadows preferred to draw from his imagination rather than from models: 'Nature puts me out', he told the Dalziel brothers (Dalziel and Dalziel, 41). By 1823 he had moved to London, where that year he collaborated with George Scharf in designing and lithographing the plates for James Robinson Planche's five-part edition illustrating the costume of six of Shakespeare's plays (1823-5). Meadows was one of the first to introduce wood-engraving among English publishers as a means of cheap and popular illustration, and he became a useful, unostentatious workman who supplied many cuts for newspapers, especially Herbert Ingram's 'Illustrated London News'. The publisher Henry Vizetelly described Meadows as 'a slow and not very regular worker', needing help at first from other artists in drawing landscapes (Vizetelly, 1.153). Often unoriginal, he none the less sometimes invented epigrammatic and witty images, such as 'Peace' represented by a butterfly at the mouth of a cannon ('Punch', February 1844). He dropped his first name for reasons of 'professional distinction' (Spielmann, 447) and was known throughout his career as Kenny Meadows. 
Meadows collaborated with Isaac Robert Cruikshank on 'The Devil in London' (1832), and in the late 1830s he produced portraits of Dickens's characters ('Bell's Life in London', 1838) and twenty-four portrait heads of characters in 'Nicholas Nickleby' 'from drawings by Miss La Creevy' (6 parts, 1839). 'The Heads of the People, or, Portraits of the English', published in 1838-40, to which William Makepeace Thackeray, Douglas Jerrold, Laman Blanchard, and Leigh Hunt contributed letterpress, increased his popularity. The images range from the highest society ('The Young Lord') to the lowest ('The Farmer's Daughter'), and, while devoid of originality, they sold well and were republished in Paris in 1839 under the title 'Les Anglais peints par eux-memes', running in tandem with Paul Gavarni's superb 'Les Francais peints par eux-memes'. Thereafter he was much in requisition for portraits; for the 'Illustrated London News' he drew the principal actors in Dickens's amateur theatrical company (22, 29 November 1845) and a memorable 'Old Father Christmas'. 
The chief ambition of Meadows's life was to produce a complete illustrated Shakespeare. This he accomplished between 1839 and 1843 by designing upwards of 1000 plates for Barry Cornwall's three-volume edition (1843). His wit and graceful fancy here had free rein, and his designs were masterfully cut by W. J. Linton, John Orrin Smith, and his best pupil, Alfred Harral. Some found a few designs eccentric: in the late nineteenth century Graham Everitt complained that Richard III seemed to suffer 'from an attack of tetanus instead of an accession of mental terror' (Everitt, 361). But Meadows's contemporaries praised the work: 'almost poetical', the painter William Powell Frith called the pictures for 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (Frith, 2.103). And subsequent commentators in Britain and Germany have judged his Shakespeare plates 'astonishing', 'not to be missed', 'the best in the whole of the 19th century' (Muir, 54-5). So popular was his conception of Falstaff that a bronze statuette modelled after it in Germany sold in large numbers. 
Thereafter Meadows's services were eagerly sought as an illustrator of holiday stories and children's books. Among his later productions, Percy Muir singles out the drawings for a nursery classic, Frances Browne's 'Granny's Wonderful Chair' (1856), as deserving of a 'very special place' in book illustration (Muir, 133), and Everitt calls the wood-engravings for D. W. Jerrold's 'Chronicles of Clovernook' 'probably the finest designs he ever executed' (Everitt, 362). Meadows painted a few oil portraits; between 1830 and 1838 he exhibited once at the Royal Academy and on four occasions at the Suffolk Street gallery of the Society of British Artists. It is said that necessity forced him to paint a butcher's wife in order to pay off his bill, and that he added bits of jewellery on the barter system: a brooch for so many ribs of beef, a watch for chops and steaks, and so forth (Price, 43). In later life Meadows became an accomplished watercolourist. 
Meadows associated intimately with the early 'Punch' circle. His wife, Agnes ('bap'. 19 Aug 1800), the daughter of the eminent sculptor John Henning, was 'a quiet, thriftful woman' (Spielmann, 447). Her brother was Archibald S. Henning, who designed the first 'Punch' cover; Meadows provided the fifth. For the first seven years of 'Punch''s existence he supplied unoriginal but competent drawings; his landscapes were often better than his figures, which tended to 'puffy faces and straight arms' (Houfe). R. G. G. Price judged Meadows's best work to be 'more delicately fanciful than either [John] Leech's or [Richard] Doyle's' (Price, 42), but Meadows received little encouragement from Mark Lemon, the editor, perhaps because his humour was more poetic than robustly pointed. When the magazine developed a small stable of house artists Meadows was no longer employed. 
Meadows was a genial, if sometimes temperamental, drinking companion. While working on Samuel Carter Hall's 'Book of British Ballads' (1842), he and the other artists would gather at the Halls' home, The Rosery, Brompton, for 'small talk and smaller Marsala' and afterwards repair to a neighbouring tavern for a night-long carouse (Linton, 74). Despite his slight frame and chronic rheumatism, he was known as Iron Jack for his stamina and capacity to hold his liquor. Among Meadows's many friends were Blanchard, Dickens, John Gilbert, George Hodder (a nephew by marriage), Hunt, Jerrold, Charles and Edwin Landseer, Daniel Maclise, David Roberts, Clarkson Stanfield, Frank Stone, and Thackeray. 
Meadows lived for some years in Cottage Place, Camden Town, and enjoyed afternoon rambles up to Highgate and Hampstead. Constantly in financial difficulties, in June 1864 he was granted a civil-list pension of $80 'in acknowledgment of his merit as an artist, more especially shown by his illustrations of Shakespeare' ('DNB'). He spent 'a hale and vigorous' old age (Heaton), outliving his reputation, as the obituarists noted ruefully. He died at 458 King's Road, Chelsea, on 19 August 1874; five days later he was buried, near his father-in-law, in the St Pancras cemetery at Finchley. 


@@@@@


doc= 18479


Meadows, Sir Philip (bap. 1626, d. 1718), diplomat, was baptized at Chattisham, Suffolk, on 4 January 1626, the fifth son of Daniel Meadows (1577-1651) of Chattisham and Elizabeth (died 1678), daughter and coheir of Robert Smith of Wickham Market, and the grandson of William Meadows (died 1588) of Witnesham. His grandfather's elder son, William Meadows, married the heir of Witnesham Hall, and his father bought the lordship of the manor in 1630. Philip was admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 18 February 1642 and graduated BA in 1646. He proceeded MA from Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1649 and became a fellow. 
In 1653, on the recommendation of John Thurloe, Meadows was recruited as Latin translator to the council of state to assist the blind John Milton -- Milton's preference for Andrew Marvell was overridden. On 17 October Meadows was chosen to assist Thurloe in foreign affairs as well, his salary doubled to $200 per annum, and he gave enough satisfaction to be confirmed as full 'Latin Secretary', Milton remaining 'Latin Secretary Extraordinary', in Thurloe's list of officials to the protectoral council of state on 3 February 1654 ('CSP dom.', '1653-4', 386). 
Meadows's growing knowledge of foreign affairs as Thurloe's assistant and his expertise in Latin were such that on 19 February 1656 the council advised Oliver Cromwell to appoint him envoy to Portugal to seek the ratification of the Anglo-Portuguese treaty of 1654. England's conflict with Spain, with which Portugal was also at war, meant that English warships needed access to Portuguese ports and that merchants excluded from Spain sought Portuguese markets. However, the treaty was contentious in Portugal as Cromwell had required the fervently Catholic government to accept the open practice of protestantism by English residents and had sought compensation for Portuguese aid to royalist privateers. Tension had been increased by the execution in London, following conviction for murder, of the Portuguese ambassador's brother, Dom Pantaleon de Sa, in defiance of his diplomatic immunity. Meadows was required to secure an immediate payment of $50,000 damages on penalty of attack, and sailed from Plymouth on the 'Phoenix' on 11 March. However, King Joao VI proved obstinate, over both compensation and the opening of a protestant church in Lisbon, and in order to intimidate him Cromwell duly ordered his navy to seize the Portuguese 'plate fleet', 'en route' for Lisbon. Vengeful relatives of Dom Pantaleon tried to shoot Meadows as he left the palace on 1 May; as it happened, he was only slightly injured in the hand, but the perpetrators were not arrested. Given Cromwell's high-handedness and the previous murders of Commonwealth ambassadors in Madrid and Holland, a violent English reaction and subsequent collapse of the treaty was probable. Meadows was instructed to give Joao five days to sign and then, if he refused, to join the English fleet, but in order to continue negotiations he delayed departing until the fleet anchored at Cascaes on 30 May. When Meadows then requested a farewell audience, the king promptly signed and provided the compensation. The envoy's gamble paid off, but he faced criticism from Admiral Robert Blake and his assistant Edward Mountagu for not leaving earlier. The money delivered, Meadows arrived on Mountagu's ship to be told Whitehall would have preferred him to cancel the negotiations. He wrote to Thurloe that the risks entailed in trying to find the plate fleet to retaliate outweighed the pecuniary advantage of capturing it, and that the personal insult to himself of the attack was better dealt with separately from national-level negotiations. His success was duly commended in England, and on 15 July the council voted him a ninety-nine-year lease on lands worth $100 'in consideration of the maim received... in execution of his duty' ('CSP dom.', '1656-7', 22). There was, however, difficulty in finding lands, though confiscated episcopal estates were considered, and the case was still outstanding in August 1657. The money presumably helped Meadows in his subsequent purchase of an estate at Bentley, Suffolk. 
Meadows returned to England in November and resumed his duties as Thurloe's deputy; Marvell replaced him as Latin secretary in 1657. His diplomatic success led to the council's selecting him on 24 February 1657 for the equally difficult role of ambassador to Denmark at a time when Cromwell was endeavouring to keep the peace between the two leading protestant powers in the Baltic, Denmark and Sweden, to secure access to shipping supplies and to divert Charles X of Sweden's aggressiveness against exclusively Catholic targets. Meadows's allowance was to be an impressive $1000 per annum, but his departure was delayed by pressure of council business and the kingship debate, and in June Frederick III of Denmark declared war on Sweden. When Meadows was finally given his instructions, he was told to try to persuade Frederick that war only assisted Habsburg plans to weaken protestantism and endangered commercial access to the Baltic; he was to offer to mediate with Sweden to prevent Charles seizing more Danish territory. He sailed on the 'Assistance' in August, a Mr. Sterry taking on his council duties, and was received honourably by Frederick at Copenhagen about 20 September. Frederick declared that he would accept 'equal and honourable terms' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 6.533), but Cromwell did not send Meadows detailed instructions, and when the Sound froze Charles was able in February 1658 to march his army over the ice on Copenhagen. Cromwell was personally sympathetic to Charles, but Meadows proceeded to the king's camp with the Dutch and French ambassadors to endeavour to moderate his demands. He shuttled between the Danish and Swedish commissioners, whose initial demands he reckoned 'both monsters, the one 'in defectu' and the other 'in excessu'' (ibid., 802-03), while Charles continued to advance, and claimed 'unless I make a peace, adieu Denmark' (Meadows, 'A Narrative', 59). Meadows rejected Charles's proposal to occupy all Norway on the grounds that it would give the Swedish king control of shipping materials vital to England, 'too great a treasure to be entrusted to one hand' (ibid.). The threat of England's combining with the Dutch finally persuaded Charles to accept at Roskilde on 8 March a peace founded on Sweden's occupation of both the Trondheim province (thus cutting Norway in two) and Denmark's last possession east of the Sound, Scania. Crucially, at Meadows's insistence, 'hostile' (ibid., 62) warships were banned from the Sound, rather than all foreign warships, a proposal which 'though immediately levelled against Holland, yet obliquely and remotely reflected upon England' (ibid.). Charles had allegedly paid Meadows 9000-10,000 rixdollars in an attempt to influence him, evidently without effect. 
The treaty of Roskilde was Meadows's greatest achievement, but it only served as a temporary brake on Charles X's ambitions; Meadows commented that the sword which he presented to the king to use against the Habsburgs could easily be wielded against Brandenburg. He vainly begged Thurloe to send the outstanding $30,000 in aid promised to Sweden. In April he was sent to Charles's peace conference with Poland at Braunsberg to prevent any terms to England's disadvantage and to promote war against the Habsburgs. Charles used the peace to attack Denmark again in August, and Cromwell's death weakened England's position. Still attending the Swedish court as Charles attacked Copenhagen again that winter (while the Dutch and Brandenburg assisted Denmark), Meadows found Charles appealing for assistance which he could not give. In April 1659 Mountagu brought the English fleet out to join the Dutch, and Meadows sought to mediate on the basis of the Roskilde settlement. This foundation was accepted at The Hague negotiations in June, but the upheavals in England, illustrated by the dispatch of Algernon Sidney and other commissioners to watch Mountagu, diminished England's potential role, and in August the recall of most of the fleet undermined Meadows's bargaining position. He requested his recall, which the council of state granted on 23 August; the eventual treaty of Copenhagen in 1660 was reached without him. 
Meadows had been knighted by Cromwell in the spring of 1658 in recognition of Roskilde and had been made knight marshal of the household, while Frederick III had knighted him in the order of the Elephant. However, Meadows returned to England to be evicted from his Whitehall lodgings (7 February 1660), though he was unmolested at the Restoration. On 4 April 1661 he was granted a licence to marry Constance Lucy, second daughter and eventual coheir of Francis Lucy of Westminster (from the Charlecote family). He retired to his new estate at Bentley, and had sufficient reputation to be knighted by Charles II on 24 November 1662; on 15 January 1664 the king granted him an augmentation to his arms in return for surrendering that assumed through his Danish knighthood. In 1669 Meadows was advising the deputy secretary of state, Joseph Williamson, on his recollection of the terms of the treaty of Copenhagen in 1660, saying that he had copies of all the treaties involving France and the Dutch since 1621 in his possession. This collection was useful when he utilized his leisure to write on diplomacy; in 1677 he published 'A narrative of the principal actions in the wars betwixt Sweden and Denmark before and after the Roskilde treaty', including a view of the current Swedish involvement in Germany as it affected England. In 1681 he published 'A Brief Enquiry into Leagues and Confederacies Made betwixt Princes and Nations', with particular reference to England's abandoning the triple alliance to combine with France in destroying their confederate, Holland, and then abandoning France to make peace. He concluded that man was 'bound to the true and just performance' of contracts as 'declarative testimony' ('Scarce and Valuable Tracts... Lord Somers', ed. Scott, 8.21-8) of private intentions, while accepting that princes could alter decisions as circumstances changed to protect their subjects; criticism of Charles II's vacillations was implied. In 1689 followed 'Observations Concerning the Dominion and Sovereignty of the Seas', a work influenced by John Selden, in which Meadows considered England's claim to salutation of the flag (with its inconsistencies and dangers), marine jurisdiction, and the theory of dominion of the seas. 
Having lived from 1666 partly in Newport Street, Covent Garden, in 1685 Meadows acquired a house in the new Gerrard Street development, and that April joined the commission set up to hasten the building of the parish church, St Anne's, Soho. In 1675 Danby reckoned that Meadows exercised influence on two Lucy relatives in parliament but he was not otherwise politically prominent. The revolution of 1688 brought him greater favour, and on 28 January 1692 he became a commissioner for public accounts. On 19 December 1695 he also became a commissioner for trade and the plantations, and remained active in the role into his eighties; in March 1696 he joined the commission for excise. In 1696 he advised the suspected Jacobite plotter Thomas, Lord Ailesbury, to give himself up to the secretaries of state; Ailesbury called him 'grave and ancient and formal, but he had a good and solid judgement' ('Memoirs of... Ailesbury', 373). Meadows also concluded an important marriage alliance for his eldest son, Philip, with a niece of Sidney Godolphin. He resigned from the excise commission in November 1702 but remained a commissioner for trade, as of 1697 at a salary of $1000 per annum, until December 1715. 
Meadows died at Hammersmith on 16 September 1718, his age variously given as ninety-three or ninety-four, and was buried at Hammersmith Chapel on 18 September; the menfolk of his family were frequently long-lived. Of his three daughters, Elizabeth married Sir Thomas Powis, Constance married Joseph Craggs, and the third married Richard Dyott, commissioner of stamp duties in 1708-10. A skilled, pragmatic diplomat, Meadows had played a major role in protectoral foreign relations in mitigating the effects of Cromwell's and Mountagu's desire to intimidate Portugal in 1656, helping to secure vital naval bases, and Cromwell's naive belief in Charles X's potential as an anti-Habsburg weapon in 1657-8. His success at Roskilde would have been impossible without French and Dutch backing and did not bind Charles X to Cromwell, but both there and with Portugal Meadows showed more realism than his master and his subsequent writings show a professional expertise in the subjects of international relations and naval power from which the Stuarts could have benefited. 
Meadows's eldest son, 
In 1702 Meadows entered parliament as MP for Truro, a seat controlled by his brother-in-law Hugh Boscowen. As in his father's case, Whitehall office was the precursor to diplomacy and in January 1704 he became ambassador to Holland, an important position at a critical point in the war of Spanish Succession when William III's death had put the onus of maintaining the alliance on officials. At the 1705 general election Meadows was elected in his absence MP for Tregony, another Boscawen borough. In December 1706, having reportedly at first declined the honour, he was appointed special envoy to Vienna to maintain relations with another crucial ally, Emperor Josef I, and was awarded $500 for his equipage and $720 per quarter in his dual role as envoy and plenipotentiary. In this capacity he not only worked to maintain the military alliance but, as his father had, kept a watchful eye on protestant interests, making a determined protest to Josef in November 1708 against Habsburg persecution of Silesian protestants. 
In June 1708, while he was still abroad, Meadows was appointed joint commissioner for army accounts; Richmond House in the Privy Garden, Whitehall, was fitted up as an office. He was replaced as ambassador by Lord Raby in August 1709, and on his return to London on 16 October took up his new duties. He also acquired the lease of a house between Richmond House and the Thames, and in January 1714 became a governor of the Royal Hospital, Chelsea. He was retained in office by George I with James Bruce as his colleague; Narcissus Luttrell reckoned him 'a worthy person, but not so vigilant as the other' (Luttrell, 'Brief Relation', 6.648). Clearly benefiting from nepotism but politically inoffensive to any of the whig factions, he remained in position until his death, living in Whitehall until some time prior to 1738 and subsequently at Richmond and Brompton. He died at Brompton on 3 December 1757, aged ninety-five, leaving three sons and five daughters. His eldest son, Sydney (died 1792), succeeded him as marshal of the household; his third son, Philip (died 1781), deputy ranger of Richmond Park, married Frances Pierrepoint, through which arrangement their sons Evelyn and Charles became heirs to the extinct dukedom of Kingston. 


@@@@@


doc= 18480


Sir Philip Meadows (1662?-1757), diplomat and politician, was born almost certainly in 1662. On 30 August 1696 he married Dorothy ('c'.1675- 'c'.1749), sister of Hugh Boscawen and niece of Lord Godolphin, at Lambeth, with Archbishop Thomas Tenison officiating; John Evelyn, congratulating Meadows senior, reckoned them 'a most virtuous discreet young virgin and as hopeful a young gentleman' (Evelyn, 'Diary', 5.258). On 4 August 1698 Meadows joined his father as a commissioner of excise (until March 1700), and on 27 June 1700 was appointed knight marshal of the king's household (a post held by his father under Cromwell) and marshal of the Marshalsea for life. Lord Jersey, who had disposed of the offices, was reckoned to have been paid about $5000. On 23 December Meadows was knighted at Hampton Court, and in 1703 added the clerkship of the green cloth to his emoluments. 


@@@@@


doc= 18481


Meager, Leonard (c.1624-c.1704), gardener and writer on gardening, worked for Philip Hollman of Warkworth, Northamptonshire, and later at the Brompton Park nursery. His most popular work, which ran to eleven editions between 1670 and 1710, was 'The English Gardener, or, A Sure Guide to Young Planters and Gardeners, in Three Parts'. This deals with fruit trees and the kitchen garden, and arranges plants in categories such as 'Herbs for setting knots' and 'Florist's flowers'. 'The New Art of Gardening; with the Gardener's Almanack' (1697) was followed by 'The mystery of husbandry, or, Arable, pasture, and wood-land improved; to which is added, the countryman's almanack' (1697), with 61 chapters in 61 pages on how to improve the soil. Meager died about 1704. 


@@@@@


doc= 18482


Thaddeus de Meagher (1690-1765). Sometimes referred to as Chevalier de Maar, he served in the French army and in 1734 was commissioned in the Saxon lifeguards of Frederick Augustus II, king of Poland and elector of Saxony. Appointed the king's chamberlain in 1739, he was promoted to colonel, 1740, appointed captain-proprietor of the Swiss guards, 1742, and advanced to the rank of major-general, 1744, and later lieutenant-general, May 1752, in the Polish army. At the beginning of the Seven Years' War, 1756, Frederick the Great of Prussia invaded Saxony, and de Meagher was dispatched to Wilsdruf to negotiate Saxony's neutrality with Frederick. General de Meagher died in Dresden on 22 May 1765. 


@@@@@


doc= 18483


Meagher, Thomas Francis (1823-1867), Irish nationalist and soldier, was born in the city of Waterford, at what is now the Granville Hotel, Meagher Quay, on 3 August 1823. Little is known of his mother apart from the fact that she was a member of the Quan family of Waterford. His father, Thomas Meagher (1796-1874), was, however, quite prominent. A prosperous merchant engaged in the Newfoundland provision trade, he was elected mayor of Waterford in 1843 and 1844, and later represented the city in the British House of Commons, 1847-57. The marriage produced two other children, Henry Meagher JP (died 1875) and Mary Agnes Meagher, who became a nun. 
The Meaghers were a prominent family who had long held lands in the barony of Irrekin, Tipperary. They were gradually dispossessed, and the process was escalated after their open support for James II in 1689. Following the treaty of Limerick, 1691, many Meaghers left Ireland for service in Catholic Europe and distinguished among these was 
Educated by the Jesuits at Clongowes Wood College, co. Kildare (1833-9), Thomas Francis Meagher later attended their college at Stonyhurst, Lancashire (1839-43). He returned to Waterford in 1843 with a lisping English upper-class accent, affected manners, and a taste for fine clothes. In 1844 he was sent to Queen's Inn, Dublin, to study law but quickly abandoned his studies for politics. He attached himself to the radicals of the Repeal Association, Young Ireland, who advocated a physical force solution to end the union with Britain. At an emotional meeting in Conciliation Hall, Dublin, on 28 July 1846, he made an impassioned speech asking the members not to 'abhor the sword' nor 'stigmatize the sword' but to view it as an instrument of liberation. When moderate members called for his expulsion from the association, he and other radicals left the meeting and the organization. William Makepeace Thackeray sarcastically labelled him Meagher of the Sword, a name Meagher proudly used for the rest of his life. 
In January 1847 Meagher was a founder member of the Irish Confederation, a new organization dedicated to raising revolution in Ireland. In February 1848 he unsuccessfully contested, much to his father's annoyance, a by-election in the city of Waterford and in the following March made a violent speech which attracted the attention of the authorities. Arrested for sedition, he travelled to Paris while on bail to congratulate the new French provisional government on its own successful revolution. The day before his trial, 15 April 1848, he presented the citizens of Dublin with a new Irish tricolour. Arraigned before Lord Chief Justice Blackburne on 16 April 1848, he was later released when the jury failed to agree on a verdict. 
As a member of the Irish Confederation's war directory, Meagher toured Ireland in the summer of 1848 attempting to stir up rebellion. The activity of Meagher and his confederates so alarmed the government in Dublin that in July 1848 a warrant and a reward were posted for his arrest. Following a somewhat pathetic clash with the police in Ballingarry, co. Tipperary, Meagher and others were taken into custody. In October 1848 he was tried before a special commission headed by Lord Chief Justice Blackburne in Clonmel. He was found guilty of high treason and sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, but his sentence, because of his youth, was reduced to penal servitude and exile for life in Tasmania. He was transported in July 1849. 
Allowed a considerable liberty upon a ticket of leave, Meagher farmed, and in February 1851 married Catherine Bennett (1832-1854), the daughter of another Irish political exile. The marriage produced two sons but only the younger, Thomas junior, survived; in 1872 he became a US army cadet at West Point. Thomas senior planned his escape. On 3 January 1852 he notified the magistrate at Campbelltown that he intended to break his parole, rode to the coast, and by pre-arrangement was picked up by Captain Betts of the 'Elizabeth Thompson'. Transferred to the 'Acorn', he arrived in New York on 26 May 1852. His revolutionary reputation, good looks, and daring escape made him an instant hero among the Irish Catholic population of New York. In 1853 he published his 'Speeches on the Legislative Independence of Ireland'. But he proved as restless in the United States as he had in Ireland. Having become an American citizen, and a popular public lecturer, he helped to create the 'Citizen' newspaper in 1854; he studied law and was called to the New York bar in September 1855. In November, following the death of his first wife the previous year, he married Elizabeth Townsend, daughter of Peter Townsend, a successful New York businessman. In April 1856 he was a co-founder of the 'Irish News', a New York newspaper which became noticeably pro-southern, toured Central America in 1857, and became a strong supporter of the Democratic Party. Regarding the slavery issue, Meagher identified with the south, and even after the Confederate attack on Fort Sumter, April 1861, he initially remained pro-southern. However, following President Lincoln's call for volunteers, Meagher decided to fight for the union. 
Meagher raised a company of Irish zouaves, which became company K of the Irish 69th New York volunteers, and became its captain. With the regiment, he fought at the first battle of Manassas, 21 July 1861, where he had his horse shot from under him. Responding to nativist attacks on the bravery of the Catholic Irish, he published 'The Last Days of the 69th in Virginia' (New York, 1861). When the regiment, a thirty-day militia unit, volunteered for the duration of the war, it became the nucleus for an American Irish brigade seen by Meagher as a unit he hoped would emulate the eighteenth-century 'wild geese' brigades in European armies. Elected the colonel of the brigade's first regiment, Meagher proved tireless in raising the command, and when James Shields, an Irish-born veteran of the Mexican War, refused command, Meagher was commissioned the unit's first brigadier-general, 3 February 1862. He proved to be a courageous commander who helped shape the brigade into one of the army of the Potomac's finest combat units. 
The brigade distinguished itself during the seven days' campaign in Virginia, 25 June to 1 July 1862, and during the battle of Antietam, September 1862, where it launched a heroic charge against a strong Confederate position known as the Bloody Angle. During the battle of Fredericksburg, 13 December 1862, Meagher led an even more heroic, but hopeless, charge against Mary's Heights. Decimated by this action, the brigade was little more than a skeleton command during the battle of Chancellorsville, May 1863. When he was refused permission to return to New York to raise new volunteers for the brigade, he resigned his commission, which was accepted on 14 May 1863. As a democrat, Meagher had made political enemies who suggested the high casualty rate among his command was due to his heavy drinking. Returning to New York, he was accorded another hero's welcome. Frustrated by inactivity, he petitioned constantly for reappointment. Political reasons led to his being recommissioned a brigadier-general in December 1864. Ordered to Nashville, he was placed in command of the military district of Etowah. When directed to transport his command to Savannah, January 1865, to support General Sherman's Georgia campaign, he so mismanaged the transportation -- due, so his critics believed, to his heavy drinking -- that he was relieved by General Grant and ordered home to await orders. Inactive, he resigned his commission on 12 May 1865. 
Political reasons led to Meagher's appointment by President Andrew Johnson as secretary to the territory of Montana. Arriving in the territory in September 1865, he became 'de facto' governor in September 1866. Faced with disorder and the hostility of the Sioux under Red Cloud, Meagher raised a militia unit, the Montana Volunteers. While awaiting a shipment of arms for the unit at Fort Benton, he fell off the deck of the 'G. A. Thompson' into the Missouri River and drowned on 1 July 1867. His body was never recovered, nor his death adequately explained. 
If considered by some, such as Thackeray, as an impulsive and reckless Irishman, Meagher was none the less a brave soldier and was considered a national hero by both the Irish and Irish-Americans alike. In Waterford he is remembered by a plaque outside the Granville Hotel, and a fine equestrian statue outside the Montana state capital in Helena. He was survived by his second wife, Elizabeth, who presented his ceremonial swords and portrait of him in his federal uniform to the city corporation of Waterford in 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 18484


Means, Joseph Calrow (1801-1879), General Baptist minister, was born in London on 20 May 1801, the only surviving child of John Means, a wine merchant in Rood Lane, London, and his wife, Phillis Simpson (died 1814), the third daughter of John Simpson, preacher to the afternoon congregation of General Baptists at Worship Street. From 1809 he was educated in a day school, but on his mother's death he was enrolled at the boarding-school of the Revd John Evans (1767-1827). He left this school in 1818 and entered his father's business as a clerk. Unhappy in commercial life, he became one of the original teachers of the Worship Street Sunday school. In 1822 he was baptized at Deptford and in 1823 he was elected to the committee of the General Baptist assembly. Turning his thoughts towards the ministry, he entered the classics and mathematics classes of the newly opened University College, London, in 1828, and at the same time studied theology in the General Baptist Academy under Benjamin Mardon. 
In 1829, while still pursuing his studies, Means became preacher to the afternoon congregation at Worship Street. His ministry was successful, and his congregation moved later that year to Trinity Place, and subsequently to Coles Street, Southwark. In 1831 he was appointed secretary to the General Baptist assembly, a post he held with only two short breaks until 1872. He edited the organ of his denomination, the 'General Baptist Advocate', from 1831 to 1836. In 1834 he was elected a messenger, a quasi-episcopal office held for life. In 1836 he preached the annual sermon before the assembly, and caused a sensation by blaming the perceived decline among the Old Connexion of General Baptists on their repudiation of the atonement. The position which he held, and made clear during the sermon, was an evangelical one, and totally unacceptable to the majority of the assembly, who were inclined towards unitarianism. The strength of the reaction against him led Means to retire from his editorship of the 'General Baptist Advocate'. After the publication of his volume on the atonement, 'Jesus the Mercy Seat, or, A Scriptural View of Atonement' (1838), his connection with his congregation was severed in 1839. He formed a small evening congregation at Worship Street to which he ministered without stipend, supporting himself by literary work and by taking in boarders. He remained outside the denomination for four years. 
In 1843 Means became minister of the General Baptist congregation at Chatham, Kent; his settlement was in the face of great opposition, but proved a very happy one. He was elected headmaster of the Chatham proprietary school, and kept it on when it was relinquished by the proprietors. In 1855 he succeeded Mardon as minister at Worship Street, and from this time he exerted a paramount influence on the counsels of his denomination. Means ceaselessly advocated closer union between the Old and New Connexions of General Baptists. His campaigning bore some fruit: the two bodies exchanged delegates over a period of about twenty years, beginning in 1868. 
In 1837 Means married Louisa (died 1878), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Hugh Robert Alcock; they had no children. He was never robust, and in later life he suffered greatly from asthma. He retired from the pastoral charge in October 1874, but returned again to many of its duties, preaching the last sermon (23 June 1878) at Worship Street before the removal of the congregation to new premises in Bethnal Green. He died on 6 February 1879 in his home at 21 New North Road, Hoxton. 
Means's lucid contributions to theology were undervalued by his co-religionists; his position was a modified Arianism. His general literary work began in the 'Penny Cyclopaedia', to which he contributed topographical and other articles, including a biography of the Unitarian minister Lant Carpenter. He published a few separate sermons, and his addresses as messenger, often valuable for their historical details, are included in the 'Proceedings' of the assembly. He wrote frequently on theological topics in the 'Christian Reformer', 'The Inquirer', and in Baptist periodicals. He also contributed to the 'Biographical Dictionary' (4 vols., 1842-4) published by the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge and to William Smith's 'Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography' (3 vols., 1844-9). 


@@@@@


doc= 18485


O'Meara, Dermot (fl. c.1614-1642), physician and author, was, according to the title-page of his 1615 work 'Ormonius', born in Ormond, co. Tipperary. He was a member of the family of the O'Mearas who were closely connected with the earls of Ormond and may have been the son of Domhnail of Lisaniskey, the most prominent O'Meara of the time, and the brother of William O'Meara, sheriff of the county palatine of Ormond in 1616. About 1614 O'Meara's son, Edmund O'Meara, was born in Ormond. 
O'Meara studied at Oxford University, although Wood could later find no record of his matriculation, and styled himself 'insignissimae Oxoniensis Academiae quondam alumnus' ('erstwhile student of the outstanding academy of Oxford') in his 1615 panegyric on Thomas Butler, tenth earl of Ormond. The work, published in London, was entitled 'Ormonius, sive, Illustrissimi herois ac domini D. Thomae Butleri, Ormoniae et Ossoriae comitis commemoratio', and has been described as 'perhaps the most complete account of Thomas's life in existence' (Carney, 173). With it were printed two other pieces: 'Anagramaticon, acrosticon, & chronologicon in eundem Thomae Butler' and 'Epicedion in obitum Thomae Butler Ormoniae & Ossoriae comitis'. 
Walter Harris notes that O'Meara became a physician of 'great repute' in Ireland; he was physician to both the tenth and eleventh earls of Ormond. In 1619 he published 'Pathologia haereditaria generalis'. In the dedication, to Sir Oliver St John, lord deputy of Ireland, he wrote on the need for the regulation of medical practice in Ireland: 'There are certainly more persons in Dublin at the present day practising the Art of Medicine than any other art, yet there are very few of them who have the six qualifications which Hippocrates requires in a Medical Doctor. Here, not only cursed Mountebanks... but also persons of every other craft whatsoever... all have free leave to profane the holy temple of Asculapius. (translation in Fleetwood, 23-4)' The book was reprinted in a work by Edmund O'Meara in London in 1665 ('Examen diatribae Thomae Willisy'), and again in Amsterdam the following year. 
About 1620 O'Meara may have been a teacher in Carrick-on-Suir, co. Tipperary, owing to the imprisonment of his patron Walter Butler, eleventh earl of Ormond. An affidavit of one Captain Edmund Corcoran, dated 26 April 1653 (now in the National Library in Prague), states, 'Col. Walter Butler of Roscrea was able to speak Latin fluently because in his youth he had studied Logic and Humanities under Doctor Dermot Meara in Carrick' (Logan, 313). No more is known about him for the next two decades. 
O'Meara was a Catholic and a supporter of the Irish party of the confederation of Kilkenny. On 12 October 1642 a letter from the lords justices of Ireland to the principal secretary of state in London stated 'We hear that Dr. Dermot O'Meara the elder a doctor in physick is now or was lately at the court. He stands indicted here of high treason which we hold fit to make known to his majesty' (Logan, 313). The letter is signed by James Butler, twelfth earl of Ormond, among others, and so it seems O'Meara had lost his position with that family. The last that is known of him is this report by Walter Enos of a letter that O'Meara sent to a friend in Dublin, in which he refers to James Butler, twelfth earl of Ormond: 'his will is that the dismembered parliament there [in Dublin] continue, and [he] prayed the king to turn the Irish over unto him and he would draw them to what condition he pleased' (ibid.). No record of Dermot O'Meara's death, nor of any will, has been found. 


@@@@@


doc= 18486


O'Meara, Edmund (c.1614-1681), physician, son of Dermot O'Meara (fl. c.1614-1642), physician to the earls of Ormond, was born in Ormond, co. Tipperary, Ireland. Educated at Oxford and abroad Edmund became MD of Rheims (1636); he may have been a member of the Dublin Fraternity of Physicians established in 1654, a forerunner of the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland, but the roll for the period in question is incomplete. He was elected honorary fellow of the College of Physicians, London (1664). He was medical adviser to the earl of Clanricarde. Like his father, Edmund O'Meara had a talent for Latin verses: he exchanged epigrams with Rinnucini, the papal nuncio, and wrote epitaphs for two archbishops of Tuam. The Cromwellian plantation obliged him to leave Ireland and practise medicine in London; he moved later to Bath and Bristol. After the Restoration he initiated a petition for the return of his confiscated estates in co. Wicklow. Prospects for a successful decision seemed favourable provided he could prove good title to the lands, and that these had not been given to adventurers or soldiers. Contrary to his expectations his claim was dismissed on 28 February 1663 by the commissioners of settlement. Leave to appeal was granted, and it is believed by Patrick Logan that the second petition was successful. 
O'Meara's 'Examen diatribae Thomae Willisy' (1665), dedicated to Sir Kenelm Digby, was reprinted in Amsterdam (1666). Additional to its attack on Willis's 'De febribus' it contains 'medicae rariores', descriptions of nineteen unusual cases which he had seen in Bristol, and includes a reprint of his father's 'Pathologia haereditaria generalis', the first medical book printed in Dublin (1619). The engraved frontispiece of Edmund's 'Examen' displays a glow-worm in sunlight and a motto, 'Useless in the light'; below, the same little creature is seen 'shining in the dark'. The polemic against Willis evoked the displeasure of Richard Lower, an Oxford physiologist, who responded so quickly with 'Vindicatio diatribae Willisii' (1665) that Kenneth Dewhurst, its translator, suggested that Lower, prone to mood swings, may have been then in a hypomanic state. Later, in his 'Tractatus corde', Lower, still incensed, referred to ignoramuses who obstructed scientific progress with inept criticisms, among whom he included 'Meara quidam Hybernus'. The motivation of O'Meara's attack on Willis is unclear, but may represent the disturbed feelings of a traditionalist who followed doctrines advocated by Galen. His animadversions were supported by his fellow-countryman Conlis Cassin MD, whose book bore a title which may be translated: 'Willis badly vindicated, or an Oxford doctor found out in untruthfulness and ignorance'. 
O'Meara returned to Dublin in 1666 and was in demand as a consultant. The association between the O'Mearas and the Butlers of Ormond was re-established in 1674 when Edmund was called as second opinion in an illness of James, duke of Ormond. He expressed the opinion that diet and exercise alone would be insufficient -- bleeding in early spring was an absolute necessity, and mineral waters might be taken in either England or Ireland. He also advised that the patient be given 'the spleen broth used by my Lady of Thurles by Dr. Fennell's direction' (Logan, 315). He believed that the underlying disorder emanated from the spleen, and was unlikely to be fully relieved in one season. 
O'Meara died in Dublin in 1681, survived by his wife, Cathleen, his daughter, Martha, and three sons -- William, who was also a physician and prefixed Latin verses to the 1666 edition of his father's 'Examen'; Edmund, a Jesuit; and Francis. The latter, who was the second son, was named a burgess in James II's charter of 1687 to the town of Wicklow, and was granted a commission of horse in Tyrconnel's regiment in the same year. He was sheriff of co. Wicklow in 1688, and was killed at the battle of the Boyne, being then a major, on 1 July 1690. 


@@@@@


doc= 18487


Meares, John (1756?-1809), naval officer and entrepreneur, is of unknown origins. Nothing is known of his early years until he entered the navy in 1771 on board the 'Cruiser', in the rating of 'captain's servant'. After serving for nearly seven years, mostly in small ships, he passed his examination on 17 September 1778, when he was said to be more than twenty-two (passing certificate); the next day he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant. After the peace of 1783 he entered the merchant service and obtained command of a ship for a voyage to India. At Calcutta he was inspired, like many others in India and Britain, by news of Cook's discoveries in the north Pacific and he formed a company for opening or developing a trade with north-west America. On 12 March 1786 he sailed in the ship 'Nootka' of 200 tons, not knowing that two other expeditions were being mounted at the same time. On 25 September he arrived in Prince William Sound, where he wintered in extremely harsh conditions. Most of the crew of the 'Nootka' were dead by the time George Dixon and Nathaniel Portlock arrived in the sound in the 'Queen Charlotte' and the 'King George' the following spring. As an officially sanctioned expedition sent from London, they were surprised to find Meares already on this coast, and they only offered to help him in his difficult situation if he undertook to leave at once. This later prompted a bitter dispute between the two parties which became known as the Dixon-Meares controversy. 
When Meares reached Macau in October 1787, he at once began to lay plans for a return to the coast of north-west America and a small group of interested entrepreneurs funded two ships for a voyage. In January 1788 he sailed for Nootka Sound in the ship 'Felice', arriving there in May. In June he was joined by the 'Iphigenia', with William Douglas as master; and after some traffic with the indigenous people, land was bought and a trading post was established. Having obtained a promise of free and exclusive trade, Meares sailed for China in the 'Felice' in September, leaving the 'Iphigenia' and her tender, the 'North-west America', with orders to winter in the Hawaiian Islands. 
In Macau, Meares formed a consortium with a rival group of businessmen led by John Cadman Etches (whose partners ironically included George Dixon and Nathaniel Portlock). Meares, whose position was vulnerable as an interloping trader, believed that this merger under a joint trading account would allow him the official recognition that had previously been granted to Etches's organization, the King George's Sound Company. In 1789 Meares and his partners at Canton (Guangzhou) dispatched two ships, the 'Argonaut' in April, and the 'Princess Royal' in May, to join the 'Iphigenia' in Nootka Sound. Their instructions from the consortium were to establish a permanent factory there. The 'Iphigenia' was in the sound on 6 May when the Spanish frigate 'Princesa' of twenty-six guns came in. On the 13th the 'Princesa' was joined by the sixteen-gun corvette 'San Carlos'; and on the 14th the Spaniards seized the 'Iphigenia' and the 'North-west America', making Douglas and all his men prisoners. On their arrival later on, the 'Argonaut' and 'Princess Royal' were also seized, the grounds of the aggression being the allegation that the coast was in the possession of Spain, and that any foreign ships trading and establishing settlements there were violating Spanish rights. When fragmentary news of these events reached London, in January 1790, a demand for compensation and the return of British property was made to the Spanish. Only then, it was declared, would the larger issue of territorial rights be discussed. Simmering tension, however, became a deep international crisis when Meares entered on the scene. 
As soon as news of the incident in Nootka Sound had reached Meares in China, he had returned to Britain, and in a memorial dated 30 April 1790 he laid the details of the case before the government. He presented ministers with a colourful and far from accurate account of what had happened the previous year and during his earlier voyages to the sound. In particular, there was great uncertainty as to whether or not the British had ever established permanent settlements which had then been taken into the possession of the Spanish crown. After the cabinet had assessed the information from Meares, a message from the king (drafted by Pitt) was laid before parliament on 5 May noting that two ships flying British flags (the other ships had been operating under Portuguese colours) had been taken by the Spanish and that Spain had established an exclusive right to trade on that coast. This provoked a great public uproar and a clamour for war against Spain. A fleet of forty ships was assembled, under the command of Lord Howe, which became known as 'the Spanish armament of 1790'. In the face of this threat, the Spanish government eventually acceded to British demands in August, and the Anglo-Spanish Convention of 28 October 1790 saw the restoration of all land taken from British subjects and the opening of trade on the north-west coast of America to all nations. The political excitement created great interest in Meares's voyages and mercantile schemes, and encouraged him to publish a number of books and pamphlets relating to his travels and the exploration of the coast of north-west America, in addition to items associated with his dispute with George Dixon. As the crisis passed, however, Meares disappeared from public view. It does not appear that he had any further service in the navy; but on 26 February 1795 he was promoted to the rank of commander. He died in 1809. 


@@@@@


doc= 18488


Mearns, Duncan (1779-1852), Church of Scotland minister and theologian, was born on 28 August 1779, the elder of two children, at the manse of Towie, Aberdeenshire, where his father, Alexander Mearns (1745-1820), was parish minister. His mother was Anne (died 1823), daughter of James Morison of Disblair and Elsick, lord provost of Aberdeen; she was the widow of John Farquhar (1732-1768), minister of Nigg in Kincardineshire, with whom she had had three sons. At the age of twelve Mearns entered Marischal College, Aberdeen, gaining the first bursary. He graduated MA in 1795 and went on to study divinity under Gilbert Gerard and George Campbell. He was licensed by the presbytery of Kincardine O'Neil in June 1799, and in November of that year he was ordained assistant in the parish of Tarves, Aberdeenshire, to which he succeeded soon after. On 11 August 1808 he married Elizabeth Forsyth (died 1830), with whom he had eight daughters and two sons, the younger of whom, William (1814-1891), became minister of Kinneff. His eldest daughter, Anne, married Robert Macpherson, Mearns's successor in the divinity chair, while his second daughter, Jane, married Hercules Scott, professor of moral philosophy in Aberdeen University. 
Mearns was admitted to the chair of divinity in December 1816; while not in principle opposed to the practice, he declined to follow his predecessor's example in holding the chair in plurality. In 1818 he was awarded a DD by St Andrews University. A leading figure in the moderate party in the Church of Scotland, he served as moderator of the general assembly in 1821, becoming a royal chaplain in 1823. He took a prominent part in the events leading up to the Disruption of 1843, showing a particular interest in the suspended moderate ministers in the presbytery of Strathbogie. Mearns was always deeply studious and retiring; in the words of his obituary in the 'Aberdeen Journal' he was 'plain to a degree of earnestness in his own tastes and habits, he let the vain show of the world pass with contempt'. For a scholar of such repute he published little: his 'Principles of Christian Evidence Illustrated' (1818) was, perhaps significantly, as much a polemical as a theological work, with Thomas Chalmers as its intended target. After his death, his Murtle lectures appeared in two volumes as 'Lectures on Scripture Characters' (1853), edited by his son William. He died, after a long and painful illness, at Chanonry, Old Aberdeen, on 2 March 1852, and was buried in the churchyard of St Machar's, Aberdeen, on 5 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 18489


Mears, John (1695-1767), non-subscribing Presbyterian minister, was born in Loughbrickland, co. Down, one of at least two sons of John Mears (died 1718), Presbyterian minister successively at Colydon, Ayrshire (1689), Longford (1697), and Newtownards (1707), and his wife, Margaret Gilchrist (died 1716) of Antrim. He entered Glasgow University in 1710, graduated MA in 1713, and studied divinity under John Simson, whose teaching shook his orthodoxy. Early in 1718 he was licensed by the Down presbytery and on 10 February 1720 he was ordained at Newtownards, in succession to his father. 
On the outbreak of the subscription controversy in 1720 Mears, who was clerk of Down presbytery, sided strongly with the non-subscribers. In 1722 he made overtures to Francis Hutchinson, bishop of Down and Connor, offering to conform to the Church of Ireland. On 22 November 1722 the matter came before the Down presbytery, to whom Mears apologized; blaming his actions on a 'temptation of Satan', he declared that 'he was now more fixed in his former faith and Presbyterian principles, and hoped this step of his weakness should have a good effect upon him in making him a more able advocate for the Presbyterian cause' (Reid and Killen, 'History of the Presbyterian Church', 3.166n). As some of his congregation remained dissatisfied and suspicious of his non-subscribing principles the presbytery moved them into a separate congregation in May 1723. In 1724 Mears supported his fellow non-subscriber Thomas Nevin, minister of Downpatrick, who had been accused of Arianism and excluded from ministerial communion. Mears had to defend himself from the charge of Arianism made by Gilbert Kennedy, of Donacloney and Tullyish, and anonymously vindicated himself in Samuel Haliday's 'Letter to the Revd Mr G. Kennedy' (1725). In June 1725 Mears and his congregation were transferred to the Antrim presbytery, which formally separated from the general synod in the following year. In 1732 he published a catechism for adults that became the standard 'shorter catechism' in Irish non-subscribing congregations until the nineteenth century; as a consequence it was frequently reprinted. 
In 1735 Mears resigned Newtownards to take charge of the Presbyterian congregation at Clonmel, co. Tipperary, where he was installed on 9 April. In 1738 it was recorded that he had between seventy and eighty communicants. On 9 January 1740 he was installed minister of a small congregation in Stafford Street, Dublin, which had separated from Capel Street congregation on 10 October 1738. In December 1740 he preached the funeral sermon for John Abernethy, at Wood Street Chapel, and in 1762 his congregation amalgamated with that in Wood Street. A new meeting-house was built for the united congregation in Strand Street, where Mears preached the opening sermon on 22 January 1764. He wrote a short explanation of the Lord's supper that was published in 1758 and incorporated in 'Forms of Devotion' (1766) by John Leland, James Duchal, and Isaac Weld. 
Mears died on 11 October 1767, leaving a son, who settled in Calcutta, and a daughter, who married John Brown, Presbyterian minister at Waterford. 


@@@@@


doc= 18490


Meres, John (1698-1761?), printer, was born in London, the son of Thomas Meres, the disinherited son of Sir Thomas Meres (bap. 1634, d. 1715). On 9 February 1713 John Meres was apprenticed to William Stephens, a London printer, for seven years and while it remains uncertain when Meres formally entered the book trade, it was most likely his relative Hugh Meres who gave him a formal introduction to the profession. Hugh Meres was a director of Sun Fire Insurance and the printer of the 'British Mercury' and, from 1721 onwards, the 'Historical Register'. In October 1719 he commenced a new daily newspaper, the 'Daily Post', and three years later was printer of the 'British Journal', before he died on 19 April 1723. His widow, Cassandra, the daughter of Thomas Grover the typefounder, continued the printing business until her own death in February 1726, at which time her son-in-law, Richard Nutt, assumed control. In December 1727 Nutt started the 'London Evening-Post', which by 1737 was under the printing management of John Meres. 
By this time, Meres was established in the Old Bailey. He had married Sarah Robinson on 2 June 1732 at St Botolph without Bishopsgate; they had one son, John. The 'Daily Post', alongside the 'London Evening-Post' and the weekly 'Universal Spectator', became the focus of Meres's energies, and he dropped the 'Historical Register' to concentrate on the management of these three papers. With three newspapers printed from the same office, there were clear indications of reproducing news from each other, which was typical of the London papers of the time. While the 'Universal Spectator' claimed that 'this Journal... contains about six Times more Domestick News than the Common Journals; with several material Paragraphs of fresh News, not in any other Paper', Meres was not loath to admit that in every issue of the 'London Evening-Post' 'we copy the principal Paragraphs from the Morning Papers (without which our Evening Paper would be of no service to the Country)' (Harris, 161). Despite this process of news sharing, Meres's papers still offered enough space for competing commentaries. Indeed, in 1738 he was tried for inserting disparaging remarks in the 'Daily Post' concerning the king of Sweden. Initially, he refused to find sureties for his good behaviour and was confined to Newgate prison, but he eventually changed his mind and Robert Gosling and George Strahan, both booksellers, offered sureties in his favour. However, within two years remarks in the 'Daily Post' reflecting upon an act of parliament dealing with the embargo of provisions saw Meres called to the bar of the House of Commons on 2 December 1740, and he was subsequently held in gaol until 10 February 1741. Upon his release, Meres was cautioned for selling the 'London Evening-Post'. Meres was also implicated in the legal action taken against Nutt in 1754 over the publishing of an allegedly seditious letter in the 'London Evening-Post', which led to Nutt's conviction and imprisonment the following year. Meres reputedly died in 1761, but no record of his death or burial has been located. The records of the Stationers' Company detail apprentices bound to and freed by Meres after 1761 though this may be the result of confusing Meres with his son, who was freed by patrimony in 1758. The son inherited the business and discontinued publication of the 'Daily Post' in 1772. 
Further confusion is caused by John Nichols identifying William Mears (bap. 1686, d. 1739) as John Meres, although there is no clear relationship between the two men. William Mears, bookseller, was baptized on 24 October 1686 at Faversham, Kent, the son of Leonard Meeres, mariner, and his wife, Elizabeth. He was bound to the bookseller Israel Harrison on 9 September 1700 and on 6 October 1707, he was made free of the Stationers' Company. On 2 May 1709 he married Mary, daughter of the prominent bookseller and member of the Stationers' Company Daniel Browne, in St Dunstan-in-the-West parish. Between 1713 and 1727, he traded from an office at the Lamb without Temple Bar before moving to Ludgate Hill. He was master to several apprentices, including his son, William, who was bound on 6 June 1727. In 1713 he issued a catalogue of English plays and the following year he co-published, with his father-in-law, 'The Persian and Turkish Tales' translated from Petis de la Croix. He published no fewer than eight more works during the course of his career, including Defoe's 'New Voyage Round the World' (1725) and 'Tour through Great Britain' (1724-7), before his death in 1739 from an unknown cause. 


@@@@@


doc= 18491


Mechi, John Joseph (1802-1880), agriculturist, was born on 22 May 1802 in London, the third son in the family of four sons and two daughters of Giacomo Mechi, of Bologna, and of Elizabeth, daughter of J. Beyer of Poland Street, London. He passed much of his childhood in Kensington, where his father is said to have held a position at the palace, taking holidays in the countryside of Essex and Suffolk, and he finished his education in France. He entered the City at sixteen, as a clerk in a house in Walbrook in the Newfoundland trade. He married first, in 1823, Fanny Frost, who died in 1845. Second, in 1846, he married Charlotte (1816-1896), daughter of Francis Ward of Chillesford, Suffolk, with whom he had four daughters and one son. 
In 1827 Mechi was able to set up on his own account as a retail cutler in small premises at 130 Leadenhall Street; he moved to no. 4 in 1830. In that year he regularized his position by being admitted to the Loriners' Company (of which he was master in 1860-63), and by becoming a freeman in the City of London (he had to petition the court of common council because his father was not naturalized). His business prospered between 1830 and 1840; 'he set and ground razors with more than ordinary skill' ('City Press', 29 Dec 1880) and supplied scientific instruments, pencils, and quill-cutting penknives. 'Mechi's magic razor strop' was heavily advertised and may have been based on a purchased patent. His own two patents, of 1840, were both concerned with lighting improvements -- to illuminate shop window fronts and to modify oil and gas lamps so that the heat and the combustion vapours were carried off, thus improving room ventilation. 
From 1840 Mechi turned his attention to farming and after an intensive study of the earlier English farming writers he resolved to practise, and especially to publicize, improvements in agriculture. Accordingly in 1841 he purchased, for $3400, Tiptree Hall Farm, said to be of 130-170 acres at Tiptree Heath, an area of poor clay soil in Essex. Mechi established a model farm with a large capital input for drainage and irrigation; the farm also had a 6 hp fixed steam-engine to provide power for driving barn machinery and for pumping water and liquid manure. The essence of his practice was to use the manure from sheep, pigs, and bullocks, expensively stall-fed on bought concentrates, to fertilize crops of wheat, pulses, and sown grasses. He held annual gatherings in July to which 'he invited men of talent and skill to witness the combined results of capital and science' ('ILN', 11 April 1857), and he encouraged visitors, who came from all over the world and who recorded their comments in the visitors' book, kept from 1846 to 1878. The farm was the scene of the reaping machine trials of the 1851 Great Exhibition and of the 1855 trial of Robert Romaine's steam cultivator. After the trial of Cyrus McCormick's reaper at Tiptree in August 1851, Mechi reported his 'conviction that all our reaping will soon be done by horse or steam machines' ('The Times', 12 Aug 1851). 
Above all Mechi used the spoken and written word to spread his views on scientific farming, with talks (many subsequently published) to farmers' clubs and agricultural societies, with letters to the agricultural press, and with his best-selling publications, notably the three main versions of 'How to Farm Profitably' (1859, 1872, and 1878); included in these were the Tiptree Hall Farm balance sheets. Among the improvements he advocated were deep cultivation, farm steam power, and the use of town sewage. Although many were impressed by Mechi's achievements, others criticized his intensive husbandry for requiring a massive capital input beyond the reach of ordinary farmers. 
Gradually Mechi's enterprises ceased to prosper. He had operated his business as a cutler with Charles Bazin (1859-69) and had moved to 112 Regent Street, London, but sales of the 'magic razor strop' and penknives declined. Certainly since 1840 Mechi had ceased to direct his creative energy into the City concerns which helped to underpin his farm financially. Nevertheless he was elected sheriff of London and Middlesex in 1856-7 (receiving a grant of arms in 1856), and alderman of the ward of Lime Street in the City in 1858. However, he resigned this post in 1866 to avoid the expensive prospect of becoming lord mayor, after heavy losses in companies that he had founded. The Unity Joint Stock Bank, of which he was a governor, failed in 1866, and the Unity Fire and General Life insurance companies were torn apart by internal dissension. Mechi was a juror in the department of art and science at the Great Exhibition of 1851 and also in the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1855. He was a member of the council of the Royal Agricultural College, Cirencester, from 1845, and of its committee of management from 1847, and he was regarded as the founder of the Royal Agricultural Benevolent Institution in 1860. Mechi was elected a member of the Farmers' Club, London in 1846, was a prominent speaker at meetings, and served as chairman 1877-8. 
The decline of all Mechi's enterprises continued inexorably, that of Tiptree Farm being accelerated by the bad seasons of the 1870s which culminated in the disastrous year of 1879. Mechi became ill with diabetes and was forced to place his affairs into liquidation on 14 December 1880. He died of phrenitis and gastritis at Tiptree Hall on 26 December 1880 and was buried in Tiptree Heath church on 1 January 1881. 
Mechi's early farming success had coincided with the 'golden age' of English agriculture but it was doubtful whether his intensive method of mixed farming was appropriate to the heavy Essex clays or even to the more general run of English soils. His more lasting reputation must remain that of an enthusiastic publicist of scientific agriculture in an era of high farming. 


@@@@@


doc= 18492


Medbourne, Matthew (bap. 1637?, d. 1680), actor and playwright, may have been the Mathew Medburne, son of George Medburne, who was baptized at St Margaret's, Westminster, London, on 17 June 1637. He performed with the Duke's Company, London, from 1661, and is the author or translator of at least one play. His earliest documented appearance on stage was as Delio in John Webster's 'The Duchess of Malfi' on 30 September 1662, though he was active in the company before that date. Medbourne played many secondary roles for the Duke's Company throughout his career: Lennox in 'Macbeth', the Ghost in 'Hamlet', Morat in Elkanah Settle's 'Ibrahim the Illustrious Bassa', and Don Pedro in Aphra Behn's 'The Rover'. He played the count of Blamount in Roger Boyle's 'History of Henry V', and John Downes notes that Medbourne played Clermont, though no role by that name appears in the play. 
Medbourne may have been the author of 'Saint Cecily, or, The Converted Twins', which was licensed on 11 June 1666, during the time when the theatres were closed because of the plague. The play's title-page assigns authorship to 'E. M.', but Medbourne's name appears at the end of the dedication. Lori Sonderegger makes a convincing case for attributing the play to him. Medbourne's other known literary effort was a translation of Moliere's play entitled by Medbourne as 'Tartuffe, or, The French Puritan'. Judith Milhous and Robert D. Hume date this play as being performed in autumn or winter 1669-70 (Milhous and Hume, 'Dating play premieres'). Gerard Langbaine repeats the author's claim that it 'was receiv'd with universal Applause on our English Stage' (Langbaine, 367), but we have record of only one performance. An epilogue by Charles Sackville, earl of Dorset, from March 1670, credits Medbourne with ten plays, but only the two mentioned survive. His engagements with the Duke's Company are fairly steady throughout his career, though after the reopening of the theatres in autumn 1666 he is not listed in the company roster until 1668. He seems to have worked for the rival King's Company in the season 1669-70, since he appears to have spoken the epilogue to 'Tartuffe', which was performed at the King's Bridges Street Theatre. He appears to have returned to the Duke's Company for the 1670-71 season. 
Medbourne's career was marred, however, by legal and political difficulties. On 18 July 1662 he was fined 3's'. 4died for assaulting a messenger from the office of the revels on 4 July. The bill states that he and eleven others, 'all twelve late of St. Clement's Danes'... with divers unknown disturbers of the peace, riotously assembled together and assaulted Edward Thomas, gentleman, and beat and maltreated him, and held him their prisoner for the space of two hours' (Jeaffreson). On 9 December 1669 an arrest warrant was issued for Medbourne and his fellow actor Samuel Sandford for 'refractory & disorderly' conduct (Milhous and Hume, 'Register', vol. 1, p. 110). Medbourne's greatest trials were ahead. In November 1678 he played Agamemnon at Dorset Garden Theatre in John Banks's 'The Destruction of Troy'. This was his last known stage role, for he was arrested, charged with high treason, and sent to Newgate prison on 26 November. As a Roman Catholic and an acquaintance of Titus Oates from at least 1676, he became swept up in the Popish Plot. A man named Phillips 'in Black Friars at the Wonder Tavern' swore on 3 February 1679 that 'Medbourne's wife, in the presence of another woman, offered in her husband's name to make him a man forever, if he could invalidate Oates' testimony' ('CSP dom.'). On 7 February Phillips maintained that 'a certain woman brought to him by Mrs. Medbourne offered him money to swear that Oates offered him money to bring witnesses against Medburne' (ibid.). Medbourne remained in Newgate until his death on 19 March 1680. In May 1679 he made out his will to 'give all that I have unto my wife', Catherine. Langbaine wrote that Medbourne was 'One, whose good parts deserv'd a better fate than to die in prison, as he did in the time of the late 'Popish-Plot'; thro' a too forward and indiscreet Zeal for a mistaken Religion' (Langbaine, 366). 


@@@@@


doc= 18493


Medhurst, George (bap. 1759, d. 1827), mechanical engineer, was baptized on 11 February 1759 at Shoreham, Kent, the son of George and Anne Medhurst. He was in business as a clockmaker at Pleasant Row, Clerkenwell, London, until the imposition in 1797 of a duty on clocks depressed trade. He then turned to engineering, working at Battle Bridge, Clerkenwell. His first patent, filed in 1799 (no. 2299) was for a windmill and pump for compressing air to obtain motive power. The sails of the windmill were arranged in the manner which became commonplace for pumping windmills, while his machinery showed great ingenuity, with a governor attached to vary the length of stroke to the pump, according to the wind strength and the pressure of air in the reservoir. The specification included a description of a small rotary engine to be worked by compressed air. Medhurst pursued the idea of taking advantage of the available wind to compress large bodies of air, as an energy source for use when required, throughout his life. 
The following year Medhurst patented his Aeolian engine (no. 2431 of 1800), by which a carriage could be propelled by compressed air contained in a reservoir beneath the vehicle. In an undated pamphlet he proposed the establishment of regular coach services, with pumping stations along the route, to replenish the reservoirs. He also described an engine worked by gas produced by exploding small quantities of gunpowder at regular intervals in the cylinder. In 1801 he patented a compound crank for converting rotary into rectilinear motion (no. 2467) and in the same year he took over the patent rights for a washing and wringing machine devised by James Wood in 1790. 
By about 1800 Medhurst had established himself at 1 Denmark Street, Westminster, as a maker of scales and weighing machines, machinist, and ironfounder. He was the inventor of the equal balance weighing machine, patented in 1817 (no. 4164), which found a place on the counter of most retail shops, and he also made heavy duty platforms for weighing goods in sacks, cases, or carts, and for weighing jockeys. 
Medhurst was the first to suggest pneumatic dispatch, as it was later called, whereby letters and small packages were propelled along a tube by compressed air. This idea was not patented; Medhurst published a description in 1810, followed in 1812 by proposals for a pneumatic passenger railway. His plan specified brick tunnels of 30 feet cross-section, through which closely fitting passenger or goods carriages ran on rails. The carriages might, he thought, reach a speed of 50 m.p.h., with goods conveyed at the low cost of a penny per ton per mile, passengers at a farthing per mile. Recognizing that people might not be willing to be propelled through a tube, Medhurst also proposed carriages running on rails on the roadway, connected to a piston driven through a continuous tube beneath the rails. He did not put these plans into action. Like others with similar ideas at this time, he could not devise a practical method of sealing the longitudinal slit in the pressurized tube while permitting the tow bar to pass along. 
Medhurst's steam carriage met with more success; carrying one man it ran between Paddington and Islington on 3 April 1820 and again on 6 July. A year later his more substantial carriage ran up and down Paddington Hill at 5 m.p.h.. By 1827 Medhurst was offering to sell a carriage able to carry four persons at 7 m.p.h.. At this time he was also advertising his patent canal lock, to prevent loss of water, and a leak proof lock gate, though no patents were filed under his name. Medhurst died early in September 1827 and was buried at the church of St Peter and St Paul, Shoreham, on 10 September. He left a widow, Ann, four sons, who inherited his Denmark Street workshop, and five daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 18494


Medhurst, Walter Henry (1796-1857), missionary, was born in London on 29 April 1796, the son of William Medhurst, an innkeeper of Ross, Scotland. He attended St Paul's School (1807-12), and after leaving was apprenticed as a printer to Joseph Wood at the 'Gloucester Herald' office. There he joined the Congregational church at Southgate Chapel in December 1813. In 1816 he began work for the London Missionary Society (LMS). Following a short period of study at Hackney College he left Britain for Malacca in September 1816 as a missionary printer at the Anglo-Chinese College. On the way he broke his journey at Madras from 11 February to 20 May 1817, and there he married Mrs Elizabeth Braun, 'nee' Martin (1794-1874), the day before he sailed. From June 1817 he worked at the printing press and also made rapid progress in Malay and Chinese, and began preaching in Hokkien. He was ordained by William Milne at Malacca on 27 April 1819. 
Of wiry frame, good health, and unfailing cheerfulness, Medhurst proved an efficient if independently minded missionary. He was too energetic to be confined to the college and, after a disagreement, left in September 1820 for Penang, and began his own mission station. At the end of 1821 he moved to Batavia, where his only surviving son, Walter Henry Medhurst, was born in 1822. There were also four daughters from the marriage. In 1829-30 Medhurst journeyed in Java and Bali, and in 1835 along the Chinese coast and even to Shanghai, then still a closed port. In 1836 he returned to Britain, where he wrote 'China, its State and Prospects', published in 1838, with a view to stimulating interest in Chinese missions, and especially in a new translation of the 'Bible' into Chinese, later known as the Delegates' Version, a work he accomplished with the co-operation of friends between 1847 and 1850. In November 1838 he returned to Java. When Shanghai and four other ports were opened to British merchants in 1842 under the Anglo-Chinese treaty of Nanking (Nanjing), he seized his opportunity and established an LMS mission there, largely on his own initiative. His family joined him the following year. Medhurst became the dominant figure in this, the most important station of the LMS in China, and also in the steadily growing British community in Shanghai, where he served on the first municipal council in 1854-5. 
Medhurst was by no means genial, or an easy man to get on with, and was the object more of respect than affection. In Shanghai he established the mission press (the first modern one in China) and published a steady stream of works in English and in Chinese, many of them his own. His works were numerous, and included thirty-four Chinese and some sixty-two Malay volumes, as well as translations from the Chinese and his English writings. They exhibit unceasing activity of mind, a remarkable gift for languages, and an intellect not shackled by the disciplinary barriers between sacred and secular learning. Medhurst also had the energy to undertake proselytizing trips into the Chinese interior almost immediately, most notably a courageous clandestine journey in 1845, engagingly written up that year as his 'Glance at the Interior of China'. On 8 March 1848, on a less secretive trip, he was badly beaten in what became known as the 'Tsingpu outrage'. 
On 19 March 1853 Medhurst wrote that he had seen a 'most extraordinary document'. This was a religious pamphlet, apparently Christian, issued by the Chinese Taiping insurgents. The excitement thus generated cannot be overestimated, even though it was ultimately disappointed. The following month Medhurst accompanied George Bonham on a delegation to meet the Taiping leadership in their capital, Nanjing. There he collected a large number of rebel pamphlets which he translated and published. 
The strain of the past decade's pioneering work began to show. During the occupation of Shanghai by the rebel Small Sword Society (1853-4) Medhurst was assaulted by Qing soldiers, and in 1855 his son implored the LMS to recall him, as he had aged appreciably in the previous two years. On 10 September 1856 he sailed with his wife and family for Britain. The voyage was hardly a restful affair and he died in London on 24 January 1857, just three days after reaching the country. He was buried in Abney Park cemetery on 30 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 18495


Medhurst, Sir Walter Henry (1822-1885), consul in China, was born in Batavia, Java, the son of the missionary Walter Henry Medhurst (1796-1857) and his wife, Elizabeth Braun, 'nee' Martin (1794-1874). Educated at Macau, he was appointed Chinese secretary to the British superintendent of trade in China in October 1840. Britain's consular officials in the Far East in the mid-nineteenth century generally owed more to government patronage than to their knowledge of China or the Chinese language. Almost by accident, some of the appointees turned out to be men of great ability. W. H. Medhurst was one of those few. He proved to be a capable, energetic, and willing official, who spoke with ease Dutch, Chinese, and Malay. His career spanned a crucial period in the history of China; a period which saw the gradual, though reluctant, opening of the country to Western influence. Indeed, Medhurst entered the consular service at a critical moment, just after the outbreak of the First Opium War. 
In February 1841 Medhurst accompanied Captain George Elliot, Britain's outgoing plenipotentiary to China, to take possession of and inspect the newly acquired Hong Kong, then a small, barren island, but also the centre of opium smuggling into China. In August 1841 he joined the suite of Colonel Sir Henry Pottinger, the new plenipotentiary to China, moving north with him as the third phase of the war began. He was present when Amoy (Xiamen) was occupied at the end of the month and later, in October, when Chushan was taken. Medhurst's linguistic skills soon attracted Pottinger's attention, and he was attached to the garrison at Chushan as interpreter between October 1841 and December 1842. He was later decorated with the Opium War medal for the services he rendered to the Chushan garrison. 
Medhurst's knowledge of Chinese continued to stand him in good stead: in October 1843 he was appointed consular interpreter at Shanghai, just after that place, along with four other ports, was first opened to foreign trade under the treaty of Nanking (Nanjing) of August 1842. He continued to serve in his new function for seven years. Having also been acting vice-consul at Amoy between 1848 and 1849, he became Chinese secretary to the British superintendency of trade in China in August 1850. In November 1854 he was promoted to the consulship at Foochow (Fuzhou) in Fukien (Fujian) province, where he remained for four years. Medhurst's next posting was to Hangchow (Hangzhou) in December 1858, though he was repeatedly left in charge of Foochow and Shanghai as well. His linguistic services were called upon again in 1861 when he was attached to the British contingent of the Anglo-French expeditionary corps at Shanghai, which was sent to China in response to the Taiping uprising. 
Life in China was notoriously difficult for European women. Medhurst married three times. On 20 October 1847, while in London, he married the sixteen-year-old Ellen Gilbert, daughter of James Woodward Cooper; she died in China in December 1848. His second wife, whom he married in February 1854, was the daughter of the US consul in Macau; she too died after a year, in February 1855. In 1858 he married Juliana Tryphena, daughter of Henry Burningham, who survived until 1881, and with whom he had a son and two daughters. 
In January 1864 Medhurst was transferred to Hankow (Hankou), a major treaty port on the Yangtze (Yangzi) River in Hupeh (Hubei) province. In his new post he fought staunchly for British treaty rights, and was contemptuous of Mandarin officials, but never anti-Chinese, as so many Westerners were at that time. Medhurst was one of the 'warrior consuls', an advocate of gunboat diplomacy, the method much preferred by Britain's minister-plenipotentiary to China, Sir Rutherford Alcock, of exerting pressure locally to solve disputes with local authorities in the absence of a strong Chinese central government. In August 1868 the minister at Peking (Beijing) dispatched Medhurst on such a mission. With four gunboats the consul sailed down the Yangtze to Nanking, the provincial capital of Kiangsu (Jiangsu), to pressurize the governor-general to cashier some Chinese officials at Yangchow (Yangzhou) who had condoned the plundering and burning of a missionary station there. Medhurst's mission was successful and compensation was duly paid; but the British government later condemned the action as rash and contrary to Britain's established China policy. None the less, later in 1868 Medhurst was sent to Shanghai as acting consul. When his posting to Shanghai was made permanent in January 1871 Medhurst had reached the peak of the Chinese consular service. Six years previously, when that same post had fallen vacant, Medhurst failed to secure promotion to the much coveted Shanghai consulship. Aggrieved, he considered resigning from the service, only to stay on after the Treasury disputed his pension rights. 
Medhurst eventually retired from the service on 1 January 1877 on grounds of ill health, and was knighted in March of the same year. He returned to south-east Asia in 1881 to take part in the formation of the British North Borneo Company. From 1882 he resided for two years in Hong Kong to organize the emigration of Chinese labourers to the new company's territories. In 1884 Medhurst finally returned to England to live at Formosa, Torquay, where he died of apoplexy on 26 December 1885. In 1872 Medhurst had published 'The Foreigner in Far Cathay'. 


@@@@@


doc= 18496


John Medina (1721-1796), who was born in Edinburgh was also a portrait painter. He restored the pictures at Holyrood Palace and made several copies of the 'Ailsa' portrait of Mary Queen of Scots. He resided in London for a short time, and exhibited portraits at the Royal Academy in 1772 and 1773. He died at Edinburgh on 27 September 1796, in his seventy-sixth year. Examples of his work are in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 18497


Medina, Sir John Baptiste de (1659-1710), painter, was born in Brussels, the son of a Spanish officer serving in the Southern Netherlands whom George Vertue calls 'Captain Medina de L'Asturias'. His mother's identity is unknown. Little is known of his training, beyond an apprenticeship with Francois Duchatel. In this workshop Medina would have acquired the technique and the rather formal manner of later Flemish portrait painting, although at some stage his style acquired the more painterly breadth associated with Sir Godfrey Kneller, whose origins were Dutch rather than Flemish. 
At some time about 1686 Medina was attracted by the possibilities of the London market, where Kneller was already firmly established. There is no evidence that he ever rivalled Kneller during the period of eight or nine years that he spent in London before eventually settling in Scotland. This is confirmed by a comparison of their prices, Medina's being only one-third of Kneller's -- for example, $8 as opposed to $24 for a three-quarter length portrait. Although Medina was primarily a portrait painter, among his earliest recorded works in London was a series of eight illustrations (V&A) for an illustrated edition of Milton's 'Paradise Lost', published in 1688 by Jacob Tonson in association with the barrister John Somers. These wash drawings are slight, and derivative, vaguely Rubensian in manner. Throughout his career Medina also produced a number of subject paintings, usually small in scale, which have a higher quality of draughtsmanship than his portraits. These include 'Prometheus', 'Cain and Abel' (priv. coll.), and, the finest of those known, 'Apelles and Campaspe' (priv. coll.). By the early 1690s Medina was running a productive portrait workshop in Drury Lane. Among his clients were members of the Scottish nobility, no doubt attracted by his reasonable prices. One of these was George Melville, first earl of Melville, whose cousin Margaret, countess of Rothes, was instrumental in persuading Medina to move to Edinburgh to fill the void in the Scottish portrait market. After a temporary visit with an array of partially completed canvases he finally settled there, along with his wife, Jeanne Marie Vandale, and their children -- John (who became a painter), William, Gisberta, Katherine, Elizabeth, and Anne. Two of these are the subjects of an intimate and lively double portrait (priv. coll.). 
Medina's earliest commissions in Scotland were from members of Melville's family, including his son David, third earl of Leven, whose three-quarter length portrait of 1691 has a not unconvincing baroque panache (Scot. NPG). The circle of Melville and his son encompassed a wide spectrum of Scottish society and provided Medina with the basis of a highly lucrative practice. There is a slightly mechanical air to many of these portraits, as might be expected in a virtual monopoly, lively heads not always convincingly attached to draped or armoured bodies. However, a less contrived head and shoulders portrait of the learned Sir John Clerk of Penicuik (priv. coll.) shows Medina working in a fresh, observational manner not much inferior to Kneller. 
About the turn of the century Sir John Clerk's cousin William Aikman, a minor landowner who wished to become a painter, joined Medina to learn the craft, although he was not formally apprenticed. He may have been involved in a major project that Medina accomplished between about 1697 and 1708 -- a series of twenty-nine portraits of members of the Royal College of Surgeons. At the request of the surgeons, Medina added his self-portrait to the group, as explained in detail in a 'cartellino' within the painting (Royal College of Surgeons, Edinburgh). This inclusion was evidence of the status Medina had gained within Scottish society, and it was further confirmed by a grant of naturalization by the soon to be dissolved Scottish parliament. Shortly afterwards he received the rare honour of a knighthood, the last, as it happened, to be granted in an independent Scotland. Despite the relative artificiality of much of his portraiture, and its uneven quality, Sir John Medina created an image of Scotland around the years of the union that remains historically significant. 
Medina died in Edinburgh on 5 October 1710 and was buried the following day in Greyfriars churchyard. He left considerable wealth to his widow, and his elder son, John (died 1764), carried on the business. The latter's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 18498


Medland, Thomas (c.1765-1833), engraver and draughtsman, of unknown parentage, resided in Westminster for many years. His education is largely unknown but it appears from his inclusion in a drawing by Alfred Edward Chalon entitled 'Students at the British Institution' (1807) that he did undertake some training or teaching there. He practised both in the line manner and in aquatint and excelled in landscape work; his skill in this field led to many commissions for topographical work, and it is this for which he is now chiefly known. He engraved many plates for Farington's 'Views of the Lakes in Cumberland and Westmoreland' (1789) and 'Cities and Castles of England' (1791); Harding's 'Shakspeare Illustrated' (1793); the 'Copperplate Magazine'; Sir G. Staunton's 'Embassy of the Earl of Macartney to China' (1797), three engravings from which, including a 'View of the Great Wall of China', are in the department of prints and drawings at the Victoria and Albert Museum; Seeley's 'Stowe: a Description of the House and Gardens' (1797); 'Select Views in London and Westminster' (1800); and Sir W. Gell's 'Topography of Troy' (1804). Among Medland's most successful early works was a set of illustrations to 'Robinson Crusoe', from designs by Stothard (1790), and his largest plate was 'Evening of the Glorious First of June', after R. Cleveley. 
Medland was also well known for his aquatints, especially those of topographical scenes. His finest examples are possibly those after drawings by Colonel Garstin in 'An Account of the Hindoo Temple of Vissvisshoor, or Bissinant, at Benares' (1801), which included an impressive elevation of the temple, and those after drawings of W. Alexander in 'Egyptian Monuments from the Collection Formed by the National Institute... Deposited in the British Museum' (1805-7), notably an important depiction of 'The Sarcophagus in which the Enbalmed Body of Alexander the Great was Deposited, Taken from the Mosque of St Athandonis'. In other collections he depicted parts of Scotland, Ireland, and China. In addition Medland executed a few aquatints of hunting scenes, such as 'Pheasant Shooting with Pointers' for Thornhill's 'The Shooting Directory' (1804). His skill in this field enabled him to convey a heightened atmosphere and depth in his works. A few engraved portraits survive, among them those of George Cartwright and Daniel Defoe (in the British Museum department of prints and drawings), but these seem to be unusual among his output. 
Medland also practised watercolour painting and exhibited views of London at the Royal Academy, such as 'A View in Hyde Park' and 'A View on Millbank, Westminster' in 1777, and 'A View of Aylesford Priory in Kent' in 1779. He later made many transcripts of English scenery. An oil painting by him of 'The Panshanger Oak' survives (Christies, 16 October 1956), but is a rare example of his work in this medium. 
When Haileybury College was founded by the East India Company in 1806 Medland was appointed drawing and oriental writing-master there, and thereafter he resided near Hertford. He continued to send drawings to the Royal Academy up to 1822, among them one of the west front of Haileybury College (1808), a view of St Albans Abbey in 1810, and of Windsor Castle, seen from the Great Park, in 1814. He died at Hertford on 30 October 1833 and asked to be buried in All Saints, his parish church. Medland's wife is unidentified, but he left a will bequeathing his household goods and furnishings to his unmarried daughter, Anne, his clothing to his youngest son, Henry, and to his eldest son, William, the choice of a picture, drawing, book, or proof. 


@@@@@


doc= 18499


Medley, Henry (d. 1747), naval officer, was the son of Robert Medley (1650-1708), lawyer, and Dorothy, 'nee' Grimston (died 1691). He married Anne Gooch (died 1733). Medley entered the navy in 1703 and three years later was a midshipman of the 'Somerset' with Captain Price at the relief of Barcelona. He passed his examination on 8 February 1710, was promoted lieutenant of the 'Fame' by Sir John Norris on 5 September, and was moved into the 'Stirling Castle' a few months later. In 1717 he was a lieutenant of the 'Barfleur', flagship of Sir George Byng in the Baltic. Early in 1720 he was promoted to the command of the fireship 'Poole', and on 17 February 1721 he was posted into the 'York'. In 1722, while commanding the 'Leopard' in the Mediterranean, he seized a ship named the 'Revolution', lying within the mole of Genoa, on information that she was in the service of James Francis Edward Stuart, the Old Pretender. Medley afterwards commanded the 'Leopard' on the coast of Portugal and in the channel until the end of 1728. On 5 May 1730 he was given command of the 'Diamond'; on 19 May 1731 he moved to the 'Romney', and on 12 May 1732 he was appointed captain of the 'Gibraltar' which he took to Virginia and Maryland. On 8 August 1734 he arrived back at Spithead; he was then sent cruising, and during this period retook a British brigantine from Barbary corsairs. On 8 November 1734 Medley assumed command of the 'Dreadnought'. He served in Sir John Norris's squadron at Lisbon from 1735, becoming at one point after Norris's departure in 1737 the senior officer of the force. In September 1737 the 'Dreadnought' was ordered to be paid off. Medley was then moved to the 'Romney'. During 1739 and 1740 he convoyed the Newfoundland fishing fleet to the fishing grounds and to the Lisbon market. On 29 January 1741 he took command of the 'Nassau' in the Channel Fleet under Norris, and in 1742-4 he was with Norris as captain of the fleet. On 19 June 1744 he was promoted rear-admiral of the white, and in the following winter he commanded a squadron cruising in the Soundings for the protection of trade. On 23 April 1745 he was promoted vice-admiral of the blue, and sent out as commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean. The service was one of blockade and co-operation with the Austro-Sardinian armies which, in the winter of 1746-7, drove the French out of Italy, and then invaded Provence. Medley's squadron closely supported the invading armies but, after an unsuccessful attack on Antibes, the Austro-Sardinians were obliged to retire. Medley continued to maintain support to the allied armies. On 15 July 1747, he was advanced to vice-admiral of the red, but he died of fever at Vado on 5 August 1747, probably in ignorance of his last promotion. His body was taken back to England and buried at St Michael-le-Belfrey church in York on 10 December. A monument to Medley was placed in the north choir aisle of York Minster. 


@@@@@


doc= 18500


Medley, John (1804-1892), bishop of Fredericton, was born on 19 December 1804, in Grosvenor Place, London, the home of his father, George Medley (who died while his son was still young), and his wife, Henrietta, who, having greatly influenced her son's choice of vocation, was killed in a carriage accident at Oldridge, near Exeter, in September 1844. Medley graduated from Wadham College, Oxford, in 1826, in which year he married, on 10 July, Christina Bacon. They had five sons and two daughters before her death from tuberculosis in 1841; her effigy was placed in the chancel of St Thomas's Church, Exeter. 
Medley was ordained deacon in 1828 and priest in 1829, and served as curate of Southleigh, Devon, from 1828 to 1831; he was perpetual curate of St John's, Truro, from 1831 to 1838, and vicar of St Thomas's, Exeter, from 1838 to 1845. In 1842 he was made a prebendary of Exeter Cathedral. He assisted in the translation of the 'Homilies of St John Chrysostom on the Corinthians' (1838), and at the request of his friends he published a volume of his sermons in 1845. At Lambeth Palace on 4 May 1845 he was consecrated bishop of Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada, and on 11 June 1845 he was installed as the first bishop of the new diocese in the parish church there. This church served as his pro-cathedral until the cathedral church, Christ Church Cathedral, begun in that year, was completed and consecrated in 1853. 
John Medley embodied the Tractarian understanding of the episcopate. From its beginning he was an active supporter of the Oxford Movement and a close friend of John Keble, E. B. Pusey, and W. E. Gladstone. With his appointment to the see of Fredericton he became the first Tractarian bishop and was able to put into practice his understanding of the role of a bishop in the life of the church. His views had already been expressed in 'The Episcopal Form of Church Government', which he had published in 1835. The charges that he delivered to his clergy in the course of his episcopate reflect a deep understanding of the work of the priest, and of his view of the bishop as shepherd. In spite of his argumentative nature, by perseverance he was able to unite a divided diocese and to gain the respect and support of the majority of those who served under him. Although he was a vocal supporter of Catholic principles, as his sermons and writings demonstrate, he showed tolerance towards his opponents. 
Medley sought to improve the standard of worship in the diocese and used his cathedral to reflect his understanding of the uses of music and ritual in public worship. The hymns that he wrote reflected his scholarship and are a testament to his musical ability: although no longer in general use, his settings of the canticles were revived for the celebrations in 1995 of the 150th anniversary of the founding of the diocese. In his sermons he spoke out against the materialism of the age. His own simple life reflected a devotion to the principle of charity: it was his sincerity as much as his scholarship that swayed the opposition to his understanding of the church and churchmanship. 
Medley's interest in church architecture dated at least from his time as vicar of St Thomas's, Exeter. He was supported by the Camden Society, Cambridge, in his building projects both in his Canadian parish and in his diocese. The cathedral, modelled on St Mary's, Snettisham, and St Anne's Chapel, Fredericton (begun in 1846 and consecrated in 1847), the precursor of which he had built as St Andrew's, Exeter, were to serve as examples of design for his diocesan churches. In these and other projects he was assisted by the architects Frank Wills and William Butterfield, and the impact which these two churches were to have on Canadian ecclesiastical architecture was profound. Because of the lack of experienced craftsmen and of stone for building, Medley supported the development of a type of wooden structure, in Gothic style. Within his lifetime the Gothic revival, its roots in Fredericton, had swept North America, its influence extending to secular as well as ecclesiastical design throughout the continent. 
Over twenty years after the death of his first wife, Medley married Margaret Hudson (died 26 Feb 1905), of Exeter, on 16 June 1863, at Campobello island, New Brunswick. He was elected metropolitan of Canada in January 1879, and in 1889 he attended the Lambeth conference, causing an uproar by speaking against the 'Public Worship Regulation Act' of 1874 and in favour of the ritualists. He died on 9 September 1892 at his home, Bishop's Cote, 97 Church Street, Fredericton, and was buried outside Christ Church Cathedral, on 13 September, having served as bishop for forty-seven years. 


@@@@@


doc= 18501


Medley, Samuel (1738-1799), Particular Baptist minister and hymn writer, was born at Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, on 23 June 1738, the second son of Guy Medley (died 1760), tutor, and Elizabeth, the youngest daughter of William Tonge, schoolmaster in Enfield, Middlesex. His grandfather, Samuel Medley, had been a diplomatist, and his father, who was a considerable linguist, had served as attorney-general of St Vincent before settling in Cheshunt, where he kept a school. His father was a deacon at Eagle Street Particular Baptist Church, Holborn, where the pastor was Andrew Gifford, and corresponded frequently with the religious writer James Hervey, offering loving criticism on his works. 
After being educated at William Tonge's school in Enfield, at the age of fourteen Samuel Medley was apprenticed to an oilman of the city of London, but in 1755 secured his freedom in order to follow his brothers into the navy. During his naval years he confesses 'he had neither the fear of God nor man' ('Memoirs', 66). Severely wounded, with incipient gangrene threatening the need for amputation of a limb, he turned to prayer, and an apparently miraculous cure ensued. However, as his health improved, so his new-found seriousness declined. Invalided out of the navy, he lived with his grandfather and was convinced of sin under a grand-paternal reading of a sermon by Isaac Watts. Attendance on the preaching of Whitfield and Gifford led to his conversion in July 1760, just before the death of his father. He sealed this by joining the Eagle Street church, which practised strict communion, by public profession of his faith in baptism in December 1760. Using his grandfather's excellent library he equipped himself in biblical languages and the study of the sacred text. 
Following his marriage to Mary, daughter of William Gill, a hosier from Nottingham, on 17 April 1762, Medley started a school in Soho. However, under the tutelage of Gifford, he discovered a call to the ministry to which he was set aside by the Eagle Street Church on 29 August 1766, with his first endeavours exercised at Harlington, near Hounslow. Ivimey says that Gifford had hoped Medley might have become his assistant, but in June 1767 he accepted a call to the church at Watford which had been pastorless for five years. He was ordained on 13 July 1768, Gifford presiding, with Robert Robinson of Cambridge offering the ordination prayer. Because of the financial deficiencies of the congregation Medley combined the pastorate with running a school. 
The Particular Baptist church in Liverpool, which practised closed communion, was in 1771 facing severe difficulties consequent on the revelation of the moral lapses of its then pastor. John Livesley, a senior deacon, on a visit to London discovered that Medley might be persuaded to take a northern pastorate, and accordingly Medley was invited to preach in Liverpool for two Sundays in December 1771. The impression was such that he was immediately invited to the vacant pastorate, and the family accordingly moved to Liverpool in April 1772, where Medley was able to devote all his energies to the pastorate. Within a year the church needed to be enlarged, and in 1789 new and commodious premises were opened on Byrom Street. In addition to his normal pastoral duties he took a special interest in the Liverpool seamen. 
In 1786 a group of northern Baptist leaders met in Preston and determined to break the spell of hyper-Calvinism and reshape their association on the model of what was happening within the Northamptonshire Association. Much of the leadership fell to Medley in association with his good friend John Fawcett of the Wainsgate church at Hebden Bridge, both of them successful hymn writers. Of Medley's hymns, only 'I know that my Redeemer lives' remains in regular use, though it has been suggested that Thomas Kelly's 'We sing the praise of him who died' is really Medley's. By contrast to the urbane Medley, Fawcett was a rough-hewn northern autodidact. That Fawcett became a successful schoolmaster was partly due to instruction he received from Medley. 
With his well-kept wigs and cultivated southern education, Medley suggested a very different appearance from the other northern Baptist leaders, but commitment and faith soon brought them together. Sellers argues that Medley 'preached a warm Evangelical Calvinism' but, out of deference to the narrower 'walled garden' mentality of the staunch Calvinists of the north-west, never avowed himself a Fullerite (Sellers, 114). The extent to which Medley shared the views of Joseph Ivimey, Gifford's successor at the Eagle Street Church from 1805, in criticizing those who 'preached upon the non-application, non-invitation scheme' of higher Calvinism has been contested. Some claim that he did not, but implicit invitation seems very evident in the way in which the attractions and admonitions of the gospel were placed before 'Christless sinners'. Medley exhorted in a sermon preached at Moorfields in October 1777 'let me intreat you to consider what will all your worldly wealth do for you in a dying hour... Oh, sirs, the unsearchable and inexhaustible riches of Christ are the one thing needful, to make poor sinners rich, and miserable sinners happy. May the Lord help you to consider this to your soul's eternal welfare and salvation. ('Memoirs', 196)' Halley, who speaks of the Lancashire Baptists being 'neither very general nor very particular, neither low Arminians nor high Calvinists', ranks Medley as 'a great preacher' (Halley, 2.478, 480). Medley exercised an 'earnest, popular and prolonged ministry', while displaying 'his liberal and catholic spirit' in forming happy associations with the Liverpool Independents (ibid., 2.480). He was certainly one of those who readily gave support to the infant missionary society in which his son, Samuel Medley (1769-1857), painter, took a particular interest. 
Medley maintained close contact with metropolitan revivalist Calvinism, and regularly supplied the pulpit at Whitfield's chapels at Moorfields Tabernacle and Tottenham Court Road. Indeed it was on a visit to these churches that his final illness began upon its critical progress. With difficulty he returned to Liverpool, where he died on 17 July 1799, anxious to clarify that he was no Arminian, Arian, or Socinian. He was buried in Liverpool on 24 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 18502


Medley, Samuel (1769-1857), painter, was born on 22 March 1769, probably at Watford, Hertfordshire, the son of Samuel Medley (1738-1799), the Baptist minister, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Gill. He entered the Royal Academy Schools on 14 October 1791 aged twenty-two, and exhibited there for the first time in 1792 sending 'The Last Supper'. On 2 October 1794 Joseph Farington mentioned that Medley 'has been at Leigh, employed somehow by Taylor' (Farington, 'Diary', 1.248). He painted religious and historical subjects, but subsequently devoted himself chiefly to portraiture, in which he gained considerable practice and reputation. Between 1792 and 1805 he exhibited twenty-eight pictures at the Royal Academy. In 1805, however, he found his profession injurious to his health, so he abandoned it, and went to work on the stock exchange, where he made a comfortable income, continuing to paint in his leisure hours. 
Medley was a member of a large Baptist community in Hackney, Middlesex, under the Revd F. A. Cox, with whom, Lord Brougham, and some leading dissenters of education and position, he was associated in founding University College, London, in 1826. Medley married, first, in 1792 Susannah, daughter of George Bowley of Bishopsgate Street, London; second, in 1818, he married Elizabeth, daughter of John Smallshaw of Liverpool. With his first wife he had three sons, William, Guy, and George, and three daughters, of whom the eldest, Susannah, married Henry Thompson of Framlingham, Suffolk, and was mother of Sir Henry Thompson, the eminent surgeon. 
A large group portrait by Medley, 'The Medical Society of London', hangs in the rooms of that society in Chandos Street, Cavendish Square, London. A portrait of Joseph Warner is in the collection of the Royal College of Surgeons and his work is also represented in the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich. Medley lived the latter years of his life at Chatham, Kent, and it is there that he died on 10 August 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 18503


Medows, Sir William (1738-1813), army officer and colonial governor, was born on 31 December 1738, the third son of Philip Medows (1708-1781), deputy ranger of Richmond Park, and his wife, Lady Frances Pierrepont, the daughter of the duke of Kingston. As a youth he is thought to have attended Eton College (1755-6) before entering the army as an ensign in the 50th foot on 26 February 1757; he was promoted lieutenant on 20 November 1757 and campaigned with his regiment in Germany between 1760 and 1762. Commissioned a captain in the 4th horse on 6 March 1764, he was promoted major in 1766, and appointed lieutenant-colonel of the 5th foot on 31 December 1769. When stationed with his regiment in Ireland he married, in 1770, Frances Augusta (1747/8-1827), the daughter of Robert Hammerton, of Hammerton, co. Tipperary. Medows then completed two years as lieutenant-colonel of the 12th light dragoons before exchanging into the 55th foot on 20 September 1775. He took his regiment to America the same year and was given command of a composite battalion of grenadiers during the New York campaign of 1776. In September 1777 he was wounded while leading his grenadiers at the battle of Brandywine. He then returned to the lieutenant-colonelcy of the 5th foot (16 October 1777). 
In November 1778 Medows accompanied, as a brigadier-general, the expedition led by General James Grant which sailed from New York to the West Indies. During the landings on the French-held island of St Lucia he commanded the reserve, some 1300 men, which consisted of his own regiment, the 5th, and the expedition's combined grenadier and light infantry companies. St Lucia had no sooner been captured, however, when a vastly superior French armament under the command of the marquis d'Estaing appeared, and Medows's position on the Vigie peninsula -- the key to the British defences -- was assaulted by 5000 troops. Notwithstanding the odds, the battle-hardened British veterans beat off the enemy attacks and inflicted 1600 casualties, and in so doing established Medows's reputation. 
Medows returned to England in 1780 and was made colonel of the 89th foot. In March 1781 he commanded the troops which sailed for the Cape of Good Hope with Commodore George Johnstone's squadron. The French, however, beat the British to the Cape, reinforced the Dutch garrison, and rendered a landing by Medows's troops impracticable. Dismissing Johnstone's suggestion that their expedition divert to the River Plate, Medows interpreted his instructions positively and continued on to India, where his reinforcement, which arrived in February 1782, proved crucial in the struggle against Haider Ali of Mysore and the French. Medows himself, although carrying the rank of major-general, played only a minor part in the unfolding conflict. Dismayed by the antagonism between the civil and military authorities at Madras, he refused the overall command which a disgruntled Eyre Coote attempted to thrust upon him and elected instead to serve as a volunteer aboard Admiral Hughes's fleet. 
In 1788 Henry Dundas sent Medows back to India as governor and commander-in-chief of Bombay. The governor-general of Bengal, Lord Cornwallis, was given to understand that Medows would ultimately be his successor. After two years in post at Bombay, during which time Cornwallis first came to doubt his intended replacement's judgement and application to business, Medows succeeded to the governorship of Madras and immediately took command of the forces assembling to fight the Third Anglo-Mysore War against Tipu Sultan. Throughout the ensuing campaign, however, Medows proved incapable of getting to grips with his elusive foe. Not only were his movements, burdened by a long supply train, too slow, but by splitting his army into detachments he risked defeat in detail. In the end all Medows had to show for his efforts was the capture of Coimbatore: he had not penetrated the Mysore heartlands, and Tipu Sultan had been left free to ravage the Carnatic. Medows admitted to Cornwallis that he felt unequal to his responsibilities, and the governor-general, having by now lost patience, sailed from Bengal in December 1790 to take personal charge. Thereafter, as second in command, Medows was happier. Leading the stormings of Bangalore and Nandidroog was more to his taste than accepting the reversion of the governor-generalship, which, when formally offered him, he declined. Medows relished also the prospect of leading the right-hand of three assault columns against Tipu Sultan's capital of Seringapatam. But faulty staff work led his column to turn in the wrong direction during the night attack of 6-7 February 1792; Medows succeeded in reuniting with Cornwallis's centre column only after the decisive combat had already been won. While he was not exclusively to blame, Medows allowed the error to disturb his mind; and when Tipu Sultan's decision to sue for peace denied him the opportunity to atone in battle for his mistake he shot himself. Fortunately the suicide attempt was bungled and Medows speedily recovered. 
Medows was kindly received on his return to England; he was made a KB on 14 December 1792 and was offered command of an expedition (which never sailed) to capture Mauritius and the Isle de Bourbon. George III considered him 'eccentrick though worthy' ('Later Correspondence of George III', 2.74). Medows was promoted lieutenant-general on 12 October 1793, was made colonel of the 7th dragoon guards on 2 November 1796, and became a full general in 1798; the same year he was appointed lieutenant-governor of the Isle of Wight. Between June 1801 and May 1803 he served as commander of the forces in Ireland. He settled afterwards at Conholt Park, near Andover, Wiltshire. His last appointment was as governor of Hull in 1808, a post which he held until his death, at Bath on 14 November 1813. 
Medows lacked the self-belief necessary to high command but he was a notable fighting general. In moments of danger he always had well-chosen words of encouragement to offer his men and they admired him wholeheartedly. It was entirely characteristic that he should have resigned to the troops his share of the Seringapatam prize money, worth nearly $5000. 


@@@@@


doc= 18504


Medwall, Henry (b. 1462, d. after 1501), playwright, was evidently born on 8 September 1462. His father, John Medwall (died 1491), was a resident of St Margaret's parish, Southwark, by 1449, where he served as clerk, organist, churchwarden, and provider of banners and prick-song books. An Emma Medwall who died in 1498 may have been his mother. In 1475 Henry followed his elder brother John to Eton College, whence he entered King's College, Cambridge, in 1480. He left King's College precipitately in June 1483, at almost exactly the time his future patron John Morton, then bishop of Ely, was sent to the Tower. Following the accession of Henry VII, Medwall served as a notary (by 18 August 1489), and entered minor orders (1490). In 1491 he was granted a degree in civil law from Cambridge. In 1492 he was appointed to the living of Balinghem in the district of Calais, but was almost certainly non-resident, dwelling rather at Lambeth Palace, where he served Morton as chaplain and factotum. Following Morton's death on 12 October 1500 Medwall's name can be traced for one further year. He was separated from various benefices, and after 1501 disappears from the records. 
Medwall is the first English vernacular playwright known by name. While a student at King's College, and during subsequent visits, he witnessed and perhaps participated in college disguisings. His service under Morton overlapped with that of young Thomas More (1491-2), who, according to his biographer William Roper, would 'at Christmas tyde sodenly sometimes steppe in among the players, and neuer studyeng for the matter, make a parte of his owne there presently among them' (Roper, 5). The two interludes that survive under Henry Medwall's name were probably written for Morton's household at Lambeth in the 1490s (a proposed date of 1497 depends on the doubtful supposition that one or both interludes were written for the reception of ambassadors from Spain or the Low Countries). 'Fulgens and Lucres', the earliest full-length secular play in English, draws its plot from Buonaccorso da Montemagno's humanist Latin treatise 'De vera nobilitate' ('c'.1428), translated into English 'c'.1460 by John Tiptoft, earl of Worcester, and printed in 1481 by Caxton: in Medwall's play, Lucrece, daughter of the Roman senator Fulgens, chooses for a husband not the debauched noble Publius Cornelius, but the virtuous commoner Gaius Flaminius; meanwhile, in a sub-plot, her wily maid Joan outwits two servant-wooers identified only as A and B. 'Nature', by contrast, conforms to the structure of a typical English morality play: Reason tries in vain to protect Man from Sensuality; Worlde introduces Man to Worldly Affeccyon, and thence to Pryde, Bodyly Lust, and other sins. Rescued by Reason, Man lapses into sin once more, but as Age renders him incapable, he finally faces death as a penitent, confident of salvation. Both interludes were published posthumously, 'Fulgens and Lucres' 'c'.1512-16 by John Rastell ('STC, 1475-1640', 17778), 'Nature' 'c'.1530 by William Rastell (ibid., 17779). A third play, 'Of the Finding of Truth', for which no text survives, is probably an invention of the nineteenth-century forger J. Payne Collier. 


@@@@@


doc= 18505


Medwin, Thomas (1788-1869), writer and biographer, was born on 20 March 1788 in Horsham, Sussex, the second child of Thomas Charles Medwin (1752/3-1829), a solicitor and steward to the duke of Norfolk, and his wife, Mary ('c'.1760- 'c'.1850), daughter of John Pilfold and first cousin to Shelley's mother, Elizabeth Pilfold. Like Shelley, who was four years younger, Medwin attended Syon House Academy, entering about 1798 and leaving in 1804 to attend an unidentified 'public' school before matriculating at Oxford on 2 December 1805. Although Medwin's veracity as a biographer has been questioned, his close relationship with his young cousin in these early years is attested to by Shelley's earliest extant letter and by later correspondence showing the poet's continuing respect and affection for his 'old friend and fellow-townsman' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 2.240). 
In 1807 or 1808 Medwin visited Wales, where he met the fourteen-year-old Felicia Dorothea Browne (later Hemans). On his return he incited Shelley's interest in Felicia's poetry, initiating a brief correspondence between the two young poets. During this period the boys collaborated on a novel, 'The Nightmare' (no longer extant). Before Shelley's arrival at Oxford in October 1810, Medwin had left the university without a degree and was living at Lincoln's Inn, perhaps studying law independently at his father's behest. Whether he or Shelley or anyone really picked up a scrap of German poetry in Lincoln's Inn Fields and whether that scrap later became the seed of 'The Wandering Jew' remains a subject of heated debate among Shelley biographers and critics, along with the extent of Medwin's contribution to the poem. But, as Medwin remembered vividly thirty-six years later, Shelley's career at Oxford was about to come to an abrupt and unpleasant end. At four o'clock in the morning of 27 March 1811, Medwin was awakened by Shelley's high-pitched voice excitedly crying out that he had been expelled for atheism. After Shelley's elopement with Harriet Westbrook in August 1811 (during which time he borrowed money from Medwin's father and sought his legal advice), the lives of the two young men diverged and they did not meet again until 1820. 
Meanwhile, Medwin incurred his father's displeasure by rejecting a legal career. According to his biographer Ernest J. Lovell jun., his father's affluence and his mother's connections with the Sussex gentry had bred in Medwin expensive tastes and an aversion to earning his living. Now the eldest surviving son, his brother John having died in a fall in 1806, he persuaded his father to purchase him first a cornetcy and then a lieutenantcy in the army. Sent to India, he joined the 24th light dragoons on 12 November 1813, arriving at Cawnpore after a 1200-mile journey up the Ganges. Less than a year after his arrival, probably in June 1814, he contracted dysentery, resulting in lifelong disease of the liver. Of his four and a half years with the regiment, twelve months were spent on leave of absence. Although Medwin spent much of his tour of duty hunting, attending parties, and writing in his journal, he probably participated in the siege of the fort at Hathras in February-March 1817. At some point during his enlistment, he met and befriended Edward Ellerker Williams, then serving in another regiment. 
On 8 May 1818 Medwin received permission to return to England on an eighteen-month leave of absence. Despite his ill health, however, he did not leave India until October. The day before he sailed, Medwin felicitously discovered a copy of Shelley's 'Revolt of Islam' 'at a Parsee bookstall' (Medwin, ed. Buxton Forman, 230), rekindling his interest in the young genius he had half forgotten. On 24 May 1819 the 24th light dragoons disbanded, and in July Medwin went on the half-pay of a lieutenant. (Though he is frequently referred to as Captain Medwin, Mary Shelley disputed his claim to this title and the issue remains unresolved.) 
After a brief stay in England, Medwin travelled to the continent, still sporting a magnificent military moustache lubricated with bear grease. He arrived in Geneva on 20 September 1819 and was soon joined by Edward Williams and Jane Cleveland Johnson (who was known as Jane Williams though the couple were not married). In the autumn of 1820 Medwin accepted Shelley's invitation to join him in Italy and spent many contented hours reading, writing, and conversing with Shelley and Lord Byron. After the deaths of Shelley and Williams in July 1822 and of Byron two years later, these conversations, which Medwin had recorded in his journal, became the basis for the highly popular but controversial 'Conversations of Lord Byron' (1824). 
Medwin's reputation and social position were sufficient to enable him on 2 November 1824 to marry Anne Henrietta Starnford, countess of Starnford (1788-1868), born Baroness Hamilton of Sweden. At first the marriage was happy and Medwin lived in high style, 'moving in the most exclusive circles' (Lovell, 220). Their first daughter, ostentatiously baptized Catherine Mary Anne Pilfold Hamilton Medwin, was born in Florence on 3 November 1825. But before the birth of his second daughter, Henriette, in 1829, lavish spending coupled with speculation in art had resulted in financial ruin. In September 1829 the destitute Medwin hurried to England for the reading of his father's will, only to find that the elder Medwin, exasperated by his son's extravagance, had left him only 10 guineas for a memorial ring. Unable to support the wife whose fortune he had squandered, Medwin returned to Italy determined to live alone and supplement his scanty income through his writing, leaving his wife and their two small daughters in Florence. In 1831 he returned to England where he sold his commission (apparently at a profit) and, according to Lovell, 'set about again trying to clear his name' of the attacks on the authenticity of his 'Conversations' (ibid., 252). The publication in 'The Athenaeum' of his 'Memoir of Shelley' (1832) and 'The Shelley papers' (1832-3) established him (along with Thomas Jefferson Hogg, whose 'Shelley at Oxford' articles appeared almost simultaneously) as one of the few living authorities on the poet (the articles were published together in 1833 as 'The Shelley Papers. Memoir of Percy Bysshe Shelley'). Medwin also published a substantial amount of literary criticism and poetry; one play; a novel, 'Lady Singleton', attacking England's stringent divorce laws; and the semi-autobiographical 'Angler in Wales' (1834), incorporating material from his Indian journals. In 1846 he returned to England to visit his ageing mother and to obtain letters for his most important work, 'The Life of Percy Bysshe Shelley' (2 vols., 1847), the first full-length biography of the poet. 
Though Medwin was working abroad from limited sources and his faulty memory sometimes led to misquotations or errors in dates, he seems to be guilty of only two deliberate distortions in his writings on Shelley: the implication in the 'Conversations' that he had been present at Shelley's cremation and the conflation in the 'Memoir of Shelley' of two trips abroad into one to disguise the married poet's elopement with young Mary Godwin. 
Well aware that such mendacity was no longer feasible and fearful of adverse publicity, Mary Shelley strenuously opposed the publication of Medwin's biography and condemned it unread, interpreting Medwin's request for reimbursement of his expenses in exchange for withdrawal from publication as an attempt at blackmail. Her reaction, perpetuated in Lady Jane Shelley's 'Shelley Memorials' and in H. Buxton Forman's introduction to the 1913 edition of Medwin's 'Life', is largely responsible for the general disrepute in which Medwin's biography has long been held. Admittedly the book is riddled with small inaccuracies such as his reference to Claire Clairmont as Mary Shelley's 'half sister' (p. 129), but his depiction of Shelley is straightforward, undistorted by the conflicting emotions that led Hogg to exaggerate Shelley's eccentricities and even deliberately to alter documents. An ardent admirer and astute critic of Shelley's poetry, Medwin had neither the motive nor the inclination to harm his cousin's reputation as Mary Shelley feared. 
Medwin's last years were spent in the company of fellow poet Caroline Champion de Crespigny, 'nee' Bathurst (1798-1858x62), whom he had met about 1843. Accepted into elite social circles in Germany and elsewhere, he seems to have been respected as a critic and forgiven, at least on the continent, for the abandonment of his wife. He returned to England in 1862 and continued to write and to annotate his 'Life of Shelley'. After an extended illness that prevented him from accepting Sir Percy Shelley's invitation to visit Boscombe Manor, he died on 2 August 1869 in the Carfax, North Horsham, aged eighty-one. He was buried a few days later in Denne Road cemetery, also in the Carfax. 


@@@@@


doc= 18506


Mee, Anne (c.1770-1851), miniature painter, was the eldest daughter of John Foldsone (d. 1784), portrait painter of small whole-lengths, for which 'a guinea the piece, or less, rather than lose the sitter was taken' ('Court and Private Life', 2.144). He lived in 1770 in Little Castle Street, Oxford Market, London, though his occupation took him to fashionable resorts during the summer months. Anne attended Madame Pomier's school in Queen Square, Westminster, where her artistic, poetic, and musical skills became evident at an early age. She mixed colours for her father, prepared his palette, and 'put in the background to the canvas, ready for his portraits' (ibid.). Basil Long notes that she began painting at the age of twelve and became a pupil and protegee of the portrait painter George Romney, under whom she made copies of works by Gainsborough and Reynolds. After her father died she was noted to have been the sole support of her mother and her eight brothers and sisters, though her mother's acknowledgement in a letter of 1792 to Sir Thomas Lawrence that 'your goodness to me and my poor children has been unbounded' suggests that the painter gave them substantial financial assistance (Layard, 19). This led to rumours that he had 'in the common phrase, paid [his] addresses to Miss Anne Foldsone' but in a draft of a letter he described himself, rather, as 'a friend of the lady' (ibid.). The poet William Hayley, who sat to her in 1788, described her as a 'young female genius in miniature' and 'a pretty, modest and sensible girl' (Long, 218). Walpole on the other hand called her 'a prodigy of dishonest impertinence' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 11.193). 
Miss Foldsone was introduced to Queen Charlotte by Lady Courtown through Lady Cremorne. With her sister she was placed to board with Madame de Lafitte, a Dutch emigree under the protection of the queen who lived in a house in the cloisters at Windsor. When Madame de Lafitte visited the lodge to read German with the princesses she was accompanied by Miss Foldsone, to whom the princesses and the queen herself sat for their miniatures. In his letters to Miss Berry of 1790 and 1791 Walpole had noted that Miss Foldsone was occupied with commissions at Windsor -- commenting that they were 'not the work of a moment' -- instead of completing her commission to paint miniatures of the misses Berry for him (Walpole, 'Corr.', 11.145). Miniatures of the princesses Sophia, Amelia, and Charlotte by Miss Foldsone remain in the Royal Collection. The portraits of the misses Berry (priv. coll.) were eventually completed and one was engraved as the frontispiece to the second volume of Lady Theresa Lewis's edition of Miss Berry's journals and correspondence (1865). 
Miss Foldsone married at St Marylebone on 15 May 1793 Joseph Mee (died 1849), a barrister of Mount Anna, Armagh, with whom she had six children by 1833. Joseph Mee owned a fairly large estate in co. Armagh, and on his death left a substantial amount of property. In his diary Joseph Farington recorded a comment made by Lady Smith Burgess, a distant relative of Joseph Mee whose miniature portrait Mrs Mee had painted: 'Mr. Mee had consented to let Her paint 'Ladies Only' who were never to be attended by gentlemen. -- She sd. She gave Mrs. Mee 40 guineas for [her] picture, & that she had 18 guineas for pictures of a certain size. (Farington, 'Diary', 26 April 1804)' Mrs Mee exhibited at the Royal Academy and at the British Institution from 1804 to 1837. 
Mrs Mee had also obtained the patronage of George IV, when prince regent, and it was from him that she received her most important commission, completed in 1814, to paint a series of large miniature portraits of fashionable ladies, seventeen of which remain in the Royal Collection. When serial publication of engravings from these miniatures was begun in 1812 they were entitled 'The Gallery of Beauties of the Court of... George the Third', an intended reference to two previous series of portraits of court beauties, the 'Windsor Beauties', painted by Sir Peter Lely for Mary II, and the 'Hampton Court Beauties', by Sir Godfrey Kneller for Anne Hyde, duchess of York. The account from the silversmiths Rundell, Bridge, and Rundell 'For setting 19 portraits of Ladies in richly chased Frames, antique scroll honey suckle, richly gilt... with chased coronets &c' (Walker, 357) conveys an opulence that 'suggests that the Prince Regent intended his 'Gallery of Beauties' to be displayed in an area of some importance' (Lloyd and Remington, 190). Indeed the 'Ladies Monthly Museum' recorded that the prince regent was 'forming a superb boudoir for their reception' (ibid.). Basil Long considered that 'Mrs Mee's miniatures are rarely satisfactory... often the eyes are of an exaggerated size... [and] her colouring is often displeasing' (Long, 48) and Walker held that 'The Beauties of 1812-13 incline to be flashy, affected and melodramatic, all with large soulful eyes and melodramatic colouring' (Walker, 354). Compared with the series of full-size portraits of court beauties by Lely and Kneller, Mrs Mee's large miniatures (about 8 inches x 9) lack subtlety of execution. In their attributes and settings, however, they constitute an original development from the earlier series of beauties. While some of the sitters' attributes are those traditionally associated with female portraiture others are highly contemporary in their reference to literary, especially poetical, sources. The decision to place some sitters within Gothic architectural settings increases the sense of a move away from the classicizing effect of introducing the attributes of goddesses into female portraiture. In this context the rich and sometimes brilliant colouring conveys an intensity of vision that is essentially Romantic. In addition to the engravings published in 'The Gallery of Beauties' others were engraved and illustrated in the 'Court Magazine', 'La Belle Assemblee', and the 'Ladies Monthly Museum'. 
Lord Byron sent privately to the sitter a 'Condolatory address to Sarah countess of Jersey on the prince regent's returning her picture to Mrs Mee', which was subsequently published, without his leave, in 'The Champion' (31 July 1814) and in the 'Morning Chronicle' (1 August 1814). A miniature by Mrs Mee of Lady Jersey, a noted court beauty, was given by the prince regent to the duke of Cumberland and remains in the Hanoverian collection (Calenberg, Hanover). Mrs Mee had earlier painted for Byron a miniature portrait of Lady Oxford, by whose 'autumnal charms' he was soothed following the debacle of his affair with Lady Caroline Lamb in 1812. 
Towards the end of her life Mrs Mee lived at 3 Woodman's Cottages, The Grove, Hammersmith, where she died on 28 May 1851, leaving her son Arthur Patrick Mee, who was articled to the architect Sir John Soane, sole beneficiary and executor of her will. A self-portrait in watercolour on ivory is in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, together with her miniature of William Grimaldi. 


@@@@@


doc= 18507


Meehan, Charles Patrick (1812-1890), writer and translator, was born at 141 Great Britain (now Parnell) Street, Dublin, on 12 July 1812. He received his early education at his parents' native town, Ballymahon, co. Longford, and in 1828 went to the Irish College in Rome, where he was ordained priest in 1834. He also acquired a good knowledge of Italian, German, French, and Spanish there. After nine months' work as a curate at Rathdrum, co. Wicklow, he was transferred to a curacy at the parish church of Sts Michael and John, Exchange Street, Dublin, in 1835. He remained there all his life. He was well known for his charity and temperance activity. 
As a member of the Romantic nationalist group Young Ireland, Meehan contributed to 'The Nation'. His first poem, 'Boyhood's Years', appeared in the journal on 5 November 1842 under the pseudonym Clericus. A few more poems, translations of continental poetry, and articles followed. Meehan was known for his wit, and Young Irelanders often gathered in his presbytery. He was close friends with John Mitchel, Father Kenyon, T. D. Reilly, and James Clarence Mangan. 
Meehan prominently defended Young Ireland from accusations of atheism, and also spoke in favour of mixed education. He seceded with Young Ireland from Daniel O'Connell's repeal movement in 1846, and became an active member of the Irish confederation. He wrote 'History of the Confederation of Kilkenny' (1846) and a translation from the Latin of Dominic O'Daly, 'The Geraldines, Earls of Desmond' (1847) for the 'Library of Ireland'. 
In 1847 Meehan was president of St Patrick's Confederate Club, which met in Bishop Street, Dublin, but retired in the hope for an appointment at one of the new queen's colleges. He published 'The life and death of Most Rev. Francis Kirwan, bishop of Killala, from the Latin of John Lynch, archdeacon of Tuam, author of Cambrensus eversus' in 1848. 
After the failed rising of 1848 Meehan appears to have taken no further part in public life, but focused on his parish duties and his literary work. He gave occasional lectures, and visited famous libraries on the continent in search of unpublished manuscripts dealing with Ireland. In 1865 he was elected member of the Royal Irish Academy, and he was known in Irish literary circles. He wrote many articles in Irish periodicals, mainly translations and historical works. His chief compilations were 'Rise and fall of Irish Franciscan monasteries, and memoirs of the Irish hierarchy in the seventeenth century' (1869) and 'Fate and Fortunes of Hugh O'Neill, Earl of Tyrone, and Rory O'Donell, Earl of Tyrconnel' (1870); the latter was popularly known as 'The flight of the earls'. He also edited Thomas Davis's essays (1883) and selections of Mangan's poetry (1884), and re-edited Richard R. Madden's 'Literary Remains of the United Irishmen' (1887). 
In his old age Meehan was regarded as an eccentric. He was 'slightly under medium height, always wore a monocle, attached to a silk ribbon, a tall silk hat, and a stout blackthorn stick' (O'Sullivan, 314). He died on 14 March 1890 in the presbytery of Sts Michael and John, Lower Exchange Street, Dublin, and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. His parishioners erected a mural tablet to him in the church of Sts Michael and John. 


@@@@@


doc= 18508


Meek, Sir James (1778-1856), civil servant, was born at Astbury, Cheshire, where he was baptized on 13 September 1778, the son of John Meek and his wife, Sarah. He entered the public service in the commissariat department in 1798, and was employed by Lord Keith in collecting supplies in Sicily for the Egyptian expedition of 1800. He was appointed a paymaster in the Royal Navy on 25 July 1800 and became secretary to several flag-officers on the Mediterranean station between 1803 and 1814. In June 1830 he was made a commissioner of the victualling board, and after Sir James Graham's reorganization of naval administration was appointed in 1832 comptroller of the victualling and transport services at the Admiralty. 
In November 1841 Meek was employed by government, on Gladstone's instructions, to undertake a special mission to the ports of northern Europe, to establish the price of agricultural produce, the quantity available for export, and the current freight charges. His report was printed by command of parliament in February 1842, and formed part of the material upon which Sir Robert Peel based his free-trade measure of 1846. 
On his retirement from the public service Meek was knighted (3 February 1851). He was married twice: first to a daughter (died 1851) of Edward Down, lieutenant RN, and second, in 1853, to Mary Anne, daughter of Dr Grant of Jamaica. He died at his home in Ilfracombe, Devon, on 18 May 1856. 


@@@@@


doc= 18509


Meeke, Elizabeth (1761-1826?), writer, was born on 13 November 1761 in King's Lynn, Norfolk, and baptized on the same day at St Margaret's Church in the town. She was the youngest of three children of Stephen Allen (1724-1763), merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth Allen (1728-1796); her parents were cousins. Following her father's death, in 1767 her mother married second the musician and author, Charles Burney. The Allen children thereby gained several step-siblings, including the future novelist Frances Burney. In December 1775 Elizabeth was sent to Paris to complete her education, initially under the care of Isabella Strange, a family friend, and subsequently as a boarder with a Mlle Picot. Her mother travelled out to meet her in August 1777, intending to bring her home: but Elizabeth Allen then absconded from Paris with Samuel Meeke ('c'.1737-1802), and their marriage followed on 12 October 1777 at Ypres. Scandalized contemporaries described Meeke as 'Bankrupt in Fame as well as Fortune' and 'an adventurer' (Sclater, 31; 'Burford Papers', 60). 
The Meekes are next recorded living in Geneva in 1781, before moving to France in the following year. Thereafter, Elizabeth Meeke occasionally visited her relations in Britain, and there was some question of a potential separation from her husband: in an undated letter to Frances Burney she declared that 'Meeke & I are likely to [join] together again for better for worse', and asked her 'to hint this to my Mother & to beg she would not indulge her talents for embellishing at my expense' (MS letter, NYPL, Berg Collection). By 1786 Samuel Meeke was employed in Paris as an English tutor under the supervision of Mme de Genlis, and counted the duc de Chartres, son of the duc d'Orleans, among his pupils; Elizabeth Meeke presumably encountered this milieu to some extent. In 1787, however, the Meekes arranged a legal separation: this estrangement, according to gossip in the extended Burney family, had involved Elizabeth leaving her husband for another man. Thereafter, she apparently continued to live on the continent, surprising her relatives by reappearing in Britain in 1793, some months after the outbreak of war with revolutionary France. 
The first 'Mrs Meeke' novel was published in 1795 by William Lane's Minerva Press, and a total of twenty-six novels appeared between then and 1823; these included five works published anonymously and six written under the pseudonym Gabrielli, but which are all traceable to Mrs Meeke through cross-references on title-pages and advertisements. This output made Mrs Meeke the most prolific novelist of the period, outmatching even Sir Walter Scott (Raven, 1.39, 2.64). None of the novels gave a first name for Mrs Meeke. However, a Minerva Press prospectus produced in 1798 gave the author's name as Elizabeth Meeke ('Minerva Literary Repository'). Meanwhile, the first two Mrs Meeke novels received unsigned puffs in the 'Monthly Review' which are known to have been written by Charles Burney, Elizabeth Meeke's stepbrother; and the first Gabrielli novel was dedicated to Mrs Arthur Young, who can be identified as Martha Young, 'nee' Allen, wife of the agriculturalist and writer Arthur Young, and the maternal aunt of Elizabeth Meeke. This evidence allows Elizabeth Meeke to be identified conclusively as the author Mrs Meeke. Unfortunately, none of this information was known at the time of compilation of the Victorian 'Dictionary of National Biography', and its new edition (2004), where 'Mrs Meeke' was misidentified as Mary Meeke (1744/5?-1816), wife of the Revd Francis Meeke, a Staffordshire clergyman and occasional poet. This error was subsequently reproduced in standard accounts, until corrected in 2013 (Macdonald). 
Meeke's first novel, 'Count St Blancard, or, The Prejudiced Judge' (1795), set the pattern for much of her subsequent output. The action unfolds largely in pre-revolutionary France and hinges around the oppressive family history of the young St Blancard, who has been lost to his parents as a baby -- through the malevolence of his grandfather -- and brought up unawares by kindly strangers. As the plot develops, these mysteries are gradually unravelled, culminating in the revelation of St Blancard's true identity, which enables him to marry his high-born paramour. This broadly Gothic formula was one which would serve Meeke well, and she quickly became a leading author for the Minerva Press. Notable readers included the young Thomas Babington Macaulay. As his sister Hannah Macaulay later recalled, 'There was a certain prolific author named Mrs. Meeke, whose romances he all but knew by heart; though he quite agreed in my criticism that they were one just like another, turning on the fortunes of some young man of a very low rank who eventually proves to be the son of a Duke. (Trevelyan, 1.132)' Macaulay himself described this 'fondness for Mrs Meeke's novels' as evidence that his tastes were 'incurably vulgar' (Pinney, 2.216), indicating the extent to which Meeke's works were associated with a popular readership. 
The other Mrs Meeke novels were 'The Abbey of Clugny' (1796), 'Palmira and Ermance' (1797), 'Ellesmere' (1799), 'Which is the Man?' (1801), 'Midnight Weddings' (1802), 'Amazement' (1804), 'The Nine Days' Wonder' (1804), 'The Old Wife and Young Husband' (1804), ''There is a Secret, Find it Out!'' (1808), 'Matrimony, the Height of Bliss, or, The Extreme of Misery' (1812), 'Conscience' (1814), 'The Spanish Campaign, or, The Jew' (1815), 'The Veiled Protectress, or, The Mysterious Mother' (1819), and 'What Shall Be, Shall Be' (1823). Her five anonymously published titles were 'The Wonder of the Village' (1805), 'Anecdotes of the Altamont Family' (1800), 'The Sicilian' (1798), 'Harcourt' (1799), and 'Something Odd!' (1804). The six Gabrielli novels were 'The Mysterious Wife' (1797), 'The Mysterious Husband' (1801), 'Independence' (1802), 'Something Strange' (1806), 'Langhton Priory' (1809), and 'Stratagems Defeated' (1811). 
Four novels translated by Meeke were also published, all based on French-language sources: 'A Tale of Mystery, or, Celina' (1803, from Francois-Guillaume Ducray-Dumenil), 'Lobenstein Village' (1804, based on a French translation of an original German novel by August Lafontaine), 'Julien, or, My Father's House' (1807, also from Ducray-Dumenil), and 'Elizabeth, or, The Exiles of Siberia' (1807, from Sophie Ristaud Cottin). Meeke later produced a non-fiction French translation, 'The Unpublished Correspondence of Madame Du Deffand' (1810). She also had some ability in German, completing Mary Collyer's 1763 translation of Friedrich Klopstock's 'Messiah' (1811). Meeke also authored three children's books, all undated: 'The Birth-Day Present' (in circulation by 1825), 'Mamma's Gift', and 'The Parent's Offering to a Good Child'. 
In taking up the pen Elizabeth Meeke joined an auspicious family tradition, represented above all by her stepsister Frances Burney. Yet their respective outputs could hardly have been more contrasting: if Burney was the most prestigious novelist of the period, Meeke would become the most prolific, and her motivation for writing was unashamedly commercial. Her literary career began following a series of personal upheavals which had undermined her social and financial position. Nevertheless, her personal history as an expatriate in France and on the wider continent evidently informed her fiction writing and facilitated her translation work. Little is known about her life during the period when she was writing. About 1796, and for an indeterminate period thereafter, she posed socially as Mrs Bruce. However, she does not seem to have remarried until long after Samuel Meeke's death in 1802. Legal documents dating from July 1824 record her impending marriage to a Benjamin Rawlings, and this appears to have taken place by November of that year. Details of the date and place of her death are unknown. However, her death is noted in an undated letter from Cornelia Cambridge, a social connection of the Burneys (BL, Egerton MS, 3705 fol. 65), which may have been written in October 1826. 


@@@@@


doc= 18510


Meen, Henry (1744-1817), classical scholar and Church of England clergyman, was born on 2 December 1744 at Harleston, Norfolk, the son of Henry Meen, a local apothecary. He was educated at Mr Colling's school, Bungay, and entered Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 9 October 1761. He graduated BA (1766), MA (1769), BD (1776), and became a fellow of the college. As an undergraduate he published 'Happiness, a Poetical Essay' (1766), which brought him little when reread as an adult. Having been ordained into the Anglican church, on 30 April 1792 he was appointed to a minor canonry in St Paul's Cathedral, instituted to the rectory of St Nicholas Cole Abbey, with St Nicholas Olave, London. On 13 November 1795 he was collated as prebendary of Twyford in St Paul's Cathedral, where he also held the office of lecturer. He obtained no other preferment, and these posts left him ample time for literary pursuits. 
In 1780 Meen 'revised, corrected, and completed, as coadjutor and editor', the unfinished translation of Apollonius Rhodius, by the Revd Francis Fawkes, and superintended its publication for his widow's benefit. To it he annexed his own independent version of Coluthus's 'Rape of Helen, or, The Origin of the Trojan War'. His other works were 'A Sermon before the Association of Volunteers' (1782), 'Remarks on the Cassandra of Lycophron' (1800) and 'Succisivae operae, or, Selections from Ancient Writers, with Translations and Notes' (1815). The biblical scholar Gilbert Wakefield believed that Meen had studied the writings of Lycophron more than any man living. When Meen told Samuel Parr that he proposed to undertake an edition of Lycophron's works, Parr encouraged him with the remark that 'many books have been well edited by men who were no scholars'. Meen's criticisms on Lycophron appeared in the 'European Magazine' from 1796 to 1813, but his complete translation was never published. Meen's additional literary activities included proof-reading Bishop Percy's 'Blank verse before Milton' (a work which was destroyed in the fire at the printing office); their correspondence is reprinted in John Nichols's 'Illustrations of... Literary History' (1817-58, 7.38-68). He was also employed to collect and pass through the press 'Alonzo and Cora' (1801) by the Edinburgh poet Elizabeth Scot. The literary commentator George Steevens dubbed Meen 'Little Meen' on account of his confused and haphazard working practices, with the result that he was 'always employed without doing anything'. Gilbert Wakefield more charitably described him as 'pacific, gentle, unassuming'. Henry Meen died, unmarried, aged seventy-two, at the rectory, Bread Street Hill, London, on 3 January 1817. Several months later (17-21 March) his manuscript translation of Lycophron and other books were sold at Sothebys. 


@@@@@


doc= 18511


Meeson, Alfred (1808-1885), architect and engineer, was born on 4 April 1808 at 67 Aldermanbury, London, the son of Edward Meeson and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Collins. He was educated in London, and spent the earlier part of his life in private practice as architect and surveyor in Wakefield, Yorkshire. In 1842 he moved to London at the request of Sir Charles Barry to superintend the constructional and engineering details of the new Houses of Parliament; he continued to act as Barry's confidential assistant until the completion of the work. In 1853 he was appointed building services engineer at the Houses of Parliament, with a residence in the building. On the abolition of that post Meeson continued in private practice at 58 Pall Mall. His principal tasks as a surveyor and consulting engineer were on the international exhibitions buildings of 1851 and 1862, and on the erection of Covent Garden Theatre, and of the Royal Albert Hall. He was architect to the first Alexandra Palace on Muswell Hill (1867-73), in the construction of which he reused materials from the 1862 exhibition building in Kensington. The distinctive building with five domes was almost destroyed by fire in 1873; Meeson worked on the new building with the architect John Johnson. Meeson died unmarried, aged seventy-six, on 12 January 1885, at his home, 4 Harley Road, South Hampstead, London. His nephew Frederick Meeson lived next door and was also an architect. 


@@@@@


doc= 18512


Meetkerke, Edward (1590-1657), Church of England clergyman, was born in the parish of St Botolph, Aldersgate, London, and baptized at the Dutch church, Austin Friars, on 29 September 1590, the only son (of three children) of 
Meanwhile, Adolf's four sons with his first wife, Jacoba Cervina, Adolf, Nicolaas, Anthony, and Baldwin, continued to distinguish themselves in Anglo-Dutch military service. Nicolaas van Meetkerke fought valiantly at the battle of Sluys in 1587, took 500 troops levied by refugee protestants in England to the Netherlands in 1588, commanded the Dutch regiment that Sir John Norris recruited for the unsuccessful expedition to Portugal in 1589, and commanded a company in the English army in 1590-91. He was killed at Deventer. The earl of Leicester paid for the education of Baldwin van Meetkerke, who joined other young men of his circle at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on 11 March 1587, aged nineteen. Between 1591 and 1596 he served in the English army in the Low Countries. He was knighted by the earl of Essex after the storming of Cadiz, probably on 22 June 1596, but died of his wounds and was buried eight days later at sea. 
Adolf van Meetkerke died in London on 6 October 1591 and his widow in November 1594; both were buried at St Botolph, Aldersgate. The infant Edward was brought up, as his will reveals, by Mary du Bois of London. He most probably went first to King's School, Canterbury, and then attended Westminster School, being taught Hebrew there by Saravia, before matriculating from Christ Church, Oxford, on 16 January 1607, aged sixteen. He graduated BA on 21 June 1610 and, having declined an offer from the Dutch church of a scholarship to study theology in Leiden, proceeded MA on 10 June 1613. He became a tutor of his college and provided private instruction in Hebrew. In 1616 he published 'A Declaration and Manifestation, of the Chief Reasons... of Master M. Du Tertre' and 'A Declaration of Henri Marc de Gouffier, Marquise of Boniuet', translations from the French of two conversion testimonies given respectively at Saumur and La Rochelle. He later contributed some Latin and Greek verses to Oxford poetical collections. He proceeded BD and was licensed to preach on 19 June 1620, and on 8 November that year was elected to succeed Edward Kilbye as professor of Hebrew. On 26 May 1625 he proceeded DD and was made a canon of Christ Church. 
That year Meetkerke's career took a new turn, however, when he was made rector of Easton, Hampshire, and by 1626 he had resigned his professorship. On 9 January 1632 he was installed as a prebendary of Winchester, and about this time he married Barbara, daughter of fellow prebendary Robert More (1568-1640). Deprived of his prebend during the 1640s, he retained his rectory, 'my only Pastorate charge that I ever had' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/267, fols. 88-9). He died at Easton on 10 August 1657 and was buried there, having expressed the desire to be buried in the chancel 'under the communion table as it now standeth'. In his will, drawn up on 7 December 1654, and proved by his widow on 24 September 1657, he repeated, 'as bound in duty to hir memory', the 'hearts desire for my children, and childrens children' enunciated in his mother's testament. This was that they might all: 'be brought up in the true reformed Christian Protestant Religion, and not led away by any sects, schismes or heresies of the times... and that for no temporall advancement or preferment they be enticed from the same to the profession of Popery, it being better that they should for want be forced to beg their bread, then ever to have such nurture. (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/267, fols. 88-9)' Property in Hampshire and an outstanding loan of $540 were to go to his widow and their son Adolf (who had followed Meetkerke to Christ Church and graduated in 1654); other beneficiaries included his daughter Frances, her husband Nathaniel Napper, their children, and four godsons -- Robert Moore, Adolf Balgnymy, Richard Glyd of New College, Oxford, and Thomas Newcomen. Meetkerke's apparently wide circle of friends is further attested by the identities of the overseers -- John Harris, warden of Winchester College and Edward Appleford of Winchester, common lawyer -- and of the witnesses, Robert Fishwick, minister of Hideburne Worthy, and Lancelot Addison. 


@@@@@


doc= 18513


Meggott, Richard (d. 1692), dean of Winchester, was born in St Olave, Southwark, the son of a brewer; nothing more of his parentage is as yet known. He was a scholar at St Paul's School, London, where he was a contemporary of Samuel Pepys, who on Christmas day 1664 heard 'a good sermon of one that I remember was at Pauls with me, his name Maggett' (Pepys, 'Diary', 5.356). Meggott was admitted pensioner to Queens' College, Cambridge, on 4 March 1650, graduating BA in 1653 and proceeding MA in 1657 and DD in 1669. He was appointed by Oliver Cromwell to the Sussex livings of Ford (9 June 1654) and West Tarring (15 November 1655). He held the latter living until 1657, and in June 1656 was also installed as vicar of Fermy in the same county. In 1656 he published 'The Rib Restored, or, The Honour of Marriage', a wedding sermon he had delivered the year before at St Dionis Backchurch, London. 
Meggott conformed at the Restoration and was collated to the rectory of Ford on 6 August 1661. From 1662 he was rector of St Olave, Southwark, but it seems that the effort of ministering to a large urban parish badly affected his health. To lessen the strain on his constitution Meggott was appointed to the vicarage of Twickenham, Middlesex, on 17 November 1668, a living he held until 1687. He was appointed a canon of Windsor on 18 July 1677 and on 9 October 1679 was installed dean of Winchester. In spite of his supposed ill health Meggott still seems to have passed much of his time in London. In 1672 he was appointed chaplain-in-ordinary to Charles II and preached several times before the court during the 1670s and 1680s. When James II visited Winchester in September 1685, John Evelyn records, he stayed at Dean Meggott's lodgings. 
Although, as the editor of a posthumous collection of his sermons admitted, Meggott had on occasion preached in favour of 'the Lineal Succession' with much 'warmth' (Meggott, 'Ten Sermons', 'To the reader'), Meggott conformed at the revolution of 1688. His earlier support for James did not prevent Meggott from remaining a popular court preacher and he delivered many sermons before William and Mary. He remained in these court sermons a staunch defender of the Anglican church. One sermon in particular, delivered on 14 July 1689 before the king and queen at Hampton Court, provoked controversy. Here Meggott urged that, in spite of the 'Toleration Act', dissenters who remained outside the communion of the Church of England were schismatics. This received a reply in 'The Charity and Loyalty of some of our Clergy' (1689), in which the author both refuted the charge of schism and attacked the conformist Anglican clergy (among whom, by implication, he included Meggott) for offering William only 'de facto' allegiance. 
Meggott died at Twickenham on 7 December 1692. His Williamite political inclinations are underlined by the fact that it was William Sherlock, dean of St Paul's and advocate of King William's providential divine right, who delivered his funeral sermon at Twickenham three days later. Sherlock praised Meggott's learning and abilities as a preacher, accurately describing him as a 'hearty and zealous assertor of the doctrine, worship, government and discipline of the Church of England' (Sherlock, 21). Though no details of his wife are as yet known, he had at least one son, born in 1673 or 1674. 
Sir Godfrey Kneller twice painted Meggott's portrait, engraved copies of which were made by Thomas White and David Loggan. 


@@@@@


doc= 18514


Meidel, Christopher (b. c.1659, d. in or before 1715), Quaker minister and translator, was born probably in Skien, Norway, one of three or more children of Gert Meidel ('c'.1606-1696), a shipowner of Langesund, and his wife, Elen, whose surname was probably Winge. He was educated at the University of Roskilde and may have come to England about 1683 as chaplain to Prince George of Denmark. In 1687 he was appointed minister of the Danish congregation in Wellclose Square, Ratcliffe, London, but he was soon troubled in his conscience by the fact that he 'administered the sacrament to persons who were no way bettered thereby', and consequently, about 1690, he relinquished the charge. About 1696 he began preaching to an Independent congregation in Nightingale Lane, East Smithfield, but after holding the post for a few years his doubts were confirmed and eventually he joined the Quakers. At the time he was living at Stratford in Essex, and supported his family by manual labour. 
With the approval of Friends Meidel travelled to Norway in 1700 to visit his brother and other relatives. He ran into difficulties and was arrested in Skien. English Friends intervened and Prince George of Denmark persuaded the Danish ambassador to write to the king of Denmark, thus securing his release. On 24 February 1701 Meidel took part in a notable dispute at Green's Coffee House, Finch Lane, in the City, between Benjamin Keach, a Baptist, and the Quaker minister Richard Claridge. In November of the same year he accompanied Claridge on a series of visits to meetings in Hertfordshire and Buckinghamshire. In September 1705 he and Claridge attended the burial of a Quaker, by direction of her son at Barking churchyard, and protested that she, being unbaptized, or excommunicate, had no need of ceremonies. Meidel addressed a large crowd over her grave but the vicar's son thrust him out of the churchyard. In the same year, 1705, Meidel issued 'An address to my neighbours and others in and about Stratford, near Bow, Essex, assembled to dance on the 1st of the 3rd month, called Mayday'. 
Meidel was soon afterwards imprisoned. On 4 July 1706 he wrote, from Chelmsford gaol, 'An Address to the Danish and Norwegian Lutheran Church in London', which was printed in a Danish translation by himself in his Danish edition of William Dell's 'Treatise on Baptism' (1706); an English version later appeared in 'The Irish Friend' (2/5 1837, 36). Meidel's address gives his reasons for joining the society and takes affectionate leave of his former congregation. He was imprisoned again, in 1707, in Truro and in Launceston, after disturbing the Anglican incumbent of Liskeard's services and for preaching in the streets. He was responsible for the Danish version of William Penn's 'Key Opening the Way... to Discern the Difference' (1705) as well as the Danish translations of Robert Barclay's 'Apology for the True Christian Divinity', a major undertaking published posthumously in 1738, and Barclay's 'Catechism and Confession of Faith' (1717). 
Meidel also travelled on the continent. In 1704 he attended the yearly meeting of Friends in Amsterdam, and in 1705 made another journey to visit Friends in the Netherlands. As a Quaker minister, in 1708 he visited Friedrickstadt and other towns in Holstein, where the Friends were suffering persecution. Travelling through France he was arrested, detained at Pont and at St Lys, and finally taken to Paris. There he was brought through the streets, chained to other prisoners, and preached repentance to the people standing by, who freely offered him money which he refused. On 22 August 1708 he wrote to William Sewel from the Grand Chatelet, asking for money to be sent. Meidel appears to have died, presumably in Europe, by 1715, when his brother Gerhard acted on behalf of his son, who was in London, in the matter of a family inheritance. Nothing further is known of his wife and family. 


@@@@@


doc= 18515


Mawgan (fl. 5th-6th cent.), holy man, belongs to the large group of saints who have been described as 'the relatively insignificant and humbler men whose fame during their lifetime was local' (Bowen, 69). Although their identities are interwoven, it is possible that Mawgan and Meugan were two different saints, the former predominantly represented in church dedications and place names in Cornwall and Brittany, the latter in Wales. But if St Mawgan and St Meugan are one and the same saint, he would belong to a group witnessed in dedications and place names across Wales, Cornwall, and Brittany which includes St Cadog, St Petroc, and St Brioc. It has been suggested that the St Machan witnessed in the early place name Ecclesmachan (in Lothian) may be the same person as St Mawgan, though this must remain uncertain. There is no biography of Mawgan or Meugan. A holy man, either Mawgan ('Maucan') or Meugan ('Moucan'), is mentioned incidentally in the life of St Cadog (late eleventh century) as intervening in a dispute between Cadog and King Maelgwn of Gwynedd; and a 'monastery of Mawgan' is mentioned in the late eleventh-century life of St David. Meugan appears in 'Bonedd y Saint', the collection concerned with graves of the saints, in a section dated to 'c'.1510. It has also been stated that he was president of the 'college' at Llanilltud Fawr (Llantwit Major). None of these references can be said to add to the sum of genuine information on Mawgan or Meugan, which is so uncertain as to raise doubts about whether the two names indeed refer to one person. 


@@@@@


doc= 18516


Meikle, Andrew (1719-1811), millwright and inventor of the threshing machine, was born on 5 May 1719, probably at Saltoun, Haddingtonshire. He was one of at least two brothers. His father, James Meikle, wright in Nether Keith, Haddingtonshire, working on behalf of Henry Fletcher, brother of Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun, visited the Netherlands in 1710 and brought back knowledge of pot barley making. 
Between the late 1740s and late 1760s Meikle worked on a number of projects, mostly textile mills, with his brother, Robert (died 1780), whose surname was sometimes rendered Mackell. In 1751 they were appointed as consultants to the board of trustees for manufactures, who allowed them $20 per annum to train apprentices and in 1754 granted them a premium for improvements to bleaching machinery. They surveyed mills for the forfeited estates commission and in 1768 obtained a patent (no. 896) for a grain winnowing machine. In 1772 Andrew Meikle took out a second patent, for spring-regulated windmill sails. In addition to Scottish projects and commissions, his work took him to the north of England, East Anglia, and London. 
By the early 1750s Meikle had settled at Houston Mill, near East Linton on the Haddingtonshire Tyne. John Rennie, the engineer, lived at the nearby farm of Phantassie and spent two years working with Meikle in the early 1770s before completing his formal education. From about 1780 onwards, Meikle was also associated with Knowes Mill, a mile or so further downstream. 
Meikle was married to Marjorie Mirrilees, who predeceased him. They are known to have had at least eight children. Of these, James (the eldest, died before 1807), Andrew (1760-1839), Mary, and Marion remained in Haddingtonshire; George ['see below'] followed his father's trade and was best-known as the inventor in 1787 of an ingenious water-lifting wheel, which was used to float peats from Blairdrummond Moss, Perthshire; Robert and John lived and worked in the West Indies, at Berbice, Demerara, and Grenada, where John was reputed to have made a considerable fortune from building sugar mills; and another son, David, died at Houston Mill before he could make the passage to Grenada. 
Meikle's work on the threshing machine first comes to light with a machine for threshing grain and 'scutching' (that is, beating) flax, and which consisted of five flails driven by a water-wheel at Knowes Mill. A demonstration on 14 February 1788 impressed a number of Haddingtonshire gentlemen, who drew it to the attention of the board of trustees for manufactures. Meikle did not persist with this design, but instead worked on machines based on a revolving drum, which had originated in Northumberland in the early 1770s and had been brought to Scotland in model form by Sir Francis Kinloch of Gilmerton. Kinloch sent a model, incorporating his own improvements, to Meikle, who tested it to destruction at Houston Mill in 1784. When in 1785 Meikle worked on a new design, this incorporated a revolving drum. 


The patent proved troublesome. There were competing claims from proponents of the Northumbrian and Dunblane machines and from Sir Francis Kinloch. During the first ten years so many unlicensed machines were erected that attempts to enforce the patent were abandoned. In 1809 Sir John Sinclair established a subscription fund which raised $1500 on Andrew Meikle's behalf. Andrew Meikle died on 27 November 1811 at Houston Mill, near East Linton, and was buried at the kirk of Prestonkirk, East Linton, where there is a tombstone to his memory. His son George died just two days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 18517


George Meikle (d. 1811), working from Alloa, Clackmannanshire, almost certainly knew of another early design, initiated by Michael Stirling, farmer at Craighead, Dunblane, in 1748 or 1758. This machine had revolving wooden 'scutchers' (beaters) of a type already used in flax-preparing lint mills. Meikle's prototype machine, erected at Knowes Mill, used short scutchers mounted on a revolving drum. When in 1786 George Meikle installed the first complete machine for James Stein at Kilbagie, Clackmannanshire, he added a pair of fluted feed-rollers, another feature of lint mills. The patent (no. 1645), granted to Andrew and George Meikle in 1788, incorporated all of these elements, but could not apply in Scotland as the machine had already been publicly used there. 


@@@@@


doc= 18518


Meikle, James (1730-1799), surgeon and religious writer, was born at Carnwath, in the upper part of Clydesdale, on 19 May 1730, the fifth child of George Meikle (died 1748), a surgeon and druggist. James, a delicate boy, received little regular education; but he was religiously brought up by his parents, and when about sixteen years old joined the 'Secession' church, a body which had separated from the established church of Scotland in 1732. 
Meikle's wish to study at Edinburgh for the ministry remained unfulfilled owing to his poverty and the death of his father in February 1748, which left his mother and two sisters dependent on his earnings. He managed to attend some medical lectures at Edinburgh, and returned to Carnwath in 1750, intending as a temporary expedient to practise as a surgeon before becoming a minister. But his difficulties grew, and in December 1757 he decided to join the Royal Navy. 
After passing the examination at Surgeons' Hall in London Meikle was appointed second surgeon's mate to the 'Portland', a 50-gun ship, in April 1758. Although he was distressed by the loose conduct both of the officers and the crew, writing at one point that their 'wickedness made me weary of my life' (Peddie, lx), they grew to respect him. Meikle spent much of his time reading and writing; many of the 'Meditations', which afterwards appeared in 'The Traveller' and in 'Solitude Sweetened', were written at this time. After cruising off the western coast of France and in the Mediterranean, the 'Portland' was ordered to join the fleet under Admiral Boscawen, and took part in the victory off Cape Lagos on 18 August 1759. His ship being ordered home with the prisoners and for repairs, Meikle reached Spithead on 16 September. An application to the Admiralty for his release from the service was refused, but he was promoted to the rank of first mate, and put to sea again on 22 October. He joined the fleet under Admiral Hawke, and took part in the victory off Belleisle on 20 November. 
After repeated applications Meikle finally obtained his discharge in February 1762, and immediately returned to Carnwath. He went to Edinburgh for some months in the summer of 1764 to continue his medical studies. In 1779 he married his first wife Agnes Smith, who died in 1781; he married again in November 1785. In July 1789 he was ordained to the eldership in the congregation of Biggar, and continued his devotional writings to the last week of his life, dying rather suddenly on 7 December 1799, leaving a widow and five children. 
Meikle was a man of earnest religious feeling, and at the same time of great cheerfulness, a characteristic one would scarcely expect from the author of such works as 'The house of mourning' and 'The monthly memorial, or, A periodical interview with the king of terrors'. In 1797 he published a small volume entitled 'Metaphysical Maxims', which was reprinted in 1805 and 1807. In addition to his several published collections of religious writings, he left a large number of religious meditations in prose and verse, a selection from which was published by subscription for the benefit of his widow under the title of 'The Select Remains' (1803), which contains both 'The house of mourning' and 'The monthly memorial'. 


@@@@@


doc= 18519


Meilan, Mark Anthony (c.1743-1813), writer, was born apparently in England. His family was possibly of Swiss protestant or French origin. Meilan left a position in the Post Office to become, in his own words, an 'indefatigable Labourer in the Vineyard of Instruction' ('Holy Writ Familiarized to Juvenile Conceptions', 1791, 1.i) who, for over forty years, offered private instruction in languages, arts, mathematics, and sciences. In 1776 he was keeping an academy in Charles Square, Hoxton, London. Meilan was an equally indefatigable author of works on English grammar and shorthand, drama and poetry, as well as moral and didactic books for children that reflected his wish to 'convert instruction into pastime, and seduce them as it were to virtue' ('The Friend of Youth', 1788, 1.ii). 
His first work, 'Stenography, or, Short-Hand Improved' (1764), was a more curvilinear -- and at 3's'. cheaper -- version of Thomas Gurney's shorthand (based on that of William Mason), the best system then extant, according to Meilan, who employed a simplified alphabet, used different symbols for five letters, and altered Gurney's method for writing vowels. On 4 October 1768 Meilan married Elizabeth Newton in the parish church of St Dunstan-in-the-West, London, he at that time being resident in that parish and she in the parish of St Andrew Holborn. They had a large family. 
Having from youth nursed the ambition to be a playwright, Meilan submitted in turn three tragedies ('Northumberland', 'Emilia', and 'The Friends' -- derivative of plays by Shakespeare and Nicholas Rowe and stories in 'The Spectator' and the 'Gentleman's Magazine') to David Garrick and George Colman. They were not accepted, but subscription allowed their publication as 'The Dramatic Works of Mark Anthony Meilan' (1771?), with a preface containing a sharp but entertaining rebuttal to the 'despots of the drama'. The published plays met no happier fate: 'Such pieces... would have been dismissed with contempt even by the manager of a company of strollers acting in a barn' ('Critical Review', 31.228). In prefaces to his later works Meilan attacked those who 'exercise the tooth of surly criticism' ('The Book of Righteousness', 1800?, vii). Better, if mixed, reception met his verse adaptation of Fenelon's 'Les aventures de Telemaque' ('The Adventures of Telemachus, an Epic Poem', 4 vols., 1776; 2nd edn, 2 vols., 1792-4). 
Meilan was ordained deacon in the Church of England in 1778 and in the following year the bishop of London ordained him priest and licensed him as curate to the rector of Ilford Parva, Essex, at a salary of $30 per annum. He later served as curate of St John-at-Wapping, and, from 1809, was assistant minister of St Mary's Newington, London. He is listed in 'A Biographical Dictionary of the Living Authors' (1816). Meilan, then living at Kennington Lane, made his will on 16 June 1813, leaving everything he owned to his unmarried daughters Marin and Elizabeth. His will was proved on 3 August, at which time he was described as 'late of Francis Street, Newington'. 
The popularity in England of French moral and didactic literature for children inspired Meilan to direct his literary ambitions towards what he often termed the 'rising generation', producing between 1786 and 1800 five works (a total of forty-four volumes) on this and religious subjects. 'The Children's Friend, Consisting of Apt Tales, Short Dialogues, and Moral Dramas' (24 vols., 1786), in small format 'suited to the little hands of children' (24.163), was Meilan's translation and adaptation of the popular 'L'ami des enfans' (1782-3) by Arnaud Berquin. 


@@@@@


doc= 18520


Meilyr Brydydd (fl. 1081-1137), poet, was perhaps the son of Mabon ab Iarddur ap Mor, and, we may assume, dwelt at Trefeilyr in the parish of Trefdraeth, Anglesey, an estate which doubtless took its name from him; his wife was Tandreg ferch Rhys ap Seisyllt. Three poems preserved in the Hendregadredd manuscript (NL Wales, MS 6680B) have been attributed to him, namely: an elegy on Gruffudd ap Cynan (died 1137); the poet's death lay, in which he prays that his bones may be laid in Enlli (Bardsey Island); and a short poem on the battle of Mynydd Carn (1081), which professes to foretell the deaths of Trahaearn ap Caradog, Meilyr ap Rhiwallon, and Caradog ap Gruffudd ap Rhydderch (who is not named) in that battle. His authorship of the last has been disputed on chronological grounds. 
Meilyr (whose name means Meilyr the Poet) is among the first of the Gogynfeirdd, the medieval professional poets whose poems can be approximately dated, as distinguished from the 'cynfeirdd', the poets of the later sixth and earlier seventh centuries, whose verse, in the main, celebrates the exploits of north British kings and warriors. He is the herald of the poetic revival which contact with Norman civilization and success in arms brought about among the Welsh towards the middle of the twelfth century. From his elegy for Gruffudd ap Cynan it is apparent that he was 'pencerdd' (chief poet) under that prince. On at least one occasion, according to the same source, he acted as envoy for the court of Aberffraw. His son, Gwalchmai, and his grandsons, Einion, Meilyr, and Elidir Sais, also won renown as poets, and the family was for generations of consequence in Anglesey. 


@@@@@


doc= 18521


Mel (fl. 5th-early 6th cent.) of Ardagh (Ardachad) in modern co. Longford, is also a character of some importance in what has been claimed as the earliest life of Brigit, the so-called 'Vita prima', and in her mainly vernacular life, 'Bethu Brigte'. The heirs of these saints, Patrick and Brigit, were competing for influence within the kingdom of southern Tethbae; Ardagh was the episcopal church of southern Tethbae, and the competition naturally centred on the principal church of the kingdom. Although there is no life of Mel, his cult seems to have been resilient. In the ninth century his feast day, 6 February, is recorded in the martyrology of Tallaght, and also in the text of the 'Felire Oengusso': the 'Felire' chose the most important saints to include within its brief verses, one to each day of the year, and it is thus significant that the Irish saint chosen for 6 February was Mel. The connection between Mel and Patrick seems to have strengthened in the viking period: according to the saints' genealogies, his mother, Dar Erca, was Patrick's sister. 


@@@@@


doc= 18522


Melbancke, Brian (d. 1600), writer, was probably born in Yorkshire, where he attended Sedbergh School. Later he went to St John's College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in the same term as the playwright Robert Greene (Michaelmas 1575) and graduated BA in 1580. He is identified in his own book, entitled 'Philotimus' (1583), as 'Student in Graies Inne' and the book is prefaced by an epistle to the gentlemen of the inns of court. Nevertheless Melbancke's admission to Gray's Inn is not officially recorded. 

'Philotimus', subtitled 'The Warre betwixt Nature and Fortune', is an obvious imitation of John Lyly's 'Euphues'. It contains many proverbs and pieces of verse, including an allusion to the story of Romeo and Juliet. One part of the dedication -- to Philip Howard, earl of Arundel -- might allude to Howard's time as a student at St John's. The other part of the dedication -- to the 'Gentleman Students in the Inns of Court and Chancerie, and the University of Cambridge' -- is clearly an attempt to solidify whatever ties Melbancke had to Gray's Inn and Cambridge. It has been hypothesized that 'George Wastnes Esquire', who contributed some verses to Melbancke's collection, was a relative of Gervase Wastenys, student of Gray's Inn in 1571. 
'Brian Mullebanke and Sara Baker' were married on 3 June 1583 at St Olave's, Southwark. Melbancke had buried a daughter named Margaret on 9 December 1582 in the parish of St Mary Magdalene, Bermondsey, but the identity of her mother is unknown. All the subsequent life events of Melbancke's immediate family were recorded in the parish registers of St Mary Magdalene, where he and his wife seem to have lived following their marriage. The registers include baptismal and burial records for eight other children, from 1584 to 1595, as well as Melbancke's own burial (20 June 1600) and what is probably that of his widow (13 August 1603). How Brian Melbancke made a living remains a mystery. 'Philotimus' (now extant in only a few copies) appears to have been printed only once, in 1583 by R. Warde (although some title-pages bear the date 1582), and there were seemingly no subsequent printings of it or other publications bearing Melbancke's name. 
The Milbankes of Yorkshire, who possibly were relatives, were distinguished by a long line of baronets and famous aristocrats, including Admiral Mark Milbanke and Anne Isabella Milbanke, Lady Byron. 


@@@@@


doc= 18523


Meldola, Raphael (1754-1828), rabbi, was born in Leghorn, Italy, the son of Hezekiah Moses Meldola (1725-1791), a professor of oriental languages at the University of Paris. He came from a line of rabbinical scholars taking their family name from Meldola, near Forli, in north-east Italy. The first to attain some prominence was Jacob Meldola in the sixteenth century; a family tradition of earlier Spanish origins, though not improbable, cannot be proved. Raphael Meldola's paternal grandfather (1684-1748), also named Raphael, was rabbi in Pisa and Bayonne. At Leghorn, Meldola received a secular education, alongside a thorough training in talmudic and wider rabbinic literature. After employment as a preacher he attained rabbinical qualification in 1796, by which date he was married to Stella (Estrella) Bollaffi (died 1851); they had eight children. He was appointed 'dayyan' (a member of the rabbinical court) in 1803. In October 1804 he was invited to become ''hakham' (chief rabbinical authority) of the Sephardic Jews in London, where he worked congenially with his Ashkenazic counterpart, Solomon Hirschell. Although he presumably knew some French, he never mastered English properly and may have preached in Spanish, of which his command was indifferent. Relations with his lay leadership were difficult and sometimes stormy; coming from a large Italian Jewish community, long integrated socially, he probably failed to appreciate the need for a strong lay leadership to steer British Jews towards Anglicization. 
Meldola's activity was naturally limited to his own (and the wider) Jewish community. He proved energetic in combating missionary attempts at attracting children of the Jewish poor to a locally established school and addressed himself, on arrival, to securing co-operation with the Ashkenazic community regarding control of the butchery trade in accordance with Jewish religious requirements. The emergence of a joint board for 'shehitah', to implement this, owed much to him. For the re-opening of the Bevis Marks Synagogue in 1825, following its redecoration, he composed a Hebrew hymn which was rendered, innovatively, by a choir -- a feature that would later become a regular congregational institution. 
Meldola's published legacy included two significant Hebrew texts. The first, a commentary on the entry of the high priest into the holy of holies in the temple, as described in the liturgy for the Day of Atonement, was included in a prayer book published at Leghorn in 1791. His manual regarding marital conduct (''huppath 'hatanim') appeared, likewise at Leghorn, in 1797. Unpublished Hebrew works were said to survive him. Fourteen other pieces have been traced (Barnett, 13-14), mainly special prayers or sermons for national occasions, such as the peace of 1814. He attended Nelson's funeral and subsequently preached a commemorative sermon (which does not survive), as he did in 1817, on the death of Princess Charlotte, which was perhaps the occasion of his being introduced to George III by the archbishop of Canterbury. 
During his latter years Meldola suffered from ill health. He died on 1 June 1828 and was buried two days later in the Sephardic Jewish cemetery at Mile End, London; his wife survived him. He cannot be said to have been a national figure, but it is notable that the bells of Aldgate church tolled while his funeral procession passed. Of his sons, David (1797-1853), also a rabbi, was his 'de facto' successor, although he did not bear the title ''hakham'. Through his daughter Rebecca, married in 1819 to David de Sola, the reader (''hazzan') in his own synagogue, a number of leading Sephardi families in England, Canada, and the United States were descended from him. 


@@@@@


doc= 18524


Meldrum, George (1634?-1709), Church of Scotland minister and religious controversialist, was the fourth son of Andrew Meldrum, dyer and baillie of the city of Aberdeen. He studied divinity at Marischal College, Aberdeen, and in 1651 graduated MA. His prodigious intellect and undoubted ability as a teacher were quickly recognized, and in 1653 he was appointed as one of the regents, or bursars, of the college. He sat upon the ecclesiastical committee, which investigated irregularities in the administration of the parish of Turriff, Aberdeenshire, from April 1653 to April 1657, and in March 1658 served as the moderator of the synod of Aberdeen. Unanimously elected by the town council, on 1 December 1658, to the ministry of the East parish of Aberdeen, he was ordained on 2 February 1659. 
However, Meldrum was deprived of his charge by act of parliament and privy council in October 1662, and retired to the country after being relieved of his pastoral duties by the express order of the bishop of Aberdeen. Unable, in his own words, to distinguish 'the Difference betwixt the State of Things Anno. 1662 and before the 1638', he decided to bide his time and to accept tacitly the return of episcopacy to the church (Wodrow, 'Sufferings', 1.148). Accordingly he appeared before the Scottish privy council on 16 December 1662 and subscribed to the oath of allegiance. Promptly restored to his ministry he distinguished himself through his zeal in combating the influence of both the Quakers and the Jesuits within the parish, and on one occasion was said to have only narrowly escaped assassination at the hands of a Roman Catholic after being called out at night to visit the sick. In his posthumously published pamphlet, 'The Danger of Popery Discovered' (1714), Meldrum sought to demonstrate to those 'who have not Money to buy, or time to read larger Books' that Roman Catholicism was deceitful, corrupt and idolatrous, destroying 'faith and truth among Men' (39). 
In 1663 Meldrum was elected rector of Marischal College, but he declined the offer of a DD in 1679. In 1681 he was deprived of all of his offices on account of his refusal to take the Scottish 'Test Act', and 'continoued silent till King James Toleration' (Wodrow, 'Analecta', 1.176). Admitted to Kilwinning parish, Ayrshire, before 21 March 1688, he accepted the ministry of the Tron Kirk at Edinburgh on 11 February 1692. Thereafter his rise in the hierarchy of the Church of Scotland was both steady and assured. He was elected as the moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland on 11 January 1698, and accepted the position of professor of divinity at Edinburgh University on 24 December 1701. Unwilling to abandon his charge of the Tron Kirk he initially agreed to serve for only one year but on the appointment of an assistant, who assumed the more onerous and time-consuming aspects of his pastoral work, he consented to accept the appointment upon a permanent basis. 
Elected moderator of the general assembly for a second time on 10 March 1703 Meldrum used a sermon preached before the duke of Queensberry on 16 May (later published) as a set piece in which to attack the episcopal wing of the Church of Scotland, which had been gaining ground, and to refute moves aimed at the granting of toleration and the restoration of lay patronage. The impact of the closing words of a sermon, which had otherwise consisted of an unremarkable exposition of 'Psalm 122': 6 upon peace, was both immediate and electrifying. Meldrum was mercilessly attacked by his adversaries in a paper war between rival pamphleteers who published 'A Vindication and Defence of Mr. George Meldrum's Sermon' (1703); 'Toleration Defended', (1703); 'Reasonableness of a Toleration to those of Episcopal Perswasion', (1704); and 'Reasonableness of a Toleration, Enquir'd into' (1705). He more than managed to hold his own and did much to unite the core membership of the Church of Scotland around a common system of presbyterian self-government. 
Famed for his many charitable bequests and personable demeanour, Meldrum died unmarried at Edinburgh on 18 February 1709 after suffering a succession of strokes. 


@@@@@


doc= 18525


Meldrum, Sir John (b. before 1584?, d. 1645), parliamentarian army officer, came of obscure Scottish origins. Nothing is known of his parents and all that is known of his date of birth is the statement by an adversary that he was over sixty in the year of his death, a plausible claim in the light of what is known of his early career. In April 1611 he was described as a captain in the Irish army; in 1642 he was to remind the king of his thirty-six years' service to the crown, and of his 'zeal to your majesty's father's service in settling the province of Ulster' (Rushworth, 4.627-8). As a result of his Irish service he was granted lands in co. Fermanagh in 1617. The following year he and Sir William Erskine purchased a monopoly to build and maintain a lighthouse at Winterton Ness on the Norfolk coast, for which they were entitled to levy a penny per ton of cargo on every ship passing; this patent set them at odds both with Trinity House and -- for the charges it imposed on the east coast coal trade -- with the hostmen of Newcastle and the City of London. The monopoly was complained of to the privy council and in every parliament from 1621 to 1626. Meldrum retained the patent and acquired another for a lighthouse at Orford Ness on the Suffolk coast. 
After fighting as a mercenary in the Low Countries, Meldrum returned to England where James I, who evidently liked his fellow Scot, knighted him on 6 August 1622. In 1627 Meldrum was collecting weapons and recruits for the Re expedition, in which he took part and was generously paid $600 for his services. During the early 1630s Meldrum returned to the continent, in Swedish service under Gustavus Adolphus: in 1632 he was serving in east Prussia as a colonel of foot. By 1635 he was back in England, defending another lighthouse patent, for three lights at the North Foreland and South Foreland to guide ships passing by the Goodwin Sands. A royalist opponent later taunted Meldrum that his desire to protect his monopoly -- those 'lights you study to preserve' rather than 'the dazeling lighte of Reformation' had 'misled you out of the way of obedience' and prompted him to become one of the first mercenary officers to side with parliament ('Abergavenny MSS', 156). 
In June 1642 Meldrum commanded a force of 1500 men sent from London to reinforce the arsenal at Hull. Early that month Meldrum explained his choice of allegiance in an open letter to Charles I. He reminded the king of their conversation in Newcastle the previous November, when the veteran of the Thirty Years' War warned of the 'inhuman Butcheries of an intestine war'. Blaming the failure of the king's policies on 'Court parasites', Meldrum begged Charles to heed the advice of parliament. 'I could find no better way to do your majesty a more general service than by stopping the course of the civil war' he concluded, 'as to cast myself into Hull' (Rushworth, 4.627-8). The contradictions of the argument that he was going to war to stop a war may suggest other motivations. The Scottish mercenary may have felt poorly done by. Without mentioning the land in Ireland and the lighthouse monopoly, Meldrum complained that during his thirty-six years of royal service he had incurred debts of $3000. 
There was no more vigorous defender of Hull than Sir John Meldrum. In early July at the head of 500 men he ambushed an approaching royalist column of some 3000 under the king's command, driving them back to Beverley. This was 'the first blood', reported a news sheet, 'that was shed in these unnatural wars' (Rushworth, 4.610). A couple of weeks later he led a night attack against the royalists at Anlaby, capturing some fifteen cannon, as well as a 36 lb mortar called 'the Queen's pocket pistol' (which the parliamentarians immediately renamed 'Sweet Lips' after Hull's most celebrated prostitute). It was reported that the king 'was much incensed at the news thereof' (Cooper, 4). Certainly Meldrum's vigorous defence of Hull persuaded Charles to lift the siege. 
After helping Sir William Waller capture Portsmouth in September 1642, Meldrum commanded an infantry brigade on the parliamentarian right at the battle of Edgehill on 23 October. Lord Saye, who had raised most of the troops from his north Oxfordshire estates, had sense enough to let the Scots veteran lead them. One regiment panicked, but the other two stood their ground and acquitted themselves with credit. After the battle Meldrum was one of six parliamentarian officers who sent John Pym a report of the battle, which was published five days later on 28 October ('An Exact and True Relation of the Dangerous and Bloody Fight', 1642). 
During 1643 parliament employed Meldrum, who had gained the reputation as 'a Scot of good capacity', as a trouble-shooter in the midlands ('CSP Venice', '1642-3', 292). In June he arrested Captain John Hotham, his old commander from Hull, for treachery. In October he reinforced the besieged garrison at Hull with 400 men, and as a result of the sally he led on 9 October, in which he was wounded, forced the royalists to lift the siege. He took part in the capture of Gainsborough in December 1643, and expelled the royalists from the Isle of Axholme the following February. 
After laying siege to the important garrison of Newark in late February 1644, Meldrum complained to his good friend Colonel John Hutchinson 'of the envyings, heart-burnings and dissensions' of his officers. Recruited from several counties, the garrison would not co-operate. 'It galled the poor old gentleman to the heart', recalled the colonel's wife, Lucy Hutchinson, 'who having commanded abroad, and been used to deal with officers that understood the discipline of war, was confounded among those who knew not to obey any orders' (Hutchinson, 173). On 22 March 1644 Meldrum was forced to surrender Newark to Prince Rupert's relieving force and give up a large quantity of arms: eleven brass cannon, two mortars (including 'Sweet Lips'), fifty barrels of gunpowder, and 4000 muskets. Although the royalists had agreed to let Meldrum's troops march away with colours flying, they plundered the troops to their shirts, 'and sent many captains quite naked away' (ibid., 177). The surrender had a tremendous effect on the morale of both sides. 'Even the most zealous were cast down and gave up all for lost', remembered the parliamentarian Lucy Hutchinson. Edward Hyde the royalist historian crowed that Meldrum's capitulation was 'a victory as prodigious as any happened throughout the war' (ibid.; Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.327). 
Over the next eight months Meldrum learned much from his defeat, admitting in November 1644 that 'I have passed an apprenticeship' ('CSP dom.', '1644-5', 129). He now thought of the royalists as 'This potent and vigilant enemy, which is now... wasting and spoiling'. He recognized that Prince Rupert was their most dangerous leader, telling the committee of both kingdoms in August that he would follow up his victory at Ormskirk, 'If Prince Rupert does not enter upon the stage and interrupt the game' (ibid., '1644', 180, 442). On 9 September he and Sir William Brereton captured Montgomery Castle, killing 500 royalists and taking 1200 prisoners. At the end of the month Meldrum started the siege of Liverpool. 'The enemy is stronger in the town', he reported, 'than we are without, beside the advantage of very strong works' (ibid., '1644', 543-4). Yet by 1 November he persuaded the garrison to surrender, granting clemency to the Irish troops, whom he paroled home. 
The following February, Meldrum besieged Scarborough, the royalist stronghold on the north Yorkshire coast, which was defended by Sir Hugh Cholmley. Meldrum bombarded the castle with a 57 lb cannon and two 27-pounders. He nearly died when he fell down a 200 foot cliff, but was saved by his cloak, which acted as a parachute. 'Yet hee is taken up for dead', Cholmley admiringly recorded: 'lyes 3 dayes speachless, his head opened and the bruised blood taken out [i.e. he was trepanned], though a Man above three score yeare old, recovered thus soe perfectlie that within six weekes hee is on foote againe, and begins to batter the Castle. ('Memoirs and Memorials', 156)' Soon afterwards he suffered a 'shot through the Codds' (ibid., 158) which so discouraged him that the committee of both kingdoms wrote saying how much they appreciated his fine service, and that the House of Commons had voted him $1500. Leading an assault on the castle on 11 May, Meldrum was shot in the stomach. Cholmley is probably wrong in asserting that he 'dyed with in six dayes of this wound' (ibid.), as the date on the preserved copy of his will, 24 May, suggests an even more horribly prolonged death. By it he appointed his nephew Robert Meldrum executor, the only kin named, though the will alluded to legacies which Robert was to pay. The will proclaimed Meldrum's commitment to the parliamentarian cause: 'since theis unhappie troubles began, God is my witnes I have denied myselfe and all private ends, and followed the publicke cause with a single hearte and unwearied spirite, and am nowe readie to give up my life in a willinge sacrifice for the honour of God and welfare of these Kingdomes.' However, he was hard-headed enough to remember orders made by the Commons for his arrears of pay, 'which I have not yet receaved' and 'for the establishing in my Person the Pattent of Goodwin Lights, which is a necessarie service for the good of the Navigation' (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/200, fol. 494'r'). He was buried with full military honours on 4 June at the church of the Holy Trinity, Hull. His death so demoralized the troops that they ceased offensive operations, starving the royalists into surrender on 21 July 1645. 
Had Meldrum lived he might have gone on to become one of the parliament's leading generals, who as a Scot in English employ might have helped deal with the covenanters. As it was, Meldrum was a fine soldier who learned from his mistakes. He had a firm understanding of his profession and of European affairs, and a sincere reluctance to take up arms against his sovereign. He alerted parliament to the dangers of getting bogged down in sieges which could 'rather forment than finish a war', and urged them to treat their troops fairly, since such will be 'to the advancement of the public service' ('CSP dom.', '1644', 91, 523-4). Historians have assessed Meldrum positively. S. R. Gardiner described Meldrum as 'A Scottish Officer of tried ability and character' (Gardiner, 1.190). J. P. Kenyon thought him to be 'one of Parliament's most enterprising and successful generals' (Kenyon, 45). The last word, however, must go to his fatal adversary, Sir Hugh Cholmley, who called him 'a bold Scot' (Rushworth, 4.627). 


