@@@@@


doc= 1253


Baltzar, Thomas (c.1630-1663), violinist, was the eldest child of David Baltzar (died 1647), town musician of Lubeck, and his wife, whom he married on 4 October 1630 but whose name is unknown. His father's family had been musicians for at least four generations. It is possible, as Tilmouth suggests, that he studied the violin with Gregor Zuber (a civic musician in Lubeck from 1641) and composition with Franz Tunder. The composer-violinist Nicolaus Bleyer taught Thomas Baltzar's younger brother Joachim in Lubeck, and (particularly given their shared interest in writing sets of divisions for solo violin) it seems likely that he also taught Thomas. To complicate matters further, a note (attributed to one Dreyer) in Samuel Hartlib's 'Ephemerides' of 1656 claims that 'Hee lived under that famous Musitian and Componist of Hamburg Schoppius [Johann Schop], who hath scarce his like in all Europe'. By 1653 Baltzar held a position at the Swedish court (and, in fact, it was probably here that he came under Schop's influence). There he must have met the English musicians who accompanied Bulstrode Whitelocke on his embassy to Sweden (1653-4). Baltzar left Stockholm, presumably after Queen Kristina's abdication in June 1654, and returned to Lubeck where, early in 1655, he was appointed 'Ratslautenist'. Before long, however, he had moved to England, and it seems that it was his Swedish associations that took him there. Hartlib's 'Ephemerides' (1656) twice describes him as being in the service of Count Christer Bonde, the Swedish ambassador who arrived on 27 July 1655. Baltzar stayed on after the ambassador's departure thirteen months later and was listed among the instrumentalists who performed in 'The Siege of Rhodes' (originally planned for September 1656 but possibly not presented until 1659). According to Anthony Wood, from the summer of 1658 Baltzar was 'entertained by Sir Anthony Cope of Hanwell House, Banbury, Bart., with whom he continued about two years' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood D.19(4)). In 1658 he played in both Cambridge (at Benjamin Rogers' MusB degree ceremony) and, on several occasions, in Oxford. In 1661 he became a member of the king's private musick at the very favourable salary of $110 per annum. 
Several extended descriptions of his playing convey a sense of the impact Baltzar made in England. John Evelyn recorded in his diary for 4 March 1656 that: 'This night I was invited by Mr. 'Rog: L'Estrange' to heare the incomperable 'Lubicer' on the Violin, his variety upon a few notes & plaine ground with that wonderfull dexterity, as was admirable, & though a very young man, yet so perfect & skillfull as there was nothing so crosse & perplext, which being by our Artists, brought to him, which he did not at first sight, with ravishing sweetenesse & improvements, play off, to the astonishment of our best Masters: In Summ, he plaid on that single Instrument a full Consort, so as the rest, flung-downe their Instruments, as acknowledging a victory.' Anthony Wood heard him in Oxford two years later and was similarly impressed by his dexterity: 'A. W. did then and there, to his very great astonishment, heare him play on the violin. He then saw him run his fingers to the end of the finger-board of the violin, and run them back insensibly, and all with alacrity and in very good tune, which he nor any in England saw the like before. ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 1.257)' On this occasion John Wilson, the professor of music in Oxford (and described by Wood as the greatest judge of music that ever was) 'did, after his humoursome way, stoop downe to Baltzar's feet, to see whether he had a huff on, that is to say to see whether he was a devill or not, because he acted beyond the parts of man'. 
Inevitably, Baltzar was compared with his English confreres. Evelyn pronounced that 'There were at that time as excellent in that profession as any were thought in Europ: 'Paule Wheeler', 'Mr. Mell' and others, 'til this prodigie appeared & then they vanish'd'. Wood offered a more extended comparison: 'One Davis Mell was hitherto accounted the best in England for the violin but after Baltzar had shewed his parts, he by the generality [was] accounted better yet those that were proficient in music did acknowledge that Mell though he had not the ground or the command of his hand to run up and back the fingerboard yet he played sweeter far. (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood D.19 (4))' Baltzar's surviving compositions are musically interesting and indicate a more advanced technique than Mell's. His 'divisions' (found in John Playford's 'The Division Violin', 1684) require the ability to move about the violin rapidly. Some of his other works reveal more of his virtuosity. Two movements in a C major suite for three violins (Bodl. Oxf., MSS mus. sch. D.241-3) have rapid semiquaver scale passages ascending to 'e'''', requiring the use of the fourth position (which to English observers in the 1650s might well have seemed as close 'to the end of the finger-board' as a violinist might safely go). His D major suite for two violins and continuo bass (Bodl. Oxf., MS mus. sch. D.102) is quite similar in this respect, while his solo violin pieces (Bodl. Oxf., MS mus. sch. F.573) demand facility in chord playing and string crossing. Baltzar wrote a number of pieces with 'scordatura' (non-standard) tunings. 
Baltzar was apparently a heavy drinker, and this (according to Wood) hastened his death on 24 July 1663. He was buried in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 1254


Baly, William (1814-1861), physician, was born and brought up in King's Lynn, Norfolk, the son of a bibliophile local businessman and his energetic intelligent wife. He attended King's Lynn grammar school and was apprenticed to a local general practitioner. In 1831 Baly began his medical studies at University College, London, and in 1832 he began pupillage at St Bartholomew's Hospital. In 1834 he passed the examinations of the Royal College of Surgeons and Apothecaries' Hall and he spent two years abroad studying at Paris, Heidelberg, and Berlin where he graduated MD in 1836. On return that same year he began general practice in London, first in Vigo Street, then in Devonshire Street, and finally in Brook Street. He was also for a short time medical officer to the St Pancras workhouse. 
Between 1837 and 1842 Baly translated the work of the eminent German physiologist Johannes Muller ('Elements of Physiology', 2 vols.) and thus evidenced a considerable intellectual and academic ability which would be amply displayed later in life in his published work on morbidity and disease in prisons ('On mortality in prisons', 'Medico-Chirurgical Transactions', 27, 1845), the physiology of motion, cholera (report commissioned by the Royal College of Physicians, 1854), and on dysentery ('Goulstonian Lectures', 1847). Indeed Baly had a minute knowledge of dysentery and was the first to observe that dysenteric sloughs in the large intestine may be associated with the true ulcers of enteric fever in the small intestine. In 1841 Baly became lecturer on forensic medicine at St Bartholomew's Hospital and in 1846 was admitted a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians and in 1847 a fellow of the Royal Society. In 1854 he became assistant physician at St Bartholomew's and in 1855 lecturer on medicine there. 
On the recommendation of Dr Latham, who had been employed as a consultant at Millbank penitentiary at the time of severe epidemic scurvy, diarrhoea, and dysentery in the 1820s leading to many deaths and the temporary abandonment of the prison, Baly was appointed in 1840 to visit and report on the health of prisoners at Millbank. This institution had been opened on the banks of the Thames in London in 1816 as the showcase prison of Europe for convicts and it held up to 1000 prisoners of both sexes and, as indicated, had subsequently gained a reputation for putting the health of prisoners at risk. In 1841 Baly was appointed permanent medical superintendent there on the resignation of the post holder. At that time the prison served as a depot for holding transportees until removal to Australia, and later became part of the system of home-based penal servitude for convicts which replaced transportation after 1850. 
The governor (and chaplain) at this time was the Revd Daniel Nihill who was dedicated to the spiritual and moral reform of prisoners. However, it was clear to Baly that dysentery was epidemic there in 1842 and he engaged closely with this problem through the next two years, which saw Nihill replaced by the choleric disciplinarian Captain Groves who remained governor throughout the rest of Baly's time there. Baly arranged for more meat to be included in the diet but he was anxious to devise a multi-dimensional analysis of the high levels of dysentery, diarrhoea, and fever. Thus he emphasized that disease was imported through transfer from other prisons, that prisoners were languishing longer than previously in Millbank itself, that dysentery was prevalent in London generally, that prisoners were poorly fed and suffered from cold, that lack of ventilation and foul air led to spread of disease in the prison and its neighbourhood, and that inmates were generally vulnerable to all disease as a result of mental depression engendered by long-term imprisonment. At this time Groves's irascible disposition resulted in a public inquiry into alleged abuse of staff and prisoners at which Baly gave evidence in Groves's defence. 
In 1848 the cholera epidemic reached Millbank leading to high mortality for that year of 5.8 per cent among prisoners rising to 9.3 per cent in 1849 of which half was due to cholera. Baly suggested, again on the theory of miasmic contagion, that the proximity to nearby foul-smelling manufactories and sewers and damp, foetid atmosphere from the very polluted River Thames were the main causes. However, he also began to wonder whether the custom in the prison, and of other nearby institutions having a high incidence of cholera, of drawing drinking water from the Thames was also implicated. Although he was not sure of this he pressed for an artesian well to supply the prison and in 1854 this was dug near Trafalgar Square and a direct supply piped to the prison. Cholera all but disappeared from the institution. Baly, none the less, believed contaminated water to be no more than a subsidiary, 'exciting' cause of the disease. In mid-July 1859 he retired to take the post of physician-extraordinary to Queen Victoria. He acted also as censor of the College of Physicians (1858-9) and sat as a crown representative on the General Medical Council. 
On the evening of 28 January 1861 the 5.10 p.m. train from Waterloo to Portsmouth careered off the track on a bridge 20 yards from Epsom Junction onto the road below. William Baly was the only passenger to be killed although several others were severely injured. He was buried seven days later at Kensal Green cemetery near his home in Queen Anne Street, London. Baly never married and was survived by two sisters. He was a dedicated and humane pioneer of prison medical care who, moreover, contributed significantly to scientific medical knowledge and was greatly respected by the medical profession as a whole. The College of Physicians instituted a gold medal awarded biennially in his name, for distinction in physiology. 


@@@@@


doc= 1255


Bambridge, Thomas (d. 1741), prison warden, became briefly notorious for the regime of extreme cruelty he inflicted upon the prisoners under his charge. The details of his parentage and childhood are unknown. He practised as a London attorney and had chambers at the Inner Temple, though by 1722 he was in serious arrears of rent and was barred from access. It was possibly from this time that John Huggins, warden of the Fleet prison, employed him as one of his deputies. 
The Fleet, like other prisons at the time, was a private enterprise and combined conditions of freedom with brutal restraint. Its inmates were mainly debtors, usually decent but economically unfortunate tradespeople who, as the law allowed, could be retained by their creditors in gaol until debts had been settled. In August 1728 Huggins, who had bought the wardenship from Edward Hyde, third earl of Clarendon, during the reign of Queen Anne, sold his patent to Bambridge and an associate named Dougal Cuthbert for $5000; and by the end of September Bambridge was acting as warden 'in his own right'. He was already a hardened accomplice in Huggins's harsh regime of extorting 'fees' from prisoners in return for petty benefits and privileges outside the prison walls but within its 'rules', while those who could not pay were thrown into pestilent dungeons. The wardenship of the Fleet prison was a guaranteed money-spinner and Bambridge could reckon on yearly profits in excess of $4600. Under his brief rule conditions became even more barbaric until the death of one of the prisoners, Robert Castell, an architect of some note, led to his public exposure as a social villain. 
Castell was a friend of the philanthropically minded MP James Edward Oglethorpe, and had been visited several times by him in prison. Oglethorpe was enraged to hear of Castell's demise on 12 December 1728 in a smallpox-infected 'sponging house' where Bambridge had consigned him for failure to pay fees, so much so that on 25 February 1729 he raised the matter in parliament and a committee was appointed under his chairmanship to inquire into the state of the nation's gaols. The committee gave first priority to the Fleet, and after beginning its inspections on 27 February was dismayed when Bambridge contemptuously disregarded their instruction to remove iron shackles from one of the prisoners, Sir William Rich. Next day Oglethorpe notified the matter to the House of Commons and Bambridge was immediately ordered into custody. Oglethorpe's report to the house on 20 March catalogued the full extent of Bambridge's inhumanity. There was overwhelming evidence of Bambridge's arbitrary and unlawful conduct, and the house readily concurred that he was 'guilty of... the highest crimes and misdemeanours in the execution of his said office' ('JHC', 21.282), whereupon he was committed to Newgate gaol and crown proceedings initiated against him. An act of parliament (2 Geo. II c. 32) divested him of the wardenship and incapacitated him from holding any other office. Oglethorpe's committee of MPs meanwhile continued their investigations of other London gaols amid huge applause from the public and the press for their humanitarian spirit. 
The opposition newspaper 'The Craftsman' published a satirical piece on 10 May elaborating at length upon the parallel between Bambridge and the prime minister, Sir Robert Walpole, as lovers of tyranny and arbitrary power. But when Bambridge was brought to trial at the Old Bailey on 22 May for Castell's murder he was acquitted. He was also acquitted of charges of theft from several Fleet prisoners early in December; and when tried once more at London's Guildhall in January 1730 on an 'appeal for murder' brought by Castell's widow, he again walked free. There was speculation, not least among Oglethorpe's parliamentary colleagues, that Bambridge's skin had been saved through the agency of highly placed friends in the judiciary. Bambridge largely disappears from view after this. In 1733 he began proceedings to regain possession of his chambers at the Inner Temple, and in 1735 commenced a bill of chancery in order to effect this. He appeared in person at the Temple to press his case in May 1741, but his arguments were rejected. His death was reported two months later, though whether it was suicide, as has been suggested, has not been verified. 


@@@@@


doc= 1256


Bamford, Samuel (1788-1872), radical, was born in Middleton, Lancashire, on 28 February 1788, one of five children of Daniel Bamford, a dissenting muslin weaver, part-time teacher, and later master of the Salford workhouse, and his wife, Hannah (1755-1795). After private tuition Bamford was sent to the Manchester grammar school, from which he was withdrawn by his father, who refused to let him study Latin. He learned weaving instead, and was then employed as a warehouseman in Manchester. Here he read Homer's 'Iliad' and Milton's poems, which cultivated a lifelong taste for poetry as shown in his own compositions. 
Bamford had an unsettled early adulthood: in 1802 he joined the local militia, but left to return to warehousing; he then became a farm worker near Prestwich, worked on a collier trading between Shields and London, and returned to warehousing before finally settling down as a weaver. He married Jemima Shepherd (1788-1862) at Manchester Cathedral on 24 June 1810; their daughter, Ann (died 1834), had been baptized in the previous January. 
The onset of Luddite unrest prompted Bamford's political consciousness, already given direction by the writings of Robert Burns and William Cobbett. A gifted organizer, Bamford helped found the Hamden Reform Club, Middleton, in 1816, and represented the club at a reform gathering in London that year. Despite his opposition to the Blanketeers, his reformist activities led him to be charged with treason in March 1817, although he was acquitted. He chronicled this in his 'Account of the Arrest and Imprisonment of Samuel Bamford' (1817). 
On 16 August 1819 Bamford led the Middleton contingent to St Peter's Fields, where they witnessed the Peterloo massacre. Bamford was charged later with treason, but although the evidence showed that his own conduct and that of his contingent were peaceful and orderly, he was sentenced to a year in Lincoln gaol for inciting a riot. 
Upon his release Bamford returned to weaving, but writing took up an increasing amount of his time. In 1819 he published 'The Weaver Boy, or, Miscellaneous Poetry', but to little critical success. However, by 1826 he had discarded weaving to become Manchester correspondent for the 'Morning Herald', although he continued to hold a series of other jobs as well. By 1839 Bamford abandoned full-time journalism in order to devote himself to writing the autobiographical works 'Passages in the Life of a Radical' (1840-44), which included his wife's account of Peterloo, and 'Early Days' (1849), as well as 'Homely Rhymes' (1843), 'Walks in South Lancashire' (1844), and 'Tawk o'seawth Lankeshur' (1850). 
In the meantime, Bamford withdrew from the forefront of radical politics: his last radical tract was a poem on the acquittal of Queen Caroline entitled 'The Queen's Triumph' (1820). Although he continued to support moderate reform, disillusionment -- prompted in particular by the increasingly violent rhetoric of Chartism, but also by the petty antagonisms among the radical leadership and their condescension towards the working classes -- drove him away. Indeed, he served as a special constable in Middleton during the Chartist agitation there, and became a member of the Anti-Corn Law League. 
In 1846 a private subscription was raised to assist Bamford, and in 1851 he moved to London to take up the post of messenger in Somerset House. Here he published his 'Life of Amos Ogden' (1853) and 'The Dialect of South Lancashire' (1854). Unhappy with the city of London and his employment, Bamford returned to Manchester in 1858 and attempted to survive on the proceeds from public readings of his poetry. In 1864 a group of Manchester Liberals became aware of his near destitution and raised an annuity, which supported him until his death at Harpurhey, Lancashire, on 13 April 1872. He was buried in the churchyard of St Leonard's, Middleton. 
Bamford has been viewed as something of an apostate of radicalism owing to the popularity with which his memoirs were greeted by members of the middle classes, and in the light of his strong opposition to Feargus O'Connor's physical-force Chartism. This has led editors of his writings either to marginalize Bamford's intellectual consistency or to emphasize his increasing irrelevance to Victorian working-class agitation. Recently, however, his role has been reappraised. 
Bamford can be seen as the voice of a class-conscious radicalism which was nevertheless compelled to oppose physical-force activism. He believed the 1830s and 1840s had demonstrated the capacity of parliament to reform itself in the face of moral pressure; furthermore, he was haunted by the spectre of the Peterloo massacre and remained convinced that the physical power of the state could always crush radical militancy. It was the confluence of these factors which gave Bamford's later life an appearance of political passivity. However, he remained a strong supporter of continued legal and political reforms, and of a self-disciplined and self-educated working-class movement independent of middle-class machinations. Consequently, his writings continue to be of great use to social historians of nineteenth-century Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 1257


Bampfylde, Sir Coplestone, second baronet (1637/8-1692), politician, was the eldest son of Sir John Bampfield ('c'.1590-1650) of Poltimore, Devon, and Gertrude (1611-1658), daughter and coheir of Amyas Coplestone of Warleigh House, Tamerton Foliot, Devon. Succeeding at the age of twelve to 'a fair estate, and a very plenteous fortune', he was entered at Corpus Christi College, Oxford. He changed the spelling of his surname, possibly to indicate rejection of the puritan and parliamentary sympathies of the older generation. At the university he distinguished himself by his 'very generous and splendid way of living' (Prince, 122, 125). His first wife, Margaret, daughter of John Bulkeley of Nether Burgate, Hampshire, whom he married in 1655, also came of presbyterian gentry stock, but Bampfylde was 'actuated even then with Principles of Loyalty to his Sovereign, though in Exile, and the Church, then under a Cloud' (ibid., 122). Nevertheless it was probably his uncle, Thomas Bampfield, who secured Bampfylde's election for Tiverton to Richard Cromwell's parliament. Bampfylde played a leading part in promoting the Restoration in Devon: he presented to George Monck the petition for a free parliament and raised a troop of 120 gentlemen to disarm 'disaffected and seditious persons' (ibid., 123-4). As sheriff it fell to him to conduct the county election in 1661 at the head of his customary retinue, and his speech at the hustings exhorting the electorate to choose 'only those who were, and always had been, loyal subjects and good Christians' found its way into the government-controlled London press ('Mercurius Publicus', 25 April 1661). 
Bampfylde was returned for Devon at a contested by-election in 1671 when Sir Thomas Clifford, on behalf of the cabal, failed to secure the victory of a candidate more favourable to the dissenters. 'Much addicted to tippling' according to a hostile account, he was 'presented to the King by his pretended wife, Bett Roberts, in Pall Mall' ('English Historical Documents', 8.239). In 1674 Bampfylde contracted a second marriage with Jane ('c'.1654), daughter of Sir Courtenay Pole of Shute, Devon, and a pillar of the new court party as reconstructed by Sir Thomas Osborne on firmly Anglican principles, but the Popish Plot and fears of French influence at court brought this ministry down, and Bampfylde did not sit in any of the three Exclusion parliaments that followed. 
Bampfylde again represented Devon in James II's parliament. On grounds of declining health he handed over his militia command to his son Hugh at the time of the Monmouth rebellion. He gave the standard negative answers on the proposed repeal of the laws against Roman Catholicism and was dismissed from local office. In 1688 he sent his son to wait on William of Orange at Exeter 'as one come to preserve our laws and religion and maintain the established Government', but he could not accept the transfer of the crown to William and Mary, and 'so far declared against these Proceedings as to refuse Payment of any New made Rates and Taxes'. His son was killed in a riding accident in 1691 and it was during a visit to his widowed daughter-in-law and his infant grandson at Warleigh that Bampfylde died of gout on 9 February 1692, in his fifty-fifth year. 'On his death-bed he charged his family that they should always continue faithful to the Religion of the established Church of England and be sure to pay their Allegiance to the right heirs of the Crown' (Prince, 124). He died intestate, having lived for many years above his income, and was buried at Poltimore without any monument. 
John Prince described Bampfylde as 'the goodliest person that ever mine Eyes beheld, exceeding by some inches six Foot in heigth... Of a manly and yet a charming Countenance, a ready wit and a good Judgment, and was of a truly large and generous Soul. (Prince, 125)' He cut no great figure in any of his three parliaments and shone only on the provincial stage, where his career illustrates the problems of conflicting loyalties to church and to crown. His three children, all with his first wife, predeceased him, but his grandson, the third baronet, sat in the Hanoverian parliament as a Jacobite. 


@@@@@


doc= 1258


Bampfield, Francis (1614-1684), Seventh Day Baptist minister, was probably born at Poltimore, Devon, the third son of John Bampfield (died 'c'.1650), who served as sheriff of Devon, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Drake of Buckland Monachorum, Devon; Thomas's brother was Sir Francis Drake. Intended for the ministry by his pious parents, Bampfield received his early education in godly families. In 1631, aged sixteen, he entered Wadham College, Oxford, as a commoner, matriculating on 16 May 1634 and graduating BA on 4 July 1635 and MA on 7 July 1638. Reflecting on his Oxford years in 1681 he wrote of 'that void space of his time' in which he had made little advancement in 'Scripture-Learning' (Bampfield, 2, 36) and mocked puritan students. 
Bampfield was ordained deacon by Bishop Joseph Hall of Exeter, and priest by Bishop Robert Skinner of Bristol. Appointed rector of Rampisham, Dorset, on 25 July 1639, he used the income of nearly $100 p.a. to provide hospitality, assist the poor, and purchase bibles. He was appointed a prebendary of Exeter Cathedral on 15 May 1641. When civil war erupted Bampfield supported the royalists and consulted Dr Gilbert Ironside about the legality of paying taxes levied by parliament. An opponent of the solemn league and covenant, he drafted a statement explaining his position. In May 1645 he took a horse and weapons to royalist troops at Berry Pomeroy, Devon. As late as 1674, according to Richard Baxter, Bampfield was still speaking against the parliamentary cause. He used the 'Book of Common Prayer' longer than any minister in Dorset, stopping only when compelled by troops. Bampfield had had a change of heart by January 1647, for on 19 January his father, with the Dorset committee's approval, presented him with the rectory of Wraxall. His parting gift to the parishioners at Rampisham was a new parsonage worth approximately $300. In his new living he supported himself on an annuity of $80 p.a. provided by his father, much of which Bampfield used for charitable purposes. When his congregation resisted his efforts to impose greater discipline he began to preach at Sherborne about 1653, following William Lyford's death. He was formally admitted as its vicar on 28 April 1657 in a service led by an Independent and a presbyterian minister and attended by 2000 people. Bampfield had the triers' approval, though he neither sought it nor appeared before them. Nor did he take the engagement, contrary to Edmund Calamy's claim. Indeed, for preaching against the engagement he was briefly imprisoned; he may have been the Bamfield released on a $1000 recognizance on 19 September 1659. Bampfield's assistant at Sherborne was Humphrey Philips, formerly chaplain to Bampfield's father and now a fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford. 
At the Restoration Bampfield regained his prebend, but he declined an invitation to become rector of Trinity, Dorchester. On 1 November 1660 Baxter recommended him for a bishopric to Chancellor Hyde, but nothing came of this. About 1661, when Bampfield became very ill, he sought the anointing of the sick mentioned in 'James' 5. After neighbouring clergy refused this ministration he anointed himself, claiming the authority of a secret voice, and subsequently recovered. About this time he voluntarily paid the exchequer $30 to compensate for augmentations from the royal revenue Philips had received as his assistant. The Sunday before St Bartholomew's day 1662 Bampfield preached a farewell sermon at Sherborne, from which he and Philips were shortly ejected; Bampfield also lost his prebend. The 'Book of Common Prayer' to which he had once been so faithful was, he now opined, an 'unclean Constitution of humanely invented Worship' (Bampfield, 4). While conducting a service for a small group of neighbours in his home on 19 September 1662 Bampfield, with Philips and approximately twenty-five others, was arrested and detained for five days. Summoned before the deputy lieutenants Bampfield, insisting his activities were not seditious, was released after providing sureties and agreeing to appear at the next assizes. With Philips, Bampfield went to his brother Thomas Bampfield's house at Dunkerton, near Bath, where they held more conventicles. For illegally preaching at Shaftesbury, Dorset, Bampfield and John Westley were arrested on 23 July 1663 and imprisoned in Dorchester. The two were fined 40 marks apiece, but this was reduced by half, with a provision to compound for 1 's'. per pound. Although Westley was released after three months Bampfield remained in prison with other dissenting clergy -- Peter Ince, Thomas Hallet, Josiah Banger, and John Sacheverell. About a year later Bampfield wrote to Charles II, denouncing sedition, promising not to oppose lawful authority, and affirming his willingness to suffer rather than cease preaching. After he had been incarcerated a year and a half, Bampfield and his associates were offered freedom if they provided security for good behaviour, but Bampfield refused because he deemed this tantamount to acknowledging guilt. 
During the early part of his imprisonment Bampfield preached every day and twice on Sunday until the gaoler received orders to curtail him. In prison Bampfield gathered a congregation to whom he preached as much as sixteen times a week near the end of his confinement. About 1664, after concluding that all ministers in the 'Bible' had known the scriptural languages, he resolved to acquire greater facility 'in the inner knowledg of the Hebrew Significations by the Holy Spirits Teachings' (Bampfield, 8). About a year later Bampfield concluded that both scripture and nature prescribed Saturday as the sabbath for Christians as well as Jews. When two ministers failed to dissuade him he began holding services on Saturday. Bampfield's conviction that Saturday was the proper day for Christians to worship and rest was intimately related to the millenarian outlook of the Seventh Day Baptists. The papal Antichrist, the little horn of the apocalyptic prophecy in 'Daniel' 8, was adjudged responsible for denigrating the fourth commandment by altering the sabbath and urging respect for unscriptural holy days. Approximately a year later Bampfield had a vision in which he was seemingly transported to heaven, where he 'had a clear view of Christ in his Glorified Humanity' (Bampfield, 4). He recorded other visions, one of which he deemed the baptism of the Holy Spirit. Such experiences, including the marriage of his body, soul, and spirit to the Trinity, were essentially mystical. Bampfield's sabbatarian views elicited refutations from Baxter in 'The Divine Appointment of the Lord's Day' (1671), and William Benn in 'The Judgment of Mr. Francis Bampfield' (1672), which includes Bampfield's account of his position. 
The earl of Arlington issued a warrant for Bampfield's release on 17 May 1672, and on 29 June he received a general licence to preach under the declaration of indulgence. During his imprisonment he had embraced the doctrine of believers' baptism, and he and a companion now went to Salisbury, where Bampfield was baptized in the Avon 'as by the Hand of Christ himself' (Bampfield, 17). While in gaol Bampfield had met Damaris Town (died 1694), who provided relief to prisoners; her father, a doctor of divinity in Limerick, had lost his estate in the Irish rising. For a time she accompanied Bampfield on his preaching itineraries, and he finally married her on 23 September 1673 to avoid scandal. Because she had no dowry Bampfield was criticized for marrying beneath his station, but he retorted that he preferred grace to earthly riches. Later the same year he went to London, settling in Bethnal Green. Before founding his own church in 1674 he preached to Seventh Day Baptist congregations in Mill Yard and Bell Lane. In 1675 he preached to churches in Salisbury (where he was imprisoned for eighteen weeks), Hampshire, Dorset, Gloucestershire, and Berkshire. From Salisbury gaol he defended himself in 'The Open Confessor and the Free Prisoner' (1675). After schism rent his congregation he organized the remnants into a new church on 5 March 1676. The following year he published two substantive volumes, the first of which, 'All in One', averred that proper teaching of the 'Bible' was the way to perfect the arts and sciences. On this foundation he proposed erecting a new educational system, with lecturers in every county, teaching geared to students' abilities, instruction in Hebrew for all students, an end to traditional philosophy and astrology, and the study of scriptural geography. The second work, 'Septima dies', was an exposition of the works of creation, including a defence of the seventh day sabbath and an explication of covenant theology. During the Popish Plot scare Bampfield forwarded a prophecy from Elizabeth Hooker to the king, urging him to establish Christ's laws. 
In 1681 Bampfield moved his expanding congregation to Pinners' Hall, Broad Street, a decision made by lot. After the move increasing numbers of young men and women joined the congregation. Bampfield founded several (unidentified) congregations in several counties, though his attempt to establish an association of sabbatarian churches in England, Wales, the Netherlands, and New England failed for unexplained reasons. In part Bampfield had wanted an association to train ministers, provide better education for children, relieve the indigent, and convert Jews. He offered a blueprint for his proposed educational reforms in 'The House of Wisdom' (1681), in which he repeated his call for instruction in Hebrew and a curriculum shaped by scripture. The academy he envisioned in this work would provide instruction in a variety of subjects, accommodating students' interests and abilities. Pupils could study for the magistracy or ministry as well as for other occupations. Most of the instruction was utilitarian in nature, dealing with such subjects as husbandry, seamanship, the military arts, and artisanry. Due attention was accorded to geometry, medicine, and astronomy, but Bampfield insisted that Christ must be the principal subject of the curriculum, that the 'Bible' must be the only authoritative book, and that all subjects should be studied in biblical words and phrases wherever possible. If teachers spoke Hebrew, Bampfield thought deaf people could learn to speak by observing the movements of the instructors' mouths and tongues. Such attention to education set Bampfield apart from most Seventh Day Baptists. In 1681 he also published his autobiography, 'A Name, an After-one', in which he compared himself to St Paul. 
Bampfield again found himself in legal trouble when, on 13 February 1683, he was arrested while preaching at Pinners' Hall. He and some six of his congregation were taken before the lord mayor, who fined several of them $10 before releasing them. A week later Bampfield was rearrested and incarcerated in Newgate prison, where he remained after refusing to take the oath of allegiance. His refusal stemmed from principled opposition to oaths, not hostility to the regime in general; although he knew something about the Monmouth cabal's consideration of a proposed insurrection through his contact with the printer Francis Smith, he did not endorse such action. When he again rejected the oath at his trial in the Old Bailey on 17 March the judge directed the jury to find him guilty, and on 28 March his chattels were forfeited and he was sentenced to imprisonment for life or during the king's pleasure. Bampfield published an account of these events in 'The Lords Free Prisoner' (1683). Before Lord Chief Justice Edmund Saunders and three other judges he again rejected the oath on 18 April. He remained steadfast in further appearances at the Old Bailey on 12 and 13 October, and twice in January 1684, which he recounted in 'A Just Appeal from Lower Courts' (1683) and 'A Continuation of a Former Just Appeal' (1684). While in prison he also wrote 'The Holy Scripture' (1684), in which he reiterated his call for schools to educate pupils in Hebrew and biblically based arts and sciences. He was also in communication with radical printers; in May 1683 he received a letter from Francis Smith which he was asked to forward to Mr Culliford, a printer with ties to the plotter Robert Ferguson. Bampfield passed the letter to Jane Curtis who, with her husband, Langley, printed dissident material. Aged seventy, Bampfield died in Newgate prison on 16 February 1684 and was buried three days later in the Baptists' graveyard in Glasshouse Yard, near Aldersgate Street. His wife survived him. Many nonconformists of varying persuasions attended his funeral, and several elegies, including 'Counsel for the Living' and 'An Elegy on that Special Messenger' (both 1684) commemorated his life. His religious pilgrimage had been one of the most extensive in seventeenth-century England, taking him from the conformists to the Seventh Day Baptists. 
Francis Bampfield's brother Thomas (died 1693), recorder of Exeter and MP (1654-60; speaker in 1659), had embraced Seventh Day Baptist tenets by 1667, defending them in 'A Reply to Doctor Wallis' (1693); he also wrote 'An Enquiry whether the Lord Jesus Christ Made the World' (1692). The oldest brother, Sir John Bampfield ('c'.1610-1650), served in the Long Parliament and the parliamentary army. 


@@@@@


doc= 1259


Bampfield, Joseph (1622-1685), army officer and spy, was probably born in Devon, one of a family long established in the west country, but his parentage and early life are obscure. There is no validity for the earl of Clarendon's later statement that he was an Irishman, although he may have been educated at Trinity College, Dublin, in the 1630s. He began his military career aged seventeen in 1639 as an ensign in Lord Astley's regiment in the expedition against the Scots known as the first bishops' war. In the second bishops' war he was a lieutenant and then captain in the regiment of Colonel Wentworth. By September 1642 he was a major in the royalist army commanded by the marquess of Hertford and fought at Yeovil on 7 September 1642, when he was taken prisoner. He had escaped by December 1642 and, still only nineteen, was commissioned a colonel by Charles I by 16 January 1643. About this time, certainly by 1 February 1643, he married Catherine (1622-1657), daughter of John Sydenham of Brympton, Somerset. The couple were estranged by 1645-1646 and had no children. Bampfield was involved in the royalist occupation of Malmesbury in April 1643 and played a prominent role in the sieges of Exeter and Dartmouth. Late in October 1643 he was part of Lord Hopton's army and with Sir Edward Ford was given the task of recapturing Arundel Castle in December. Having been given command of the castle Bampfield found himself besieged by Sir William Waller's forces and surrendered on 6 January 1644, attracting some criticism from the royalist side. He was again taken prisoner and remained in the Tower for some five months, until released on parole, when he immediately absconded to Oxford and rejoined the king's forces in the west. In autumn 1644 he was in action at Lyme and Taunton, but after a disorderly retreat from Chard in December 1644 he was arrested and then dismissed from service by Hopton. 
In the course of the following year, however, Bampfield gained the confidence of Charles I, who employed him as a courier, occasional adviser, and intelligence agent from late 1645 until access to the king's person was halted in 1648. He appears to have followed a pro-presbyterian line in his advice to the monarch. His greatest adventure of the latter years of the second civil war was contriving the escape of James, duke of York, from parliamentary hands in April 1648. Overcoming James's own scruples Bampfield engineered an escape from London on 20-21 April with the prince disguised in woman's clothes. The pair were assisted in the venture by Anne Murray (1623-1699) and landed at Zeeland on 22 April 1648. Bampfield had met Anne ['see 'Halkett, Anne] in late 1647 or early 1648 and they had a lengthy affair from 1648 to 1653, although the details of their relationship remain obscure. In 1648 Bampfield was advised that his wife, whom he had not seen for some time, was dead and it is possible that he and Anne were privately married, bigamously, in Bampfield's case, in the Netherlands in winter 1648-9. Their relationship came to an end in March 1653 when Anne finally accepted that Bampfield's wife was still living. 
Despite Bampfield's success in rescuing James his dabbling in court politics for the presbyterian interest damaged his standing at the exiled court and his attempts to make use of the duke of York's authority to improvise a naval expedition in summer 1648 to save the king were a failure. His subsequent comments that the king's children should have taken a lead in rescuing their father permanently lost him the friendship of the prince of Wales and he returned to England. 
In the months following the death of Charles I Bampfield was in hiding in London, often in the company of Anne Murray. Arrested in December 1649 he was imprisoned in the Gatehouse but was able to escape with the help of friends that same month and fled to the Netherlands. On the boat over he was recognized by Sir Henry Newton, Anne's brother-in-law, and challenged to a duel for the offence he had caused the family by maintaining this liaison. Bampfield wounded Newton and was once more forced into hiding. Although Charles II refused to see him Bampfield followed him to Scotland in summer 1650 where he attempted to redeem himself by being very active in royal affairs, but 'was frequently agitated betwixt hope and despair' ('Bampfield's Apology', 81). 
Charles II received Bampfield at Paris in 1653, but the king's continued dislike of him was obvious and consequently, in spring or summer 1654, he entered the service of John Thurloe as an agent of the protectorate. He provided intelligence about the exiled court, conspiracies, and foreign affairs in the late 1650s, frequently returning to England, in the early years of his employment, to receive instruction from Thurloe. An attempt to enter military service again by raising a regiment of English and Scots troops to fight in the French army failed when Oliver Cromwell became suspicious of his motives, imprisoned him in March 1657 and then exiled him from Britain. He remained abroad until Cromwell's death in 1658, continuing to write intelligence reports for Thurloe, although without much encouragement. Shortly before the restoration of the king he returned to England, hoping that he would be included in the general pardon given out at Breda, but Charles II remained hostile and by May 1660 Bampfield was in the Tower. 
Released on 30 July 1661 Bampfield left England for the Netherlands. He settled in Middelburg in Zeeland from 1661 to spring 1665, attending the English reformed church there and claiming he had been exiled because of his nonconformity. In October 1662 he was encouraged to act as an agent for the government of Charles II by Sir Allen Apsley and Sir Henry Bennet and for nearly two years he spied on the dissenters and other republican rebels located in the United Provinces and also supplied foreign intelligence to the British. His correspondence at this time was littered with pleas for money and pitiful expressions over his miserable condition, but his hopes for a pardon from Charles II and a return to good fortune remained unfulfilled. In spring 1664 he attracted the attention of John de Witt, the grand pensionary. Although warned that Bampfield had a reputation as a notorious rogue de Witt was intrigued by his 'very through knowledge of the Court of England and of our present disturbances' ('Bampfield's Apology', 192) and recruited him in March 1665 as an agent for the Dutch government. Bampfield identified English spies in the Netherlands, reported on political opposition, and proffered advice, whether wanted or not, to de Witt on the current political situation in Europe. He became entangled in numerous conspiratorial schemes and had convoluted associations with William Scot, son of Thomas Scot the regicide, and Aphra Behn in 1665-6. 
Bampfield volunteered for naval service in 1665 and by mid-October he had been given a major's commission to organize a troop of cavalry. The English government took revenge by attainting Bampfield for high treason in 1665, effectively preventing him from ever returning to England. For the remainder of the 1660s de Witt employed Bampfield in political negotiations relating to the role of the prince of Orange and as a military adviser. Despite his apparent value, de Witt kept Bampfield short of money and he had to wait until 19 March 1671 to become a colonel. With the approach of war he was sent to Cologne to recruit troops, returning to the Netherlands in February 1672 while his men were stationed in garrisons along the Rhine valley. In spring 1672 Bampfield was attached to the army assembling at Ijssel under the prince of Orange. During a French offensive at Zwolle, Bampfield apparently tried to rouse the local populace, but the town surrendered and Bampfield was blamed. His career in the Dutch army was finally ruined when his post at Ameide, south of the River Lek, was overrun in a French attack on 27 November. Rumours that he had betrayed the post to the French did not help his cause, nor did his former association with de Witt. Although Bampfield was exonerated by two courts martial and restored to his rank, William of Orange intervened and he was dismissed from the army. 
Bampfield retired to Bergum in Friesland in 1674. At the end of September 1679 he moved to Leeuwarden. When in 1682 the earl of Argyll settled in Friesland, having fled England after involvement in treasonable activities, Bampfield once more became a potential source of intelligence to the English government and a somewhat desultory correspondence was carried on with the secretary of state, Sir Leoline Jenkins, from 1682 to 1684. In 1685 Bampfield published a pamphlet justifying his career, notably leaving out his activities as a spy. In it he noted that he had for 'a long time considered death... as the only end of my calamities which I could reasonably hope for and my most sure azile' ('Bampfield's Apology', 37). He died in Leeuwarden in 1685 and was buried in the Netherlands. 


@@@@@


doc= 1260


Bampfield, Thomas (1622/3-1693), speaker of the House of Commons, was a younger son of John Bampfield (died 'c'.1650) and Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Drake. The Bampfields were one of Devon's leading gentry families, seated at Poltimore near Exeter. After attending Exeter College, Oxford, where he matriculated, aged seventeen, on 15 May 1640 but did not take a degree, Bampfield was admitted to the Middle Temple on 28 October 1642, and was called to the bar in 1649. Back in his native county he was made deputy recorder of Exeter in 1652, and succeeded Edmund Prideaux as recorder in 1654. He was first included in the Devon commission of the peace in 1653, and had been admitted to the quorum by 1656. He was a commissioner for ejecting scandalous ministers in the county from 1654, and this appointment accorded well with his presbyterian leanings. He provided $100 for the building of a wall in 1657 in Exeter Cathedral that separated presbyterian and Independent congregations, and as a county magistrate was an advocate of the so-called reformation of manners. 
Elected to the first protectorate parliament on 12 July 1654 for Exeter, Bampfield took little or no part in this assembly, and may have been initially reluctant to take the Recognition, imposed by the government on MPs as a test of loyalty to the new constitution. He and another MP went to discuss their scruples with Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell before concluding that to accept the Recognition was justifiable. He was returned again to the second Cromwellian parliament, and this time played a major role both in committees and in debate on the floor of the house. He reported from the large and emotionally charged committee that examined James Nayler, the notorious Quaker, and urged repeatedly that the committee's verdict that Nayler was a blasphemer be accepted and acted upon by the house: 'If you set this aside, and do nothing in it, I shall say it is no more Nayler's sin, but set it upon your doors' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 1.33). On other matters before this parliament Bampfield demonstrated a country suspicion of the government, and was quick to detect any threat to the legislature by the executive. 
In the parliament of Richard Cromwell, Bampfield was first appointed speaker on a temporary basis on 16 March 1659, and then on 15 April was elected speaker in his own right until the dissolution a week later. His severity in the chair was noted, as was his capacity to keep control of proceedings. It was probably his advocacy of parliament as a check on the government that recommended him as speaker, both to republicans as well as to Cromwellians. Later that year Bampfield presented to the revived Commonwealth government from the Devon gentry a petition calling for a free parliament, in effect recommending some kind of restored monarchy. 
In 1660 Bampfield was elected to the Convention to represent both Exeter and Tiverton, but chose to sit for the former. He was a staunch supporter of a presbyterian church settlement, seeking to confirm ministers in their livings. He resisted the return of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' of the Church of England. He helped draft a petition to the king in favour of clemency for John Lambert and Sir Henry Vane, and moved that 'the King should be desired to marry and that it should be to a Protestant' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 4.119). Although he lost his recordership of Exeter while the Convention was still in being he did not respond by modifying his advocacy of presbyterian inspired solutions to issues of public drunkenness and profanity. He saw new legislation on the excise and the militia as deliberate revivals of the authoritarian government style of the mid-1650s, and opposed the revival of the dukedom of Norfolk as 'an act of grace to those of the popish religion' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 4.155). 
The corporation of Exeter retained respect for Bampfield even after his loss of office, voting him a small reward for his efforts in parliament on their behalf, but he probably read the omens correctly in not standing again for parliament. He kept a place on the Devon bench until 1665, but thereafter only re-entered public life briefly. He was listed as a supporter of James II in the failed election of 1688, and made an appearance on the hustings at the Exeter by-election of June 1689, but did not press his own candidature. From 1687 he was the leading member of an Exeter committee to administer a fund for presbyterian ministers. He was buried at St Stephen's, Exeter, on 8 October 1693. 


@@@@@


doc= 1261


Bampfylde, Coplestone Warre (1720-1791), landscape painter and garden designer, was born on 28 February 1720 at Hestercombe House, Kingston, Taunton, great-grandson of Sir Coplestone Bampfylde (1637/8-1692) and the eldest of nine children of John Bampfylde (1691-1750), MP for Exeter and Devon, and his second wife, Margaret (1694-1758), only daughter of Sir Francis Warre of Hestercombe and his second wife, Margaret, 'nee' Harbin. Bampfylde was educated at Kingston and then Tiverton before attending Winchester College from 1731 to 1738. He matriculated at St John's College, Oxford, on 27 February 1738 but did not graduate. Bampfylde's earliest recorded painting is a life-size equestrian self-portrait dated 1746 (exh. Lane Fine Art, London, 1995) jointly painted with Richard Phelps of Porlock, a student of Thomas Hudson. An etching by Bampfylde of a pollarded tree is dated 1749 (exh. Christies, 1995) and his earliest dated watercolour is a view of Exeter (1750; Royal Albert Museum, Exeter). 
Bampfylde's early pictures show the influence of George Lambert, whose paintings of Plymouth were redrawn by Bampfylde, engraved by James Mason and P. C. Canot, and published by Lambert in 1755 as 'Views at Mount Edgcumbe'. In the same year he married Mary Knight (died 1806) of Wolverley, near Kidderminster, by special licence; there were no children. The poet William Shenstone wrote in 1758 to the writer Richard Graves (1715-1804), 'Perhaps you may have heard of Mr Bampfylde who is very much at Bath, is there now with his lady, or has left the place but lately and whose fortune, person, figure and accomplishments can hardly leave him unnoticed in any place where he resides' ('Letters', 481-2). In 1776 Bampfylde provided humorous illustrations for 'An Election Ball' by his friend Christopher Anstey, author of 'The New Bath Guide'. In 1776 Anstey published an 'Epistola poetica familiaris' addressed by him to Bampfylde, in which were included Bampfylde's 'An Election Ball' illustrations engraved by W. Hibbart. For various reasons the full set of illustrations was not finally printed in 'An Election Ball' until the fifth edition in 1787. Bampfylde drew the frontispieces for 'Columella, or, The Distressed Anchoret' (1779), which features the cascade at Hestercombe, and 'Eugenius, or, Anecdotes of the Golden Vale' (1785), both by Richard Graves. He also designed the elaborate title cartouche for 'Map of Somerset' by William Day and Charles Harcourt Masters (1782). In 1791, the year of his death, Bampfylde provided an illustration of Hestercombe for John Collinson's 'History and Antiquities of Somerset' (1791), a view of Taunton Castle for Joshua Toulmin's 'History of the Town of Taunton' (1791), and an aquatint of Oakhampton Castle, Devon, which was published by W. Hibbart. 
Bampfylde made several painting tours including Hampshire (1765, 1770), the Peak District (1766, 1780), and the Lake District (1780). He exhibited at the Society of Artists in 1763 and 1766, the Free Society in 1783, and the Royal Academy, as an honorary exhibitor in 1771, 1772, 1774, and 1783. Many of Bampfylde's oil paintings are of idealized classical landscapes influenced by Salvator Rosa, whereas his watercolours encompass Italianate capriccios to extremely fine topographical views. Two watercolours of Stourhead (Stourhead House, Wiltshire) were engraved by F. Vivares (1777) and his painting 'The Storm' (exh. RA, 1774) was engraved by P. P. Benazech and published in 1779. 
Bampfylde had inherited Hestercombe in 1750 and started what was to become his most important achievement -- the creation of a magnificent landscape garden. Much had already been achieved by 1761 when it was first recorded by his brother-in-law Edward Knight. Bampfylde continued adding to the garden throughout his life and in 1786 erected an urn to the sacred memory of his lifelong friends Henry Hoare of Stourhead and his neighbour Sir Charles Kemes Tynte of Halswell, both of whom also created landscape gardens. Water features are an important component of the design of Bampfylde's garden at Hestercombe, where he constructed the great cascade after 1762. He also designed the cascade at Stourhead (1765) and a penstock sluice for George III at Virginia Water (1788). A competent amateur architect, he submitted plans for the new Wardour Castle, Wiltshire, in 1770, and in 1772 he designed the Market House, Taunton, which still dominates the centre of the town. Bampfylde was commissioned in 1758 as major in the 1st Somerset militia, and became its colonel on 27 August 1767. He was still active in the militia as late as 1779 when he was recalled with his men to Plymouth as the French and Spanish fleets lay off the Lizard. Bampfylde died on 23 August 1791 at four o'clock in the morning, and was buried on 30 August at St Mary's Church, Kingston, in the Warre family tomb, where he was commemorated by a fine wall plaque erected by his nephew and heir, John Tyndale Warre. 


@@@@@


doc= 1262


Bampfylde, John Codrington Warwick (1754-1796), poet, was born on 27 August 1754, the second son of Sir Richard Warwick Bampfylde, baronet (1722-1776), of Poltimore, Devon, and his wife, Jane Codrington (died 1789). He was educated at Trinity Hall, Cambridge (where he matriculated on 25 October 1771), and published 'Sixteen Sonnets' in 1778. William Jackson, a well-known musician of Exeter, told Southey that Bampfylde lived as a youth in a farmhouse at Chudleigh and often used to walk to Exeter in order to read Jackson his poems. 
Bampfylde went to London where he began to lead a dissipated life. His mother, Lady Bampfylde, sat for Sir Joshua Reynolds in 1777 and he was painted in a double portrait with George Huddesford entitled 'Portraits of Two Gentlemen' in 1778-9. In his 'Popular Handbook to the National Gallery', Cook compares the two men, saying of Bampfylde that he 'has more inspiration in his face, and a certain wild look which was not belied by his after-life' (Cook, 2.247). Bampfylde proposed to Miss Palmer, afterwards marchioness of Thomond, niece of Sir Joshua Reynolds, to whom the sonnets are dedicated. Sir Joshua, however, disapproved of the match, and refused to allow the poet in his house. As a consequence Bampfylde broke Sir Joshua's windows and was sent to Newgate. On coming to town soon after, Jackson found that the poet's mother had got him out of prison, but that he was almost destitute. Jackson rescued him, before returning to Exeter, but he soon had to be confined in a private madhouse. In 1796, after twenty years' confinement, he recovered his senses only to die of consumption in that year. 
Bampfylde's poems consist of the sonnets mentioned above, with two short poems later published by Southey and one by Park. In 'Specimens of Later English Poets' Southey called them 'some of the most original in our language' (p. 434). 


@@@@@


doc= 1263


Bampton, John (fl. 1317-1341), Carmelite friar and theologian, according to John Bale (quoting an untraced Leland reference) came from the west country. He may possibly be identified with the Carmelite of the same name who was ordained deacon at Winchester on 17 December 1317, and who was listed as from the Gloucester convent when he was licensed to hear confessions in the Worcester diocese in 1328. Bampton is known to have studied at Cambridge, where on 9 September 1337 he was licensed to hear confessions in the diocese of Ely. He was recorded as 'magister' and a member of the Cambridge community on 21 December 1341, when he received a licence to hear confessions for a further two years. He studied and lectured on the works of Aristotle, and he wrote one philosophical work, 'De veritate propositionum', which consisted of eight 'quaestiones', and a possible second work, 'Lecturas scholasticas in theologia'. Both are now lost. 


@@@@@


doc= 1264


Bampton, John (1689-1751), benefactor, was born in 1689; details of his place of birth, parentage, and upbringing are unknown. He was educated at Trinity College, Oxford, where he graduated BA (1709) and MA (1712). Having taken orders he was installed as a prebendary at Salisbury Cathedral on 7 May 1718, and on 5 May 1726 succeeded Thomas Wyatt to become canon of Salisbury, where he remained until his death on 2 June 1751. In his will Bampton bequeathed land to the University of Oxford for the endowment of eight annual lecture sermons to be delivered at St Mary's, Oxford, 'to confirm and establish the Christian Faith and to confute all schismatics and heretics'. The lectures were intended to instil undergraduates with a conservative Anglicanism by confirming the orthodoxy of the Trinity, defending the Christian faith as expressed in the apostles' and Nicene creeds, and, in the Oxford tradition, through emphasizing the authority of the scriptures and the church's early fathers. Lecturers were to be in holy orders and hold an MA from either Oxford or Cambridge; they were chosen by college heads only 'and by no others, in the room adjoining to the Printing-House'. The first Bampton lectures were given in 1780 by James Bandinal who spoke in defence of Christian revelation. True to Bampton's wishes, early lecturers spoke out against innovations in religious thought so that, as R. Greaves has put it, 'from these lectures alone it would be possible to construct a list of those dangers to the minds and souls of the junior members... chiefly enthusiasm and scepticism' ('Hist. U. Oxf.' 5: '18th-cent. Oxf.', 5.419-20). The Bampton lectures remain an ongoing part of theological instruction at the university though, since 1895, the series has been given biennially. In 1952 a second series of sermons, the Sarum lectures, was founded from the Bampton fund for non-Anglican theologians, and in 1968 a Bampton fellowship was established to support research on subjects considered in the lectures. 


@@@@@


doc= 1265


Banastre, Alard (fl. 1166-1175), administrator, was a landowner in Berkshire, probably at Finchampstead. William Achard's return to Henry II's inquest of 1166 into feudal subtenancies declared that Alard and John Banastre had been enfeoffed on his demesne by William's father in Henry I's time; Finchampstead appears in Henry I's grant to Robert Achard, and in 1220 an Alan and a Roger Banastre are recorded there. In 1166/7 Alard Banastre accounted in Berkshire for 40's'. from the pleas of Alan de Neville, probably for a forest offence; the debt had been paid off by Michaelmas 1168. If this Alard was identical with the man enfeoffed under Henry I, he was of age in 1135. At Easter 1170 Alard Banastre became sheriff of Oxfordshire, and remained in office until Michaelmas 1175, that is, throughout the rebellion of 1173-4. In 1173 or 1174 he and the constable of Oxford assessed a tallage on the borough of Oxford. But in 1176 he was one of many who were amerced for forest offences as royal authority was reaffirmed following the rebellion; his amercement was the fairly substantial one of 40 marks, and may indicate why he had been removed from office in the previous year. Some offenders subsequently received pardons, but Banastre had paid in full by Michaelmas 1177, when 1 mark was also accounted for from him, 'for a false summons'. 
Alard Banastre was the second lay witness to a deed of Jocelin de Bohun, bishop of Salisbury (died 1184), concerning land in Sonning, Berkshire, between 'c'.1165 and 1173. He is also recorded as sheriff. He was the first witness to an agreement made before him in Oxfordshire county court between Godfrey, abbot of Eynsham, and Walkelin Harang; and among the records of an agreement made before Alard and the county of Oxfordshire between Abbot Henry and the monks of Winchcombe, and William Taillard and his heirs, there occurs a deed of Alard Banastre himself, confirming and testifying to the agreement made, and issued with the counsel and consent of the county. It is not known when he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 1266


Banastre, Gilbert (d. 1487), composer and poet, is of obscure origins, but was possibly related to (or even the son of) Henry Banaster (died 1456) of Southwark, a yeoman of Henry VI's household. His mother, Alice, was still alive when he made his will. A birth date not later than 'c'.1425 is suggested by the rhyming translation by 'Gilbert Banester' -- the earliest surviving in English -- of Boccaccio's 'Tale of Guiscardo and Ghismonda', which is dated before 1450 (BL, Add. MS 12524). 
Banastre was working in or near London by 1456, when he joined the city's fraternity of St Nicholas. He also seems to have been associated with Canterbury: the chronicle of John Stone, a monk of Christ Church Priory, preserves a poem attributed (if uncertainly) to Banastre, 'Miraculum sancti Thome martyris' (1467) (Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, MS 417), and a manuscript believed to have been copied there contains his 'Vox saecli justi judices' and 'Alleluia: laudate pueri', liturgical pieces for two and three voices which were probably written 'c'.1460 (Pepys Library, Magdalene College, Cambridge, MS 1236, fols. 15'v'-17'v', 101-101'v'). 
Banastre became a lay clerk of Edward IV's household chapel, first being mentioned as such on 25 February 1469 when granted a corrody in Daventry Priory. He acquired corrodies at more than ten religious foundations to supplement his salary and traded them with other members of the household in order to improve his financial portfolio. In 1479 (having started in the post the previous Michaelmas) he was formally promoted to master of the choristers, with a further 40 marks per annum to instruct the boy choristers. Like his successors, he may have diversified from training in plainsong and polyphony to the production of dramatic interludes outside the chapel -- one dated 1482 has been attributed to him. 
Banastre's extant compositions are mostly modest in scale. Later than the Pepys Library pieces are a three-part secular carol, 'My Feerfull Dreme' (BL, Add. MS 5465, fols. 77'v'-82), and, most important, a five-part motet, 'O Maria et Elizabeth', one of the earlier works to be found in the Eton choirbook (Eton College, MS 178, fols. 71'v'-74) ['see 'Composers of the Eton choirbook]. Its text combines a prayer for peace and loyalty to an unspecified monarch with a narrative of the visitation story; its likeliest context is the marriage of Henry VII and Elizabeth of York in January 1486 or Elizabeth's pregnancy later that year. The complexities of its rich polyphonic structure appear to have overstretched Banastre's compositional technique. 'My Feerfull Dreme', less adventurous but more accomplished, shares several characteristics with the larger motet: a combination of simple syllabic declamation and florid cadential melisma, syncopation of rhythmic patterns, and cross-quotation of melodic cells. 
Banastre had settled at East Greenwich, Kent, where he expressed a wish to be buried, when he made his will on 18 August 1487. He was dead by 1 September, when his corrodies began to be redistributed. The will also shows that he had actively developed his landed concerns -- besides his own house and a quantity of silver and gilt, he left eleven tenements and several plots of land within the parishes of East Greenwich and Kidbrooke. He was survived not only by his mother, but also by his brother, Roger, his wife, Johann (Joan; perhaps his second wife), and four daughters, Agnes, Margaret, Elizabeth, and Alice. 


@@@@@


doc= 1267


Bancroft, Edward (1744-1821), chemist and spy, was born at Westfield, Massachusetts, on 9 January 1744. His tutor was Silas Deane, later a member of the American congress. After a brief apprenticeship to a physician in Connecticut, Bancroft went to sea at the age of eighteen. In 1763 he was in Dutch Guiana, where he extended his education and practised medicine. 
Bancroft moved to England in 1767 and studied at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London. He began his literary career with 'An essay on the natural history of Guiana... with an account of the religion, manners, and customs of several tribes of its Indian inhabitants' (1769), and in the same year he published 'Remarks on the Review of the Controversy between Great Britain and her Colonies', a critical response to William Knox (1732-1810) and George Grenville, in which Bancroft defended the rights of British colonies. In 1770 he published the novel 'Charles Wentworth', through which he expressed his ideas as a freethinker. He befriended Benjamin Franklin and Joseph Priestley, and through them began working for the journal 'Monthly Review'. 
Bancroft was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 20 May 1773, and at that time was described as MB. Subsequently he was awarded his MD by Aberdeen University. 
At the outbreak of war with the American colonies, Bancroft acted as a spy for Franklin. He was accused of conspiring with others in an attempt to burn Portsmouth Dockyard. (James Aitken was later arrested and executed for his part in the conspiracy.) Bancroft avoided arrest by escaping to France, where, in 1776, he turned king's evidence, and provided the British government with information acquired from Silas Deane, then an American commissioner based in Europe. From December 1776 Bancroft received regular payments from the British for his spying activities, and the American government continued to pay him for similar services until 1783. Bancroft sometimes used the alias Edwards during the colonial wars. 
About two years after arriving in England, Bancroft began to study dyeing and calico printing. He made a number of trips to the Americas to study native woods for use as dyestuffs, and around 1771 discovered a yellow colourant present in the inner bark of the American black oak ('Quercus velutina'). In 1775 the British parliament passed an act providing Bancroft with patent rights for its importation and use. In 1785 Bancroft gained extended patent rights for the dye, which in the relevant act was called quercitron, a name that has been in use ever since. Bancroft's monopoly over control of the dye in England expired in 1799, when an application to extend his rights by a further seven years failed to pass the House of Lords due to opposition from northern calico printers. Ironically, the price of the bark trebled within a year. 
In 1794 Bancroft published in London his 'Experimental Researches Concerning the Philosophy of Permanent Colours'. It was a blend of practice and theory in which he demonstrated his ability to apply chemical knowledge to dyeing and printing. In the introduction he defined terms that entered the industry's vocabulary, namely, substantive dyes (those that do not require mordants) and adjective dyes (those that do). He also adopted the new nomenclature of chemistry introduced by French chemists a few years earlier. His writings on chemistry and dyeing were influential. His theories of colours and of attachment of dyes to fabrics appealed to leading chemists, including Claude-Louis Berthollet and Jean-Henri Hassenfratz, and contributed towards the downfall of Newton's mechanical theory of light. The theoretical discussion and polemics, however, were not appreciated by most practising dyers and printers during the first half of the nineteenth century. 
After 1800 Bancroft made further journeys to North and South America, but without great success, in part due to his ill health. His loss of income from the quercitron monopoly probably prevented publication of a revised edition of his book, and of a second volume (as promised in the 1794 edition), until 1813. A United States edition was published in 1814. The German translation of 1817-18 was reprinted as late as 1834. Bancroft lived in reduced circumstances, probably even before the second edition of his book was published. However, he continued with the study of chemistry and dyeing. 
Bancroft was married to Penelope Fellows; Edward Nathaniel Bancroft was their son. He died at his home in Margate on 8 September 1821. His quercitron was used as a colourant in the dyeing industry until the early 1900s. 


@@@@@


doc= 1268


Bancroft, Edward Nathaniel (1772-1842), physician, son of Edward Bancroft (1744-1821), American spy and writer on natural history, and Penelope Fellows, was born in London and received his schooling under Dr Charles Burney and Dr Samuel Parr. He was entered at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1789, and graduated BM in 1794. In 1795 he was appointed a physician to the forces. Bancroft served in the Windward Islands, in Portugal, in the Mediterranean, and with Abercromby's expedition to Egypt in 1801. On his return to England he proceeded MD at Cambridge, in 1804, and began to practise as a physician in London, retaining half-pay rank in the army. He joined the Royal College of Physicians in 1805, became a fellow in 1806 and in the same year was appointed to give the Goulstonian lectures, and was made a censor in 1808, at the comparatively early age of thirty-six. 
At this time Bancroft wrote two polemical pamphlets: 'A letter to the commissioners of military enquiry, containing animadversions on some parts of their fifth report' (1808) and 'Exposure of misrepresentations by Dr McGrigor and Dr Jackson to the commissioners of military enquiry' (1808). Both publications addressed proposed changes in the army medical department, specifically in the distinctions between physician to the forces and regimental surgeon. Bancroft argued for the precedence of the former in the military-medical hierarchy, because 'for one officer or soldier who is likely to want the aid of a surgeon, 20 may be expected to want that of a physician' (Bancroft, 'Letter', 1808). His opponents in the controversy were two army medical officers holding Scottish degrees, James McGrigor (afterwards created baronet, and director-general of the army medical department) and Robert Jackson. McGrigor charged Bancroft with lack of accuracy and candour, and with partiality. Jackson accused him of being 'presumptuous in his professional rank, which he conceives to be superior to actual knowledge' (Jackson). Bancroft wanted the best physicians admitted to the military and he believed that they could be drawn from civilian circles, not simply from the lower ranks (of regimental surgeons) of the military-medical hierarchy. Civilian physicians, he argued, had more experience in medical matters generally, and were therefore better equipped to be admitted to the upper military-medical ranks than regimental surgeons. 
During this year of great disagreement with colleagues, Bancroft was appointed a physician to St George's Hospital. In 1811, however, he gave up his practice in London owing to ill health, but not before publishing his most memorable and well-received work, 'An essay on the disease called yellow fever, with observations concerning febrile contagion, typhus fever, dysentery, and the plague, partly delivered as the Gulstonian lectures before the College of Physicians in the years 1806 and 1807' (1811), a 'Sequel' to which was published in 1817. Although Bancroft's 'Essay' mistakenly associated the development of yellow fever with malarious conditions, this conclusion was none the less adopted by contemporaries largely because of the author's skill in explaining away entire sets of facts vouched for by authorities such as Sir John Pringle, Donald Marvo, and Sir Gilbert Blane. 
In 1811, Bancroft resumed his full-pay rank as physician to the forces and proceeded to Jamaica. He remained there until his death on 18 September 1842 in Kingston. After his death the physicians and surgeons of Jamaica placed a mural tablet to Bancroft's memory in the cathedral church of Kingston, commemorating his 'acute and accurate reasoning' and his keen ability 'as a polemical writer' to 'form the facts or arguments of an antagonist against himself' (Munk, 'Roll', 1818, 68). 


@@@@@


doc= 1269


Bancroft, George (d. 1573?), religious writer and Church of England clergyman, is first recorded in 1544, when he was presented by Giles Gore, esquire, to the Wiltshire rectory of Grittleton. On 14 October 1547, still incumbent of Grittleton and now also chaplain to William Parr, marquess of Northampton, he was dispensed to hold another benefice. In that same year he was presented to Nettleton by John Butler of Great Badminton. In 1548 he published, as a translation from the Latin, 'The answere that the preachers of the gospel at Basile made for the defence of the true administration and use of the holy supper of Our Lord. Agaynst the abhomination of the popyshe masse'. It is dedicated to 'his singular good Master Silvester Butler', who, appearances notwithstanding, was his patron's wife, elsewhere impartially recorded as Silvester and Silvestra. 
Bancroft's translation of his unidentified original constitutes a modest contribution to Reformation debate. His preface and the main text alike follow a strongly reformist line. Both mount a fierce attack on the Catholic mass as idolatrous and detestable and on the priests who administer it, denounced by Bancroft for their avarice -- 'whan they here of any riche manes death they flocke together lyke ravennes to a dead carren' (sig. Aiii'v'); in the translation they are castigated for pride as well. In the latter English readers are instructed that the Lord's supper is an act of commemoration, rather than a renewal of Christ's sacrifice, that Catholic priests err when they 'denye that we are Justified by fayth only ascribinge part of our justificacion to good workes' (sig. Eiii), and that indeed 'there be no priestes nowe appointed of God to offer for synnes, but every christian man is ordeined of Christe to be a prieste' (sig. Fiiii'v'). Such teaching was fully in accord with protestant doctrine as laid down by leading Swiss reformers, and now increasingly propagated in England. 
The theological content of 'The answere' seems likely to have appealed to Bancroft's patrons. Northampton was an evangelical, and so was Andrew Baynton, who in 1554 presented Bancroft to the living of Bromham. Bancroft was deprived of Grittleton and Nettleton in the same year, but presumably thanks to Baynton's protection he retained Bromham, and apparently also Yatton Keynell, where the advowson was shared by his former patron Giles Gore throughout Mary's reign. It must have helped him that Baynton does not seem to have flaunted his protestantism, whereas in 1557 Mrs Butler was pardoned her involvement in a conspiracy in the course of which she was said to have exclaimed, 'I wold the Kyng and Quene were in the sea in a botomles vessell' ('CPR', '1555-7', 400-01). Bancroft resigned Yatton Keynell in 1560 but was at some point reinstated in Grittleton, holding that living and Bromham until he died, probably in 1573, when successors were presented to both benefices following Bancroft's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 1270


Bancroft, John (1574-1641), bishop of Oxford, was born at Asthall, Oxfordshire, between Burford and Minster Lovell in the Cotswolds. His father, Christopher, was brother of Richard Bancroft (bap. 1544, d. 1610), bishop of London and later archbishop of Canterbury, and through his paternal grandmother he was great-great-nephew of Hugh Curwen, the second bishop of Oxford. He was educated at Westminster School and as a Westminster student went up to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1592. There he took the degrees of BA on 16 June 1596 and MA on 21 May 1599. He was twenty-seven when his uncle presented him to the rectory of Finchley, Middlesex, vacant by the death of Richard Latewar. Seven years later he resigned it when his uncle, now archbishop, offered him Orpington in Kent (27 May 1608). Bancroft further increased his nephew's income by granting him two sinecures in Kent, those of Woodchurch (1609) and Biddenden (1610). On 23 October 1609 John Bancroft was presented with the prebend of Maplesbury in St Paul's Cathedral, on the elevation of Samuel Harsnett to the episcopate. 
Having gained his BD degree on 9 July 1607, Bancroft was made DD on 25 June 1610 after successfully defending the conformist thesis 'major est auctoritas scripturae quam ecclesiae' ('the authority of scripture is greater than that of the church'). On 2 March 1610 he had been elected master of University College, Oxford, probably at the behest of his uncle, who as archbishop was the college's visitor. A tireless administrator, over the next twenty-three years Bancroft set the college on a sound financial basis, and in 1629 he was among those chosen to oversee the revision of the university's statutes. His mastership of University College ended on 23 August 1632, soon after he had been consecrated bishop of Oxford at the hands of Archbishop Abbot on 10 June. 
That he owed his see to his friend William Laud, as William Prynne later alleged, is undoubtedly true, but if there is truth in Prynne's defamation of Bancroft as 'a corrupt, unpreaching popish prelate' (Prynne, 353), it is only in the charge of Bancroft's lack of preaching, for, singularly among those whom Charles I sanctioned to become his bishops, Bancroft had seemingly never served as a chaplain-in-ordinary and was absent, even as a bishop, from any royal pulpit; for Palm Sunday 1635 Archbishop Laud entered Bancroft's name as an alternative to his own in case he did not preach the Lent sermon at court, but in the event he did. The Short Parliament ceased sitting before Bancroft's designated Sunday duty on 24 May 1640 and he died before he could preach his turn during the Long Parliament. 
Rather, Bancroft's appointment was the result of Laud's determination to build a new courtyard at his old Oxford college of St John's, and it is Bancroft's work in the building of Canterbury Quadrangle that has most contributed to the preservation of his memory in Oxford. He acted as both broker and chief fund-raiser for his friend Laud. At 16 April 1636 the final account showed that, of the $3260 10's'. 5died raised for the quadrangle, $3170 had been remitted by Bancroft allowing, as William Juxon, president of St John's, had assured Laud, for the grander court, 'of the largest size that Art can allowe' (Juxon to Laud, 12 March 1632, TNA: PRO, SP 16/214/38), and the surviving receipts show regular and substantial payments for the new building. By the terms of his will Bancroft asked that the proceeds from selling half his books should go to Laud's other major project, the repair of St Paul's Cathedral. 
In the diocese Bancroft was a noted upholder of the conformist position and may, like Laud himself, have imposed only the railing-in and eastward position of the holy table when enforcing Laud's metropolitical injunctions (Davies, 218). He sanctioned the remodelling of furnishings at his cathedral church, consecrating communion plate as well as ecclesiastical fixtures of a new pulpit, reading desk, and communion table there on 18 December 1636 after an ordination. Dean Fell commented that the form of words used was as 'pious and serious' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D 399, fol. 280) as the form for consecrating churches drawn up by Lancelot Andrewes. Similar regard for propriety and correct usage led him to become embroiled in arguments over the repair of a spire at Witney in 1638, in the 1639 altercation between John Dowson and his parishioners at Maidenhead, and in vigorously demanding winter repairs at the decaying church at Churchill in 1639-40. Richard Gardiner, in 'A Sermon Concerning the Epiphany' (1639), congratulated Bancroft on restoring altars to their primitive accustomed places in churches, and beyond the diocese he consecrated the chapel, 'newly built and recently embellished' (Nicolson, 28), at Sissinghurst on 15 September 1639. 
Bancroft was concerned to prevent lax ordinations and in 1639 refused to ordain twenty men whom he regarded as unsuitable candidates: they were, however, later ordained in other dioceses. It was later alleged, in charges that might have been brought against him had he lived, that he required his examining chaplain, Edward Fulham, to ask all ordinands whether the order of bishops was a divine institution, bowing at the name of Jesus a pious ceremony, and 'whether a Minister may not with a safe conscience administer the sacrament to one not kneelinge?' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D 353, fol. 159, articles 5, 6, 8). The more trenchant question, of theology rather than practice, was whether 'Christ did locally descend into hell' (ibid., 9). 
Little more than a year into his episcopate at Oxford, Bancroft was being discussed as a possible successor to Laud as bishop of London (E. Nicholas to Sir J. Pennington, 12 Aug 1633, TNA: PRO, SP 16/244/53), but he was to remain in the diocese until his death. By collating himself to the vicarage of Cuddesdon (reckoned to be worth $70 per annum), which was later annexed in perpetuity to his see by royal warrant, Bancroft was able to build a much needed palace for himself and his successors at Cuddesdon, 7 miles out of Oxford. Something of the scope of the property was glimpsed when Archbishop Laud, with his retinue of fifty mounted servants, stayed there in August 1636 'en route' for the royal celebrations that marked the completion of his Canterbury Quadrangle. Bancroft died in London on 11 February 1641 and his body was taken back to Cuddesdon and buried below the south transept wall of the parish church the next day, 'without any other monument then a plaine stone' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/186/80). He never married. His new episcopal palace was soon demolished for fear of its falling into parliamentarian hands. 


@@@@@


doc= 1271


Bancroft, John (1655-1696), playwright and surgeon, was born in London, perhaps in the Postern, on 3 June 1655, the son of John Bancroft ('bap'. 1614, died 1705), sergeant carver to the lord mayor from 1660, and his second wife, Rebecka, 'nee' Cole ('bap'. 1631, died 1711). His younger brother Francis Bancroft became a noted financial agent and benefactor of Bancroft's School, Mile End, London. John was apprenticed to the surgeon Richard Wiseman on 3 September 1669 and later practised in the fashionable Covent Garden area. Becoming 'infected by the Vicinity of the Wits with Poetry' (Gildon, 5), he wrote a blank-verse tragedy, 'Sertorius', which was staged at Drury Lane early in 1679 and published shortly afterwards as by 'John Bancroft, Gent.' It was not a success. His 'King Edward the Third', premiered late in 1690, was published anonymously in 1691. The actor William Mountfort signed the dedicatory letter, describing the play as 'a Present to me'. Mountfort doubtless prepared the play for the stage and oversaw the production; the epilogue stated that the author's payment was to go to 'the Player'. It fitted the political temper of the time and did well, Queen Mary and her maids of honour seeing it at Drury Lane on 4 February 1691. An anonymous adaptation, 'The Fall of Mortimer', was popular in 1731 as an anti-Walpole piece. The 'Gentleman's Journal' for October 1692 (appearing in late November) announced: 'A new Play, by the Author of that call'd 'Edward the Third', which gave such universal satisfaction, hath been acted several times with applause' (p. 24). This was 'Henry the Second', which also appeared anonymously in 1693 with a dedication signed by Mountfort, who presumably again reworked the play where necessary. The play had strong acting roles for Thomas Betterton as the king, Elizabeth Barry as the jealous queen, and Anne Bracegirdle as the fair Rosamond. It opened on 8 November 1692 and was performed every day until at least 14 November, when the queen was present. Late in the evening of 9 December Mountfort was attacked by Captain Richard Hill and Lord Mohun, after their failed attempt at abducting Anne Bracegirdle. Bancroft, hurriedly summoned to Mountfort's house after midnight, found the actor 'very Desperately wounded' (Egerton MS 2623, fol. 47'v') and stayed with him until four o'clock. He returned at eight, remaining until he was called to give evidence to the justices. Mountfort, who died that afternoon, told Bancroft that Hill, not Mohun, stabbed him. Bancroft was a witness at Mohun's trial, Hill having escaped. 
John Bancroft married Diana King (1658-1709) of Ashby-de-la-Launde, Lincolnshire. Four of their children, three of whom died in infancy, were baptized at St Paul's, Covent Garden, between 1681 and 1692, and Bancroft was buried there on 1 September 1696. 


@@@@@


doc= 1272


Bancroft, Richard (bap. 1544, d. 1610), archbishop of Canterbury, was baptized at Prescot, Farnworth, Lancashire, on 12 September 1544. He was the second son of John Bancroft, gentleman, and his wife, Mary, daughter of James Curwen and niece of Hugh Curwen ('c'.1500-1568), archbishop of Dublin (1555-67) and bishop of Oxford (1567-8). 
Bancroft was educated locally at the grammar school in Farnworth. He was older than was usual for his generation when admitted to Cambridge, where he was elected scholar at Christ's College, graduating BA in 1567. Although his reputation was said to be higher on the sports field in boxing, wrestling, and quarterstaff, he was nevertheless chosen to greet Elizabeth during her first visit to Cambridge in 1564. He delivered an overweening encomium, lauding her shining example and praising her as a judge against the raging bulls of the pope. 
Financial uncertainty may have delayed Bancroft's initial entry to university. In his final undergraduate year Archbishop Curwen granted him the prebendal stall of Malhidert in St Patrick's, Dublin. As he was not yet ordained this would assist him financially. With it came a royal licence to be absent from the university for six months. It is also possible that education in a newly reformed university may not have been an altogether appealing option for someone from a traditionalist background in the north-west. A fellow Lancastrian student, Laurence Chaderton, some eight years senior to Bancroft, came from a financially more secure background and yet did not enter Christ's until he was almost thirty. 
For a time Bancroft may have been a close member of Chaderton's wide-flung network of patronage and acquaintance. The two remained lifelong, if unlikely, friends even when Bancroft removed to Jesus College as a tutor (he was never a fellow there). Later Bancroft regarded men like John Rainolds, William Whitaker, and Chaderton as respectable moderates, and in his 'Daungerous Positions' (1593) he deliberately omitted any mention of Chaderton's leading role in the conference movement. He retained broad sympathies for the moderate puritan position and with them opposed the Elizabethan university statutes of 1572. 
Bancroft proceeded MA from Jesus in 1572, and two years later, at the age of thirty, he was ordained priest in the diocese of Ely by Bishop Richard Cox. Cox, who had supported the university statutes of 1572, was also visitor of Jesus. He made Bancroft one of his chaplains, in which post he probably served until Cox died in 1581. He later offered him a prebend at Ely (21 December 1575) and collated him to the rectory of Teversham, near Cambridge (24 March 1576). Later that year he was licensed as one of the twelve preachers in the university. 'By the appointment of Archbishop [Edmund] Grindal, he did once visite the Diocese of Peterborough', in the wake of the 'disorders' involving preachers in Northamptonshire in 1576 (CUL, Mm.1.47, fol. 332). This would appear to be the first time that he had acted as the bishop's proxy in matters of discipline. In 1580 or 1581 Bancroft entered the service of the lord chancellor, Sir Christopher Hatton, as a chaplain, 'for the most part in her Majesties Court, & was in good Reputation with him, & often employed in sundry maters of great Importance, for her Highnes service' (ibid.). 
It was as one of the university select preachers, and not as an episcopal visitor, that Bancroft was sent to preach at the Bury St Edmunds assize in July 1583. Bury had recently become troubled by the sermons of Robert Browne, a kinsman of Lord Burghley, who had been released from his imprisonment for unauthorized preaching in Cambridge and had moved his centre of operations to the neighbouring diocese of Norwich. The choice of Bancroft as assize preacher was deliberate. Browne had earlier appeared before him, as the bishop's officer, to be reminded of the need for an episcopal licence when he had delivered his Cambridge homilies. Bancroft's new position in Hatton's household meant that he would be able to report back fully to the government on the presbyterian claims of the sectaries. 
As Archbishop John Whitgift attested in 1597, it was while Bancroft was in Bury that: 'he detected to the Judges, the writings of a Poesie, about Her Majesties Armes, taken out of the Apocalyps, but apply'd to her Highness most falsely & seditiously. It had been sett up a quarter of a year, in a most publick place, without controulment. (CUL, Mm.1.47, fol. 332)' The libel, pinned to the royal achievement in one of the city churches, compared the queen, England's Deborah, to 'that woman Jezebel', of 'Revelation' 2:20. Its discovery led to the arrest and subsequent death of two Brownists, John Copping and Elias Thacker, who had been distributing 'A Treatise of Reformation without Tarrying for Anie' (1582) by Browne and books by Robert Harrison. Chief Justice Sir Edmund Anderson gave Bancroft a copy of Harrison's 'Three Formes of Catechismes' (1583) by way of an honorarium. Bancroft dated the gift to the day of the death of Archbishop Grindal (6 July 1583). 
John Whitgift, who succeeded Grindal at Canterbury, immediately demanded clerical subscription to three articles, asserting that the queen had supreme authority in matters ecclesiastical, that the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' of 1563 were agreeable to the word of God and that the 'Book of Common Prayer' contained nothing contrary to scripture. He met forceful opposition in both parliament and the privy council, where Lord Burghley made explicit his concern that 'the Inquisitors of Spain use not so many questions to comprehend and to trap their preyes', concluding that 'this kind of proceeding is too much savouring of the Romish Inquisition' (J. Strype, 'The Life and Acts of... John Whitgift', 1718, new edn, 3 vols., 1822, 3.104-7). 
Whitgift had, however, a further string to his bow. John Aylmer, bishop of London, who had been 'de facto' primate during the years of Grindal's suspension, had done much to reinvigorate the ecclesiastical commission, which now operated as an independent 'court of high commission'. As such, part of its function was to pursue and discipline clerical nonconformists. Although both Whitgift and Aylmer remained at the head of its affairs, Bancroft rapidly became the more powerful figure behind the scenes. The high commission worked methodically to extirpate presbyterianism, to stifle subversive publications, and to suspend -- although only selectively, in view of the privy council's continued propensity to challenge its decisions whenever its victims had friends at court -- those leading sectaries who refused to subscribe to Whitgift's articles. 
Bancroft was increasingly involved in developing an anti-puritan rhetoric, and by the time that he was admitted DTh at Cambridge in April 1585 he had produced a series of investigative accounts of puritanism in which he wrote warmly in the defence of episcopacy and denounced the practices of gathered congregations. He condemned the heresies in Robert Browne's books, wrote of the 'Opinions and Dealings of the Precisians', and sought to exploit the inner weaknesses and rivalries of the fissiparous movement. Against William Turner he wrote his 'Discourse upon the bill and book exhibited in parliament by the puritans for a further reformation of the church principles' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/199/1). 
Not that all Bancroft's energies were directed against the godly at home. In 1584 he joined Archbishop Adam Loftus of Dublin in a remonstrance to prevent Sir John Perrot alienating the endowment and church site of St Patrick's, Dublin, in order to found a university college. Loftus, who had succeeded Bancroft's great-uncle as archbishop in 1567, had been dean of St Patrick's from 1565 and may therefore have known him from that foundation. Perrot's plan was essentially based on the models of many Oxford and Cambridge colleges; Bancroft's second college, Jesus, had been reformed out of the former monastic foundation of St Radegund. The appeal was upheld and the plan for a college or university in Dublin was revised. 
Not until 10 February 1586 did Bancroft receive his first major appointment, becoming treasurer of St Paul's Cathedral by royal prerogative. The same year Sir Christopher Hatton presented him to the rectory of Cottingham, Northamptonshire. Bancroft had earlier successfully sought the parsonage of St Andrew's, Holborn, in August 1584 through Hatton's intercession with Burghley. Accordingly he is gazetted as non-resident and double-beneficed in a contemporary list drafted for the lord mayor and aldermen by members of the London clerical conference. This document sought the support of the lay authorities in petitioning the queen to 'have consideration of the state of the Ministry of London, for speedy Reformation of it' (Peel, 2.96, 180). Following the death of Cox, Bancroft was also appointed to the commission of visitation for the diocese of Ely, which administered the see throughout its lengthy vacancy (1581-1600). On 19 July 1587 he was installed as a canon of Westminster. 
On 23 June 1586 Star Chamber enacted an ordinance to restrain the printing of seditious propaganda: no volume might be printed without a licence from either the archbishop of Canterbury or the bishop of London. This established a form of censorship which went far beyond that imposed upon the Stationers' Company and was to remain in place until 1640-41. Its immediate effect was to foment a series of underground publications and from the summer of 1588 there appeared a series of lampoons and tracts, written by 'Martin Marprelate', whose identity has never been established. It was Bancroft who uncovered the location of the printing press, at Newtown near Manchester, and silenced it. 
In his Paul's Cross sermon of 9 February 1589 Bancroft responded to many of the charges of Martin Marprelate. He claimed that episcopacy itself had existed as a form of ecclesiastical government since apostolic times. He further attacked the 'Arians, Donatists, Papists, Libertines, Anabaptists, the Familie of Love and sundrie other' heresies (R. Bancroft, 'A Sermon Preached at Paules Crosse', 1589, 3). Bancroft's agenda was threefold. The sermon was clearly directed at the parliamentary session that had begun the previous week, but at the same time it sought to underscore the essentially anti-establishment nature of the godly reform programme. For the first time it also took the battle of scholarship into Scotland. The general assembly of the kirk had agreed on 10 May 1586 that 'the name of a Bishop hath a speciall charge in the function annexed to it by the word' but that this was no different from an 'ordinary Pastor'. It further ruled that only the general assembly could admit any pastor to be bishop or minister as granted by the king. The Pauline style of 'episkopos' was to be 'appointed to a speciall floke where he shall keepe his residence & serve the cure as another Minister' (BL, Sloane MS 271, fol. 73'r'). Bancroft's defence of episcopacy against this argument raised fundamental questions about church order and the essentials of faith and in conformist circles became a benchmark for a discussion of church polity for half a century, until the abolition of bishops in 1643. 
Bancroft's homily had another intended target: those who exalted the word of God to the point that it became the sole authority that, by preaching and prophesyings, threatened the balance within a church that set greater store by the use of sacraments. He denounced those false prophets who 'would have the people to be alwaies seeking and searching: and these men (as well themselves as their followers) can never finde wherupon to rest. Now they are carried hither, now thither. They are alwaies learning (as the apostle saith) but do never attaine to the truth. (Bancroft, 'A Sermon Preached at Paules Crosse', 38)' For Bancroft, the ploughboy in the field, whom Erasmus hoped would have the scripture to hand, had become 'the pratling old woman, the doting old man, the brabling sophister'. All of them assume that they have obtained the truth when in fact 'they teare it in peeces, and take upon them to teach it before they have learned it' (ibid., 41). 
With regard to Scottish affairs Bancroft greatly miscalculated and put his own future career in jeopardy. He had the temerity to criticize John Knox and falsely (albeit understandably) attributed to James VI a declaration about the church in Scotland which had in fact been drafted by Patrick Adamson, archbishop of St Andrews. A furious Burghley, who was keen to maintain discreet relations with the Scottish king, summoned Bancroft to account for himself and refused him leave to read his own carefully prepared defence that he had taken the precaution to bring with him. Burghley ordered him back to Hatton's residence in Ely Place to write a submission to the king. When, however, James himself pressed for a full public apology Burghley firmly demurred. North of the border the issue remained a live one; John Davidson chided Bancroft as late as September 1590 in 'D. Bancrofts Rashness in Rayling'. 
In 1592, after the death of Sir Christopher Hatton, Bancroft became one of Whitgift's household chaplains at Lambeth. The following year he 'did sett out two Books in defence of the State of the Church, & against the pretended Holy Discipline: which were liked and greatly commended, by the learnedest Men in the Realm' (CUL, Mm. 1.47, fol. 333). The first, 'A Survay of the Pretended Holy Discipline', was an extended form of remarks he had passed in his sermon of 1589. In it he traced the origins of the reform movement to Geneva under Calvin and its propagation in England to the work of Beza and the admonition of 1572. The work espoused a 'jure divino' case for episcopacy, largely drawn from two recently published tracts: Hadrian Saravia's influential 'Diverse Degrees of the Ministers of the Gospel' (1590) and Matthew Sutcliffe's 'Treatise of Ecclesiastical Discipline' (1591). Bancroft undertook to explain why the Church of England retained hierarchical office as a sign of the true church and rejected the pattern of reformation demanded by the godly. He emphasized that episcopacy was both scriptural and historical, whereas 'the institution of this pretended Government cannot be shewed out of the 'Old Testament': and then by their own confessions... it may not be urged out of the 'New'' (R. Bancroft, 'A Survay', 1593, 69). Such claims advanced the bishops well beyond the status of ecclesiastical civil servants that had been Burghley's and the earl of Leicester's preferred model for the early Elizabethan episcopate. 
Bancroft further advanced the cause of episcopal government and attacked puritanism in his next publication, 'Daungerous Positions and Proceedings, Published and Practiced within this Iland of Brytaine, under the Pretence of Reformation, and for the Presbiterial Discipline' (1593), a work that was reprinted in 1640 as a clarion call against the Scottish sympathizers in the country. 'The devilish and traitorous practices of the seminary priests and jesuits' were as bad as 'the lewd and obstinate course held by our pretended reformers, the consistorian puritans', since both of them were 'labouring with all their might by railing, libelling and lying to steal away the people's hearts from their governors, to bring them to a dislike of the present state of our church' (R. Bancroft, 'Daungerous Positions', 2-3). By stressing the links between the conference movement and subversives, like William Hacket and Henry Coppinger, Bancroft wrote a scaremonger's handbook to political resistance and ensured that conformity, whether of puritans or of papists, would be judged in the light of allegiance to the crown. An act of parliament of 1593 (35 Eliz. I c. i) threatened sectaries with imprisonment for staying away from divine service and made conventicles unlawful. By then puritanism had already been driven underground; the Dedham conference had met for the last time in June 1589, Thomas Cartwright was imprisoned, and Henry Barrowe, John Greenwood, and John Penry had been put to death (under the act of 1581 that forbade seditious writings), although not before Penry's damaging tract, 'A briefe discovery of the untruthes and slanders (against the true government of the church of Christ) contained in a sermon preached 8. of Februarie 1588 by D. Bancroft', had appeared anonymously in Edinburgh. 
As a theologian and church leader Whitgift was a thoroughgoing Calvinist. For all his outbursts he never regarded the likes of Cartwright and fellow members of the conference movement as more than disaffected brethren who needed to be brought to their senses. The logic of Bancroft's approach, however, recast not only exasperated radicals, who were moving towards semi-separatism, but also 'moderate puritans' as politically subversive. This effectively identified authority within the church with authority in the state. 
Despite this difference in attitude Whitgift now canvassed Bancroft's elevation to the bishopric of London, which John Aylmer was willing to resign in his favour if his own translation to Worcester could be effected. The plan came to nothing, apparently because Bancroft would not agree to the pension from episcopal revenues that was Aylmer's price for his resignation. On his deathbed in 1594 Aylmer is said to have regretted that he had not written to Elizabeth to commend Bancroft as his successor. 
It is unlikely that such a representation would have persuaded Elizabeth against more powerful patrons since Burghley, at this stage, preferred William Day, dean of Windsor, while the earl of Essex backed Richard Fletcher, bishop of Worcester. Whitgift, no doubt aware that Bancroft had little chance of promotion, in December 1595 added his voice to that of Essex and Bishop Fletcher was duly translated. Fletcher's unexpected death on 15 June 1596, coming soon after Day's appointment to Winchester, gave Whitgift a second chance. He wrote candidly that in the past fifteen or sixteen years (in other words since Bancroft himself had entered centre-stage politics in the household of the lord chancellor): '17: or 18: of his Juniors (few or none of them being of his experience) have been preferred, eleven to Deaneries, & the rest to Bishopricks. Of which number, some have been formerly inclin'd to Faction, & the most as neuters have expected the Issue, that so they might, as things should fall out, run with the time. (Strype, 'Whitgift', 2.386-8)' This remarkable assessment, which disparages many, strongly argues for Whitgift's support of Bancroft; when he thanked Robert Cecil for making the appointment possible, he claimed that Secretary Cecil would 'finde him a honest, true and faythfull man' (Hatfield House, MS 49, fol. 108). At the age of fifty-three Bancroft was elected on 21 April 1597, consecrated on 8 May, and enthroned on 5 June. 
As a new diocesan bishop, Bancroft set out at once to implement locally the reforms that he and Whitgift had devised for the church at large. In the first instance he was determined to ensure the conformity of London ministers. Although there are no surviving subscription rolls for London in the period 1597-1604, Bancroft felt confident enough to assure Cecil on 2 April 1601 after four years in post, that 'all within my diocese have conformed themselves save Mr Egerton' ('Salisbury MSS', 11.154). This somewhat pointed remark was prompted by antagonism as Stephen Egerton of Blackfriars owed the continuation of his ministry to Cecil's protection at the behest of William Fitzwilliam, a kinsman of Lady Burghley. 
Bancroft's primary visitation articles of 1598, which were later reissued with minor amendments for the visitations of both 1601 and 1604, constitute a detailed and careful inquiry into the ministry. They became the model for many such episcopal articles in the Jacobean and Caroline church, being used, for instance, by Richard Neile at Coventry and Lichfield (1610), John Howson (Oxford, 1619-28), and Richard Corbet (1629). In them Bancroft ordered a dozen ministers in the diocese to bring confirmation candidates forward, either to himself or to his suffragan, John Sterne, bishop of Colchester. Here he was following Whitgift's directive of 1591 to ensure that 'bishoppings' were held regularly and that those coming forward for confirmation were suitably prepared in the faith. Despite Bancroft's claim at the Hampton Court conference that his chaplains ensured this and so prevented indiscriminate confirmation, Nicholas Ferrar remembered being confirmed twice by Bancroft during his visitation of 1598. Bishop Aylmer had ensured that London clergy had some vocational training and Bancroft retained this emphasis; the visitation call book for 1598 records that more than 100 clergy were interviewed by commissaries for their suitability as licensed preachers. Among his chaplains acting as a commissary for the visitation was Samuel Harsnett, whom he later preferred as archdeacon of Essex (1602) and bishop of Chichester (1609) and who served as one of his executors. 
If Bancroft's primary visitation gave him an opportunity to regulate the preaching ministry of the established church he also became involved in monitoring the activities of Romish priests resident in England. Cardinal Cajetan's appointment of George Blackwell to the office of archpriest with supreme authority over the English mission (7 March 1598) highlighted the divisions in the Catholic parties in the country. Bancroft's policy was to foment rivalry between secular priests in England and Jesuits abroad. Contemporaries believed that he was personally, and even solely, responsible for ensuring that 'the appellant priests have such liberty' (Anthony Rivers to Robert Persons, 3 March 1602, in H. Foley, 'Records of the English Province of the Society of Jesus', 7 vols., 1877-83, 1.22). All the main appellant leaders wrote to Bancroft at some time or other and he, with the cognizance of Cecil, whom he kept informed at every stage, offered them limited licences to ensure a degree of local control within the Catholic community. He also read widely, on both sides of the controversy. 
One secular priest, William Watson, who had come from Rheims to England in June 1586, was living at Fulham Palace by September 1601. It was claimed then that he was, 'under the Bishop's elbow, by whose appointment he is placed there' (Dodd, 3.cxlvii). Bancroft assured Cecil on 18 August that he was 'very tractable to whet his pen against the jesuits' ('Salisbury MSS', 11.350). But he was quick to disown him when Watson fell out with Rome and began to dabble in treason; in July 1603 he claimed he had not seen him since January. Watson had become involved in the so-called Bye plot to kidnap James I and impose toleration of Catholics; he was executed on 29 November that year. In the parliament of 1604 an action was brought against Bancroft alleging that he had committed treason in allowing the printing of appellant books; the bill was suppressed by the crown when Bancroft was being considered for the primacy. 
This policy of limited toleration, intended to discredit the Jesuits, had been co-ordinated by Robert Cecil and the privy council. Bancroft was not yet a member of the council and needed an official letter from it to cover his clandestine activities throughout the controversy. Following the revelations of the Bye plot Bancroft may have acted scarcely a moment too soon to ensure that his conduct had the sanction of the crown. When at the Hampton Court conference John Rainolds of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, claimed that there were too many popish books in circulation, James VI and I defended Bancroft as having acted with official warrant. In fact, he was being employed on other government business too. For instance he was part of a diplomatic mission to Emden with Dr Christopher Perkins and Dr Richard Swale to resolve a dispute with Denmark and is said to have led pikemen against the London citizenry raised by the earl of Essex. Whitgift's failing health also thrust Bancroft centre stage in the church. As Thomas Fuller later averred, 'he was in effect Archbishop whilst Bishop' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 122). 
Whitgift was alarmed by the modest demands made in the millenary petition presented to the new king in his journey south for 'a uniformity of doctrine' and for 'no popish opinion to be any more taught and defended'. On 12 May 1603, a week after the new king had entered London, he wrote to the bishops requiring them to compile lists of all their clergy and preachers, with details of their academic qualifications, their licences (if any), and their place of residence. Detailed responses were not forthcoming, and at the end of the summer Whitgift was still trying to obtain answers. Those who saw the new reign as an opportunity for securing a new settlement of religion were more organized in achieving results from their own county-wide surveys. As a result the king issued a royal proclamation on 24 October 1603 ('CPR', James I, 1/3) 'concerning such as seditiously seek reformation in church matters', intending to hold a public disputation on 1 November. The plague, however, was raging in London and when the conference met it was at Hampton Court, in sessions on 14, 16, and 18 January 1604. 
Bancroft was one of nine bishops who, with Whitgift and James Montagu, dean of the Chapel Royal, represented the church hierarchy. The distinctly moderate puritan disputants were led by John Rainolds, who enjoyed good relations with Whitgift, and included Laurence Chaderton, a long-standing acquaintance of Bancroft. Among the several accounts of the proceedings, that of William Barlow, dean of Chester, is the lengthiest and as the officially commissioned version casts the bishops' contribution in the most favourable light, yet the Bancroft he praises with Thomas Bilson, bishop of Winchester, for his 'pains and dexteritie' (Cardwell, 168), emerges not just as a dominant but also as an impatient, hardline, and sometimes overbearing participant. While Whitgift left the detail of much of the debate to both Bancroft and Bilson, Bancroft was more combative than either. On the first day, in response to the king's opening oration discussing the alleged shortcomings of the church, it was Bancroft who asserted the apostolic institution of confirmation. Whitgift defended public absolution, but Bancroft defended private absolution too. Whitgift and the bishop of Worcester thought that the founding fathers of the English church had intended to suppress baptism by the laity, but had been compelled by circumstances to proceed obliquely; Bancroft asserted that there was no ambiguity, rather, they had intended to permit it as a necessity, since 'if [a child] die baptised, there is evident assurance that it is saved' (ibid., 175). When on the second day Bancroft intervened in Rainolds's exposition of the puritan case, advancing authorities to argue that those who spoke against bishops and the established liturgy should not be heard, the king excused his 'passion' but 'misliked his sudden interruption of D[r] Reinolds' (ibid., 180). Uncowed, Bancroft repeated this tactic later in the day. He defended himself vigorously against an accusation he sensed (probably correctly) was aimed at him of insufficiency in taking action against the publication of popish books, and moved three petitions indicative of his views on pastoral priorities: that attention should be given to the establishment of a praying ministry; that the reading of homilies should be promoted; that pulpits should not 'be made pasquils' (ibid., 192) for the airing of discontent. On the third day James, having apparently considered the case for change to the articles and prayer book and found it wanting, seems to have spoken in measured terms for the maintenance of the 'status quo'. It was Bancroft who characteristically responded with a call for no concessions to nonconformists and for a strict time-limit on subscription. It was also Bancroft who 'ended all with a thanksgiving to God' (ibid., 212) and a prayer for the royal family. 
On 31 January the king issued a writ of summons to the southern convocation to meet at St Paul's Cathedral on 20 March. In the interim Archbishop Whitgift died, on 29 February, and ten days later James issued a second writ, to Bancroft, as dean of the province of Canterbury, appointing him to preside in the convocation of clergy. When it met, convocation proceeded to adopt 141 constitutions and canons that Bancroft had drawn from the articles, injunctions, and synodical acts passed in the reigns of Edward VI and Elizabeth. Convocation approved them in April 1604 and James hoped to impose them unilaterally by letters patent on the province of York as well, but objections meant that they were not ratified by the northern province until 1606. Parliamentary sanction was technically supplied through citation of the 'Act for the Submission of the Clergy' of 1534 (25 Henry VIII, c. 19) but parliament, meeting from 19 March, had in fact strenuously resisted them, even passing a resolution that no canon passed in the last decade could have any authority to impeach or hurt anyone's liberty. The canons enshrined, in canon 36, Whitgift's three articles of 1583. No fewer than 73 and no more than 83 ministers lost their benefices for their refusal to subscribe, of whom 7 later conformed and were reinstated. 
The appointment of Bancroft as successor to Whitgift was not without controversy. He was obviously a leading candidate, recognized as an astute bureaucrat and a talented polemicist, but the archbishop of York, Matthew Hutton, was thought by many to have the edge. In turn Hutton himself sought to advance either Bilson of Winchester or the great preaching prelate in the north, Tobie Matthew of Durham. Like Bancroft, both the bishop of Durham and Archbishop Hutton had entertained James VI and I on his arrival in England at the outset of his reign and had been among the first to preach before the new king. The rivalry of such candidates may explain why the 'conge d'elire' for Bancroft's appointment was not granted until 6 October 1604. He was formally nominated on 9 October, elected on 17 November, and confirmed on 10 December by the bishops of Durham, Rochester, St David's, Chester, Chichester, and Ely. 
Bancroft at once took up the king's business of ensuring conformity, and during the following six years some eighty ministers were deprived. In a circular to the bishops of 22 December 1604 he required them to remove those who refused to subscribe or would not accept ceremonial conformity. During the summer of 1605 Bancroft carried out a metropolitical visitation of ten dioceses where he set out to improve standards of preaching among the clergy and address other 'abuses' raised in parliament's criticism of the ministry. By so doing he may have addressed himself to issues facing the whole province at the cost of neglecting his own diocese; there is no evidence that he ever visited the diocese of Canterbury and in both 1607 and 1608 he sent Barlow, now bishop of Rochester, in his stead. 
Bancroft was determined to address standards of preaching, non-residency, and catechizing among the clergy. In the letter of 28 May 1605 to his commissary in Bath and Wells which accompanied his articles of visitation he highlighted several of the canons of 1604. He specified canons 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 59, and 74, 'all of them concerninge the increase of the preachinge of the word of God, the catechisinge and instructinge of the younger sort in the principles and grounds of Christian religion', as a way of countering charges of non-residency and scandal of an inattentive ministry, 'the defects wherof you knowe hath bynn often and so violentlie complayned of in parliament' (Fincham, 'Visitation Articles', 4, 5). Surprisingly, they made no requirements for confirmation. They did, however, provide (art. 33) 'for halfe an houre or more' for Sunday catechizing, and concerned themselves with the use of the sign of the cross at baptism (art. 21), and the reporting of recusancy (art. 37; (ibid., 9)). The articles necessarily embodied a tougher drive towards conformity and as a consequence a number of ministers lost their livings. However, it is not always possible to trace which presentments had arisen from which visitation, so that the overall effect of the metropolitical visitation should perhaps not be overemphasized. The articles of visitation themselves were not wholly original: Bancroft drew widely on those already used elsewhere. None the less, his became a model for articles widely used throughout the Church of England until the abolition of the hierarchy, including those of his successor, Abbot, and they were significantly more thoroughgoing than those of Whitgift's twenty-two articles. 
As bishop of London, with Whitgift's support Bancroft had followed a policy of divide and rule when dealing with recusants. But as primate he faced something of a resurgence in English Catholicism which required in response more than subtle support for seculars against the Jesuits. There had been rumours at James's accession that he would grant full toleration to recusants; Anne of Denmark's status as a Catholic convert, though not widely known, may have informed such expectations. If the Gunpowder Plot of November 1605 largely put paid to these hopes, James was still prepared to offer tolerance if not toleration, allowing that Catholics who remained quiet and secluded would not be harried. He explained to a furious House of Commons that not all those who professed the 'Romish religion' were disloyal subjects. 
Although Bancroft too was concerned to mitigate violence and to uphold religion and the church without recourse to extreme measures, he was nevertheless implacable in his opposition to the papists. A number of high-profile defections to Rome, following the controversy over the oath of allegiance of 1606, led Bancroft to attack Catholics before the privy council in the years between 1607 and his death. When more than ten dozen suspected recusants failed to answer charges at the metropolitical visitation of Winchester diocese in 1607, they were summarily excommunicated. Having been elected in 1608 the first clerical chancellor of Oxford University since Mary's reign, Bancroft dismissed the appeal against suspension made by Humphrey Leech, a canon of Christ Church who had preached suspect sermons and denounced Calvin. Leech defected to Rome and Bancroft warned the university against publicly disputing matters contrary to the teachings of the church. In 1609 he ordered that every parish in the land should have a copy of Bishop John Jewel's 'Apologie', the classic defence of the Church of England as established under Elizabeth. 
Meanwhile Bancroft was tangentially involved in King James's attempts to settle the Church of Scotland. He offered open hospitality to Andrew Melville, the head of Aberdeen University, and seven presbyterian colleagues when they were summoned to London by the king in the autumn of 1606, although this was refused. With the prince of Wales, fellow clergy, and leading laymen, Bancroft attended the meeting between James and the Scottish commissioners at Hampton Court. After the gathering had been treated to four sermons on order and obedience, on 6 October Bancroft tried privately to get the Scots to sign an agreed statement but to no avail. The latter remained in London under house arrest, and when in November Andrew Melville was hauled before the privy council for criticizing the St Michael's day service he had witnessed, his frustration led to an outburst in which he seized the sleeve of Bancroft's cassock, calling his vestments 'Romish ragis, and a pairt of the beastis mark' (A. R. MacDonald, 'The Jacobean Kirk, 1567-1625', 1998, 125). 
There were later attempts to reconcile the Scots to episcopacy, most notably when George Downham, one of Bancroft's eight household chaplains, preached at James Montagu's consecration in April 1608. This sermon, and its defence in 1611, demonstrate how Bancroft used his authority over his household chaplains to preach conformity at the very heart of the system, at the consecration of the successors of the apostles. When published it caused a furore and one of the numerous treatises attacking it called upon the privy council 'not to depend upon the mouthes of Bishops and their Chaplains (who in this case are rather to be mistrusted of Godly wise men, as Achabs 400 'prophets' were of Jehosophat)' ('Informations, or, A Protestation, and a Treatise from Scotland', 1608, sig. 2). The printing of Downham's sermon was clearly part of a carefully co-ordinated campaign intended to convince the Scots of the need for episcopacy so that although Bancroft, as primate of all England, could exercise no jurisdiction over the Scots, he could still provide his king with a theological armoury. When in 1610 three bishops were sent from Scotland to be consecrated in England, it was agreed that they should receive orders at the hands of the bishop of London and other bishops and not attend at Lambeth, lest there be any confusion over Bancroft's authority. Their orders were nevertheless the hard-won fruits of his exertions. 
At the end of his life Bancroft was still fighting the twin menaces of public Catholicism and an inadequate ministry. On 21 July 1610 the Spanish ambassador, Alonso de Velasco, reported to Philip III the outcome of a recent heated meeting of the privy council at which the archbishop had denounced the earls of Northampton, Suffolk, and Worcester as Catholics, claiming that they frequently absented themselves from communion. However, Robert Cecil, earl of Salisbury, ensured that the king took no action against Suffolk and Worcester and so thwarted the archbishop. The two earls had both had very public roles at the creation of the prince of Wales on 4 June 1610, and Bancroft's blistering attack may have been partly designed to point up the danger of allowing Catholics to stand so close to the crown. He will also have known how Salisbury relied on Lady Suffolk as his go-between with successive Spanish ambassadors. 
At the end of July 1610, following the year's first parliamentary session, Bancroft sent instructions to the dioceses in the king's name. The session had not been an easy one; a sermon by Bishop Samuel Harsnett, another of Bancroft's former chaplains, had aroused controversy, and Bancroft's patience had snapped over a bill on pluralities. The instructions show that he was still keen to remove the twin evils of non-residency and pluralism, although he had previously failed to obtain a parliamentary statute to restore impropriated tithes to vicars and curates as a way of funding parish clergy. They also show that he was concerned with standards of ecclesiastical administration, charging the bishops: 'to examine very narrowly the proceedinges of your chauncellors, commissaries, archdeacons and officials; for whilest we repose soe much truste in them as we doe, and they intend little (I meane espicially chauncellors, commissaries and officialls) but theire owne profitt, many true complaynts and mischiefes doe indeede thereof ensue. (Fincham, 'Visitation Articles', 1.95)' Bancroft may have placed too much blind trust in his bishops in this regard. Certainly the promiscuous ordinations by Bishop Sterne of Colchester had attracted criticism. 
At the same time, ecclesiastical power was under attack from another quarter. In the first decade of the century common lawyers had increasingly urged that in matters ecclesiastical the high commission was subject to parliament (which had passed the statute of 1559 authorizing the commission), and that, therefore, parliament's authority in religious matters outweighed the king's. Furthermore, since Cowdrey's case in 1591 Bancroft had been under personal attack, above all from Edward Coke, who was successively solicitor-general (1592), attorney-general (1593), and chief justice of common pleas. In this context, following the Hampton Court conference disillusioned puritans had again resorted to the law to contest the authority of the high commission. When facing prosecution in the church courts, they would turn to common law courts for writs of prohibition. Since the commission compelled self-incrimination, by putting defendants on oath in order to interrogate them about their religious affiliations, Coke was able to argue that the oath taken 'ex officio' tempted men to perjury and placed their souls at risk. He averred that only the common law or statute should ever require such extreme measures. Although by October 1605 Bancroft presented the king with a list of complaints (the 'Articuli cleri') in which he attacked the judges, the latter continued to issue writs of prohibition, while a series of ineffectual conferences was held over the next four years. In November 1608 James I sought to take the matter into his own hands, but he was attacked by Coke for meddling in matters that took lawyers years to learn. Although the king demanded that all cases in matters ecclesiastical be reported to him, as the fount of all justice, the judges disregarded the instruction, thereby weakening the sovereign's authority in the church, a central pillar of Whitgift's and Bancroft's drive for conformity. Bancroft witnessed one final indignity when his friend, the civilian John Cowell, was brought before the House of Commons at Coke's behest, and worsted. 
Bancroft died at Lambeth Palace on 2 November 1610. As he had specified in his second will, dated 28 October, he was interred two days later without great ceremony in the chancel of the parish church of Lambeth. A single slab, inscribed with his name, marks the spot. There is no memorial sculpture. He provided that within a month of his death a memorial sermon should be preached in the church before his household, requesting it be given by either George Abbot, Samuel Harsnett, or by one of his eight household chaplains. His first will was popularly supposed to have left his entire estate to the church but, according to Thomas Fuller, he latterly thought better of it. As the first post-Reformation archbishop routinely to use a carriage, he bequeathed his best coach and four Dutch geldings to his successor, while his second coach and the team of English geldings went to his nephew Dr Newman. His will distributed $60 to the poor of Lambeth and Croydon, generously provided for his household staff, and further honoured his nephews and nieces with items of silver and his musical instruments. As well as giving four bishops (Barlow, Montagu, Neile, and Harsnett) each 'a round hoope ring of gold of a marke in weight with this inscription 'Sic sanctorum communio', two hands being joyned together within the round at the beginning of the inscription' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/57/115), he gave lesser gold rings to a handful of friends, including Sir Christopher Hatton and Sir George Paule. He gave his library in perpetuity to the archbishops of Canterbury, enjoining the king 'and his most Royal Successors, when they receave the homage of any Archbishop of Canterbury, first to procure him to enter Bonde to leave all the said Books to his Successors' (ibid.). This substantial donation formed the basis of the replacement library set up after Matthew Parker had alienated the earlier collections. It included William Camden's manuscripts, which had come to Bancroft as a result of a long-held friendship between the two men. At the interregnum parliament ordered that the library should be transferred to the University of Cambridge and only the persistence of Archbishop Gilbert Sheldon after the Restoration ensured that it was returned to Lambeth. 
His collection of some 6065 volumes shows Bancroft to have been a lover of the classics -- he owned copies of works by Seneca and Virgil, Aristotle, Homer, Horace, Martial, Ovid, Plato, Pliny, Plutarch, and Petronius among 531 volumes of 'literae humaniores'. He also bequeathed 102 bibles, 294 volumes of patristic theology, and 659 volumes of biblical commentary, as well as 755 works of Catholic theology and of controversy. Patrick Young, who became keeper of the royal library in 1609 but had been acting keeper since 1597, complained a month after the archbishop's death that Bancroft had at least 500 books from the royal collection, many of which have remained at Lambeth since. This suggests that Bancroft, like many serious bibliophiles, was often not too scrupulous about matters of ownership. He could also be generous, and shortly before his death was considering contributing books to the young prince of Wales's library (BL, Add. MS 6094, fol. 174'r'). 
Bancroft appointed both Harsnett and Abbot, men from very different wings of the church, to be the overseers of this will. He left the first a silver-gilt basin and ewer for his pains, and the latter, 'if it should not please God and his Majesty, that he may suceede me in the Archbishoprike', 100 marks to bestow as plate (TNA: PRO, SP 14/57/115). No trace of Abbot's funeral eulogy has been found, but his succession to Canterbury had been assured, even though some contemporaries still imagined that Lancelot Andrewes, Thomas Bilson, or Tobie Matthew might be appointed. 
It has been argued that Bancroft's single-mindedness reconstructed the Church of England after a period of Elizabethan neglect, but such an opinion misjudges the very real work undertaken by his predecessor, Whitgift, from whom he learned, and equally exaggerates the success of his own policies of insistence, whether upon clerical subscription, the imposition of the canons of 1604, or the enforcement of his visitation articles. All three derived from concerns and considerations of the church post-1588 when the Marprelate tracts seemed, alongside the Spanish Armada, to threaten a pincer movement against the Church of England. In a very real sense Bancroft's achievements derived from his faithful service to Whitgift and not from the period of his own occupancy of the chair of St Augustine. His years as a dogged ecclesiastical bloodhound brought the highest promotion, and his nomination of his successor was honoured, but his tenure of the primacy was little more than as a servant of the crown, even if he imbued that service with religious content. The king had made clear at Hampton Court that he could act independently of his bishops, and it may be that Bancroft was one of the few to appreciate the limitations that set him. 
At Lambeth, Bancroft surrounded himself with a diverse but highly articulate group of chaplains, all of them of his own preferred academic mind. Several of them preached and wrote on matters close to his heart. Leonard Hutton defended the use of the cross in baptism in 1605; Thomas Rogers defended kneeling at communion in 1608; the same year Downham defended episcopacy. Bancroft astutely used their penmanship to infuse ceremonies that might otherwise have remained unpopular with a sense of God-given decency. At each stage his own persona remains discreetly in the background, but there can be no mistaking his presence among the ghost writers. The earl of Clarendon's opinion that Bancroft 'had almost rescued' the church 'out of the hands of the Calvinian party, and very much subdued the unruly spirit of the Non-conformists' may have been optimistic, but his contention that he 'understood the church excellently' stands better with the evidence (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion' (Macray edn), 1.186). 


@@@@@


doc= 1273


Bancroft, Thomas (fl. 1613-1658), poet, was born at Swarkston, Derbyshire, and matriculated at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, at Easter 1613. Alluded to in contemporary records as the 'small poet', he was known to be living at Bradley, Derbyshire, in 1658. His published works are 'The Glutton's Feaver' (1633), 'Two Books of Epigrammes and Epitaphs' (1639), a romance in eight cantos entitled 'The Heroical Lover' (1658), and a collection of twenty satires, 'Times out of Tune' (1658). 'The Glutton's Feaver', written in the first person from the perspective of the repentant glutton, places him in a series of trials and punishments for his past error-strewn years; atonement follows, as the glutton is made to see his mistaken ways. The 'Two Bookes of Epigrammes and Epitaphs' are similar in tone to 'The Glutton's Feaver', and in all the book contains 480 short pieces. Some lighter compositions are to members of the Knyveton family, one to Swarkston village, and another to the Trent River, yet most continue the ashen view of life seen in his earlier work. His epigram 'Of Human Life' is a model of his early pessimism: '
If life be but a thread, then why not 

Sharpe misery be th' needle, death the knot? 
(epigram 179, book 2)' The satires found in 'Times out of Tune, Plaid upon However in XX Satyres' are against sectaries; the abuse of poetry; presumption; pride in apparel; lying; vanity; discord; weakness; falsehood in friendship; gluttony; excess in drinking; ambition; whoredom; voluptuousness; timidity; detraction; injustice; cruelty; and discontentedness. Given that they are written against largely abstract concepts, they lack the precision or venom of those by other authors targeted against individuals. If the subjects chosen seem to leave no aspect of unbuttoned human life to enjoy, the author was aware that whatever his disapprobation, human nature would still indulge. His most amiable work is 'The Heroical Lover', a romance in which the hero Antheon seeks his queen Fidelta. The poem shows little interest in love 'per se', and the plot is basically a means of exploring Bancroft's interests in geography and vulcanology. Each canto sees Antheon in another country, though the geographical progress defies common sense. Borrowing from 'The Odyssey' each country provides Antheon with female temptation, which he stoically refuses, preferring to return to his quest to find Fidelta. Antheon is also equipped with the arts of war, able to lay siege or to attack, yet spends his journey somewhat restlessly. He travels first to Italy and the Roman campagna, and is tempted by a 'Lady of the Lake' before moving to France. After a further temptation offered by a woman at court he goes to Spain, passing across the ''Pyrenean' hills', before he meets Sordezza, 'That Harpy-like, Hell-raking Sorceress'. A further canto is set in Greece, before his journey to Sicily: here 'Aetna' is described. The penultimate canto finds Antheon in Belgium, plied with alcohol and tobacco, which again he refuses, before his first meeting with Fidelta in a land called Eutopia (not far from Atlantis). 
An encounter with Bancroft's lighter work, with its excitement over geography and volcanoes, represents an interesting supplement to a reading of the lengthy texts devoted to his main areas of interest with their various measures of disapprobation. 


@@@@@


doc= 1274


Bancroft, Thomas (1756-1811), Church of England clergyman and schoolmaster, was born in Deansgate, Manchester, son of Thomas Bancroft, a thread maker. He was educated at Manchester grammar school from the age of six and at Brasenose College, Oxford, whence he matriculated on 8 April 1778, aged twenty-two. He graduated BA in 1781 and was awarded his MA in 1784. After leaving Oxford he worked briefly as assistant master at Manchester grammar school under the headmaster, Charles Lawson, before being appointed headmaster of King Henry VIII School at Chester. Little is known of his headmastership apart from the assessment of the Cheshire antiquary George Ormerod, that 'the school attained a considerable degree of classical celebrity' under Bancroft's headship (Ormerod, 1.366n.). He published a collection of Greek, Latin, and English exercises, written partly by his pupils, at Chester in 1788 as 'Prolusiones poeticae', described in the dedication to the bishop of Chester as 'the literary first-fruits of the King's School, Chester' (T. Bancroft, 'Prolusiones poeticae', 1788, dedication). Bancroft became a minor canon of Chester Cathedral and was ordained deacon at Chester on 29 June 1783. He was ordained as a priest on 28 September 1783. 
While headmaster of King Henry VIII School, Bancroft married Elizabeth, the daughter of a Mr Bennett, wine merchant and alderman of the city of Chester. Bennett was opposed to the marriage, and after Bancroft and his fiancee ran away to be married, Mr Bennett chased them, stabbed Bancroft in the leg with his sword, took his daughter back home, and forbade them to have any contact. However, they eloped a second time, and after they married Bennett disowned his daughter and they were never reconciled, though he did bequeath $1000 to each of their two daughters, Elizabeth ('bap'. 6 May 1789) and Ann ('bap'. 7 May 1783). 
In 1793 Bancroft became vicar of Bolton, where he remained until his death in 1811. He became domestic chaplain to the first Viscount Castle-Stewart, chaplain to the Bolton Volunteers in 1798, and was appointed as king's preacher for Lancashire in 1807. He also served on the Bolton magistrate's bench. 
Bancroft was an intellectual, a frustrated academic who had missed out on the opportunity of taking his doctorate at Oxford. He published translations of Latin and Greek works but the majority of his publications concerned matters of theology and Christian duty. He was a high-church tory, and a close associate of Colonel Ralph Fletcher, a founder member of the English Orange order, and he was not above using the pulpit for the purpose of political propaganda. His published sermons testify to his vehement antagonism to civil and religious dissent, and revolutionary politics, which he associated with heathenism. He believed in the notion of a chain of being, and that each individual was allocated to a station in life by God. He also believed that England and the English protestant constitution were superior to any other system of civil government or theological doctrine. Moreover, he believed that England had a special relationship with God and that divine providence had blessed England with prosperity and liberty. Political loyalism, therefore, was a religious act, and a fundamental part of Christian duty, for, as he argued, 'One irregular stone in the Fabric may prejudice the firmness, as well as destroy the symmetry of the whole' (T. Bancroft, 'Christian Zeal and Civil Obedience Earnestly Recommended to the Friends of Piety and Good Government', 1800). Yet Bancroft did not write for posterity and clearly had no desire for his political preaching to survive his death. In his will he directed that his sermons be destroyed to safeguard them against passing into the hands of others or being used by others. 
Bancroft died on 5 February 1811 and was buried at Bolton parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 1275


Bandinel, Bulkeley (1781-1861), librarian, was born in Oxford on 21 February 1781, the third child of James Bandinel (died 1804), fellow of Jesus College, and his wife, Margaret. His ancestors, originally from Italy, had moved to Jersey early in the seventeenth century. His father was the first of the family to settle in England. Educated at Winchester College and New College, Oxford, Bandinel proceeded from BA in 1805 to MA in 1807 and to BD and DD in 1823. He was ordained in 1805 and served as chaplain in the Royal Navy in 1808. He held the rectory of Haughton-le-Skerne, co. Durham, and the curacy of Wytham, Berkshire, until 1855. In 1815 he married Mary (died 1875), daughter of John Phillips, of Culham, Berkshire; they had no children. 
John Price, Bodley's librarian and Bandinel's godfather, appointed him under-librarian in 1810, and on Price's death three years later Bandinel was elected unopposed to his place. Within four months the Bodleian statutes were altered to increase its staff, its annual grant, its opening hours, and its librarian's salary. Bandinel's long period in office was marked by the continuous expansion of the library's collections. A decision in the court of king's bench in 1814 confirming the copyright libraries' claim to all British publications left the increased grant available for the purchase of foreign and rare books and manuscripts. Bandinel prided himself on the speed with which he responded to items coming on the market, and through judicious purchases he significantly strengthened the holdings of incunables and early bibles. Extensive purchases of English material filled gaps in the library's holdings, for example seventeenth- and eighteenth-century plays and pre-1814 booksellers' catalogues in 1834 and, in 1837, over 19,000 pamphlets of the period 1660 to 1820. Bandinel made spectacular purchases of manuscripts both western and oriental, among them the collections of Canonici in 1817 and Oppenheimer in 1829 and selections from those of Saibante in 1820 and Ouseley in 1844. 
Bandinel's energies were not confined to acquisition. As under-librarian he prepared the catalogue of the large Gough collection, which was published in 1814. As Bodley's librarian he set about the daunting task of producing a general catalogue of printed books to replace the existing one which, published in 1738 and containing many inaccuracies, was a woefully inadequate guide to the collections. Attempts made through Lord Grenville, chancellor of the university, to acquire a grant from the civil list to assist in this 'national object' came to nothing, and the work proceeded slowly. In 1837 Bandinel, eloquently pointing out that some 160,000 items had been added to the collections since 1813, asked for more staff. Three additional assistants were appointed and the catalogue was published in three volumes in 1843. A fourth volume, covering the accessions of 1835-47, appeared in 1851. 
In the evidence presented to the 1850 royal commission of inquiry into the state of the university, there was much cause for congratulation for the librarian who had ruled the Bodleian for thirty-seven years. Bandinel could take pride in the richness of the collections, the courtesy of the staff, and the existence of published catalogues. His health was, however, failing and he took little part in the general overhaul which, in the Bodleian as elsewhere in the university, followed the publication of the commission's findings. His attendance at the library declined, but he clung to office, resisting change, while his governing body of curators turned increasingly to his subordinates. He was eventually persuaded to retire in September 1860. He died of angina after a severe attack of bronchitis at his Oxford home, 31 Beaumont Street, on 6 February 1861 and was buried six days later. 
Outside the Bodleian, Bandinel's scholarly interests lay in editing. He served for many years as delegate of the university press. With John Caley and Henry Ellis he produced a lavish new edition of Dugdale's 'Monasticon' (1817-30). Although hailed as an outstanding achievement in its day, its reputation has not survived the rigours of modern scrutiny. David Douglas, in his 'English Scholars, 1660-1730' (rev. edn 1951, 38-40), dismisses it as 'almost entirely derivative'. 
Contemporary accounts of Bandinel's character vary. His obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' described his endearing combination of universal courtesy and kindness. His gracious reception of Francis Douce when he visited the library in 1830 caused that great collector to alter his will in favour of the Bodleian. Yet he was clearly autocratic and did not suffer fools gladly. W. D. Macray, in his 'Annals of the Bodleian', admitted that Bandinel sometimes lacked 'the general courtesy which should be exhibited to all duly qualified readers alike' (Macray, 371 n). This verdict was endorsed by Professor Friedrich Max Muller, who in his 'Autobiography' (Muller, 251), deplored Bandinel's rough treatment of his subordinates. Perhaps he had, as Sir Edmund Craster speculated in his 'History of the Bodleian', learned vigour of expression in the navy (Craster, 30). Macray, who served under him for twenty years, ended his account of Bandinel with the words 'all the staff trembled at Jupiter's nod'. 


@@@@@


doc= 1276


Bandinel, David (d. 1645), dean of Jersey, settled in Jersey with his English wife, Elizabeth Stallenge, towards the end of the reign of Elizabeth I. Of his earlier life nothing is known beyond his contemporaries' statement that he was Italian. In September 1601 he offered himself to the Calvinist colloquy in Jersey as a candidate for the ministry. He was accepted for the parish of St Brelade and installed there only two months later, so it appears that he had already trained for the ministry elsewhere. He remained there nearly twenty years, during which time his seven children, five sons and two daughters, were born. After St Brelade's he served St Mary's and then St Martin's. 
The presbyterian form of church government was not destined to last much longer in the island. James I, on the understanding that this arrangement had been formally sanctioned by Elizabeth, confirmed it in the first year of his reign, but Sir John Peyton, appointed governor of the island by the king in 1603, was soon in conflict with the colloquy over the right of appointment to benefices. In 1614 there was still greater controversy over an appointment made by Peyton: the colloquy's objection in that case was related to the candidate's having received episcopal orders. In the same year delegations went to London, one representing each of the episcopal and presbyterian parties. Bandinel formed part of the delegation favouring the continuation of the presbyterian form of church government, though he accepted the office of dean when it was re-established. 
When, on 15 April 1620, Bandinel was sworn into office, he was the first to hold it since John Paulet, who had been appointed under Henry VIII and served into Elizabeth's reign. One of Bandinel's first tasks as dean was to oversee the drawing up of the 'canons and constitutions ecclesiastical of the isle of Jersey'. An ecclesiastical court was established, which first met in September 1623, and Bandinel presided at its sittings. 
Bandinel's appointment as dean was controversial: there was a heated dispute in the states on the occasion of his swearing in. Some of the rectors in the island objected strongly to what they saw as a non-scriptural innovation in church government. It is hard to determine whether there was much feeling against Bandinel personally, particularly since at least from the time of the contemporary account of island life in the 1640s contained in Jean Chevalier's 'Journal' he was cast strongly as a troublesome foreigner allowed to hold too much power in the island -- a view inspired almost entirely by his quarrel with the lieutenant-governor, Sir Philip de Carteret, and by his involvement in the parliamentary party in Jersey. 
De Carteret was appointed by Charles I, and, although a zealous protestant, was always an ardent loyalist. He is said to have been a man of ability and integrity, but of austere manners, and he was accused by his enemies of absorbing all the more lucrative offices in the island. He and the governor, Sir Thomas Jermyn, were charged with having attempted to deprive the dean of part of his tithes, an act which roused Bandinel's animosity to the lieutenant-governor, which was in turn fostered by subsequent events. 
During the civil war, Bandinel was among those leaders of the parliamentary party who kept back supplies from the besieged fortresses of Elizabeth Castle and Mont Orgueil, where the lieutenant-governor and his wife were confined. The hardships which he had to endure undermined de Carteret's health, and Bandinel revealed the extent of his bitterness in refusing all spiritual and material comforts to de Carteret in his final illness, keeping even his wife from him until the last moment. When on de Carteret's death in 1643 his son-in-law, Sir George Carteret, became lieutenant-governor in his place, he arrested Bandinel and his eldest son, Jacques, the rector of St Mary, on a charge of treason. The Bandinels were confined first in Elizabeth Castle and afterwards in Mont Orgueil, where, after more than twelve months' imprisonment, they formed a plan for escape. Having knotted together bed linen and other material, on the night of 10 February 1645 they forced their way through the grating of their cell and lowered themselves down the side of their prison. The son succeeded in reaching the end of the line but it was too short and he fell, seriously injured. The line broke under Bandinel's weight and he in turn fell, but from a greater height onto the rocks below, where he was discovered unconscious by a guard in the morning; he died later that day, 11 February. He was buried on 13 February in St Martin's churchyard. Elizabeth Bandinel survived her husband; Jacques Bandinel escaped for a time, but was recaptured and died in prison. 


@@@@@


doc= 1277


Bandinel, James (1783-1849), civil servant, was the son of James Bandinel (died 1804), fellow of Jesus College, Oxford, and his wife, Margaret. Bulkeley Bandinel, Bodley's librarian, was his elder brother. James entered the Foreign Office as a clerk on 5 April 1799, became senior clerk in March 1822, and retired in December 1845 through ill health. About 1813 he married Marian Eliza, daughter of the Revd Robert Hunter (died 1815), a Glaswegian who was rector of two parishes in Dorset. Bandinel was closely acquainted with Lady Arabella Harvey and Lord and Lady Rosebery. From 1824 until 1845 he was superintendent of the slave trade department, and as such bore considerable responsibility for the abolition of the slave trade. In 1842 he published a substantial work, 'Some account of the trade in slaves from Africa as connected with Europe and America, especially with reference to the efforts made by the British government for its extinction', and dedicated it to Lord Aberdeen, then foreign secretary (next year he asked Aberdeen for a living for his son). The book 'is an invaluable abstract of the Foreign Office slave trade papers' (Bethell, 6). Also in 1842 he was a member of a small commission to assess the role of the navy in the suppression of the slave trade; its report in 1844 led to increased naval action on the west coast of Africa. Bandinel latterly supported the use of force by the navy, arguing to the select committee on the Brazilian trade in 1847-8 for 'making redress by force of arms' when necessary (ibid., 307). He died of Asiatic cholera at his house in Berkeley Square, London, on 29 July 1849. 
His son, 


@@@@@


doc= 1278


Banim, John (1798-1842), novelist and playwright, was born in the city of Kilkenny, on 3 April 1798, the younger son of Michael Banim, a proprietor of a gun and tackle shop, and his wife, Joannah Carroll. His elder brother, 
In 1820 John Banim returned to Dublin, where he turned to journalism, contributing to the 'Leinster Gazette', the 'Limerick Evening Post' under the pseudonym A Traveller, and various magazines. Hampered by debts, he travelled to London to advance in his profession, and there he was introduced to Richard Lalor Sheil, a playwright and politician influential in the campaign for Catholic emancipation. Banim's poem 'Ossian's Paradise', based on the legend of St Patrick's attempt to convert the pagan hero Ossian, was shown by Banim to Sir Walter Scott, who admired it; in 1821 it was published as 'The Celt's Paradise'. Sheil also introduced Banim into theatrical circles, and although his first play, 'Turgesius' (1820), remained unstaged, his second, 'Damon and Pythias', was performed at Covent Garden on 28 May 1821. The tragedy, using classical settings reflecting Banim's ascendancy education and with William Macready and Charles Kemble in the principal roles, was successful enough to allow Banim to return to Kilkenny and discharge his debts. 
On 27 February 1822 John Banim married Ellen, the daughter of John Ruth, a Kilkenny farmer, and in March the couple travelled to London, where they set up home in Brompton, and Banim joined the staff of the newly formed 'Literary Register'. While in Kilkenny, he had outlined to his brother Michael a plan for a series of national tales that the two would write in collaboration. Over the next two years the brothers worked upon a first volume, John being supported in London by the friendship of the Irish novelist Gerald Griffin, while Michael was gathering material in Ireland. The brothers adopted the pseudonyms Abel and Barnes O'Hara respectively, and were in constant communication over drafts of each other's fiction. An insight into the close collaborative nature of the Banims' writing practice can be gathered from John's letter to Michael at this time, in which he requests 'your severest criticism [...] sit in judgement and send me all your opinions sincerely given' (quoted in Cronin, 46). Each brother freely edited the work of the other, deleting passages, adding new sections, and even reshaping the other's characters or plot. 
John Banim's third play, 'The Prodigal', was accepted at Covent Garden in 1823 but was never performed. Frustrated, he published 'Revelations of the Dead-Alive' (1824), a satire upon the London literary scene. Within a year the publication of John's 'John Doe, or, Peep O'Day' and 'The Fetches', and Michael's 'Crohoore of the Billhook' as 'Tales from the O'Hara Family' made the Banims part of that scene. The 'Tales' reflected the brothers' commitment to Daniel O'Connell's campaign for Catholic emancipation, and both 'Crohoore' and 'John Doe' endeavoured to explain the underlying causes of Whiteboy agrarian violence. 'Crohoore', which focused upon 'life in the cabin', was considered by many contemporary critics to be the best of the O'Hara tales. The 'Edinburgh Review' remarked that 'It is pleasant after ages of bad romances in politics to find good politics in romances' ('EdinR', 43, 1826, 172), while Gerald Griffin praised the Banims' 'excellent tact in seizing on all parts of national character which are capable of effect' (Griffin, 231). 
Tact was essential to the Banims' success, as they published in London, and wrote in English at a time when 50 per cent of the Irish population spoke Gaelic. While John Banim might remark to his compatriots that his work was inspired by 'an indignant wish to soften the hearts of Ireland's oppressors' (Wolff, introduction to Murray, xlvi), to his English readers he described 'the uniform political tendency' of the 'Tales' as 'for the formation of a good and affectionate feeling between England and Ireland' (Wolff, xlvii). As Michael Banim explained, it was necessary to 'insinuate through fiction the causes of Irish discontent, the conclusion to be arrived at by the reader' (Webb). All three of the first collection of tales endeavoured to attract English readers by placing an Englishman abroad figure at the centre of their narratives. The presentation of dialogue between Irish characters (rather than any more overt form of direct address to the reader), was also a preferred method of persuasion for hesitant English well-wishers. 
Following the success of the 'Tales', Michael Banim spent several months in 1825 researching a second volume, through travel in the south of Ireland and correspondence with folklorists such as the bookseller Patrick Kennedy. In 1826 he travelled to London, partly to celebrate the birth of his niece, Mary, and partly to supply his brother with background information. John Banim's third novel, 'The Boyne Water', was a direct and controversial appeal for Catholic emancipation set in the 1690s during the battle of the Boyne; it concludes by insisting that the English had reneged upon the treaty of Limerick, which had expressed conciliatory intentions towards Catholics. Again, an English readership was encouraged to identify with the hero, Robert Evelyn, an Anglican Orangeman. With his sister he meets a Catholic brother and sister, Edmund and Eva McDonnell; the couples fall in love, but are driven apart by sectarian violence. Some of the novel's dialogue was written in Gaelic, with translations footnoted. 

'The Boyne Water' was published in 1826, together with John Banim's 'The Nowlans' and 'Peter of the Castle' as the second volume of 'Tales from the O'Hara Family', dedicated to Thomas Moore, 'Ireland's True Son and First Poet'. 'The Nowlans', the first in a long line of Irish Catholic novels about 'spoiled priests', including George Moore's 'The Lake' (1905) and Gerald O'Donovan's 'Father Ralph' (1913), was especially favourably reviewed, and in 1895 W. B. Yeats admired the novel enough to include it in his list of thirty best Irish books. Reviewers commented that the O'Hara family 'borrowed largely from the storehouse of Sir Walter's machinery' ('Monthly Review', 4th ser., Jan 1827, 131), and 'The Boyne Water', which stood for more than a century as the most widely acclaimed Irish historical novel, was favourably compared with Scott's 'Waverley'. 
In 1827 Michael Banim began work on 'The Croppy', which like 'The Boyne Water' invited support for Catholic emancipation. 'The Croppy' traced the cultural confusion of the 1820s to the 1798 rising, penetrating to the heart of the Wexford rising while retaining the Banim spirit of reconciliation. It appeared in a third volume of O'Hara tales, alongside John's 'The Conformist', about a Catholic victim of the penal laws who ousts his family from their hereditary holdings by turning protestant, and 'The Last Baron', encouraging Catholic secession from the materialism of Ulster. Both John Banim's novels were heavily revised in the wake of the 'Catholic Emancipation Act' of 1828, and the volume was prefaced with the hope that English readers would not be offended, and was dedicated to Arthur, duke of Wellington. 
Later in 1828 John Banim published another novel, 'The Anglo-Irish in the Nineteenth Century', where the hero, the absentee landlord George Blount, has his hatred and contempt for the 'uncivilised Irish' challenged by his love for a 'wild Irish girl' who initially masquerades as a sophisticated Frenchwoman. Banim's satire on the political divisions between social classes in Ireland appeared anonymously, and the contrast with the O'Hara tales was so pronounced that it was thought to have been written by Sydney Owenson's husband, Charles Morgan. 
During the following year John Banim became severely ill and moved to Boulogne to convalesce. Financial hardship advanced with ill health, and the success of the O'Hara tales in America and their translation into French and German in 1830 was not enough to defray the increased expenses necessitated by medical care and the birth of two sons in 1831 and 1832. John worked on 'The Smuggler', his only novel set in England, and contributed several light pieces to the English Opera House, mostly adaptations of the first volume of O'Hara tales. These successes failed to prevent the Banims from declining into further poverty, and at the end of 1832 John Banim's wife, Ellen, visited John Sterling, the editor of 'The Times' and a friend of her husband's. Sterling organized a relief fund in 'The Times', and Richard Lalor Sheil set up a similar subscription fund in Dublin to 'assert the eminence of an author who had reflected so much honour upon his country' (Murray, 226). 
Although John Banim's financial distress was alleviated by these tributes to his reputation, his sufferings continued. In 1834 he became paralysed from the waist down and was pronounced incurable by his doctors, and later that year both his sons died. He became eager to leave France and return to Ireland, and his arrival in Dublin in July 1835 was greeted with much enthusiasm. Performances of his play 'Damon and Pythias' and of his adaptations of the O'Hara tales were given for his benefit at the Dublin Theatre Royal. Shortly after his arrival in Kilkenny, John Banim was granted a civil-list pension of $150 per annum, with an extra $40 for his daughter. Although too ill to write, he managed to assist his brother with his stories 'The Ghost Hunter and his Family' and 'The Mayor of Windgap', which appeared along with 'The Smuggler' in a fourth O'Hara volume. 

'The Bit o'Writing' appeared in 1838, and represented a collection of twenty stories including sketches by Michael Banim and selections from John Banim's contributions to periodical literature. The large sales of the collection combined with Michael's commercial success in the family business to make the brothers wealthy, and in 1840 Michael Banim married Catherine O'Dwyer, with whom he had two daughters, Mary and Mathilde. However, within a year of his marriage Michael's business collapsed due to the bankruptcy of a merchant, and he lost the greater proportion of his fortune. 
In preparation for the next O'Hara volume, Michael Banim had researched the Kilkenny branch of the Whiteboys, the Whitefeet: a rural protest movement committed to the abolition of church tithes. Michael had interviewed Whitefeet leaders, and wished to write another novel as a companion to 'Crohoore of the Billhook', his earlier examination of Whiteboyism. Yet John Banim advised him 'we have given too much of the darker side of the Irish life: let us for the present treat of the amiable' (Murray, 240), and the brothers instead collaborated on a character study of a kindly priest who had been a friend since childhood. 'Father Connell' (1842), although in parts sentimental, gave a grim picture of pre-famine rural poverty. 
On 13 August 1842 John Banim died at Kilkenny of the progressive spinal illness that had afflicted him since his teens. He was diagnosed as suffering from spinal tuberculosis, although his symptoms also indicate multiple sclerosis. His wife, Ellen, and daughter, Mary, survived him, although Mary died a year later. Michael Banim had lived in his brother's shadow for most of his life, as John Banim was not only better known, but was also considered to be the possessor of 'the poetic vein', whereas Michael's talents were considered to rest more mundanely in the close observation of social background and peasant life. In 1852 Michael Banim published a short story, 'Clough Finn, or, The Stone of Destiny', in the 'Dublin University Magazine'. Later that year he was appointed postmaster of Kilkenny, which distracted him from writing for another decade. In 1864 his final book, and the only one to bear his name, appeared; 'The Town of the Cascades' was a temperance novel describing the disastrous effects of drink upon family life. 
During the 1850s Michael Banim assisted Patrick Murray in writing a biography of his brother, and 'The Life of John Banim' was published in 1857, running through ten editions in London and Dublin until 1869, and reprinted in facsimile by Robert Lee Wolff in 1978. In 1865 Banim wrote the introduction and notes for the collected works of the 'O'Haras', the first edition to be published in Dublin. Michael Banim became ill in 1873, and resigned as postmaster in order to retire to Booterstown on the coast of co. Dublin. A grant from the Royal Literary Fund did little to defray the financial hardship in which he spent his last years. He died at Booterstown on 30 August 1874, and his widow received a civil-list pension. His daughter Mary became a journalist for the 'Weekly Freeman' and travel writer, best known for 'Here and There Through Ireland' (1893), a nationalist account of a journey through post-famine Ireland. 
The Banims gained a lasting posthumous reputation as nationalist novelists, and several of the novels were reprinted in the twentieth century. As Sir Charles Gavan Duffy remarked in 1891, 'Moore's Melodies, Griffin's and the Banims' novels have been a constant cordial to the sorely tried spirit of our people' (Gilligan, 81). 


@@@@@


doc= 1279


Michael Banim (1796-1874), was also born at Kilkenny, on 5 August 1796. The brothers were educated locally at Dr MacGrath's Catholic school, but an improvement in the family fortunes allowed John to be sent to St John's College, Kilkenny, where he gained an education more usually reserved for protestants. At sixteen, Michael began legal training, but financial troubles forced him to give up his studies to take over his father's business. Meanwhile, John had demonstrated a precocious talent for painting, and in 1813 he joined the drawing academy of the Royal Dublin Society, where he won the highest prize at the end of his first year. After graduating in 1816, he returned to Kilkenny to take up work as a drawing-master in a girls' boarding-school. There he fell in love with one of his pupils, the daughter of a protestant land agent, but her father on religious grounds refused him permission to marry her. She was removed from Kilkenny, and when she died several months later from tuberculosis, John believed she had died for love of him. His disappointment precipitated a period of depression from which his biographer Patrick Murray dates the first symptoms of the spinal disease that would eventually prove fatal. 


@@@@@


doc= 1280


Banister, John (1532/3-1599?), surgeon, was the son of John Banister, apparently 'a minor official in the royal household' (Bindoff, 647), and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Richard Lowth, of Sawtry, Huntingdon. He had a brother, Gabriel, and a sister, Elizabeth. Little else is known about his origins. He attended Edward VI during his last illness in 1553, and corresponded at least between 26 May and 21 July with the imperial ambassador, Jehan Scheyfve, detailing the king's decline and the duke of Northumberland's preparations for the succession. After service at sea he went as surgeon with the earl of Warwick's army sent to relieve Le Havre in 1563. When Warwick was struck by a poisoned bullet on 29 July, Banester successfully treated him. It was probably during this campaign that he began a long friendship with William Clowes the elder. Some time after his return he studied medicine at Oxford and received a licence to practise on 30 June 1573. Meanwhile, on 12 February 1572, he had been admitted to the Barber-Surgeons' Company, enabling him to practise in London. On moving to London he changed his name from Banester to Banister. His description in the company's court minutes (B/1/1) as 'of Nottingham' confirms that he had not served a surgeon's apprenticeship in London. 
A painting in Glasgow University Library (MS Hunter 364) shows Banister delivering a visceral lecture at the Barber-Surgeons' Hall, Monkwell Street, London. Four such lectures were given each year and all freemen and guests were invited to attend. Dated 1581, and giving Banister's age as forty-eight, the picture represents the method of teaching anatomy in the late sixteenth century. Before an audience of young surgeons he points to a skeleton beside which there is an opened medical text, while in front of him there is a body in the process of dissection. In 1582-3 Banister served as surgeon on the 'Leicester', one of four ships which took part in an expedition to China and the East Indies financed by a group of wealthy citizens with the support of the earl of Leicester. However, the voyage was unsuccessful. Banister lost forty-five of his patients and the ships got no further than the Atlantic so he learned nothing of tropical diseases. Two years later he went with the earl of Leicester's expedition to the Netherlands. 
In 1593 Banister was licensed to practise medicine and surgery by the College of Physicians of London, in obedience to a letter from Queen Elizabeth. The letter referred to Banister's honesty and skill and noted that he had 'always jointlie used the art of Physick with Chirurgerie'. Being licensed to practise medicine as well as surgery was unusual at a time when the surgeon, who had learned his craft through apprenticeship, was considered subordinate to the university educated physician. The college had once censured him for illicit practice. It has been suggested that the queen's letter reflects attempts to further the union of medicine and surgery in late Tudor times, and also the College of Physicians' opposition to the idea. Banister's daughter Cicely married the surgeon John Read, who also opposed the separation of medicine from surgery. 
Banister was a prolific writer. He wrote the epilogue to William Clowes's book on syphilis, 'A Short and Profitable Treatise', first published in 1579. His own works were 'A needefull, new, & necessarie treatise of chyrurgerie, briefly comprehending the generall and particular curation of ulcers' (1575), which was dedicated to Thomas Stanhope, high sheriff of Nottingham, and was based largely on ancient and modern authors but including some of his own treatments; 'The Historie of Man, Sucked from the Sappe of the most Approved Anathomistes' (1578), which includes a passing reference to his treatment of young children in Nottingham suffering from pleurisy; 'Compendius Chirurgery, Gathered and Translated Especially out of Wecker' (1585), which includes many annotations to correct the errors of Johann Jacob Wecker and to supply new information; and 'An Antidotarie Chyrurgicall' (1589). His collected works were published in 1633. Banister's books contain little original thinking and were less highly regarded than those of William Clowes, whose practical outlook he lacked. Compiled from the standard authorities their purpose was to bring to the fraternity of surgeons what Banister considered to be the theory and practice of the day. He was one of a group of medical practitioners who not only 'advocated chemical therapy but also projected themselves as allies of the Paracelsians' (Webster, 327). Banister's wife was named Joan; they had a daughter, Catherine, who married the physician Stephen Bradwell. In later years Banister lived in Silver Street, London, and was buried at St Olave, Silver Street, where a monument erected to his memory was destroyed, together with the church, in the great fire. He is possibly the 'Mr John Banister' who was buried there on 16 January 1599. 


@@@@@


doc= 1281


Banister, John (1624/5-1679), violinist and composer, was the son of a wait in St Giles-in-the-Fields, London. He played (alongside Thomas Baltzar) in William Davenant's 'Siege of Rhodes' (scheduled for September 1656 but possibly not performed for another three years). Pepys heard him perform at the Mitre tavern at the beginning of 1660. By the end of the year he had been appointed to one of the new places in the court musical establishment. He was then, according to Anthony Wood, sent to France 'to see and learn the way of the French composition' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood D 19(4)). In April 1662 he was placed in charge of twelve violins (to be chosen by him from the band of twenty-four) who accompanied the king to Portsmouth to welcome the new queen, Catherine of Braganza. 
In 1662 Banister was appointed to a place in the king's private music, filling a vacancy created by the death of Davis Mell in April. In July of the following year he was placed in charge of the select band of twelve violins, which was now to be constituted as a permanent ensemble. Not only was Banister given total artistic control, but he was also responsible for disbursing the $600 per annum allocated to the group; this was eventually to become the source of a grievance among the other players. 
For the moment, however, Banister's career continued to flourish. In November 1663 he was elected as an assistant in the Corporation for Regulating the Art and Science of Musick, and in June 1664 he was made one of the wardens for the following year. An order of 9 May 1665 from the lord chamberlain gave him joint responsibility with George Hudson and Matthew Locke for 'composing, ordering and directing of all his Majesty's violins (in the absence of the Master of his Mats Musick)'. 
But then things started going quite seriously wrong. Banister got into personal financial difficulties, and by 1665 was being importuned by creditors. This was a predicament shared by many of the king's musicians, since salary payments were well in arrears. In July 1665 Banister applied for the payment of the $600 allowance due to the select band, complaining that he had 'spent much tyme in soliciting ye payment of the said Augmentacon to his own Damage by the hindrance of yor Mats service and finds that wthout the constant payment of the same allowance yor Mats Comands cannot effectually bee obayed...' The following November the payment of some arrears was authorized in a warrant which noted that up to that date little more than a third of the money owing to the group had been paid over. A year later, on 7 November 1666, Banister and eleven other violinists (all but three of them members of his select group) signed another petition which emphasized the difficulties of their situation: 'That yor petrs... are in Arreare of their Sallaryes at the Trea[su]ry Chambers fower yeares and three quarters. And that severall of your Maies petrs have had their houses and Goods burnt by the late Fire, which hath reduced them to great misery and want.' But on 14 March the following year an order was issued for the $600 allowance to be paid not to Banister, but to Louis Grabu (who had been sworn in as master of the musick four months earlier). By the end of the month Banister's colleagues in the select band had turned against him, submitting a lengthy 'Remonst[ran]ce against Mr Banister' in which they accused him of embezzlement and even blackmail; he '... demanded of the Company $20 a peice... which if wee refused hee swore wee should be turn'd out of the Band. for saies he, I am to carry upp the names to morrow morning to the Councell Chamber, and they that will not doe this, their names shall be left out and others put in.' All of this coincides with reports of Banister's rather hot-headed and arrogant behaviour. Anthony Wood had the idea that Banister had been displaced by Grabu as the director of the select band 'for some saucy words spoken to His Majesty (viz. when he called for the Italian violins, he made answer that he had better have the English)' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood D 19(4)). And Pepys reported in his diary in February 1667 that 'they talk also how the King's viallin, Bannister, is mad that the King hath a Frenchman come to be chief of some part of the King's musique, at which the Duke of York made great mirth'. Worse was to come. In May Banister was arrested for abusing Grabu and several other musicians. He had become, it seems, a somewhat disaffected member of the king's music. Banister was twice married. Following the death of his first wife, Mary, he married on 14 January 1671 Mary Wood ('b'. 1620/21), a widow; the marriage licence, issued on 11 January 1671, stated his age to be forty-six. 
Throughout this period, Banister had been heavily involved with theatrical music, particularly for the King's Company, managed by Thomas Killigrew. The company's theatre in Bridges Street (completed in 1663) introduced to England the placement of musicians in front of the stage (the area now known as the pit). An order from the lord chamberlain dated 20 December 1664 required members of Banister's select band to 'attend at his Majesty's theatre whenever Thomas Killigrew shall desire them'. Within a few months, the remaining members of the twenty-four violins were filling a similar role for the Duke's Company at its theatre in Lincoln's Inn Fields. This arrangement seems to have been doubly satisfactory to the court since it ensured both that the king and queen would be treated to excellent music when they visited the theatre and that these instrumentalists were getting some cash in hand at a time when their court salaries were hopelessly in arrears. 
Banister's own involvement with the theatres was as composer as well as performer. In fact, he provided music for at least ten productions in the first decade of the Restoration period -- more than any other composer. The first seems to have been Sir Robert Stapylton's 'The Slighted Maid' (performed by the Duke's Company in February 1662), whose text records that 'the Instrumental, Vocal, and Recitative Musick, was composed by Mr Banister'. Banister's next theatrical compositions were songs to be sung between the acts of Katherine Phillips's 'Pompey', which was performed by Ogilby's Men in Dublin in 1663. The following year he wrote songs and instrumental music for 'The Indian Queen' by John Dryden and Robert Howard. After his displacement as the leader of the select band in 1667, Banister's compositional output increased and his loyalties shifted towards the Duke's Company: he provided music for its productions of Dryden's 'Sir Martin Mar-All' (1667), Dryden's adaptation of 'The Tempest' (1667) (to which Pelham Humfrey also contributed), Davenant's 'The Man's the Master' (March 1668), Thomas Shadwell's 'The Royal Shepherdess' (1669), Aphra Behn's 'The Forc'd Marriage' (1670), Samuel Tuke's 'The Adventures of Five Hours' (a 1671 revival), John Crowne's 'Juliana' (1671), William Wycherley's 'The Gentleman Dancing Master' (1672), Shadwell's 'Epsom Wells' (1672), and Davenant's 'Circe' (1677). He contributed music for just two productions by the King's Company: Charles Sedley's 'The Mulberry Garden' (1668) and Dryden's 'The Conquest of Granada', part 1 (1670). 
Banister, needing to find a way out of his financial difficulties, became an innovator in other ways. Roger North gives a vivid account of his contribution to the development of the public concert in England: 'The next essay was of the elder Banister, who had a good theatricall vein and in composition had a lively style peculiar to himself. He procured a large room in Whitefryars, neer the Temple back gate, and made a large raised box for musitians, whose modesty required curtaines. The room was rounded with seats and small tables alehous fashion; 1s. was the price and call for what you pleased. There was very good musick, for Banister found means to procure the best hands in towne, and some voices to come and performe there, and there wanted no variety of humour, for Banister himself (inter alia) did wonders upon a flageolett to a thro base and the severall masters had their solos. This continued full one winter, and more I remember not. (Hereford Cathedral Library, MS R.II.xlii)' Banister's concerts began at the end of 1672 in his house in Whitefriars ('the Musick School'). At the beginning of 1675 they moved to Chandos Street, Covent Garden, and from November 1678 until his death in 1679 they were held in the Essex Buildings, near St Clement's Church in the Strand. Despite North's assertion that the audience could call out requests, these concerts must, from time to time at least, have been quite elaborately structured. A booklet by Banister entitled 'Musick, or, A Parley of Instruments' provides a dramatic framework for one of the 1676 concerts, which included such items as a 'Symphony of Theorboes, Lutes, Harps, Harpsicons, Guittars, Pipes, Flutes, Flagellets, Cornets, Sackbutts, Hoboys, Rechords, Organs, and all sort of Wind Instruments... with assistant Voices, and Violins'. 
Banister's financial troubles continued to the end. In 1679 he was still petitioning to be paid six years' worth of salary arrears. In May he was given six months' leave from his court duties, and in July he obtained a passport for himself and his son to travel abroad. The trip was never made, and he died on 3 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 1282


Banister, John (1650-1692), naturalist, was born in Twigworth, Gloucestershire, the son of John Banister, whose family were described as 'common folk'. In 1667 he enrolled at Magdalen College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1671 and proceeded MA in 1674. He remained at Magdalen, serving as a clerk and librarian from 1674 to 1676 and as a chaplain from 1676 to 1678. Banister became deeply interested in natural history during these years at Oxford, where he was probably influenced by William Browne and Professor Robert Morison, both ardent botanists. The extensive plant collections at the Oxford Physic Garden and herbaria from Africa, Europe, and the New World provided Banister with an opportunity to study much of the known flora of the day. By the time he sailed to North America in 1678 he was well qualified as a naturalist and, after brief sojourns in Barbados and Grenada, he arrived in Virginia, where he promptly began work on a 'natural history' of the colony. Little is known of Banister's private life. By 1687 he had married, his wife's name being given as Martha; their one son was named John. 
Whether Banister went to America to work as a naturalist or to serve the Anglican church is uncertain, but it was not until 1689 that he received his appointment as a minister in Virginia. Meanwhile, by 1679, within a year of settling there, he was sending botanical specimens and species lists to correspondents in England, including Henry Compton, bishop of London, Martin Lister, Jacob Bobart the younger, and Morison. In 1680 he provided a lengthy catalogue of Virginia plants to John Ray, who published the list in volume two (1688) of the 'Historia plantarum', where he described Banister as 'eruditissimus vir et consummatissimus botanicus' ('a most learned man and most consummate botanist'). In 1690 Banister acquired 1735 acres of land near the Appomatox River in Charles City county, Virginia. He was a founder and trustee of the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg. His extensive library of natural history and religious books was acquired after his death by William Byrd of Virginia. 
During the last decade of his life Banister shipped plants, insects, molluscs, and fossils to his associates in England, eventually providing more than 340 plant species, more than 100 insects, and many drawings of shells, plants, and insects. While collecting plants along the Roanoke River, Virginia, in May 1692, Banister was accidentally shot and killed by a member of his exploring party. After his death many of his specimens, drawings, and species catalogues were sent to England, where some went to Oxford and others passed into the possession of Sir Hans Sloane and eventually became part of the collections at the Natural History Museum in London. 
Banister was the first university-trained naturalist to send specimens, illustrations, and natural history data from North America to England. Although he died without publishing any material under his own name, he contributed significantly to the progress of natural sciences through the published works of others. Extracts of his letters to Lister appeared in volume seventeen of the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' (1693), and some of his entomology records were printed by James Petiver in volume twenty-two of the 'Philosophical Transactions' (1701) and in the 'Monthly Miscellany, or, Memoirs for the Curious' (1707). Johann Frederick Gronovius used Banister's data extensively in the 'Flora Virginica' (1739, 1743), while Carl Linnaeus relied heavily on Banister for his Virginia species descriptions in 'Species plantarum' (1753). Linnaeus had obtained much of his information from Banister's drawings in Leonard Plukenet's 'Phytographia' (1691-1705) and from Banister's data published in Ray's 'Historia plantarum' (1686-1704) and in volume three of Morison's 'Plantarum historiae' (1699). Additionally, Banister's data and writing were used without attribution by Robert Beverley in the 'History and Present State of Virginia' (1705) and by John Oldmixon in his 'British Empire in America' (1708). 


@@@@@


doc= 1283


Banister, Richard (c.1570-1626), oculist, whose precise date and place of birth are unknown, was the son of Gabriel Banister. He was one of four brothers, two of whom died early, all apprenticed to surgeons or barber-surgeons. His grandfather was John Banister of Cobham, Surrey. He studied surgery under his uncle John Banister (or Banester) and practised for fourteen years in Sleaford, Lincolnshire, during which time he was also trained in couching cataracts by various oculists, including the itinerant Henry Blackborne, Robert Hall of Worcester, Master Velder of Fennie-Stanton, Master Surflet of Lynne, and Master Barnabie of Peterborough. From these he learned 'much practice, but little Theorie', for which reason, by his own account, he read late at night the writings of 'Rasis, Mesue, Fernelius, Vesalius, and others'. Thereafter Banister was based in Stamford, 25 miles from Sleaford, travelling as requested to other towns, such as Norwich and even London. He practised primarily as an oculist, but also gave 'helpe of Hearing by the instrument, the cure of the Hare-lip, and the wry Necke'. 
An incomplete and anonymous memoir preserved in the British Library (MS Sloane 3801), entitled 'Briefe discourse of ye chefeste oculistes', can confidently be assigned to Banister. It is an important source for the social role of early English oculists, as in it he comments on the prominent oculists of his day and on his own training. The names of many of these contemporary oculists are repeated in the preface to his 'Breviary of the Eyes', a collection of aphorisms, ocular therapies, and case histories compiled by Banister in 1621 while in Stamford; it was published the following year in London, as an essay preceding a reprint of an English translation (said by Banister to be long unavailable) of the 'Traite des maladies de l'oeil qui sont en nombre de cent treize' by Jacques Guillemeau, originally published in Paris in 1585. The first printing of this English translation had appeared in London some time between 1586 and 1589 under the title 'A Worthy Treatise of the Eyes'; the translator, given as A. H. (possibly A. Hunton of Nottinghamshire), had, like Guillemeau himself, dedicated the work to Banister's uncle, John Banister. It was bound in one volume with three other medical treatises. These same three treatises were included, along with the English translation of Guillemeau's book, in Banister's book, published in 1622 under the general title 'A treatise of one hundred and thirteene diseases of the eyes, and eye-liddes, the second time published, with some profitable additions of certaine principles and experiments'. From the preface it is evident that Banister did not intend to claim credit for any but the first item, his 'Breviary of the Eyes', although later writers unjustly accused him of plagiarism. 
Banister's 'Breviary' contains, in addition to an expose of 'proud quacksalving Mountebankes' and 'emptie empirickes', some interesting observations of medical practices of the day. In it he recognized hardness of the eye as an important diagnostic and prognostic sign, anticipating by a century and a quarter the work of J. Z. Platner. Banister also published 'An Appendent Part of a Treatise of One Hundred and Thirteene Diseases of the Eyes', which was intended to follow on the 'Breviary', published in 1622, but was in fact printed in London the year before. It consists of sixteen chapters devoted to the uses of a 'purging Ale' of his devising, with case histories attesting to its usefulness. 
Of Banister's personal life very little is known, although he has provided many anecdotes about other oculists of his day. His first wife, Anne, died in 1624 in Stamford; they had three daughters, Frances (died 1619), Brigett, and Susan, and four sons, Gabriel, Richard, John, and Francis. Banister died in April 1626 at the age of about 56 and was buried on 7 April 1626 at St Mary's churchyard in Stamford. He had been a benefactor of the church, having built a public library in the south choir to which he donated books, including the writings of Galen and others on medicine and surgery; he left an additional sum in his will for the continued increase and maintenance of the library. His personal library appears to have been substantial, for in his will he divided his collection of medical and Latin books, as well as his medical equipment, among his sons. To his two surviving daughters he left $50 each, large trunks, and all his English books, with the elder also receiving a cloak and gown belonging to his first wife, and the younger his medical bag and 'lignum vitae'. His second wife, Elizabeth, was left the lands he owned in Stamford and in the county of Northampton. 


@@@@@


doc= 1284


Banister, Sir William (bap. 1653, d. 1721), judge, was baptized on 29 March 1653 at Turkdean, Gloucestershire, the son and heir of William Banister (1614/15-1685), gentleman, and his wife, Jane (1618/19-1707). He was admitted to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1669, and to the Middle Temple in 1672. In 1679 he was called to the bar. He married Elizabeth Edwards of Bristol, and they had two daughters. Little is known of his practice, save that in 1704 his chambers in Brick Court were destroyed by fire. Banister did not become a bencher of his inn, though in 1704 he was made a Welsh judge, as second justice on the Brecon circuit, and the following year he took the coif at the only general call of serjeants held under Queen Anne. In 1713 he was transferred to the Carmarthen circuit as chief justice, and later in the year Lord Chancellor Harcourt chose him to fill Sir Salathiel Lovell's place as a baron of the exchequer, whereupon he was knighted. His appointment gave dissatisfaction, however, and after the queen's death the following year the new lord chancellor, Lord Cowper, took the opportunity to revoke his patent on 14 October 1714. Banister died at his ancestral home at Turkdean on 17 January 1721. There is a memorial inscription to him in Turkdean church. 


@@@@@


doc= 1285


Bank, Richard (d. 1415), justice, was probably the son of John Bank of Bank Newton in Gargrave, in the West Riding of Yorkshire. Bank seems likely to have distinguished himself during his legal training at one of the London inns of court, for his is the only name of a practising lawyer found in the moot cases of the period. He first appears in government records in 1388, when, as Richard Bank of Yorkshire, he is listed as one of a group of four men providing surety for the good behaviour of John Gargrave, previously imprisoned at Newgate 'upon suspicion of spying out the king's counsel' ('CClR, 1385-1389', 597). In 1395 he was one of three commissioners appointed to inquire into expenditure on the paving of the road between Charing Cross and the New Temple Bar. He served as lord treasurer's remembrancer from 1397 to 1410, his career apparently undamaged by the deposition of Richard II and the succession of Henry IV, and he was one of a group of seven commissioners, headed by Sir William Rickhill, appointed in 1403 to inquire into the case of 'certain bondmen and tenants in bondage... who have leagued themselves together to refuse their due services' at Tottenham in Middlesex ('CPR', '1401-5', 361). On 19 June 1410 Bank was named as one of the barons of the exchequer, and his appointment was renewed on 28 April 1413. He died, probably in London, in 1415, between 19 October, when he added a codicil to his will, and 2 December, when probate was granted. However, owing to a clerical oversight he continued to be paid his baron's salary until Michaelmas 1416. 
It is likely that Bank's patron, possibly his mentor, had been Sir Robert Plessington, who was chief baron of the exchequer between 1380 and 1386. Plessington had lands in Wharfedale, Yorkshire, close to Bank's home; in May 1405 moreover, Bank was granted the wardship and marriage of Plessington's son, also Robert. Bank's will, dated 6 October 1415, records his receipt of 11 marks owed to the younger Robert, and also refers to some of the father's law books and two silver belts which had come into his possession. The closeness of the relationship is suggested by Bank's stipulation that the belts are to be sold and the proceeds distributed 'for his soul, my soul and the souls of all to whom Robert was indebted' ('Register of Henry Chichele', 2.67). 
Bank was married to Margaret, daughter of William Rivere, who predeceased him. There were three children of the marriage: William, Thomas, and Elizabeth. Two of his brothers are mentioned in his will: John Pierson (perhaps a half-brother) and Thomas Bank; the latter was also a lawyer, who is recorded as attorney in the exchequer for the duchy of Lancaster in 1399, and died as a baron of the exchequer in 1426. Richard Bank's main bequests were $100 to each of his children, four silver cups, and his armour, in addition to his books. In his will Bank stipulated that, should he die in London, he was to be buried next to his wife in the priory of St Bartholomew, Smithfield; Stow confirms that there was a memorial to them there. Bank's ties with Yorkshire were not forgotten; the codicil to his will left 100 marks for a chantry in the church of St Mary of Whixley, York, where his family also owned property. 


@@@@@


doc= 1286


Bankes, George (1787-1856), politician and lawyer, was born on 1 December 1787, the third son of Henry Bankes (1757-1834) of Kingston Lacy, Dorset, who represented Corfe Castle for nearly fifty years, and of Frances (1760/61-1823), daughter of William Woodley, governor of the Leeward Islands. He was a lineal descendant of Sir John Bankes, chief justice of the common pleas in the reign of Charles I. Bankes was educated at Westminster School (1795-1803). He attended Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1805, graduating LLB in 1812; he was a fellow there from 1814 to 1822. He studied law first at Lincoln's Inn and in 1815 at the Inner Temple, being called to the bar that year. Practising on the western circuit, he unexpectedly was offered the seat of Corfe Castle and joined his father as its second tory representative until 1823. He was again returned for Corfe Castle in 1826, and sat until 1832, when the family borough was united with that of Wareham. He was appointed one of the bankruptcy commissioners in 1822, and cursitor baron of the exchequer in 1824 (he was the last holder of this office, abolished on his death). In 1829, under the Wellington administration, he became chief secretary of the Board of Control, and in the next year a junior lord of the Treasury and one of the commissioners for the affairs of India. At the general election in 1841 he again entered parliament, being returned by the county of Dorset, for which he continued to sit until his death. He opposed repeal of the corn laws, arguing that the 'whole class' of tenants would be 'swept away' (Crosby, 140). During Derby's administration in 1852, Bankes held the office of judge-advocate-general and was sworn a privy councillor. 
On 8 June 1822 he married Georgina Charlotte Nugent, whose supposed father was Admiral Sir Charles Edmund Nugent but whose real father was probably Ernest, duke of Cumberland. They had three sons and five daughters; six of the children died in childhood. On the death of his maverick elder brother, William John Bankes, in 1855, Bankes succeeded to the family estates of Kingston Lacy and Studland in Dorset. He died at his London house in Old Palace Yard, Westminster, on 8 July 1856 and was buried at Studland, where a stained-glass window is dedicated to his memory. Bankes was the author of 'The Story of Corfe Castle and of Many Who Have Lived There' (1853) (he was thrice mayor of Corfe Castle) and of 'Brave Dame Mary', a work of fiction founded on the 'Story'. 


@@@@@


doc= 1287


Bankes, Henry (1757-1834), politician and parliamentary diarist, was born on 19 December 1757; he was the second but only surviving son of Henry Bankes ('bap'. 1700, died 1776), commissioner of customs, a member of the parliamentary dynasty descended from the royalist chief justice Sir John Bankes (1589-1644) and his second wife, Margaret, daughter of John Wynne, bishop of Bath and Wells. Having been educated at Westminster School (1767-73) he entered Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1773 and graduated BA (1778) and MA (1781). In September 1776 he succeeded to his father's extensive Dorset estates and to the country house of Kingston Lacy, Wimborne, which he commissioned Robert William Brettingham to remodel from 1784. On 18 August 1784 he married Frances (1760/61-1823), daughter of William Woodley (1728-1793), MP and governor of the Leeward Islands, and Frances Payne. They had five sons and two daughters; two of his sons and one of his daughters predeceased him. 
From 1780 Bankes represented the rotten borough of Corfe Castle, of which he was the electoral patron; his father had held the seat from 1741 to 1762. In the Commons he opposed Britain's prosecution of the war against the American colonies, and from the mid-1780s he was a supporter of the administrations of William Pitt, a personal friend. But he always pursued a self-righteously independent course in financial matters, reprobating the cost of continental warfare, advocating reductions in peacetime expenditure, and urging the abolition of sinecures. At times a dangerous critic of government his influence peaked in 1812, when he at last secured an -- albeit temporary -- act to prevent the granting of offices in reversion (52 Geo. III c. xl). Initially a friend to Catholic relief he gave his last vote in its favour in 1812 and announced his change of heart in a printed speech on 25 February 1813. A procedural expert and an indefatigable committee man he was active, for example, on behalf of the British Museum, of which he was a trustee. With a house at 5 Old Palace Yard, Westminster, which was occasionally used for political meetings, he was well placed for the life of a busy politician, and indeed he had his own recognized seat on the cross benches in the chamber. His manuscript parliamentary journal, which he kept for most of his career, provides an almost daily account of proceedings in the Commons, with illuminating comments on the abilities of the principal speakers. His scholarly reputation was made by the appearance in 1818 of his only published work, 'The Civil and Constitutional History of Rome from its Foundation to the Age of Augustus F.P.'

After several thwarted attempts to gain a county seat Bankes was finally elected for Dorset in February 1826. By that time a fierce critic of Catholic emancipation, he helped to lead the unsuccessful rearguard opposition of the ultra-tories against it in early 1829 -- for instance, by his 'Speech... in Defence of the Protestant Constitution' on 30 March. An alarmist over parliamentary reform he was defeated in Dorset by his whig rival, John Calcraft, at the general election of 1831. He declined to offer himself for the vacancy caused by Calcraft's suicide in September but his fifty years' service in parliament were celebrated at a tory dinner in Dorchester on 26 July 1832. He was considered a dull but earnest parliamentarian, although Nathaniel Wraxall observed in 1818 that his 'talents compensated by their calm solidity for the want of brilliancy. His enunciation, slow, formal, precise, and not without some degree of embarrassment, was nevertheless always controlled by judgment, caution, and good sense' ('Historical and Posthumous Memoirs', 4.80). He died at Tregothnan, near Truro, Cornwall, the home of his son-in-law Lord Falmouth, on 17 December 1834 and was buried at Wimborne Minster, Dorset, on 24 December. His estate was inherited by his elder surviving son, William John Bankes (1786-1855), who, like his younger son George Bankes (1787-1856), was also an MP. His third surviving son, Edward, became rector of Corfe Castle. 


@@@@@


doc= 1288


Bankes, Sir John (1589-1644), judge, was the son of John Bankes, a merchant of Keswick, Cumberland, and his wife, Jane Malton. He matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, in February 1605. Having left without a degree, he began his legal studies at Gray's Inn in 1607. According to Nicholas Fuller, following his call to the bar in 1614 Bankes 'for some years... solicited suits for others', which suggests that he was more involved in the conduct of litigation, in which he obtained 'great practical experience' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 1.344), than with arguing technical points of law. Whatever the truth of this, it is likely that his early career centred on the north of England; from at least 1619, and throughout the 1620s, his professional opinion was frequently sought by Lord William Howard of Naworth. 
Bankes was returned to parliament as a member for Wootton Basset in 1624, and in 1626 and 1628 he sat for Morpeth, almost certainly thanks to the influence of Lord Howard, whom Bankes had advised in his recent dispute with the town over the exercise of his seigneurial rights there. In the 1626 session, moreover, Bankes began to make his name as a parliamentarian, speaking regularly in debates that were also participated in by other notable lawyers such as William Noy, John Selden, and Edward Littleton. In 1628 he chaired two important committees of the house: that considering the king's claim to be entitled to take tonnage and poundage, and that dealing with the grievances of parliament. Bankes argued that the liberty of the subject should be protected by law from arrest by the king without cause being shown, and he was critical of the recent imposition by the crown of martial law and the billeting of soldiers on the country. Making the point on 16th April 1628 that 'the King's supply and the fundamental liberties go together' (Johnson, 2.481), he thought that recent royal commissions introducing martial law were contrary to the common law: subjects have their rights and the kings their prerogatives, '[y]et the ocean hath banks, and common law limits prerogative' (ibid.). Explaining the illegality of billeting of soldiers, he developed a historical approach, claiming that a search of the records revealed that there was no tenurial obligation to 'find such soldiers' (ibid., 2.363). 
In 1630 Bankes gave the Lent reading at Gray's Inn on the Jacobean 'Statute of Limitations' (21 James I c. 26). In 1631 he became a bencher, and from that date until 1635 also acted in the important capacity of treasurer of the society. Along with several of his former parliamentary colleagues, Bankes also received royal recognition and promotion. He was knighted in June 1631 and became attorney-general to the infant prince of Wales in July. In early 1632 he was appointed to a commission for inquiring into the evasion of customs duties by smugglers. It is also likely that he was working with Noy, now attorney-general, on developing the legal case behind the crown's attempts to increase revenue by launching commissions to inquire into the bounds of the royal forests and the extent to which royal privileges within them had been evaded. When Noy died in August 1634 Bankes was evidently preferred over Littleton and Selden as his replacement as attorney-general. Although one of the earl of Strafford's correspondents described Bankes as more judicious than Ellesmere, more eloquent than Bacon, and more learned than Noy himself, the earl's opinion was that he would prove to have 'something of the indifferent in him, betwixt the Sow's ear and the Silken Purse' (Radcliffe, 1.294). Nevertheless, now occupying an office that was probably worth approximately $10,000 p.a., Bankes made an impressive addition to his landed estate in 1635 by purchasing Corfe Castle on the Isle of Purbeck from Lady Elizabeth Hatton, the estranged widow of Sir Edward Coke. 
Bankes appears to have been primarily an instrument rather than an initiator of royal policy that, during this period, was rapidly expanding the exploitation of the prerogative powers of the crown in order to raise money. Within weeks of his appointment he was busy searching for medieval precedents of royal levies of ship money. The extensive archive that has survived from his tenure as attorney-general shows that, in addition to commissions for enforcing the forest laws and for uncovering defective titles to land, he also drew up and was asked about the legality of letters patent, in which (in return for payment) the crown granted powers to groups of projectors that enabled them to regulate a wide range of trades, mainly in London, including coachmen, tobacco-pipe makers, glaziers and combmakers, distillers, musicians, and the brick and tile makers of Westminster. He also considered schemes for finding ways to license alehouse-keepers, brewers, and the owners of dovecotes, as well as plans to create commissions for enforcing the laws requiring the regular exercise of archery. Some observers thought that Bankes might lose his office in the wake of the outcry that followed the revelation that he had regularly permitted the illegal exportation of gold in return for a heavy fine, rather than initiating prosecutions in Star Chamber, as was prescribed in the proclamation prohibiting the practice. On this occasion, however, the king, evidently impressed by the income generated, promised his support, and there is little other evidence that Bankes himself profited directly by becoming involved in the many projects his paperwork launched. 
As attorney-general Bankes was also responsible for initiating actions in Star Chamber in the king's name, and in this capacity he introduced the case against the religious dissidents Prynne, Bastwicke, and Burton, as well as that of Bishop John Williams. In May 1638 he examined John Lilburne for comments he uttered about the bishops while he was sitting in the pillory, and after the outbreak of war with Scotland in 1639 Bankes questioned a number of people who were reported to have made suspect political statements. In May 1638, when vigorously prosecuting the case against Thomas Harrison, a Northamptonshire vicar who had publicly called the judge Sir Richard Hutton a traitor because he had ruled against the legality of ship money, Bankes said that Harrison had cast an aspersion on his profession by claiming that all the clergymen in England thought the king had a right to command whatever he wanted; Harrison had failed to realize that the king's power was based on the law, and that the duty of judges was to determine to the best of their understanding what the law was. Bankes's own political views appear to have involved a strongly historical approach to the interpretation of the common law, combined with the belief that legally justified royal powers could be used both to profit the crown and to enforce social and economic regulation, which was arguably for the good of the Commonwealth. Commenting on a scheme for collecting a quarterage payment from all 'foreigners' resident in London, Bankes observed that it was 'free from the least touch of oppression or monopoly, but agreeable to the old Roman law called 'Lex peregrinaria' and the modern rules of policy and sound government' (Bankes Papers, 6/16). Returning legislation that had been approved for passage by the Irish parliament, Bankes wrote to Wentworth in March 1635 commending the bills for making 'Ireland to be England in point of Government' (Radcliffe, 1.387). His three-day-long address that put the king's argument before the judges in the case of ship money ('R. v. Hampden') in 1637 was largely historical in thrust. Citing an array of precedents, it illustrated the way in which early charters contained exceptions that allowed the king to raise money for the defence of the realm, and Bankes claimed that levies such as ship money had been collected in time of danger since before the Norman conquest. The writs themselves were based on many records, and were issued according to the laws and customs of England. He made it plain that he thought one of the reasons why kings could act in time of danger was that they had existed before parliaments. Royal power was inherent in the king's person, and in no way derived from the people, 'but [was] reserved unto the king when positive laws first began' ('State trials', 3, col. 1017). The king was the sole judge of imminent danger and how the danger was to be prevented and avoided. Furthermore, having sat in parliament himself in 1628, he argued that the petition of right never intended that any prerogative power of the king should be diminished. Confirming the 'antient and old liberties' (ibid., col. 1056) of the subject, the debates surrounding its passage had never touched on the issue of ship money. 
According to Clarendon, Bankes was concerned in late 1640 about investigations by the Long Parliament into some of the grants that had passed through his hands during his time as attorney-general. Hence he was relieved when made chief justice of the court of common pleas on 29 January 1641, following Edward Littleton's elevation to the lord keepership. On joining the king at York in the spring of 1642 he was sworn of the privy council, and thereafter appeared regularly at the side of Charles I, evidently becoming a voice in favour of moderation. When the king became dissatisfied with the prevarication of Lord Keeper Littleton, he resisted giving the great seal to Bankes largely on grounds that he was no less cautious. Bankes himself claimed to have earned the king's displeasure by not speaking out firmly enough against the legality of parliament's militia ordinance. Along with other peers and councillors he signed a declaration on 15 June 1642 that the king had no intention of making war on parliament, and he evidently maintained good relations with members of the parliamentary leadership. During the spring and early summer of 1642 he was in regular correspondence with, among others, the earl of Northumberland and Lord Saye and Sele in an attempt to find a peaceful solution to nation's problems, which he acknowledged involved fears on both sides. The alternative, civil war, would lead to the misery of the people, and, possibly, threaten the involvement of foreign powers. 
When war did break out Bankes accompanied the king to Oxford, where he received an honorary DCL degree on 20 December 1642. Peace propositions presented by the two houses to the king in February 1643, which were concerned with the maintenance of the judiciary, called for Bankes to retain his position as chief justice of common pleas in the proposed settlement, but while keeping summer assizes on the western circuit in the same year, Bankes gave a charge that denounced the earls of Essex and Manchester as traitors. In May of the same year, parliamentary forces laid the first of two sieges on Corfe Castle, which was famously defended by Sir John's wife, the former Mary Hawtrey ['see 'Bankes, Mary (d. 1661)], daughter of Ralph Hawtrey of Ruislip, Middlesex, whom he had married some years earlier. 
Bankes's house in London was sequestered and sold by parliament in February 1644, and a resolution of the Commons on 22 July 1644 formally accused him of high treason. He died at Oxford on 28 December 1644 and was buried in Christ Church Cathedral, where there is a monument to his memory. His will, dated 20 September 1642, provided $200 in addition to $30 p.a. for the establishment of a workhouse for the poor in his native Keswick. He had a large number of children, and expressed the desire that 'whatever professions they or any of them shall undertake, they shall labour with all diligence to attaine the perfect knowledge thereof. And then with all industry and a good conscience towards God and man, practise the same' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/642). 


@@@@@


doc= 1289


Bankes, Mary, Lady Bankes (d. 1661), royalist landholder, was the only daughter and an heir of Ralph Hawtrey (1570-1638) and his wife, Mary Altham (1578-1647). The Hawtreys claimed Norman descent and established themselves in Ruislip, Middlesex, in the sixteenth century. In 1618 she married Sir John Bankes (1589-1644), a successful lawyer, knighted in 1634, and successively attorney-general and chief justice of the common pleas. Between 1621 and 1644 they had fourteen children. In 1635 Bankes bought Corfe Castle, Dorset, which henceforth became the family's seat. 
With the outbreak of civil war Bankes accompanied the king to Oxford; he was impeached by parliament in 1643. Lady Bankes retired to Corfe Castle which, set on a steep hill and commanding the entrance to the Isle of Purbeck, was regarded as 'one of the impregnablest Forts of the Kingdome' (Ryves, 98). Parliamentarian soldiers first attempted to occupy it in 1643 under cover of a traditional May day stag hunt but, forewarned, she denied them entrance, and 'very wisely, and like her selfe' (ibid., 100), called in a guard. With her small force -- reputedly only five men and her women servants -- she repelled attempts to seize the castle's four cannon, and in the succeeding lull she built up supplies and called in a garrison of eighty royalist soldiers. On 23 June the castle was surrounded by Sir Walter Erle, a Dorset neighbour, with five or six hundred men, but bombardment and threats against the defenders, and promises of rewards to the parliamentarian soldiers, proved equally ineffective. When a storm was finally attempted Lady Bankes, her daughters, and women servants joined in the defence by dropping stones and hot embers over the walls onto the attackers. Erle's casualties were heavy, and on 4 August, after learning of the approach of relieving forces, he precipitately departed. Though an undistinguished affair, this first siege demonstrated Lady Bankes's resourcefulness and 'brave resolution' (ibid., 107). 
On 28 December 1644 Sir John Bankes died suddenly in Oxford. As his executor Lady Bankes had to deal with the legal and financial problems associated with inheritance by minor children, as well as with the burdens of heavy tax assessments and punitive sequestration of the estate. A parliamentarian tax assessment of $300 on 8 January 1645 was followed by assessment at $1000 on 30 May. She did not pay, and on 22 September the committee for the advance of money ordered that she be taken to London in custody. On 1 October it ordered her committed to the Peterhouse in London, and on 6 October she agreed to pay the $1000 within fourteen days. Meanwhile she also faced the consequences of her husband's sequestration. A pass for her to go to London to compound had been issued on 16 July, and on 2 September she submitted the first of several petitions. On 10 September the Commons, before the sequestration committee had reached its decision, awarded $100 from the first profits of sale to the daughters of Captain Robert Turpin, executed after conviction by Sir John Bankes and other royalist judges. Lady Bankes petitioned again on 15 October on behalf of her ten minor children. She explained that the manor of Andleby, Lincolnshire, had been settled on her for life at the time of her marriage while Sir John had, in 1642, settled Dorset lands comprising most of the estate on her for the benefit of the younger children until the heir, John, now twenty, reached the age of twenty-four. As this settlement predated Sir John's sequestration, she urged either that the sequestration be removed or that she should be allowed to compound for it and for her son's wardship. She added that only a few years remained in which to raise portions and maintenance for the younger children. Finally, she asked that her $1000 assessment payment should be considered in the composition. 
Lady Bankes and her advisers hoped to preserve the family's fortunes by appeals to law and compassion. These efforts were undercut by the fact that Corfe Castle continued to hold out and on 27 November 1645 the question was raised as to whether she should be allowed to compound before Corfe was reduced. In December Sir Thomas Fairfax turned serious attention to the castle. Lady Bankes rejected an opportunity to escape, but one defending colonel deserted in February 1646 while Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Pitman offered to deliver the castle in return for future protection. He brought up 200 parliamentarians disguised as royalists, half of whom secured admission. Faced by renewed attack without and interlopers within, the defenders succumbed to 'stratagem and storm' (Sprigge, 334-5) and finally surrendered on 27 February 1646 after a siege of forty-eight days. The terms were generous if imperfectly observed, and the parliamentarian commander Colonel Bingham, a neighbour, returned the keys of the castle to Lady Bankes as a gesture of respect for her courage. On 5 March 1646 parliament voted that the castle be demolished. It was stripped of its rich contents and of its stone and timber, but the massive surviving ruins bear witness to the impossibility of total destruction. The keys were later enshrined in the family's new house at Kingston Lacy, Dorset. 
On 4 February 1646 Lady Bankes's status as a delinquent royalist in her own right, independent of her husband, had been reasserted. In June, Dorset officials reminded London of her active defence of the castle and inquired 'whether your Lordships are not informed of any delinquency in her since her husband's decease' (Bankes, 307). In early 1647 her petitions were finally answered, the committee for compounding setting fines of $380 on her own estate, $1794 on her son John's, and $444 on that held by trustees for the younger children. After minor adjustments to these figures parliament formally pardoned her and discharged the sequestration in September 1647. In several cases between 1648 and 1650 she secured reductions on assessments. In the latter year her major responsibility for the estate ended when John Bankes turned twenty-four, but she, John, and the children's trustees again faced heavy taxes in 1651. She was also fined $350 for under-reporting the value of lands in Dorset, and was penalized for a similar offence in 1652. Thereafter she seems to have escaped serious financial scrutiny. In her financial dealings she displayed the same persistence and adroitness demonstrated in her defence of Corfe Castle, while benefiting from the services of family associates including Giles Green MP, co-trustee and tenant, her kinsman John Hawtrey, and her 'most affectionate servant' John Hunt. She sought to trace the dispersed contents of Corfe Castle; one agent's report in January 1647 recorded tapestries, carpets, and furniture that had found their way to a London broker and a Dutch merchant. Losses, meticulously chronicled, remained a persistent irritant in relations with Dorset neighbours such as Erle, Bingham, and humble but opportunist local people into whose hands Bankes goods had strayed. After John Bankes's death in 1656 his brother Ralph continued his mother's efforts to retrieve these goods, with little success. 
Lady Bankes apparently spent her later years in London and at Damory Court, Dorset. She died without fuss and 'with great peace of mind' (Bankes, 245) on 11 April 1661. Her memorial, erected in St Martin's Church, Ruislip, by Ralph Bankes, declared that she 'had the honour to have borne with a constancy and courage above her sex a noble proporcon of the late calamities, and the happiness to have outlived them' (ibid., 245). A surviving copy of a contemporary miniature shows her as a determined widow. The circumstances of civil war forced her to turn that determination not only to the military action for which she attained a degree of fame but, like many other women who gained no such renown, to the preservation of the family fortunes. 


@@@@@


doc= 1290


Bankes, William John (1786-1855), traveller and antiquary, was born on 11 December 1786, second son of Henry Bankes (1757-1834) of Kingston Lacy, Dorset, politician and author, and his wife, Frances (1760/61-1823), daughter of William Woodley, governor of the Leeward Islands, and the elder brother of George Bankes. He was educated at Westminster School (1795-1801) before entering Trinity College, Cambridge, on 25 June 1803. In 1806, on the death of his elder brother, Henry, Bankes became heir to his father's estates and, with an income of $8000 a year, he led a life at Cambridge which earned him a reputation for extravagance and eccentricity which he was to keep, and indeed cultivate, throughout his life. At Cambridge he became a firm friend of Byron, who described him as the 'father of all mischief' in their fast set ('Byron's Letters and Journals', 12 Oct 1820). Bankes graduated BA in 1808 and proceeded MA in 1811. In 1810 he was elected MP for Truro, where his prospective brother-in-law was the patron. He supported his father's efforts to abolish sinecures, but otherwise supported the administration. Despite his lifelong reputation as a brilliant conversationalist in private circles, he seems to have been a poor public speaker, and his parliamentary speeches were sometimes strangely delivered and incoherent. 
Bankes, with Byron, was prominent in the London season of 1812 and, after having given up his parliamentary seat and having had his proposal of marriage to Annabella Milbanke, afterwards Lady Byron, refused, he set out, with letters of introduction from Byron, for the East. He followed Wellington's army through Portugal and Spain, buying treasures which now decorate the Spanish Room in the family home at Kingston Lacy. By September 1815 he reached Cairo, making preparations for a voyage up the Nile to see the antiquities in the company of the interpreter, attendant, and janizary Giovanni Finati, whose memoirs he later translated from the Italian, edited, and published as 'Narrative of the Life and Adventures of Giovanni Finati' (2 vols., 1830). Bankes enjoyed the bizarre, daring, and exotic, but was also a serious scholar, making detailed sketches and notes of the monuments he passed and amassing a collection of Egyptian antiquities now at Kingston Lacy. He reached the Second Cataract and Wadi Halfa before returning to Cairo, having adopted eastern dress and grown a beard. In October 1818 he made his second and longer Nile journey in the company of Henry Salt, the British consul-general, Giovanni Belzoni, and three artists to help record their discoveries. Bankes's first attempt to remove an obelisk which he had discovered on the island of Philae on his earlier trip ended with the pillar's lying on the river bed, but it was finally rescued, brought to Kingston Lacy in 1821, and, with a pedestal and a base, which belongs to a quite different temple in Nubia, was erected in 1839 on the south lawn where it still stands. While in Egypt, Bankes spent a month at Abu Simbel, uncovering figures and systematically recording the interior. Bankes went on to Palestine, Syria, and Jordan in the company of James Silk Buckingham. He returned to Europe in 1819, meeting Byron in Italy in 1820. He arrived back in England in 1820, where he basked in society admiration and enjoyed the nickname from Byron the Nubian Discoverer. He wrote or inspired a review of Silk Buckingham's work on Palestine which appeared in the 'Quarterly Review' (January 1822) and in a published letter repeated allegations that Buckingham had plagiarized drawings and some observations from his (Bankes's) notebook which he had mistakenly left with Buckingham. On 26 October 1826 Buckingham obtained $400 damages from Bankes for this libel, although some modern interpreters are less sure of the justice of his case (personal information). 
While on his travels in 1815, on the death of his uncle Sir William Wynne, Bankes inherited Soughton Hall, Flintshire, and after 1834, when he succeeded to his father's estate, he commanded a considerable fortune. He made extensive changes to both Soughton and Kingston Lacy with the help of Charles Barry. He was tory MP for the University of Cambridge (1822-6) and for Marlborough (1829-32) before succeeding to his father's county seat and representing Dorset (1832-4). 
Having already been the subject of gossip and a suit for criminal conversation with Lady Buckinghamshire ('nee' Anne Pigot, married name Anne Hobart) in 1823, in 1833 he was charged with meeting a guardsman for 'unnatural purposes' in a public convenience between Westminster Abbey and St Margaret's Church. He was found not guilty after many people, including the duke of Wellington, had given character references, but the suggestion of impropriety and the detailed discussion of his personal habits undermined his public career. In 1841 another such charge drove him abroad and, having made over his estates to his brother George, he took up residence at Venice, from where he continued to direct in minute detail the furnishing of Kingston Lacy. Bankes died in Venice unmarried and childless on 15 April 1855. He was buried at the family vault at Wimborne Minster, Dorset. 
Bankes's drawings at Kingston Lacy remain an important source for Egyptologists because they are detailed site plans, measured sections, elevations, and meticulous transcriptions, not artistic impressions, and because many of the objects he recorded have since been lost, destroyed, or moved from their original environment. The drawings from Nubia and the Sudan are particularly important as they are some of the earliest to be made of those regions. Bankes did many of the drawings and transcriptions himself; others in the collection are wholly or in part by others but were made under Bankes's direction by Finati and Louis Linant. His contribution to the decipherment of the hieroglyphic script, one of the purposes for which the collection of drawings was made, was significant, but his influence was greatly and unfortunately limited by his failure to publish any account of his travels other than his notes to Finati's 'Narrative'. The first systematic study of his papers (Usick, 2002) shows the importance of his scholarship and quite how much has been lost since he visited Egypt and Nubia. 


@@@@@


doc= 1291


Bankhead, John (1738-1833), minister of the Presbyterian General Synod of Ulster, was born into a family that is thought to have come from Bank Head, Edinburghshire, and settled near Clough, co. Antrim. He is believed to have been educated at Glasgow University but his name is not in any college register. He was licensed by Ballymena presbytery before 29 June 1762 and called on 13 February 1763 to Ballycarry congregation, co. Antrim, which had been vacant since the death of James Cobham, on 22 February 1759. On 26 July 1763 Bankhead subscribed the confession of faith according to the following cautious formula: 'I believe the Westminster Confession to contain a system of the Christian doctrines, which doctrines I subscribe as the confession of my faith' (Witherow, 'Memorials, 1731-1800', 136). He was ordained minister on 16 August 1763 and remained all his life at Ballycarry, where the disadvantage of a salary of $45 was offset by the income from a grazing farm and the pleasure of his close friendship with the Edmonstone family of Redhall. He declined the call (and promise of a higher salary) from the richer congregation of Comber, co. Down, in July 1774. He married, first, Jane Martin, and following her death he married, in February 1812, Mary Magill, who survived him. He was father to twenty-two children. 
In 1800 Bankhead served as moderator of synod. In 1786, however, he had published a catechism that hinted at his unease with doctrinally orthodox forms, for though the questions are those of the orthodox Westminster shorter catechism the answers are simply scriptural passages, printed without comment. In the second edition, published in 1825, some of the Westminster questions are omitted and others are altered. His assistant, William Glendy (1781/2-1853), who had been ordained on 30 July 1812, broke with orthodoxy and joined the Remonstrant Synod of Ulster in 1829, taking the Ballycarry congregation with him. Bankhead remained on the roll of the general synod, and so his denominational affiliation in his last years is unclear. 
A convivial man and an excellent mimic, Bankhead was gently satirized in a poem by the Revd William Heron of Ballyclare, 'The Ulster Synod' (1817): '
In jovial mixture, and in dose enough 

Scattering bright wit, sound sense, and Dublin snuff 

To make you sneeze, or learn, or loudly laugh. 
(Witherow, 'Memorials, 1731-1800', 138)' He died at Ballycarry on 5 July 1833, aged ninety-five and six weeks short of his seventieth year as minister at Ballycarry. He was buried in the churchyard of Templepatrick. Of the nineteen of his children who survived into adulthood John and Charles (died 1859) became physicians, James (died 1824) was minister of Dromore, co. Down, and William (died 1881) served as Unitarian minister at Brighton and Diss, Norfolk, before leaving the ministry. 


@@@@@


doc= 1292


Banks, William (fl. 1591-1637), showman, the exhibitor of a famous performing horse called Morocco or Marocco, is hard to identify precisely. This is perhaps because of the kind of cultural phenomenon the horse and his trainer represent. It is the horse's activities that are described in detail in the literature of Banks's day. Banks, who may have been a native of Staffordshire, becomes the shadowy figure behind the performance, as an epigram in Thomas Bastard's 'Chrestoleros' (1598) makes clear: 'B'ankes' hath a horse of wondrous qualitie, For he can fight, and pisse, and daunce, and lie. And finde your purse, and tell what coyne ye have. 'But' 'Bankes', who taught your horse to smel a knave?' (p. 62). 
Banks's first recorded appearance with a horse was in Shrewsbury in 1591. According to 'Tarlton's Jests' (1611), Banks originally served the earl of Essex, exhibiting his horse 'of strange qualities... at the Crosse Keyes in Gracious-streete' (Hazlitt, 217). He may be identified with William Banks, a vintner in Cheapside, London, in later years, who is said to have 'taught his Horse to dance, and shooed him with Silver' ('The Life and Death of Mrs. Mary Frith', 1662, 75). This William Banks achieved his vintner status not through the company but by special royal licence from the king. In a record of May 1637, a mock bill of fare is preserved 'sent to Bankes the Vintner in Cheapside'. It itemizes delicacies from the animal kingdom such as 'a rhinoceros boyled in alligant; sixe tame lyons in greene sawce; a whole horse sowced after the Russian fashion' (Halliwell-Phillipps, 52; MS Ashmole 826). Mention is made of 'mine host Bankes' in James Shirley's 'The Ball' as late as 1639 (H4'v'), which seems to support the celebratory horse trainer-turned-vintner idea. In German records of performances of the horse, however, the owner is named 'Reichardt [Richard] Banckes' rather than William (Schrickx, 138). 

'Tarlton's Jests' tells of the horse's ability to single out persons named by his master, as does Richard Braithwaite's 'Strappado for the Divell' (1615). Marocco's talent for counting out money is mentioned by Shakespeare in 'Love's Labour's Lost' (1594-5?), by Joseph Hall in his 'Virgidemiarvm... of Byting Satyres' (1598), and by Sir Kenelm Digby in 'The Nature of Bodies' (1644). 
At the end of 1595 a pamphlet was published called 'Maroccus extaticus', 'or Bankes Bay Horse in a Trance, a discourse set downe in a merry dialogue between Bankes and his beast, anatomizing some abuses and bad trickes of this age'. A woodcut included with the dialogue represents Banks in the act of opening his entertainment, the horse standing on his hind legs with a stick in his mouth, and there are dice on the ground. From the title-page it appears that Banks was then showing his horse at the Belsavage inn without Ludgate. About 1600 the horse was said to have performed his most famous feat -- that of climbing to the top of St Paul's Cathedral. In 'The Owles Almanacke' entry for 1617 (by 'Iocundary Merrie-braines', published 1618) it is stated that 'since the dancing horse stood on the top of Powles, whilst a number of asses stood braying, below -- 17 [years]' (p. 7). References to the event are to be found in many of Thomas Dekker's plays and tracts, in William Rowley's 'A Search for Money' (1609), and elsewhere. 
In 1601 Banks exhibited his horse at Paris, and the best account of Morocco's feats is given by a French eyewitness, Jean de Montlyard, in a note to a translation of 'The Golden Ass' by Apuleius ('Les metamorphoses, ou, L'asne d'or', 1602). According to this text a magistrate of Paris had suspected that his tricks were performed by magic, and for some time Banks was imprisoned and his horse impounded. When Banks demonstrated how he had instructed Morocco by signs, they were both released, and Banks was permitted to continue his performances. At Orleans, according to Thomas Morton, Morocco was again suspected of being a pupil of the devil. Banks, to counter the suspicion, 'commanded his horse to seeke out one in the preasse of the people who had a crucifixe on his hat'. This done, he 'bad him kneele downe unto it, & not this onely, but also to rise up againe and to kisse it' ('Direct Answer unto the Scandalous Exceptions of Theophilus Higgons', 1609, 11). The same account describes how man and horse visited Frankfurt shortly after this adventure. More recent research has found records of performances before Henry Julius, duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel, in April 1605, and this is where the name Reichardt is recorded. 
Texts like Gervase Markham's 'Cavelarice' (1607) continued to refer to Banks's tricks with his horse when the original Morocco would have been too old to perform, and was probably dead or retired. Playful allusions in Ben Jonson's 'Epigrams' (1616) and in a marginal note to the mock romance of 'Don Zara del Fogo', by Basilius Musophilus, killed off horse and trainer by having them both burnt at Rome 'by the commandment of the pope' (Basilius Musophilus, 'Don Zara del Fogo', 1656, 114). 
If it is not known what happened to the bay gelding, something is known of what happened to Banks after his initial equine success. In 1608 Henry, prince of Wales, temporarily employed Banks as a horse trainer, as did the duke of Buckingham, according to records of 1622-5. Curious allusions to Banks and his dancing horse are found in late publications written 'c'.1635-40 (William Davenant's 'The Long Vacation' in 'Wit and Drollery', 1656, 84; and Thomas Killigrew's 'The Parson's Wedding', 1664, in 'Comedies and Tragedies', 86). An early Lancashire pedigree states that a 'daughter of... Banks, who kept the horse with the admirable tricks', married John Hyde of Urmeston, a member of an ancient county family (Hunter). 


@@@@@


doc= 1293


Banks, Benjamin (1727-1795), musical instrument maker, was born at Salisbury on 14 July 1727, the third of the five children of George Banks, master butcher, and his wife, Barbery Huttoft. In 1741 Banks commenced a seven-year apprenticeship with his uncle William Huttoft, musical instrument maker and retail music dealer of Salisbury. In fact Huttoft is not recorded as a stringed instrument maker and it seems probable that Banks spent some time in the workshops of London makers such as Peter Wamsley of Piccadilly (1715?-1751) or members of the Hill family, particularly Joseph Hill (1715-1784). There was also a later London connection with the Cahusac instrument retail business, for Banks's eldest daughter, Ann, married Thomas Cahusac in 1780. Banks used as his main London outlet the retail music firm of Longman and Broderip, whose instruments so labelled were made for them by others and may occasionally reveal Banks's signature or initials internally. Despite the attraction of London as a marketing base, Banks continued to maintain his workshop in Salisbury. 
After two centuries Banks's reputation stands high, a number of authorities referring to the almost faultless workmanship, particularly in his copies made on the grand Amati model, after Nicolo Amati of Cremona. Banks himself is often referred to as 'the English Amati'. He also made instruments, supposedly mainly for the trade, on the highly arched Germanic Stainer model, which are less well regarded, and occasionally produced copies of Stradivari some decades before this became fashionable. Banks's sonorous cellos in particular remain highly prized by professional players and have long competed for favour with those of William (Royal) Forster of London (1739-1808), who enjoyed the patronage of the prince of Wales. Banks is thought to have produced violins, violas, and cellos in roughly even numbers, no doubt with the help of his sons. Examples of his work are to be found in the Salisbury and South Wiltshire Museum. 
Banks married Ann Burtt in Salisbury on 8 August 1749 and they had nine children, two of whom, James and Henry, carried on the family business in Catherine Street, Salisbury, until that moved to Liverpool in 1811. Their output varies in standard. Banks died on 18 February 1795 and was buried with his wife at the church of St Thomas in Salisbury High Street. His tombstone bears the words 'Restored 1863... in memory of the most eminent English maker of stringed musical instruments'. 


@@@@@


doc= 1294


Banks, Sir Edward (1770-1835), builder and contractor, was born near Richmond, Yorkshire, on 4 January 1770; nothing is known of his parentage. As a young man he went to sea for two years. After returning to Yorkshire, in 1789 he became involved with the first of many construction projects, undertaking sea banking and draining in Holderness. 
In 1791 Banks became contractor on the Leeds and Liverpool Canal, and in 1793 under the engineer John Rennie (1761-1821) worked on the Lancaster and Ulverston canals, rapidly extending his operations in 1795-7 to the Huddersfield (including the 31/2 mile Marsden Tunnel), Peak Forest, and Ashton under Lyne canals. In 1800 he worked on several Derbyshire canals under William Jessop, as well as on tram roads and turnpikes, and began a carrying trade in coal and limestone, employing thirty barges. Jessop then engineered the Surrey iron railway (on which trucks were drawn by mules), which in 1803 Banks extended from Croydon to Merstham, where Colonel Hylton Jolliffe MP had an interest in lime works. Banks formed a partnership with Jolliffe, developing a considerable trade with London in building materials. Banks himself in 1810 surveyed the line of a canal to link Merstham with the proposed Grand Southern Canal to Portsmouth. 
In 1807 the Revd William John Jolliffe (1774-1835) replaced his brother in the partnership, which rapidly became a major contractor -- probably the largest of the day -- for public works, principally of an engineering character, such as embanking Cardiff marshes (1808), erecting a lighthouse at Heligoland, and constructing Rennie's Howth harbour in Dublin Bay (1809-19). More conventional building such as the Croydon court house (1809) and prisoner-of-war accommodation at Princetown, Dartmoor (1809-10), was also undertaken. In 1822 they contracted for the canal and locks which created the port of Goole on the Humber, and also tendered unsuccessfully for Nash's new Royal Mews, Pimlico, which they later completed as assignees of Want and Richardson. 
Rennie's knowledge of Banks's efficiency doubtless assisted in gaining the latter a footing in London's rapidly developing enclosed dock system. By submitting what Rennie described as very reasonable competitive tenders, and carrying out excellent work, including state-of-the-art coffer dam techniques, Banks undertook a number of important projects from his yard at Beaufort wharf, Strand. In 1811 Jolliffe and Banks reconstructed the Limehouse entrance to the West India Dock at their own estimate, work by another contractor having collapsed; in 1813 they made good failed piling for a dock at Chetney Hill lazaretto; in 1816 they excavated for the no. 2 rum warehouse at West India Dock; and in 1817 they built a new entrance for London docks, and contracted at a low price for similar work and river walls at Deptford Dockyard. Although theirs was not the lowest tender for a new river wall and wharf at the London custom house in 1817, Rennie recommended them because they had all the required materials in hand as well as pile engines and other machinery from work on Southwark Bridge, 'and from their great experience in works of this sort there is the best assurance of its being well and speedily executed' (Rennie, 9.70). In 1828 the partners built the saltpetre warehouse on the south side of the Blackwall basin, West India Dock, having previously in 1811 rebuilt the outer wing walls of its western Limehouse basin. 
Rennie had established himself as the principal bridge builder in the capital, and Jolliffe and Banks became contractors for his granite Waterloo Bridge (1811-17), described by Canova as the noblest bridge in the world, under the new system of lump-sum contracts with a single firm; for the piling, masonry, and centering for Southwark Bridge (1814-19), the largest cast-iron bridge ever built, with a central span of 240 ft; and under the younger Rennie for the new thousand-foot granite London Bridge (1824-31), the smaller but socially conspicuous bridge over the Serpentine, Hyde Park (1821-4), and Staines Bridge which was also of granite. The stoneyard at Millwall was probably laid out specifically for the London Bridge contract, their bridge-building operations having led them to open a trade with Aberdeen (from where they also drew masons) for large blocks of granite, expending $155,000 by 1821. Later they drew supplies from Dartmoor. For building the arches of London Bridge they employed preframed centering ingeniously floated into position, a device sometimes credited to Banks rather than to Rennie. 
Jolliffe and Banks were also, with Nicholson of Rochester, employed in a series of excavation, piling, and walling contracts for Rennie's vast Sheerness naval dockyard (1812-30), a $3 million work designed for 'the building and equipment of ships of war of the largest dimensions' (Westall and Owen, 167). Their 1815 contract for tonguing-and-grooving sheet piling proved unremunerative so Rennie invented a machine, executed at their cost, which greatly reduced the expense and performed the work more efficiently. Because they already had on site steam-engines, mortar mills, lime-kilns, railways, and scaffolding, Rennie recommended employing them for a further large contract in 1817 if they would bring down their price to within $2000 of the lowest tender. They failed to do so and were replaced by another contractor, though they subsequently constructed the northern sector, an $850,000 contract. Close by, Banks founded Banks Town (later Sheerness-on-Sea) as a speculation, instituting a tri-weekly service from London by steamboat (built by Jolliffe, Banks & Co.). With Jolliffe, he was a founder of the General Steam Navigation Company (1824). 
Another extensive enterprise undertaken by the partners in association with Rennie was the 3 mile Eau Brinck Cut on the Ouse at King's Lynn, 1817-21, to drain 300,000 acres of the Great, or Bedford, Level of the fens, where they executed $40,000 worth of works before receiving any return. This was a labour by which 'an immense value has been given to otherwise worthless swamps and wastes' (Smiles, 169). Similar works executed on the Nene (a new cut of over 5 miles, where they employed about 1300 men, 1827-31), Witham (1828), and Ancholme (1828) were engineered by Telford or the younger Rennie. The partnership was dissolved in 1834, the year before both Banks and Jolliffe died. 
Banks lived in Adelphi Terrace, Westminster, and had country properties at Oxney Court, Dover, and Sheppey Court, both in Kent. In 1793 he married Nancy (died 1815), daughter of John Franklin, with whom he had five sons and three daughters; in 1821 he married Amelia (died 1836), daughter and coheir of Sir Abraham Pytches of Streatham, and sister of his partner's wife. One of his daughters married Jolliffe's son. There were no children from his second marriage. 
Banks was knighted on 12 June 1822 for his skill and perseverance in building Waterloo and Southwark bridges, the first knighthood bestowed on an engineer (the elder Rennie having declined one in 1817). Obituaries remarked on his perseverance, integrity, piety, and benevolence. He died at his daughter's house at Tilgate, Sussex, on 5 July 1835. He was buried in a family grave at Chipstead, Surrey, the beauty of which spot he had observed when working on the Merstham tram road many years earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 1295


Banks, George Linnaeus (1821-1881), author and journalist, was born at the Bull Ring, Birmingham, on 2 March 1821, and baptized at Cherry Street Wesleyan Methodist chapel, Birmingham, the son of John Banks, a seedsman, and his wife, Sarah. The father was an inflexible Methodist; he once took a copy of 'Robinson Crusoe' from his son and thrust it into the fire. When a boy George was totally blind for seven months, and was eventually cured by a quack, who applied leeches to the soles of his feet. He was sent to work for an engraver, but his eyes proved too weak for this work; afterwards he went to a modeller, then, neglected by his father, bound himself apprentice to a cabinet-maker. His master's business failed, and Banks became, at the age of seventeen or eighteen, a contributor to newspapers and magazines, an amateur actor, and orator. He had a remarkable faculty for silhouette portraiture. He was an active radical, and from December 1846 a popular lecturer. One of his lyrics, 'What I Live For', was frequently quoted by platform and pulpit orators; it is believed that it first appeared in a Liverpool newspaper. He wrote a number of plays, though some attributions of his authorship are doubtful: he was said to have written 'The Slave King' for the African-American actor Ira Aldridge, and 'The Swiss Father', performed in Liverpool, in which William Creswick took the leading part. In both instances, however, earlier versions of the plays had been performed, almost certainly the work of other authors. His songs, especially 'The Minstrel King' and 'Warwickshire Will', were long popular. The song 'Dandy Jim of Caroline', sometimes attributed to him, is more probably attributable to Henry Russell. 
On 27 December 1846 Banks married Isabella ['see 'Banks, Isabella Varley (1821-1897)], daughter of James Varley, a chemist, of Manchester; she was the author of a volume of poetry, 'Ivy Leaves', and several novels. They had eight children. Between 1848 and 1864 Banks was editor of the 'Harrogate Advertiser', 'Birmingham Mercury', 'Dublin Daily Express', 'Durham Chronicle', 'Sussex Mercury', and 'Windsor Royal Standard'. For a time he had some share, along with William Sawyer, in the 'Brighton Excursionist'. Several volumes of his poetry were published, including 'Daisies in the Grass' (1865), which contained work by himself and his wife, and he also took part in the Shakespeare tercentenary. His increasing alcoholism and depression led to financial problems, and latterly his wife's writing supported the family. He destroyed most of his papers, thus frustrating his wife's intention of writing his biography. A characteristic Victorian autodidact, who flourished in the world of the radical intelligentsia, he died of cancer of the penis and pneumonia on 3 May 1881 in Dalston, London, and was buried at Abney Park cemetery; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 1296


Banks, Isabella Varley (1821-1897), public lecturer and writer, was born on 25 March 1821, at Oldham Street, Manchester, the daughter of James Varley, chemist (died 1842), and his wife, Amelia Daniels. Her grandfather, James Varley the elder, of Bolton, discovered chloride of lime as a means of bleaching cotton. She was educated at Green Street School, Miss Hannah Spray's Ladies' day school, and the Revd John Weelden's academy. Her first literary effort, a poem entitled 'A Dying Girl to her Mother', was published in the 'Manchester Guardian', 12 April 1837, when she was just sixteen. From 1838 to 1848 she kept a school at Cheetham, near Manchester, and in 1842 became a member of the ladies' committee of the Anti-Corn Law League. The first of her three volumes of poetry, 'Ivy Leaves: a Collection of Poetry', was published in 1844. She was also skilled in needlework and knitting and produced a fancy-work pattern each month for forty-five years from 1850 to 1895; these were published in little quarterly volumes. A deep interest in the tradition of British literature prompted her participation in the London Shakespeare tercentenary (23 April 1864), where she baptized a memorial oak, presented by Queen Victoria and planted by the actor Samuel Phelps, with water from the River Avon, and delivered an address. 
On 27 December 1846, Isabella Varley married George Linnaeus Banks (1821-1881), a journalist and poet from Birmingham, and later assisted him in his work by contributing to the journals he edited. These included: the 'Harrowgate Advertiser', the 'Birmingham Mercury', the 'Dublin Daily Express', the 'Durham Chronicle', the 'Sussex Mercury', and the 'Windsor Royal Standard'. As she accompanied him about the country to these various posts, she acquired the historical and dialectal background which she would later use in her novels. In 1865 she and her husband co-authored a collection of songs and poetry, 'Daisies in the Grass'. 
Mrs Banks's domestic life was difficult: she gave birth to eight children, five of whom predeceased her; she suffered more or less constantly from ill health; and her husband had a progressive drinking problem which eventually caused him several times to sell their household furniture to raise money for alcohol, and resulted in his near-suicidal depression in later life. When she was forty-three she turned to novel writing to support her family. Her first novel, 'God's Providence House' (1865), was set in Chester and was well received by critics. Between 1865 and 1894 she published twelve novels, three volumes of poetry, and three volumes of stories, many of the titles running to multiple editions, which kept her name before the public almost continually during those years. She became known as the Lancaster Novelist because of the setting of her novels in such places as Yorkshire, Wiltshire, Durham, Birmingham, Chester, and Manchester. 'In every case the dialect is as carefully done as the rest of the details, the author having a special gift for reproducing in type the peculiarities of local pronunciation' ('Woman's Signal', 22 Oct 1896). 
Mrs Banks's most famous and enduring novel was 'The Manchester Man' (1870) which went through eleven editions, five during her lifetime and six posthumously, the latest being 1991. It is set in Manchester at the beginning of the nineteenth century and gave the best available picture of the 'buildings, institutions, and personalities in the days of 'Peterloo'' ('Woman's Signal', 13 May 1897). Another of her books, 'More than Coronets' (1881), which first appeared as a serial in the 'Girl's Own Paper', is of interest because one of the main characters, Hesba Stapleton, a physician, is based on her friend the noted journalist and feminist Florence Fenwick Miller, who practised medicine briefly in the 1870s ('Woman's Signal', 13 May 1897). 
Mrs Banks was a firm supporter of women's rights and women's suffrage, saying that as long as 'women have to pay for the maintenance of governments, local and national, I consider that they have as clear a right to vote for proper representation as have their masculine relations' ('Woman's Signal', 13 May 1897). 
Despite the popularity of Mrs Banks's writing, finances were a continual problem for her. She received numerous grants from the Royal Literary Fund, and attracted the special attention of fellow novelist Anthony Trollope, who suggested that her 'reward in literary life had fallen short of [her] deserts' ('Anthony Trollope at the Royal Literary Fund', 'Nineteenth-Century Fiction', December 1982, 322). She also received a pension from the civil list in 1895. Among her contemporary literary friends were Charles Dickens, Victor Hugo, Mary Howitt, Elizabeth Gaskell, Mrs Henry Wood, Eliza Cook, and John Strange Winter (Henrietta Stannard). 
Mrs G. Linnaeus Banks died on 4 May 1897 of heart failure, following influenza and bronchitis, at her home, 34 Fassett Square, Dalston, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 1297


Banks, John (1652/3-1706), playwright, was born in obscurity. Before embarking upon a career as a playwright, he enrolled at the New Inn court of chancery where he was trained in the law. However, following the success of Nathaniel Lee's 'The Rival Queens' at Drury Lane in March 1677, Banks turned his attention to the stage. His first tragedy, 'The Rival Kings', was performed at Drury Lane in June 1677 and published shortly afterwards. In November 1678 a second tragedy, 'The Destruction of Troy', was acted at Dorset Garden, with the text of the play published the following January. 
After the failure of his third play, 'Cyrus the Great, or, The Tragedy of Love' (written in 1681), which was rejected by the actors, the playwright revised his style. Abandoning the bombastic language of his early tragedies, Banks produced a series of dramas based upon episodes drawn from English history. In May 1681 the company at Drury Lane staged 'The Unhappy Favourite, or, The Earl of Essex', which appeared with a prologue and epilogue by John Dryden. A further historical tragedy, 'Vertue Betray'd, or, Anna Bullen', was staged at Dorset Garden in March 1682. In 1684 the playwright's third attempt at exploring Tudor history, 'The Island Queens, or, The Death of Mary, Queen of Scotland', was banned from the stage, presumably on account of its contentious portrayal of the rivalry between Elizabeth I and her Catholic cousin. Although Banks's sympathetic portrayal of Mary Stuart met with the approval of the Catholic duke of York, the ban on the play remained in force, obliging Richard Bentley to publish a quarto text of the tragedy 'in Defence of the Author and the Play' in 1684. This failure of 'The Island Queens' to reach the stage appears to have impoverished the playwright, Robert Gould noting in 1685 that Banks was now 'in Tatters' as a result of his 'bad Poetry' (Gould, 2.241). 
Following the death of Charles II Banks resumed his legal career, and on 21 February 1691 he married Elizabeth Thompson ('c'.1662-1702) at St Paul's, Covent Garden. However, his name continued to be connected with the theatre. In 1694 Bentley published Banks's 'The Innocent Usurper, or, The Death of the Lady Jane Gray', a dramatization of the Tudor succession crisis of 1553. Although Banks claimed to have written the play ten years earlier, an attempt by the United Company to stage the play in the 1692-3 season was thwarted by the lord chamberlain, who noticed in Banks's tragedy a series of reflections upon the accession of William and Mary in 1689. In December 1695 the playwright's 'Cyrus the Great' was finally produced at Drury Lane. However, the tragedy enjoyed only four performances, its run being cut short by the death of the actor William Smith. Following the death of his wife in May 1702, Banks began work on an adaptation of his earlier play, 'The Island Queens', striving to offer the censor a more sympathetic portrait of Elizabeth I. The resulting tragedy, 'The Albion Queens', proved popular with the Drury Lane audience, running for seven nights in March 1704, although the text of the play remained unpublished until the end of Queen Anne's reign. Despite this success, Banks again appears to have fallen into debt. He died in April 1706, owing money to two principal creditors. On 9 April 1706 he was buried at St James's Church, Westminster. 
Although Banks's early heroic plays were soon forgotten, his historical tragedies, with their protracted scenes of sadness and distress, proved influential. In 'Vertue Betray'd' and 'The Albion Queens', Banks pioneered the 'she-tragedy', a dramatic form peculiar to the late Restoration. This genre of tragedy, which abandoned the concept of poetic justice in favour of a persistent emphasis upon the suffering of an innocent heroine, was later popularized by Nicholas Rowe. 


@@@@@


doc= 1298


Banks, John (1709-1751), poet and biographer, was born at Sonning, Berkshire. After the death about 1715 of his father, John, his education was entrusted to his uncle, who placed him at a local private school run by Mr Belpene. Banks proved to be a bright and able scholar but was shortly afterwards withdrawn from the school, allegedly because his schoolmaster was jealous of his ability. A more plausible explanation would be that the uncle was unwilling or unable to continue to pay for his nephew's education. Banks was placed as an apprentice to a weaver in Reading but before he could complete his apprenticeship he broke his arm, which prevented him from working. He was saved from destitution by a timely legacy of $10 from a distant relation. He moved to London and set up a bookstall in Spitalfields. 
Banks, impressed by the success of Stephen Duck's poem 'The Thresher' Labour' and the patronage Duck received from Queen Caroline, was inspired to emulate him. He published in imitation in 1730 'The Weaver's Miscellany', but this failed to produce the required effect. Even Banks admitted that it was a work of little distinction. Soon afterwards he gave up his bookstall and became an assistant at the bookshop of Mr Montague. He now found time to write poetry and sent a poem to Alexander Pope, who was sufficiently impressed to agree to subscribe to Banks's forthcoming publication, which appeared in 1738 entitled 'Miscellaneous Works in Verse and Prose'. This not only enhanced Banks's reputation as a poet but enabled him to become a writer by profession. His next work, 'A Life of Christ', also proved popular with the public. His most renowned work was 'A Short Critical Review of the Political Life of Oliver Cromwell' (1739), which, unlike previous biographies of Cromwell, was sympathetic towards its subject. This led to accusations by staunch tories that Banks was a subverter of the truth and an enemy of the monarchy. Nevertheless the book was well received by the public and by 1769 had reached a fifth edition. Further biographical works followed: in 1740 he wrote a biography of Peter the Great and in 1744, amid increasing fears of an imminent French invasion and a landing by James Stuart, the Pretender, published 'The History of the Life and Reign of William III'. This did much to restore his reputation as a true patriot and dispel any lingering doubts that he entertained Jacobite sympathies. In the late 1740s Banks wrote for, and may have edited, the opposition essay newspapers, the 'Old England Journal' and the 'Westminster Journal'. 
Towards the spring of 1751 Banks's health, which for long had been delicate, visibly deteriorated. He was diagnosed as suffering from a nervous disorder which ultimately proved fatal. He died at his home in Islington on 19 April 1751. 


@@@@@


doc= 1299


Banks, John Sherbrooke (bap. 1811, d. 1857), army officer in the East India Company, baptized at Naas, co. Kildare, Ireland, on 7 October 1811, was the son of Samuel Banks, physician in HM forces, of Burton upon Trent, and his wife, Lucinda. In 1828 he was nominated to a cadetship in the Bengal army by the Rt Hon. Charles Wynn, then president of the Board of Control. Arriving in India and commissioned ensign, both in December 1829, he was posted to the 33rd Bengal native infantry, of which he became quartermaster and interpreter in 1833. He was subsequently employed on civil duties in the Saugor and Nerbudda territory. He was promoted lieutenant in October 1835, captain in January 1846, and major in 1857. In 1842 he served in Afghanistan with General Pollock's army of retribution in the march upon Kabul, and shortly afterwards was appointed to a post in the military secretariat. In this office he was brought into contact with the governor-general, the marquess of Dalhousie, whose confidence he speedily acquired. Owing to the absence of the head of the department on sick leave, it devolved upon Banks to make the arrangements for the expedition which resulted in the conquest of Pegu. Shortly after the war in 1853, he accompanied Dalhousie on a visit to British Burma, and subsequently became a member of the governor-general's personal staff as military secretary. In July 1855 he was sent to Lucknow, to communicate to Sir James Outram, the resident, the governor-general's intentions on the annexation of Oudh. Banks married at Ootacamund on 13 October 1855 Elizabeth Hutchinson, youngest daughter of Major-General Robert Bryce Fearon. 
When Dalhousie left India in 1856 Banks joined the Oudh commission as commissioner of Lucknow, and became the trusted adviser and friend of the chief commissioner, Sir Henry Lawrence, by whom, on his deathbed, he was nominated to succeed as chief commissioner, but whom he survived only a few weeks. During the defence of the Lucknow residency, on 21 July 1857, Banks was shot through the head and killed. Banks was a man of judgement and tact, able and industrious in his duties, a brave soldier, and an excellent linguist. His widow received a special pension from the India Office for her husband's services. 


@@@@@


doc= 1300


Banks, Sir Joseph, baronet (1743-1820), naturalist and patron of science, was born on 13 February 1743 at 30 Argyll Street, London, the first child and only son of William Banks (1719-1761), gentleman, of Revesby Abbey, Lincolnshire, previously named William Banks Hodgkinson, of Overton, Derbyshire, as heir to his maternal grandfather, William Hodgkinson (1661/2-1731), merchant and landowner. Joseph's mother was Sarah (1709-1804), eldest daughter of William Bate and his wife, Arabella. 
Banks was educated in a manner appropriate to his status as the heir to a landed fortune, being sent first to Harrow School (1752-6) and then to Eton College (1756-60). At Eton he was a fairly indifferent student as regards the traditional classical curriculum but, largely thanks to his own efforts, he there began his lifelong preoccupation with botany. His mother may also have played a part in his developing botanical interests: he was encouraged by a copy of Gerard's 'Herbal' which he found in her dressing-room. At Oxford, where he matriculated at Christ Church as a gentleman commoner in 1760, he largely devoted himself to natural history rather than the predominantly classical course of studies. Such was his determination to receive botanical instruction that, at his own expense, he brought the Cambridge botanist Israel Lyons to give a set of lectures at Oxford in 1764, thereby filling the vacuum created by the reluctance of Oxford's professor of botany, Dr Sibthorp, to teach. Though there was little in the formal curriculum at Oxford which bore on his natural history interests, his time as an undergraduate helped to consolidate his love of the study of nature. He found other students who shared his enthusiasm and participated in informal societies devoted to such pursuits as botanizing and the study of geology. 
After his father died in 1761, leaving him the Revesby estate in Lincolnshire, Banks had the financial means to follow any calling he chose and so devoted himself to the pursuit of natural history. Increasingly he divided his time between Oxford and London, where his mother's new house at 22 Paradise Row, Chelsea, gave him ready access to the Chelsea Physic Garden of the Society of Apothecaries, then the most important centre of botanical activity in the country. 1764, the year in which he came of age, was the last year he spent any length of time at Oxford which, like many of his social class, he left without taking a degree. Thereafter he immersed himself in the cultural world of the London elite, becoming both a fellow of the Royal Society and a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1766 (he had previously become a member of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce in 1761). He also spent a great deal of time at the British Museum and there he came to know his close collaborator, Daniel Solander, who held the post of assistant librarian from 1765 until his death in 1788. Solander had trained under the great Linnaeus and, after coming to Britain in 1760, helped to disseminate his classificatory system. Through his friendship with Solander, which was cemented by their time together on the 'Endeavour', Banks was, then, indirectly a disciple of Linnaeus, with whom he exchanged cordial correspondence. 
Banks served his apprenticeship as a scientifically trained Linnaean naturalist -- as opposed to an undiscriminating virtuoso gentleman collector -- by accompanying his old Etonian friend, the naval officer and future MP and lord of the Admiralty, Constantine Phipps, on an expedition in 1766 to Labrador and Newfoundland. Though Banks was the sole naturalist on board, Solander assisted him in his choice of equipment and reference works, and later helped put his specimens from this voyage (now in the Natural History Museum, London) in order. Banks's journal (ed. A. M. Lysaght, 1971) indicates the close attention he paid to the full Linnaean domain of natural history which embraced not only the flora, fauna and minerals of an area but also its human population. 
This expedition served as a virtual rehearsal for the great 'Endeavour' voyage of 1768 to 1771 which lifted Banks from the ranks of gentlemen naturalists to become a figure of international scientific significance. He owed his position as a self-funded member of the 'Endeavour' expedition to Lord Sandwich, first lord of the Admiralty and his close friend. Both were enthusiastic London clubmen as well as being fellow devotees of a free-living 'demi-monde'. Thus, for example, David Hume reported the two fishing near Newbury in the company of 'two or three ladies of pleasure' (Carter, 'Sir Joseph Banks', 1988, 152). 
The 'Endeavour' expedition made it possible for Banks to explore a whole portion of the globe hitherto largely unexposed to European gaze. In doing so, he was ably assisted by the scientific party he had brought with him at his own expense. Along with Solander, there was another Swede, Herman Sporing, who served as secretary, together with two draughtsmen, Alexander Buchan, who specialized in landscapes, and Sydney Parkinson, who concentrated on natural history specimens. The chief goal of the voyage was to observe the transit of Venus at Tahiti where the 'Endeavour' anchored on 13 April 1769; it remained there for three months, during which time Buchan died. 
This lengthy stay gave Banks ample opportunity to study the flora and fauna of the island as well as to observe the character of its human society. He learned Tahitian and was fascinated by points of contrast with English society, being ready on occasions to admit the superiority of some aspects of Tahitian society, and that Europeans could benefit from a knowledge of some of the islanders' practical skills. He participated enthusiastically in local customs, even to the point of undergoing the painful operation of being tattooed. Like many of his shipmates, too, he formed liaisons with the Tahitian women and, in Enlightenment fashion, he later discoursed on the way in which Tahitian society was less oppressed by sexual taboos than was Europe. When the Tahitian Omai was brought to England in 1774, Banks became his patron, introducing him to the court and to elite society more generally. 
Following his sealed Admiralty orders, Cook, captain of the 'Endeavour', next turned south to explore the largely unknown territories which earlier Dutch explorers had termed New Zealand and New Holland. Though six months were spent in circumnavigating and charting New Zealand, Banks had only limited opportunities to investigate its natural history since there were few landfalls. This was partly because of the warlike nature of the Maori people, whose cannibalism Banks regarded as undermining the proper position of man in the great chain of being. Australia offered more possibilities for natural history -- as Cook's choice of the name Botany Bay for the area near the future city of Sydney indicates. However, Banks was disappointed not to have made more contact with the native peoples, and used the few opportunities that presented themselves (such as the enforced sojourn for repairs following the 'Endeavour''s encounter with the Great Barrier Reef in June 1770) to compile some record of their customs and languages. His lack of any conception of racial superiority is evident in his remarks about the Australian Aborigines in his 'Endeavour' journal. 
Because of the need for a thorough overhaul following the 'Endeavour''s near fatal grounding on the Great Barrier Reef, Cook called at Batavia on 9 October 1770. There his proud record of keeping his men safe from disease (and especially scurvy, the traditional scourge of long ocean voyages) was broken when thirty men died as a result of the Java fevers -- among them Banks's associates, Parkinson and Sporing. Banks and Solander survived their own illness largely by leaving Batavia for the Javanese countryside. After a stay of over three months the depleted ship left Batavia and made its way back to Britain, landing at Deal on 12 June 1771. 
Back in England, Banks received a rapturous welcome which overshadowed that of Cook himself. He was introduced to George III, beginning a long association which saw him become a close friend and the king's adviser on matters related to science or agriculture. The success of Cook's first great Pacific voyage prompted the organization of another in 1772, which Banks enthusiastically supported. This time he planned to take a much larger entourage including, it would seem, a valet who appears to have been a mistress in disguise. But the adulation that he had received on his return from the 'Endeavour' expedition had blinded him to the limitations of his influence with the navy and his attempts to reorganize the expedition to accommodate this large party led to his former patron, Lord Sandwich, turning against him. Thus thwarted, Banks withdrew from the 'Resolution' voyage in high dudgeon and employed the scientific party he had formed on a shorter voyage in 1772 to explore the geology and natural history of Iceland. This was the beginning of a lifelong association with that island and its people which led to his intervening on their behalf with the British government in 1810 to lessen the effects of the naval blockade of the island -- a blockade which was really directed at Denmark, Iceland's ruler, which was then an ally of Napoleon. 
The voyage to Iceland marked the end of Banks's overseas travel (apart from a short trip to the Netherlands in 1773). More and more he devoted his always considerable energies to furthering the cause of science. In 1773 his close association with the king led to his appointment as the virtual director of the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew, an institution he transformed from a royal pleasure garden to a major scientific centre devoted to fostering botanical exchange around the globe -- especially if such an exchange benefited England's larger imperial purposes. In the following year he served for the first time on the council of the Royal Society, thus beginning his steady rise within that body which culminated in his election as president in 1778. 
Another indication of Banks's increasingly single-minded sense of purpose was his move in 1777 from bachelor quarters at New Burlington Street to a much larger establishment at 32 Soho Square which became a virtual research institute. He employed a series of naturalists (Solander, Dryander, and Robert Brown) to keep his ever-increasing collections in order. The transition from the youthful man about town to the gentleman assuming his social responsibilities was also marked by his marriage in 1779 to Dorothea Hugessen (1758-1828), a well-acred heiress. Marriage meant parting from his long-established mistress, Sarah Wells, but the leave-taking appears to have been a civilized one with, no doubt, a suitable financial arrangement. An earlier association with Harriet Blosset dated from just before he left on the 'Endeavour' but though, according to the naturalist Daines Barrington, Banks admitted he gave Blosset 'the strongest reason to expect he would return her husband' (Barrington to Pennant, 24 Aug 1771, NL NZ, Turnbull L.), he broke off the connection on his return, paying some $5000 in compensation. 
Banks's election as president of the Royal Society, followed by his marriage, marked the end of his life as a free-living youthful adventurer and his elevation to the position of a statesman of science. However, he took some time to establish his authority, despite the king's bestowal of a baronetcy in 1781, since he was seen by some in the society, and especially those who regarded themselves as custodians of the mathematical Newtonian tradition, as a gentleman virtuoso without respectable scientific credentials except in the less prestigious area of natural history. This, together with his cavalier manner in dealing with some of the office-bearers, especially his ousting of Charles Hutton as the society's foreign secretary, helps account for the disputes within the organization over his presidency in 1783-4. He survived these assaults, which were led chiefly by Bishop Samuel Horsley, editor of Newton's works, and thereafter he established an unprecedented sway within the society as its longest serving president, continually re-elected until his death. 
During his long tenure Banks greatly strengthened the links between the Royal Society and the political establishment, helping to make science part of the natural concerns of the British state. The price for this was a reluctance on his part to elect low-born fellows or those suspected of political radicalism. Election depended very much on Banks's favour. However his continual re-election as president is an indication that the generally independent-minded fellows did not regard his firm hold on affairs as oppressive. Throughout his presidency he remained fiercely protective of the society: thus he opposed the foundation of the Geological Society in 1809 and the Astronomical Society in 1820, since he regarded the foundation of such new bodies as a challenge to its traditional dominance of the scientific estate. 
His position was the hub around which Banks's ever-mounting scientific and political responsibilities revolved. As president of the Royal Society he was an 'ex officio' member of the governing boards of the few institutions established by the British government to deal specifically with scientific affairs: the Royal Observatory, the board of longitude, and (from 1793) the board of agriculture. Moreover he considerably broadened the scope of his activities in order to link the possibilities of science more closely with the apparatus of the British state. The main bureaucratic agency through which he worked was the privy council committee on trade. There he had a firm ally in Charles Jenkinson (from 1786 to 1796 known as Lord Hawkesbury and then as the first earl of Liverpool) who was appointed the committee's first president in 1786. Like Banks, Jenkinson was something of a neo-mercantilist committed to ensuring as great as possible economic and strategic independence for Britain, and so greatly valued Banks's advice on the ways in which it might be possible to transfer economically valuable crops such as cotton and tea to areas of the globe under the British flag. Banks's work with the committee on trade and on coin ultimately led, in 1797, to his elevation to privy councillor. 
Together with the privy council committee on trade, Banks provided scientific advice through a number of other bureaucratic channels including the Board of Control (for India), the Home Office, and the Admiralty. At the last he benefited from his association with that scientifically minded administrator, Sir Evan Nepean, with whom he closely worked when organizing expeditions such as the ill-fated 'Bounty' expedition of 1787-9 and Flinders's circumnavigation of Australia on the 'Investigator' expedition of 1801-3 -- expeditions which merged scientific purposes with Britain's larger imperial designs. The 'Bounty' venture was well in accord with Banks's mercantilist goal of increasing Britain's economic self-sufficiency through the application of science to imperial policy, for its object was to transfer breadfruit from Tahiti to provide a cheap source of food for the slaves in the British West Indies. Banks's close supervision of the expedition extended to the appointment of his client, William Bligh, as captain both of the eventful 'Bounty' expedition and of its successor, the 'Providence', which successfully brought the breadfruit to the West Indies in 1793. The focus for such ventures in imperial botany was the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew, which, thanks to Banks's efforts, became the centre of a worldwide network of colonial botanical gardens often staffed by Kew-trained collectors. 
Alongside his position as what his close friend, William Eden, Lord Auckland, facetiously described as HM minister of philosophic affairs, that is, a virtual minister for science, Banks also acted as an adviser to government on other imperial issues. In 1779 he strongly urged the House of Commons to consider establishing a penal settlement at Botany Bay using his own firsthand knowledge to argue that it could support a convict population. Thereafter he remained closely involved with Australian affairs, advising the British government on suitable appointments as governors and doing what he could to represent the infant colony's interest at a time when British politicians were preoccupied with the French wars. 
Along with his promotion of Australian interests Banks was actively involved in promoting greater British involvement in the exploration of Africa. He was one of the founders of the African Society, which was established in 1788 with the goal of sponsoring expeditions to Africa and, in particular, charting the course of the Niger. The most celebrated of these were those led by the Scot Mungo Park (in 1795-9 and 1805-6), the German Friedrich Hornemann (1797-1801), and the Swiss Johann Burckhardt (1809-17). The last two owed their appointments to Banks's connections with the University of Gottingen which, as part of Hanover, was linked with the British crown. 
Banks's associations with Gottingen are a reminder that, along with his determination to use science, wherever possible, to promote the interests of the British empire, he also retained an allegiance to a larger and cosmopolitan republic of letters. His attempt to keep open the channels of scientific communication with France led him to use his influence to recover for the French Republic a large natural history collection captured by the British navy in the course of the war with revolutionary France in 1795. This had been assembled by La Billardiere, the botanist on the D'Entrecasteaux expedition sent in search of the lost expedition led by La Perouse. It was partly in recognition of this service that Banks was chosen as a member of the National Institute of France in 1802 and his enthusiastic public letter acknowledging this honour and describing the French Institute as 'the first Literary Society in the World' led to accusations that he was unpatriotic and had slighted his own Royal Society and with it the king. 
With the descent into madness of his chief patron, George III, and the political eclipse of his close ally the earl of Liverpool, who resigned his last public office in 1802, Banks's role in public affairs declined in his last two decades. He did, however, continue to give advice on behalf of the Royal Society for such scientific expeditions as the 1818 Arctic expedition commanded by John Ross. Such activities, together with his own example in combining naval and scientific purposes, helped to forge the tradition of scientific exploration which, in the nineteenth century, produced such notable voyages as those undertaken by the 'Beagle', 'Rattlesnake', and 'Commander'. Banks was also able to increase the sway of the Royal Society through securing, in 1818, a bill for changing the composition of the board of longitude to include more representation from the Royal Society. 
In 1818 Banks was involved in a carriage accident which led to the death of his beloved sister, Sarah Banks, who had lived with him most of his life and shared his love of collecting. Both, in their different ways, were examples of that cultural type, the virtuoso, who amassed large collections of the rare and the curious. But while Sarah built up a huge and miscellaneous collection of everything from coins to visiting cards, Banks brought to his collecting activities greater system and purpose, using the Linnaean and, subsequently, other systems of classification (notably that of Antoine de Jussieu) to give his private museum -- which after his death became the core of the British Museum's natural history division (now the Natural History Museum, London) -- a scientific purpose. His house-cum-research institute at Soho Square was open to serious naturalists of all nationalities and it also provided the setting for his celebrated scientific soirees which helped bring together major figures from the worlds of science and politics. The rather brash but eager young man who withdrew in pique from the second Cook voyage gave way to a more courteous but, none the less, determined advocate of science -- a transformation captured in the contrast between his two best-known portraits, that by Joshua Reynolds painted in 1771-2 soon after his return from the 'Endeavour' expedition (now in the National Portrait Gallery) and that painted by Thomas Phillips in 1815 as his official portrait as president of the Royal Society (still in the Royal Society). He was more at home in male than female company, and was, the painter, Joseph Farington, noted, 'rather coarse and heavy' ('Farington Diary', ed. Greig, 1.136). Lord Glenbervie described him more fully as 'awkward in his person, but extremely well-bred, in the best mode of English breeding... one of the many instances to prove that the personal graces are far from essential to politeness' ('Diaries of Sylvester Douglas (Lord Glenbervie)', ed. F. Bickley, 1928, 2.206). 
Along with his position at the centre of scientific and political affairs in London, Banks also maintained close ties with his family seat at Revesby Abbey in Lincolnshire. Thence he returned every summer to supervise the improvement of his estates and to renew his ties with his fellow squires. In county politics he worked, where possible, to prevent political division but his fundamental conservatism is apparent in his hostility to any would-be Lincolnshire politician connected with the cause of reform. He also took the view that it was incumbent on him, as president of the Royal Society and as a loyal servant of the king, to be seen to be above the noisy din of party politics. Thus he would accept the honour of being made a knight in the Order of the Bath in 1795 only when it was apparent that it was a direct gift from the king rather than a recognition for service to any party. None the less, he would intervene -- as unobtrusively as possible -- in the political process when he felt the welfare of what he termed the country interest was at stake. Thus he played an important but discreet role in organizing the opposition to the 'Wool Bill' of 1788 which favoured manufacturers at the expense of growers, and he was a spirited defender of the need for a system of corn laws. Indeed, his sympathies on the latter issue were widely enough known for his London house to be attacked during the corn laws riots of 1815. 
Though a determined defender of the constitutional order in church and state -- particularly when it came under threat in the age of the French revolution -- Banks's own religious views hovered between an enlightened Christianity and deism. As an improving landlord he was hostile to the system of clerical tithes, and to clerical privilege more generally. Theological discussion he regarded as largely fruitless and he had an aversion to ritual forms of religion. Though prepared to encourage missionary activity to promote larger imperial designs he was doubtful of its worth: in his words he was 'little inclined to Conversions. The will of God will, no doubt, put + keep all mankind on the right way; + his mercy will most assuredly despise all Ceremonial and all mistaken Faith' (Gascoigne, 'Joseph Banks', 42). He was animated by a strong sense of public duty, which complemented his strictly hierarchical view of society. Hence the choice of the lizard for his seal, 'an animal said to be Endowed by nature with an instinctive love of mankind'. He hoped the choice would serve 'as a Perpetual Remembrance that man is never so well employd, as when he is Laboring for the advantage of the Public; without the Expectation, the hope or Even a wish to Derive advantage of any kind, from the Result of his Exertions. (ibid., 18)' Banks remained active to the end of his life despite increasingly severe gout. He died on Monday 19 June 1820 and was buried (at his own request) without any monument at the parish church of Heston near his Middlesex country house, Spring Grove in the village of Spring Grove, the site of a number of his botanical and horticultural experiments. When he died he had achieved a European-wide reputation as one who had fruitfully brought together the worlds of government and science. As the great French naturalist, Georges Cuvier, generously acknowledged in his 'eloge' before the French Academie des Sciences, Banks's publications were few but his role as a statesman of science meant that 'his name will shine with lustre in the history of the sciences' (Cuvier, 3.49). However, Banks's fame soon faded since he was regarded as the embodiment of a scientific old regime which was being transformed by the reforms of the nineteenth century. Moreover, accident and the sheer mass and eventual scattering of his papers prevented the appearance of the massive biography which was his due. Not until the late twentieth century has his importance again been properly acknowledged as his papers have been reassembled by H. B. Carter and the historiography of science has become more sympathetic to the patrons as well as the practitioners of science. 


@@@@@


doc= 1301


Banks, Sarah Sophia (1744-1818), collector of antiquarian items, was born on 28 October 1744 at 30 Argyll Street, London, the second child and only daughter of William Banks (1719-1761), gentleman, and his wife, Sarah Bate (1709-1804). While her brother, Sir Joseph Banks, largely devoted his collecting to the realm of natural history, Sarah amassed antiquarian items which documented the social history of her age. Her extensive collections, now kept in the British Museum and British Library, encompassed coins and medals along with historically valuable ephemera such as broadsheets, newspaper clippings, visiting cards, engravings, advertisements, and playbills. Together with her omnivorous interest in the social world of elite society she also retained a strong interest in the folk culture of Lincolnshire (where the family seat of Revesby Abbey was located) -- an interest evident in her painstaking collection of Lincolnshire dialect words, 'Glossaries in Lincolnshire dialect, 1779-1783' (BL, Add. MS 32640). 
Though British elite culture offered few opportunities for women, the large number of visitors to her brother's residence in Soho Square, where she lived from shortly after his marriage in 1779 until her death, made it possible for Sarah to achieve some recognition in the scientific and scholarly circles in which her brother moved. She died, unmarried, on 27 September 1818, following a carriage accident. Her unusual status was acknowledged in a glowing obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. 


@@@@@


doc= 1302


Banks, Thomas (1735-1805), sculptor, was born on 22 December 1735 in Kennington, south London, and baptized in St Mary, Lambeth, on 18 January 1736, the eldest of the three sons of William Banks, later landscape gardener, land steward, and surveyor to the fourth duke of Beaufort at Badminton in Gloucestershire, and his wife, Mary. 
Educated in Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire, Banks first worked for his father, who was then supervising building works at Badminton under William Kent. According to the sculptor John Flaxman, Banks's father was an architect and taught his son the principles of the profession and how to draw. His younger brother Mark became an architect with the board of works. Aged fifteen or nineteen (the date is uncertain as until 1803 he believed he was born in 1739) Banks returned to London to be apprenticed to the mason and woodcarver William Barlow. He may have assisted Barlow with chimney-pieces for the Mansion House, London, and with wood-carving for the house of the Rt Hon. Henry Pelham in Arlington Street. Banks spent his evenings studying drawing and modelling in the studio of Peter Scheemakers in Vine Street, Piccadilly. Here he met the sculptor Joseph Nollekens, and both were able to study the clay and marble copies that Scheemakers had brought back from Italy. 
On completing his seven-year apprenticeship, Banks enrolled for life classes at the St Martin's Lane Academy. His marriage on 31 August 1766 to Elizabeth Hooton (1748-1834) brought him a modest income from land in Mayfair. By 1769 the sculptor Richard Hayward probably employed Banks as his assistant in Piccadilly. Between 1763 and 1769 Banks earned considerable sums in prize money from the Society of Arts for ambitious sculptures of historical subjects. According to the only account of his life published while he was alive ('European Magazine', 18, July-December 1790, 23), Banks decided to become a sculptor rather than remain a mason carver in response to premiums then on offer. In 1763 he was awarded a premium of 30 guineas for a bas-relief in Portland stone, 'The Death of Epaminondas'. In 1765 he won a premium of 25 guineas for a marble relief, 'The Ransoming of Hector', and in 1769 he received a premium of 20 guineas for a life-size clay statue, 'Prometheus and the Vulture'. The award of 20 guineas in 1766 for a 'Design for Ornamental Furniture' confirmed his versatility and potential employment beyond sculpture. He also exhibited at this time with the Free Society of Artists, showing 'The Ransoming of the Body of Hector' in 1767 (presumably the marble relief completed two years before) and models of 'The Judgment of Paris' in 1768 and of 'Perseus' in 1769. From 1769 to 1772 he is recorded living in New Bird Street, Oxford Road (on the north side of the present Oxford Street). 
In 1769 Banks moved his allegiance to the new Royal Academy of Arts and on 30 June was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools. His younger brother Charles ('c'.1745-1795) also enrolled as a student that year; he won the gold medal in 1774 and became his brother's assistant. At the academy exhibition of 1769 Thomas Banks exhibited two models, 'Aeneas and Anchises Escaping from Troy' and the same subject 'in another point in time' (as stated in the exhibition catalogue). In the first election for associateships of the Royal Academy, held that year, he was unsuccessful, yet he won the academy's gold medal for sculpture with the bas-relief 'The Rape of Proserpine'. He also received $10 from the academy as the first instalment of a stipend to study in Rome. The first sculptor to receive the Rome scholarship, he did not depart until 1772. In 1771 he exhibited at the academy a portrait study in chalks of its first porter and model, John Malin (RA), probably after a death mask, together with a model for a monument showing 'A Cherub Decorating an Urn'. In 1772 he showed a model for a sculpture of 'Mercury, Argus and Io'. 
Banks arrived in Rome with his wife on 22 September 1772. He may have intended to settle there in the hope of finding international patronage among the gentlemen on the grand tour for the historical and poetical subjects for which he had received prizes, but little employment, in London. His daughter, Lavinia, was born in Rome in 1774, and he remained a further four years after his academy stipend expired in 1775, returning to England only after protracted physical and mental illness caused by unreliable patrons, including Frederick Hervey, bishop of Derry, later fourth earl of Bristol. His reputation rests, essentially, on five surviving works from these years. Sir Joshua Reynolds 'pronounced him the first British sculptor who had produced works of classic grace, and said 'his mind was ever dwelling on subjects worthy of an ancient Greek'' (Cunningham, 3.86). 
Banks first sent back to the academy an oval marble relief, 'Alcyone Discovering the Dead Body of her Husband Ceyx' (Leeds City Council, Lotherton Hall, Yorkshire), exhibited at the academy in 1775, and in 1778 he showed there a marble bust of a lady. Between these years he produced three marble reliefs: 'Caractacus before Claudius' (priv. coll.); 'The Death of Germanicus' (priv. coll.); and 'Thetis and her Nymphs Rising from the Sea to Console Achilles for the Loss of Patroclus', together with the terracotta statuette 'Achilles Arming' (both V&A). These works illustrate the two great influences on Banks in Rome: the carving techniques of the Italians, discovered with the assistance of Giovanni Battista Capezzuoli, and the Romantic classicism of Henry Fuseli and the international circle in Rome that included George Romney, Nicolai Abildgaard, and the sculptor J. T. Sergel. 
In 1779 Banks recovered from his illness sufficiently to visit Naples, and in May he returned to England with his family and Maria Hadfield (at whose marriage to Richard Cosway in 1781 he was a formal witness). In 1780 he showed at the academy his marble relief of 'Caractacus before Claudius', prior to installing it opposite Christophe Veyrier's 'Darius before Alexander' in the entrance hall at Stowe, and a bust of the painter Benjamin West, Banks's neighbour in Newman Street. The following year he exhibited two other works begun in Rome and finished in London: a portrait of Princess Sophia of Gloucester as 'Psyche Plucking the Golden Wool' and a statue of Cupid (formerly Pavlovsk Palace, Russia). Lord Bristol had commissioned the latter in marble in early spring 1778 but left it in Banks's hands. 
Still determined to find patronage for sculpture of poetical and historical subjects, Banks set out alone for St Petersburg in June 1781 with the statue of Cupid, hoping to sell it to Catherine the Great. In this he succeeded, and he also received commissions for a portrait of Catherine the Great and a bas-relief, 'The Armed Neutrality', emblematic of the current political standing of Russia, which did not favour Britain. He returned to London in 1782, to his family's surprise, probably as a result of the declining political climate. He may also have been prompted to come home by a commission for a monument to Thomas Newton, dean of St Paul's Cathedral, to stand in the cathedral, which he began immediately upon his return (formerly St Mary-le-Bow, Cheapside). Newton had encouraged a scheme, led by Reynolds, for decorating St Paul's, and it seems likely that Reynolds secured Banks the commission. 
Banks's ambitions for sculpture found some fulfilment in his church memorials, which, unlike those of contemporaries such as Bacon and Flaxman, are all individual designs and do not tend towards standardization. In 1783, through the architect George Dance, the East India Company commissioned Banks to produce the vast monument to Sir Eyre Coote, still in Westminster Abbey, completed in 1789. In this otherwise traditional sculpture, the life-size heroic nude figure of a 'Mahratta Captive' (exh. RA, 1789) received particular praise. At the academy exhibition in 1784 Banks had shown a colossal sculpture, 'Achilles Enraged for the Loss of Briseis' (British Institution vestibule 1805-68; RA entrance hall until 1899; presumed destroyed 'c'.1920). This full-size plaster helped secure his election as an associate of the Royal Academy in November and as a Royal Academician three months later, in 1785. As his diploma piece he deposited the marble 'Falling Titan' (RA), which his daughter later stated to be based on sketches Banks had made with Fuseli in Rome. In 1789 his high-relief 'Shakspeare between the Dramatic Muse and the Genius of Painting' (New Place gardens, Stratford upon Avon), for the entrance facade of Boydell's Shakspeare Gallery in Pall Mall, London, received general acclaim. Banks's last known surviving work of a poetical nature is the portrait of Mrs Johnes and her infant daughter as 'Thetis Dipping the Infant Achilles in the Styx' (1790; V&A). Thomas Johnes of Hafod in Cardiganshire commissioned it after he had withdrawn his order for a marble of the 'Achilles Enraged'. 
The most celebrated of Banks's church memorials is the recumbent effigy of Penelope Boothby (St Oswald's Church, Ashbourne, Derbyshire), the only child of Sir Brooke Boothby. When the model (Sir John Soane's Museum, London) of the six-year-old girl, apparently sleeping, was exhibited at the academy in 1793 it prompted Queen Charlotte and her daughters to burst into tears. Other important memorials include the reliefs commemorating Isaac Watts (1779) and William Woollett (1791) (both Westminster Abbey) and that to Mrs Petrie (1795; St Mary's, Lewisham). His monuments in St Paul's Cathedral to Captain Richard Burgess (1802) and Captain Westcott (1802-5) attracted criticism for their combination of portraiture with heroic nudity. 
Portrait busts by Banks are exceptional in their intellectual intensity. More than thirty-five are recorded, the most accessible and admired of which today are 'Warren Hastings' (1790-91; marble, India Office Library; bronze, NPG) and 'Dr Anthony Addington' (1791; marble, V&A). His last exhibited work, a bust of Oliver Cromwell (priv. coll.), was ordered to be withdrawn from the exhibition of 1803 to avoid embarrassment to the Royal Academy. Banks had been arrested on suspicion of treason in 1794 when the artist Joseph Farington noted in his diary (16 January 1794): 'Banks is a violent democrat' (Farington, 'Diary', 1.144). Farington's observation was made after noting Banks's failed attempt to be appointed librarian at the academy. His known political sympathies must have harmed his career. Since 1780 he had exhibited annually at the academy, missing only three years (1786, 1790, and 1801). Regularly elected a visitor to the Royal Academy Schools, he served on the academy council, exhibition hanging committee, and schools committee, as well as on the committee for monuments in St Paul's Cathedral, but he was not selected from a shortlist presented to George III for the keepership in 1803. 
In the history of collecting old master drawings in Britain, Banks holds a significant position. For his time, he was unusual in the interest he took in the early Renaissance masters, including Parmigianino and Durer. Drawings from his collection were later divided between Sir Thomas Lawrence and Banks's great-grandson, the painter Sir Edward Poynter. Partially paralysed by a stroke in 1803, Banks destroyed many of his terracottas that year. He died at his home, 5 Newman Street, London, on 2 February 1805 and was buried in the churchyard of St Mary's, Paddington. A tablet to his honour was the first erected to a sculptor in Westminster Abbey. Flaxman wrote a lecture on Banks immediately after his death, but he was denied permission to deliver it by the academy, who feared that the king would see it as a celebration of a democrat. 
The nineteenth century regarded Banks as a founding father of the British school of art. This reputation endured through the prominence of his works and publications such as Cunningham's 'Lives' (1830). Flaxman's 'Address on Banks' appeared in the second edition of his 'Lectures on Sculpture' (1838), a volume presented to prizewinning students throughout the century. At a time when churches were the equivalent of today's museums and galleries of modern sculpture, Banks's monuments were seen in Westminster Abbey, St Paul's Cathedral, and local churches, particularly in London. His sculptures of poetical and historical subjects could be seen in the National Gallery, the British Institution, Sir John Soane's Museum, and the entrance halls of the Royal Academy and of country houses such as Stowe, Buckinghamshire, and Holkham Hall, Norfolk. The International Exhibition of 1862 included his four best-known works: 'Falling Titan' and the three Achilles subjects mentioned above. 
Today, despite the destruction of many London churches and the loss of most of his terracotta sketches, Banks is admired, with his contemporaries John Bacon and Joseph Nollekens, as the leading sculptor of the era of patriotic patronage that saw the founding of the Royal Academy. After the great generation of immigrant artists who had dominated sculpture in the second third of the eighteenth century (including Roubiliac, Rysbrack, and Scheemakers) Banks was the first native sculptor to answer the ambitions of his time. Despite his disappointments with his patrons, his best surviving works are distinguished by a commitment to the spirit of the antique while drawing on wider artistic sources, resulting in an originality that stretched the familiar vocabulary of the fashionable neo-classical style. 


@@@@@


doc= 1303


Banks, Thomas Christopher (1765-1854), genealogist, was the eldest child of Thomas Banks, a gentleman pensioner. He claimed a relationship to the Banks family of Whitley; on his mother's side, he claimed descent from the Nortons of Barbados. He studied law, and on the strength of his genealogical knowledge offered his services as an agent in cases of disputed inheritance. From 1813 to 1820 he practised at 5 Lyon's Inn, London, and subsequently he took an office, called the Dormant Peerage Office, in John Street, Pall Mall. Although he specialized in cases based on the weakest of claims (which he strengthened with largely fanciful pedigrees), some of his published works were well researched and accurate. 

'The Manual of the Nobility', his first publication, appeared in 1807. The same year he brought out the first volume of the 'Dormant and Extinct Baronage of England'; a second volume followed in 1808, and a third in 1809. The work drew heavily on Sir William Dugdale's 'Baronetage of England' (1675-6). In 1812 he published the first volume of a corresponding work on the 'Peerage', which was never completed. The same year he edited, in one volume, reprints of Sir William Dugdale's 'Ancient Usage in Bearing... Arms' (first published in 1682), Dugdale's 'Discourse Touching the Office of Lord High Chancellor', with additions, together with Sir William Segar's 'Honores Anglicani' (1590). In 1825 he brought out 'Stemmata Anglicana, or, A Miscellaneous Collection of Genealogy'. The second part contained an account of the ancient and extinct royal families of England, re-embodied from the 'Extinct Peerage'. In 1837 this was republished as a fourth volume of the 'Dormant and Extinct Baronage of England', and continued down to January 1837, with corrections, appendices, and index. 
In 1812 Banks published the first of his pamphlets in support of spurious claims to peerages under the title 'An Analysis of the Genealogical History of the Family of Howard'. In 1815 the pamphlet was republished with the more exciting title 'Ecce homo, the Mysterious Heir, or, Who is Mr Walter Howard? An Interesting Inquiry Addressed to the Duke of Norfolk'. A third edition appeared in 1816. In the same year another pamphlet appeared, entitled 'The Detection of Infamy', written anonymously by Banks on behalf of Thomas Drummond, of Biddick, claimant to the estates of the earl of Perth. During the next twenty-five years he continued to take on similar cases. In the late 1820s he undertook the case of Alexander Humphrys, who laid claim to the earldom of Stirling. He wrote several pamphlets in support of Humphrys's cause and travelled to North America (1826-8) and Ireland (1828-9) to search for evidence. Banks gave proof of his own personal faith in the claims of Humphrys by allowing the pretendant, in accordance with rights conferred on the first earl of Stirling by King James, to create him a baronet, and by accepting from him (in anticipation) a grant of 6000 acres of land in Nova Scotia. When the documents on which Humphrys founded his claims were discovered to be forgeries, Banks ceased to make use of his own title. While the Stirling case was still in progress, Banks published the imaginary discovery of another unrecognized claim to a peerage, under the title of a 'Genealogical and historical account of the earldom of Salisbury, showing the descent of the Baron Audley of Heleigh from the William Longespe, earl of Salisbury, son of King Henry II by the celebrated fair Rosamond'. In 1844 he published, in two parts, 'Baronia Anglica concentrata'. 
Banks was a knight of the holy order of St John. During his later years he resided near Ripon, Yorkshire; he died at Greenwich, Kent, on 30 September 1854. 


@@@@@


doc= 1304


Banks, William Stott (1821-1872), antiquary, was born at Wakefield, Yorkshire, on 9 March 1821, the son of William Banks and his wife, Harriet Stott, and baptized on 15 April following at the Salem Independent Chapel. He was educated at the Lancasterian School there, and at the age of eleven began work in the office of John Berry, a local solicitor. He subsequently became a clerk in the office of Marsden and Ianson, solicitors and clerks to the West Riding justices, and remained with Ianson at the dissolution of the firm in 1844. He then took articles, was admitted an attorney in Hilary term 1851, and in 1853 became Ianson's partner. On the formation of the Wakefield borough commission in March 1870 he was elected clerk to the justices, an office that he retained until his death. 
In 1865 Banks published a short but scholarly 'List of Provincial Words in Use at Wakefield', and in the following year the first of three volumes of 'Walks in Yorkshire' (1866-71), which combined antiquarian and topographical notes and were highly regarded for their research. Banks died at his house in Northgate, Wakefield, on 25 December 1872, shortly after a visit to the continent, undertaken for health reasons. He was survived by his wife, Susannah. 


@@@@@


doc= 1305


Banquell, Sir John (d. 1308), administrator, came of a family who had connections with the leather and fur trades in London. He married Cecily, sister of the prosperous wool merchant Laurence of Ludlow, before the autumn of 1285, by when he was a king's clerk, responsible for receiving recognizances of debts from the city's traders, while in May 1286 he was granted custody of the merchants' seal, under the law merchant. He also became active as a financier and moneylender. His rapid rise to prominence in London owed much to crown patronage, particularly after 1285, when Edward I took over the government of the capital and replaced the mayor and sheriffs with royal appointees. By November that year Banquell had been installed as common clerk of the city, the second known holder of the office. He probably relinquished the post soon afterwards on becoming an alderman, first for Cripplegate ward (1286-91) and later for Dowgate (1291-8). One of the most influential citizens, effectively a deputy to the wardens appointed by the crown, he was on several occasions appointed by the civic authorities to present the city's business in the king's council. In recognition of his services to the city he was granted a plot of land near the Guildhall which, by the late fourteenth century, had become the site of a cloth market known as Backwell, or Blackwell, Hall. The grant was completed in June 1293. Numerous other properties in London, as well as lands at Lee, Bromley, and other places in Kent, were acquired by Banquell and his wife. 
Banquell remained a London alderman until April 1298, when control of the city's government was ceded back to the citizens. Despite this reversal his ties with the crown enabled him to develop his career into new areas. From 1297 onwards he became active as a justice and, probably in the early summer of 1299, he was appointed seneschal of Ponthieu, the French county inherited by the young Edward, prince of Wales, from his mother, Queen Eleanor. He held this post until 1305, becoming a member of the prince's council and receiving a knighthood. He was also sent on a number of diplomatic missions to France before the signing of a peace treaty with Philippe IV in May 1303 and was among those chosen to visit the pope at Lyons in October 1305 in connection with Edward's proposed marriage to Isabella of France. In March 1304 and April 1306 he was one of two commissioners appointed to meet with their French counterparts to inquire into the losses incurred by merchants on both sides following breaches of the truce. 
Banquell had probably relinquished the post of seneschal by August 1305, when he was one of the justices of gaol delivery who tried and convicted William Wallace. Entrusted with the task of accompanying Cardinal Sabina, the papal pro-nuncio, on his visit to England between December 1306 and March 1307, he was later appointed a baron of the exchequer. He was summoned to Edward II's first parliament, to be held in March 1308, but died while attending the coronation, held at Westminster Abbey on 25 February. According to the London chronicles, he was crushed to death when a stone wall collapsed under the weight of the large crowds. He was buried in the Austin friary in London and was survived by his wife, Cecily (died 1328) and their two sons, Thomas (died 1333) and John. 


@@@@@


doc= 1306


Baukwell, Roger (d. in or after 1350), justice, derived his name from Bakewell in Derbyshire, where he appears to have held property. His parentage is unknown. He is first recorded in Michaelmas term 1314, acting as an attorney in the court of common pleas. During the 1320s he became a pleader in that court, and was created a serjeant at Michaelmas 1329, serving in that capacity at the Northamptonshire eyre of 1329-30. No sooner had he begun to receive commissions of oyer and terminer, and to take assizes, than on 27 February 1331 he was appointed a justice of the bench in Dublin. He may have gone to Ireland -- there is a break in the flow of commissions in this year -- but the appointment does not seem to have taken effect, and he was certainly back in England by 25 June 1332, when he was made an assessor of tallage in Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire. On 2 October 1333 he was appointed chief justice of the Dublin bench, but again seems to have failed to establish himself there, and from 1334 his career was restricted to England, and particularly to the north midlands. 
As well as being a regular assize justice on the midland circuit, Baukwell received numerous separate commissions. Thus in July 1335 he was appointed to investigate the behaviour of tax collectors in Northamptonshire, Warwickshire, and Rutland. In April 1338 he was ordered to define the boundaries of Sherwood Forest. In April 1340 he was made an assessor and collector of the ninth of wool, sheaves, and lambs in Derbyshire. On 8 January 1341, following Edward III's dismissal of much of the judiciary, Baukwell was made a justice of king's bench, and ten days later was appointed a justice for an abortive London eyre. Later in the same year he was a justice on a commission investigating official misconduct in Lincolnshire, Derbyshire, and Nottinghamshire. A trier of petitions in the parliaments of Easter 1341, Easter 1343, and Hilary 1347, in May 1345 he was added to the panel of justices appointed to hold an eyre (which never took place) in the bishopric of Durham. 
In 1346 Baukwell received an increment of 20 marks to his annual salary, and in the same year was one of fourteen justices whom the keeper of the great wardrobe was ordered to provide with cloth and fur for robes. He served in king's bench until Michaelmas 1348, but continued to take assizes and to act as a commissioner after that date -- his last commission was issued on 25 June 1350, suggesting that he had survived the black death, but died shortly after the epidemic. Unusually for a professional justice by this date, Baukwell was an ecclesiastic -- hence his acting as an assize justice at Lincoln on 18 February 1333, but not as a gaol delivery justice on the following day. His rewards in terms of benefices were fairly modest. In 1339 he was presented to a prebend in the royal free chapel of Penkridge, Staffordshire, where in 1349 he became sacrist; in 1341 he was recorded as parson of Dronfield in north-east Derbyshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 1307


Bankin, John (fl. 1347-1387), prior of the Augustinian convent, London, and religious controversialist, is said by John Bale to have been born in London, where he entered and was educated at the Augustinian convent. By 1347 he had moved to the convent in Oxford, although between 7 March 1347 and 14 November 1348 he was also licensed to hear confessions in Sarum diocese. While in Oxford, again according to Bale, he acquired the reputation of 'supremae classis magister'. He completed his DTh at some time before 1382. 
In 1371 Bankin and another Augustinian friar (perhaps Thomas Ashbourne) laid articles before parliament urging the use of clerical endowments to help finance the war in France. In making such a proposal they were voicing what seem to have been widely held ideas. When John Wyclif (died 1384), himself a spectator at this parliament, argued such ideas later in the decade, therefore, Bankin was almost certainly one of his supporters: he may even have been one of the four friars produced by John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster (died 1399), to defend Wyclif at St Paul's Cathedral on 19 February 1377. If Bankin began by supporting Wyclif, however, he then changed his position, probably in response to the publication of Wyclif's 'De eucharistia' in 1380. In May 1382 he was among those who condemned Wyclif's views at the council held at Blackfriars, London. 
By 18 July 1387 Bankin had succeeded Ashbourne as prior of the London convent. As such he had to deal with the apostasies of at least two fellow Augustinians, Peter Pateshull and Robert Stokesley, alias York, who had abandoned the religious life and returned to the world. It is not known when he died. John Bale credits Bankin with three works, 'Contra positiones Wiclevi', 'Determinationes variae', and 'Sermones ad populum', none of which has survived, and also describes him as a popular preacher and able disputant. His 'Contra positiones Wiclevi' suggests that he ultimately became an active anti-Wycliffite polemicist. 


@@@@@


doc= 1308


Bannard, John (fl. 1402-1411), Augustinian friar and theologian, is first mentioned in exercises dated 1402 in the theological notebook of an unknown bachelor (now Oxford, Corpus Christi College, MS 280), as opponent to questions raised on the second book of Peter Lombard's 'Sentences'; only the bachelor's replies are noted, but Bannard evidently defended the doctrine of the immaculate conception, and put forward a further thesis on angels and the earthly paradise. He must have already graduated bachelor or doctor of theology to play this role. He must have remained in Oxford for a further decade, as his name is mentioned in two documents of 1411 as chancellor or acting chancellor; some time after 31 May he signed the bursar's account at University College, and on 11 November he made an agreement on behalf of the university with the assessors for the tenth and fifteenth levied in the parish of St Mary Magdalen. Almost certainly he was acting as commissary only within a brief period, lasting from 9 September to 18 November, when the office of chancellor was under contention. There is no evidence for him after 1411. 


@@@@@


doc= 1309


Bannatyne, George (1545-1607/8), compiler of the Bannatyne manuscript, was born in Edinburgh on 22 December 1545, the seventh child and fourth (but second surviving) son of James Bannatyne of Kirktown of Newtyle (1512-1584) and Catherine Telfer (1522/3-1570). George had eleven brothers and eleven sisters. No offspring is known from his father's second marriage in 1573 to Jonet Cockburn, widow of James Wood, portioner of Bonnington (died 1546) and, secondly, of David Forrester, merchant burgess of Edinburgh (died 1572). In 1558 a George Ballenden matriculated at St Mary's College, St Andrews, where he also appears among the 'baccalaurei' and 'intrantes' of 1560-62, this time with the name spelt Ballandyne. This is most likely to be George Bellenden, half-brother of Sir John Bellenden, justice-clerk, who was studying in Paris in 1564. However, since scribes regularly mistook the name Bannatyne for Ballenden, the possibility cannot be entirely ruled out that this is in fact George Bannatyne; several of his brothers studied in St Andrews, their names likewise misspelt. Although Bannatyne was never styled 'maister' in later life, he may have obtained his master's licence but not have been able to go through the required formal ceremonies because of the troubles of the Reformation, with his later career in business never requiring him to rectify this. However, it is more likely that he did not go to university altogether. 
George's father, burgess of Edinburgh, was writer to the signet, keeper of the rolls, member of Edinburgh town council, searcher of English ships, and deputy justice-clerk. He was closely related to the poet John Bellenden and to Sir John and Sir Lewis Bellenden, consecutive justice-clerks. George Bannatyne was thus connected to the contemporary literary, legal, and political establishment, which is confirmed by the 'Memoriall buik' in which he faithfully copied the births, marriages, and deaths of loved ones. 
These urban and legal circles with connections to church, court, and literature enabled Bannatyne to compile the Bannatyne manuscript, the most wide-ranging of the contemporary Scottish literary miscellanies, arranging some four hundred texts, many otherwise unknown, into five sections of religious, moral, merry, amatory, and narrative poetry, for an audience that wanted such texts for a range of didactic and leisure-time purposes. Opinions are divided as to whether he copied the manuscript at his family's estate of Newtyle in Angus (Forfarshire) or at their Edinburgh residence in the Cowgate; whether he did so in the last three months of 1568 or from 1565 to 1568; whether it was meant to be printed; and whether it was intended as a conceptually focused family miscellany, or even a coterie anthology. 
The lack of evidence for any other cultural enterprise by Bannatyne suggests that ethical and utilitarian rather than aesthetic or nationalist impulses lie behind his compilation. Merging an appreciation of vernacular texts with socially conservative yet culturally open-minded tastes, his editing presents literature as both moral counsel and entertainment in a laicized society that, based on law and education, emphasizes civic responsibility. Such 'vernacular humanism' fits with Bannatyne's public profile as a reformer concerned with the 'bonum commune' rather than with doctrinal issues; as a result, his protestant self-censorship was not rigorous and some Roman Catholic features of his copy-texts remained. In their attempt to combine the archaic dictates of courtly love with a more rational philosophy of love, the two eloquently conventional poems attributed to Bannatyne in the manuscript reflect a similar mindset. 
In 1572 James Bannatyne gifted his son a tenement in Leith near Edinburgh, adjacent to property owned by William Fowler, elder brother of the poet of the same name and uncle to another poet, William Drummond of Hawthornden. George Bannatyne was also presented in 1582 with the income deriving from the chaplaincy of St Michael's altar in the parish church of Crieff, vacant by decease of John Bannatyne, his uncle. On 27 October 1587 he was made merchant and guild brother of Edinburgh; he was styled 'merchant' throughout his life, but his wealth derived mainly from numerous financial transactions, especially speculation with annual rents. At an uncertain date he married Isobel Mauchan (1545/6-1603), widow of the bailie William Nisbet and mother of Edward and Isobel Nisbet. They had three children, Jonet (1587-1631), James (1589-1598), and a stillborn daughter (1593). Jonet in 1603 became the second wife of George Foulis (1569-1633), second son of James Foulis of Colinton and master of the king's mint. Through this marriage the Bannatyne manuscript passed into the Foulis family; it is now in the National Library of Scotland. The best diplomatic version is that edited by W. Tod Ritchie, 'The Bannatyne Manuscript' (Scottish Text Society, 1928-1934), which contains many transcripts of family documents. An excellent facsimile edition is provided by Denton Fox and William A. Ringler, in 'The Bannatyne Manuscript' (1980). 
In 1600 Bannatyne was appointed master of Trinity Hospital, just outside Edinburgh, for a year, an appointment which indicates that Bannatyne linked business acumen with charity. In 1606 he lived with his daughter's family in Dreghorn, a few miles south-west of Edinburgh. He was still alive on 10 September 1607 but had died by 5 April 1608, a document of that date stating that the deceased George Bannatyne had been searcher of customable skins, an office that had been held by several members of his family before him. His wife's testament -- his own has not been preserved -- suggests the couple enjoyed a comfortable lifestyle. 


@@@@@


doc= 1310


Bannatyne, Richard (d. 1605), secretary to John Knox, may have originated in western Scotland, for his brother James was a merchant in Ayr around the time of Richard's death. There is no evidence to support suggestions that he belonged to the same family as his contemporary George Bannatyne, the collector of Scottish poetry. Richard Bannatyne became secretary to John Knox, attracted to the latter's service primarily out of admiration for his integrity and ministry, not for 'worldlie commoditie' (Bannatyne, 94). He appeared frequently in the kirk's general assembly, and prior to the earl of Moray's assassination, on 21 January 1570, he twice carried messages from Knox to the countess, urging her to advise Moray not to return from Stirling to Edinburgh via Linlithgow (where his killer was waiting). When Knox was attacked in an anonymous handbill for his criticism of Queen Mary in 1571, Bannatyne, on his own initiative, attempted (unsuccessfully) to persuade the general assembly formally to endorse Knox's position, and was 'not a litill in choler that his just desyre was refuised' (Bannatyne, 95). When Knox went to St Andrews in July 1571, Bannatyne lived in the priory with him and his family. As a student at St Leonard's College, James Melville watched Bannatyne help the frail Knox to the church and into the pulpit each day. By now in failing health, Knox asked his wife and Bannatyne to read to him from 'John' 17, 'Isaiah' 53, a chapter of 'Ephesians', the 'Psalms', and Calvin's sermons in French. Three days after he had instructed Bannatyne to have his coffin made, the reformer died, on 24 November 1572, with his secretary at his side. Knox left the care of his wife and three small daughters to Bannatyne, asking that he 'be a husband, in my rowme' (Bannatyne, 288). 
After Knox's death, Bannatyne petitioned the general assembly for financial assistance to enable him to preserve the reformer's manuscripts. In addition to giving him $40, the assembly instructed the Edinburgh church to appoint several scholars to assist him. It has been suggested that Bannatyne composed the fifth part of the 'History of the Reformation within the Realm of Scotland', covering the period 1564-7, possibly using Knox's notes, but this is doubtful. The two men's literary interdependence is more probably manifested in Bannatyne's 'Memoriales of Transactions in Scotland', covering the years 1569-73. 
Having completed his work for the general assembly about 1575, Bannatyne became a clerk for the advocate Samuel Cockburn of Tempill, or Tempillhall. In that capacity Bannatyne almost certainly had contacts with his employer's relatives, Sir Robert Cockburn, lord privy seal, and Sir John Cockburn, lord justice clerk. In 1575 he published Henry Balnaves's treatise on justification by faith (written in 1548, and then revised with Knox's assistance), which he had found in Lady Alison Sandilands's papers. Bannatyne served Samuel Cockburn for nearly three decades, during which time he continued his ties with the Knox family. Bannatyne's will, dated 27 August 1605, appointed his brother James as joint executor along with Cockburn; his possessions were worth $1181 Scots. Bannatyne died on 4 September 1605. His importance derives primarily from his 'Memoriales', which presents Knox, the 'light of Scotland', in a flattering manner. The view that Knox was strongly anti-episcopalian, which some modern scholars have challenged, was shaped in part by Bannatyne and by David Calderwood, who relied extensively on the 'Memoriales'. Although the 'Memoriales' became an invaluable source, Bannatyne is sometimes vague or unreliable, as in his exaggerated claim that the king's forces exceeded 4000 when the siege of Edinburgh commenced in October 1571. Bannatyne's discovery and publication of Balnaves's influential treatise, with its proclamation of the religious character of ordinary occupations, its stress on the separation of the spiritual from the temporal office, and the limitations it urged for the prince's power over the church, likewise constituted an important service to the Scottish Reformation in its formative period. 


@@@@@


doc= 1311


Bannatyne, Sir William Macleod, Lord Bannatyne (1744-1833), judge, was born on 26 January 1744, perhaps in Edinburgh, the son of Roderick Macleod (died 1784) of Sunbank, writer to the signet, and his first wife, Isabel ('fl'. 1736-1744), daughter of Hector Bannatyne of Kames. He was admitted as a member of the Faculty of Advocates on 22 January 1765. Through his mother he succeeded to the estate of Kames, in Bute, when he assumed the name Bannatyne, and he was appointed sheriff of Bute in February 1776. Although letters of 1802-3 show that he hoped to marry a Miss Brisbane, this suit was unsuccessful, and he never married. 
Bannatyne was one of the political group which gathered around Henry Erskine, a Scottish branch of the opposition whig connection, which hindered his professional ambition in the alarmist 1790s. When he asked his patron, John Stuart, fourth earl of Bute, to try to secure a place on the bench for him in March 1795, Bute reported that Bannatyne's attendance at a dinner held in Edinburgh in honour of Charles James Fox's birthday in January that year had excluded him from consideration. Bannatyne argued strenuously and persistently that his political views were very moderate, and he was eventually allowed to take a gown at the court of session on 16 May 1799 as Lord Bannatyne, after the death of Lord Swinton. He remained courageously loyal to his old allies, however: in January 1796 he voted in support of Henry Erskine in the ballot which deposed Erskine as dean of the Faculty of Advocates in Edinburgh for having presided at a public meeting to oppose government policy. As a judge Bannatyne was generally regarded as impartial, sound, and clear, although a choleric William Adam in 1811 described him as one of a group of judges who were 'worse than Faggots in a Muster roll', from whose incapacity 'nothing is to be expected' (Adam, 'Memorandum'). He retired from the court of session in 1823 and was knighted on 22 December 1823, becoming Sir William Macleod Bannatyne. He was father of the Scottish bar when he died in 1833. 
Bannatyne's interests and friendships extended from the professional and the political to the literary and the philanthropic. He was associated with Henry Mackenzie, Robert Cullen, William Craig, and others in producing the Edinburgh periodicals 'The Mirror' (1779) and its successor 'The Lounger' (1785-7), which arose out of an informal essay club and which were modelled on 'The Spectator'. Bannatyne himself wrote for five issues of 'The Mirror' (nos. 6, 28, 46, 58, and 76) and two issues of 'The Lounger' (nos. 13 and 39). The Bannatyne Club, of which he was a founder member, was established in 1823 for the purpose of publishing Scottish antiquarian papers. His colleague Sir Walter Scott edited an account of the life and manuscripts of the poetry collector George Bannatyne (1545-1607/8) for volume 35 and included some of Sir William's own verses as an appendix, which Scott privately described as 'sad trash' ('Letters of Sir Walter Scott', 10.495). Reflecting his practical interest in the economy and culture of highland Scotland, Bannatyne was a founder member of the Highland Society of Scotland in 1784. He also maintained a strong personal connection with the highlands through the Macleod family, for whose senior members, such as General Norman Macleod (1754-1801), he sometimes acted as a trustee and legal adviser. 
Bannatyne, clubbable, popular, and described by Cockburn as 'an honest merry old gentleman' ('Memorials... by Henry Cockburn', 133), sacrificed the Kames estate to his enjoyment of Edinburgh culture and society, selling it about 1810 to James Hamilton, writer to the signet. He died on 30 November 1833 at his home, Whiteford House on the Canongate in Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 1312


Bannerman, Anne (1765-1829), poet, was born on 31 October 1765 in Edinburgh, the daughter of William Bannerman, and his wife, Isobel Dick. Bannerman was a highly gifted poet, part of the Edinburgh poetic circle that also included John Leyden, Thomas Campbell, and Dr Robert Anderson. Anderson, the editor of the 'Edinburgh Magazine', encouraged Bannerman's publications from the late 1790s, sending copies and praising her poetry to important literary figures of the day. Through the efforts of Anderson and Thomas Park (the antiquary and editor), Bannerman's poetry was read and admired by such literary men as James Currie (Burns's first biographer), Bishop Percy (editor of 'Reliques of Ancient English Poetry'), and Joseph Cooper Walker (Irish writer on Italian tragedy and lifelong friend of Charlotte Smith). Bannerman was an old friend of John Leyden (Scott's co-editor of 'The Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border', 1802-3), whose best-known ballad, 'The Mermaid', appeared two years after Bannerman's own remarkable ode, 'The Mermaid', was published in her 1800 'Poems'. Leyden and Bannerman fell out shortly before he left Edinburgh for London, on his way to India, though after his death there in 1811 it was Bannerman who rescued many of his papers which had been abandoned by his executor. 
Like most Romantic writers, Bannerman began her career by publishing in the periodicals, as Augusta, as B, and under her own name in the 'Monthly Magazine', the 'Poetical Register', and the 'Edinburgh Magazine'. Her first volume, 'Poems' (1800), was widely praised in reviews and correspondence, although it did not sell well. 'Poems' contains a series of remarkable original odes, as well as a sonnet series translated from Petrarch, one series based on 'The Sorrows of Werther', and original sonnets. In her two sonnet series Bannerman expanded Joanna Baillie's theory of dramatic composition, elaborated in Baillie's 'Introductory discourse' to her 'Plays... on the Passions' (1796), by applying it to the sonnet, explaining in 'Poems' that 'an attempt has been made in the 'Sonnets from Werter' ['sic'], to delineate the progress of a single passion... In this manner a 'unity' may be communicated' (Bannerman, 220). A great admirer of Baillie, Bannerman sent her a presentation copy of 'Poems'. 
Bannerman's longer 1800 poems, such as 'The Genii' and 'Ode: the Spirit of the Air' were often singled out for praise in reviews, as evoking a sublime and visionary poetic identity, as the 'Critical Review' noted: 'Anne Bannerman's Odes may be quoted as an irrefragable proof that the ardour, whatever be its gender, which gives birth to lofty thought and bold expression, may glow within a female 'breast'' ('Critical Review', 435). She may also have been the author of the anonymous verse 'Epistle from the Marquis de Lafayette to General Washington', also published in 1800. 
Bannerman's second volume, 'Tales of Superstition and Chivalry' (1802), published anonymously, comprised ten Gothic ballads and four engravings, the fourth of which, 'The Prophecy of Merlin', caused a small scandal because it featured a nude female figure, causing it to be withdrawn from the volume at the author's request, although some copies have survived. Unlike her positively reviewed 1800 volume, the 'Tales' was frequently derided, with critics and fellow poets such as Anna Seward growing frustrated with her Gothic poetry's cultivation of the 'palpable obscure' ('Letters of Anna Seward', 5.325). In 1802 she also translated several verse passages for Joseph Cooper Walker's 'An Historical and Critical Essay on the Revival of the Drama in Italy' (1805), and declined his offer to translate longer works. 
The death of her mother in 1803 and of her brother left Bannerman without any source of income, and she began to support herself through the charity of friends such as Anderson, Park, and Beattie. Anderson and Park obtained for her a new edition of her poems by subscription, hoping that she would be able to live off the interest. At first reluctant to publish by subscription, Bannerman soon agreed, though the volume, 'Poems: a New Edition' (1807) sold poorly and had insufficient subscribers to grant her an annuity. The volume included most of the poems in the 1800 and 1802 volumes, with some revised and some new works, such as her poem 'To Miss Baillie'. Park was able to obtain $20 from the Royal Literary Fund for her in 1805, though an attempt to gain her a pension failed. With Anderson's help and insistence, in 1807 Bannerman accepted the position of governess for Lady Frances Beresford's daughter in Exeter for $60 per year. She visited Park in Hampstead during this time, and by the early 1810s was back in Scotland, existing at least partially through gifts from the Beresford family, and visiting the writer Anne Grant in 1824. 
On 29 September 1829 Bannerman died an invalid and in debt in Portobello, near Edinburgh, with two of her poems appearing in 'The Laurel' (1830) and 'The Casket' (1829). After her death, Lady Frances Beresford and her family paid $22 toward Bannerman's debts and spoke fondly of her, though she urged a mutual friend to destroy all of Bannerman's letters. After her death, Walter Scott praised her poetry in his 'Essay on imitations of the ancient ballad' (1830), and noted her poetry's characteristic obscurity: 'Miss Anne Bannerman likewise should not be forgotten, whose 'Tales of Superstition and Chivalry' appeared about 1802. They were perhaps too mystical and too abrupt; yet if it be the purpose of this kind of ballad poetry powerfully to excite the imagination, without pretending to satisfy it, few persons have succeeded better than this gifted lady, whose volume is peculiarly fit to be read in a lonely house by a decaying lamp. (Scott, 4.16-17)' Bannerman was the only female poet Scott included in this essay on Scottish ballads, and she remains significant for her Gothic ballads, as well as for her innovative sonnet series and her bold original odes. 


@@@@@


doc= 1313


Bannerman, James (1807-1868), Free Church of Scotland minister and theologian, was born on 9 April 1807 in the manse of Cargill, Perthshire, the son of James Patrick Bannerman (died 1807), minister of Cargill. He was educated at Perth Academy and, from 1822, Edinburgh University and Divinity Hall. He was licensed by the presbytery of Perth in January 1833 and, after assisting briefly at Dron, he became minister of Ormiston, in East Lothian, in the August of that year. On 2 April 1839 he married David Anne (died 1879), the daughter of David Douglas, Lord Reston, a senator in the courts of justice. They had three sons and six daughters. 
Bannerman played a leading part in the events leading up to the Disruption in 1843. In 1840 the general assembly appointed him as convenor of the committee charged with providing temporary ministers for the contested parishes of Strathbogie; in the same year, he published a 'Letter to the Marquis of Tweedale on the Church Question', a trenchant reply to speeches in support of patronage made at a meeting in Haddington. In 1841 he visited London in a delegation representing the non-intrusionist position to the government. Later he was also prominent in unsuccessful negotiations for the union of the presbyterian churches of Scotland and England. In 1849 he was appointed professor of apologetics and pastoral theology in the Free Church New College in Edinburgh, an office which he held until his death. In 1850 he received a DD from Princeton College, New Jersey. 
Bannerman published several theological works: one of the most significant, 'Inspiration: the Infallible Truth and Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures' (1865), was criticized by the theologian A. B. Davidson (1831-1902) for calling forth 'no opposition and no assent' (Drummond and Bulloch, 263). Nevertheless, it sounded a cautious retreat from the fundamentalism of Free Church orthodoxy, as Bannerman dissociated himself from the theory of verbal inspiration and accepted translations (and even paraphrases) as equally valid with the Greek and Hebrew scriptural originals. Also important (but less original) was the posthumous 'The Church of Christ' (1868), which was praised by Robert Rainy as 'a fresh statement of our fundamental principles' (Bannerman, 1.viii). Bannerman died in Edinburgh on 27 March 1868. 


@@@@@


doc= 1314


Bannerman, Alexander (b. 1730s, d. in or after 1774), printmaker, was probably born in Cambridge. Nothing is known of his youth or education and most of what is known of him has to be deduced from his work. Bannerman worked principally as a copper-engraver and specialized in reproductions of old master works, most of which were published by Alderman John Boydell. According to T. Mortimer's 'The Universal Director' (1763) he was a 'History and Architecture Engraver', but his exhibits at the Society of Artists, between 1761 and 1774, suggest an interest in Dutch genre, for example 'A Fiddler' after Ostade and religious scenes after eighteenth-century favourites such as Guido Reni and Spagnoletto. In 1762 he was lodging in Great Queen Street, London, with a fellow engraver, 'Mr Basire', but in 1766 he moved to Fountain Court in the Strand before returning to Cambridge in 1770. 
In addition to the information provided in the exhibition catalogues of the Society of Artists, several comments in Horace Walpole's correspondence are also revealing. Bannerman's relationship with him began about 1762 when Walpole was preparing his 'Anecdotes of Painting' for the press. Developed from George Vertue's manuscripts 'Anecdotes' was the first ever history of British art and this fact must have ensured a large degree of exposure for Bannerman. He worked on this venture alongside engravers such as Thomas Chambars and Johann Sebastien Muller, producing thirty-two of the portrait heads that illustrated Walpole's first three volumes. 
When he came to commission the illustrations for the fourth volume of 'Anecdotes of Painting', Walpole was keen to use Bannerman, 'though there will be a little trouble, as he does not reside in London' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 1.198). Despite his relocation to Cambridge, Walpole was happy to employ Bannerman because he could rely on the Revd William Cole to keep an eye on his progress. This was important to Walpole as he appears to have had little trust in Bannerman's rate of work, his accuracy, or his commitment. One can do little more than speculate upon the causes, but in March 1771 Walpole was 'very... angry with Bannerman, who shall do nothing for me' (ibid., 14.188). Consequently, he asked Thomas Gray, another of his emissaries, to take all outstanding work from Bannerman and 'deliver them to Mr Tyson's engraver' (ibid.). Apart from his submissions to the Society of Artists exhibitions of 1773 and 1774 nothing more is heard of Bannerman. 


@@@@@


doc= 1315


Bannister, Charles (bap. 1741, d. 1804), actor and singer, was baptized at some time between May and October 1741 in Newland, Gloucestershire, the son of John Bannister and his wife, Rebecca Powell. He was brought up in Deptford, where his father worked in the victualling office for the navy. He was fascinated by theatre from childhood, and played such roles as Romeo and Richard III in amateur productions. After being rejected by David Garrick, whose company he had applied to join, he acted on the Norwich-Ipswich circuit until Samuel Foote engaged him in April 1762 to join his company at the Haymarket Theatre in Foote's 'Oratorial Lectures', one of the latter's attempts to present drama but evade the constrictions of the 'Licensing Act'. But Bannister was not a success and returned to the provinces, acting at Dublin in 1764, at Richmond, Surrey, in 1766, and at Norwich in 1766-7. 
Bannister was finally invited to join Garrick at Drury Lane, and made his first appearance there as Merlin in Garrick's 'Cymon' on 22 September 1767. William Hopkins, the prompter, noted that he 'was received with Applause, -- is a tall Figure, -- good Voice and sings well' ('BDA'). In October Bannister played Hopkins in Garrick's backstage farce 'A Peep behind the Curtain'. From that season until 1783 he acted at Drury Lane in a wide range of roles, though he specialized in eccentric old men. He often played for Foote's Haymarket Theatre in the summers and sang at performances at Marylebone Gardens and Ranelagh as well. In 1783-4 he was at Covent Garden, where he doubled his salary to $12; he kept the rise when he returned to Drury Lane. For the next few years he oscillated between the two major companies, but his career was declining. He finally retired at the end of the season in 1799 while a member of Colman's company at the Haymarket. 
Bannister's considerable reputation as a singer was built not only on his striking physique and his superb bass voice and accomplished falsetto range but also on his talents as a mimic. As an anonymous attack on him noted in 'Momus' (1767): '
See B[annister] assume (unaw'd by shame) 

A mimic's vile and despicable name [...] 

A very monkey with a human name. 

' His imitations of other, better-known, singers were clearly extremely funny, but he was also known as a moving singer of sentimental songs. As a versatile actor he was most successful in dozens of dialect roles and playing caricatures of Italian singers. By the 1780s he was famous enough to be imitated himself by provincial comics. It was claimed that he could not read music and had to be taught songs by the pianist at Covent Garden. In 1782 he played Polly Peachum in a cross-dressed production of Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera' so successfully that, it was said, a Mrs Fitzherbert laughed so much that she died from the after-effects three days later. 
A clubbable man and at times a heavy drinker, well known for his practical jokes and careless with money, Bannister was much in demand at private gatherings and was a member of such groups as the Glee Club, the Anacreontic Society (a club for noblemen and professional singers), and the School of Garrick, a club he led for those who had acted with Garrick. He was painted by Zoffany and by others in a variety of his best-known roles, including as Polly Peachum. 
It is not known when Bannister married his wife, Sarah, but they had three children: Charles (died 1762), John Bannister (1760-1836), even more successful as an actor than his father, and Jane ('fl'. 1783-1829). He died at the house in Suffolk Street, Charing Cross, London, where he had lived most of his life, on 19 October 1804, three days after a full house at Drury Lane for his benefit night. He was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 25 October. In 1808 his estate, worth a mere $200, was passed on to his son John, Sarah having died at some date in the interim. 


@@@@@


doc= 1316


Bannister, John (1760-1836), actor, born at Deptford on 12 May 1760, was the son of the actor Charles Bannister (bap. 1741, d. 1804) and his wife Sarah. In 1777 he became a student at the Royal Academy, where he had for associate and friend the caricaturist Thomas Rowlandson, but his theatrical bent led to his abandoning painting and adopting the stage as a profession. Before leaving the academy he called on David Garrick, who, two years previously, in 1776, had retired from the stage. Bannister's account of an interview which, though formidable, was not wholly discouraging, is preserved in the diary used by his biographer, J. Adolphus. 
Bannister's first appearance took place at the Haymarket, for his father's benefit on 27 August 1778, as Dick in Murphy's farce 'The Apprentice'. He recited on this occasion a prologue by Garrick, and wound up his share in the entertainment by giving imitations of well-known actors. The following season (1778-9) saw Bannister engaged with his father as a stock actor at Drury Lane; he made his debut on 11 November 1778 in the character of Zaphna in James Miller's version of Voltaire's 'Mahomet', playing opposite Perdita Robinson. He had been coached intensively in this part by Garrick. He appeared, again in Voltaire, as Dorislas in a version by Aaron Hill of 'Merope'. In February 1779 at Covent Garden he played Achmet in Brown's tragedy 'Barbarossa'. His only other appearance that season was for his benefit at Covent Garden in April 1779, when he acted the Prince of Wales in '1 Henry IV' and Shift in Samuel Foote's comedy 'The Minor', and gave his imitations. While Drury Lane was shut, Bannister joined Mattocks's company at Birmingham, playing such characters as Macduff, Orlando, Edgar Lothario in Nicholas Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent', and Simon Pure in Susannah Centlivre's 'A Bold Stroke for a Wife'. 
His first 'creation' of importance appears to have been Don Ferolo Whiskerandos in Sheridan's 'The Critic', which was produced at Drury Lane in October 1779, and in which he later played Sir Fretful Plagiary. An unremarkable appearance in 'Hamlet' followed, and whatever capacity Bannister possessed in tragedy had shortly to yield to the growing fame of John Philip Kemble. Happier efforts were made in the comic roles of Charles Surface and Parolles. 
On 26 January 1783 Bannister married Elizabeth Harper (1757-1849) ['see 'Bannister, Elizabeth], an actress and singer at the Haymarket; the first of their family of four daughters and two sons was baptized the following January. By 1787 Bannister's social and professional position was established. His repertory continued to increase, with Brisk in Congreve's 'The Double Dealer', Sir David Dunder in Colman's 'Ways and Means', Ben in Congreve's 'Love for Love', Brass in 'The Confederacy', Scrub in Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem', Trappanti in Cibber's 'She Would and She Would Not', and Speed in 'The Two Gentlemen of Verona' among the parts that prepared the way for his conspicuous success as Sir Anthony Absolute and Tony Lumpkin, characters in which he was received with pleasure to the end of his career. He retained, in the height of his success, his taste for painting, and Rowlandson, George Morland, and Gainsborough were his close friends. From this time forward his career was an unbroken triumph. The principal comic parts in the old drama fell to him, and his acceptance of a role in a new piece was considered a favourable augury. Bob Acres in 'The Rivals', Job Thornbury in 'John Bull', Marplot in 'The Busybody', Dr Ollapod in 'The Poor Gentleman', and Dr Pangloss in 'The Heir-at-Law' were among his greatest performances; Mercutio was the only comic character of importance that seemed outside his range. In 1802-3 he succeeded Kemble as acting manager at Drury Lane. 
In 1809 Bannister took a monologue entertainment with songs, entitled 'Bannister's Budget', on a tour of the provinces and Ireland; it opened in London in Lent 1810, and was a financial, popular, and critical success. On 1 June 1815 Bannister retired from the stage, at Drury Lane, playing Echo in Kenney's comedy 'The World', a character created by him and which afforded room for a display of his mimetic gifts, and Walter in Thomas Morton's 'Children in the Wood'. His career had been connected with Drury Lane for thirty-seven years, but no less celebrated were his regular summer engagements at the Haymarket and his frequent and extensive provincial tours. He died at his house, 65 Gower Street, on 7 November 1836, at 2 a.m., and was buried on the 14th in the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields in a vault with his father. 
An extremely sociable man and a practising Christian, Bannister counted aristocrats, painters, and writers among his friends, as well as members of his own profession; all acknowledged his charm, while his acting obtained the high praise of the acutest judges. Of the galaxy of comic actors which marked the close of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth century, he was one of the brightest stars. 


@@@@@


doc= 1317


Bannister, John (1816-1873), philologist, was born at York on 25 February 1816, the son of David Bannister (1788-1854) and his wife, Elizabeth Greensides (1789-1864). From 1839 he was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, where he studied classics and Hebrew (BA, 1844; MA, 1853; LLB and LLD, 1866). He was ordained priest in 1845, and served as curate of Longford, Derbyshire, from 1844 to 1845. From 1846 he was perpetual curate of Bridgehill, Duffield, Derbyshire, where on 16 August 1849 he married Patience Statham Newham ('b'. 1828, died in or after December 1878). In 1857 he was appointed perpetual curate of St Day, Cornwall. 
As a philologist Bannister's principal work was 'A glossary of Cornish names, ancient and modern, local, familiar, personal, & c.: 20,000 Celtic and other names now or formerly in use in Cornwall; with derivations and significations, for the most part conjectural...' (1869-71). This work was brought out in seven parts. The supplement, which was to have formed three additional parts, was never published, owing to the death of the author. Bannister also published 'Jews in Cornwall' (1867) and a number of articles in the 'Journal' of the Royal Institute of Cornwall. 
Bannister died at Gwennap, St Day, on 30 August 1873 and was buried in the churchyard at St Day on 4 or 5 September. He was survived by his wife who was living in Penzance in December 1878. Bannister's library, comprising some 2000 volumes of theology, philology, antiquities, and early typography, was bought by the British Museum. It included 'Gerlever Cernouak, a Vocabulary of the Ancient Cornish Language' (Egerton MS 2328, fol. 4), 'An English-Cornish Dictionary', a copy of Johnson's 'Dictionary', interleaved with Cornish and other equivalents (Egerton MS 2329, fol. 5), 'A Cornish Vocabulary', being copious additions by Bannister to his printed work (Egerton MS 2330, fol. 6), and 'Materials for a Glossary of Cornish Names' (Egerton MS 2331). 


@@@@@


doc= 1318


Bannister, Saxe (1790-1877), lawyer, son of John Bannister, was born at Bidlington House, Steyning, Sussex, on 27 June 1790, and attended schools at Lewes and Tonbridge and then Queen's College, Oxford (BA, 1813, MA, 1815). He volunteered for active service when Napoleon escaped from Elba and, with a captain's commission, was on the way to Belgium when the battle of Waterloo ended the war. He retired from the army on half pay, and was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn. 
In October 1823 Bannister was appointed attorney-general of New South Wales under the 'New South Wales Act' of that year. With a guaranteed salary of $1200 he was also given the right of private practice as a barrister, and was sworn in at the first sitting of the NSW supreme court on 17 May 1824. Later that year he advised Governor Brisbane that he had no power to license or censor the press without special legislation, and that free persons accused of crime at the court of quarter sessions had to be tried by a civilian jury. He thus introduced such bodies and a free press into New South Wales. 
However, Bannister's relationship with Governor Darling was tumultuous, Darling considering that though he was 'an upright, conscientious man, the apparent eccentricity of his mind and his want of experience in his profession prevented my depending on his counsel' ('Historical Records of Australia', dispatch, 1 March 1829, 148). Chief Justice Forbes, like other officials, thought him at times mentally unbalanced. 
Bannister's correspondence continually lamented that his salary was inadequate. In July 1825 he informed Lord Bathurst, the secretary of state, that unless it was more than doubled he could not stay in New South Wales. Bathurst refused to sanction any increase, and informed Darling that his majesty had no other alternative but to accept Bannister's resignation. Much aggrieved, Bannister sailed for England nine days later, but not before he became embroiled in a duel with Dr Wardell, editor of 'The Australian', from which both men emerged uninjured. On his return to England, Bannister vainly sought re-employment by the Colonial Office for the next seventeen years. In 1848 he accepted the position of gentleman bedel of the Royal College of Physicians at a salary of $50 a year in fees. 
Bannister had a keen interest in philanthropic causes, and was concerned with the welfare of children, convicts, and especially Aborigines. He was instrumental in the establishment of the first infants' school in Sydney, and published numerous pamphlets dealing with the subjects of transportation and government policy towards indigenous people. His other written works covered a diverse range of topics including the constitution and laws of the United States, a description of the 'Mappa mundi' in Hereford Cathedral (1849), and a biography of William Paterson, founder of the Bank of England (1857). He was a lucid and engaging writer whose works reveal an agile and learned mind. 
On 16 September 1832 Bannister had married Mary Lambe ('b'. 1796), and he died on 16 September 1877 at Thornton Lodge, Thornton Heath, Croydon, Surrey, the home of Mrs Wyndham, their only child. 


@@@@@


doc= 1319


Bansley, Charles (fl. c.1550), poet, is unknown except as the author of 'A Treatyse Shewing and Declaring the Pryde and Abuse of Women now a Dayes', a caustic and often bawdy rhyming satire attacking the love of dress in women. It begins with the line 'Bo pepe what have I spyed!' and concludes with a benediction of Edward VI. There can be no doubt of Bansley's religious opinions. The poem (written in fifty-nine four-line stances) castigates Catholic Rome as much as women's dress. Bansley even blames that city as the source of the feminine love for light raiment, declaring that: '
From Rome, from Rome, thys carkered pryde, 

from Rome it came doubtles: 

Away for shame wyth soch filthy baggage, 

As smels of papery and develyshnes! 

' The poem was printed by Thomas Raynold, ('c'.1550), which places it within a year of William Thomas's 'An Argument wherein the Apparaile of Women is both Reproved and Defended' (1551), which had defended women against a vicious attack on female attire. Within the poem Bansley also refers to 'The Scole House of Women', a tract published by Edward Gosynhill in 1560, but probably circulating in manuscript before that date. 


@@@@@


doc= 1320


Banting, William (1796/7-1878), writer on diet, was a funeral director in St James's Street, London. He may have been the William Banting, son of Thomas Banting and his wife, Ann, who was baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, in December 1796. On 20 January 1818 he married at St Mary's, Newington, London, Mary Ann Thurmott (1793-1862). 
Banting was somewhat short (5 feet 5 inches), and as he got older suffered great personal distress from his increasing fatness. It was said that by the time he was sixty he found himself unable to stoop to tie his shoes, 'or attend to the little offices which humanity requires, without considerable pain and difficulty'. He was forced to go downstairs slowly backwards, to avoid the jar of increased weight on the ankle joints, and with every exertion 'puffed and blowed in a way that was very unseemly and disagreeable'. His doctors told him to take exercise, which he did; he walked long distances, rowed, and took up other sports. But all this only improved his appetite and added to his weight, and no other solution was offered. On 26 August 1862 at the age of sixty-five, he weighed 14 st 6 lb, an amount which he found unbearable. After further trying a course of fifty Turkish baths and 'gallons of physic' without any success, he happened to consult a surgeon, Mr William Harvey, for an increasing problem of deafness. Mr Harvey, believing that obesity was the source of the hearing problem, suggested that Banting cut out bread, butter, milk, sugar, beer, soup, potatoes, and beans, and in their place adopt a diet of mainly flesh meat, fish, and dry toast. The result of this treatment was a gradual reduction of 46 lb in weight, and better health at the end of several weeks than Banting had enjoyed for the previous twenty years. 
The delight at being so much relieved by such simple means induced Banting to write and publish a pamphlet entitled 'A Letter on Corpulence, Addressed to the Public' (1863), in which he singled out sugar and fats as the chief causes of obesity. Written in plain, sensible language, this tract became an overnight success. There were four editions by 1869, and it was successfully translated into French and German. 'To bant', or 'banting', became a popular phrase for adopting a slimming diet and continued in use well into the twentieth century; it remains the accepted word in some languages, such as Swedish. Thousands took up the Banting dietary principles, and thus threw the medical profession into great confusion over the right 'carbonaceous and nitrogenous qualities of food' -- doctors were especially concerned at the exclusion of milk. As a 'Times' leader commented: 'Whatever medical men may say, the chymistry of digestion is at present very little understood, and the reason amateurs are beginning to dogmatise upon it is that physicians have neglected a material part of their own science' ('The Times', 19 Sept 1864). Certainly a great deal of research was undertaken in food chemistry in the last quarter of the century; and far greater attention was paid to diet in the patient's regimen after Banting. 
Banting scrupulously donated the profits of his book to charity, and continued to take an interest in charitable hospitals until his death at his house in The Terrace, Kensington, London, on 16 March 1878, aged eighty-one. According to Banting's will, he had three daughters and two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 1321


Banyer, Henry (1690-1749), physician, was the nephew of Lawrence Banyer (died 1720), apothecary of Wisbech, Cambridgeshire. He studied at St Thomas's Hospital, and practised as a surgeon and then as a physician (extra-licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, 1736) at Wisbech. He translated with additions Joannes van Horne's 'Micro-techne, or, A Methodical Introduction to the Art of Chirurgery' (1717), and wrote a 'Pharmacopoeia' (4 edns, 1721-39). He was married and appears to have been prosperous. Banyer died in Wisbech in 1749: he was survived by his wife, who died in 1759. 


@@@@@


doc= 1323


Barber, Thomas (b. c.1545, d. after 1603), Church of England clergyman, hailed from Middlesex. Born to unknown parents, he matriculated as a pensioner of St John's College, Cambridge, on 8 November 1560, graduated BA in 1564, and was elected a fellow on 11 April 1565. Ordained deacon at Ely on 29 July 1565, he proceeded MA in 1567 and was one of the many who petitioned for Thomas Cartwright's restoration as Lady Margaret professor in 1570. He had moved to London by August 1574, for he was certainly the 'Barber' listed as curate of St Sepulchre during Edwin Sandys's episcopal visitation that month. In October 1575 he was presented to the vicarage of Stoke Newington, Middlesex, by John Dudley, esquire, a kinsman of the earl of Leicester. In a survey drawn up in December 1576 by Thomas Watts, archdeacon of Middlesex, Barber was described as resident, married, an MA learned in Latin and the scriptures, but licensed to preach only in St Sepulchre. 
Some time after reaching the capital Barber joined the London clerical conference established in 1570 by John Field and Thomas Wilcox in the hope that further reform of the 1559 settlement, possibly along fully presbyterian lines, could be introduced by parliamentary means. Barber was consistently involved with its proceedings until its demise in 1590. 
It was an impossible dream, but meanwhile Barber soldiered on in London on behalf of the reformist cause. On 11 April 1576 the vestry of St Helen, Bishopsgate, appointed him their evening lecturer on Wednesdays and Fridays at an annual salary of 20 marks. Although he had yet to be troubled for nonconformity, he relinquished the post in 1578, and had resigned Stoke Newington by July 1580. 
Barber seems to have spent the rest of his life in the parish of St Botolph without Bishopsgate. A daughter, Dorcas, was baptized there on 10 January 1580, and six other children followed: Thomas (1582), Nehemia (1584), Rachel (1587), Prudence (1589), Bartholomew (1591), and Martha (1593). Identification is proven by the fact that in the 1591 entry Barber is described as 'preacher'. 
By 1584, when he was lecturing both at St Mary Woolchurch and St Mary-le-Bow, Barber had become one of the London clergy whom John Whitgift, archbishop of Canterbury, was disposed to silence. Whitgift finally suspended him in June for his refusal to subscribe the three articles which he had introduced in November 1583 as his yardstick of conformity. Barber was nevertheless chosen as a member of the 'national synod' which Field convened to lobby sympathetic MPs during the parliament of 1584-5. After petitions on his behalf Whitgift offered to restore him in December 1587, but Barber still refused to satisfy the archbishop as to his future conformity. He never preached officially in London again. 
Barber was one of those at whose activities a ban on unlicensed preachers in March 1589 was specifically aimed, and he was closely involved in the death throes of the conference movement. A delegate to the 'presbytery' at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1590 (as it was described by its opponents in the college, though defended as a routine clerical conference by those who attended it), he was also a member of the last general conference in London the same year. In September 1591 he was one of the nonconformist leaders who was interrogated in Star Chamber about the clandestine activities of the previous twenty years, and it is largely as a result of his evidence, and that of Thomas Edmunds, that so much is known about them. While Barber's part in unmasking his colleagues presumably distanced him from some of them, he was evidently not rejected by the godly community at large. The will of the London draper Thomas Eaton, in December 1599, mentions his 'good friends Thomas Barber and Stephen Egerton', who each received $20. 
Barber is credited with 'The Apocalypse or Revelation of St John, with a Methodicall Exposition upon every Chapter' (1596), a translation from the French of Francois du Jon's recent work. No copy of his 'Dialogue between the Penitent Sinner and Sathan', mentioned by older authorities, is known to survive. His wife, Prudence, was buried at St Botolph on 15 December 1595. Barber remarried, for a daughter, Mary, was baptized at St Botolph in 1604. There are no further references to him or his family in the London records, and he seems to have died intestate. 


@@@@@


doc= 1324


Barbauld, Anna Letitia (1743-1825), poet and essayist, was born on 20 June 1743 at Kibworth Harcourt, Leicestershire, elder child of the Revd John Aikin (1713-1780), schoolmaster, and his wife Jane (1714-1785), daughter of the Revd John Jennings of Kibworth and his wife Anna Letitia Wingate. Both her parents were Presbyterian. She was educated by her mother, who taught her to read by the age of two but who also, fearing that a girl brought up in the presence of schoolboys would become a 'hoyden', strictly curbed her activity (LeBreton, 24-5). Later she persuaded her father to teach her Latin and some Greek, and she read avidly in his library. In 1758 her family moved to Warrington, Lancashire, where Mr Aikin served as tutor in languages, literature, and divinity at Warrington Academy. Among its tutors and students she made lifelong friends, notably Joseph Priestley (1733-1804), his wife Mary (1742-1796), and William Enfield (1741-1797). 
Inspired by Warrington's intellectual atmosphere and encouraged by her brother John Aikin (1747-1822), with whom she shared literary and scientific tastes, Anna Aikin began, around the mid-1760s, to write poems. The poems display her varied interests: zoology ('To Mrs. P[riestley], with some Drawings of Birds and Insects'), the new industrial infrastructure of Lancashire ('The Invitation', praising the duke of Bridgewater's canal), opposition politics ('Corsica', 1769, written for a subscription in aid of Corsican independence), humane treatment of animals ('The Mouse's Petition'), intense devotional experience ('An Address to the Deity'), and friendship, especially with women (poems to Mary Priestley, her cousin Elizabeth Belsham, and others). In style her poems range from burlesque ('The Groans of the Tankard') to sublime ('A Summer Evening's Meditation'); some are impishly humorous. Her 'Poems' (1773) was a popular and critical success, reaching five editions by 1777 (with another in 1792) and winning the adulation of the 'Monthly Review' ('a justness of thought, and vigour of imagination, inferior only to the works of Milton and Shakespeare') and the admiration of women readers -- for instance, Mary Scott wrote in 'The Female Advocate' (1774): 'We feel thy feelings, glow with all thy fires, / Adopt thy thoughts, and pant with thy desires' ('Works', xxxii). Her next publication, jointly with John Aikin, was 'Miscellaneous Pieces in Prose' (1773), a collection of essays. One, 'On romances', an imitation of Samuel Johnson, earned his praise; another, 'Against inconsistency in our expectations', was admired for its ethical argument and stylistic elegance. 
Although shy and awkward in manner, Anna Aikin 'possessed... great beauty, distinct traces of which she retained' into old age (Aikin, ix-x), and at Warrington she had several suitors. According to legend, one was Jean-Paul Marat, who is said to have served briefly as tutor in French at the academy (Rodgers, 43-4). On 26 May 1774 she married the Revd Rochemont Barbauld (1749-1808), an academy graduate, son of a Church of England clergyman descended from French Huguenot refugees. At Warrington Rochemont Barbauld converted to dissent; he later became a zealous Unitarian. Having no children of their own, in 1777 the Barbaulds adopted Charles Rochemont Aikin (1775-1847), her brother's second son. 
After their marriage the Barbaulds settled at Palgrave, Suffolk, where on 25 July 1774 they opened a school for boys. A great success, the school drew boys from as far as New York and the West Indies; during the Barbaulds' tenure an estimated 130 boys passed through it. Several achieved eminence in later years: examples are William Taylor (1765-1836), whose translations of German literature influenced the first generation of Romantic poets, and Thomas Denman (1779-1854), drafter of the 'Reform Act' of 1832. The school also occasioned Barbauld's most influential books: 'Lessons for Children' (4 vols., 1778-9), written to teach Charles to read, and 'Hymns in Prose for Children' (1781), a primer in religion for her youngest pupils. Reprinted in England and America throughout the nineteenth century, and translated into other languages, they profoundly affected reading pedagogy among the middle classes; the name Mrs Barbauld became virtually synonymous with infant instruction. Equally popular was her brother's 'Evenings at Home' (1792-6), of which she was widely thought the principal author although she wrote only fourteen of the pieces it comprised. 
In 1785 the Barbaulds resigned from Palgrave School and travelled in France, meeting liberal aristocrats and, perhaps, a future leader of the French Revolution, Jean-Paul Rabaut de Saint-Etienne (1743-1793). In 1787 they settled in Hampstead, Middlesex, where they took pupils. Roused by Edmund Burke's attacks on the French Revolution and parliament's failure (March 1790) to repeal the 'Test and Corporation Acts', Barbauld returned to authorship with a powerful tract, 'An Address to the Opposers of the Repeal of the Corporation and Test Acts' (1790), in which she hailed the French Revolution as sublime evidence of human improvement. In 1791 she responded to parliament's failure to abolish the slave trade with a Juvenalian verse satire, 'An Epistle to William Wilberforce, esq.... on the Rejection of the Bill for Abolishing the Slave Trade'. In 1793 she denounced the British government's entry into war against France in a sermon, 'Sins of Government, Sins of the Nation'. In the controversy over public worship, however, she argued eloquently for traditional practice ('Remarks on Mr. Gilbert Wakefield's Enquiry into the Expediency and Propriety of Public or Social Worship', 1792). Although she associated with Unitarians and was claimed by them, it is doubtful that she shared all their beliefs. Her churchgoing habits were eclectic, her religious attitude was liberal, and she valued devotional spirit over doctrine. 
Starting with essays and poems in her brother's 'Monthly Magazine' (1796-1802), Barbauld began contributing to periodicals and taking commissions from booksellers. She wrote for the 'Annual Review' (1803-9), edited by her nephew Arthur Aikin (1773-1854), and provided prefaces to editions of Mark Akenside (1794), William Collins (1797), and Addison and Steele (1804). She was the first editor of the correspondence of Samuel Richardson (6 vols., 1804); subsequent scholars have criticized her editing, but her biography of Richardson remains valuable. Barbauld also wrote prefaces for a 50-volume collection, 'The British Novelists' (1810), producing an important body of criticism of the novel and individual novelists. In 1809 she began to write for the 'Monthly Review', contributing some 340 reviews during six years. She also brought out a literary anthology for young women, 'The Female Speaker' (1811). Her last separate publication and most ambitious work was 'Eighteen Hundred and Eleven' (1812), a poem deploring Britain's participation in the seemingly endless, apparently disastrous war against Napoleonic France and foretelling Britain's economic decline while, however, asserting its cultural dominion over the coming American empire. This poem met with extreme hostility from the tory press (John Wilson Croker's abusive review in the 'Quarterly' -- formerly attributed to Robert Southey -- is legendary); today, however, 'Eighteen Hundred and Eleven' is considered a major poem of the Romantic era. 
In 1802 the Barbaulds settled in Church Street, Stoke Newington, Middlesex. Their associates included the circle of radical intellectuals gathered around Joseph Johnson (1738-1809), Barbauld's publisher, and such literary figures as Joanna Baillie, George Dyer, Maria Edgeworth, William Godwin, and Henry Crabb Robinson. Barbauld, who took benevolent interest in young men, sought to mentor Samuel Taylor Coleridge; later he turned against her, and his ridicule injured her posthumous reputation. Her husband appears to have suffered from manic-depressive disorder; this affliction troubled their marriage until, in 1808, Rochemont grew violent and a separation became necessary. She remained at Stoke Newington after his death by suicide in 1808, but subsided into melancholy; the death of her beloved brother John in 1822 deeply affected her. Gradually she developed asthma (a family ailment) and she died of it at Stoke Newington, on 9 March 1825, and was buried with her brother in the graveyard of St Mary's parish church. Her niece Lucy Aikin (1781-1864) edited her 'Works' (1825), adding fifty-two poems to the fifty-five Barbauld had published, and a volume of teaching pieces and essays called 'A Legacy for Young Ladies' (1826). 
During the century after her death Barbauld came to be remembered chiefly as a writer for children, as the author of one poem, 'Life', which Wordsworth had praised, and as the object of attacks by Coleridge and Charles Lamb on the basis of her didacticism. A dislike of the moral tale led E. Nesbit to place Barbauld among the unpleasant Book People in 'Wet Magic' (1913). However, along with her sister writers, Barbauld benefited from feminist reappraisal after the 1970s and is now perceived as a leading writer of early Romanticism. 


@@@@@


doc= 1325


Barber, Charles (bap. 1784, d. 1854), landscape painter, was baptized on 28 January 1784 at St Martin, Birmingham, one of the sons of Joseph Barber (1757-1811), landscape painter, and his wife, Elizabeth. Charles attended his father's art school, where he was a fellow pupil of the watercolour landscape painter David Cox (1783-1859), with whom he formed a long friendship. Barber was one of the founders of the first Society of Birmingham Artists in 1809, which developed into the Birmingham Academy of Arts. By 1818 he was working in Liverpool as a drawing-master and was exhibiting at the Liverpool Academy by 1822. He was intimately connected with the various associations established in Liverpool in his lifetime. He was among the earliest members and most frequent contributors of the Literary and Philosophical Society, and helped to found the Architectural and Archaeological Association. Thomas Rickman found much support and encouragement from him in his early studies of Gothic architecture, and for years his house was the centre of the intellectual society of Liverpool. He also maintained close contacts with the Birmingham Society of Arts, exhibiting nine works there from 1829 to 1851. 
As a landscape painter Barber was a close observer of nature, and endeavoured to reproduce effects of mist and sunshine with accuracy. He exhibited three times in the Royal Academy, and was a regular contributor to local exhibitions. His painting 'Dovedale, Derbyshire', exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1829, is now in the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool. In spite of a severe attack of paralysis, he continued to practise his art to the end, and his two best-known pictures, 'Evening after Rain' (exh. RA, 1849) and 'The Dawn of Day' (exh. RA, 1849), were exhibited in Trafalgar Square at the Royal Academy in 1849. He was elected president of the Liverpool Academy some years before his death at his home, 4 Olive Mount, Wavertree, Liverpool, on 4 January 1854 and was buried at St Philip's, Liverpool. He was survived by his wife, Bell (1797/8-1865), with whom he had at least three sons and three daughters. Birmingham City Art Gallery holds fifty-six of his paintings and forty-six drawings. 


@@@@@


doc= 1326


Barber, (Charles) Chapman (1801x4-1882), barrister, was the first son of Chapman Barber, a solicitor of Chancery Lane, London (died before 1829). He was educated at a school in Saffron Walden, Essex, before being admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, in 1824, graduating BA in 1833 and MA in 1836. He first entered Lincoln's Inn in May 1824, was recorded as having been readmitted five years later, and was called to the bar on 2 May 1833. He was a pupil of Lewis Duval, an eminent conveyancer. Barber never took silk, but acquired a high reputation as an equity draftsman. For nearly half a century he had an extensive practice at the junior bar, conducting his business from the late 1830s onwards from chambers at 11 New Square, Lincoln's Inn. On 24 September 1845 he married Harriet Frances Bambrick at the chapel of the British embassy in Paris ('IGI'). 
In December 1850 Barber was appointed secretary to the commission set up to investigate reform of chancery court procedure, at a salary of $600; he was paid an additional $300 for the preparation of bills arising from the commission's first report of January 1852. His experience of chancery work was clearly invaluable for this role, and in this connection was later published 'Mr Barber's Statement on the Practice and Procedure of the Court of Chancery in England' (1865). Barber's spell in the limelight, however, came during the affair of the Tichborne claimant, during which he was a junior counsel on the defendants' legal team. At the initial hearing in July 1867, held at the Law Institution, Chancery Lane, it was he who cross-examined the claimant on key points of his story, most notably on the means of his escape from the shipwreck that was supposed to have claimed the life of Sir Roger Tichborne. The general opinion of the common law bar was that Barber, as a chancery barrister, was not best fitted for this task. Sir Henry Hawkins, who went on to lead for the defence, felt that Barber's mild style of questioning had let the claimant off the hook, and made the hindsight-gifted assertion that 'had I been instructed I am perfectly sure I could have extinguished the case then and there' ('Reminiscences', 1.310-11). But historians of the affair have defended Barber, who had never before undertaken a cross-examination, on the grounds that in the preliminary hearing, the aim was only to establish the key points of the claimant's story, and that in any event Hawkins had been on the spot to direct the junior counsel had he felt so inclined. Whatever his shortcomings as an inquisitor, Barber was retained by the defence for the 103-day civil trial in common pleas ('Tichborne v. Lushington', 1872), during which his experience in the law of real property and settlement was called upon in connection with the descent of the Tichborne and Doughty estates, and by the crown for the 188-day criminal trial for perjury that followed (April 1873-February 1874). On the conclusion of this, Barber was appointed a county court judge for Hull and the East Riding, but resigned after only a month in the post to resume his practice at the bar. 
Barber died on 5 February 1882 at his residence, 71 Cornwall Gardens, South Kensington, London. He was survived by his wife, the sole executor of his estate. At his death he was 'the father' of the junior equity bar, and was eulogized as 'one of the most skilful and experienced conveyancers of his day', whose advice and opinion were regularly sought by his junior colleagues ('The Times', 11 Feb 1882). 


@@@@@


doc= 1327


Barber, Christopher (1735/6-1810), portrait painter, of whose parents nothing is known, painted portraits in oil, watercolour, and crayon, and miniatures in watercolour on ivory. He exhibited at the Royal Academy between 1770 and 1808, at the Society of Artists (of which he was a member before being forced to resign in 1765) from 1763 to 1765, and at the Free Society of Artists between 1763 and 1769. He excelled in preparing his own pigments, which lent his portraits a characteristic brilliance of colour. An enthusiastic lover of music, he was well acquainted with the works of Handel and Purcell, while his convivial nature encouraged a large and warm circle of friends to grow around him. He exhibited from London addresses in St Martin's Lane, Clerkenwell, Marylebone, and the Strand, but by 1808 had moved to 29 Great Marylebone Street where he died on 8 March 1810. He was buried on 18 March in St Marylebone churchyard. Considered by his obituarist to be 'an excellent portrait painter' ('GM', 293), Barber was a minor artist whose work is now little known. 


@@@@@


doc= 1328


Barber, Edward (d. 1663), General Baptist preacher, was a son of William Barber (died in or before 1611), yeoman of Sherborne, Somerset. In July 1611 he was apprenticed in London's Merchant Taylors' Company and gained his freedom in August 1620. Barber set up trade as a cloth drawer and by 1624 had married Mary (died 1682) and was living in the London parish of St Benet Fink, where he resided for the remainder of his life. A number of his children were baptized in the parish and by his own account he was a conforming member of the established church for many years. However, in 1637 Barber and his wife were excommunicated from St Benet Fink, having been identified as Baptists. 
In June 1639 Barber was summoned before the court of high commission for denying that infant baptism and the payment of tithes were God's ordinance. For this and his refusal to take the 'ex officio' oath he was imprisoned in Newgate for eleven months. In 1641 the first of Barber's nine works was published, a petition, 'To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Honourable Court of Parliament'. This advanced the central principle of Barber's writing, namely a belief in religious liberty for all individuals on the grounds that only God had authority to judge in matters of faith. This, combined with the doctrine that God had endowed all men with the capacity for salvation, made any form of religious coercion abhorrent. Such views were typical of his sect, but Barber's second tract was far more original in its content. 'A Small Treatise of Baptisme or Dipping', published in late 1641, was the first work in England during the seventeenth century that favoured immersion as a form of baptism. 
Alongside Thomas Nutt, a fellow General Baptist, Barber published 'The Humble Request of Certain Christians' in September 1643. The authors called upon Londoners to join them in their petitions to the Westminster assembly and parliament commending Baptist doctrines as the word of God. However, their request generated little response. In Kent in 1644 Barber and Thomas Lambe, the prominent London General Baptist, debated issues of faith with the Particular Baptist leaders William Kiffin and Thomas Patient. This may have been part of a larger evangelical campaign, as in his 1645 tract, 'A True Discovery of the Ministery of the Gospell', Barber emphasized the importance of the role of the travelling apostle among the true churches of Christ. The same work attacked the established ministry with its lineage to Rome, arguing that a true minister required the gifts of God, not a university education, to perform his office. For, according to Barber, the minister of Christ was a baptized believer, a member of a true church who worked for a living to ensure that the gospel remained free. 
Barber was almost certainly among the leading members of London's early General Baptist meetings and Thomas Edwards reported that in November 1645 he attended a congregation in a large house in Bishopsgate. Edwards's account also described Barber and one unnamed person laying their hands on some eighty people. The practice of laying on of hands on baptized believers at their reception into the church was to prove divisive among the General Baptists and this meeting may have been among the first to adopt the custom. 
In August 1648 Barber's 'A Declaration and Vindication' described how in July of that year a number of the parishioners of St Benet Fink invited him to the parish church to debate with the London minister, Edmund Calamy. After Calamy delivered a morning lecture Barber had attempted to speak but the congregation turned against him and became threatening. Fearing for his life, Barber was escorted home by a constable while Calamy and other ministers looked on. 
Barber's tract of June 1649, 'An Answer to the Essex Watchmens Watchword', combined an attack on the established clergy and a plea for liberty of conscience with support for the Levellers' 'Agreement of the People'. He emphasized that the Leveller programme, with its aim of destroying tyrants in both civil and ecclesiastical government, would guarantee not only individual political rights but a complete freedom of worship. Prior to this pamphlet Barber's writings were little concerned with secular matters and he had not been among the General Baptist supporters of the Levellers. But by 1649 dissatisfaction with the presbyterian church settlement and the lack of a true reformation may have led to his endorsement of the 'Agreement' on the premise that he and the Levellers sought similar freedoms. Two years later, following the Levellers' demise, Barber turned to the officers of the New Model Army with a similar plea. His final work, 'The Storming and Totall Routing of Tythes' (1651), praised the army grandees for releasing the people from their bondage under the prelates, but demanded a more thorough reformation within the state. He argued that tithes were a remnant of popery and only their abolition would heal the current distractions of the nation. Barber died in 1663 and was buried in the parish of St Benet Fink on 22 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 1329


Barber, John (c.1500-1549), clergyman and civil lawyer, is of obscure origins. He was a fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, from 1528 to 1538, having graduated as a bachelor of canon law (4 February 1525) and of civil law (19 February 1528). He became a member of the College of Advocates on 8 March 1532, and incepted as a doctor of civil law at Oxford on 17 February 1533. He was apparently ordained by 1524, and was admitted as vicar of St Giles', Oxford, on 7 December 1531, where he remained until November 1534. On 6 September 1537 he was collated to the living of Wrotham, Kent, to which was added the living of Charing, also in Kent, on 26 February 1545. In 1538 he became a canon and prebendary of the newly founded King Henry VIII College at Oxford, and he remained there until the college was dissolved on 10 May 1545. He continued to draw a pension on the foundation until 1547. 
Barber was one of Archbishop Cranmer's chaplains and an official of the provincial court of Canterbury, but his special vocation was to advise the archbishop on civil law matters. In 1538 he was consulted by Cranmer on behalf of Henry VIII, on a subtle point of law touching the dowry of the duchess of Richmond, widow of the king's natural son; and on 18 August 1538 the archbishop asked Thomas Cromwell to appoint Barber to a royal commission to try and examine whether the blood of St Thomas of Canterbury was not 'a feigned thing and made of some red ochre, or of such like matter' (Jenkyns, 1.260-63). On 21 November 1538 Cranmer attempted to use his influence with Cromwell to obtain a prebendal stall at Christ Church, Oxford, for him, but he does not appear to have been successful, for Barber's name is not mentioned by Anthony Wood in his account of Christ Church. In this letter the archbishop speaks of Cromwell's knowledge of Barber's 'qualities and learning', and calls him 'an honest and meet man'. Barber also appeared as one of the proctors for Anne Boleyn at the annulment of her marriage on 17 May 1536. 
In 1541 Cranmer appointed Barber to visit All Souls College a second time, as his deputy, because the 'compotations, ingurgitations, and enormous commessations' reported there had excited the archbishop's indignation (Strype, 'Cranmer', 1.131). His signature is appended to 'A Declaration Made of the Functions and Divine Institution of Priests' (BL, Cotton MS Cleopatra E V, fol. 45) and to a Latin judgment on the rite of confirmation, both of which were framed to meet the demands of the post-Reformation church. In 1543 Barber repaid Cranmer's kindness to him by joining in a plot for the archbishop's ruin. On the authority of Ralph Morice, Cranmer's secretary, John Foxe mentions that the archbishop elicited a condemnation of a hypothetical case of treachery from Barber and Richard Thornden (Thornton), the suffragan bishop of Dover, and then produced their letters, showing that they were the guilty persons. According to Foxe, Cranmer magnanimously forgave them, but Strype says that Cranmer 'thought fit no more to trust them, and so discharged them of his service' (Strype, 'Cranmer', 1.173). Barber died at Wrotham in the spring of 1549 and was buried in the churchyard there. His will was dated 27 March of that year and was proved on 20 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 1330


Joseph Vincent Barber (1788-1838), both of whom were also painters. Joseph was taught by his father and lived for most of his life in Birmingham, where he was secretary of the Birmingham Academy of Arts in 1814 and a member of the Birmingham Society. He exhibited landscapes with figures at the Royal Academy in 1812, 1821, 1829, and 1830, and prepared some of the drawings for the 'Graphic Illustrations of Warwickshire' (1829). His sister, Ann Matilda Barber, was the mother of Joseph Barber Lightfoot, who became a biblical scholar and bishop of Durham. He died at Rome. Examples of his work are in the Birmingham City Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 1331


Barber, Joseph (1757-1811), landscape painter, was born at Newcastle upon Tyne, one of the six children of Joseph Barber, bookseller and copperplate printer, who resided at Amen Corner, and his wife, Eleanor. He settled at Birmingham, where he established a successful drawing school whose students included the watercolourist David Cox, and was locally well known as a painter of small, picturesque landscapes. He also painted some views of north Wales. Unknown in London, he never exhibited at the Royal Academy. A number of his rustic landscapes in watercolour are in the Birmingham Art Gallery, with others in the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; Dudley Art Gallery; Newport Art Gallery; and the Ulster Museum, Belfast. He died in Birmingham on 16 July 1811. With his wife, Elizabeth, he had two sons, Charles Barber and 


@@@@@


doc= 1332


Barber, Mary (c.1685-1755), poet, is of unknown parentage. She married Rupert Barber (died 1777?), a Dublin woollen draper, and lived in Werburgh Street, Dublin, from at least 1705 to at least 1724. In 1719 her husband acquired rights to property at Delville, north of Dublin, adjoining that of Patrick Delany, a friend of Swift and later chancellor of St Patrick's; by 1744, when Mrs Delany, formerly Mary Pendarves, came to Delville, Mary Barber and her family were neighbours. She had nine children, four of whom survived infancy: Constantine, born in 1714, later MD, professor of materia medica at Trinity College, Dublin, and president of the Royal College of Physicians; Mira, born in 1717; Rupert, born in 1719 and later known as an artist in miniature and an enamellist; and Lucius, born in 1720. 
Barber admitted in the preface to her 'Poems' (1734) that a woman should not enter into public debate and that she wrote poetry to educate her children, but almost a decade previously she had attracted the attention of Lord Carteret, the lord lieutenant of Ireland, and Lady Carteret with several poems, one of which, a petition on behalf of the widow of an army officer, is the earliest evidence of the social conscience which she demonstrated in her 'Poems'. These poems also came to the attention of the poet Thomas Tickell, whom Carteret had appointed chief secretary in Ireland in 1724 and who was on favourable terms with Swift. Through her connection with the Carterets Barber entered Swift's circle, coming to know Delany, the poet and classical scholar Constantia Grierson, and Laetitia Pilkington. Swift praised Barber's work, including her in his 'triumfeminate' with Constantia Grierson and the literary critic Elizabeth Sican (Psyche). 
In 1730 Barber visited England, with Swift's support, to raise subscriptions for a volume of her work. Against his advice she approached, and irritated, Alexander Pope, evidently expecting the encouragement she had readily obtained in the 'senatus consultum' of her friends in Dublin, where Swift, in the chair, Constantia Grierson, Laetitia Pilkington, her husband Matthew, and Delany had discussed her verse. While Swift believed, as he wrote to Pope in 1731, that 'her Modesty and her Ambition' had been in conflict ('Correspondence', 3.457), mystery surrounds an incident later in 1731 in which Swift's signature was forged on a letter to Queen Caroline in praise of Mary Barber. Swift denied any involvement in a letter to Pope and Mary Barber has never been cleared of suspicion. 
Barber travelled between Ireland and England several times in the early 1730s, visiting London, Tunbridge Wells, and Bath. She contributed anonymously to 'Tunbrigialia, or, Tunbridge Miscellanies, for the Year 1730'. In 1732 Swift attempted to assist her, without success, when he asked his friend John Barber, lord mayor of London, who was no relation, to secure a position for her husband. In 1734 she was arrested in England with Matthew Pilkington and others for possession of manuscript copies of some of Swift's political poems attacking Walpole's administration. Matthew Pilkington had informed against her. After an early release she lived for some years in Bath, possibly with her son Rupert. She obtained over 900 subscribers to her 'Poems' (1734), including leading figures of the Irish and British establishments. Swift subscribed for ten copies. The Pilkingtons were conspicuously absent. Six poems by Constantia Grierson were published posthumously in this volume. Barber's son Constantine contributed five and Elizabeth Rowe one. One poem, 'Apollo's Edict', has since been published as Swift's and has inspired scholarly controversy. A second edition followed in 1735 and was reissued in 1736. Swift and Mary Barber wrote prefaces to the earl of Orrery, one of her most influential patrons. 
In 1737 Swift gave Barber the manuscript of his 'Complete Collection of Genteel and Ingenious Conversation' (1738) in response to her plea for support. She was unwell, having suffered considerably for some years from gout, for which she had been treated by Dr Richard Mead. She abandoned her idea of sailing to Georgia and returned to Ireland, where she lived near the Delanys at Delville, possibly with her son Rupert. She wrote very little after 1734, notably some verse on gout in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1737 and some minor pieces. She corresponded with her printer Samuel Richardson about 'Pamela' in 1741, and indirectly with George Ballard in 1747 about Constantia Grierson. She was given significant representation in 'Poems by Eminent Ladies' (1755). 
Barber died on 14 June 1755, 'in an advanced Age' ('Dublin Journal', 14/17 June 1755). A few months before, Mrs Delany, her friend from the early 1730s, wrote that 'Old Mr. Barber 'is alive', drinks his claret, smokes his pipe, and 'cares not a pin for any of his family''. He survived his wife by twenty-two years (Pilkington, 2.391). 
Swift's praise of Barber as 'the best Poetess of both Kingdoms' ('Correspondence', 4.186) was not universally accepted. Her most trenchant critic, Laetitia Pilkington, thought her work 'might... be seen in the Cheesemongers, Chandlers, Pastry-cooks, and Second-hand Booksellers Shops' (Pilkington, 2.383). Swift referred to her 'bashfulness' ('Correspondence', 4.456) but that did not protect her from controversy. Her world of the friendships and social conscience of an early eighteenth-century Irishwoman has been generally neglected since her own time, but since the 1970s she has received individual scholarly and critical attention as a woman writer and a significant figure in Irish culture and eighteenth-century studies. 


@@@@@


doc= 1333


Barber, Samuel (1737/8-1811), minister of the Presbyterian General Synod of Ulster, was the younger son of John Barber, a farmer near Killead, co. Antrim, and his wife, Sarah. He matriculated from the University of Glasgow in 1757 and graduated MA two years later. Having completed his 'trials' with the presbytery of Templepatrick he was ordained at Rathfriland, co. Down, on 3 May 1763, where he ministered for the rest of his life. He subscribed to the Westminster confession of faith, though he was an advanced Arian in his theology. In 1771 he married Elizabeth ('c'.1743-1833), daughter of the Revd Alexander Kennedy of Mourne; they had seven children. 
Like many other Presbyterian clergymen Barber played a prominent role in the volunteer movement that spread throughout Ireland during the American War of Independence. He was a founder of the Rathfriland Volunteers (14 April 1779) and was soon chosen as captain of the company (24 June 1779). At the end of 1780 Lord Glerawly, a local nobleman, resigned, demanding the return of the weapons that he had originally supplied to the company. Barber organized a subscription list, and with the help of donations from volunteer companies in Belfast, Lisburn, and Newry the Rathfriland corps was rearmed. This episode is indicative of the social tensions that emerged in Ulster during these years as the 'independent interest' sought to challenge the electoral dominance of the larger landowners. In the County Down election of 1783 Barber supported the independent candidate, Robert Stewart, later Lord Londonderry, against Lord Kilwarlin, son of the earl of Hillsborough. It was reported that some years earlier Kilwarlin had refused to contribute to the rebuilding of the Rathfriland meeting-house, replying that he would sooner give money to pull it down. Accusations were exchanged between the two men until, on 24 August 1783, Kilwarlin appeared at Barber's meeting-house and launched a personal attack on the minister before his congregation. 
Barber's credentials as a parliamentary reformer were established by his election as a delegate to the volunteer conventions held at Dungannon in 1782, 1783, and 1793. More unusually he was also an early advocate of Catholic relief. In October 1779 he preached a sermon to two volunteer companies, calling for protestant unity against the threat of invasion but praising the 'present generation' of Roman Catholics for behaving 'peaceably and quietly, though as a religious society they have been subjected to penal laws too shocking to enumerate' (S. Barber, 'A Sermon Delivered... to the Castlewellan Rangers, and Rathfriland Volunteers', 1779, 9). During the tithe controversy of 1787, which had been sparked off by the publication of 'The Present State of the Church of Ireland' by Richard Woodward, bishop of Cloyne, Barber wrote two pamphlets condemning the principle of church establishments, the tithe system, and the penal laws against Roman Catholics. In 1791 he preached a sermon as moderator to the General Synod of Ulster on 'Revelation' 18: 20. He took this opportunity to reiterate his belief in religious equality, now reinforced by a strong tinge of millenarianism. The reign of Antichrist, which Barber associated with the alliance of church and state, was traced back to the Council of Nicaea, and the French Revolution taken as an omen of its demise. 
The nature of Barber's connection with the United Irish movement is not clear, though he certainly sympathized with its aims. In July 1792 he accompanied Wolfe Tone and Samuel Neilson on a mission to suppress sectarian disturbances between the Peep o'Day Boys (protestants) and The Defenders (Catholics) in the Rathfriland area. Both the informer Nicholas Mageean and the United Irishman Charles Hamilton Teeling state that Barber was involved in the preparations for the rising of 1798. He was arrested and imprisoned for several months during the summer of 1797. Following the outbreak of the rising he was convicted by court martial, on a charge of having uttered seditious words, and imprisoned a second time, from July 1798 to January 1799, though he maintained his innocence. 
Barber died in Rathfriland on 5 September 1811, in his seventy-fourth year. He was said to be well over 6 feet tall. 


@@@@@


doc= 1334


Barbon, Nicholas (1637/1640-1698/9), builder and economist, was the son of the London leather merchant and sectarian politician Praisegod Barbon (c.1598-1679/80), after whom the short-lived parliament of 1653 was nicknamed Barebone's Parliament. He was educated at the universities of Leiden and Utrecht, where he studied medicine, graduating MD at Utrecht in 1661. After returning to London he was admitted an honorary fellow of the College of Physicians in 1664 but soon gave up the practice of physic for more lucrative pursuits in the turbulent business world of his day. 
A number of plans were put forward for building insurance in the aftermath of the great fire of 1666, with Barbon's 'Insurance office for houses' the first to become operative after the issue in 1680 of a prospectus offering to insure up to 5000 homes in the city. Barbon became a key player in the rebuilding of modern London. The expansion and merging of the cities of London and Westminster, the need for rebuilding in the wake of the great fire, along with the growing concentration of wealth and population in the capital, led to a property and building boom facilitated by some innovations in the terms of mortgages and ground rents pioneered by Barbon. He played a leading role in the redevelopment of the Strand, linking the two ancient cities, and in the district of Bloomsbury. In the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries London finally lost its medieval character and became an impressive modern city and world trading capital. Green fields were rapidly covered with modern housing and commercial architecture. Some interests opposed this recasting of the cityscape. Royal decrees and acts of parliament had been enacted between 1580 and 1602 prohibiting new building, and this policy was adopted under successive protectorate and Restoration parliaments, but Barbon bypassed or simply ignored the surviving legislation that had acted as a brake upon new construction. He was impervious to the conservatism of the crown and the majority of city dwellers, and this led to some bitterness and conflict, occasionally even violence. At times he was known to demolish homes and rebuild on the site without having first secured permission of the legal owner, and to face down any subsequent legal action. 
In 1684 Barbon's workmen were involved in a stand-up fight against the lawyers of Gray's Inn, who were protesting over his plans to develop Red Lion Fields without official sanction. His skill as a builder lay, according to North, 'more in economising ground for advantage and the little contrivances of a family than the more noble aims of architecture, and all his aim was at profit' (North, 53). Poorly constructed vaults in his early buildings in Mincing Lane led to a disastrous collapse of foundations, but his reputation survived this setback. By these means he became a presiding influence upon the new architecture and land use of the city. His redevelopment of Red Lion Fields, the Temple, and the streets around what had been Essex House stand as his most noteworthy contributions to the rebuilding of London. He built his own grand home at Crane Court, Fleet Street, where he set up the centre for his dealings. He later acquired as a residence Osterley House on the Thames to the west of London. 
His role as projector and speculator in the burgeoning economy of Restoration England aroused a good deal of hostile commentary in Barbon's own day and continues to contribute to a scurrilous reputation as a practised schemer and manipulator of men. North, who knew him personally and well, described him as a 'mob master', who knew amply 'the arts of leading, winding, or driving mankind in herds' (North, 53-4). There can be no doubt that at times his practices were deliberately dishonest. An intimidating, argumentative, and combative figure, he was all but impervious to personal slights -- 'he would be called rogue, knave, damned Barbon, or anything, without being moved' (ibid., 54) -- and showed no signs of his father's religious enthusiasm. A fine and showy dresser, he lived in sumptuous style, partly in order to maintain social appearances and also to inspire confidence in his business schemes. A reckless speculator, known at times to overvalue his assets and the extent of his credit, some of his enterprises failed, leaving a trail of creditors and dissatisfied co-projectors making suit against him. At times he preferred to accrue debts in this manner and face drawn-out legal actions for recovery, sometimes setting one group of creditors against another, and deliberately delaying by complicating court actions, calculating this to be a cheaper means of obtaining credit than arranging conventional loans and paying interest. He was said to keep in his employ a team of clerks and lawyers specifically for these purposes. He was elected as member of parliament for Bramber in 1690 and 1695 after having bought a placeman's seat. He was thus able to claim parliamentary protection from prosecution and thereby frustrate some outstanding cases against him in the courts. 
Barbon was also an innovator in economic theory. His early training as a physician was a factor in common with Sir William Petty and others of the seventeenth-century economists and political arithmeticians. He is considered by modern commentators to have propounded advanced views on free trade, the function of money, interest rates, and consumption. His 'Discourse of Trade' (1690) argued that money had no intrinsic value. Rather it functioned symbolically as a means of facilitating exchange. He conducted debates with John Locke over the debasement of the coinage, and in favour of a legal reduction in the rate of interest in his 'Discourse Concerning Coining the New Money Lighter' (1696). Barbon well understood that modern economic conduct was driven by desire and appearances as well as necessity: 'the use of most things being to supply the wants of the mind, and not the necessitys of the body; and those wants, most of them proceeding from imagination, the mind changeth; the things grow out of use, and so lose their value. (N. Barbon, 'A Discourse of Trade', 1690, 6)' The fashion for frivolous luxury goods might then have beneficial consequences. Excess itself would spur trade, prodigality was a vice that was prejudicial to individuals, but not to trade, whereas covetousness was prejudicial to both men and trade. 'Fashion, or the alteration of dress is a great promoter of trade because it occasions the expense of cloths before the old ones are worn out. It is the spirit and life of trade; it makes a circulation, and gives a value, by turns, to all sorts of commodities; keeps the great body of trade in motion. (ibid., 65)' He scorned the current classical nostalgia for the ancients in politics as neither Livy nor Machiavelli had taken due account of trade. 
Barbon's economic theory was in many ways linked to and informed by his commercial activities. The roles of MP, builder, projector, and writer were all intertwined in practice. Among later schemes there was a plan for an orphans' bank and a plan to raise drinking water from the Thames. One of his last projects, the National Land Bank, aimed to raise funds secured on landed property and sought to compete with the newly established Bank of England. The bank received royal assent in 1696, but when Barbon was called upon in July of that year to provide financial support for overseas military operations, funds were found wanting and the bank folded soon after. Barbon wrote his will on 18 May 1698, giving instructions that his debts should be paid, especially that owing for his late wife's funeral. He probably died at Osterley House, Middlesex, later that year; his will was proved on 6 February 1699. 


@@@@@


doc= 1335


Barbon, Praisegod (c.1598-1679/80), lay preacher and politician, first appears in 1623, when he was made free of the Company of Leathersellers in London; having served an eight- or nine-year apprenticeship, he was probably then aged about twenty-five. At an unknown date, but probably by 1632, Barbon joined the semi-separatist congregation founded in 1616 by Henry Jacob, and later led by John Lathrop and then, from 1637, by Henry Jessey. On 18 May 1640 this church was divided 'by mutual consent' with half of the original congregation following Jessey and the other half choosing Barbon. At this date Jessey is known to have been living in east London, in the liberty of the Tower, whereas Barbon's shop-cum-warehouse was outside the western wall of the city, so the division was probably a matter of geographical convenience. 
By May 1632 Barbon had married Sarah, a member of Lathrop's church; they had at least one son, Nicholas Barbon (1637/1640-1698/9). Praisegod was clearly doing well in his trade, for he was elected a warden of the yeomanry of the leather-sellers in 1630, and a liveryman in 1634. His premises, at the Lock and Key, at the lower end of Fleet Street near Fetter Lane, were spacious enough, for here on 19 December 1641 he preached before about 150 people, including (according to an outraged reporter) as many women as men. Perhaps Barbon was straining to make himself heard before such a crowd, but the noise of his oration attracted the attention of passers-by. Outside the Lock and Key, hostile crowds gathered. In the course of a long sermon directed against the bishops and the 'Book of Common Prayer', apprentices began smashing the windows and sought to break down the door. Eventually the constables arrived; some of Barbon's congregation were taken to the Bridewell prison, others to the Counters, and still others made their escape over the roof-tops, while the crowd was left to destroy his shop-sign. 
Barbon's association with the Jessey church and its offshoots brought him into contact with groups more hostile to the Church of England. At the Lock and Key disturbance, a second preacher, the separatist leader John Green, was also arrested. The following month more than fifty persons, including many members or former members of Jessey's church, were rebaptized by immersion in London. Barbon strongly disagreed with these advocates of believers' baptism, and within a few weeks he issued 'A Discourse Tending to Prove the Baptism... to be the Ordinance of Jesus Christ'. No evidence has been discovered for the frequent assertion that Barbon himself was rebaptized; the claim that he was an 'anabaptist' probably derives from post-Restoration royalist diatribes. However, his 'Discourse' and a second work issued in spring 1643, 'A Reply to the Frivolous and Impertinent Answer of RB', are important sources for the views and practices of the Baptists at this early stage in their development. Just like other controversialists, such as the separatist Samuel Chidley, Barbon defended baptisms received in the Church of England, though unlike Chidley he also defended the authenticity of the English church. However, Barbon stood for a broadly pluralistic outlook against the enthusiasts for the imposition of Anglican orthodoxy. God 'causeth much profit to come out of the variations of his servants, the truth is the more sought into and discovered, and cometh to shine forth more fully afterward' (Barbon, 'Discourse', A3'r'). 
Barbon's adherence to semi-separatist views, in the tradition of Henry Jacob, enabled him to participate in the political life of the parish. He was involved over the next few years in a series of conflicts with the group of wealthy men who controlled the vestry of St Dunstan-in-the-West, and with Francis Kemp, the lawyer and (up to 1642) common councillor who acted for them. In 1643 Barbon was involved in an action against the parish officers in the court of king's bench; in 1645 he was chosen as a member of a committee for the establishment of a free school in the parish, but this too seems to have involved wrangles with the vestry. The following year there was controversy over the election by show of hands of a churchwarden. It seems that one source of tension was the high presbyterianism of the vicar, Anthony Perne, to whom Barbon and some other prominent parishioners were strongly opposed, and another was the exclusion of many householders from the franchise. Barbon was made third warden of the Leathersellers' Company in 1648, but it was only the following year, after the purge of presbyterians from the City government, that he was returned as common councilman for his parish of St Dunstan-in-the-West. Other radicals and separatists were becoming prominent in London politics at the same time. Barbon was re-elected as a common councilman for 1650-51, and served also on the committee of safety in 1651. 
The peak of Barbon's political career, however, was in 1653, when he was selected, as one of the seven members for London, for the parliament which, probably even while it was sitting, attracted the sobriquet derived from his name. It seems that in July 1653 the London bookseller George Thomason picked up a list of the members of 'Barebones Parliament', in which those of moderate politics were distinguished from the rest. The combination of Barbon's pious first name, his unfortunate surname (lampooned as Rawbones by John Taylor even twelve years earlier), and his (relatively) humble social status were all open to ridicule. This combination was irresistible to opponents of the assembly, keen to belittle it. Barbon himself was a member of the committee which published on 12 July the enthusiastic and hopeful announcement in which the new body proclaimed itself the parliament of the Commonwealth, and he was shortly appointed to the committee for receiving petitions. Though never elected to the council of state, Barbon was in the second rank of the most active and influential members in the new house. He was one of the radicals who sat on the committee on tithes set up on 19 July, and was also one of the thirteen original members of the committee established on 19 August to consider a thoroughgoing reform of the law. In late July at Westminster large numbers of women demonstrated in support of John Lilburne, who was on trial having returned to London from exile without a pass. Possibly it was Barbon's reputation as a radical, and his long history of involvement with the semi-separatists, that led parliament to select him for the unrewarding task of placating Kathleen Chidley and the other leaders. 
It is clear that while Barbon was more radical than some, he did not always vote with the radicals, and appeared more than once as a teller in divisions alongside a known moderate. Sometimes, however, his opposition to apparently radical innovations such as the bill for a high court of justice, defeated on 28 September, probably arose from the fear that the new instrument might be used against radicals as well as royalists. Among the more extreme members of parliament was the group of Fifth Monarchists. It may be suspected that Barbon shared their millennial aspirations, but he was uneasy about both their predictions and the insurrection to which many looked forward. In November 1654 members of ten London congregations signed a Fifth Monarchist declaration against what they took to be the most offensive features of the newly established protectorate. Though more than twenty members of his congregation set their names to this work, Barbon did not, and neither does he appear to have been involved in any of the later Fifth Monarchist plots against the Cromwellian regime. 
Barbon was re-elected to the common council for the three years from 1657 to 1660, and after the restoration of the Rump Parliament he was named to the London militia committee under the act of 7 July 1659. In January 1660 he was one of the common councillors who opposed the proposal that the City should send its compliments to General George Monck. The following month he was appointed as controller of the commissioners for compounding at the generous salary of $300 p.a. Barbon was the chief promoter of a petition presented to parliament on 7 February in the name of the well affected of London and Westminster. This warned against the 'return of the justly-secluded members, or a Free Parliament, without due qualifications' (Davies, 279) and demanded that all office-holders, and members of either parliament or the council of state, should renounce both Charles Stuart and rule by any other single person. It probably helped provoke, during the next few weeks, the two attacks on his house by royalist crowds. The smashing of Barbon's windows marked both the beginning and the end of the interregnum. 
In July, following the Restoration, there appeared a royalist tract, the 'Picture of the Good Old Cause Drawn to the Life', which reprinted the petition of 7 February and published also an engraving in which Barbon appears in gaunt and serious mien with cap and gown. On 5 September 1661 it was reported that he was a frequent visitor to both Vavasor Powell and Major John Bremen, then in the Fleet prison. These were dangerous connections, and Barbon was also named as one of those who frequented Nonsuch House in Bow Street, a republican meeting place. He was arrested on 25 November 1661 and charged with treason alongside James Harrington and Samuel Moyer. These and others were thought to have plotted the military seizure of London and restoration of the Long Parliament. On 27 July 1662, following a petition of his wife, Sarah, it was ordered that Barbon be freed from his close imprisonment in the Tower, since he was 'so ill that he must perish unless released' ('CSP dom.', '1661-2', 447). The fortunes of the Lock and Key did not improve. Barbon had taken out a new fourteen-year lease on the premises in 1656 at the very considerable rent of $40 p.a., but in 1666 it was one of the most westerly buildings to be engulfed in the great fire of London. The loss of his workplace must have caused Barbon acute difficulty. On 10 March 1667, in the court of judicature, he obtained a judgment against his landlords, a widow, Elizabeth Speght, and her son Paul Speght, which stipulated that in exchange for rebuilding the property, he should be entitled to a reduction in annual rent to $15, and that on these terms forty extra years should be added to the lease. On 5 January 1669, having completed the work, Barbon sold the rights and the lease to his son Nicholas, who proceeded to take out a mortgage for $300, probably to help his father recoup some of the considerable costs of reconstruction. 
This experience did nothing to weaken Barbon's millenarian convictions. In 'Good Things to Come' (1675) Barbon looked forward to the coming of Christ and his rule for a thousand years: 'his kingdom and reign shall be outward, and visible on earth... when he shall come the second time, in power and great glory' (p. 10). Barbon died about the end of 1679 and was buried on 5 January 1680 near the artillery ground, in the parish of St Andrew Holborn. 


@@@@@


doc= 1336


Barbour, John (c.1330-1395), ecclesiastic and verse historian, was author of the Old or Middle Scots poem 'The Bruce'. His birth is usually placed about 1325, as much to give him a toehold in Robert I's reign as for anything his career tells us, and a slightly later date seems likelier. The trade name he inherited suggests that his father was a barber, and John's first appearance, in 1356 resigning the precentorship of Dunkeld which he held for just a year, links his family to that see. 'The Bruce' records the dash and bravery of William Sinclair, bishop of Dunkeld (died 1337), and his following in repelling an English force in 1317; John may have grown up on the fringes of the bishop's household, his father barber to Bishop William and perhaps to his successors, for when John obtained the precentorship in 1355 he was evidently at the papal court at Avignon with the new bishop, previously precentor. His promotion may also have been earned by their diplomatic activity on behalf of the guardian, Robert Stewart: in 1354 David II had been about to return from captivity in England, but the unenthusiastic guardian allowed the ransom negotiations to lapse while negotiating for military assistance from France. 
In 1356 Barbour was appointed to the archdeaconry of Aberdeen, presumably from the same Stewart patronage. But David II came home in November 1357 for an even larger ransom, at which prospect Barbour had sought leave to study at Oxford; he was the first Scot to be granted a safe conduct for that purpose in August 1357 and in September was his bishop's proctor at the council which discussed the king's release. He had further English safe conducts to leave Scotland during the years 1357-71, when David II was an active king, for study in England (1364), to visit St Denis (1365), and to study in France (1368), which he probably did in the following three years. That he had been to a university is almost certain because he is called on occasion master, but given the rarity of this description it is likely that he had not graduated and was not entitled to it. 
After 1356 Barbour received no further advancement in his long life, certainly not the bishopric for which he was as well qualified as any of the bishops. Everything suggests that he was a known client of Robert Stewart, who in 1371 at last ascended the throne as Robert II. Barbour, it seems, wrote 'The Bruce' for this royal patron, whose father, Walter, appears in a generous measure and light in its pages. When Barbour began to write is a matter of judgement, but the poem as it stands must have taken two or more years, perhaps as many as five or six. Composition started, therefore, about 1372 and detained him at or brought him to court, as a result of which he was employed in February 1373 as one of the auditors at the exchequer (worth $40 per annum), acting for the second time in that office two years later. The date 1375 marks the conclusion of the poem he planned and was followed by a change in his career, for he now appears in a north-eastern context: in 1378 the king granted him a pension of $1 annually from Aberdeen burgh's annual payment to the crown. This was paid until his death and (since the grant was perpetual, to assigns) from 1395 to his legatees, the cathedral chapter; in 1429 it was said to have been granted 'for the compilation of the book of the deeds of the late King Robert the Bruce' (Burnett and others, 4.457). 
The poem of 1375, written in rhyming octosyllabic couplets, sketches the Bruce claim to the throne in 1292, but moves rapidly to the Edwardian occupation, presumably of 1304. After the killing of Sir John Comyn, cursorily described, it gives a vivid depiction of the battle of Methven on 19 June 1306 and an extended treatment of the early tribulations of Robert I and of Sir James Douglas. It skims over the years 1309-13, partly because there was a truce, but mainly, it would seem, because of lack of sources. The narrative resumes with the taking of Perth, Roxburgh, and Edinburgh, going on to a full account of the battle of Bannockburn and the king at the top in the revolution of Fortune's wheel; there follow, briefly, the return of the king's daughter, her marriage to Walter Stewart, and the birth of their child Robert, in the fifth year of whose reign, 1375, this poem is being written. It is the only year date in the whole poem, and surely marks the end of the original composition, over 8000 lines long. It is a 'romance' (Barbour's word) of chivalry, with emphasis on loyalty, bravery, and wisdom. It claims to be truthful, but Barbour has often been misled by his sources, as over the chronology of events leading to Bannockburn, and sometimes tailors the facts to create a better literary effect, as when Edward I condemns to death the prisoners taken at Kildrummy, an action wrongly placed for dramatic impact at the time of Edward's own death. It has nothing on romantic love, and women are rare in its pages. Its most famous passage is an encomium of freedom, which, it can reasonably be pointed out, in Barbour is enjoyed by men of nobility. 
In the 1380s Barbour returned to court, serving as auditor again in 1383, 1384, and 1385; he had several one-off gifts of money from the king in 1382-6 and in 1388 an annual pension of $10 for life, this last suggesting that he had satisfactorily completed a literary work, but was not to be given a bishopric. The work was probably the continuation of 'The Bruce', in a further 5000 lines, up to the deaths of Sir James Douglas (1330) and Thomas Randolph, earl of Moray (1332). These sections show a less sure touch and lack the exempla from French romances which are a marked feature of the earlier part. 
The division of the whole poem into twenty books is entirely modern. Barbour used a collection of tales of the king's adventures in 1306-8 and a narrative, perhaps put together about 1332 from some annals and personal recollections of the rest of the reign. But the main chivalrous character, of whom a vivid picture is given, is Douglas, and a literary life of him was surely known to Barbour. A highly coloured, minstrel-like narrative of Edward Bruce would explain the erratic account of the Irish campaigns, a tenth of the poem. There are those, however, who would credit Barbour with piecing much of the story together himself, from reminiscences collected by himself, on the grounds that he virtually never mentions written sources, but frequently says, 'I heard tell'. 
What else did Barbour write? Before 1449 the chroniclers Wyntoun and Bower had ascribed to him 'The Bruce' (sections and lines from which were silently borrowed by Wyntoun), 'The Brut', 'The Stewartis Oryginalle', and 'The Stewartis Genealogy'. The last two are certainly identical, and if a mythical Trojan origin were suggested for the Stewarts, 'The Brut' could be another title for the same. They surely confirm that Barbour devoted his literary talents pretty single-mindedly to one family, the Stewarts. And whether one or two works, they are lost. Although 'The Bruce' survives in only two manuscripts, it was clearly influential upon all later Scottish historiography and pseudo-history, for Blind Hary took episodes from it shamelessly to attribute to Wallace. A number of other works were once said to have come from Barbour's pen: 'The Buik of Alexander', with many unattributed borrowings from 'The Bruce', but ascribed to 1438 in the manuscript of its text; sections of a translation of Guido delle Colonne's Latin history of the taking of Troy; and all or part of a translation of the legends of the saints. Cogent reasons have been given for rejecting all the ingenious hypotheses supporting these attributions. 
His patron, Robert II, having died in 1390, Barbour was at Aberdeen in 1391-2, and probably until his death. Aberdeen Cathedral lists give the anniversary of his death on 13 and 14 March, and the transfer of his $1 pension shows that the year was 1395; it is likely that he was buried in the cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 1337


Barclay, Alexander (c.1484-1552), poet and clergyman, was born at a place and date that are still obscure. John Bale, in the mid-sixteenth century, described him once as 'English', once as 'Scottish', and stated on a third occasion that 'some contend that he was a Scot, others an Englishman' ('Scriptorum illustrium Maioris Brytannie', 1557-9, 723). Another early witness, William Bullein of Ely, writing in his 'Dialogue Against the Fever Pestilence' (1564), believed that Barclay was 'born beyond the cold river of Tweed' and the belief is supported by six stanzas in praise of King James IV of Scotland, inserted by Barclay into his translation of 'The Ship of Fools' (1509) where the context did not require them. On the other hand, Barclay's recorded life was spent wholly in England or continental Europe, and he had cousins living in London at the time of his death. His connection with Scotland, if it existed, was limited to parentage, birth, or childhood, or to a misunderstanding of origins in the far north of England, whose inhabitants were often confused with Scots by people from further south. 
The date of Barclay's birth is usually given as 1475 or 1476, on the ground that he gives his age as thirty-eight in the prologue to his 'Eclogues', parts of which were written as early as 1513 or 1514, but it is not known when the prologue was composed. He does not appear in records until ordained priest in 1508, and the placing of his birth in the mid-1470s has given rise to speculation that he spent his young adulthood in a lengthy period of travel and study on the continent of Europe. He has also been credited with the anonymous English translation of Pierre Gringore's work 'The Castle of Labour', printed in Paris about 1503. There is as yet no direct evidence, however, about an early career spent on the continent or about his authorship of the translation, and it is more economical to place his birth close to 1484: the latest possible date, since the priesthood was not conferred until the age of twenty-four. His first known appointment was a relatively junior one, and although he states in the prologue to 'The Ship of Fools' that he has been 'a scoler longe, and that in dyvers scoles', he also asks readers to pardon his youth ('Ship of Fools', 1.3-4). He could easily have attended a series of schools, travelled abroad, and acquired the familiarity with French and German which he claims in 'The Ship', between the late 1490s and 1508. 
Barclay was evidently educated in Latin to a high standard (he later edited a Latin schoolbook and worked as a schoolmaster), but it is unclear whether this was followed by university study. He certainly did not gain a degree higher than that of BA until the 1530s, since only one reference before that decade calls him 'Master Barclay'. The first certainty in his life comes in March and April 1508, when he was ordained subdeacon, deacon, and priest at Exeter Cathedral to a title, or guarantee of support, provided by the collegiate church of Ottery St Mary in Devon. He had previously been living in the diocese of Lincoln, whose bishop issued letters dimissory allowing him to seek ordination elsewhere. Barclay entered the priesthood to qualify himself for employment in the church of Ottery, probably as chaplain (or clerk) of the lady chapel, a junior office responsible for teaching song to the choristers and young adult 'secondary clerks' of the college and for organizing the daily services in the chapel in honour of the Virgin Mary. His stay at Ottery was brief but notable for the production of his first major work, 'The Ship of Fools', the translation of Sebastian Brant's 'Narrenschiff' (1494) into English verse. It was printed in London in December 1509 (when Barclay had left the college) by Richard Pynson, who published most of the author's subsequent works. 
Barclay embellished his translation with copious additions. He dedicated it to Thomas Cornish, warden of the college and suffragan bishop in the diocese of Exeter, who may have been responsible for bringing him to Ottery, and included complimentary references to Henry VIII, Sir John Kirkham of Paignton, Devon, and John Bishop, rector of St Paul's Church, Exeter. The work enabled him to mount attacks on a range of contemporary social groups and practices: attacks which accord with traditions of social criticism going back to the fourteenth century, while reflecting some of the concerns of humanist writers in the early sixteenth. His targets included fond parents and ungrateful children, inconstant and evil women, all who wore extravagant clothes, pluralist clergy, ignorant gentlemen, avaricious merchants, corrupt lawyers and physicians, riotous servants, and sturdy undeserving beggars. He also took the opportunity to settle some private scores. The secondary clerks of the college were singled out for their unwillingness to learn, the neighbouring parish clergy for ignorance and worldliness, and a group of named men of Ottery (who appear to have been ordinary laity) for being frauds and thieves. The work shows a sympathy with humanist Latin, and criticizes those attached to the medieval grammar of Alexander of Ville-Dieu rather than to the works of Priscian and the Renaissance grammarian Giovanni Sulpizio. 
By 1513 Barclay had become a Benedictine monk of Ely Cathedral priory, a considerable shift both geographically and vocationally. As he was sixteenth in seniority out of thirty monks in 1516, it is likely that he went there straight from Ottery about 1509. This alteration of direction seems to have embodied a genuine calling, since Barclay had hardly been a secular priest for long enough to feel disappointed at lack of advancement. It may have reflected an ambition to pursue a career as an author, and gave him a secure and comfortable environment in which to do so. His subsequent writings, all or most of which were undertaken at Ely, spanned a range of genres. Pre-eminent are his five verse 'Eclogues', the first major pastoral poems to be written in English. The first three, which discuss the miseries of courts and courtiers, were translated from works by Aeneas Sylvius Piccolomini (Pope Pius II). The fourth, on the behaviour of rich men to poets, and the fifth, a dispute between a citizen and a countryman, were based on poems by Mantuan (Baptista Spagnuoli). Barclay seems to have written the fourth, the easiest to date from mentions of current events, in 1513-14. The 'Eclogues' were apparently first printed separately, the earliest surviving editions being approximately datable to 1518 (the fifth), 1521 (the fourth), 1523 (the first), and 1530 (the first three). They were the most successful of Barclay's writings in the sixteenth century, to judge from the number of reprints. Their appeal no doubt reflected their pleasant traditional pictures of landscapes, seasons, and rural life; their gentle criticisms of courts, towns, and neglect towards scholars; and their numerous references to places and people in England. 
Barclay produced at least six other works during his time at Ely. 'Alex. Barclay his Figure of our Mother Holy Church Oppressed by the French King', a lost printed book in English recorded by the bibliographer Andrew Maunsell, may have dated from 1512 when Louis XII of France was campaigning in Italy, or 1515 when his successor, Francois I, was doing the same. 'The Life of St George' in verse, also based on a work by Mantuan, was printed about 1515, and 'The Mirror of Good Manners' in verse, translated from a Latin text of the humanist scholar Domenico Mancini, about 1518. Later, Barclay applied himself to more practical works in prose. His revision of an elementary school treatise on Latin words, 'Vocabula' by John Stanbridge, was published in 1519 with further reprints in 1524 and 1526-7; his English translation of Sallust's 'History of the Jugurthine War' about 1520; and his 'Introductory to Write and to Pronounce French' in 1521. The last of these works, as Barclay admitted, drew on older guides to the French language produced for English people. John Palsgrave, who published a large-scale work on French in 1530, 'L'esclarcissement de la langue francoyse', paid tribute to Barclay in his preface as a 'studious clerke', but warned readers later on that he differed from Barclay on orthography and other matters, and caustically remarked 'I have sene an olde boke written in parchement in maner in all thynges like to his sayd 'Introductory', which by conjecture was nat unwritten this hundred yeres. I wot nat if he happened to fortune upon suche another' ('L'esclarcissement', sig. A.iii'v'). Bale also ascribes to Barclay lives of St Katherine and St Margaret, and later scholars have suggested other titles, without secure confirmation. 
Barclay was a productive monastic writer on the scale of John Lydgate, whom he resembled in the variety of his output, the undertaking of translations, and the writing of verse in English. His works were dedicated to important people of the day, either for his own benefit or for that of Ely Cathedral. The principal person so honoured was Thomas Howard, duke of Norfolk, who is praised in the fourth eclogue and to whom 'The Life of St George', 'The Jugurthine War', and 'The Introductory' were all addressed. 'The Jugurthine War' was also offered to John Veysey, bishop of Exeter, and 'The Mirror of Good Manners' to Sir Giles Alington, a courtier and knight of Cambridgeshire. Barclay appears to have had links with the royal court during his time at Ely, especially with the Chapel Royal -- a fact which recalls his probable duties in the lady chapel at Ottery. Not only are his first three 'Eclogues' moralizations on court life, but the second of them praises John Kyte, the subdean of the Chapel Royal; William Cornish, the master of its choristers; and William Crane, one of its gentleman singers. In April 1520 Sir Nicholas Vaux asked Thomas Wolsey to send Barclay to devise historical subjects and other themes to embellish the buildings planned for the English court at the Field of Cloth of Gold in Flanders. The 'Eclogues' also include a commendation of John Colet, dean of St Paul's, London, and contain dismissive references to poets laureate which appear to allude to John Skelton, whose poem 'Philip Sparrow' is mentioned by name. Bale credited Barclay with a work 'Contra Skeltonum'. 
The impact of Barclay's writings can be judged partly from the observations of his contemporaries and partly from the editions of his works. Henry Bradshaw of Chester, a fellow Benedictine, linked him with Chaucer, Lydgate, and Skelton in 1513, and William Bullein with the same writers in 1564. Bale (followed by Raphael Holinshed) called him 'a notable rhetorician and poet', and William Forrest described him in 1569 as 'eloquent'. His only works to be reprinted in the sixteenth century, however, were the first three 'Eclogues' about 1548 and about 1560, 'The Jugurthine War' in 1557, and 'The Ship of Fools' with the whole of the 'Eclogues' in 1570, this last edition being an enterprise of the London printer John Cawood. Thereafter he attracted little notice in literary circles until his works began to be reprinted in the nineteenth century. 
Barclay himself appears to have exhausted his literary ambitions by the 1520s. Between 1521 and 1528 he abandoned Ely to become a Franciscan friar, possibly at Canterbury, a house of the reformed or Observant branch of the Franciscan order. This was another unusual change of direction -- monks and friars had different traditions, objectives, and ways of life -- and signified a further large vocational adjustment on Barclay's part. He now ceased to write either poetry or practical works, and much of his time was probably given to the study of theology, a study which may have provided one motive for joining the friars, who were more committed to it than were monks. By 1538 he was styled 'doctor', doubtless of divinity, indicating that he had graduated in this study in a university outside England, since he is not recorded as taking a degree at either Oxford or Cambridge. 
In October 1528 the German informer Hermann Rinck wrote to Cardinal Wolsey that various dissidents including 'William Roy, William Tyndale, Jerome Barlow, Alexander Barclay and their adherents... formerly Observants of the Order of St Francis but now apostates... ought to be arrested, punished, and delivered up on account of Lutheran heresy' ('LP Henry VIII', 4/2.2083 (no. 4810)). The rest of these men were living in Germany, which makes it appear as if Barclay was based there too. Rinck's letter is a principal piece of evidence that Barclay joined the reformed or Observant branch of the Franciscan order rather than the original and larger Conventual branch, but the letter is not entirely accurate: Tyndale was not a friar. Another Observant friar, John West, who mentions that he was soon to meet Barclay about April 1529, accused him of calling Wolsey a 'tyrant' and other 'opprobrious and blasphemous words' ('LP Henry VIII', 4/3.2406 (no. 5463)). It is not impossible that Barclay was attracted by aspects of Lutheranism at this time, but he did not voluntarily adhere to the Reformation until much later; on the contrary, he acquired a reputation in England during the late 1530s of being a religious conservative. 
In 1534 the English Observant houses were closed because of their hostility to Henry VIII's claim of supremacy over the Church of England, and the surviving members were transferred to the mainstream Conventual houses. Barclay is likely to have returned to England by about this date, in view of the increasing separation of England from the Catholic church, and next turns up in Cornwall, where he was granted an annuity of $4 by Launceston Priory in 1535. Perhaps he was employed to provide the preaching and lecturing imposed by the crown on religious houses at this time. He also retained links with London, since the chronicler Charles Wriothesley, writing in the city, singled him out by name, under the year 1538, as one who refused to give up wearing his religious habit in public until he was compelled to do so. John Foxe the martyrologist later recounted a version of this story in which Thomas Cromwell personally threatened Barclay with hanging unless he changed his clothes. In the summer and autumn of 1538 Barclay carried out a number of private preaching engagements, including sermons at Thetford Priory, Norfolk; Barking, Suffolk, at Whitsuntide; and in the diocese of Exeter in October. Reports of his demeanour were duly transmitted to Cromwell. At Barking he had not spoken in favour of the king's supremacy or against the pope; at St Germans, Cornwall, he had made his conservatism known, albeit in a circumspect way; and in Cornwall and Devon he was doing 'much hurt' with 'open preaching and private communication' ('LP Henry VIII', 13/2.222 (no. 571), 232 (no. 596), 272 (no. 709)). What action Cromwell took, if any, is not clear, because Barclay drops out of the records for the next eight years. As a friar, he did not receive a pension after the suppression of his order, and the only pointer to his whereabouts and support in the early 1540s is his will, which reveals a number of links with lay people in London. 
When Barclay reappears it is in yet another role, that of a beneficed clergyman and eventually a clerical pluralist, signifying that he had come to accept the English Reformation, at least as an accomplished fact, and had resolved to make a new career as a secular priest in the Church of England. In March 1546 William Bowerman, subdean of Wells Cathedral, presented Barclay to the vicarage of Wookey, Somerset, near Wells, with an income of $12 15's'. 8died He probably lived at one or other of these places for the next two years. In the summer of 1547 the headmaster of Wells Cathedral school, Richard Edon, fell ill and Barclay took his place, probably on a temporary basis, with a further salary of $13 6's'. 8died He was paid to run the school until Michaelmas or Christmas 1548, when he moved abruptly from Somerset to the other side of England to become vicar of Great Baddow, Essex, on the presentation of a local gentleman, John Pascall. The date of Barclay's admission to Great Baddow is traditionally given as 7 February 1547, but this is based on a mistake by the eighteenth-century historian Richard Newcourt; the correct year is 1549. Barclay went to stay at Great Baddow in January of that year and lodged with Pascall until April, paying him money to organize the rebuilding of the vicarage. This fact emerged in 1554 when Pascall sued Barclay's executors, claiming further unpaid costs of the project. Great Baddow was a more valuable benefice than Wookey, with an income of $18 6's'. 8died, and since Barclay obtained permission to go on holding Wookey as well, his net income rose to a respectable $25, supposing that he paid a curate to serve his Somerset parish. In 1552 he was presented by the dean and chapter of Canterbury Cathedral to a third, even wealthier, living: the rectory of All Hallows, Lombard Street, London, with an income of $22 6's'. 8died This promotion involved his giving up one of his other two parishes, but he died at Croydon, Surrey, before he could do so, in June 1552, and was buried there on the tenth of the month. 
Barclay's will was made on 25 July 1551, and proved on the day of his burial. Its monetary bequests amount to over $70 which, together with the mention of a sum of $80 owed to him by one Cuthbert Croke of Winchester, suggests that his career as a beneficed clergyman had already made him moderately wealthy. He left small sums to the poor of Great Baddow and Wookey, and the residue of his goods and chattels to the bedridden, maidens, widows, and other helpless people. Money for rings was given to thirteen other men and women, including Sir John Gates, Sir Henry Gates, Mr Cheke, and four London citizens. The chief beneficiaries of his will were members of his family: his cousins Parnell Atkinson and Joan Bowyer; Parnell's husband Thomas Atkinson, a London scrivener; and their four daughters. Atkinson was made executor, together with a gentleman named Thomas Edon, and the speedy probate of the will may explain why two other relatives, Michael and John Barclay, subsequently tried to contest its validity. Barclay asked those to whom he made bequests to pray to God for remission of his sins and mercy on his soul -- phrases that look conservative, but his will by no means shows that he died a reluctant protestant. Cheke was probably John Cheke, tutor to Edward VI, and the Gates brothers were close associates of the duke of Northumberland, and deeply implicated in his attempt to exclude Mary Tudor from the throne in 1553. That Barclay made friends with such pillars of Edward's protestant regime provides a final twist to the convoluted story of his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 1338


Barclay, Andrew Whyte (1817-1884), physician, was born on 21 July 1817 in Dysart, Fife, the son of Lieutenant John Barclay, a naval officer, and Henrietta Whyte. He was educated at the high school, Edinburgh, and began studying medicine at Edinburgh University in 1834. In 1836-7 he visited London and studied at the Westminster Hospital. He also visited Berlin and Paris before returning to Edinburgh, where he gained his MD in 1839. He then continued travelling and visited Germany, Switzerland, France, Italy, and Madeira. After his return to England he entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1842; he proceeded MD in 1852. He also studied at St George's Hospital, London, and was appointed medical registrar there, a post which he held for many years. 
Barclay became the first medical officer of health for Chelsea in 1855. His 'Progress of Preventive Medicine and Sanitary Measures' appeared in 1856. He was elected assistant physician to St George's Hospital in 1857, and he paid particular attention to the interests of the medical school, where he lectured on medicine. He served as physician from 1862 to 1882. He married the eldest daughter of a Dr Noble in 1864. Henry Noble Barclay (1866-1939) was their son. 
At the Royal College of Physicians Barclay became a fellow in 1851, and he was examiner in medicine, councillor, censor, Lumleian lecturer, and Harveian orator (for 1881); he was elected treasurer in 1884. He was president of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society for the year 1881, and he contributed to the transactions of that society two papers on heart disease. Barclay was shrewd and cautious as a physician, and concise and polished as a writer. He wrote 'A Manual of Medical Diagnosis' (1857), 'On Medical Errors', and 'On Gout and Rheumatism in Relation to Diseases of the Heart' (1866). 
Barclay retired to Stevenage, Hertfordshire, in 1882, and was also appointed consulting physician at St George's Hospital in London. He died on 28 April 1884 at Whitney Wood, Stevenage. 


@@@@@


doc= 1339


David Barclay of Ury (1610-1686), soldier and politician, and Katherine Gordon (1620-1663), daughter of Sir Robert Gordon of Gordonstown. David Barclay was born in 1610 at Kirktownhill, Mearns, the son of David Barclay, the laird of Mathers (1580-1660), and Elizabeth Livingston. David Barclay of Mathers overspent at court and lost his estates to creditors, prompting his son David and grandson Robert to devote considerable energies to restoring the family fortunes. Following his education, possibly at local schools between about 1616 and 1626, David Barclay became a professional soldier; from 1626 he served in Germany, eventually rising to the rank of major under Gustavus Adolphus in the Thirty Years' War before returning to Scotland in 1638 on the eve of the civil wars. He served in covenanting armies for the next decade, becoming colonel of a horse regiment under General John (afterwards first earl of) Middleton. David Barclay and Katherine Gordon were married on 26 January 1648. She was third cousin to Charles I, and about the time of the wedding Barclay began to veer to the royalist side. Later in 1648 he purchased the ruinous estate of Ury (also Urie) near Stonehaven, 15 miles from Aberdeen, from William Keith, seventh Earl Marischal, but he would remain in Gordonstown until 1665. Barclay supported the Scottish engagement with the king, for which he was made to do penance when the kirk party returned to power, and seems not to have participated in resisting the English invasion of 1650. Marischal did resist, and after the conquest all properties associated with him were forfeited, including Ury. David Barclay ingratiated himself with the English, however, and was appointed trustee of lands forfeited by royalists. He used that position and his subsequent election to the Cromwellian parliaments of 1654 and 1656 to win back Ury for himself while protecting and promoting Marischal's interests. 


@@@@@


doc= 1340


Barclay, Sir George (c.1636-1710), army officer and Jacobite conspirator, was probably born in Kincardineshire, the son of Andrew Barclay of 'Sheels', who was of an unrecorded cadet branch of the Barclay family of Johnston, Kincardineshire, and was perhaps Andrew, a younger son of John Barclay MP ('fl'. 1619-1671). The Johnston branch in turn were cadets of the Barclays of Mathers and Urie, who produced Robert Barclay, principal of the Scots College, Paris, and his nephew Robert Barclay the Quaker. Yet a government propagandist mentioned in 1696 'the Obscurity of Sir 'George''s Character, that he hath no great Interest in his own Country, and is not much known in 'England'' ('Observations', 7). A proclamation of 1696 described him as aged about sixty. He had a sister, Anne, who survived him. He perhaps originally adopted Catholicism for a military career in foreign service. He wrote in 1688 to a secretary of state mentioning his battlefield experience and his zeal, known to James II, in the worst of times -- meaning the Popish Plot, when he, already a captain, received $40 English royal bounty in early 1681 and $50 in 1682. Barclay's first recorded British commissions were issued on 2 May 1685: to command a fort to be built on Stirling Bridge (never completed), and as inspector of the Scottish army. On 28 November 1685 he became major of the new English infantry regiment of his fellow Catholic Sir Edward Hales (afterwards the 14th foot), and on 3 October 1686 its lieutenant-colonel; he commanded it until the revolution. He acquired west highland contacts through Robert Barclay. He was knighted between 3 July 1687 and 6 November 1688. He was bequeathed the interest on $2000 sterling by an otherwise unrecorded first wife. In 1687 he secretly married in London Anne ('c'. 1648-1729), daughter and co-heir of Robert Caesar of Willian, Hertfordshire, and widow of Sir John Poyntz of Iron Acton, Gloucestershire. In January 1689, when he, like other Jacobites, wished to follow James to France, he was seriously ill in London. He was allowed to remain there by William of Orange, who then gave him a pass to go to France. On 13 February he made a hasty will to protect his wife if he was forfeited for treason. 
Barclay was with James in Ireland in 1689, but in early July that year he crossed with Brigadier-General Cannon and other officers to Mull to join Viscount Dundee (John Graham of Claverhouse) and the Jacobite highland rising, carrying a commission for a proposed dragoon regiment. At Killiecrankie on 27 July he helped command Sir Donald Macdonald of Sleat's clan regiment on the left flank -- he was one of the few professional soldiers whom the highlanders admired. In September 1689 he was badly wounded and captured by raiding Williamites at Alexander Robertson of Struan's house in Atholl, but was exchanged that winter. In February 1690 he carried a letter from the clan chiefs to James in Ireland, asking the king to send his illegitimate son James Fitzjames, duke of Berwick, to command them. Barclay returned with money for the clans and was promoted brigadier-general in July 1690. That autumn he stayed with Macdonell of Glengarry and encouraged him to continue resistance. 
By June 1691, however, Barclay, now a major-general, was convinced that the clans, lacking French help, could no longer hold out. He persuaded the hesitant Jacobite commander, Major-General Thomas Buchan, to enter into negotiations at Achallader with John Campbell, earl of Breadalbane, who acted as William's representative in the highlands. Barclay was chosen and then replaced as a messenger to ask James's permission for the clans to submit, but finally left on that mission in September, when no reply had been received. Without his support, Buchan was increasingly influenced by those opposed to the settlement, which virtually collapsed in November. That month Barclay finally joined Breadalbane's agent Duncan Menzies at St Germain. After a proposed French invasion of Scotland came to nothing, they persuaded James to sign a warrant releasing the clans on 12 December 1691 NS (2 December 1691 OS). A Dunkirk privateer would take them to Scotland; but they did not yet realize that William's revised deadline for the chiefs' submission, 1 January 1692, was in deadly earnest. They were captured off Dover on 12 December 1691 OS and taken to London. Barclay, on refusing to take the oaths to William, was prevented from carrying his news north. Menzies was allowed to do so on 15 December, and reached Edinburgh within a week; but snow delayed its dissemination among the clans. The chiefs rushed to submit in late December mainly because a winter campaign was imminent, not on account of James's permission; but had the messengers not been detained, the particular delay which prevented Alexander Macdonald of Glencoe from taking the oaths on time, and so led to the massacre of Glencoe, might not have occurred. Barclay felt sympathy for the clans; it is unknown whether the massacre affected his attitude to William. 
Barclay was allowed to return to France in February 1692, and was involved in the Scottish side of the French invasion attempt that May. In 1692 he was appointed lieutenant of the second troop of James's guards. On 28 September 1693 NS he transferred to the first troop, of which Berwick was captain. During the summer they often served with the French army. In December 1693 Barclay and a Captain Francis Williamson were in England to obtain for the Jacobite secretary of state, John Drummond, earl of Melfort, opinions from various leading Jacobites that James should invade swiftly with a French army 30,000 strong. They carried back several propositions from lesser men for kidnapping William, which were disregarded. 
In the winter of 1695-6 James at last prepared to lead a small French invasion. According to Berwick, who was in overall charge of the rising intended to support it, Barclay was appointed second-in-command to Sir John Fenwick in the leadership of 2000 Jacobite cavalry expected to assemble in London and the south-east. In November 1695 James instructed Barclay to cross secretly to London and organize the rising in conjunction with the leading Jacobites involved. Officers and troopers of James's guards would follow, and he should appoint them to stiffen the raw regiments in the rising. James's secretary of state, John Caryll, had Barclay paid $800 to buy horses for them. His commission, issued on 27 December 1695 NS, the day he set off, authorized James's subjects to rise and make war on William, and particularly to seize strongholds in England. To cover Barclay's absence from St Germain, he was rumoured to be undergoing a pox cure at Paris. For security reasons, the guardsmen who followed him over in pairs were simply told to receive their orders from him. He reached London about 27 December OS, but was almost recalled at once over a problem of seniority as a general -- a confirmation that his mission was genuinely for the rising. 
Barclay lived in London in disguise. His normal appearance was described in 1696 as tall, thin, hook-nosed, and ruddy-faced, with a crippled right hand. He changed lodgings several times, and secretly met and paid the Jacobite guardsmen who followed him in the piazza of Covent Garden. According to Barclay, Robert Charnock and Sir William Parkyns, both particularly active in preparing a rising, were the first to suggest to him an attack to assassinate William as a way of improving the invasion's chances. He responded eagerly, and showed Parkyns, a lawyer, his commission, probably to confirm that it could be interpreted as covering such attacks. Evidence of how unready most south-eastern Jacobites were to rise before the French landed, noted also by Berwick, evidently confirmed his determination, since he apparently never approached Fenwick. While keeping William's movements under observation, he received suggestions from various Jacobites of possible methods and places, besides alternative operations such as seizing the Tower. Barclay showed as much caution as such a plot allowed. He opposed, for instance, trusting George Porter, who, after capture, was to become the most damaging crown witness. Finally the conspirators, after several conferences, agreed to ambush William at Turnham Green as he returned from Saturday hunting at Richmond, with forty horsemen. Barclay with eight men would attack the king's coach and kill everyone inside, while the remainder in two parties fought the accompanying lifeguards. Barclay obtained nearly half the number of horsemen, ironically, from the officers and men of James's own lifeguards who had crossed. Several followed orders reluctantly, assuming that this was the mission for which James had told them to obey him, under a commission which, the leading conspirators claimed, specifically authorized it. There were no plans for securing the conspirators' safety afterwards, merely Barclay's assurance that James would land very soon. Berwick did not veto the scheme, under its thin cover of a kidnapping, but retired to France to avoid involvement. 
Saturday 15 February was the day intended. Barclay gathered the guardsmen 'and declared, that these were his janissaries, and that he hoped they would bring him the garter' ('State trials', 12.1326). However, the plot had been betrayed by two conspirators whom Barclay never met and one double agent whom he had kept from full knowledge, and William stayed at home. As no alarm was given, a further attempt was planned for 22 February, when the participants reassembled. This time, when William's preparations to hunt were cancelled, rumours of a plot spread, and the would-be assassins dispersed for good. A proclamation offered $1000 for Barclay's capture. The exposure of the plot and of James's apparent responsibility temporarily crushed Jacobitism, and strengthened William's government politically when economic factors were bringing it near total collapse. The executed plotters included Ambrose Rookwood, an officer in James's guards, and several others were imprisoned without trial for life by parliament's authority: obeying a military superior's orders was not accepted as justification. 
Both the government ministers and his fellow Jacobites, misled by his false trails, assumed that Barclay had instantly fled back to France when the plot was exposed. In fact he remained in hiding in London, and by late March had organized regular payments to his imprisoned subordinates, which were exposed in late May. His wife or her relatives perhaps helped shelter him. According to his son Alexander, he remained in England until September. There were later false sightings and alarms. It was only in July 1697 that he was authorized to revisit St Germain. On 4 August 1697 NS he completed at Paris a short account of his mission. The delay in his return apparently cooled any anger over his actions. 
When Hans Willem Bentinck, first earl of Portland, entered Paris as ambassador in February 1698, he protested at finding Barclay and other would-be assassins appearing freely there and at St Germain. Louis XIV replied that Barclay had recently been paid off when his company was disbanded, and he did not know his whereabouts. Presumably to avoid further complaints and suspicions, he was afterwards sent to reside, receiving a French pension, at Bourges in Berry. He died at Issoudun in Berry on 31 July 1710 NS, and the French government seized his papers. That perhaps provoked the ludicrous rumour that he had been 'the Man in the Iron Mask'. Despite having sent money to his wife, Barclay had saved 43,000 livres, laid out in 'rentes' on the Paris Hotel de Ville. By his will of 15 June 1704 he left these to his wife for life, and afterwards 300 livres a year to the Scots College, Paris, where he desired his heart to be buried, to educate priests for the Scottish mission. Most of the residue was to support the main Barclay of Johnston family, now impoverished and crypto-Catholic. His widow, though already rich, frustrated his intentions, successfully claiming in lawsuits in France that the 1689 will, leaving her as sole legatee, remained uncancelled and that the 1704 will was merely a codicil. It is doubtful whether the Scots College received its bequests, and the Barclays had to sell Johnston in 1762. 
Barclay's will did not mention any children, but his 'eldest' (Cole, 225) illegitimate son Alexander Barclay was interrogated in London in 1705 aged twenty-seven. Born in Britain, he studied at the Scots College and afterwards trained as a chemist and surgeon. He accompanied Barclay on a mission of 1695-6 and undertook a Jacobite mission to England in 1700. An Alexander Barclay, an East India Company ship's surgeon since 1711 with a doctor brother named George, died on a trading voyage of 1731-4 to China. 


@@@@@


doc= 1341


Barclay, Hugh (1799-1884), judge, was born on 18 January 1799 in the Gorbals, Glasgow, son of John Barclay, merchant, and Jean McKinlay. After serving his apprenticeship as a law agent he was admitted a member of the Faculty of Advocates in 1821. In 1829 he was appointed sheriff-substitute of Dunblane and in 1833 sheriff-substitute of Perthshire. He wrote 'A digest of the law of Scotland, with special reference to the office and duties of the justice of the peace' (2 vols.; 2nd edn, 1852-3), a work which passed into several editions and proved very useful to legal practitioners. Besides editions of various other legal works, he also published on a range of miscellaneous legal matters, from the law of highways to the Scots law against profaning the sabbath. He was a frequent contributor to the 'Journal of Jurisprudence' and other legal periodicals, and various of his papers, including 'Curiosities of the game laws' and 'Curiosities of legislation', were also published by him in a collected form. 
Barclay was married to Margaret Buchanan, and they had at least one son and one daughter. For many years he was a prominent member of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, and, taking an active interest in ecclesiastical and philanthropic matters, he published 'Thoughts on Sabbath Schools' (1855) and a few other small works of a similar kind. Barclay died at his residence at Early Bank, Craigie, near Perth, on 1 February 1884, having for several years been the oldest judge in Scotland. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 1342


Barclay, John (1582-1621), writer, was born on 28 January 1582 at Pont-a-Mousson, Lorraine, the son of William Barclay (1546-1608) and his wife, Anne de Malleviller. His father was Scottish, and professor of civil law in the college recently founded in Pont-a-Mousson by the duke of Lorraine; his mother was native to Lorraine. Despite his place of birth and upbringing, and even though there is no record of his ever visiting Scotland, Barclay seems to have been proud of his Scottish ancestry and to have valued his allegiance to James VI and I. However, during Barclay's residence in England, state records consistently refer to him as French, and make little or no reference to his Scottish parentage. 
Barclay was educated at the Jesuit school in Pont-a-Mousson until about 1602; he may also have tried the noviciate, but either because he was unsuited or because of his father's quarrel with the order and resignation from his post, in the end Barclay did not join. Instead, he developed an antipathy to Jesuit modes of education and recruitment, which he satirizes in his 'Satyricon' (1605). At the age of nineteen Barclay had published his first work, 'In P. Statii Papini Thebaidii libros III commentarii et in totidem sequentes notae' (Pont-a-Mousson, 1601) a commentary on Statius's 'Thebaid'. It was the beginning of a distinguished literary career, which would bring him fame all over western Europe. 
Barclay's movements between 1602 and 1606 are uncertain, although he may have attended his father in Paris. During this period, probably in 1605, he married Louise Debonnaire ('c'.1585-1652), the daughter of an army paymaster, with whom he had two daughters and a son. During the same time he published the first part of 'Euphormionis lusinini satyricon' (Paris, 1605; reports of an earlier edition in London in 1603 seem to be unfounded), a Menippean satire modelled on Petronius's 'Satyricon'. Barclay's choice of model was a first in Renaissance Latin writing and his version was as irreverent as the original. Barclay's 'Satyricon' is the story of Euphormio, a citizen of an ideal realm who arrives in seventeenth-century Europe, and his adventures therein. Almost as soon as it was published, keys appeared to interpret the characters and locations depicted in it. Barclay did not produce any keys himself, only an apology for some of the associations ('Apologia pro se', sometimes identified as the third part of the 'Satyricon', first published in Paris in 1610), and the interpretations of his satire are diverse. Of the references agreed by most authorities, two stand out: James VI as Neptune, a benevolent and powerful figure, and Acignius as the Jesuits. Although Euphormio is generally held to be a figure of Barclay, the extravagance of the character's adventures argue against a directly autobiographical reading. The second part of the 'Satyricon', containing further adventures of Euphormio, appeared in Paris in 1607. The work was very popular, the first part running to six and the second to five editions within Barclay's lifetime. Its popularity continued into the vernacular, and by the eighteenth century the 'Satyricon' had been translated into French, German, and Dutch. Its attraction is a combination of speculation as to the correct interpretation of the figures within the narrative and delight in the comic misadventures of Euphormio. The work was Barclay's first great literary success, and its dedication to James VI and I doubtless helped his progress at the British court. 
By 1606 the family was in England, where Barclay sought favour at the Jacobean court. He had already written 'Regi Jacobo Primo, carmen gratulatorium' (Paris, 1603) to congratulate James on his accession to the English throne, and he continued his practice of literary flattery in a number of other works, such as 'Sylvae' (1606), a collection of poems addressed to James and to some of his courtiers. Much of Barclay's quest for royal favour seems to have been channelled through Robert Cecil, earl of Salisbury, for there are records of Barclay sending laudatory verses to Salisbury in 1606 and of William Barclay writing to him on his son's behalf in 1607. Such approaches were evidently successful, for several times Barclay appears to have been paid a pension by Salisbury, who was later reimbursed by the king. 
While at court Barclay took on a variety of literary tasks. He maintained his satirical edge in 'Icon animorum' (1614), which sometimes appears as the fourth part of the 'Satyricon', but which in fact is a collection of sketches of the characters of nations. He also diversified by writing a directly political work, the 'Series patefacti divinitus parricidii inter maximum regum regnumque Britanniae cogitati et instructi' (1605), a commentary on the Gunpowder Plot, and then undertook the editing and publishing of a work by his father, 'De potestate papae' (1609), which argues for the pope's disqualification from secular power. Both of these were designed to appeal to James, and Barclay became involved in one of the king's own literary projects. On 27 April 1609 Barclay was rewarded for his translation work on the 'king's book' ('CSP dom.', '1603-10', 506); this book was presumably 'Apologie for the Oath of Allegiance', published first in 1607-8 and then in a revised version in 1609. A month later Barclay, together with the Scottish poet Robert Aytoun, received $300 for 'expenses on their journey with His Majestie's letters to divers foreign princes' (ibid., 514, 591). Among these letters seems to have been included a copy of the 'king's book', which Barclay carried to the magnates of Lorraine, Bavaria, and Savoy. On his return from this mission, Barclay continued to enjoy royal favour: not only did James award him a new pension of $200 in 1610, but later the same year he also intervened to ask the French king to suppress an attack made by Bellarmine on 'De potestate papae'. 
Despite these signs of royal favour Barclay left England for the papal court in 1615. In the preface to 'Paranesis ad sectarios' (Rome, 1617), a piece of Catholic apologetics, he says he left England to allow his children to remain Catholic, and the English court may have become less welcoming to Roman Catholics during the 1610s. It is also possible that his place there was not financially secure, since a letter survives to Salisbury from Barclay in 1611, then in Paris, asking that his pension still be paid. His final departure from James's court was not without its scandal, for it was believed -- wrongly -- that he had written a book against James, such that could only have been composed by an intimate. The preface to 'Paranesis' may have been written in part to defend himself, but it was not until 1618 that the true author of the book in question was revealed as a lecturer at the University of Louvain. 
In Rome Barclay undertook his greatest work, the 'Argenis'. It was published posthumously in Paris in 1621 and dedicated to Louis XIII of France, suggesting that even then Barclay was seeking a new sponsor. It is a romance written in Latin centred on Argenis, an ideal princess, with three suitors, one good, one bad, and one who is finally recognized as her long-lost brother. It is also an allegory of seventeenth-century Europe, and keys for its characters also survive, for example identifying Archombrotus and Poliarchus as figures of Henry IV, Hyanisbe of Elizabeth I, and Radirobanes of Philip II. In contrast to the 'Satyricon', however, there is no character that can be identified as a type of Barclay himself. Like the 'Satyricon', the 'Argenis' was instantly popular: in London in May 1622, because of demand, the cost of a volume rose from 5's'. to 14's'. and James commanded Ben Jonson to translate it, although if a translation ever existed, it seems not to have been published. Other translations appeared, in many European vernaculars, and two sequels, by other hands, were also published. 
Barclay died in Rome on 15 August 1621, a fortnight after he had fallen ill with a fever and only eighteen days after he had finished the 'Argenis'. He was buried in the church of St Onofrio in Rome. His widow returned to France and died at Orleans in 1652. Although Barclay can be claimed as French and also as Scottish, his contribution to literature is very much international. Through his associations with the court of James VI, his place in British cultural history is assured, but his works, particularly the 'Satyricon' and 'Argenis', were read all over Europe. Such works demonstrate clearly the accessibility and importance of Latin as a language of literature and culture in the seventeenth century; they also show that the response to classical literature continued to develop throughout the Renaissance. 


@@@@@


doc= 1343


Barclay, John (1733-1798), Church of Scotland minister and founder of the Berean church, was born in Muthill, Perthshire, in March 1733, the son of Ludovick Barclay, a farmer and miller, and his wife, Martha MacInnes. He proceeded from the village school to the University of St Andrews, where he graduated MA in 1755. Thereafter he studied divinity at St Mary's College, St Andrews, and was strongly influenced by the teaching of Archibald Campbell, who taught that no knowledge of God was possible from creation through fallen reason. In his writings and preaching Barclay developed this precept into a firm affirmation that all knowledge of God comes directly from the scriptures. 
After serving as a private tutor in the parish of Crieff, Barclay was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Auchterarder on 27 September 1759 and became assistant to the Revd James Jobson of Errol, a Marrow sympathizer. Despite deep disagreements between the two, Barclay remained in Errol until 1763, when he became assistant to the Revd Antony Dow at Fettercairn, where he lived until Dow's death in August 1772. In Fettercairn, Barclay gained a reputation as a preacher, and crowds, including many from neighbouring parishes, filled the church. Despite his youthful appearance 'his fervid manner, in prayer especially, impressed the minds of his audience... He had a most luxuriant fancy and a great taste for poetry' (Cameron, 201). While at Fettercairn he published 'A Paraphrase of the Book of Psalms' (1766) and 'Rejoice Forever' (1767), which contains 196 hymns based on scripture passages. Barclay set his hymns to popular tunes and wrote a large amount of verse. In both works he maintained that the psalms should be interpreted in such a way that Christ is the speaker in all first person passages. This view was questioned by the presbytery of Fordoun. In 1769 he addressed a letter to James Smith and Robert Ferrier, founders of the Old Scots Independents, on 'The Eternal Generation of the Son of God', in which he supported the orthodox doctrine, and in the same year he wrote 'Without Faith, without God', in which he attacked the whole system of Scottish education because it was founded on the premise of natural revelation: 'pretended reason murders faith' (Barclay, 126). With the publication of 'The Assurance of Faith Vindicated' in 1771, Barclay's peculiar views were now in print: there is no natural revelation; God reveals himself in sovereign acts throughout scripture; the psalms must always be interpreted as referring to Christ; assurance is of the essence of faith, which is an intellectual act; the sin against the Holy Ghost is unbelief. 
For the parishioners of Fettercairn Barclay was the natural successor to Dow in 1772. However, the presbytery, the synod, and finally the general assembly of May 1773 upheld the claim of a rival candidate, Robert Foote. Barclay had as his advocate at the general assembly James Boswell. He was also refused a certificate of character by the presbytery, and he separated himself from the Church of Scotland. A group of supporters in Edinburgh invited him to become their pastor, and he received ordination by a classis of the Presbyterian church at Newcastle upon Tyne. Meanwhile in Fettercairn the great majority of the parish seceded and built a meeting-house at Sauchieburn in the parish of Marykirk, where for several years James McRae, inducted by Barclay, had over one thousand hearers. This congregation, which sought fellowship with Congregational churches in Dundee and Newburgh (Fife), survived until 1854. 
The name Berean (from 'Acts' 17: 11) was probably chosen by Barclay himself for his followers, who were also known as Barclayans and Barclayites. Churches were founded in Glasgow, Edinburgh, Crieff, Montrose, Kirkcaldy, and other centres of independent church activity in Scotland. Between 1776 and 1778 Barclay was in London, where several churches, along with a debating society, were established; there was also a church for a time in Bristol. Barclay was a good classical scholar, well read in the theology of his day, 'a metaphysician rather than a prophet, an acute reasoner rather than an inspirational visionary' (Miller, 2.521). He made quite exclusive claims for his church, which by 1850 was a tiny remnant, rousing itself in Glasgow to a last effort by republishing an eight-volume collection of Barclay's 'Works' in 1852. 
The Berean churches were notable as small, exclusive, and close-knit fellowships. Apart from Barclay himself they did not attract many educated men, and pastors were chosen from the congregation, but appointed by Barclay or his successor. Worship was similar to that of the Glasites and Scotch Baptists, communion being celebrated monthly. Most Bereans maintained paedobaptism, but in Glasgow and Dundee Baptist Bereans are recorded. Despite their general adherence to Calvinist orthodoxy, their strong doctrine of assurance led to their being suspected of antinomianism, and 'Berean' became a term of abuse in the controversy surrounding John Macleod Campbell and Edward Irving in the 1830s. David Thom of the Scottish kirk in Liverpool became in the 1820s a strong advocate of Barclay's views. He was deposed from the ministry, began an independent cause and reached a somewhat 'advanced' theological position. 
Barclay was married twice, without children, although further details are unknown. He received a 'small property' through his first wife, but struggled with poverty most of his life. He died on 29 July 1798 in the house of a friend and in the presence of his nephew John Barclay, a well-known Edinburgh physician. He was buried in the old Calton cemetery, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 1344


Barclay, John (1741-1823), marine officer, entered the corps in March 1755 as second lieutenant, and became first lieutenant in July 1756. He served throughout the Seven Years' War (1756-63), in the Mediterranean, at Belle Ile (off the Britanny coast) in 1761, and on the coast of Africa; he was promoted captain in October 1762. He served with distinction through the American War of Independence, particularly in 1777 in Lord Howe's operation on the Delaware River at the Red Bank, and in the mud forts; he was in command of the marines on board the 'Augusta' (sixty-four guns), when she bombarded the forts, and was abandoned after catching fire (on 23 October 1777). For these services he was promoted brevet major in August 1777. He served at the first relief of Gibraltar. He was one of the commanding officers of marines in Rodney's victory at the battle of the Saints (off Dominica, 12 April 1782), and afterwards was promoted lieutenant-colonel by brevet in February 1783. 
Barclay had no further active service at sea, but was for the next thirty years chiefly employed on the staff of the marines in England. He became major in the marines in December 1791, and lieutenant-colonel in the marines, and brevet colonel in 1794 (marine officers then held concurrent marine and army ranks). In May 1796 he became major-general, and in February 1798 second colonel commandant in the corps. As such he was much involved with the marines' organization, and made changes in their drill and uniform including, in 1805 when he was commandant of the Chatham division, the introduction of blue working jackets for the Royal Marine Artillery. In 1803 he became lieutenant-general (September) and colonel commandant of the marines (December), and in September 1806 he became resident colonel commandant. He was then practically commander-in-chief of the corps, and its good character indicated the quality of its organization. In the 1797 Spithead and Nore mutinies and in other mutinous manifestations, the marines proved reliable against mutiny among the sailors. In June 1813 Barclay became general (though still colonel in the marines), and in April 1814 he retired on full pay, after fifty-nine years' continuous employment. He was married and had children. He went to live at Taunton, Somerset, where he died on 12 November 1823. 
Barclay's son Fletcher Barclay entered the 56th (West Essex) regiment as ensign in 1791, served in the West Indies, the Low Countries, and India, was promoted lieutenant-colonel in 1811, commanded his regiment, was promoted colonel in the army in 1825, and retired in 1831. 


@@@@@


doc= 1345


Barclay, John (1758-1826), anatomist, was born at Muthill, Perthshire, on 1 December 1758, the son of Lodowick Barclay, a farmer, and Margaret McIlwhannel. John Barclay (1733-1798), founder of the Berean confession in Edinburgh, was his uncle. In 1776 Barclay obtained a bursary in St Andrews University with the intention of entering the church. He was licensed as a minister and then became a tutor in Mr C. Campbell's household in 1781. While a tutor he developed an interest in natural history and human anatomy. In 1789 he became the tutor of Sir James Campbell's two sons and accompanied them to Edinburgh University. In 1792 Barclay attended lectures on anatomy and, after a period of hesitation, decided to pursue his interests in anatomy and physiology by studying medicine. While a student he acted as the assistant to John Bell (1763-1820), a private anatomical lecturer. With the sponsorship of Sir James, Barclay graduated MD from Edinburgh University with the thesis ''De anima, seu principio vitali'' in 1796; he spent the following winter studying anatomy and surgery in London with Andrew Marshall of Holborn. He returned to Edinburgh in 1797 and began giving his own course of lectures on anatomy. He remained in Sir James's household until 1811, when he married Campbell's daughter Eleanora on 25 October that year. 
When Barclay began lecturing, the Napoleonic Wars had created a demand both for surgeons and for anatomy courses to instruct them. The Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh had instituted a new degree for surgeons, and in 1804 Barclay's course was recognized as fulfilling its anatomy and surgery requirements. Barclay's lecture hall was well placed to attract students, next door to the Royal Medical Society (the chief student society) and across the street from Surgeons' Hall. Until 1825 he gave two sets of lectures a day, at 11 a.m. and 6 p.m. during the six-month winter session, and towards the end of his life he gave a summer course in comparative anatomy. He became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh in 1806. At one point the creation of a university chair in comparative anatomy was proposed, with Barclay as its first incumbent, but this was opposed by the medical faculty. 
Several of Barclay's publications stemmed from his desire to fill lacunae in the literature available to his students: 'Muscular Motions of the Human Body' (1808) and 'A Description of the Arteries of the Human Body' (1812). He also provided references to 'A series of engravings representing the bones of the human skeleton; with the skeletons of some of the lower animals' (1819), engraved by Edward Mitchell from the illustrations in M. Sue's edition of Alexander Monro's 'Traite d'osteologie' (Paris, 1759), on condition that the book be sold at a low price to students. Other publications, from his thesis through to his last work, 'An Inquiry into the Opinions, Ancient and Modern, Concerning Life and Organization' (1822), reflect his firm belief in the existence of an organizing principle in living organisms which explained physiological functions. He also had a keen interest in the new science of chemistry, particularly its applications to physiology. Several of his books were dedicated to his friend Thomas Thomson, an Edinburgh private lecturer who became professor of chemistry at Glasgow University, and in 'A new anatomical nomenclature relating to the terms which are expressive of position and aspect in the animal system' (1803) Barclay proposed a new nomenclature for anatomy inspired by that of A. Lavoisier in chemistry. 
Barclay became ill in 1825, and his classes were taught by Robert Knox. He died on 21 August 1826. 


@@@@@


doc= 1346


Barclay, Joseph (1831-1881), bishop of Jerusalem, was born on 12 August 1831 near Strabane in co. Tyrone, Ireland, the son of John Barclay (died 1845), gentleman, and his wife, Rebecca Brandon (died 1874). His parents were of Scottish extraction, and he had two sisters. He was educated at a school in Strabane kept by a Presbyterian minister. Barclay went on to Trinity College, Dublin, and proceeded BA in 1854 and MA in 1857, but showed no particular powers of application or study. He was ordained deacon in the Church of Ireland in 1854 (and priest the following year), taking up a curacy at Bagnelstown, co. Carlow. 
During this period Barclay began to take a great interest in the work of the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews. The question of Jewish conversion was then agitating the religious world in England, and Barclay energetically supported the cause in his own neighbourhood, until in 1858 his enthusiasm led him to offer himself to the London Society as a missionary. He left Ireland, much regretted by his parishioners and friends, and after a few months' study in London was appointed to Constantinople. The mission there had been established in 1835, but no impression had been made on the 60,000 Jews calculated to inhabit the town. Barclay stayed in Constantinople until 1861, making missionary journeys to the Danubian provinces, Rhodes, and other nearer districts. He acquired a thorough knowledge of the Spanish dialect spoken by the Sephardic Jews, and diligently prosecuted his studies in Hebrew. In 1861 he was nominated incumbent of Christ Church, Jerusalem, a position requiring energy and tact to avoid getting entangled in local quarrels; these rivalries Barclay described as a 'fretting leprosy', neutralizing his best efforts. 
In 1865 Barclay visited England and Ireland on private matters, received the degree of LLD from his university, and married on 21 December. His wife was Lucy Agnes (died 1882), the third daughter of the Revd W. W. Andrew of Ketteringham, Norfolk. The couple had a large family. On his return he found it impossible, as a married man, to continue in his post unless his salary was increased, and the London Society's refusal compelled his resignation in 1870. He returned to England and filled for a time the curacies of Howe in Lincolnshire and St Margaret's, Westminster, until in 1873 he was presented to the living of Stapleford in the St Albans diocese. The comparative leisure thus afforded him enabled him to publish in 1878 a book containing his translations of extracts from the 'Talmud'. He had worked on it for sixteen years and, according to his biographer, it faithfully reproduced 'the sententious interrogative and involved style of the Rabbis' (Courtenay, 403). Unfortunately, critical opinion was divided over its importance; and Jewish readers regarded it as marked by an animus against their nation and literature. In 1880 Barclay received the degree of DD from Dublin University. 
In 1879 the see of Jerusalem became vacant, and Dr Barclay's experience and attainments marked him out as the only man likely to fill the post successfully. He was consecrated at St Paul's Cathedral in London on 25 July 1879. He was most enthusiastically welcomed to Jerusalem, and entered on his duties with his usual vigour, but his sudden death there, after a short illness, on 23 October 1881 put an end to the hopes of those who believed that at last some aims of the bishopric's founders were to be realized. Bishop Barclay's attainments were considerable. He preached in Spanish, French, and German; he was intimately acquainted with biblical and rabbinical Hebrew; he was diligently engaged at his death in perfecting his knowledge of Arabic; and he had acquired some knowledge of Turkish during his residence in Constantinople. The bishop's widow returned to England, but she died on 5 March 1882 when giving birth to their eighth child. 


@@@@@


doc= 1347


Barclay, Robert, of Ury (1648-1690), religious writer and colonial governor, was born at Gordonstown, Moray, on 23 December 1648, the eldest of the five children of 
David Barclay could see early on that his son Robert was 'very Ambitious of Knowledge' (Barclay, 'Truth Triumphant', 678). Robert later recalled that he was first schooled locally 'by the strictest Sort of Calvinists', but with the Cromwellian regime crumbling and the prospect of renewed civil war looming, in 1659 the ten-year-old was sent to Paris to be educated by his uncle and namesake, Robert Barclay, rector of the Scots Theological College (ibid.). Young Robert flourished in Paris, perfecting his French and Latin, honing his debating skills, and winning book prizes from his tutors. He also converted to Catholicism ('I became quickly defiled with the Pollutions thereof', he subsequently wrote), much to the horror of his mother (ibid.). As Katherine Gordon lay dying in March 1663 she begged her husband to bring Robert, not yet fifteen, back to Scotland and protestantism. The uncle offered to make Robert his heir if he would remain in Paris, but that summer he returned to Scotland with his father. Robert Barclay promptly renounced the Catholic church and would remain hostile to it (though not to individual Catholics) for the rest of his life. That early association, however, helped fuel conspiracy theories to the effect that Quakers in general, and Barclay in particular, were really papists in disguise. 
In August 1665 David Barclay was committed to Edinburgh Castle at the behest of enemies resentful of his dealings during the interregnum. He shared a cell for a time with John Swinton, a fellow Scottish MP under Cromwell who had turned Quaker in 1657. David Barclay declared himself a Quaker in March 1666. Prison officials strove to keep Robert Barclay away from his father and Swinton, but their brief visits culminated in his own conversion to Quakerism early in the winter of 1666-7, about the time of his eighteenth birthday. His ability to articulate the Quaker experience was immediately apparent, and his first evangelizing trip took him to the north of Scotland with Swinton and George Keith in May 1667. Soon after, his father sent him to live at Ury, where he immediately established a weekly Quaker meeting. David Barclay was released from prison in 1669 and set about building a new manor house at Ury and (contrary to the terms of his release) an adjacent Quaker meeting-house. 
In February 1670 Robert Barclay married Christian Molleson ('c'.1651-1724), daughter of Margaret Smith, one of Aberdeen's first Quaker converts, and Gilbert Molleson, a merchant and a magistrate on the town council that persecuted Quakers. The couple were married in her father's house (her mother having died the year before): it was the first Quaker wedding in Aberdeen and was attended by no minister, a throng of Quakers inside, and a mob of scandalized Aberdonians outside. The couple raised three sons and four daughters, and were considered exemplary parents. Their eldest son, also Robert Barclay (1672-1747), succeeded to Ury on the death of his father and married Elizabeth Brain, daughter of a London merchant, while the second son, David Barclay (1682-1769), became a London merchant himself and grew rich in the American trade. All seven children were alive in 1740 for the fiftieth anniversary of their father's death. 
By the 1670s there were only a few hundred Quakers in Scotland, mainly in and around Aberdeen. Small numbers did not save them from persecution at the hands of the authorities; nor did it prevent Scottish Quakers, led by Robert Barclay, from having a disproportionately large impact on the 60,000-strong international Quaker movement. It was the need to combat persecution that drove Barclay to write the books that became the definitive statement of the Quaker faith for upwards of two centuries. Barclay was only thirty when the persecution of Scottish Quakers ended in 1679, but he published very little after that date. 
In 1672 Barclay felt called by God to walk through the streets of Aberdeen in sackcloth as a call to repentance. By then, however, he had already started to publish Quaker tracts, and no further such spectacles were required of him. He was a charismatic speaker and a gifted controversialist in person and on paper, and his talents (and his gentry pedigree) quickly drew the attention of Quaker leaders in England. Indeed, Barclay soon emerged as a leader in the campaign to transform Quakerism from a loose, ecstatic movement into a tight, disciplined sect. The intensely personal, experiential nature of Quakerism militated against an official creed, but mainstream Quakers facing persecution needed a way to dissociate themselves from their more extreme members and from the wilder accusations of their enemies. To win toleration, the Quakers had to convince the authorities that they and their beliefs were tolerable. The Quaker counter-offensive was led on the literary front by Robert Barclay, his friend and mentor George Keith, and William Penn; and on the diplomatic front by Penn and Barclay. 
Barclay and Keith, who was ten years older, worked closely together. Keith defected to the Church of England after Barclay died and claimed, correctly, that Barclay borrowed much from Keith's early work, including his cavalier way with patristic sources. Nevertheless, it was Barclay's work that was regarded as definitive by friend and foe alike, particularly his distinctive doctrine concerning inward and immediate revelation and the universal saving light. His most important works were all completed before he turned twenty-eight, beginning with the 'Catechism and Confession of Faith' in 1673. This was followed by 'Theses theologicae' in 1674, a fifteen-point statement of Quaker principles accompanied by Barclay's challenge to debate these with 'clergy, of what sort soever' (Barclay, 'Truth Triumphant', 259). This sparked lengthy correspondence with a number of continental clerics, and led in April 1675 to a rowdy public debate in Aberdeen between Barclay and Keith, on the one hand, and three overmatched postgraduate divinity students on the other. It was all grist for Barclay's mill while he was writing 'An Apology for the True Christian Divinity', an elaborate defence of the 'Theses' completed in November 1675. The 'Apology' was composed and first published in Latin in 1676. With a boldness that seems to have endeared him to the Stuart kings, Barclay opened the book with a plea for toleration addressed to Charles II and written in direct and somewhat admonitory language much admired by Voltaire, among others. The 'Apology' appeared in English in 1678, and has since been reprinted many times and in many languages. Robert Barclay's reputation among Quakers has waxed and waned, but the 'Apology' remains the classic statement of Quaker principles, and few would dispute Leslie Stephen's judgement in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' that the book is 'impressive in style; grave, logical, and often marked by the eloquence of lofty moral convictions'. 
Barclay was not writing for posterity, however, but from an urgent need to win respect and tolerance for his people. In Restoration Scotland legislation directed against conventicling presbyterians also applied to Quaker men, who were arrested for attending their outlawed meetings and kept in prison when they refused to pay their fines or swear an oath to desist. Robert Barclay was imprisoned briefly in Montrose in 1672 but remained at liberty for the next four years. In addition to his writing, he continued to travel on Quaker business. He attended his first yearly meeting at London in 1673. In 1676 Barclay was again in London, just back from his first tour of Quaker outposts in the Netherlands and Germany, when he learned that his father and nearly every adult male Quaker in the north-east of Scotland had been imprisoned in the Aberdeen tolbooth. David Barclay, the old politician, advised his son to seek an audience with the duke of Lauderdale, but the duke proved unhelpful. In Germany Robert Barclay had met and befriended Elisabeth, princess palatine of the Rhine, and though she resisted the lure of Quakerism she asked her brother Prince Rupert to intercede with the king on behalf of the Aberdonian prisoners; however, Rupert did nothing. In Edinburgh, on his way back to Ury and certain imprisonment, Barclay made the Quaker case to the Scottish privy council, but again to no avail. He was imprisoned in Aberdeen from November 1676 to April 1677 with as many as forty other Quakers. When the overcrowding was at its worst, several elite prisoners, including the Barclays and George Keith, were moved to a disused chapel on the outskirts of town. The single tiny window made reading and writing difficult, but Robert Barclay and Keith kept up their voluminous writing and correspondence. Barclay's treatise 'Universal Love' (1677) was composed in prison, as was a letter summarizing his most important ideas, published as 'The possibility and necessity of inward and immediate revelation' in 'Truth Triumphant' (1692). 
Robert Barclay, David Barclay, and George Keith were released in the spring of 1677, but most of the other Aberdeen Quakers remained in prison. David Barclay settled into vigorous old age at Ury, where he died of a fever about 10 October 1686 and was buried on 12 October. Robert Barclay attended the yearly meeting in London in 1677 and stayed on to lobby on behalf of his colleagues in Aberdeen. He had two hopeful meetings with the duke of York (afterwards James II) at which they discussed the Quaker prisoners and Penn's colonial plans. In July and August of 1677 Robert Barclay returned to the Netherlands and Germany on a celebrated missionary tour with Penn, Keith, and George Fox. Upon his return, he met with York again. Accepting the duke's sincerity but sensing his lassitude, Barclay urged him to speak firmly to Lauderdale on behalf of Quakers. York seemed to like Barclay despite his forwardness (according to Keith, Barclay -- unlike Penn -- would not bow, even for royals), but merely offered a letter granting him and his father immunity. Barclay considered attendance at court 'drugery', but his connection with the future king proved beneficial ('Reliquiae Barclaianae', 68). The Aberdeen Quakers were finally set free in November 1679, coincident with the duke of York's arrival in Edinburgh, and Barclay grudgingly acknowledged that 'tho' not for several years, yet at last [the duke's] interposing proved very helpful' (ibid., 67-8). 
Robert Barclay continued to preach and travel on behalf of Quakers, but no longer wrote for publication. He spent time with his family and saw to his financial affairs, which began to improve after Charles II restored Ury to the status of a free barony, complete with criminal and civil jurisdiction, in 1679. The final decade of his short life, however, was mainly spent promoting Quaker colonial enterprises and Scottish emigration. Fox and Penn counted on Barclay's ready access to the duke of York in Edinburgh to help steer Penn's colonial plans through the murky political waters of the early 1680s: as proprietor of New York, James had to be part of any agreement. Barclay attracted a circle of wealthy Scottish investors, but advised Penn that Pennsylvania land prices were too high: 'thou has land enough, so need not be a churl' ('Papers of William Penn', 1.132). Barclay and the Scots preferred to invest in East and West New Jersey, and in 1682 the proprietors of East New Jersey, mainly Quakers and friends of the duke, appointed Barclay governor for life. 
Robert Barclay accepted the governorship of East New Jersey on condition that he did not have to go there, but he was a tireless advocate for the colony. His brothers John and David emigrated, the latter dying on the way. Barclay worked hard to attract Scottish settlers, casting his promotional net as far as Belfast. He won the right to transport covenanters and religious prisoners, and probably wrote the unsigned broadsheets advertising the colony. His powers of personal persuasion were such that a young man visiting Aberdeen in 1684 was apparently so taken by Barclay's sales pitch that he immediately boarded and set sail for the New World, without telling his family. Upwards of 700 Scots, mainly from the north-east, moved to East New Jersey in the 1680s, but immigration slumped after 1690 with the fall of James II and the death of Barclay. 
Laird of Ury since his father's death in 1686, Robert Barclay made his last trip to London in 1688 when he presented his eldest son, Robert, at court. His last visit to King James came just as William of Orange was expected in England. After James fled, Barclay retired to a quiet life at Ury. He died there of a fever on 3 October 1690, aged forty-one, and three days later was buried beside his father on the estate. As a final tribute from the Quaker leadership, his complete works were gathered and published in 1692 under the title 'Truth Triumphant'. 


@@@@@


doc= 1348


Barclay, Robert (1774-1811), army officer, entered the army as an ensign in the 38th regiment on 28 October 1789, and embarked with it for the East Indies, where he distinguished himself in most of the actions fought there in 1793. He was promoted lieutenant on 31 May 1793, and captain on 8 April 1795. Taken prisoner by the enemy, he suffered much in captivity, and in 1796 he returned to England. Though entitled to six months' leave, he hastened to rejoin his regiment, then in the West Indies. 
Barclay's great qualities having become known to Lieutenant-General Sir John Moore, he was promoted major in the 52nd on 17 September 1803, and lieutenant-colonel on 29 May 1806. In 1808 he accompanied Moore on the expedition to Sweden, and afterwards to Portugal. He was mentioned in dispatches for his distinguished conduct at the action on the Coa on 24 June 1810. Afterwards he commanded a brigade and, while leading a charge on the French on the heights of Busaco, he received a gunshot wound below the left knee. Again he was mentioned in dispatches. His wound obliged him to leave the service, and he died from the effects of it on 11 May 1811. 


@@@@@


doc= 1349


Barclay, Robert (1833-1876), Quaker and ecclesiastical historian, was born on 4 August 1833 at Croydon. He was the younger son of John Barclay (1797-1838), a descendant of the Quaker apologist Robert Barclay, and himself an expert on the early literature of the Society of Friends. After attending a preparatory school at Epping, he went to the Friends' school at Hitchin, run by Isaac Brown. His education was finished at Bruce Grove House, Tottenham. He attained a good knowledge of botany and chemistry, was fond of electrical experiments, and had skill as a watercolour artist. He married on 14 July 1857 Sarah Matilda, eldest daughter of Francis Fry of Bristol, the bibliographer of the English 'Bible'. They had nine children. 
Trained for business at Bristol, Barclay bought, in 1855, a London manufacturing stationery concern (in Bucklersbury, afterwards in College Street and Maiden Lane), taking into partnership his brother-in-law, J. D. Fry, in 1867. In March 1860 he patented an 'indelible writing paper' for the prevention of forgery, the process of manufacturing which he described in a communication to the Society of Arts. 
Both at home and abroad Barclay was interested in efforts for the evangelization of the masses; though not recorded as a minister of the Society of Friends, he preached in their meetings and missions. Thirty-six of his sermons, which were written, an uncommon thing with Friends, were published by his widow in 1878. In 1868 he delivered a lecture on the position of the Society of Friends in relation to the spread of the gospel during the previous sixty years, and was anxious to see the body regaining its position as an evangelical church. He was strongly in favour of the public reading of the 'Bible' in Friends' meetings, and thought Richard Claridge's 'Treatise of the Holy Scriptures' (1724) presented a more accurate view of the sentiments of the early Friends than their controversial writings. He was strongly opposed to the practice of birthright membership, introduced among Friends in 1737; his work 'On Membership in the Society of Friends' (1873) was one of the most important contributions to the debate. His opinions on these points led to his undertaking the important series of investigations which culminated in 'The Inner Life of the Religious Societies of the Commonwealth' (1876), in which he examined the internal constitution of the obscurer Commonwealth sects, the ramifications of which he traced with a diligence which caused his book to be highly regarded by contemporaries. His presentation of the doctrinal aspects of primitive Quakerism was ably criticized from the standpoint of a quietist Friend in an 'Examen' (1878) by Charles Evans of Philadelphia. 
Barclay's health was undermined by his work, and before the last proof-sheets of his book had been finished the rupture of a blood-vessel in the brain caused his death on 11 November 1876 at his home, Hillside, Reigate, Surrey. He was buried in the Winchmore Hill burial-ground in Middlesex. In addition to editing his sermons, his widow published 'The Self-Revealing Jehovah of the Old Testament the Christ of the New Testament' (1885). 


@@@@@


doc= 1350


Barclay, Thomas (c.1570-1632), jurist, was born in Aberdeen of unknown parents. He was sent to Bordeaux in the 1580s to study the Latin and Greek humanities and philosophy at the municipal College de Guyenne. This was one of the leading schools in France and had strong Scottish connections. George Buchanan had taught there earlier in the century, and one of Barclay's professors was the later principal, Robert Balfour. On leaving the college, Barclay probably studied law at the University of Bordeaux before gaining employment in the early 1590s as professor of rhetoric at the Toulouse College de l'Esquille, another municipal humanist powerhouse. He taught there for three or four years under the principal, Simon Tubeuf, then, in the middle of the decade, returned to the College de Guyenne as professor of philosophy. This time, though, he stayed no more than a year or two before being recalled to the College de l'Esquille in 1596 as principal on Tubeuf's death. Barclay presided there for twelve years and proved an effective administrator, persuading the municipality to double its annual subsidy and building up its boarding facilities by getting the councillors to outlaw private lodgings in the city with more than six pupils. He himself taught philosophy, and he had two other Scots on his teaching staff: his brother, Patrick, a Catholic priest, and Thomas Dempster. Barclay resigned as principal in 1608 and at some date in the next few years took up a chair of law at the University of Poitiers, where he lectured on Justinian's 'Institutes'. In 1614-15 he represented the University of Poitiers at the royal court, but almost immediately gave up his professorship to move to a chair in the more prestigious law faculty at Toulouse. He held this position until his death at Toulouse in 1632, serving as the university's rector in 1621. 
Barclay was married, possibly in 1600 when he paid a flying visit to Scotland, and had three children: Francoise (who became the wife of a financial official), Jean-Antoine, and Thomas (whose careers are unknown). He owned an expensive town house in Toulouse, purchased in November 1608, and a farm in the neighbouring countryside. Nothing is known about his abilities as a professor, but he must have been highly thought of by contemporaries to hold the posts he did. Toulouse was so keen to engage his services as a law professor that he was apparently appointed without having to demonstrate his learning alongside other candidates in a series of disputations, as was the custom. Barclay left no printed works, but a transcription of his course on the 'Institutes', given at Toulouse in 1619, survives (Bibliotheque Municipale, Toulouse, MS 429). He should not be confused with William Barclay (1546-1608), a contemporary Scottish law professor on the continent. 


@@@@@


doc= 1351


Barclay, Thomas (1792-1873), Church of Scotland minister and university principal, was born at Unst, in Shetland, in June 1792, the youngest of the five sons of James Barclay (1745-1793), the minister of the parish, and his wife, Ursula, daughter of William Archibald, James Barclay's predecessor as minister. Educated at Lerwick Academy, Thomas headed the bursary competition in 1808 for a place at King's College in the University of Aberdeen, where he graduated MA in 1812. He remained in Aberdeen, completing his theological studies with a view to following his father into the church. He supported himself by teaching elocution, publishing in 1815 'The Academic Reciter, or, Select Classical Extracts in Prose and Poetry'. Barclay abandoned his chosen career in 1818 in favour of journalism with 'The Times' in London. As a general and parliamentary reporter he covered many national events, including the Peterloo massacre, the Glasgow radical riots, and the trial of Queen Caroline. On 21 September 1820 he married Mary (died 1881), daughter of Captain Charles Adamson of Kirkhill, with whom he had nine children. 
Barclay was licensed by the presbytery of Lerwick in June 1821 and presented to the parish of Dunrossness in September 1822 by Lord Laurence Dundas. Five years later, again on Dundas's recommendation, he moved to the more prestigious charge of Lerwick, where he made a reputation as a preacher and a liberal. It was during his time here that Sir Henry Holland heard him preach and on the Monday went sailing with him. A storm got up, the helmsman panicked, and Barclay, taking over, steered the boat safely to shore. Holland was much impressed. Barclay was elected synod clerk of Zetland in 1831. He left Shetland in September 1843 for Peterculter, where he remained for just ten months before accepting the charge of Currie near Edinburgh. In 1849 the University of Aberdeen conferred upon him the degree of DD. These were difficult times for the Church of Scotland in the immediate aftermath of the Disruption. Barclay took a moderate liberal position, and became a close friend and supporter of Dr Robert Lee (1804-1868), minister of Greyfriars and, from 1847, professor of biblical criticism at Edinburgh University. He defended Lee's innovations in forms of worship and church architecture. 
In 1858 Dr Duncan Macfarlane, principal of Glasgow University, died and Barclay was appointed his successor (13 February 1858), reputedly on the recommendation of Holland, who remembered their earlier encounter. This is unlikely and it is more probable that the professors, led by Alexander Hill, lobbied the chancellor, the fourth duke of Montrose, and the rector, Lord Lytton, for the appointment of a moderate, tolerant churchman. His scholarly interests included biblical learning and philology, more particularly in the languages of northern Europe. As principal his remarkable physical resemblance to John Knox immediately made him a popular figure with the students. His arrival in Glasgow coincided with profound changes in the organization of the university following the 'Universities of Scotland Act' (1858), which transformed the powers of senates and established university courts and general councils representing graduates. The legislation caused a considerable storm in Glasgow, where the twelve professors of the old foundation were shorn of most of their privileges, particularly the patronage of the non-regius chairs, which passed to the court. The moderate reforms embodied in the act were to be implemented by commissioners, with whom Barclay was in constant contact -- often travelling to London for the purpose. 
The university occupied a cramped site in the old city centre surrounded by slums and industry. Most of Barclay's principalship was dominated by securing funds to obtain a fresh location in the west end of Glasgow and the construction of new buildings. These, built to the designs of George Gilbert Scott, were the largest public buildings undertaken in Victorian Britain after Barry's Palace of Westminster and cost more than $266,000, of which more than half was raised by donations. On 19 July 1870, when the structure was as complete as money would allow, Barclay led a symbolic procession of his colleagues through the city to view their new home. By this time his health had succumbed to the Glasgow smog and he was forced to spend time in Egypt during the winter to relieve chronic asthma. Barclay died at his official residence, The College, Gilmore Hill, Glasgow, on 23 February 1873 and was buried at Sighthill cemetery, Glasgow. His wife, two married daughters, and a son survived him. One biographer noted: 'With an energy derived from his old Norse descent, he combined love of liberty, which determined his attitude to the changes of his time, and he was ever found on the side of freedom in both Church and State'. 


@@@@@


doc= 1352


Barclay, William (1546-1608), civil lawyer, was born in Scotland. According to Sir Robert Sibbald he was descended from the Barclays of Collairnie in Fife; but according to a note attached to James Gordon's 'History of Scots Affairs' (1841) he was a grandson of Patrick Barclay, baron of Gartly, Aberdeenshire. A birth date of 1546 appears on the inscription above his portrait kept in the museum at Nancy. He was educated at King's College, Aberdeen. 
A devoted Catholic, close to Queen Mary, Barclay made the decisive choice of leaving his own country and the university in 1569 when the general assembly made it compulsory for all members of Aberdeen College to sign the confession of faith. He emigrated to France with the intention of studying law, which he did in Paris and in Bourges. There he exchanged the name William for Guillaume. The exact date of his arrival at Bourges is not known, but there is proof that he was already there in 1572, for he states in his 'De regno' that he had Francois Hotman and Hugues Doneau as his professors before they left the university in August 1572. Barclay remained in Bourges until 1576. At first he was a student and then was appointed as lecturer in charge of reading the 'Institutiones' in March 1575. According to Berriat Saint-Prix, he was taught in August 1575 by Cujas, who may also have been president of his doctorate. It is stated in the town accounts that for the year 1575 Barclay's income was $70. After he complained of the meagreness of his wages, he received an annual salary of $100 until the last day of March 1576. There is no evidence of his lectures, but Collot states that he adopted the 'historical method' following the lessons of Alciat, Baron, and Le Duaren. 
On the invitation of his uncle, the Jesuit Edmund Hay, rector of the recently founded University of Pont-a-Mousson, William Barclay left Bourges for Pont-a-Mousson. The duke of Lorraine appointed him professor of civil law and he started teaching during the academic year 1576/7; he was appointed doctor-regent at the end of the year. The duke made Barclay councillor of state and master of requests. In 1581 Barclay married Anne de Malleviller, a young lady of the Lorraine nobility. James VI sent Barclay letters patent for the wedding attesting his (Barclay's) good birth and nobility of the professor. A son was born, John Barclay (1582-1621), the author of 'Argenis'. Barclay was joined by Pierre Gregoire from Toulouse in 1582, and at the latter's death on 3 April 1598 he became dean of the faculty of law. None the less the insecurity of the Scot's position was evident two years before, for dissensions arose between him and the Jesuits who dominated the university. Barclay and Pierre Gregoire sided together in a quarrel regarding the status of the rector, but failed to maintain the independence of the faculty of law. A second cause of discord was the attitude of the Jesuits who soon endeavoured to attract John to their order, but the father stood firm. His strong personality, his integrity, and sense of responsibility forbade him to yield to influences offensive to him, and, having lost the favour of the duke of Lorraine, Barclay resigned his chair on 26 July 1603. He immediately left the duchy, after twenty-seven years of hard work. 
In 1600 the editor Guillaume Chaudiere had published in Paris Barclay's first important work, 'De regno et regali potestate, adversus Buchananum, Brutum, Boucherium, et reliquos monarchomachos'. 'De regno' is divided into six books and is furnished with a dedication to Henri IV. The first two books deal with a refutation of Buchanan's work 'De jure regni apud Scotos' and are presented in the form of a dialogue. The third and fourth books are directed against Hubert Languet -- in Barclay's opinion a heretic comparable with Machiavelli -- who wrote 'Vindiciae contra tyrannos' under the name Stephanus Junius Brutus. In the fifth book Barclay turns to Jean Boucher and his 'De justa Henrici tertii abdicatione e Francorum regno'. The sixth and last book is a repetition of arguments, combined with references to Scottish and French history. 'De regno' is neither a philosophical nor a theoretical treatise; its value is historical. Barclay's views are discussed in the 'Civil Government' of Locke, who defines him as 'the great assertor of the power and sacredness of kings'. 
After he left the duchy Barclay went to Paris and then to London, where James VI, who had just succeeded to the English crown, was attracting Catholics by his alleged sympathies with the Church of Rome. It is said that the king welcomed this defender of the divine right of kings, but his offer of preferment was on condition that he accept the Church of England, which he refused to do. Barclay returned to Paris at the end of 1603. The chair of civil law in the University of Angers had been vacant since 1599, and the town officials, well informed of the Scot's good reputation, sent a deputation to Barclay requesting him to accept the chair. In the town register of 5 February 1603 Barclay is described as 'l'un des grands personnages de ce temps'. He accepted the position but stipulated that he should have the first place in the faculty. On 15 January 1604 he signed the contract by which he was to teach at the University of Angers for five years. On 1 February 1605, by a special decree of the university and despite the strong opposition of his colleagues, he was appointed dean of the faculty of law. To the end he remained the magnificent Scottish professor who used to go to his lectures, accompanied by his son and two valets, clad in a superb garment and wearing a heavy gold chain around his neck, as can be seen in his portrait. 
Barclay was dark-haired, and with a pointed beard and a long thin waxed moustache cut a dignified and austere figure. He died at Angers on 3 July 1608 and was buried in the church of the Cordeliers, which no longer exists. His second work, 'Commentarii in titulos pandectarum de rebus creditis et de jurejurando', was also published in Paris during his lifetime in 1605. His 'De potestate papae' was published in London in 1609 and at Pont-a-Mousson in the same year with a preface by his son; further editions appeared in 1610, 1612, and 1617, as well as two French and two English translations which attest to the interest of the work. Barclay spent more than ten years writing the essay, which is directed against the power of the pope over the temporal power of kings. The controversy was so great that Cardinal Bellarmine published a treatise against Barclay's, asserting that the pope possessed supreme power over temporal matters. The publication of his posthumous work cast a light on what appeared obscure in the 'De regno'. Barclay had a cosmopolitan point of view and his position as an exile gives his theory of the divine right of kings special value. 


@@@@@


doc= 1353


Barclay, William (b. c.1570, d. in or after 1627), medical writer and Latin poet, was born at Cullen, Banffshire, one of at least three sons of Walter Barclay (died 1587), the fiar of Towie, and his wife, Elizabeth, or Elspeth, Hay ('fl'. 1553-1601). In 1586 William Barclay entered the Catholic college at Pont-a-Mousson, in France, run by his namesake William Barclay (1546-1608) with whom he is sometimes confused. It is possible that he was back in Scotland by 1590, when he was named in legal documents arising from the murder of his father by William Meldrum. 
In April 1593 Barclay entered the seminary at Douai, and continued from there to Louvain University, where he studied under Justus Lipsius. Lipsius was said to have considered Barclay among his favourite pupils, and according to the 1670 reprint of 'Callirhoe', Lipsius said 'that if he were dying he knew no person on earth he would leave his pen to but the doctor' (Leask, 3.4). Certainly, Barclay provided a Latin 'praemetia' to the 1599 Paris edition of Lipsius's Tacitus. By 1598 Barclay had moved to Paris, where he was teaching, and was preparing to return to Scotland as a priest ('Records of Scots Colleges', 5). 
Barclay's career in Scotland is difficult to distinguish owing to the presence of another namesake, an advocate who in time became procurator fiscal of Aberdeen: however, it is clear that it was William Barclay of Towie who was present at a mass being said at the house of William Naper in Edinburgh in March 1601. The house was raided, and Barclay was among those arrested. Barclay, who had previously taken an oath that he was not a Catholic, was declared infamous and sentenced to banishment. In May Patrick Barclay provided bail of 2000 marks to enable his brother to live quietly at home with his mother until the sentence took effect ('Reg. PCS', 683), and Barclay returned to France, moving to Nantes. It has also been suggested that he raised a family in Sweden during this period as well, but the evidence for this is flimsy (Barclay, 2.229-30). 
It is not clear when Barclay returned again to Scotland, but when he did, he went as a doctor. His best-known publications are English-language tracts on medicine published at Edinburgh. 'Nepenthes, or, The Vertues of Tobacco' (1614) argues for the health-giving properties of tobacco. It is dedicated to Patrick Barclay, his brother Patrick's son. 'Callirhoe, or, The Well of Spa' (1615) is a short report on the medical benefits to be gained from bathing in the spring at Aberdeen. In 1618 Barclay wrote a similar pamphlet about the Kingshorn well. 
In addition, Barclay composed several pieces of occasional Latin verse, usefully anthologized in 'Musa Latina Aberdonensis' (1910). A note accompanying one of them, 'Apobaterium, or Last Farewell to Aberdeen', published in Barclay's 'Sylvae tres' (1619), implies that he was on the point of moving to England, evidence perhaps strengthened by the fact that his next work, 'G. Barclayii Judicium' (1620) -- an attack on the psalm translations of Eglisham -- was printed in London. His fellow Catholic Thomas Dempster, writing in 1627, described Barclay as still alive and practising medicine in Scotland, but nothing is known of his career after this date. 


