@@@@@


doc= 18526


Melia, Pius (1800-1883), Roman Catholic priest, was born in Rome and joined the Society of Jesus at the age of sixteen. He became professor of literature at the Jesuit college in Rome, and afterwards served as a missionary priest in Corsica, Tuscany, and elsewhere. In 1848, when the society was dispersed, he went to England at the invitation of Cardinal Wiseman to minister to immigrant Italians and to act as confessor to the cardinal. He became a naturalized British subject on 13 September 1849. 
After officiating at Lincoln's Inn, Melia was in charge of the mission at Hastings and St Leonards from 1850 to 1853. He then moved to Walthamstow, where he was missioner from 1855 to 1861, residing at 14 Gray's Inn Square, where he lived for the rest of his life. About 1853 he was appointed almoner to the Italian Benevolent Society, a post which he held until his death. He was Wiseman's private chaplain until the cardinal's death in 1865, after which he continued to preach the Sunday morning sermons at Brentwood, Essex. 
Melia was closely associated with the Pallottini Fathers, in which society his brother Raphael Melia ('b'. 1804) served as rector-general from 1856 to 1862 and again from 1869. The Pallottines (known from 1854 to 1947 as the Pious Society of Missions) were founded in 1835 and were devoted to the spiritual welfare of Catholic emigrants, particularly from Italy. The society had gone to London in 1844, founding the Italian church of St Peter at Hatton Garden. Pius Melia helped to collect money for the building of the church, and regularly preached in Italian there. In 1863 he bought an action against the builder's solicitor, Neate, for false imprisonment; the builder, claiming that he had not been fully paid for his work, had had Melia imprisoned on the grounds that he was about to travel abroad. 
In the late 1860s Melia spent some time in Italy. He read a laudatory article on the Waldensian sect in the 'Daily Telegraph' in April 1868, which provoked him to write 'The Origin, Persecution, and Doctrines of the Waldenses' (1870). Based on original documents which Melia had read in Roman libraries, the king's library at Turin, and elsewhere, it was a scholarly work which was 'regarded by competent judges as the standard work on the subject' ('Annual Register'). He also published 'Doctrines of St Thomas Aquinas on the Rulers and Members of Christian States' (1860) and 'Hints and Facts on the Origin of Man' (1872). 
Melia died on 25 May 1883, after an operation, at the University College Hospital, London, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 30 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 18527


Milton, William of (d. 1257x60), Franciscan friar and theologian, is listed as 'Fr. W. de Milton', the fifth Franciscan 'master' at Cambridge, on a leaf inserted in the oldest manuscript of the chronicle by the author known as Thomas of Eccleston. Historians have identified him with a William de Middletoun (or Melitona, and so on) who was a Franciscan regent master at Paris, and whom Pope Alexander IV put in charge of the task of completing the 'Summa' associated with Alexander of Hales (died 1245). If so, Milton was a major intellectual figure among the early Cambridge men (not a great distinction, it is true). The identification is not certain. The dates given by Moorman for the Cambridge master are hardly to be reconciled with what is known of the Paris master. But if his unreliable chronology is abandoned, it is possible to avoid multiplying Franciscan Master W.s beyond necessity. 
Even the most scanty and tentative reconstruction of Milton's curriculum vitae is beset with difficulties. He seems to have been a regent master in theology at Paris in 1248, and may have kept that position until as late as 1253. He would have been a master at Cambridge for a period in the mid-1250s. According to Doucet it was in 1255 that Alexander IV made him head of a commission to finish the 'Summa Fratris Alexandri', by the bull 'De fontibus paradisi'. This appears correct -- Doucet cites his source. An alternative version, that the bull was issued in 1256, seems to be a misunderstanding. A. G. Little's statement, that Milton was appointed by Innocent IV in 1252 to finish the 'Summa', may have derived from the 'Histoire litteraire de la France', which in turn seems to be following the early modern scholar J. A. Fabricius, who gives no medieval source. Consequently this dating to 1252 should probably be disregarded. There is also a problem about the date of Milton's death. Callebaut (followed by Smalley) argues that he died in 1257. Doucet leaves open the possibility that Milton died as late as 1260. He was one of the Franciscans who helped Isabelle, sister of Louis IX of France, with her rule for her nunnery at Longchamp; but if the 1257 date is right, Milton did not live to see the end of these preparations. 
A range of commentaries or postills on books of the 'Bible' have been attributed to Milton, but it is at present impossible to be certain of his authorship of all of these. The 'Apocalypse' commentary has been studied by Burr, and there seems no reason to doubt Milton's authorship. In a Paris university stationer's 'pecia' list of 1275 Guillermus de Mildditone appears as author of commentaries on 'Psalms', the twelve prophets, 'St Mark's gospel', 'Ecclesiasticus', and 'Job'. The commentary on the twelve lesser prophets, whose authenticity is assured, and which was popular in Milton's lifetime and/or within a few decades of his death, gives an idea of what his biblical lecturing was like. It shows originality of a kind in returning to Benedictine spirituality by drawing on a work written in the early twelfth century by Guibert de Nogent. Apart from biblical commentaries, his authorship of 'Quaestiones de sacramentis' and 'Quaestiones disputatae xxiv' seems accepted, but not of the twelve 'quaestiones disputatae' in MS Padua, Biblioteca Antoniana MS 152, which were once attributed to him. 
The history of Milton's 'Quaestiones de sacramentis', as reconstructed by Doucet, is a good example of how thirteenth-century Franciscan scholars worked. Milton drew heavily on the 'quaestiones' of Alexander of Hales, but Milton's 'quaestiones' were in turn incorporated to a great extent word for word into the fourth part of the 'Summa' 'of brother Alexander', probably when Milton was working to complete it. Milton and his collaborators apparently made additions to the earlier parts of the synthesis too, but the task was not completed when Milton died, after which the commission under his charge seems to have given up the task. Doucet is probably right to think that Milton had been working on Alexander's unfinished 'opus' even before the papacy came to his aid by asking the order to find him collaborators. William of Milton seems to have played a tenacious if unostentatious part in the formation of the powerful Franciscan intellectual tradition. 


@@@@@


doc= 18528


Mell, Davis (1604-1662), violinist and clockmaker, was born on 15 November 1604 at Wilton near Salisbury, where his father, Leonard Mell (died 1641), was in the employ of William Herbert, third earl of Pembroke. Although not appointed to a place in the court musical establishment until late in 1626, Mell was apparently associated with the violins at least since May of the preceding year (when he received livery for the funeral of James I). He was heavily involved with the inns of court masque 'The Triumph of Peace' (1634): he not only played with the violin band for the performances but also composed some of the antimasque dances and accompanied the masquers' rehearsals. 
When the court music was disbanded in 1642, Mell remained in London earning a living from teaching and playing. Playford listed him in 'A Musicall Banquet' (1651) among the 'excellent and able Masters... For the Voyce or Viole'. Mell was one of the five musicians employed by Cromwell from 'c'.1654. Early in 1657 these five petitioned Cromwell to re-establish a Musicians' Company as a way of trying to offset the damage to the profession caused by the breakup of court and ecclesiastical musical establishments. Mell walked in Cromwell's funeral procession. 
At the Restoration, Mell took up his old place in the court violins and was appointed to a place in the private music. In May 1661 (less than a year before his death) he was given joint authority (with George Hudson) over the violins. 
All the accounts of Mell's violin playing suggest that he was a fine musician. Lodewijck Huygens recorded in his journal for March 1652 that he played 'admirably well'. Four months later, on 1 August, John Evelyn described Mell in his diary as a 'rare musician'. Anthony Wood, who heard him in Oxford in March 1658, reported that 'The Company did look upon Mr Mell to have a prodigious hand on the violin, and they thought that no person, as all London did, could goe beyond him' ('Life and Times', 1.242). This group were to revise their notions of Mell's supremacy when, just four months later, they first heard Thomas Baltzar's technical virtuosity. Even then, however, Mell's playing was judged 'farr sweeter than Baltsar' (ibid.). 
Mell's compositions are well represented in John Playford's publications, especially 'Courtly Masquing Ayres' (1662), which contains a total of fifty-four dances grouped by key into suites, and 'The Division Violin' (1684). Oxford, Christ Church, MS 433 is an autograph manuscript containing versions of the violin suites without an accompanying bass line. In comparison with other English violin compositions of the period, at least, they show quite a sophisticated technique. 
Presumably because of the precariousness of the music profession during the Commonwealth, Mell developed an alternative career as a clockmaker. The first mention of his horological skills occurs in Samuel Hartlib's 'Ephemerides' of 1649: 'Mr Mell one of the king's Musitians very excellent in his Art and of a very inventive genius. Hee hath made a most admirable Clocke of 50 lb. or more price which should bee sent for a present to some king in the Indies.' Mell was admitted as a free brother to the Clockmakers' Company in 1655 and four years later was made an assistant of the company (a status which implied some responsibility for the governance of the guild). According to Aubrey ('Miscellanies', 1696), Mell 'made a great name for the goodness of his work', and the few surviving examples of his work (including one with statuettes of musicians revolving in a little gallery above the clock face) seem to be beautifully made. After the Restoration, when Mell was once again fully occupied as a musician, he apparently abandoned clockmaking. He no longer attended company meetings, and in 1661 his one remaining apprentice was transferred to another maker. 
Mell married Alice Comey on 30 April 1635, and their first daughter, Dorothy, was born exactly nine months later (she appears not to have survived beyond infancy). A son, Richard, born in 1637, died at the age of three. But two daughters, Abigail and Elizabeth ('b'. 1641), reached adulthood and were named as executors of Mell's will, written in 1662, which provides for a second wife, Ann ('nee' Allen). Mell died on 27 April 1662. 


@@@@@


doc= 18529


Mellis, John (d. 1593?), writer on arithmetic and bookkeeping, came from Norwich, but few details of his life are known. He had (according to himself) a natural genius for drawing proportions, maps, cards, buildings, and plates. He attended a Dr Robert Forth at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and went to the arithmetic lecture in the common school. He left the service of Forth, who afterwards became a master in chancery, about 1564. Subsequently he kept a school for writing and arithmetic at Mayes Gate, near Battle Bridge, in the parish of St Olave, Southwark. 
In 1582 Mellis published an edition of Robert Recorde's 'Grounde of Artes', which he dedicated to Robert Forth and to which he added his own 'Brief rules, called rules of practize, of rare, pleasant, and commodious effect, abridged into a briefer method than hitherto hath bene published. With diuers other very necessarie rules, tables, and questions, not only profitable for merchants, but also for gentlemen and all other occupiers whatsouer'. His other main work, 'A briefe instruction and maner how to keepe bookes of accompts after the order of debitor and creditor, and as well for proper accompts partible' (1588), was described by Mellis as a reissue 'of an auncient old copie printed here in London the 14 of August, 1543', from the pen of 'Hugh Oldcastle, Scholemaster'. No copy of Oldcastle's original is known to be extant but there is some independent evidence that it existed, and it would have been the first printed book in the English language on double-entry bookkeeping. Mellis's 'A Briefe Instruction' was only the sixth book of its kind. It seems highly likely that Mellis died from the plague in or about September 1593; the register for St Olave's, Southwark, records the burial of one 'John Mellys, Scholemaister', on 11 September of that year. The will of 'John Mellis of the prishe of St Olaves' had been written three days earlier. It names 'Anne, my wife' as Mellis's sole executor and provides a bequest to his son, Simon. 


@@@@@


doc= 18530


Mellish, Sir George (1814-1877), judge, was born on 19 December 1814 at Tuddenham, Norfolk, the second son of Edward Mellish, rector of East Tuddenham (afterwards dean of Hereford), and his wife, Elizabeth Jane, daughter of a prior dean of Hereford, William Leigh of Rushall Hall, Staffordshire. His godfather was George Canning, who was his mother's first cousin. He was educated at Eton College, where he was in the middle division in 1829 and the sixth form in 1832, but did not distinguish himself either as a scholar or as an athlete, though he was a good sculler and took part in the school's debating society. In 1833 he entered as a commoner at University College, Oxford, but soon won an open scholarship on Sir Simon Bennet's foundation. He was a member of the undergraduate debating society, the Oxford Union, and took a second class in 'literae humaniores' in 1836. He graduated BA on 26 January 1837, proceeding to an MA on 24 October 1839. He became an honorary fellow of University College in 1872, and received an honorary DCL degree on 17 June 1874. 
On 6 November 1837 Mellish joined the Inner Temple where he read in the chambers of Spencer Walpole, John Unthank, and Crompton. For eight years he practised as a special pleader and on 9 June 1848 was called to the bar, joining the northern circuit. He rapidly built up a good commercial practice, became a queen's counsel in 1861, and left the lead of his circuit after a few years to concentrate on what had become a substantial leading practice in London. 
Neither his mind nor his health suited Mellish for the strain of 'nisi prius' work. His strength lay in arguments 'in banco', in chancery, and in the House of Lords. More than once he refused a High Court judgeship, but in 1870, on the death of Sir George Giffard, he was appointed a lord justice of appeal in chancery, was knighted, and sworn of the privy council. It was a bold move to appoint a mere common-law practitioner to such an important post in chancery, but it proved a success, and the court, which consisted of him and Lord Justice James, continued for some years to give judgments which were considered excellent, although Mellish was often criticized for interrupting the arguments of counsel. Mellish suffered from severe gout, and was often in severe pain in court and frequently unable to work. He died unmarried at his house, 33 Lowndes Square, London, on 15 June 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 18531


Mellitus (d. 624), archbishop of Canterbury, was the leader of the group of missionaries sent by Pope Gregory I in 601 to reinforce Augustine at Canterbury and he subsequently became the first known bishop of London (604-616/618) and later the third archbishop of Canterbury (619-24) ['see also 'Gregorian mission]. According to Bede, he was of noble birth and when first encountered in Gregory's letters for the mission he is already styled 'abbot' -- an office perhaps intended to confer leadership of the missionary expedition rather than one already held in Gregory's monastery of St Andrew, on the Caelian Hill, or some other Roman house. On 22 June 601 the pope provided the mission with a series of commendatory letters to the Frankish kings Theuderic II of Burgundy and Theudebert II of Austrasia, and to their powerful mother, Brunhild, as well as to King Chlothar II of Neustria and a number of Frankish bishops. From these letters the group's expected route and possible diversions may be deduced: Toulon, Marseilles, Arles, Gap, Vienne, Lyons, Chalon-sur-Saone, Metz, Paris, and Angers. Mellitus also brought with him letters from Gregory, issued on the same day, with detailed guidance for Augustine, for King AEthelberht, and for his queen, Bertha. Accompanying Mellitus were Laurence, who had reported news of Augustine's mission back to Rome, and also Justus, Paulinus, and Rufinianus. According to Bede they took to Kent everything 'necessary for divine worship... sacred vessels, altar cloths, church ornaments, vestments for priests and clerks, relics of the holy apostles and martyrs, and many books ['codices']' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 1.29). In the fifteenth century Thomas of Elmham claimed that several of the oldest altar-books in the possession of the monks of St Augustine's had been among the volumes brought by the missionaries. Most of those manuscripts in the list which can be identified are in fact of much younger date, but the claim is plausible with regard to the Canterbury gospels, a sixth-century Italian gospel book that is now Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 286. After their departure from Rome, Gregory had sent to Mellitus 'in Francia' a further letter for Augustine, authorizing the reuse of pagan temples as churches after they had been purified and permitting feasting in lieu of animal sacrifice -- practices designed to ease the transition from paganism to Christianity. 
Mellitus's party had certainly reached England by 604, for in that year he was consecrated by Augustine as bishop of the East Saxons with his see at London. The extension of the mission was due to the influence of King AEthelberht of Kent. The East Saxon king, Saeberht, was AEthelberht's nephew (being the son of his sister Ricula) and the construction of an episcopal church, dedicated to St Paul, in London is attributed to AEthelberht rather than to Saeberht. The choice of London for the East Saxon see reflects its position at the focus of the road system of southern Britain and the mission's preference for former Roman towns. In 601 Gregory had intended London to be one of the two metropolitan sees of the English church; but after Augustine's death it seems to have been Laurence at Canterbury, rather than Mellitus at London, who exercised metropolitan authority, perhaps because AEthelberht was unwilling that the metropolitan see should be outside his Kentish kingdom. Bede tells that AEthelberht bestowed gifts and lands on Mellitus to support his household, but a charter purporting to be AEthelberht's grant of Tillingham, Essex, to Mellitus and St Paul's is shown by its spurious witness list and its formulation to be a forgery. 
Mellitus was associated with Laurence and with Bishop Justus of Rochester in sending a letter to the bishops and abbots of the Irish church in the hope of inducing them to accept Roman practices and he was sent back to Rome to take part in Pope Boniface IV's synod (27 February 610) which sought to harmonize monastic practices. He brought back to England the decisions of that council as well as two letters, which were addressed to Archbishop Laurence and all the clergy, and to King AEthelberht and the English people, respectively. No authentic texts either of the canons or of the letters survive, though spurious privileges attributed to Boniface were concocted for both the Canterbury houses, Christ Church and St Augustine's, in the 1060s or 1070s. In 616 or 618 the deaths of kings AEthelberht of Kent and Saeberht of Essex at much the same time produced a crisis for the Roman mission. Mellitus had not converted Saeberht's three sons, who ruled jointly after his death; Bede recounts how Mellitus's refusal to let them receive the eucharist, on the grounds that they had not been baptized, led them to expel the bishop. He fled to Kent, but the succession there of (the similarly still pagan) Eadbald caused Mellitus to flee to Frankish Gaul with Justus. Although they were able to return to Kent within a year after Eadbald's conversion, Mellitus could not recover his see since the East Saxons remained pagan and the Christian Eadbald had no authority beyond Kent. 
Early in 619, following the death of Archbishop Laurence, Mellitus succeeded to the see of Canterbury in his place. According to Bede he suffered severely from gout, but was active in mind and exalted in spirit. Both Mellitus and Justus are said to have received letters of encouragement from Pope Boniface V ('r'. 619-25), doubtless to congratulate them on securing Eadbald's conversion and perhaps also on the marriage of King Edwin of Northumbria to the Christian Kentish princess, AEthelburh, which seems to be placed several years too late by Bede (who recounts it after July 625). It is not known whether or not the pope sent Mellitus a pallium with his letter. Just two acts are known from his tenure of the archiepiscopal see; both derive from the traditions of the monastery of St Peter and St Paul (later St Augustine's) in Canterbury, as transmitted by Bede: first his consecration of the church of St Mary, which had been constructed by King Eadbald in that monastery, and second the miraculous saving from destruction by fire of the Canterbury church of the Four Crowned Martyrs, and indeed of the whole city, when his prayers reversed the direction of a strong south wind that was fanning the flames. Mellitus died in 624 and was buried in the monastery of St Peter and St Paul on 24 April. After the Norman conquest the wish of the monks of St Augustine's to develop the cult of the early archbishops buried in their church led to the production of a series of short lives but neither the first, written by Goscelin, nor those of later date add anything to our knowledge of Mellitus, though they do reveal that sufferers from gout were directed to his tomb. 


@@@@@


doc= 18532


Mellon, Alfred (1820-1867), conductor and composer, was probably born in London on 7 April 1820, although his early years were spent in Birmingham, his parents' home town. He became a violinist and played in the opera and other orchestras, and was later appointed leader of the orchestra at the Royal Italian Opera, Covent Garden. He then held the post of music director at the Haymarket and Adelphi theatres, and afterwards of the Pyne and Harrison English opera company, by whom his opera 'Victorine' was produced at Covent Garden in 1859. He was conductor of the Musical Society and also of the Promenade Concerts, which for several seasons were given under his name at Covent Garden. In September 1865 he became conductor of the Liverpool Philharmonic Society. Among his compositions were the opera 'The Irish Dragoon' (1845), a glee, 'Crown'd with clusters of the vine' (1850), numerous songs for farces and plays, and ballads and piano pieces. He died on 27 March 1867 at his home at The Vale, Chelsea, London, and was buried in Brompton cemetery. He left a widow, Sarah Jane Mellon, nee Woolgar (1824-1909), a well-known actress, whom he had married on 28 July 1855, and two daughters, of whom the younger, Mary Woolgar Mellon, also became an actress. He was considered an excellent practical musician. An obituary refers to his death as leaving 'a blank in the list of English conductors which will not be easily filled up' ('MT'). 


@@@@@


doc= 18533


Beauclerk, Harriot, duchess of St Albans (1777?-1837), actress and banker, was probably born on 11 November 1777, probably the illegitimate daughter of Sarah Mellon, an Irish wardrobe-keeper in Kena's company of strolling players, the lowest level of the theatrical world and regarded in law as rogues and vagabonds. Sarah Mellon claimed to have been married to and deserted by Harriot's father, Lieutenant Mathew Mellon of the Madras infantry, but the ceremony cannot be verified. On 14 July 1782 Sarah married Thomas Entwisle, a musician in Kena's company. Harriot received some education in Lancashire, where the Entwisles worked in Bibby's company. She began to work as a child actor, and on 16 October 1787, in a barn doing duty for a theatre in Ulverstone, she appeared as Little Pickle in the farce 'The Spoiled Child' and became an instant success. The family later joined Stanton's company in the midlands, where Harriot earned a guinea a week. She was seen there by the playwright Richard Brinsley Sheridan, who eventually engaged her for Drury Lane Theatre, where she appeared as Lydia Languish in 'The Rivals' on 31 January 1795. 
From then until 1815 Harriot Mellon played an extensive range of parts in both London and the provincial theatre. Her most successful role was Volante in John Tobin's 'The Honey Moon' (1805). She never reached the first rank of actresses -- Dorothy Jordan and Sarah Siddons were not challenged by her -- but she was praised for her good-natured readiness to take over parts in cases of illness, afterwards returning with good humour to the secondary roles she was accustomed to play. In her published memoirs, fellow actress Anne Mathews described her as 'a young, glowing beauty, endued with great natural powers of mind, talents and vivacity, but... an insuperable rusticity of air and manners'. On 7 February 1815, as Audrey in 'As You Like It', she made her last appearance on the stage, at Drury Lane. She was then earning $12 a week, far more than she could have earned, as a woman without education or patronage, in any other respectable occupation. 
During Mellon's early years in the theatre, there was never a whisper of impropriety about her behaviour, but for ten years (1805-15) she was intimate with the banker Thomas Coutts (1735-1822), one of the richest men in London, who assisted her living in great style. In February 1815, after the death of his first wife, they were married at St Pancras Church, but the marriage was declared invalid, and they went through a second ceremony on 12 April 1815. Coutts was seventy-nine, Harriot thirty-seven. The pre-marriage contract specified that Harriot should retain control of her own estates and properties through trustees. Coutts's three daughters, who had previously been friendly with Harriot, were furious about the marriage and treated their stepmother very badly thereafter. Each had married into the aristocracy and received a large dowry, but their father's marriage damaged their longer-term prospects of inheriting from him. Lady Guilford and Sir Francis Burdett were particularly hostile. This grieved Coutts, who constantly said how happy his wife made him, and when he died, in 1822, he left Harriot the whole of his vast fortune and his partnership in Coutts Bank, without mentioning any other person or leaving a single legacy. He thus left his widow to decide whether she wished to share his estate with his children to any degree whatever. 
Harriot Coutts proved to be an excellent businesswoman and banker, taking an active role in investment and management decisions. She was also extremely generous to Coutts's daughters, giving them each $10,000 per annum. In return they expressed nothing but ingratitude and hostility. Regarded as an adventuress who had preyed on an old man, Harriot was lampooned, caricatured, and mocked for her extravagant lifestyle and her generous giving to the poor. Sir Walter Scott, however, found her 'a kind, friendly woman, without either affectation or insolence in the display of her wealth' (Lockhart, 8.72). Portraits of Harriot were painted by Romney, Beechey, and Masquerier, among others. 
Harriot's weakness was her desire to be 'haut ton', the height of every social climber's ambition, but she was never fully admitted to the inner circles of the aristocracy, even after she married on 16 June 1827 William Aubrey de Vere Beauclerk, ninth duke of St Albans (1801-1849). The duke was twenty-six, Harriot forty-nine. Many considered the duke to be simple-minded, but others found him kind and gentle; the marriage was broadly successful. Harriot thus proved twice over that marriages could be happy even though the world considered the partners mismatched. Observers regarded their union as an exchange of wealth for a title, but that was no uncommon practice among the aristocracy. 
The duchess of St Albans died on 6 August 1837 at her home, 80 Piccadilly, London, and was buried in the parish church at Redbourne, Lincolnshire, the St Albans family seat, on 19 August. She left her husband $10,000 a year for his lifetime, and two large houses in London and one in Highgate, with their contents. She continued to direct his life from beyond the grave: a condition of her will was that neither of his brothers, lords Frederick and Charles Beauclerk, or their families, were to reside with him for as much as one week in a year. If they did, all her bequests to him would cease. The Beauclerks had greatly offended her some years earlier. She left $20,000 in trust for the benefit of Sophia Burdett, Coutts's daughter, 'the sum being over and above the sums that I have already given to her amounting to $118,602 15's' 0died, for her 'sole and separate use and benefit, exclusively of any husband' and not 'subject to the debts, control, power, inter-meddling, or engagements of any such husband'. Lady Bute, another of Coutts's daughters, was dead, but there was no mention of her children, or of the third daughter, Lady Guilford, or her children. 
Harriot left lump sums and small annuities to a long list of friends and servants, but the residue of the estate, some $1.8 million, she left in trust for the youngest granddaughter of Thomas Coutts, Angela Georgina Burdett ['see 'Coutts, Angela Burdett-]. The trustees of the estate were Harriot's partners at the bank, her solicitor, and the accountant-general of the high court of chancery. Harriot did not leave Angela the partnership in the bank, nor could she, her parents, or any future husband touch the capital. Angela was given complete control over the income of the estate, whether or not she married. The will also laid down that, if Angela should marry an alien, the fortune would go to the next person in remainder. Extraordinarily, Angela fell foul of this clause when she was sixty-seven and married her 26-year-old American-born secretary, William Ashmead Bartlett. The will also required that she take the surname Coutts, and it was under this name that Harriot's heir became known as the greatest of Victorian philanthropists. Harriot never explained her choice of heir, but Angela had been a favourite from childhood, and, unlike her siblings and cousins, had not offended Harriot with aristocratic pretensions. 
For her great fortune, Angela Burdett-Coutts was indebted solely to her stepgrandmother, though she herself always maintained that the money came directly from her grandfather. Thus it was Harriot Mellon, the darling of the frivolous Georgian stage, who became, against all the odds, fairy godmother to the Victorian poor. 


@@@@@


doc= 18534


Mellor, Sir John (1809-1887), judge, was born on 1 January 1809 at Hollinwood House, Oldham, Lancashire, the son of John Mellor and his wife (of whom little is known). His father came from an old south Lancashire family and as well as being a partner in the firm of Gee, Mellor, Kershaw & Co., was mayor of the borough of Leicester and justice of the peace there. Mellor was educated at the Leicester grammar school, and afterwards under Charles Berry, a Unitarian minister of Leicester. His schooling caused him to consider the merits of religious belief at an early age and, as a young man, he followed the Unitarian notion in rejecting the idea of subscription to any religious dogma. As a result, he was unwilling to subscribe to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' and so had to abandon his plan to attend university at Lincoln College, Oxford. Instead, he read for some time in the office of a Leicester attorney and was admitted as a student to the Inner Temple on 5 June 1828. He then read in the chambers of Thomas Chitty for four years, attended Austin's lectures at University College, London, and was called to the bar on 7 June 1833. On 24 September of the same year he married Elizabeth Cooke Moseley; they had eight sons. 
Mellor joined the midland circuit, and practised at the parliamentary bar, at assizes, and (both civil and criminal cases) at Leicester borough and Warwick sessions. After taking silk in 1851 he became leader of the circuit. From 1849 to 1852 he was recorder of Warwick, and from 1855 to 1861 recorder of Leicester. After unsuccessful attempts to be elected as a Liberal for Warwick (1852) and Coventry (1857), in 1857 he was elected for Great Yarmouth, and at the general election of 1859 was returned for Nottingham, but tended to speak little in parliament. 
On 3 December 1861 Mellor succeeded Mr Justice Hill in the queen's bench; he was knighted on 11 June 1862. He was a member of the special commission which tried Fenian prisoners at Manchester in 1867 and of the court which tried Arthur Orton, alias Castro, for perjury in claiming to be the long-lost Roger Tichborne in the highly celebrated Tichborne case of 1873. During this unusually protracted trial Mellor often amused the jury with his dry humour, and concluded the proceedings by reading out the long sentence of guilt. Deafness led him to retire in June 1879 when he was given a pension and was sworn of the privy council; he settled on the Kent coast at this time. Although retired, he often attended the judicial committee, went the northern circuit once as commissioner of assize, and frequently acted as an arbitrator in important cases. He also pursued his interest in the activities of his local lifeboat. He died at his London house, 16 Sussex Square, Hyde Park, on 26 April 1887, and was buried on 30 April in Kingsdown churchyard, near his home in Kent. Mellor wrote several papers dealing with religious issues and the question of the oath in court and in parliament. 


@@@@@


doc= 18535


Melmoth, William, the elder (1665/6-1743), lawyer and religious writer, was admitted to Clifford's Inn on 15 April 1686 and to the Inner Temple on 30 May 1689. Nothing is known of his background beyond the fact that the Inner Temple admitted him as a gentleman. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple on 29 May 1693. 
Melmoth's religious beliefs caused him some unease about taking the oaths to William and Mary on his call to the bar, and prompted him to write for advice to the clergyman and philosopher John Norris, then rector of Bremerton, Wiltshire, though at the time he knew Norris only through his work. Their brief epistolary exchange between March and May 1693 suggests that Melmoth had nonjuring sympathies; his son wrote that 'he may seem, perhaps, in his early youth, to have been inclined to give a cast of superstition to the colour of his religion' (Melmoth, 'Memoirs', 15-16). In one letter he asked Norris 'whether swearing allegiance to an usurper, who is established and firmly settled on the throne, is not only supporting an unjust power, but approving of all he has done, and thereby becoming 'particeps criminis'?' (ibid., 20). However, he was sufficiently persuaded of the government's legitimacy to take the oaths. On 25 April 1699, described as 'of Middlesex' ('Lincoln's Inn Admission Register', 1.356), he migrated to Lincoln's Inn. His first wife, whose maiden name was Sambroke and whose given name may have been Sarah (a William Melmoth, son of William and Sarah Melmoth, was baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 17 May 1696), died about this time, reputedly leaving him some property. By 1710 he had married Catherine, daughter of Samuel Rolt of Bedford, and granddaughter, on her mother's side, of Thomas Coxe, physician-in-ordinary to Charles II. They had four daughters -- Constantia, Sophia, Catherine, and Jane -- and two sons: the author William Melmoth the younger (bap. 1710, d. 1799) and Thomas. Before their marriage Melmoth had to assure himself that an estate to be settled on him as part of his wife's jointure 'was so absolutely his property as to render it a sufficient security' (Melmoth, 'Memoirs', 44), presenting him with a clash between his love, his ambition, and his conscience. 
Melmoth welcomed the accession of Queen Anne and the formation of a government with high-church sympathies, and hoped that it would prepare the way for a general reformation of manners. Melmoth viewed the stage with particular concern. In 1703 he brought playbills for a new version of 'The Tempest' to a meeting of the SPCK, where he described them as a flaunting of God's judgment. He entered into an anonymous correspondence with Thomas Tenison, archbishop of Canterbury, in which he urged that 'nothing would soe effectively contribute to check the debauchery of the present age, as the suppressing the theatre, or at least a due regulation of it' (Melmoth, 'Memoirs', 53), as the stage encouraged the young into 'false notions of virtue and vice' (ibid.). He wrote in a similar strain to Daniel Defoe, to whom he sent a copy of Arthur Bedford's 'The Evil and Danger of Stage Plays' (1706). He explained to Defoe that he was not opposed to plays in principle, as they could be morally useful, but that he considered the current London theatre corrupting. 
Melmoth's increasing celebrity as a chancery counsel robbed him of time for writing, and according to his son he composed 'The Great Importance of a Religious Life Consider'd' 'every Sabbath, after joining in the sacred and established functions of the day' (Melmoth, 'Memoirs', 58). The treatise concentrated less on the moral decay of society than on instilling in the individual 'a serious sense of religion and a true concern for the interest of their immortal souls' (Melmoth, 'The Great Importance', 1849, 37). An example of a religious life was that of the nonjuring clergyman John Kettlewell; Archbishop John Sharp's words on the distinction between worldly pleasures and communion with God were also quoted with approval. Melmoth's book was published anonymously in 1711 and became extremely popular. It was translated into Welsh and French, and Melmoth added to later editions a collection of morning and evening prayers and an essay on the sacrament. Melmoth did not claim 'The Great Importance' as his own during his lifetime; it was generally regarded as the work of John Perceval, first earl of Egmont, and listed as such by Horace Walpole in his 'Catalogue of the Royal and Noble Authors of England'. The identity of the author was revealed by the younger William Melmoth only in 1797. 
In 1719 Melmoth became a bencher of Lincoln's Inn; in the next year he was one of the leading chancery counsel, making 220 motions. Following the death of Thomas Vernon, MP for Worcestershire, in 1721, he and William Peere Williams were entrusted by Lord Chancellor Macclesfield with editing Vernon's chancery reports; Melmoth planned to publish his own reports but they remain in manuscript at the British Library. In 1730 he held the office of treasurer of Lincoln's Inn, and in 1741 he received a legacy from a friend, the tory MP John Hungerford, on the death of Hungerford's widow, towards the erection of posts and lamp irons around the inn. Melmoth's will shows that by 1742 he and his wife were living in a house in the passage between Fetter Lane and Bartlett's Buildings, in the parish of St Andrew, Holborn, and that he had property elsewhere in London and a country residence at Ealing, Middlesex. 
In 1743 Melmoth was 'suddenly attacked with the strangury' (Melmoth, 'Memoirs', 72) but he continued to work until a few days before his death on 6 April 1743. He was buried in the cloister under the chapel at Lincoln's Inn on 14 April. 'The Great Importance' continued to sell well throughout the eighteenth century and the first half of the nineteenth. It had reached thirty editions by 1797, selling 42,000 copies between 1766 and 1784 alone, and an edition published early in the 1840s claimed that 150,000 copies had been sold in the first forty years of the nineteenth century. Charles Purton Cooper, who edited 'The Great Importance' for an edition published in 1849, claimed that Archbishop William Howley had related that it 'had been deemed by Queen Charlotte a book proper to be used in the education of the Princesses her daughters' (Melmoth, 'The Great Importance', 1849, 148). Princess Sophia's copy of the 1790 edition was placed in Lincoln's Inn Library, and in 1910 was given to Lambeth Palace Library, where it remains. Melmoth's thoughts on how a Christian society could be achieved by the self-examination and self-discipline of each individual endured well beyond the controversy that had given them form. 


@@@@@


doc= 18536


Melmoth, William, the younger (bap. 1710, d. 1799), author and translator, was probably born in London, one of the seven children and elder of the two sons of William Melmoth the elder (1665/6-1743), barrister, and his second wife, Catherine, daughter of Samuel Rolt of Milton Erneys in Bedfordshire and his wife, Mary, the daughter of Dr Thomas Coxe. He was educated first at a private school in Westminster, under the tutelage of a Mr Philips, before being admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 26 June 1724, and admitted pensioner at Magdalene College, Cambridge, on 24 June 1726, aged seventeen. Early sources suggest that he was also attached to Emmanuel College, but he seems not to have stayed long in Cambridge since he was called to the bar on 9 June 1732. In 1756 Sir John Eardley-Wilmot appointed Melmoth a commissioner of bankrupts. 
According to earlier biographical sources, by 1739 Melmoth had left London and settled near Shrewsbury, but it is clear from surviving letters to his friend and publisher Robert Dodsley that he was based in Ealing until 1762. He seems to have abandoned the law at an early stage. Melmoth's first wife, Dorothy, daughter of William King (1685-1763), died on 20 June 1761, and in the autumn of 1762 he settled in Bath with his second wife, a Miss M. Ogle. He had no children of his own, but adopted and educated Sophia Skynner, daughter and coheir of the Revd John Skynner and granddaughter of Melmoth's uncle, and later the mother of a son named Melmoth Walters. 
Melmoth's earliest publication, 'Of an Active and Retired Life', a poetic epistle to Henry Coventry (died 1752), first printed in 1735, was later included in Dodsley's 'Collection'. He is supposed the author of imitations of two epistles of Horace (i.18 and ii.1) published by T. Cooper in 1736. The first volume of his 'Letters on Several Subjects' appeared in 1748, under the pseudonym Sir Thomas Fitzosborne; a second volume was added in 1749. The letters are fictionalized but have generally been held to have some autobiographical reference, and they certainly illustrate Melmoth's own favourite themes of retirement, friendship, and rhetorical style. 'Fitzosborne's letters' were to become one of Dodsley's best-sellers, going through ten editions by 1795; the eleventh edition, published in 1805, included an anonymous prefatory memoir which is usually attached to later printings of the work. 
Melmoth actively contributed to various literary projects such as Edward Moore's 'World' (1753-6) and Dodsley's 'Fables' (1761), but otherwise occupied himself chiefly as a translator from Latin. The letters of Pliny the younger appeared in 1746, with a second edition in 1747 and a third in 1748. In 1753 Dodsley paid Melmoth $600 for his translation of Cicero's 'Ad familiares' (as compared with $50 for Pliny's letters). Further translations from Cicero ('Cato, or, An Essay on Old Age' and 'Laelius, or, An Essay on Friendship') appeared in 1773 and 1777. All these translations are accompanied with Melmoth's own extensive and learned 'remarks'. 
The 'Travels in Switzerland' of William Coxe consists of letters addressed to Melmoth, between 1776 and 1779, and in the edition of 1801 Coxe pays warm tribute to him as 'an affectionate and kindly instructor' ('Advertisement', viii). In 1793 Melmoth published a pamphlet vindicating himself against an attack by Jacob Bryant two years earlier on the view expressed in his notes on Pliny on Trajan's attitude towards the Christians. His last work, the brief 'Memoir of a Late Eminent Advocate', published in 1796, had been intended some five years earlier to accompany an edition he was planning of his father's chancery reports. His reputation quickly faded after his death, and in an acerbic note in the 'London Magazine' (vol. 10, July 1824, 28) De Quincey describes his reluctance to take up the opportunity even to inspect a trunk full of Melmoth manuscripts. On the other hand Melmoth's version of Pliny's letters survived as the basis of the Loeb translation until 1969. 
Although something of a recluse, Melmoth did have some dealings with Bath literary society. Mrs Thrale met him at Mrs Montagu's in 1780, reporting him to Johnson as 'just Tory enough to hate the Bishop of Peterborough for Whiggism, and Whig enough to abhor you for Toryism' and eliciting from Johnson the response: 'From the author of Fitzosborne's letters I cannot think myself much in danger. I met him only once about thirty years ago, and in some small dispute reduced him to whistle' ('Boswell's Life of Johnson'). Despite his longevity his health seems generally to have been poor, and a posthumous difficulty over the disposal of his father's manuscripts suggests that by the 1790s he had become somewhat erratic in his dealings with others. Melmoth was of middle height, spare, with bright, quick eyes and a deeply lined face. He died at his home, 12 Bladud's Buildings, Bath, on 13 May 1799, and was survived by his second wife. There is a Latin epitaph on a tablet in Bath Abbey, but he was buried at Batheaston. 


@@@@@


doc= 18537


Melton, Sir John (d. 1640), author and politician, the son of Evan Melton, was born in Bampton parish, Devon, although it is possible that his family came from Yorkshire. He might be the John Melton who was admitted pensioner at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, on 25 June 1608; the following year he was reading law in chambers. In August 1626 he obtained a grant of arms and in 1634 he was admitted to Gray's Inn, perhaps as an honorary member. He was married three times and fathered six children who survived infancy. His first marriage, in January 1624, was to Elizabeth ('nee' Moore), widow of Sir Ferdinando Heyburne and mother to Francis and Elizabeth. In 1634 he married Catherine Currance (died 1635), who brought him land in Kent, and who produced Edward, John, Richard, and Anne from two pregnancies in 1634-5. Melton's third wife, Margaret Aldersley, outlived him. 
Melton was the author of a single published poem, 'In laudem authoris', written in support of William Fennor's work, 'Descriptions', and two books -- 'A Sixe-Folde Politician: together with a Sixefolde Precept of Policy' (1609) and 'Astrologaster, or, The Figure-Caster' (1620). 'Unlike the learned treatises, which sound as though they had been addressed to men of the twelfth century', 'Astrologaster' 'is shot through with bright threads drawn from the life of Jacobean England' (Dick, iii-iv). It was sufficiently well known to be incorporated by William Rowland into his 'Judicial Astrologie, Judicially Condemned' (1652), an attack on parliament's use of astrologers. Both books contain anti-Catholic rhetoric. 
By 1624 Melton was secretary to Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland, and the continued patronage of the Percy family brought him wealth and furthered his career. By 1632 he was serving Northumberland as receiver of rents and it might have been this that in 1628 gained him membership of a commission for levying debts due to the crown. His work for Northumberland brought him to the attention of Sir Thomas Wentworth, who in May 1625 asked Melton to gain for him the votes of the earl's freeholders in the Yorkshire election. Melton was Wentworth's replacement for Sir Arthur Ingram in the office of secretary to the council of the north. He bought the office in April 1632 and held it until his death, exercising it in person. On 11 September 1632 he was knighted at Wanstead, and the next year Wentworth took him on to the northern recusancy commission, where he supported the vice-president of the north, Sir Edward Osborne, in the face of several threats to the commission's work. Most of his letters to Wentworth refer to the commission's business, but he penned one letter in May 1635 to encourage Wentworth to bid for the post of lord treasurer. 
Melton's commercial interests in saltpetre and coal appear to have been of significant financial benefit to him. By 1631 he was deputy saltpetreman for Yorkshire, Durham, and Northumberland, and during the 1630s he leased several mines from the earl of Northumberland and traded in coal, enabling him to leave manors in several counties, mining interests, and jewellery, in all worth about $2000, and more than $6000 in money to his family. He was elected as MP for Newcastle upon Tyne in the autumn of 1640, gaining the seat through Northumberland's patronage. He died in December, before his disputed return was handled by the committee for privileges, probably at Tottenham, for he was buried there, rather than at York Minster, his chosen resting-place. A monument to his memory was placed in Tottenham church. 


@@@@@


doc= 18538


Melton, William (d. 1340), archbishop of York, was the son of undistinguished parents from Melton in the parish of Welton near Hull, where he later established a chantry for them. However, he had a brother named Henry, whose grandsons he sent to be educated in Newark at his own cost, and this family became established among the gentry of Yorkshire. In his youth Melton spent some time in the University of Oxford, but no details of this are known, although he continued to help the university financially. By 1297 he had entered royal service in Prince Edward's household, of which he later became controller. He was extensively beneficed, probably (and quite lawfully) to pay his salary during the period of his employment in the king's service, since he owed most of his advancement to royal patronage. He was rector of Reepham, Lincolnshire, from 1299 and of six other places at times thereafter, as well as being a prebendary of Southwell Minster and of Dublin, Lincoln, York, and Salisbury cathedrals. He also held a prebendal position in the royal free chapel in Hastings (1314) and was provost of Beverley (1309), dean of St Martin's-le-Grand (1308-16), and archdeacon of Barnstaple (1308-9). His principal patron was Edward II, for whom he seems to have had a genuine and lasting affection. 
Melton's outstanding ability in finance led to his rapid advancement when Edward became king. Already in 1301 he had been responsible for paying the wages of the Welsh infantry enrolled in the prince's army. From 8 July 1307 to 18 September 1312 he was keeper of the privy seal, and from 8 July 1307 to 30 November 1314 treasurer of the wardrobe. In 1308 he accompanied the king to his wedding with Isabella of France, having temporary charge of the great seal, which he held again in 1310. In June 1308 he had witnessed the king's appointment of Gaveston as lieutenant of Ireland. He seems to have avoided committing himself either to the ordainers in 1312 or to the party of Thomas, earl of Lancaster, in 1322, again probably out of personal loyalty to the king, although he allowed his clergy to give an aid to Lancaster, and eventually, after some hesitation, supported the plea for the earl's canonization. In 1312 he was one of the proctors of the northern convocation that refused an aid to the king, but this was not held against him, for in the same year he was a commissioner to deal with the Cinque Ports, and in 1313, and again in 1319 and 1321, he was commissioned to treat with the Scots. In 1323 he was appointed to head a commission investigating abuses by commissioners of array in Nottinghamshire, while from 3 July 1325 to 14 November 1326 he was treasurer. 
After Edward II's death Melton seems to have avoided royal appointments so far as he could. He did not attend Edward III's coronation, although he married the king to Philippa of Hainault in York Minster in 1328. In 1329 he was accused of complicity in Edmund of Woodstock's plot against Mortimer and Isabella, started in the belief that Edward II was still alive. He succeeded in clearing himself, and later was again treasurer (1330-31) and temporary keeper of the great seal (1333-4). 
On 21 January 1316 Melton was through royal influence elected archbishop of York. He went to Avignon for his consecration, but despite repeated appeals from the king, this was delayed until 25 September 1317 by an interregnum in the papacy. On his return to England, Melton had his cross carried erect before him in Kent and London, to uphold the claims of the northern province against Canterbury, and on a later occasion seems to have imposed an interdict on any place where the archbishop of Canterbury trespassed with erect cross in the province of York, though an agreement was afterwards reached at the instance of the king. His relations with his suffragans were not always easy, and he once excommunicated Bishop Beaumont of Durham (died 1333) for resisting his rights of visitation. 
The years of Melton's tenure at York were greatly disrupted by Scottish invasions. Already in 1314 he had been empowered to raise money for the defence of the border, and after 1318 the raids of the Scots became more extensive and ferocious. They penetrated as far south as Preston and Boroughbridge, and exposed the archbishop himself to considerable danger in the course of his visitations. In 1319 a raid led by Sir James Douglas threatened York itself, and caused Melton to collect a scratch force of clerics and townsmen to resist the Scots at Myton-on-Swale. On 20 September he was heavily defeated and lost most of his army, with his armour, horses, and silver plate, but York did not fall. Between this date and the treaty of Edinburgh in 1328 Melton's province suffered more or less continuously from raids which left the country ravaged and the religious houses particularly impoverished. As late as 1339 the northern convocation was pleading poverty as an excuse for non-payment of taxation. His register also shows that Melton was heavily involved in the papal attempts to deal with Robert I. Repeated emissaries (often unfortunate friars) were sent north, either to publish Robert's excommunication or to urge him to a settlement, but these were invariably unsuccessful, either because of Robert's highly intelligent diplomacy or the terror inspired by his army. 
There was also trouble from France, Scotland's traditional ally. During the War of St Sardos (1324-6) Edward II ordered Melton to banish foreign incumbents of English livings to 'rather remote places' where they could do no harm -- an order to which the archbishop replied that he could not find any such persons (Hill and Robinson, 3, nos. 127-8). Edward III charged Melton, among others, to summon the army to resist a French invasion in 1339. 
Melton's personal reputation in the civil service stood high in an age of considerable corruption. In 1316 the king, in granting him a quitclaim for any responsibilities he had incurred, mentioned his 'good service and fidelity in converting to the King's profit all the money and other goods which fell into his hands and custody' ('CPR', '1313-17', 432). T. F. Tout wrote that Melton 'preserved his reputation unblemished throughout a long life. Many years of court service did not corrupt his fidelity or diminish his piety and charity' (Tout, 21-2). His practical knowledge of finance stood him in good stead as an archbishop. His register shows that, in a period when most officials were in debt, he was able to make extensive loans to the king, to the northern barons, and to poor religious houses, and even to the Italian banking house of Bardi, as well as building up his private estates. He contributed $700 to the fund for rebuilding York Minster, and restored at his own expense the tomb of St William. Not surprisingly, he took particular care to check the credentials of pardoners and collectors for good causes, giving special encouragement to those whom he found responsible. 
In his diocese Melton was remembered as a good man who lived honestly and chastely. His household noted his habit of early rising and assiduous attendance at divine service, and seem to have received new outfits from him twice a year. He was sparing to himself and generous to the poor, often forgiving debts when they were owed by the needy. He was particularly careful in carrying out visitations (often in considerable personal danger) and enforcing subsequent injunctions. He was thorough in performing all the normal duties of his office, maintaining good order and discipline in parishes and non-exempt religious houses, supervising clerical appointments, and granting licences, dispensations, and testimonials. He dealt with some exceptional problems, such as a heretical preacher who was upsetting his female congregations, and a man addicted to necromancy. He had also to deal with the reallocation of the templars, whose order was dissolved in 1312, to other religious houses, and the regular payment of their pensions, a process that seems to have caused both him and the templars much trouble and distress. He dealt very mercifully with Joan Picot, a widow from Wigan, whose husband had burdened her with unreasonable conditions and heavy debts. Melton seems to have spent the last years of his life at Cawood and died there on 5 April 1340, to the general grief of his people. When his tomb was excavated it was found that he had been a very tall man. He had been buried with his chalice and paten. The statue in the niche over the west door of the minster is said to represent him, but too much reliance cannot be placed on portraiture in stone at this period. 


@@@@@


doc= 18539


Melton, William (d. 1528), theologian and Catholic priest, originated in the north of England and was educated at Cambridge (BA, 1476; MA, 1480; BTh, 1491; DTh, 1496), where between 1485 and 1495 he was a fellow of Michaelhouse (college records do not bear out the claim, first made in the Tudor biography of John Fisher, that he was master of Michaelhouse). At Cambridge he was a central figure in a group of reforming scholars which included John Fisher, John Constable, Ralph Collingwood, and John Colet, a group closely involved with the first stirrings of humanism in the Cambridge curriculum. Fisher treasured fond memories of Melton's lectures on Euclid. Ordained priest on 23 September 1486, Melton was instituted to the rectory of Clayworth, Nottinghamshire, on 18 May 1490, presented by George Fitzhugh, dean of Lincoln (whom he doubtless knew from Cambridge, and by whom he was appointed an executor in 1506). On 6 June 1496, by now papally dispensed for plurality, he was presented to the rectory of Aston, Yorkshire (which he resigned in 1517), by Sir John Melton, the head of the family. Archbishop Rotherham of York collated him to the prebends of Thockrington (1493-4) and then Laughton-en-le-Morthen (1498-1528) in York Minster, making him chancellor of York in 1496, a position he retained until his death. In this capacity he figured as executor and beneficiary of many prominent York churchmen over the following thirty years. 
Melton retained his scholarly interests after leaving Cambridge. His impressive library, recorded in the inventory of his goods, numbered over 100 items, including many patristic, classical, and humanist texts. Particularly noteworthy are his copies of Plato and of More's 'Utopia', as well as works by such leading humanists as Pico della Mirandola, Jacques Lefevre d'Etaples, and Erasmus (who was aware of Melton's support for his use of humanist techniques in theology). Besides these, he had an almost complete set of the works of his former pupil John Fisher against Luther and Oecolampadius. These were probably gifts from the author, who had certainly sent him a copy of an earlier work on St Mary Magdalen in 1519. He was clearly adding to his library until the onset of his final illness in 1528. Fisher praised him as an 'outstanding theologian', and recorded that Melton had written unpublished tracts against Luther. Melton contributed prologues to some devotional writings of John Norton, prior of the Yorkshire Charterhouse of Mount Grace, and was probably the author of a continuation of a chronicle of the archbishops of York. He did publish, with the seal of approval of his friend John Colet -- the inventory attached to Melton's will included 'A little table that was Mr Doctor Colette's' -- 'Sermo exhortatorius' ('c'.1510), an address to ordinands urging them to piety and study. Like Colet, Fisher, and other leading churchmen around the turn of the century, he was particularly attached to the cult of the name of Jesus, and was committed to the reform of the clergy through education. Melton was struck down with 'a palsy' in May 1528, and died at Acklam, Yorkshire (a living in his gift), on 25 October 1528. 


@@@@@


doc= 18540


Melvill, Henry (1798-1871), Church of England clergyman, fifth son of Philip Melvill (1760-1811), an officer in the army, who was lieutenant-governor of Pendennis Castle from 1797 until 1811, and his wife, Elizabeth Carey (1770-1845), daughter of Peter Dobree of Beauregard, Guernsey, was born in Pendennis Castle, Cornwall, on 14 September 1798, and became a sizar of St John's College, Cambridge, in October 1817. After migrating to Peterhouse he passed as second wrangler in 1821, and was a fellow and tutor there from 1822 to 1829. He graduated BA in 1821, MA in 1824, and BD in 1836. From 1829 to 1843 he served as incumbent of Camden Chapel, Camberwell, Surrey, and was appointed by the duke of Wellington chaplain to the Tower of London in 1840. Early in 1844 he became principal of the East India College, Haileybury, holding the post until the college was closed, by the legislation which followed the Indian mutiny, on 7 December 1857. By then, Melvill was already (from 21 April 1856) a canon residentiary of St Paul's Cathedral; he was also rector of Barnes, Surrey, 1863-71. He was, in addition, Golden lecturer at St Margaret's, Lothbury, 1850-56, and one of the chaplains to Queen Victoria from 13 June 1853. 
Melvill for many years had the reputation of being 'the most popular preacher in London' and one of the greatest rhetoricians of his time. First at Camden Chapel, then at St Margaret's, and later at St Paul's, large crowds of people attended his sermons. These generally occupied three-quarters of an hour, but such was the rapidity of his utterance that he spoke as much in that time as an ordinary preacher would have done in an hour. His delivery was earnest and animated, without distinctive gesticulation; his voice was clear and flexible, while his emphatic pronunciation and his hurried manner of speaking impressed the hearers with a conviction of his sincerity. He had a 'wonderful faculty of what may be called magnetizing or fascinating the ear' (Prestige, 154), and he was known as the evangelical Chrysostom. But his sermons lacked simplicity and directness of style, and his ornate phraseology, happy analogies, and smoothly balanced sentences appealed more directly to the literary than to the spiritual sense. His views were evangelical, and he was a zealous parish priest. Melvill published many volumes of his sermons, several of which went through numerous editions. These were chiefly of his Cambridge sermons and those delivered at St Margaret's, Lothbury (one volume of the latter, 'Forty Eight Sermons' (1850), was published without his permission). 
Melvill died, rather rich, at 2 Residentiary Houses, Amen Corner, London, on 9 February 1871, and was buried in St Paul's Cathedral on 15 February. His widow, Margaret Alice, daughter of Captain Richard Jennings RN, died on 18 April 1878, aged seventy-three, leaving a daughter Edith, who married Clement Alexander Midleton. 


@@@@@


doc= 18541


Melvill, Sir James Cosmo (1792-1861), East India Company servant, was born at Guernsey, the third son of Captain Philip Melvill (1760-1811), afterwards lieutenant-governor of Pendennis Castle, Cornwall, and his wife, Elizabeth Carey (1770-1845), youngest daughter of Peter Dobree of Beauregarde, Guernsey. Their fifth son, Henry Melvill, was principal of Haileybury College and canon of St Paul's. Their fourth son, Lieutenant-Colonel Peter Melvill, was military and naval secretary to the government of Bombay. 
Melvill entered the home service of the East India Company as a clerk in February 1808. In March 1815 he married Hester Jane Frances (died 1864), youngest daughter of William Marmaduke Sellon of Harlesden, Middlesex; they had nine children. In 1824 he was promoted to auditor of Indian accounts, in which capacity he appeared before several parliamentary committees. In 1834 he became financial secretary to the company and in 1836 chief secretary. 
As chief secretary Melvill corresponded with many of the company's principal servants in India and with friends and critics alike of the company at home. Often, as at the time of Lord Ellenborough's recall, he was required to soften and deflect opposition to the company's more controversial decisions. His friendly diplomacy won over even the notoriously unforgiving critic of the company, Joseph Pease, the anti-slavery campaigner, who came to look upon him as a fellow fighter in the cause of humanity and a personal friend. 
Politically, Melvill was a traditionalist, opposed to the territorial acquisitions of the 1840s and 1850s and keen to preserve the independence and prestige of India's remaining princes. In spite of his financial background, he did not hesitate to criticize acts of economy which he thought to be politically harmful. For example, he deplored as short-sighted the company's periodic bouts of military retrenchment, correctly observing that such cutbacks were generating a smouldering resentment among Indian soldiers and their families. 
In 1853 Melvill was created KCB. In February 1858, after fifty years of service, he retired, although he continued for some months as 'ex officio' government director of Indian Railways. He was the last chief secretary of the company. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1841 and became a commissioner of lieutenancy for the city of London in 1847. 
Melvill died at his home, Tandridge Court, near Godstone in Surrey, on 23 July 1861. His widow survived him by three years. Their second son, James Cosmo (1821-1880), followed his father into the home administration of British India and in 1859 was appointed assistant under-secretary of state for India. 


@@@@@


doc= 18542


Melvill, Thomas (1726-1753), natural philosopher, was born in Monimail, Fife, the son of the Revd Andrew Melvil (died 1736) of Monimail and his wife, Helen, formerly White, and the younger brother of Robert Melville (1723-1809), army officer. He matriculated at Glasgow University in 1739 and graduated MA in 1744. In 1748-9, as a student of divinity at the university, he became friends with Alexander Wilson, later the first professor of astronomy at Glasgow. Together they decided to explore the temperature of the upper air by raising a string of kites, each of which bore a thermometer. In July 1749 and again the following summer they sent up kites. It was arranged that the thermometers, wrapped in bundles of protective paper, should be detached by setting a slow match to burn through the strings that held them, and fall to the ground (the registering thermometer had yet to be invented). As these experiments were done in fine weather, they did not anticipate Franklin's discovery of atmospheric electricity. 
Melvill then studied optics, intending to verify Newton's theories. In his 'Observations on light and colours', delivered to the Medical Society of Edinburgh on 3 January and 7 February 1752, Melvill described his use of a prism to examine an alcohol flame coloured by various salts. He remarked on a yellow line always seen at a constant place in the spectrum. This yellow line was in fact derived from sodium, which was present as a constituent or impurity in all the salts that he was testing; hence Melvill is sometimes seen as the father of flame spectroscopy, though there is no evidence that he thought of his experiments as a method of analysis. 
In a letter sent from Geneva on 2 February 1753 to the astronomer royal, James Bradley, Melvill discussed whether light rays of differing colours travelled at different velocities, which might account for their differing refraction through a prism. He proposed that this could be confirmed if the satellites of Jupiter were seen to change slightly in colour as they occulted and emerged. This letter was read before the Royal Society on 8 March and the telescope maker James Short was instructed to make the necessary observations, but he reported that no such effect could be seen. In a second letter to Bradley, dated 2 June, Melvill suggested that the rate of light travel concerned in aberration might be affected by the humours of the eye itself. Melvill died in Geneva in December 1753 at the age of twenty-seven. 


@@@@@


doc= 18543


Melville, Andrew (1545-1622), university principal and theologian, was born at Baldovy, near Montrose, Angus, on 1 August 1545, the youngest of nine sons of Richard Melville of Baldovy (died 1547) and Giles Abercrombie, daughter of a burgess in Montrose. Andrew's eldest brother, Richard, who inherited the family's estate, studied at the Lutheran University of Greifswald, where he matriculated in 1546; as tutor to James Erskine, the laird of Dun's son, he accompanied the latter to Wittenberg, where they studied for two years under Philip Melanchthon before proceeding to Copenhagen and meeting John Macalpine, who taught theology in the university there. By 1560 Richard was authorized by the general assembly of the kirk in Scotland to undertake service in the reformed church, and he became minister of the neighbouring parish of Maryton. Of the other brothers, Thomas visited France and Italy, became a civil servant, and attained high office; Walter settled in Montrose and was a magistrate; Roger became a burgess of Dundee; James became minister of Arbroath; John served as minister of Crail; and Robert and David both became craftsmen. 
Brought up by his brother Richard, Andrew Melville attended Montrose grammar school, where Thomas Anderson was schoolmaster. According to his nephew, Andrew was a 'seiklie tender boy' who 'tuk pleasur in na thing sa mikle as his buik'. He remained in Montrose for a further 'year or twa', at his own expense, to be taught 'the Greek grammar and something of that language' by the Frenchman Pierre de Marsiliers, whom the reforming provost, John Erskine of Dun, had attracted to the burgh ('Autobiography and Diary', 39). In 1559 he enrolled at St Mary's College in St Andrews University and was befriended by its provost, John Douglas, who conformed at the Reformation and contributed in 1560 to the reformers' 'Book of Discipline'. Among his fellow students in the class of 1559-60 was James Lawson, who eventually aspired to the presbyterian leadership as Knox's chosen successor as minister in Edinburgh. After he had 'past his cuirse' and graduated MA probably in 1563, with the reputation of being 'the best philosopher, poet, and Grecian, of anie young maister in the land' (ibid., 39), Melville sailed first to England and then to France. He visited Bordeaux and Dieppe before finally reaching Paris, 'whar he remeanit in the Universitie twa yeiris at his awin studies' (ibid., 39-40). 
In Paris, Melville attended the public lectures given in the College de France, the royal trilingual college founded by Francois I in 1530, primarily for the study of Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. He heard Jean Mercier and Jean de Cinquarbres on Hebrew; Pierre de la Ramee (Peter Ramus), the great critic of Aristotelianism, and his great opponent Adrien Turnebe, on Greek and Latin philosophy; Pierre Forcadel, Jacques Charpentier, and Pascal Duhamel on mathematics; and Louis Duret on medicine. He also heard the Italian protestant scholar Joseph Justus Scaliger on Hebrew and Francois Baudouin on law. By 1566 Melville had decided to further his legal studies by proceeding to Poitiers, a Roman Catholic town held by the duke of Guise and besieged by protestant forces under Admiral Coligny, where he tutored privately and taught in the university for three years. 
In 1569 the religious wars led Melville to seek refuge in Geneva, where his kinsman Henry Scrimgeour was a professor of law. Melville travelled on foot, 'as he haid done befor from Deipe to Paris, and from that to Poicteors' and 'caried na thing with him bot a litle Hebrew 'Byble' in his belt', to study theology, 'wherto he was dedicat from his mother's wombe' ('Autobiography and Diary', 40-41). He did, however, take letters of introduction to Theodore Beza. He attended Beza's 'daylie lessons and preatchings' and made divinity 'his cheiff studie' (ibid., 42). At Geneva he gained a knowledge of the Chaldaic and Syriac tongues from Bertram, the professor of Hebrew, and Beza secured his appointment in November 1569 to teach Latin in the 'college'. Melville was bold enough to question the pronunciation of Portus, the professor of Greek, probably following the new pronunciation of the language fostered by Ramus in Paris. 
Also resident in Geneva by 1571 were two future leaders of English presbyterianism, Thomas Cartwright and Walter Travers, the latter of whom produced during his Genevan stay his 'Ecclesiasticae disciplinae... explicatio' (1574). Melville's interest in the work was such that he later presented a copy of the treatise to a fellow Calvinist, Alexander Arbuthnot, principal of King's College, Aberdeen. Following the influx of further Huguenot exiles to Geneva after the massacre of St Bartholomew's day in 1572, Melville had the opportunity to hear Francois Hotman, the French lawyer and political theorist, whose 'Franco-Gallia' (1573) reasserted the ultimate sovereignty of the people over their king. He also maintained a lasting friendship with another exile from France, Joseph Scaliger, who taught philosophy. In 1570 Melville heard Ramus lecture on Cicero and followed him to Lausanne to attend his lectures in July the same year. Ramus then returned to Paris, and Melville went back to Geneva. 
Persuaded by his fellow countrymen to go home, so that his native land might benefit from the services of a distinguished scholar at a politically critical time, Melville left Geneva in April 1574 after five years' residence. He travelled in the company of Alexander Campbell, titular bishop of Brechin, and Andrew Polwarth, later minister at Paisley. In Paris he engaged in debates at the Jesuit college, where the archbishop of Glasgow, then resident, made 'sum minassing speitches'; aware of the dangers, he made for Dieppe ('Autobiography and Diary', 44). After spending some time in London he arrived home in July with testimonials from Beza, as moderator of the Venerable Company of Pastors, and from Jean Pinaud, rector of the 'college', in which they warmly praised his abilities and recommended him to the Scottish church. According to Melville's nephew, Beza considered that 'the graittest taken of affection the Kirk of Genev could schaw to Scotland' was 'that they had suffered tham selves to be spuiled of Mr Andro Melvill, wherby the Kirk of Scotland might be inritched' (ibid., 42-3). 
From Edinburgh, Melville set out for Baldovy, where he sought 'to repose a whyll with his frinds' ('Autobiography and Diary', 45) and tutored his nephew James Melville (1556-1614). News of his return resulted in competition for his services, but as he 'lyked nocht to be in Court bot rather to be in sum Universitie' (ibid.), he declined the offer to become court chaplain to the regent, James Douglas, fourth earl of Morton. His candidature as principal of St Mary's College in St Andrews, in succession to John Douglas, the archbishop, who had died in July, was canvassed in the general assembly in August 1574. In the end, however, he accepted the invitation to become principal of Glasgow University at the behest of Archbishop Boyd, the university chancellor, and Andrew Hay, university rector and commissioner of churches in the west. Before taking up his appointment, which took effect in November 1574, Melville visited Stirling where he 'conferrit at leynthe' with George Buchanan, then tutor to King James, and met the young king, 'the sweitest sight in Europe that day, for strange and extraordinar gifts of ingyne, judgment, memorie and langage' (ibid., 48). 
Once installed in Glasgow, Melville set about revitalizing teaching. As an admirer of the anti-scholastic philosophy of Ramus, he introduced Ramist texts in logic, rhetoric, geometry, and arithmetic, and initiated specialist teaching in place of the outmoded practice of regenting, the system of conducting students through their entire course of study. Greek, Hebrew, and the unfamiliar Syriac and Chaldaic languages, necessary for scholarly biblical exegesis, took their place in the curriculum alongside classes in history, geography, and astronomy, but not metaphysics, which was discarded as unprofitable. 
Melville's emphasis was on the 'studia humanitatis', the liberal arts, and epitomized the new humanist values designed to replace the old scholasticism. At table after meals in college, he was apt to demonstrate informally how 'Aristotle could err and haid erred' ('Autobiography and Diary', 67). His drastic reconstitution of the curriculum and a realistic benefaction by King James in 1577 strengthened Glasgow's reputation, and soon St Andrews and Aberdeen universities, followed by the town college in Edinburgh, adopted features of his successful experiment in Glasgow. 
As theology professor and biblical scholar Melville also exercised a powerful influence within the church, which stood in the tradition of the 'best reformed churches' on the continent. Unlike the universities, the church had experienced a thorough reformation on Calvinistic lines. After his homecoming Melville attended meetings of the general assembly and, by applying Reformation principles, sought to correct perceived defects in the church's operation. He offered attractive solutions to outstanding problems and was keen to integrate the universities more fully in the wider work of the reformed church. He saw himself as holding the ecclesiastical office of doctor, which according to Calvin was one of the four essential offices in the church, and with a seat in church courts he saw it as his duty to interpret scripture aright by applying the tools of philology to exegesis. He also lent his support to the general assembly's determination to resist Regent Morton's policy of conforming the Scottish church with that of England. 
When appointed by the general assembly in 1575 to two committees for examining the aptitude of the bishop of Moray and the bishop-elect of Dunblane, Melville seems to have expressed no disapproval of the episcopal office. He was concerned not with ending episcopacy but with recommending how the examination and election of bishops could be made more effective. His attitude to bishops was based at least as much on observation and experience of Scottish practice as on any doctrinaire argument inherited from Geneva. Yet his introduction to the episcopate through the bishops of Moray and Dunblane, two improper promotions criticized by the assembly as neither had first served as a minister, provided Melville with ample ammunition when prevailing dissatisfaction over episcopal appointments led to a critical appraisal of bishops 'as they are now in the Kirk of Scotland'. 
In the assembly of 1575 Melville is said to have supported opponents of the Leith episcopacy by illustrating how the 'New Testament' bishop was 'not to be taken in the sense that the common sort did conceive, there being no superiority allowed by Christ among ministers' (Spottiswoode, 2.200). He affirmed (as Beza had earlier warned John Knox) that the church could not remain in purity unless the corruption that had crept into the estate of bishops was completely removed. The assembly certainly appointed him to a committee to debate whether diocesan episcopacy had scriptural validity and whether the electoral chapter could be tolerated in a reformed church. The committee's verdict was that the name 'bishop' was applicable to all ministers of the word and sacraments, though some might still be chosen to act as visitors while retaining their congregational charges. Melville's nephew claimed that ministers were 'informed mair throwlie be Mr Andro of the unlawfulnes of Bischopes, and the right maner of governing of the Kirk be Presbyteries', which suggests that his uncle's ideas were already shared by others, and Andrew Hay is named as one minister 'wha lyked never those bischopries and wha specialie was the ernest suttar for Mr Andro Melvill' ('Autobiography and Diary', 48, 56). 
The arguments advanced by Melville and his colleagues, so familiar to readers of Calvin's 'Institutes', seem to have been that the 'New Testament' bishop was not a great diocesan prelate who sat in parliament and council, the 'lord-like bishop' for whom Knox had shown such distaste, but rather an overseer and shepherd of the flock. Melville was determined to ensure that power continued to lie with assemblies of the church, which Regent Morton's policy threatened to subvert, and not with a new order of bishops. He was a member of the assembly's committee of more than thirty members charged with preparing the second 'Book of Discipline' (1578). Of his 'exceiding grait peans' in regularly 'keiping Assemblies and dyettes of conference, reasoning and advysing with brethring anent that wark', there is sufficient testimony ('Autobiography and Diary', 52); yet he was not the chief author, and even his admiring nephew assigned no greater role to him than to the other participants. Nevertheless, the whole thrust of the programme outlined in the second 'Book of Discipline' was entirely consistent with Melville's ideas. 
Melville was elected moderator of the general assembly in April 1578, which ratified the presbyterian polity of the second 'Book of Discipline'; and his prominence in the councils of the church led to his re-election as moderator of the assembly in April 1582, his retention in June 1582, re-election in June 1587 and May 1594, and election to a convention in January 1590. The spiritual jurisdiction and government granted to the church by God through Christ the mediator was understood to be exercised not by the membership at large but by those appointed by the Word to specialized functions within the congregation of the faithful. The church was not deemed to have received its jurisdiction from God intermediately through the prince, as was claimed in England. Any notion of intermediate, earthly headship of the church, either papal or princely, was denounced as 'ane title falslie usurpit be antichryst', which 'aucht not to be attributtit to angell or to mane of quhat estait soevir he be, saiffing to Chryst, the heid and onlie monarche in this kirk' (second 'Book of Discipline', 167). The prince and civil magistrate, as members of the church, ought to be willing to hear God's word revealed through his messengers and ambassadors, the ministers of the word, and so 'reverence the majestie of the sone of God speiking be thame' (ibid., 216). From doctrine, discipline, and distribution, there arose a fourfold permanent order of ministers or bishops, doctors or teachers, elders or governors, and deacons or distributors of the church's revenues. The office bearers were responsible for governing the church through a series of councils from congregational elderships to the general assembly, and were empowered to convene without tarrying for the magistrate's permission. All of this, however, amounted to little other than a succinct summary of earlier strands of Reformation thought, which it was deemed advisable to restate and reinforce, at a point when the crown sought to dictate policy and control the church through its bishops. 
His nephew James attributed Melville's negligible published output to his 'grait occupationes and distractiones' ('Autobiography and Diary', 63) in promoting the work of the ministry and schools. This received a fresh stimulus in 1580 with Melville's appointment at St Andrews University as principal of St Mary's College, reconstituted as a divinity college after the university's reorganization in 1579. Melville himself had been an early advocate of establishing 'an anti-seminarie to be erected in St Androis to the Jesuit seminaries for the course of theologie' (ibid., 76), and had tried, without success, to secure the services of his Geneva acquaintances Thomas Cartwright and Walter Travers as theology professors for St Andrews. 
Leaving Glasgow 'sear against his will', Melville saw his work in St Andrews as professing the 'learned tongues and theologie against the seminaries of Rems and Rome' ('Autobiography and Diary', 83). Yet he soon encountered opposition to his reforms from more conservative colleagues. The course he devised was an expansion of his theology course at Glasgow, based on an intensive study of the tongues and biblical exegesis. He resisted the influence of scholastic philosophy on theology and in 1583 helped to secure the general assembly's condemnation of those aspects of Aristotle's 'doctrine directlie impugning the grounds of religioun' (Thomson, pt 2, 640-41). Favouring Ramus's anti-metaphysical approach, which offered clarity and order in analyses of scripture, Melville saw the biblical text as 'perfect, clear in itself, its own interpreter' and 'the supreme judge of all controversies' ('Scholastica diatriba de rebus divinis', 1599). But within a year of his arrival his opponents attempted to fight a rearguard action. If Ramus were right and Aristotle wrong, the implications were clear enough to Melville's opponents: 'thair breadwinner, thair honour, thair estimation, all was gean, giff Aristotle sould be sa owir-harled in the heiring of thair schollars; and sa dressit publict orationes against Mr Androe's doctrine' ('Autobiography and Diary', 123-4). The same domineering attitude which he had displayed at Glasgow was brought to bear at St Andrews, where 'Mr Andro insisted mightelie' against the exponents of the old scholastic philosophy 'in his ordinar lessones' until they finally 'acknawlagit a wounderfull transportation out of darkness unto light'. Despite 'mikle feghting and fascherie', he made his views prevail (ibid.), and for three decades he remained the dominant figure in Scottish theological education. 
In St Andrews, Melville also sat as an elder on the kirk session for several years and, on occasion, preached from the pulpit of Holy Trinity parish church. He took part in the general assembly's proceedings against Patrick Adamson and Robert Montgomerie, the recalcitrant archbishops of St Andrews and Glasgow, and was chosen to help with the work of establishing presbyteries in east Fife. In an address to the assembly of which he was moderator in 1582, he condemned the crown's exercise of that 'absolute authoritie whereby men intended to pull the crown off Christ's head and to wring the sceptre out of his hand' (Calderwood, 3.622). As a leading presbyterian he was of considerable interest to English diplomats in Scotland: Stephan Pole, a student at St Andrews, acted as informant to the English envoy, from whom he received $50 for his services. 
Following the rise to power of James Stewart, earl of Arran, and the inauguration of an administration which was hostile to the presbyterians, in 1584 Melville was summoned to appear before the privy council for uttering in a sermon on 'Daniel' allegedly seditious and treasonable speeches from the pulpit, in which he was said to have compared the king to Nebuchadnezzar. Taking with him testimonials in his favour from the staff of St Andrews University, he denied the charge and affirmed subjects' duty to obey the king whom 'God in his mercie hath placed lawfull king and supreme magistrat in the civill government of this countrie' (Calderwood, 4.4), but declined the privy council's jurisdiction in matters of doctrine and 'planlie tauld the King and Counsall that they presumed ower bauldlie' to 'judge the doctrin and controll the ambassators and messingers of a King and Counsall graitter nor they, and far above tham'. Unfastening his little Hebrew 'Bible' from his belt, he clanked it down on the table before the king and chancellor, declaring that this was his warrant, for 'with all ernestnes, zeall and gravitie, I stand for the cause of Jesus Chryst and his Kirk' ('Autobiography and Diary', 142). 
When charged to enter ward in Blackness Castle, Melville took flight with his brother Roger and sought refuge in England, where others had also fled for safety. With his departure from St Andrews, along with 'ane number of maisters and regentis thairof', the government declared the principalship of St Mary's vacant and proceeded to appoint John Robertson as Melville's successor. From the safety of Berwick, Melville contemplated resuming his academic life on the continent and as a preliminary went to London, where in June 1584 with other exiles he had an interview with the secretary of state Sir Francis Walsingham. In July he visited Oxford and Cambridge universities, where he 'conferrit with the most godlie and lernit ther' ('Autobiography and Diary', 219). At Oxford the debate concerned the contentious issue of whether the minister in exercising his office need tarry for the civil magistrate. In London puritan ministers conferred with Melville and the Scottish exiles about creating a presbyterian polity. 
To counteract the effect of propaganda by Patrick Adamson, archbishop of St Andrews, directed to the reformed churches abroad, Melville wrote on 1 July 1584 to the churches of Geneva and Zurich with his version of events in Scotland. He was also able to lecture in the chapel of the Tower of London, which was exempt from the bishop of London's jurisdiction. In October he attended the funeral in London of James Lawson, the exiled minister of Edinburgh. In November 1585 he joined the banished lords in returning home as Arran's administration collapsed. 
From 1586 presbyterianism made headway again, and Melville urged ministers to unite in opposing the 'Black Acts' of 1584, legislation which had asserted the crown's supremacy and the authority of bishops and had deprived the church of free assemblies. Unable to return to St Andrews, where plague had broken out, Melville spent the winter in Glasgow and was invited to visit the university which he called 'his eldest bern'. In March 1586 he resumed teaching at St Andrews, but in May, on being summoned to court, he was informed by the king, displeased by his continued opposition to Archbishop Adamson, that his services in the university would be dispensed for a season and that he would be warded at Baldovy until such time as James would recall him. When the university petitioned for Melville's return, James relented, providing Adamson were treated 'reverendlie' ('Autobiography and Diary', 251). 
Forbidden by the king in 1587 from preaching to the people in English on Sundays, Melville further angered James VI in 1592 by defending the views of John Knox and George Buchanan, who had 'sett the crowne upon his head'. James considered them defensible only by 'traterous and seditious theologues', and asserted that he had received his crown 'by successioun and not by anie man'. This led Melville to deliver to the king 'a maiste scharpe and frie admonition concerning his evil thinking and speaking of the best frinds of Chryst and him selff'. In 1593 he also 'gave the king a sharpe reprooffe for his favour borne to Papists', especially to the earl of Huntly ('Autobiography and Diary', 313), and when the king marched north with an army to secure the submission of Huntly and the northern earls Melville accompanied him. 
Melville had attended the coronation of Anne of Denmark in May 1590 and, much to the king's satisfaction, contributed an oration in Latin verse for the occasion, printed as 'Stephaniskion' by Waldegrave, at the king's request. Both Joseph Scaliger and Justus Lipsius congratulated him, as copies of the work 'past throw all Europe' ('Autobiography and Diary', 279). Melville penned a further poem in 1594 to mark the birth of James's son and heir, Prince Henry, who he predicted would unite the crowns of Scotland and England and humble the pride of Spain and Rome. 
In 1594 Melville was suspected by the king, apparently without foundation, of favouring the earl of Bothwell, when the latter for a time supported presbyterian objections to the king's leniency towards Huntly. In 1595, and again in 1596, he made his famous 'two kingdoms' speech on the separate nature of the ecclesiastical and civil jurisdictions. At Falkland Palace he sharply reminded the king that he was 'God's sillie vassall'. There were two kings and two kingdoms in Scotland with overlapping spheres: the kingdom of 'Chryst Jesus the King' was the kirk, 'whase subject King James the Saxt is', and in that realm there were no lords or heads, but only members. Those who had a special commission from Christ 'to watch over his Kirk and governe his spirituall kingdome', that is, ordained ministers, 'hes sufficient powar of him, and authoritie sa to do, bathe togidder and severallie; the quhilk na Christian King nor Prince sould controll and discharge, but fortifie and assist, utherwayes nocht fathfull subjects nor members of Chryst' ('Autobiography and Diary', 370). 
Excluded by the king from attending presbyteries, in 1597 Melville was also deprived of his office as rector of St Andrews University, though in 1599 he still remained dean of the faculty of divinity. Opposed to ecclesiastical representation in parliament, he was ordered by the king to leave the general assembly meeting at Dundee in 1598; and though commissioned by his presbytery to attend, he was again forbidden by the king from participating in the Montrose assembly of 1600. In vain he protested that 'he had a calling in the Kirk of God, and of Jesus Chryst, the King of kings, quhilk he behovit to dischairge at all occasiounes' ('Autobiography and Diary', 542). In 1602 he was warded in his college for making the exercise on the text 'Ephesians' 5: 11 and touching upon 'the present corruptions of the kirk' (ibid., 545). Yet he welcomed James's accession to the English throne in 1603, which he celebrated in verse, and favoured a legislative union of the two kingdoms. 
After James suspended meetings of the general assembly in 1604, the following year Melville and others made a stand and held an assembly at Aberdeen in defiance of the king, who resorted to severe measures against the ringleaders. In 1606, after heading the list of forty-two signatories to a protest against episcopacy, Melville was summoned to London. He arrived by the end of August, and in meetings with the king at Hampton Court during September he defended the freedom of general assemblies and the meeting of the Aberdeen assembly. Accused by the English privy council in November of writing some verses 'tending to the scandall and dishonour of the Church of England', he admitted to 'being muche moved with indignatioun to see suche vanitie and superstitioun in a Christian church under a Christian king'. Shaking the sleeves of the archbishop of Canterbury's rochet he branded them 'Romish ragis', a 'pairt of the beastis marke', and their wearer, Richard Bancroft, 'the capitall enemie of all the reformed kirks in Europ' (Calderwood, 6.597-8). Melville also disapproved of the 'great superstitioun and vanitie' displayed at court on St George's day and wrote some verses in Latin, translated as: '
Saint Andro, Chrystis Apostle trew, 

Does sign the Scotismenes rites; 

St George, Armenian Heresiarch, 

The Inglischmenes delytis. 

Let Scotismen, thane, hauld fast the faith! 

That is holie Appostolicke, 

Howbeit that Ingland keipes the cours 

That Papistis Apostaticke. 
('Autobiography and Diary', 706)' Confined first in the house of the dean of St Paul's, Melville was finally committed to the Tower of London in April 1607. The principalship of St Mary's in St Andrews was then declared vacant. From the Tower he wrote a reply to George Downame's sermon in defence of episcopacy. His services as divinity professor were sought in vain by the protestant academy at La Rochelle. Melville was initially denied visitors and the use of writing materials, but after a year some relaxation was permitted through the intercession of Sir James Sempill of Beltrees. When his room was examined, its walls were found covered with verses which he had engraved with the tongue of his shoe buckle. 
By 1608 Melville was persuaded to address some conciliatory verses to the king and an apologetic letter to the privy council, on the advice of Archbishop John Spottiswoode, once his student at Glasgow. In 1610 the English ambassador to France received a request from the protestant duc de Bouillon that James release Melville and allow him to become professor of biblical theology in the Huguenot enclave at Sedan. Released from the Tower in 1611 but forbidden to return to Scotland, he debated the merits of the post in Sedan. 'I am in a state of suspense as to the course which I ought to take. There is no room for me in Britain', he wrote, 'on account of pseudo-Episcopacy -- no hope of my being allowed to revisit my native country'. He had pondered the thirty-six years of active life in Scotland and 'the idle life which I have been condemned to spend in prison', a miserable reward for all his efforts 'taken in connection with the disgraceful bondage of the Church and the base perfidy of men'. The choice before him was an unpalatable one. 'Shall I fly from my native country, from my native Church, from my very self? Or, shall I deliver myself up, like a bound quadruped, to the will and pleasure of men?' (M'Crie, 314-15). In the end he accepted the invitation and left for France on 19 April 1611. 
At Sedan, Melville found himself in controversy with David Tilenus, his fellow professor of theology, a critic of Calvinism and inclined toward the views of Arminius. He showed sympathy, however, towards Johannes Piscator, a prominent Ramist and theologian at Herborn in the Rhine palatinate, whose teaching on the doctrine of justification caused considerable controversy in both France and Switzerland. Yet Melville remained resolute in his defence of the absolute decree of reprobation and was vigorous in his opposition to all who deviated in the direction of Arminianism. He died in Sedan, unmarried, in 1622. 
As a champion of ecclesiastical independence and a redoubtable opponent of royal supremacy, Melville proved a worthy successor to John Knox in defending Reformation principles. Yet his intransigence, his explosive temper, and his unwillingness to compromise led to open conflict with King James who, taking up Melville's challenge, succeeded in outmanoeuvring him by remodelling the church to suit his own preferences along English lines. Beyond his contribution as presbyterian leader within the church, Melville exerted a powerful influence in revitalizing university education. In neither field did James VI manage to expunge his achievement. Although his published works were slender, his beliefs helped to shape the covenanting struggle in the seventeenth century. They also permeated thinking both within the presbyterian establishment after the revolution settlement in 1690 and within the ranks of presbyterian seceders in the eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 18544


Melville, Andrew (1624-1706), army officer, was born in Scotland in May 1624, the son of John Melville, minister of Newton in Edinburghshire, and grandson of the leading Presbyterian divine, and diarist, James Melville; his mother was Joannetta Kellie, whose brother Melville was later described as chamberlain to Charles I. Sent to Konigsberg at thirteen to study the languages of northern Europe, Melville escaped to Poland, having joined a regiment levied for Polish service, but, seeing no prospect of active employment, he returned to Scotland in 1639. There he learned that his parents, ruined by his uncle's debts, had died, and that creditors had seized the entire property. He joined the covenanter forces and served in the bishops' wars, and in England from 1644. Lord Grey of Werke, who had already taken his brother into his service, promised Andrew a cornetcy, pending which, at the head of other young men also waiting for appointments, he lived by plunder until captured by countrymen in the north of England and imprisoned for some months. On his release he accompanied the army as it withdrew to Scotland in 1647. He then went to France, served with the Scots guards in the French army in Flanders, and was seriously wounded at the siege of Lens. After a variety of adventures he waited on Charles II at Breda, and agreed to join him in Scotland. He was part of the army which entered England in 1651, and he fought at the battle of Worcester, was shot in the arm, stripped, and left for dead, but was sheltered for three months by villagers until he recovered from his wounds. He then repaired in disguise to London, and was assisted by a kinsman in escaping to Holland. After further privations and perils he joined the Scottish bodyguard of Cardinal de Retz, and served under the duke of York in French pay. Eventually he linked his fortunes with those of Count Josias Waldeck, with whom he fought for the elector of Brandenburg, the king of Sweden, the elector of Cologne, and the duke of Celle (Brunswick-Luneburg). The duke sent him to London in 1660 to compliment Charles II on his restoration, and Melville paid a second visit on his own account in 1667; but the king, while very affable, professed inability to do anything for him. In 1680-81 Melville accompanied the prince of Hanover (afterwards George I) to England, and received the degree of MD at Oxford, whither he went with the prince. By 1678, retiring from active service, Melville had been appointed drost (governor or commandant) of Gifhorn with the rank of brigadier. He had married, in Germany about 1667, a Mlle Lamotte, a lady of the household of the Electress Sophia, and had a son, who predeceased him, and a daughter, Charlotte Sophia Anna (1670-1724), who in 1690 became the wife of Alexander von Schulenburg-Blumberg, a Hanoverian general. 
Melville was author of an autobiography published as 'Memoires de Monsieur le Chevalier de Melvill' in Amsterdam in 1704, at the request of the Electress Sophia of Hanover, who dubbed him a 'soldier of 'ill'-fortune'. He died at Gifhorn in 1706, his career having 'typified the life of the mercenary soldier in the Thirty Years' War -- except for his survival' (Stevenson, 1-2). 


@@@@@


doc= 18545


Melville, David, third earl of Leven and second earl of Melville (1660-1728), army officer and politician, was born on 5 May 1660 at Monimail, Fife, third son of George Melville, first earl of Melville (1636-1707), and Lady Catherine Leslie (1639-1713), daughter of Alexander Leslie, Lord Balgonie and second earl of Leven. In 1677, after the death of his maternal grandfather, the second earl, and of his two aunts, Catherine and Mary (both of whom held the title as countesses in their own right), David Melville claimed the right to succeed as third earl. He was opposed by his kinsman the earl of Rothes who, as lord chancellor, pursued the claim in the court of session until his death and a favourable judgment from Charles II in July 1681. Thereafter David Melville took a seat in the Scottish parliament with a rank equal to that of his father. 
When Leven's father fell under suspicion for the Rye House plot, Leven fled with him to the United Provinces in 1683. From there, Leven travelled to Kiel, Hamburg, and Berlin, eventually entering the service of the elector of Brandenburg through the patronage of Sophia, electress of Hanover, accepting the rank of colonel. Leven also acted as the envoy of William of Orange in Berlin, arranging a meeting between the prince and the elector of Brandenburg at Cleves. In 1688 he was granted permission to raise a regiment (the 25th regiment) of Scottish refugees living in the German states and United Provinces, which was used to garrison Plymouth during the prince of Orange's invasion. Subsequently, William sent Leven to Edinburgh as his envoy to the Scottish convention in March 1689. 
As part of his mission to Scotland, Leven was commissioned to raise a force of 800 to defend the capital until regular troops arrived from England. Following the departure of Viscount Dundee from the convention, and the declaration of the duke of Gordon that he held Edinburgh Castle for James II, Leven successfully summoned a force which, until the arrival of his own men from Plymouth, calmed the convention and the populace. Having joined General Hugh Mackay to fight against Dundee, Leven raised more troops and was awarded the power to treat with those who surrendered. 
At the battle of Killiecrankie (17 July 1689) Leven's regiment, on the far right of the battlefield, held fast while other regiments, including Mackay's, broke and ran in the face of a highlander charge. The composure and courage of the regiment under fire won great respect for Leven, who held them together as they covered the army's retreat to Stirling. When the duke of Gordon surrendered Edinburgh Castle in June 1689, Leven was appointed its keeper, as well as acting as a privy councillor, and as commissioner for forfeiture of estates, for plantation of kirks, and of supply for Perth and Fife. During this period he also spent time on campaign in Flanders with William of Orange, paying his regiment out of his own pocket. 
On 3 September 1691 Leven married his first cousin, Anne Wemyss (1675-1702), who joined him in living in Edinburgh Castle. While there, he acquired a seat in the Tron Church and became a patron of local horse-racing. One of his most trying duties, however, was the keeping of Jacobite prisoners, among them lords Seaforth, Breadalbane, and Strathmore. Leven also quarrelled incessantly over castle appointments with the commander-in-chief in Scotland, Sir Thomas Livingstone. Perhaps because of this, and despite his active opposition to the 'Act of Security' and promotion of the succession of Queen Anne, he was removed from the keeping of the castle in December 1702 and instead named major-general of the Scottish forces. Rewarded in 1704 with the wards that had been in the hands of the crown since 1689, he was also called to London to advise on Scottish affairs. While there he was caught up in the Queensberry plot, in which the second duke of Queensberry, working with Simon Fraser, Lord Lovat, alleged that Leven and others, including lords Seafield, Cromarty, and Tweedale, had through him been in communication with James Stuart, the Jacobite Pretender. Although disproven, this allegation later returned to haunt Leven. In 1705 he returned to Scotland as keeper of Edinburgh Castle, although this time without his wife, who had died on 9 January 1702. This was followed by his appointment as master of ordinance (1705) and commander-in-chief in Scotland (1706). An enthusiastic promoter of the union, in the following year he was chosen as a representative peer, a position he held until 1710. In 1707 he also inherited the title second earl of Melville upon the death of his father and the prior death of his elder brothers. During the Jacobite attempts of 1708 Melville once again had the custody of high-ranking Jacobites in Edinburgh Castle, a job he handled with such discretion that even George Lockhart of Carnwath admitted that he had treated the prisoners civilly and fairly. Melville, however, was a harsh critic of the government's neglect of Scottish fortifications and ordinance, and was stripped of his position as commander-in-chief and governor of the castle in 1712, with considerable arrears in pay. 
Melville eagerly greeted the accession of George I, to whom he was known from his time in Brandenburg and through the Electress Sophia. The new king briefly returned his friendship upon his arrival at Greenwich, but this action aroused considerable envy among other courtiers. That same year Simon Fraser revived suspicions first raised during the Queensberry plot when he suggested to Lord Ilay, brother of the duke of Argyll, that, in France, he had had contact with Melville through Jacobite messengers and had sent him medals from the Pretender. Although Melville proved his innocence, suspicion stalled his career. During the rising of 1715 Jacobites seized Melville's house at Balgonie, while government troops rudely searched his Edinburgh house. 
With no further royal preferment, Melville fell into debt sufficient to force the sale of family lands and his retirement to Markinch, where he died on 6 June 1728 and was buried six days later. Melville had two sons: George, who married Margaret Carnegie, daughter of the fourth earl of Northesk and predeceased his father, producing a son, David, who became fourth earl of Leven and third earl of Melville; and Alexander, who succeeded his nephew as fifth earl of Leven and fourth earl of Melville. He also had two daughters, Mary, who married William, second earl of Aberdeen, and Margaret, who died in infancy. 


@@@@@


doc= 18546


Melville, George, fourth Lord Melville and first earl of Melville (1636-1707), politician, was the eldest son of John Melville, third Lord Melville (died 1643), and Anna (died after 1643), elder daughter and coheir of Sir George Erskine of Innerteil. 
On 6 May 1651 the king wrote to Melville from Dunfermline, seeking money on behalf of Melville's kinsman Sir George Melville of Garvock, who had obtained the position of under-master of the household to the king in Scotland. The following year the king wrote on his own behalf to Melville seeking financial aid. On 3 January 1654, in the aftermath of the abortive Glencairn rising, English troopers arrested Melville and one Sir John Carstairs in St Andrews. Although they had taken no part in the rising they were suspected of implication in the stealing of horses by some of Glencairn's men. Taken to Burntisland, they were briefly imprisoned. 
By contract dated 17 January 1655 Melville married Catherine (1639-1713), only surviving daughter of Alexander Leslie, Lord Balgonie, and granddaughter of the famous covenanting general Alexander Leslie, first earl of Leven (c.1580-1661); they had eight sons, including David Melville, third earl of Leven and second earl of Melville (1660-1728), and four daughters. Following his marriage, Melville's political profile increased. In 1656 he was a justice of the peace for Fife and Kinross-shire. That autumn he was named as a commissioner in Fife and Kinross for raising the counties' contribution to Cromwell's war with Spain and other Commonwealth expenses. He served again as a commissioner of assessment in the area in 1659. In May 1660 he was among the Scots who went to London to greet Charles II following his return to England, but stayed for only ten days, and 'haveing kissed the Kings Maj. hand' ('Diary of Mr John Lamont', 122), returned home to Scotland on 12 June 1660. He attended the first session of the Restoration parliament in Scotland from 1 January to 12 July 1661, and served as a commissioner of supply for Fife and Kinross-shire. 
In February 1663, Melville returned to London, possibly remaining there until after the marriage on 20 April of his wife's younger stepsister Anna Scott, countess of Buccleuch, to James, duke of Monmouth. Appointed one of the duchess of Buccleuch's curators, Melville afterwards managed her affairs efficiently in Scotland, obtaining the approval of the duke and duchess as well as that of Charles II. In September 1678 he received a special commission over the Buccleuch estates, probably as the result of a visit to London earlier that spring at the request of the duke. By 1681 Melville wanted to resign his position of curator, but he was persuaded to retain it until 1683. 
During the Pentland rising of 1666 Melville was one of the Fife landowners summoned by the privy council to defend Edinburgh. Twelve years later, in the context of growing covenanting tensions and activities, on 29 January 1678 Melville was listed among those in the presbytery of Cupar who had not signed the bond for keeping the public peace; neither, it seems, had he signed the bond against conventicles. However, following the duke of Monmouth's appointment the following year as captain-general of the royal forces in opposition to the covenanters in Scotland, while at court in London Melville offered his services to the cause and the king accepted them. Melville joined Monmouth's forces the day before the battle of Bothwell Bridge on 22 June 1679. Monmouth later certified that then 'I did direct and authorize the Lord Melvill to send propositions to the rebells, and receive some from them, in order to laying downe their armes, and submitting to the king's mercy' (Fraser, 2.27). 
A few years later Melville's association with Monmouth made him more vulnerable. In 1683 orders were issued for his arrest on suspicion of being involved in the Rye House plot, but by 28 July he had escaped to the Netherlands, where he attached himself to the court of the prince of Orange. In January 1684 Melville was summoned to appear before the privy council on 8 April, but when he was expected medical evidence was submitted by doctors in Rotterdam stating that he was too ill to travel. By 13 November 1684 Melville was being referred to by the privy council as 'a declared fugitive' ('Reg. PCS', 10.26). Yet he was not an active participant in the Argyll and Monmouth rebellions of 1685. In a vindication of his conduct written in 1703 he stated that he was opposed to both expeditions, although he had reluctantly granted a bond for $500 to one James Stewart in support of the Argyll expedition, in ignorance that it had already sailed. The Scottish parliament none the less declared Melville a rebel and on 16 June 1685 his estates were forfeited and annexed to the crown. Punishment was modified by James VII in January 1687: the estates were granted to Melville's eldest son, the master of Melville. In return, Melville paid compensation of $3000 sterling ($36,000 Scots) and a yearly rent of $200 sterling ($2400 Scots). Nevertheless, he remained in the Netherlands until after William and Mary had been proclaimed king and queen in 1688. 
Melville was summoned to the convention of estates which met on 14 March 1689 but did not subscribe the act of 16 March which declared it to be a free and lawful meeting of the estates. On 27 March he was appointed to the parliamentary committee for settling the government, and on 30 March as a commissioner of the militia in Fife and Kinross; on 23 April he was also appointed as a commissioner to treat for a union with England. Melville was in London when William and Mary were crowned as king and queen of Scotland. On 13 May 1689 he was appointed sole secretary of state for Scotland, securing the position from his rival Sir James Montgomerie of Skelmorlie, a militant presbyterian and the leader of the 'Club'. Melville's moderate presbyterianism appears to have satisfied episcopalians, who were wary of Montgomerie's more militant stance. He took the oath at Hampton Court on 23 September 1689. On 21 January 1690 Melville was named as an exchequer commissioner in Scotland, and on 26 February he was appointed high commissioner to the forthcoming second session of William's and Mary's parliament in Scotland. Returning to Edinburgh between 8 March and 10 March 1690, he first attended the privy council on 10 March. On 8 April 1690 he was created earl of Melville, viscount of Kirkcaldy, and Lord Raith, Monymail, and Balwearie. 
Melville continued as a high commissioner in the second session of the Williamite parliament in Scotland, apparently to the satisfaction of both people and king. His speech to the assembled estates on 15 April 1690 referred to William as 'the Instrument in the Hand of God' who 'did so magnanimously expose Himself for the Rescuing you from the greatest of evils, Popery and Slavery; and Delivering you from the Fears you were ready to sink under' and expressed his own 'intire Faithfulness to the King my Master, a sincere respect to you, and a zealous application for promoting of the true Religion, and Common good of all' ('APS', 9, appx, 38). The strident demands of the 'Club' for constitutional reform and a presbyterian church made the securing of a settlement for the king difficult, but Melville presided over the abolition of the controversial lords of the articles (8 May) and the legislation re-establishing presbyterian church government of the church of Scotland (7 June). Legislation passed in July rescinding forfeitures and fines resulted in Melville, among others, receiving back his land and estates. However, King William was displeased at the Scottish religious settlement with its concentration of power in the hands of a militant minority of presbyterian ministers and its failure to grant liberty to conscience. Although Melville had probably done the best he could, given the atmosphere in the Edinburgh parliament, his position was weakened, especially at the English court. None the less, he continued as secretary of state and he was high commissioner to the short parliamentary session of 3-10 September 1690. 
However, Melville soon suffered a political eclipse. In January 1691 Sir John Dalrymple of Stair was appointed as joint, and apparently senior, secretary of state, residing near the king and accompanying William to Flanders. On 29 December Melville exchanged his post as joint secretary for the lesser office of lord privy seal. He appears to have got on with the duties of this position and he remained in close contact with William Carstares, then one of the royal chaplains. He attended the parliamentary sessions of 1693 (18 April to 15 June) and 1695 (9 May to 17 July) as lord privy seal. Anxiety about the permanence of the 1690 restoration of his estates was allayed by the passing of an act of ratification in his favour on 12 June 1693. When the 1695 parliamentary session debated the 1692 massacre of Glencoe, Melville refused to vote either against Dalrymple, his erstwhile rival, or for the imprisonment of John Campbell, first earl of Breadalbane, on the grounds that the king should be consulted before any summary action was taken. On 28 June 1695 parliament was presented with a petition from the city of Edinburgh reclaiming from Melville a bond of $3000 sterling ($36,000 Scots) assigned to him when he was high commissioner. The case was remitted to the lords of session, but the dispute was not settled in Melville's favour until 1698 when the king endorsed the assignment. Meanwhile, on 17 July 1695, parliament granted to Melville the right to hold two yearly fairs, in May and October, in the parish of Monimail at Letham in Fife. 
In October 1695 Melville received a letter from Carstares suggesting that if he were to come to London then the king would not be displeased. Melville's return to political favour was apparent by May 1696 when he was offered the position of president of the privy council. He initially declined but persuasion from Carstares and William Bentinck, first earl of Portland, eventually changed his mind, and he took up the position about the middle of August 1696. Attending parliament in this capacity, on 10 September he became president of, and an important influence on, the committee for the security of the kingdom; he also signed the association in defence of King William on the same day. During the 1698 parliamentary session (19 July to 1 September) he was a member of the same committee but Archibald Campbell, tenth earl of Argyll, wrote to Carstares that 'Our friend Melvill has not opened his mouth scarce all this session' (Fraser, 2.237). However, he continued as president of the privy council until December 1702, when he was deprived following the accession of Queen Anne. 
Melville was not closely associated with the Darien project and, unlike his sons, he was not a stockholder in the Company of Scotland. Having attended the parliamentary session of May 1700 he went to Bath in an attempt to relieve his health problems and thereafter to London. Back in Scotland to attend the parliamentary session which sat from 29 October 1700 to 31 January 1701, on 16 January he voted in favour of a parliamentary address, as opposed to a full act, being presented to William over the legality of the Darien enterprise. In the 1702 parliamentary session he was again a member of the committee for the security of the kingdom. Although an attender at the majority of the sessions of the new parliament of 1703-7, he was not present from 3 October 1706 to 25 March 1707 and therefore he did not vote on the articles of the treaty of union. In his absence, on 12 February 1707, he was voted recompense for money advanced from him in 1689-90 for the payment of officers' commissions and to help maintain troops who had not been paid. Melville died on 20 May 1707 and was buried in the parish church of Monimail, Fife. His widow died on 2 April 1713. Writing in the early eighteenth century, Macky wrote of Melville in old age: 'He hath neither Learning, Wit, nor common Conversation; but a Steadiness of Principle, and a firm Boldness for Presbyterian Government, in all Reigns... He makes a very mean Figure in his Person, being low, thin, with a great Head, a long Chin, and little Eyes. ('Memoirs of the Secret Services', 203)' 



@@@@@


doc= 18547


Melville, James (1556-1614), Church of Scotland minister and diarist, was the son of Richard Melville of Baldovy, minister of Maryton near Montrose, Angus, and his wife, Isabell Scrimgeour (died 1557/8), sister of the laird of Glasswell. He was born on 25 July 1556, though his uncle, the presbyterian leader Andrew Melville, considered that he was born in 1557 ('Autobiography and Diary', 1.13). Taught first by the minister of Logie-Montrose, James was sent to school in the nearby burgh of Montrose and learned the rudiments of Latin and some French, before entering St Leonard's College, St Andrews, where he matriculated in 1570. He appreciated the value of education, was promised a bursary, and 'lyked the schollar's lyff best' (ibid., 23). Yet on arrival at university he found himself 'nather being weill groundet in grammar, nor com to the yeirs of naturall judgment', burst into tears when he failed to follow the Latin lectures, and was ready to return home (ibid., 25). He persevered, however, and benefited from private tuition in the evenings. Also in St Andrews he heard the preaching of John Knox, whose powerful oratory made him shudder and tremble to such an extent that he found himself unable to 'hald a pen to wryte'; he nevertheless became accustomed to hear the reformer, who was apt to call 'us schollars unto him and bless us, and exhort us to knaw God and his wark in our contrey, and stand be the guid cause' (ibid., 26). Melville's father hoped that he would become a lawyer, but James's thoughts turned to the ministry, and after graduating BA on 9 February 1572, he was invited by Andrew Melville, on the latter's appointment as principal of Glasgow University, to undertake teaching in arts. 
At Stirling, as he travelled west to Glasgow, Melville met the eight-year-old James VI, 'the sweitest sight in Europe that day, for strange and extraordinar gifts of ingyne, judgment, memorie and langage' and heard him discourse on knowledge and ignorance, 'to my grait mervell and estonishment' ('Autobiography and Diary', 48). Melville's teaching at Glasgow began in 1575 with the Greek authors, Ramus's 'Dialecticae', and Talon's 'Rhetorica', followed in 1576 with instruction in arithmetic, mathematics, logic, and moral philosophy. In private study, however, Melville pursued Hebrew and theology, and participated in the 'exercise' or 'prophesying' organized by the ministers of the area for biblical exposition and homiletical training. According to his own account, his exhortation in church before the congregation, when his turn came round, 'pleasit and confortit guid peiple verie mikle, sa that they resorted verie frequentlie' (ibid., 55-6). 
When his uncle left Glasgow for St Andrews in 1580 to become principal of St Mary's College, James Melville, who had proposed to go to France, was persuaded to accompany his uncle to St Andrews and teach Hebrew grammar there. The town of Stirling petitioned in 1582 to have him as their minister, but neither the general assembly nor Andrew Melville granted approval for his translation. On 1 May 1583 he married Elizabeth (died 1607x10), daughter of John Durie (1537-1600), the radical minister in Edinburgh who had initiated the debate on episcopacy in the general assembly in 1575. They had six children: Ephraim ('b'. 1585, died in or before 1629), later minister of Pittenweem; Andrew (1586-1588); Andrew ('b'. 1588, died in or before 1613); Margaret (1593-1594); John (1595-1649), later minister of Newton; Issobel; and Anna ('b'. 'c'.1598). 
Following the promulgation in 1584 of the 'Black Acts' asserting the royal supremacy and authority of bishops, Melville heard that the archbishop of St Andrews intended to have him arrested. He made for Dundee and sailed for the safety of Berwick upon Tweed disguised as a 'shipbroken sie-man' ('Autobiography and Diary', 168), as his house and papers were searched by the authorities. His eldest son was born in the town on 15 January 1585. Prohibited from preaching in public at Berwick, Melville served as minister to the banished ultra-protestant lords who had congregated at Newcastle upon Tyne and drew up an order of discipline to be observed. He announced there would be four sermons a week, with common prayers twice daily, and thanksgiving at every meal, with a chapter read from the 'Bible' and a psalm sung. A week each month was to be set aside for fasting and meditation, followed by the celebration of the Lord's supper. Provision was also made for lectures and for lessons on the catechism. All who could read were to possess copies of the 'Bible' and 'Psalm Book'. The elders and deacons elected from the congregation were to meet weekly. The nobles dutifully agreed to these terms, which they observed for the duration of their exile. 
From the safety of England, Melville wrote a lengthy letter condemning 'this present intolerable tyrannie of the fals Bischopes' and censuring those ministers who had obeyed the king's requirement and signed the subscription of 1584 in favour of bishops and the royal supremacy ('Autobiography and Diary', 200). In November 1585 he returned home along with other presbyterian exiles. He and his uncle soon became embroiled in disputes with Archbishop Patrick Adamson, partly because the archbishop had reconverted St Mary's College into an arts school in their absence. A fierce attack on Adamson by James Melville at a meeting of the synod of Fife in the spring of 1586 led the assembled body to excommunicate the archbishop. The latter then retaliated by having an excommunication of the Melvilles proclaimed in Edinburgh. Uncle and nephew were called before the privy council in May, and the dispute was resolved by all parties being assigned teaching duties. In October 1586 James Melville was appointed minister of Anstruther and Kilrenny in Fife. Two years later he had the unusual experience of interviewing an admiral of the Spanish Armada whose ship found its way to Anstruther harbour after the fleet had been damaged in storms off Fair Isle in the far north. 
Melville acquired further charges in Fife, but kept them only briefly. Active in collecting for the relief of exiled French protestants in England and for the city of Geneva, he consulted with nobles, lawyers, burgesses, and ministers in 1588 on the threat posed by the activities of Jesuits and seminary priests at home. In 1590 he was appointed by the privy council as a commissioner for preserving and promoting protestantism in Fife. During the following decade he published 'The description of the Spainyart's naturall, out of Julius Scaliger, with sum exhortations for warning of kirk and countrey' (1592) and a devotional work, 'Ane fruitful and comfortable exhortatioun anent death' (1597). In 1598 he issued 'A Spiritual Propyne of a Pastor to his People', a catechism 'for the profit of my peiple' ('Autobiography and Diary', 12). His proposition that prayer makes 'us hamely with God' ('A Spiritual Propyne', 5) reveals his ability to appreciate his parishioners' needs, and he underlined the value of music in enhancing family devotions. Sensitive to nature in his writings, he wrote poetry as well as prose, including a lament on the kirk in Greek verse. 
Moderator of the general assembly in June 1589, Melville preached against attempts at introducing conformity with the Church of England. After obtaining Archbishop Adamson's repentance in 1591, he recommended to the synod of Fife the archbishop's release from excommunication. In 1594, with his uncle Andrew, he accompanied King James on an expedition against the northern Roman Catholic earls but at an interview with the king at Falkland Palace in 1595 he defended his fellow minister David Black whom the king had accused of preaching politics. In 1598 he opposed the king's plans for ecclesiastical representation in parliament as a device for reviving episcopacy. While he was prepared to give a public thanksgiving for the king's deliverance from the Gowrie conspiracy in 1600, he refused thereafter to celebrate the anniversary, as commanded by king and parliament. After his uncle had been warded in 1602, he continued to attend assemblies of the kirk and to speak out forcefully. By 1604 it was said that 'the king hated him most of anie man in Scotland, becaus he crossed all his turnes and was a ring-leader to others' (Calderwood, 6.261-2). 
In September 1605 Melville wrote an apology on behalf of the warded ministers who had offended the king by holding a general assembly at Aberdeen in defiance of his wishes, and in 1606 he signed the protest against episcopacy. As one of the presbyterian ministers invited by the king to London to attend a meeting at Hampton Court in 1606, he rejected any notion of royal supremacy in matters ecclesiastical, and was warded with the bishop of Durham. Permitted to leave London on 6 May 1607, he was ordered to remain within ten miles of Newcastle. However, following the death of his wife some time between 1607 and 1610 he was allowed to return briefly to Scotland to settle his affairs. According to David Calderwood, in October 1607 the king deputed Sir John Anstruther to go to Newcastle and offer Melville a bishopric, which he firmly declined; and in 1608 Melville declared that episcopacy 'was poprie' (Calderwood, 6.732). From Newcastle Melville published another devotional work, 'A Morning Vision' (1609). In 1612 he married Deborah, the nineteen-year-old daughter of Richard Clerke, vicar of Berwick; they had no children. Melville seems to have contemplated moving to France, but he died in Berwick on 19 January 1614, and was buried there on 21 January. 
To the sympathetic Calderwood, Melville was 'one of the wisest directours of kirk affaires that our kirk had in his tyme' (Calderwood, 7.190). With John Forbes and Robert Bruce he was a central figure in the ongoing Reformation and played a key role of spiritual father to men only a little younger than himself. For Archbishop John Spottiswoode, once his student at Glasgow, he was 'a man of good learning, sober and modest', but 'a crafty, biding man' and 'so addicted to the courses of Mr Andrew Melvill, his uncle, as by following him he lost the king's favour, which he once enjoyed in a good measure, and so made himself and his labours unprofitable to the Church' (Spottiswoode, 3.190). Yet his writings have made a profound impression on the historiography of the kirk. His 'Diary', completed in 1602 and published in the nineteenth century, paints an admiring picture of one of its leading figures, his uncle Andrew, and presents a vivid and intimate portrait of church life which is generally faithful to the facts. His 'True Narratioune of the Declyneing Aige of the Kirk of Scotland', composed in 1610, also heavily influences an anti-episcopalian perspective, and other posthumously published works such as 'The Black Bastel' (1634) and 'A Short Relation of the Kirk of Scotland since the Reformation' (1638), have served to enhance it. 


@@@@@


doc= 18548


Melville, Sir James, of Halhill (1535/6-1617), diplomat and autobiographer, was the third son of Sir John Melville, fourth laird of Raith (d. 1548), and his second wife, Helen (died in or after 1584), daughter of Sir Alexander Napier of Merchiston and his wife, Janet, daughter of Edmund Chisholm of Cromlix. Born into a family that had long been prominent in Fife, at the age of fourteen James Melville was sent to France by Mary of Guise 'to be placit paige of honour with the Quen hir dochter' ('Memoirs of His Own Life', 9). He left Scotland in the entourage of Jean de Montluc, bishop of Valence, the French ambassador to the Scottish court, and in April 1550 arrived in Paris, where he spent the next three years in the bishop's household continuing his education -- learning French, dancing, fencing, and playing the lute, as well as acquiring knowledge of current European affairs. He then entered the service of Anne, duc de Montmorency, great constable of France and chief minister to Henri II, and from May 1553 he saw military service in the war against the emperor, Charles V. In August 1557 Melville was wounded at St Quentin and narrowly escaped capture. 
Following the treaty of Cateau Cambresis in April 1559, Henri II sent Melville to Scotland on a special mission to discover the real intentions of Lord James Stewart, half-brother of Mary, queen of Scots, whom Mary of Guise suspected of aiming at her daughter's crown. Melville achieved a meeting with Lord James through the good offices of Henry Balnaves, 'a godly, learnit, lang experimented, wyse consellor' ('Memoirs of His Own Life', 81), and was satisfied as to his intentions. 
On Montmorency's recommendation Melville moved to the court of the elector palatine, Friedrich III, where he learned German, and from where he was able to visit the main cities of Italy. He returned to Paris to offer condolences to Mary, left a widow by the death of Francois II on 5 December 1560, and to present a commission regarding the proposed marriage of Charles IX to the emperor Maximilian's daughter. The French queen dowager, Catherine de' Medici, offered to make Melville a gentleman of the king's chamber and an ambassador to Germany, England, and Flanders, but in the meantime he received letters on behalf of Mary calling him home to Scotland to be employed in her service. Melville returned via England, where he had an interview with Queen Elizabeth regarding a proposal of marriage to the elector palatine's son, Johann Kasimir. Elizabeth, however, was more interested in Mary's choice of husband and proposed Lord Robert Dudley, later earl of Leicester, as one of two men she had in mind to offer Mary -- the other being Darnley, 'a lusty yong prince' ('Memoirs of His Own Life', 108). 
On 5 May 1564 Melville presented himself to Mary at Perth and was well received. Melville 'thocht her mair worthy to be servit for litle proffet, then any uther prence in Europe for gret commodite' ('Memoirs of His Own Life', 111). He was appointed a privy councillor and gentleman of the bedchamber, and on 20 July 1564 was granted a yearly pension of $100 Scots. He also received 1000 merks yearly out of Mary's revenues in France, together with lands in Auchtermuchty. In September 1564 he was sent to England to win the confidence of Elizabeth, to assess her opinions concerning Mary's marriage, and to secure her position as heir to the English throne. Melville worked hard to ingratiate himself with Elizabeth, but admitted that he did not trust her. 
On 22 January 1565 Melville was granted the lands of Drumcorse in Linlithgowshire for his services, and on 18 November 1565 he was given all the goods, debts, and rights pertaining to his elder brother, Robert Melville, escheated to the crown for Robert's support to the rising known as the chaseabout raid. James Melville was staying at Holyrood on the night of 9 March 1566, and, though he was not a witness to Rizzio's murder, he exploited it to bring about the reconciliation of Mary and Moray. On 16 April 1566 he was granted a life pension of 500 merks Scots a year. Following the birth of Prince James on 19 June 1566 Melville was sent to relay the news to Elizabeth. He requested her to be a godmother to the prince, and she agreed. 
Melville was in Mary's entourage when she was abducted by Bothwell on 24 April 1567. But although he blamed Bothwell as the chief source of Mary's ruin, the prime suspect in Darnley's murder, and the bringer of 'gret trouble and mischeif into the contre' ('Memoirs of His Own Life', 170), he was nevertheless present at their marriage on 15 May. After Mary had abdicated, on 24 July, Melville was sent by the nobles in August to offer the regency to the earl of Moray. In politics and religion Melville favoured Moray, but he was loyal to Mary and hoped that she and her opponents could be reconciled. This was prevented, however, by Mary's escape from Lochleven in May 1568, followed quickly by her defeat at Langside and her flight into England. 
On the death of Henry Balnaves in February 1570, Melville inherited the estate of Halhill in Fife. Balnaves was a senator of the college of justice and an active reformer. Having no children of his own he had adopted Melville as his son and sole executor, and left him the whole heirship of Halhill. Balnaves's will, dated 3 January 1570, contains a bequest to his 'sones wyffe' of a damask gown lined with velvet showing that Melville was now married (Fraser, 3.117-20). Melville's wife, Christine Boswell, with whom he had two sons and two daughters, (including Elizabeth Melville, the writer) is identified in a charter of 24 February 1576 confirming Melville's grant to her in liferent of the half-lands of Easter Collessie (called Halhill) and of Murefield, in the sheriffdom and county of Fife. 
During the minority of James VI, Melville was entrusted with diplomatic missions by all four regents, before choosing to retire from court life. But having been recommended by Mary, queen of Scots, for his good counsel and services, he returned during James VI's reign, when he offered advice and support to the young king and received foreign ambassadors. However, 'hindered by want of health' ('CSP Scot.', '1581-3', 652), he was reluctant to act as ambassador himself, and declined missions to England, Denmark, and Spain, in spite of being commended in 1590 for his knowledge of Latin, Italian, and German, and his diplomatic experience. Appointed a member of the privy council and of the exchequer, and also made gentleman of the bedchamber to Queen Anne, Melville was knighted at her coronation on 17 May 1590. He was present at Holyrood on 27 December 1591, and again at Falkland on 28 June 1592, when the first earl of Bothwell tried to kidnap the king, and he commented at length on Bothwell's association with witches. 
Following the death in 1594 of his brother David Melville of Newmill, Melville was retoured his heir in the lands of Prinlaws. He was called to parliament on 30 May 1594, as one of four representatives for Fife, and in December 1597 his annual pensions of $100 and 500 merks were ratified by the king in parliament, with an augmentation fee of $300. In July 1599 Melville was named to a commission for raising men for military service, and on 14 July 1600 he was received and admitted to the privy council (as reconstituted in 1598). 
Melville declined James VI's request to accompany him to England in 1603, though he did subsequently make one visit to London. His later years were spent quietly at Halhill, where he wrote his memoirs. Intended mainly as a guide for his son James, they are among the most important sources for British history in the second half of the sixteenth century, through the light they shed on the human qualities of the leading actors on the public stage. They did much to justify Sir Walter Scott's verdict that they may 'justly be compared with the most valuable materials which British history affords' (Scott, 'History of Scotland', 1850, 2.93). Melville based his judgements on Mary, Elizabeth, Darnley, Moray, and others on his personal observation. It was to Melville that Queen Elizabeth uttered her famous cry of distress, when told of the birth of Prince James: 'The queen of Scots is this day leichter of a fair son, and I am but a barren stock' ('Memoirs of His Own Life', 159). Likewise it is to Melville that posterity owes such vignettes of the great as Mary praising Darnley's good looks, Elizabeth tickling Robert Dudley's neck while creating him earl of Leicester, and Bothwell's disgusting language. The memoirs were not published until 1683. Several further editions followed in the eighteenth century and later, notably those of Thomas Thomson in 1827 and Gordon Donaldson in 1969. 
Melville owed his ability to record people and events primarily to his employment as a diplomat. In that role he seems to have been fairly impartial, avoiding direct involvement in political and religious intrigue, and remaining free from links to any of the leading families. When setting down his opinion that the main figures of his time would have been better off if they had listened to his advice, Melville may well have been exaggerating his own importance. But his very lack of bias and self-interest did at least make it easier for him to speak freely. As both courtier and ambassador he earned the respect he won during the reigns of two monarchs and four regents. Melville died on 13 November 1617, aged eighty-two, and was buried in the churchyard of Collessie. 


@@@@@


doc= 18549


Melville, Sir John, of Raith (d. 1548), landowner, was the elder son of John Melville of Raith (died 'c'.1494), and his wife, Janet Bonar (died in or after 1506). In 1502 he succeeded his grandfather William Melville as laird of Raith, and by 1506 he had been knighted (perhaps at James IV's wedding celebrations in 1503). He married twice. With Margaret Wemyss, whom he married about 1503, he is known only to have had a daughter, Janet, who married Sir James Kirkcaldy of Grange. With Helen Napier (died in or after 1584), whom he probably married about 1525, he had nine sons and two daughters. He also had an illegitimate son, John, begotten in England. 
A handsome and plausible man, able to frame his face to all occasions, Melville is said to have fought at Flodden in 1513. Having survived the Scottish defeat, in the 1520s he charmed the sixth earl of Angus, who in October 1526 appointed him master of the Royal Artillery for life, even though a month earlier Melville had joined the earl of Lennox in trying to release the young James V from Angus's custody. After the coup failed Melville had to plead for a pardon, which he obtained on 14 August 1527. A year later Angus was banished by James, who clearly did not regard Melville as seriously compromised by his links with the fallen regime, for he several times employed him on justice ayres. A more serious handicap was probably an extended feud, beginning in 1527, with John Moultray of Markinch and Seafield, whose father had been killed by Melvilles, causing much violence and several deaths. The quarrel was eventually settled in 1534 after the king's intervention. In 1533 Melville had accompanied James to the borders when war with England threatened, and he also served on the assizes which condemned Lady Glamis in 1537 and Sir James Hamilton of Finnart in 1540. Described in the latter year as the king's 'lovit familiar servitour' (Fraser, 1.53), he was made captain of Dunbar Castle, the greatest strength north of the border at this time, and in that capacity had custody of highland chiefs arrested on James's expedition to the Western Isles. 
Like many other Fife gentry, including his own son-in-law Kirkcaldy of Grange, Melville was won over to the cause of religious reform, so much so that he features among the martyrs in John Johnston's 'Heroes ex omni historia Scotica lectissimi' (1603). In 1540 he was named in the list of heretics that Cardinal David Beaton presented to the king, recommending that James confiscate their lands and goods. No action followed, and Melville remained captain of Dunbar until about the end of 1542, after the king's death. Melville was later one of the landowners whose support the cardinal tried to buy with grants of church land, and in 1544 Mary of Guise appears to have regarded him as at least a potential supporter. There is no evidence that Melville was involved in Beaton's assassination, on 29 May 1546, though he was later suspected of gaining possession of some of the dead cardinal's valuables. In the meantime he had travelled widely, in England as well as in Scotland. He clearly favoured an English marriage for Mary, queen of Scots, and appears to have worked for an English victory. 
Melville's bastard son John had been involved in the plot against Beaton, and subsequently withdrew to England, where he became an agent for Protector Somerset. He received letters from his father, in one of which, sent in January 1548, Sir John gave information of Scottish military affairs, telling how the fourth earl of Argyll was advancing on Dundee, which was then in English hands. A month later this letter, and perhaps others, fell into the hands of the governor of Scotland, the second earl of Arran, when Arran captured the tower-house of John Cockburn of Ormiston. Arran sat on this highly incriminating evidence for months and then struck, at the beginning of December. Melville was arrested by servants of the Scottish treasurer, John Hamilton, abbot of Paisley, and taken to Edinburgh, where he was tried and condemned on 13 December. The charge sheet stretched far and wide. Melville's 'lese maiestie' included aiding the 'evill and mischevous purpois and effaris of... Henrie the aucht King of Ingland'. He had allegedly behaved traitorously since the end of 1542 ('continewalie sen the deceis of oure said ladiis umquhile derrest fader'). In particular he had revealed the 'secretis' of the realm in the first half of 1546, and had also given warning of Argyll's 'starklie' descent upon Dundee at the end of the following year. 
Executed by hanging on the day of his trial, Melville's head was set 'upoun ane prik upoun the tolbuith' and his body was dismembered, with 'every quarter put upoun ane port of the said burgh of Edinbur, to the sycht of the peple' (Fraser, 3.103-4). On 14 December all his possessions were escheated to the crown, but on 4 June 1563 his forfeiture was rescinded, enabling his widow and children to recover their inheritance. His sons included Robert Melville, who was made first Lord Melville in 1616, the memoirist Sir James Melville of Halhill, Sir Andrew Melville of Garvock, who became master of Queen Mary's household and accompanied her to England, and William, commendator of Tongland. 


@@@@@


doc= 18550


Melville, Robert, first Lord Melville (1527/8-1621), administrator and judge, was born in Fife, the second son of Sir John Melville of Raith (d. 1548), and his second wife, Helen Napier of Merchiston (died in or after 1584). Raised in the international tradition of noble service, he was not university trained but was entered into the service of Mary of Guise, queen dowager of Scotland, in his youth. His famous younger brother, the statesman Sir James Melville of Halhill, had an almost identical early career. Robert was afterwards at the French court in the service of Henri II, on whose death in 1559 he returned to Scotland. He was usually known as Melville of Murdocairny. Throwing in his lot with the lords of the congregation, who were then in conflict with Mary of Guise, Melville was sent by them, along with William Maitland of Lethington, to beg the assistance of Queen Elizabeth of England. He was admitted a privy councillor in 1562. Later he was employed in other diplomatic missions to England, one of which had for its object the marriage of Elizabeth to the third earl of Arran. Melville joined the opposition to Mary's marriage with Darnley in 1565, and in the autumn played a small part in the rebellion led by Moray known as the Chaseabout raid. For a time he took refuge in England, but Mary granted him an early pardon and sent him as her resident ambassador to the English court, whose projects he faithfully reported. He was instrumental in making peace between Mary and the earl of Moray, but the murder of Darnley (9 February 1567) disgusted him, and he withdrew from politics. 
Mary, however, after marrying the fourth earl of Bothwell (15 May 1567), sent Melville back to Queen Elizabeth to make the most plausible representation of her actions. But Melville, who thoroughly disliked Bothwell, acted more in the interests of the Scottish nobles who were opposing Mary than in those of his queen. In 1567 she made him keeper of her palace of Linlithgow, and he held this office until 1587. When Melville returned to Scotland in July 1567 Mary was a captive in Lochleven Castle, but he was permitted to visit her there. Bishop Robert Keith records that he then delivered her a ring as a pledge of Elizabeth's protection -- a promise that Mary would later rue. Melville used all his persuasive energy to induce Mary to renounce Bothwell, and so save herself and the country. Mary was obdurate, and the nobles, resolving to force her to abdicate, selected Melville to intimate to her their intention. He declined the mission, but seeing their determination he visited Mary privately and advised her to acquiesce. 
When Queen Mary effected her escape in 1568, Melville joined her at Hamilton, and he was present when she publicly revoked her deed of abdication. At the battle of Langside (13 May), Mary's last stand, he was taken prisoner by Regent Moray, but having been a non-combatant, and with many friends in the regent's party, he was speedily released and employed in further diplomatic negotiations with Elizabeth. While Mary was a prisoner in England, Melville, who maintained his attachment to her to the end and was trusted by her, laboured to bring about a reconciliation of all parties. His efforts failed, and when hostilities broke out between her supporters and the friends of the young James VI, Melville joined with Kirkcaldy of Grange in his attempt to re-establish the authority of the Scottish queen. He was prominent among the many Fife lairds, sometimes characterized as the 'loyal Melvilles', who maintained a remarkable personal loyalty to Mary despite many misfortunes (Donaldson, 106). During the siege of Edinburgh Castle, Melville was declared a traitor and forfeited, and when the castle surrendered in April 1573 he fell into the hands of Regent Morton, who would have put him to death, as he did other prominent prisoners, had not Queen Elizabeth and Henry Killigrew, the English ambassador, interposed in his favour. After a year of captivity, spent partly in Holyrood and partly at Lethington, near Haddington, Melville was liberated. He lived in retirement during the remainder of Morton's government and was not fully restored to his estates until 1579. 
In 1580 the influence of Esme Stewart, soon to be duke of Lennox, became paramount at court, and Melville was recalled, his forfeiture rescinded. He was knighted on 20 October 1581, at the same time as Lord Ruthven was created earl of Gowrie. Gowrie was already treasurer of Scotland, and Melville was appointed his clerk and treasurer-depute in August 1582. Melville did not participate in the Ruthven raid that same month, but he assisted James in his escape from Gowrie. Melville was reappointed a privy councillor in 1583. When Queen Mary was lying under sentence of death, James sent Melville, along with the master of Gray, to entreat Elizabeth on 7 December 1586 to spare Mary's life. Melville discharged his mission so fearlessly that Elizabeth threatened his life and but for Gray would have deprived him of his liberty. After his return on 7 February 1587 Melville was commended, and as a reward received from James the gift of a wardship worth $1000 Scots. 
Two English lists of 1585 assessing the religious inclinations of Scottish nobles support the conclusion that Melville was a protestant. However, they also indicate that he was inclined toward a political alliance with France, and thus was not wholly friendly to English purposes. Melville was certainly supportive of a church subservient to the polity of the state and appears to have urged presbyterian conciliation in such affairs. James Melville records in his autobiography that Sir Robert came to St Andrews in 1583 to persuade the doctrinaire presbyterian minister Andrew Melville to make peace with the king. In July 1584 Sir Robert lobbied Patrick Galloway on behalf of the government to abandon certain policies being proposed at the general assembly. Yet he apparently enjoyed the confidence of some sections of the kirk, for in February 1588 the assembly adopted a resolution to draw up of a list of known Jesuits, which was to be delivered to him on the premise that he would issue summonses against the named individuals. 
On the departure of King James for Scandinavia in October 1589 to bring home his bride, Princess Anne of Denmark, Melville was deputed to act as chancellor. He was afterwards sent to pacify disorderly districts in the north and on the borders. From the 1590s until his retirement, Melville was one of few men not trained in law who was regularly appointed one of the lords of the articles, important officials selected before each parliament to prepare its legislation. He purchased the lands and castle of Monimail, Fife, an old residence of Cardinal David Beaton, from Sir James Balfour in 1592. In 1593 he again went to England to negotiate with Elizabeth about the relations of the two kingdoms with Spain. On 11 June 1594 he was admitted a judge-extraordinary of the court of session, the highest civil court in Scotland, by the title of Lord Murdocairny, the name of his seat in Fife. The same year he accompanied King James to the north, opposing the sixth earl of Huntly, and remained there for some time with the second duke of Lennox to restore order. Melville remained treasurer-depute until 1596. After Gowrie's downfall his successors as treasurer (the third earl of Montrose, from 1584 to 1585; Thomas Lyon, master of Glamis, from 1585 to 1596) usually had only a nominal connection with their office. It was Melville who handled the money, submitted the accounts, and took responsibility for the growing deficit caused by the establishment of a royal court on inadequate revenues. On the appointment in 1596 of the Octavians, eight commissioners who undertook to manage the national finances, he ceased to be treasurer-depute, but before a year was past the Octavians petitioned for assistance, and Melville was among those directed to help them. When he quitted the office of treasurer-depute Melville was so much out of pocket (he was superexpended by $35,656 Scots) that he could not meet his own creditors and had to be protected from them by a special act of parliament, while the court of session was forbidden to entertain any action at law against him. In 1605 he and his son were granted discharge for their lifetimes of feu-duties due to the crown for the lands of Murdocairny for his service 'albeit as yet dewlie recompansit' ('APS', '1593-1625', 4.264, 455). The king did not repay him until well after 1610, and possibly not even then. 
By 1600 old age was telling upon Melville, and in December that year he resigned both his offices of privy councillor and judge in favour of his son; from time to time he still attended the council meetings, notwithstanding a special dispensation from the king in February 1604, because of his age and infirmity. He accompanied James to London in 1603, and when steps were being taken in 1605 for uniting the kingdoms, the Scottish parliament appointed him one of their commissioners. A draft treaty of union was prepared, which Melville signed, but it was not then carried into effect. 
Melville's long services were recognized on 1 April 1616 by his creation as a lord of parliament, with the title of Lord Melville of Monimail. He was thrice married, first to Katherine, daughter of William Adamson of Craigcrook, a burgess of Edinburgh; second, before 1593, to Lady Mary Leslie (died 1605), daughter of Andrew, fifth earl of Rothes; and third to Lady Jean Stewart (died after 1642), daughter of Robert, earl of Orkney (a natural son of King James V), and widow of Patrick Leslie, first Lord Lindores. Melville died in December 1621, aged ninety-four. His son Robert, who succeeded him as second Lord Melville, was the son of his father's first marriage. Melville also had a natural daughter, Christian, married to Thomas Oliphant, portioner of Hilcairny. 


@@@@@


doc= 18551


Melville, Robert (1723-1809), army officer and colonial governor, was born in Monimail, Fife, on 5 October 1723, the son of the Revd Andrew Melvil (died 1736), the minister of Monimail, and his wife, Helen, daughter of Robert Whytt or White, an advocate. His younger brother was the natural philosopher Thomas Melvill (1726-1753). Through both maternal and paternal lines Melville was descended from a cadet branch of the family headed by the earls of Leven and Melville. Owing to the early death of both parents, his education was entrusted to a maternal uncle, Dr Robert Whytt (1714-1766), a professor of medicine at the University of Edinburgh. Educated at Leven grammar school, Melville matriculated at the University of Glasgow in 1737, continued his medical studies at the University of Edinburgh, but left university without graduating to follow a military career. 
Commissioned an ensign in the 25th regiment of foot in March 1744, Melville served in Flanders during the War of the Austrian Succession, from 1744 to 1748. Present at Fontenoy (April 1745) he returned with the regiment to Scotland during the Jacobite rising. Part of the garrison of Blair Castle, Perthshire, he may have been present at Culloden (April 1746). Having returned to Flanders, he was present at Rocoux (September 1746) and at Laffeldt (June 1747). At the latter battle his conduct won him promotion to lieutenant. Following the war he served in Ireland from 1749 to 1755 and was promoted to captain in August 1751. He then returned to Scotland to recruit for the regiment. Appointed an aide-de-camp to William Maule, earl of Panmure, he was promoted to major of the 38th regiment of foot, then stationed in Antigua, in January 1756. 
During the Seven Years' War (1756-63) Melville's service was limited to the West Indies. Between January and May 1759 he commanded the light infantry during the reduction of Guadeloupe. Appointed the lieutenant-governor of the island, he was promoted to lieutenant-colonel in June 1759; following the death of Brigadier Bryan Crump in February 1761 he was appointed temporary governor of Guadeloupe. He took part in the capture of Dominica by Andrew, fifth Lord Rollo, and having been promoted to brigadier in September 1761, he commanded a division in General Robert Monckton's reduction of Martinique in February 1762. 
During these amphibious campaigns Melville continued the studies in ordnance and shell delivery that he had begun while at Blair Castle. By 1759, at the earliest, he had developed a naval gun carriage without trunnions that could mount a new type of naval gun which he had invented. A short seven-calibre weapon, the gun delivered a slow-moving, heavy shot which upon impact with timber caused a large irregular hole and massive splintering. Initially nicknamed 'the smasher', the weapon was finally put into production at the Carron Iron Works, Falkirk, in 1779, and was renamed the carronade. Although the larger version, the melvillade, was rarely used, the carronade became one of the most important innovations in naval warfare in the second part of the eighteenth century. The gun, whose elevation and angle of fire were governed by a screw on its gun carriage, suited the British style of close-in fighting and by 1781 over 600 guns had been mounted by the Royal Navy. The carronade proved decisive in Admiral Rodney's victory over the French at the battle of the Saints on 12 April 1782. 
Melville returned to Britain in September 1762, and following the treaty of Paris (1763) his appointment as the new governor of the Ceded Islands (Grenada, the Grenadines, Tobago, Dominica and St Vincent) was announced in July that year. He arrived at his administrative capital, Port Royal, Grenada, in December 1764, and his seven-year governorship was largely successful. Regional economic growth was generated largely by the concentration of land into bigger plantations and the increased importance of African slaves to work them: over 10,000 between 1746 and 1764 alone. He was promoted to major-general in August 1766. Regional prosperity was reflected in Melville's own rising wealth: in 1770 his island properties were estimated to value $45,000 -- including a large plantation, Melville Hall, on Grenada and another, Carnbee, on Tobago. Like most colonial governors in America, however, Melville experienced problems with his regional assemblies. Transplanted British planters especially opposed Melville's policy of allowing the French Catholic landowning subjects the vote and a share in administration. Recalled in 1768 to defend his actions, Melville's presence in London generated a pamphlet exchange and hostile comments in the opposition press, especially the 'Political Register'. Melville's policies were supported by the imperial government and were later implemented on Grenada by his lieutenant-governor, Ulysses Fitzmaurice, in 1769. 
Melville resigned his commission as governor in July 1771 and between 1774 and 1776 he travelled extensively in Europe, pursuing his interest in Roman history. He visited many important sites of antiquity and suggested an alternative route for Hannibal's crossing of the Alps to that favoured by historians of the day. With the outbreak of the American War of Independence he returned to Britain and was promoted to lieutenant-general in August 1777, but took no active part in the war itself. When Tobago was ceded to France at the end of the conflict, Melville undertook a successful diplomatic mission to Paris in 1783 to protect the property rights of the British subjects remaining on the island. 
A prominent freemason and an energetic supporter of the Scots Corporation in London as well as other Scottish charities, Melville was a member of the Royal Society and the Society of Antiquaries of London, and of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. Awarded an honorary LLD by the University of Edinburgh, he was, despite being totally blind in later life, advanced to full general in October 1793. At the time of his death at his house in George Street, New Town, Edinburgh, on 29 August 1809, he was the second oldest general in the British army. A bachelor, Melville left his property, including an estate at Strathkinness, Fife, to his cousin John Whyte, son of Robert Whytt, his mother's brother, who had taken the name Melville in 1797. 


@@@@@


doc= 18552


Melvin, James (1795-1853), Latin scholar, was born in Aberdeen, of poor parents, on 21 April 1795. He passed through the grammar school a few years after Byron had left it, during Mr Cromar's rectorship, and was the first bursar of his year at Marischal College, whence he graduated AM in 1816. After acting successively as usher at a private school kept by Bisset at Udny, and at Old Aberdeen grammar school under Ewen Maclachlan, he became in 1822 a master at the Aberdeen grammar school, and in 1826 he succeeded Mr Cromar as rector. He also became 'lecturer on humanity' (Latin) at Marischal College, and was created LLD by the college in 1834. He formed a wonderful collection of classical and medieval Latin literature (he was said to own a copy of Horace for every day of the year), and became probably the most accomplished Scottish Latinist of his day. He has been identified as one of the last representatives of a distinctive tradition of Scottish Latin scholarship, combining an enthusiasm for classical literature with a deep knowledge of the philology and literature of the Scottish language. He was one of the volunteers who assisted John Jamieson in preparing the two-volume supplement (1825) to his dictionary of the Scottish language. An appreciative account of his teaching and personality was contributed to 'Macmillan's Magazine' for January 1864 by a former pupil, Professor David Masson, who compares Melvin as a ruler and inspirer of boys to Thomas Arnold. His method of instruction was minute and punctilious, with a heavy emphasis on philology, but also led his students to a literary appreciation of classical works. He was twice an unsuccessful candidate for the professorship of Latin at Marischal College, first in 1839 when he was defeated by J. S. Blackie in controversial circumstances, and second in 1852. On 18 June 1853 a testimonial in the shape of $300 in a silver snuff-box (souvenir of an inveterate habit) was presented to him by old pupils. Severe application had told upon his health, and he died at his house in Belmont Street, Aberdeen, on 29 June 1853. He was publicly buried in the town churchyard on 5 July. 

'Latin exercises as dictated by the late James Melvin, LL.D., to which are prefixed dissertations on a variety of Latin idioms and constructions', was published by the Revd Peter Calder, rector of Grantown grammar school, in 1857. A supplementary volume or key appeared in 1858, and a third edition, revised by the Revd J. Pirie, Edinburgh, in 1873. Melvin also wrote for use in his school a Latin grammar, which first appeared in 1822, and passed through three editions, and a number of grammatical 'Melviniana' were appended by W. D. Geddes, professor of Greek in Aberdeen University, to his 'Principles of Latinity' (1860). 
Melvin was said to have been long occupied with a large Latin dictionary, but does not appear to have left any materials. His books (6984 in number) were presented to Marischal College in September 1856 by his sister and executor, Agnes Melvin. A stained-glass window was erected in the university library, Aberdeen, representing Melvin in his rectorial robes, in association with George Buchanan (whose Latin versions of the psalms he greatly admired), Arthur Johnston, and Thomas Ruddiman. The device was a beehive and grapes, and the inscription, 'Melvinum Natura dedit, gaudete Camenae' ('Nature gave us Melvin' -- the name in Latin means 'honey-wine' -- 'Rejoice, Muses'). 


@@@@@


doc= 18553


Mendes, Fernando Moses (1647-1724), physician and entrepreneur, was born at Trancoso, Beira Alta, Portugal, into a wealthy family of New Christian merchants and officials. He was one of the ten children of Antonio Jacob Mendes da Costa (died 1716), a merchant, and Joana, 'nee' da Silva, who fled to France in the 1650s or early 1660s for fear of the Inquisition, and settled temporarily in Rouen. Alvaro da Costa was Fernando's cousin. Fernando (originally Fernao) studied medicine, registering at the University of Montpellier on 27 July 1666; he was awarded his doctorate on 11 January 1668. He specifically stated (incorrectly) that he was from Trancoso in 'Castille', to avoid admitting that he was Portuguese, a term which in the France of the day was virtually synonymous with 'Jew'. No Jew could enter a French university. He was 'consiliarius', one of four senior students in medicine elected by the professors as heads of the student body. His thesis was published in Lyons later in 1668, prefaced by his portrait, that of a handsome gentleman in a periwig, with a thin moustache. It is dedicated to Dom Francisco de Mello, the poet and diplomat who accompanied Catherine of Braganza to England in 1662 and was later ambassador to the Netherlands, France, and England. 
Mendes's family was by now in London, where he joined them on 25 October 1669. Publicly, at least, Mendes remained a Roman Catholic, although in 1675 he married a professing Jew, Isabel Rachel Marques (died 1695) with whom he had six children. His elder daughter, Catherine Rachel ('c'.1678-1756) ['see 'Costa, Catherine da], is said to have been the queen's god-daughter and was the first Anglo-Jewish portraitist. She married Alvaro's son, Anthony Moses da Costa. Mendes's sons were all wealthy merchants or stockbrokers. One, James Mendes, was the father of Moses Mendes, the dramatist. Mendes's wife was one of the heirs of her uncle, Abraham Rodrigues Marques, a rich merchant and devout Jew, who in his will of 1688 referred bitterly to Mendes's refusal to be circumcised and disinherited him and his sons if they were not circumcised within two years. Mendes proved obdurate and his Roman Catholicism injured him both professionally and financially. 
Possibly through the influence of his family and of his patron, Dom Francisco, Mendes entered the household of Queen Catherine. On 25 March 1678 he was appointed one of her physicians, 'in consideration of good and faithful services', and sworn in on 10 September. His emoluments were $100 a year for life, the customary 12's'. a day board-wages, and one horse-livery a year. He attended Charles II during his last illness, and was physician to the queen until 1692, when the dowager returned to Portugal; he continued to receive his emoluments until her death in 1705, when with her other staff he received a legacy equal to one year's salary. 
Mendes was admitted as fellow to the Royal College of Physicians on 12 April 1687, after a reform of the college charter, approved by James II, who wished religious minorities, especially Roman Catholics, to be admitted to closed institutions and offices. After James's flight in 1688, the House of Lords ordered the college to return the names of such of its members as were 'Papists, reputed Papists and criminals'; the names were reluctantly provided on 1 July 1689 and included that of Mendes. He was duly struck off the rolls on 1 October 1689. 
Mendes had become endenizened, together with his younger brother, John Joseph Mendes da Costa, a professing Jew, on 16 December 1687. Both brothers and their families shared Cromwell House, Highgate Hill, with its owner, their cousin Alvaro. Mendes also had apartments in Somerset House, Queen Catherine's palace, and probably had a house in the City. He was wealthy, perhaps partly through a business partnership with his cousin Alvaro. On 22 June 1694 he was able to invest $1000 in Bank of England stock, which he held until his death. He was involved in the London manufacture of scientific instruments intended to encourage Portuguese cartography, and had close contacts not only with Portuguese diplomats in London but, even more unusually for a refugee 'converso', with the royal court at Lisbon. In 1706 he was consulted about the health of Pedro IV, which he would not have been had he been suspected of judaizing, and in 1723 he seconded the (fruitless) attempts of the Portuguese minister in London, Castello Branco, to purchase the fine library of the late Charles Spencer, third earl of Sunderland. He was appreciated in the highest Lisbon circles for his quinine-based elixir, 'Agua de Inglaterra', which was apparently exported to Lisbon by his four sons. 
Mendes was a highly respected physician, who lived on the best of terms with his family and with the Sephardi community. His refusal to renounce Roman Catholicism may have been due to self-interest, possibly compounded by loyalty to his queen, and to religious cynicism. What his true beliefs were, if any, is unknown. However, in his will he left $100 to the Sedaca (charity fund) of the synagogue; he asked to be buried next to his wife, who lay in the Jewish burial-ground at Mile End. Mendes died on 15 November 1724. Although his ties with the Jewish community seem mainly based on ethnic identity and family solidarity, he is considered one of the founding fathers of English Jewry, and his portrait, in full doctoral robes and painted by his daughter in 1721, was hung in the Spanish and Portuguese Synagogue, Ashworth Road, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 18554


Mendez, Moses (1690?-1758), playwright and poet, was probably born in the City of London. He was a grandson of the Sephardi physician Fernando Mendes and the only son of James Mendez, of Mitcham, Surrey, a stockjobber, and Anne, of the Sephardi da Costa family. He married outside of his faith to Ann (Anne) Gabrielle (died 1771), daughter and coheir of Sir Francis Head, baronet, of Hermitage, Higham, Kent. It is not known when Mendez was baptized. 
Mendez may have received part of his education at St Mary Hall, Oxford, under Dr William King. At first he intended to become an advocate in Doctors' Commons, but instead took up stockjobbing, by which he made a fortune. He had a home at Mitcham, and bought St Andrews, a large estate at Old Buckenham, Norfolk. In 1737 he became steward, and the following year grand steward, in a masonic lodge, probably the British lodge that met at Braund's Head, New Bond Street. 
Moses and his relative Solomon Mendez (died 1762?) had friends in London literary circles, including Richard Savage, James Thomson, David Garrick, and Robert Dodsley, but there is some confusion between the two because of frequent lack of forenames in contemporary correspondence. It now seems that it was Solomon who in 1739 contributed to Alexander Pope's project of an allowance for the poet Savage, which Solomon withdrew in 1742; Thomson addressed a mock epitaph to Solomon and a birthday poem to his wife. Moses gave an account of a trip to Ireland in 1744 in a poem addressed to John Ellis, but Simpson's statement that he was friends with Swift (Simpson, 105) remains undocumented. David Garrick in 1745 called Moses 'very much my friend' ('Letters of David Garrick', 70). Dodsley published several of his poems in his 'Collection', vol. 4 (1755). Mendez's 'The Seasons' (1751), a set of Spenserian verses (a favourite form of his), opens with an elegy on Thomson's death. 
Secure in his fortune, Mendez began a literary career. His first dramatic piece, 'The Double Disappointment', was the earliest published Jewish contribution to English literature. A farce with several songs (called a 'ballad opera'), it had its premiere at Drury Lane on 18 March 1746, and was revived the following season. The audience delighted in the exposing of national characters in the form of two Irish and French fortune hunters. 
For Drury Lane, Mendez also provided three afterpieces. Most popular was 'The Chaplet', advertised as 'a New Pastoral Masque' or 'a New Musical Entertainment in Two Interludes' ('General Advertiser'), with music by William Boyce, which opened on 2 December 1749 and had revivals until April 1755. 'Robin Hood', set by Charles Burney, opened on 13 December 1750 for four performances, with only the music to recommend it. 'The Shepherd's Lottery', also set by Boyce, had its premiere on 19 November 1751, and was revived in two following seasons; it was also performed at the meeting of the Three Choirs at Hereford on 14 September 1754, under Boyce's direction. Songs from Mendez's plays, especially 'The Chaplet', were popular at the pleasure gardens and were widely disseminated in song sheets, songbooks, and magazines. 
Mendez's poems appeared in numerous poetic miscellanies and collections; several were first printed in 1792 in the 'European Magazine' (February, November, and December issues, along with a biographical sketch and portrait in the October issue). In the 'Battiad', in two cantos (1750), Mendez, assisted by Paul Whitehead and Dr Ralph Schomberg, satirized the part taken by William Battie against Schomberg in the latter's dispute with the College of Physicians. 
The nearest contemporary source describes Mendez as a 'Person of considerable Genius, of an agreeable Behaviour and entertaining in Conversation [with] a very pretty Turn for Poetry' (Baker, vol. 2). Mendez was created an MA at Oxford University on 19 June 1750. He died at Old Buckenham, Norfolk, on 4 February 1758, and was buried there on 8 February. 
Mendez's wife married Captain the Hon. John Roper (1734-1780) on 21 March 1760, and died on 11 December 1771. Mendez's sons Francis and James Roper were authorized to take their mother's maiden name (Head) by royal licence dated 11 May 1771. His cousin, Emanuel Mendes da Costa, was the noted English naturalist. His grandsons had military careers and served under Wellington. Sir George Head (1782-1855) was assistant commissary-general and deputy knight-marshal at the coronations of William IV and Queen Victoria; and Sir Francis Bond Head (1793-1875) became lieutenant-governor of Upper Canada and suppressed the rising of 1837-8. 


@@@@@


doc= 18555


Mendham, Joseph (1769-1856), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born in London on 14 February 1769 and baptized on 10 March of that year in the parish of St Stephen Walbrook. He was the sixth of the nine children of Robert Mendham (1737-1810), a successful merchant in the City of London, and his wife, Margaret Scott (died 1812). He was educated at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, matriculating on 27 January 1789, and graduating BA in 1792 and MA in 1795. Here he imbibed a strongly evangelical atmosphere; St Edmund Hall has been described as 'the headquarters of evangelicalism at Oxford' (Reynolds, 58), and its vice-principal, Isaac Crouch, impressed evangelical values upon several generations of undergraduates. Mendham was ordained deacon in 1793 and priest in the following year, in each case by George Tomline, bishop of Lincoln. In 1795 the pattern for the rest of his life was set by his marriage on 15 December to Maria Riland (died 1841), daughter of the Revd John Riland, rector of Sutton Coldfield. He and his wife had two children, a son, Robert Riland Mendham (died 1857), and a daughter, Anna Maria Mendham (died 1872). Equally significantly, Mendham immediately became curate to his father-in-law at Sutton Coldfield, and resided there until his death. 
John Riland had been assistant to Henry Venn (1725-1797), vicar of Huddersfield and a leading evangelical; he was himself an admired figure in the evangelical revival and Mendham came to share his father-in-law's moderate Calvinism, his emphasis on the importance of personal salvation, and his devotion to pastoral duty. He served the parish of Sutton Coldfield conscientiously until he relinquished his curacy in 1826; he also served as warden of the corporation in 1807 and 1808. Having received substantial legacies from his parents, Mendham possessed sufficient financial independence to disdain the quest for clerical preferment and to concentrate upon his two principal interests, book collection and anti-Catholic controversial writing. 
From his youth Mendham had amassed a library of religious literature, mainly from the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. He was particularly interested in Reformation and post-Reformation controversies and had read widely among both protestant and Catholic authors. He strongly adhered to the protestant side in controversies of this nature, which he viewed in the context of contemporary Catholic campaigns for political emancipation. He devoted much attention to the alleged tyrannies and superstitions of the Church of Rome, which he attempted to expose by detailed quotation from Catholic sources. In the 1820s Mendham published three works of this kind, of which the most influential was 'An Account of the Indexes, Prohibitory and Expurgatory, of the Church of Rome' (1826). However, the most important event of his career as a writer was the 'Catholic Emancipation Act' of 1829, which led to allegations in some tory circles of betrayal of the protestant constitution. Mendham shared this opinion, supporting the British Society for Promoting the Religious Principles of the Reformation (or Reformation Society) and redoubling his literary efforts. His fear of growing Catholic numbers was made plain in his 'Address to the Inhabitants of Sutton Coldfield' (1834), and his claim that the Catholic church was irremediably repressive was repeated in his 'Index of prohibited books... being the latest specimen of the literary policy of the Church of Rome' (1840). His most scholarly work was 'Memoirs of the Council of Trent' (1834, with a supplement in 1836), in which he reprinted a series of contemporary manuscript sources and displayed an impressive command of Spanish and Italian. His work was favourably reviewed in such strongly protestant periodicals as the 'Church of England Quarterly Review' and the 'Protestant Journal', while his scholarly antiquarianism led him to make several contributions to the early issues of 'Notes and Queries'. 
In 1836 Mendham became perpetual curate of Hill, near Sutton Coldfield, where a chapel had been constructed to meet the needs of an increasing local population. But he was soon obliged by ill health to relinquish this living, and after the death of his wife in 1841 lived quietly with his son at Sutton Coldfield. He died there on 1 November 1856 at the age of eighty-seven, and was buried at Holy Trinity Church, Sutton Coldfield, on 6 November. His library of some 5000 volumes passed to his son and subsequently to his nephew, John Mendham, whose widow bequeathed it to the Law Society in 1869. Since the 1980s the collection has been on loan to Canterbury Cathedral Library. 
By nature reserved and, latterly, almost reclusive, Mendham had little in common with the more raucous types of English anti-Catholicism of the mid-nineteenth century, although his work was used by popular protestant writers as a valuable source of information. But he represented a branch of conservative evangelical opinion in a period of increasing religious pluralism, and his genuine, if highly partial, scholarship amounted to a serious contribution to ecclesiastical history. 


@@@@@


doc= 18556


Mendoza, Daniel (1765?-1836), pugilist, the son of Jewish parents, Abraham Mendoza and his wife, Esther, 'nee' Lopes, was born, according to the fighter's memoirs, on 5 July 1764 in the parish of Aldgate, London. However, the Spanish and Portuguese Synagogue records show he was circumcised on 12 July of the following year, making a birth date of 5 July 1765 much more probable. 
Educated for some years at a Jewish school, Mendoza afterwards entered into employment with various tradesmen including a glass-cutter, fruiterer, tea merchant, and tobacconist. During this time he served his pugilistic apprenticeship, impressing the noted Richard Humphries, who later became his bitter rival. Mendoza's first fight of significance was when he beat Sam Martin, the Bath Butcher. The contest took place at Barnet on 17 April 1787 at the instigation of the prince of Wales. On the 22nd of the next month he married his cousin Esther Mendoza (died 1855) and in the same year he opened an academy at Capel Court, Bartholomew Lane, where he taught the art of self-defence. His popularity encouraged young Jews to gain fistic proficiency, with the result, as Francis Place noted, that abusive treatment of the Jewish community began to lessen (George, 138). 
An impromptu set-to with Humphries at Epping in September 1787 led to the first of their three encounters. The men fought at Odiham, Hampshire, on 9 January 1788 and initially Mendoza had the advantage. However, after about twenty-nine minutes, injury compelled him to concede. The result being considered unsatisfactory, they again met on 6 May 1789. An octagonal amphitheatre was specially erected for the occasion in a park, near Stilton, belonging to a Henry Thornton. During the contest Humphries fell without a blow but, following a prolonged dispute, Mendoza agreed to continue and, at length, prevailed. In 1789 he published a small book entitled 'The Art of Boxing' and on 29 September 1790 he opposed Humphries for a final time. The battle, at an innyard in Doncaster, was well sustained and Humphries, despite fighting resolutely, was again beaten. 
Thereafter Mendoza was in great demand for theatrical appearances but his return to the fistic arena was delayed until he met Bristolian Bill Ward (later erroneously called Warr) at Smitham Bottom, near Croydon, on 14 May 1792. Although Ward was favourite, Mendoza proved superior in every round except one and, in approximately thirty minutes, was hailed as the victor. When the two met again at Bexley, Kent, on 12 November 1794, Ward took an early lead but was defeated in only fifteen minutes. In a brief, albeit severe, contest Mendoza lost to the much heavier and more powerful John Jackson at Hornchurch, Essex, on 15 April 1795. The latter increased his advantage by unfairly holding his antagonist's hair with one hand while hitting him with the other. A bystander, writing to 'The Times' (20 April 1795), proffered the opinion that had it not been for this 'I have no doubt but he [Mendoza] would have won'. 
Subsequently Mendoza became landlord of the Admiral Nelson public house in Whitechapel. To a challenge from Jem Belcher in November 1801 he replied that he supported a family of six children by his exertions as a publican and would only consider returning to the ring to avenge his defeat by Jackson ('Star Daily Evening Advertiser', 26 Nov 1801). This did not come to pass and his next encounter, as a result of a quarrel, was when he outclassed Harry Lee in fifty-three rounds at Grinstead Green, near Bromley. Mendoza declined Lee's request for a return match in a letter to 'The Times' (6 January 1807) wherein he stated his time was devoted to 'teaching Gentlemen the art of self-defence; from whence I derive the means of supporting my family'. Pierce Egan thought him unrivalled as a teacher and believed that no man united the theory of sparring with the practice of boxing to greater advantage. Mendoza's last prize-ring appearance was a twelve-round defeat on 4 July 1820 in a grudge encounter with fellow veteran Tom Owen on Banstead Downs. The following month he gave a farewell address at the Fives Court, St Martin's Street, in which he voiced his opinion that he had the right to call himself the 'Father of the Science' ('Weekly Dispatch', 3 Sept 1820). 
About 5 feet 7 inches tall, Mendoza was well formed, had considerable courage and excellent endurance. His blows were quick, but deficient in force, and he struck more often and stopped more dexterously than any fighter before him. Despite his pugilistic success he periodically experienced financial difficulties, suffering the indignity of an occasional stay in a debtors' prison, and his last years were spent in poverty and distress. He died at his home in Horseshoe Alley, Petticoat Lane, London, on 3 September 1836 and was buried the following day in the new cemetery of the Spanish and Portuguese Jews at Mile End. 


@@@@@


doc= 18557


Mendoza y Rios, Joseph de (1761-1816), astronomer, born in Seville, Spain, on 29 January 1761, was the son of Joseph-Ygancio de Mendoza and his wife, Maria-Romana Morillo y Rios. He later added the prestigious name Rios of his maternal grandmother to that of his father -- a common practice at the time. He was educated at the Royal College of San Isidro, Madrid, where he showed a remarkable aptitude for mathematics, and then joined the army as a cadet in the Royal regiment of dragoons. However, he soon requested to be transferred to the navy, which was a much more attractive place from the point of view of astronomy and mathematics. The transfer became effective on 16 March 1776. In August 1779, while returning from Manila, his ship, the 'Santa Ines', engaged in combat with two English cruisers; Mendoza Rios was taken prisoner to Cork, where he arrived in early September. He was released one year later, and returned to Cadiz in September 1780. 
Other naval postings and promotions followed. During this period Mendoza Rios wrote a treatise on navigation, which in early 1787 he submitted to the navy minister, 'teniente general de la armada' Baylio Fray Antonio Valdes, a man dedicated to the modernization of the Spanish navy; he recommended its publication. Mendoza Rios, released from duties at sea because of ill health, was sent to Madrid to oversee its printing. After his two-volume treatise was published, in late 1787, he was promoted to 'capitan de fragata'. Thus he began a second career, as a scientist, in areas of naval interest. 
Back in Cadiz, Mendoza Rios submitted a proposal for an institute for the sciences of navigation, including a cartographic depot, to be located at the naval headquarters near Cadiz. His ideas were accepted and the king set aside a large sum of money for it. The intention was to collect, or copy, maps and documents held by former officers and members of the nobility in Spain, for which task Mendoza Rios suggested a young naval officer, Martin Fernandez de Navarrete. Another purpose was to acquire, from other European locations, maps and charts and books and instruments relevant to navigation, and to report on recent scientific and industrial advances. Mendoza Rios undertook this aspect. He left Spain in October 1789, accompanied by another young naval officer, Jose Maria de Lanz. 
Through the publication of his treatise on navigation, Mendoza Rios's name became known in scientific circles in Europe; Sir Joseph Banks was his correspondent in London, and in Paris he became acquainted with some of the leading scientists of the time. He took a serious interest in the use of new materials (precious stones and newly available metals, such as platinum) in the design and improvement of a variety of scientific instruments. Some of the instruments he designed or improved were sent to Malaspina to be used by the scientists attached to his expedition. At the time of his stay in Paris, French scientists were considering the construction of a large telescope to emulate Herschel's achievements in England. Mendoza Rios advocated testing platinum for the mirror of the projected French telescope; the matter was discussed by a committee which included Lavoisier. He was elected foreign correspondent to the French Academy of Sciences on 4 August 1792. 
As the political situation became more unstable in Paris and the telescope project collapsed, Mendoza Rios moved to the safety of London. In 1792 he visited a number of industrial establishments in England and wrote detailed confidential reports on them. On account of his contributions to nautical astronomy he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 11 April 1793. 
In 1796 Mendoza Rios sent to Spain, from London, a large and valuable collection of maps, charts, and scientific and geographic books. In the same year he opened negotiations for one of Herschel's large telescopes. However, once installed in Madrid, this instrument, then the second largest in Europe, was not used to its full potential. Mendoza Rios made his home in England, where he married Anna Maria Parker on 8 November 1798. They had two daughters, Francisca and Anna Fermina ('b'. 1799); the latter married in 1829 Sir Patrick Bellew (1798-1866), afterwards Lord Bellew of Barmeath Castle, Dunleer, co. Louth, Ireland. 
From the 1790s Mendoza Rios was in the forefront of those who sought to modernize a wide range of activities in the Spanish Navy, such as chronometry, precision mechanics, optics, and numerical calculation. Through his acquaintance with the best instrument makers he was able to place young Spanish apprentices in their workshops, even having one of them instructed in precious stone cutting, a very secretive craft. He also played an important role in the introduction into Spain of modern lighthouse techniques. 
Mendoza Rios was interested in the use of mathematical tables as aids to nautical astronomy. Soon after his arrival in London he proposed the publication of such a collection of tables. In 1797 he contributed to the 'Philosophical Transactions' of the Royal Society an important paper on the central problems of nautical astronomy. He succeeded in simplifying mathematical calculations considerably, reducing them to the reading of a few entries in a set of pre-calculated, compact, and easy-to-use auxiliary tables. In the design of these tables he displayed a great deal of mathematical ingenuity. For their construction he used several 'computers' working in parallel, each person doing a simple and repetitive task. In 1801 he published, again in 'Philosophical Transactions', a full description of his reflecting circle, an improvement of Borda's circle. After lengthy discussions Mendoza Rios obtained funds to publish his tables, enabling him to reduce their price and make them widely available. He also persuaded Portugal, Russia, and other foreign powers to buy copies. From the early 1800s his various tables were reprinted a large number of times and published in several languages; the last editions were made in the first decades of the twentieth century. A copy of Mendoza Rios's paper is depicted in a portrait of his close friend Joseph Banks, commissioned by the Spaniard in 1807; a copy of the portrait (1815, also by Thomas Phillips) was requested by the Royal Society and now hangs behind the president's chair in the society's council room. 
In September 1796 Mendoza Rios requested permission to retire from the Spanish Navy. No action was taken then, but in May 1800 the king of Spain decided to remove his name from the navy list, probably, although not explicitly stated, because he had not returned to Spain when his country was at war with England. However, the navy and the Spanish court continued to consult him on naval matters until the end of his life. 
Mendoza Rios had always suffered from ill health; there were frequent references to his health in his correspondence (even in his scientific works) throughout his life, and these became more insistent and obsessive towards the end of it, when he commuted between his London and Brighton homes. He died on 4 March 1816 as a result of hanging himself in his country home, in New Steine, Brighton. The coroner's report stated that 'being a lunatic he hanged himself'. On 11 March Mendoza Rios was buried in the church of St Nicholas, Brighton. He left, when he died, a considerable amount of money in trust for his wife and daughters. He is probably the mathematician and astronomer of Spanish origin who has received the widest international recognition for his scientific work. However, secondary literature on him is rare and, while respecting his achievements, often hostile to his personality. 


@@@@@


doc= 18558


Mends, Sir Robert (1767?-1823), naval officer, from a Pembrokeshire family, was probably born in 1767. He entered the navy in 1779 on board the 'Culloden' with Captain George Balfour, and in her was present at the action off Cape St Vincent and the relief of Gibraltar in January 1780. Afterwards, in the frigate 'Guadeloupe', with Captain Hugh Robinson, he was present at the action off the mouth of the Chesapeake on 16 March 1781, and at the defence of Yorktown, where the 'Guadeloupe' was destroyed and Mends, then not fourteen, lost his right arm, besides being wounded in the left knee. On his recovery he was again with Captain Balfour in the 'Conqueror', one of the van of the fleet in the battle of Dominica, where he was severely wounded in the head by a splinter. In 1786 he was in the 'Grampus' with Commodore Edward Thompson on the coast of Africa. On 26 August 1789 he was promoted lieutenant. He was then for some time in the sloop 'Childers' in the channel. In 1793 he was in the 'Colossus' in the Mediterranean and was at the occupation of Toulon, and in 1795, still in the 'Colossus', was in the action off Lorient on 23 June, when he was severely burnt by a powder explosion. On 15 December 1796 he was promoted commander, and for the next three years commanded the sloop 'Diligence' (16 guns) on the Jamaica station. He was advanced to post rank on 2 May 1800, and, continuing on the same station, successively commanded the 'Abergavenny' (54 guns), the 'Thunderer' (74 guns), and the frigate 'Quebec' (32 guns). In September 1802 he returned to England in the 'Nereide' (36 guns). 
In 1805 Mends was appointed to command the sea fencibles of the Dublin district and in 1808 to the frigate 'Arethusa' (46 guns) in the Bay of Biscay and on the north coast of Spain. On the morning of 6 April 1809 she assisted in the closing stage of the action between the 'Amethyst' and 'Niemen'. The 'Arethusa''s share in it was small, but Mends was severely wounded in the head by a splinter. In the summer of 1810, in command of a squadron on the coast of Spain, Mends destroyed several French batteries, for which service, in addition to a formal letter of thanks from the junta of Galicia, he received the order of the Cross of Victory of the Asturias and the nominal rank of major-general of the Spanish army. From 1811 to 1814 he was superintendent of the prison hulks in Portsmouth harbour. On 25 May 1815 he was knighted, on receiving permission to wear the cross of the order of Charles III of Spain; and in April 1816, the pension of $7, which had been granted him for the loss of his arm, was increased to $300. In June 1821 he was appointed commodore and commander-in-chief on the west coast of Africa, with his broad pennant first in the 'Iphigenie' (42 guns) and afterwards in the frigate 'Owen Glendower'. He died on board the 'Owen Glendower' at Cape Coast, on the Gold Coast, on 4 September 1823. 
Mends married in 1802 a daughter of James Butler of Bagshot; they had three sons, of whom one, a midshipman of the 'Owen Glendower', died at Sierra Leone three months after his father; another, James Augustus Mends, died a captain on the retired list in 1875; the third, George Clarke Mends, was a retired vice-admiral at his death in 1885. Admiral Sir William Robert Mends (1812-1897) was the son of Sir Robert's brother Admiral William Bowen Mends (1781-1864). 


@@@@@


doc= 18559


Mends, Sir William Robert (1812-1897), naval officer, the eldest son of Admiral William Bowen Mends (1781-1864) and his wife, 'nee' Dawe, and the nephew of Sir Robert Mends, was born at Plymouth on 27 February 1812. After attending Haverfordwest grammar school and Plymouth School, in May 1825 he entered the Royal Naval College at Portsmouth, and shortly after passing out in December 1826 was appointed to the frigate 'Thetis' (46 guns), going to the South American station. He was in the 'Thetis' when she was wrecked on Cape Frio on 5 December 1830. It was Mends's watch when the ship struck, but as the night was dark with heavy rain he was held guiltless. He was considered to have behaved well in a difficult situation, and several of the members of the court offered to take him with them. After passing his examination he joined the 'Actaeon' in the Mediterranean, which in 1832 was at Constantinople when a Russian army of upwards of 20,000 men arrived there after the defeat of the Turks by Ibrahim Pasha at Konya. The intervention of the western powers secured the withdrawal of this force, and Mends observed its embarkation, making careful notes of their methods of embarking the cavalry and guns. In the summer of 1834 the 'Actaeon' returned to England and was paid off, and in January 1835 Mends was appointed to the 'Pique' with Captain Henry John Rous. In July the ship was sent out to Canada, and on the homeward voyage, on 22 September, struck heavily on a reef off the coast of Labrador. After a perilous and for a time rudderless voyage, Mends reached St Helen's on 13 October, and learned that he had been promoted lieutenant on 11 August. 
In December, Mends joined the 'Vernon' at Malta. A year later he was moved into the 'Caledonia' and then to the 'Rodney', from which, in July 1838, he went to be flag lieutenant of Sir John Louis, the second in command on the station and superintendent of Malta Dockyard. At Malta, in December 1837, he married Melita (died 1894), the daughter of Dr Stilon, a Neapolitan by birth who had served as a medical officer in the French army at Maida and been sent as a prisoner to England, where he married and entered the navy; some years later he settled in private practice at Malta. Mends and his wife had a son and four daughters. Mends continued with Louis, sometimes afloat, but mostly at Malta, until July 1843. From November 1843 he was in the frigate 'Fox' with Sir Henry Blackwood on the coast of Ireland and in the East Indies. On 2 January 1847 he received the news of his promotion, on 9 November 1846, to commander. In January 1848 he was appointed to the 'Vanguard', in which, a couple of months later, he lost some of the fingers of his left hand, which was carried into a block and badly crushed. It was this, more than the loss of the fingers, which caused trouble, and for years afterwards he suffered from severe attacks of neuralgia. The 'Vanguard' went home and was paid off in March 1849, and in July 1850 Mends was appointed to the 'Vengeance', again with Blackwood, who, however, died after a short illness at Portsmouth on 7 January 1851, and was succeeded by Lord Edward Russell. Towards the end of the summer the 'Vengeance' went to the Mediterranean, but came home in December 1852; on the 10th Mends was promoted captain in acknowledgement of the excellent order of the ship. 
In October 1853 Mends was selected by Sir Edmund Lyons to be his flag captain in the Mediterranean, if Captain Symonds, then in the 'Arethusa', should prefer to remain in the frigate. If not, Mends would take the 'Arethusa' ['see 'Symonds, Sir Thomas Matthew Charles]. Mends took the 'Agamemnon' out and joined the fleet in the Sea of Marmora on Christmas eve, and then took command of the 'Arethusa'. In her he took a particularly brilliant part in the bombardment of Odessa on 22 April 1854, attacking the Mole fortifications. He was promptly recalled by the commander-in-chief, who seems to have considered that he was needlessly risking the ship. 'I expected a reprimand when I went on board the admiral to report, but the enthusiasm of the fleet and the cheers given to us as we passed along the lines mollified the chief, and I was simply told not to go in again. (Mends, 102)' In June, Lyons and Symonds had found that they did not get on well together, and Mends agreed to re-exchange into the 'Agamemnon'. From that time his individuality is lost in that of the admiral. Lyons refused the services of a captain of the fleet because Mends was so successful in his dual role of flag captain and chief of Lyons's staff; he had the direction of those points of detail on which much depended. By far the most important of these were the admirably implemented embarkation of the troops at Varna and the landing of them in the Crimea on 14 September. Lyons and the navy fully recognized that the credit belonged to Mends. 
In February 1855 Lyons moved his flag to the 'Royal Albert', and Mends accompanied him. In all the operations of the year he had his full share, and he was made a CB on 5 July. He continued in command of the 'Royal Albert' until March 1857, when he was appointed to the 'Hastings' and later the 'Majestic', guardships in the Mersey, from which, four years later, he was appointed deputy controller-general of the coastguard at the Admiralty. He held this office for about a year, and in May 1862 was appointed director of transports, responsible for the transport department of the Admiralty. Here he remained more than twenty years, during which there were several exceptional calls on his department which were successfully met. Among these the most important were the initial organization of the Indian troopship service in the mid-1860s, the expedition to Abyssinia, moving Indian troops to Malta in 1879, the Anglo-Asante and Anglo-Zulu wars, and the occupation of Egypt in 1882. On 1 January 1869 Mends became a retired rear-admiral, although he remained in service. The decision to end his sea-going career was not taken lightly. He earned further appointments and promotions: KCB (20 May 1871), vice-admiral (1 January 1874), admiral (15 June 1879), and GCB (24 November 1882), the last with special reference to his work on the expedition to Egypt. In 1871 he went to India to report on the Indian marine. 
In February 1883 Mends retired and settled down at Alverstoke, within easy distance of his many old friends at Portsmouth. Here he lived peacefully for the next twelve years. In July 1894 his wife died after a short illness, a blow that seriously affected him, though he survived for three years. He died at his home, 3A Anglesey Crescent, Alverstoke, Hampshire, on 26 June 1897, the day of the great jubilee naval review. Mends's career demonstrated the limits placed on even the most brilliant officers by a lack of connection and patronage in the mid-nineteenth-century navy. Only through his close connection with Henry Blackwood and Lord Lyons, both of whom appreciated his outstanding abilities as a seaman and organizer, did Mends rise as far as he did, and both men died before they could render him much service. 


@@@@@


doc= 18560


Menken, Adah Isaacs (1835?-1868), actress and poet, is thought to have been born on 15 June 1835 in New Orleans. At various times in her life she produced different versions of her parentage, giving her father's name as James McCord, Richard Spencer, Ricardo La Fiertes (or Fuertes), and James Campbell. Her mother was stated to be either Creole or Jewish of Franco-Spanish descent. W. Mankowitz, in his 'biographic quest' entitled 'Mazeppa' (1982), has shown that her most likely maiden name was Ada Berthe Theodore and that her father was probably a wheelwright, probably called Auguste Theodore, a 'free man of colour', living in New Orleans, and that her mother was a native of Pensacola, possibly called Magdaleine Jean Louis Janneaux. She and her half-sister later appeared in a dancing act as 'The Sisters Theodore', which gives some credence to this conjecture. Further mystery surrounds her early life and, if the attribution of the name is correct, it is probable that she married a composer, W. H. Kneass, in Galveston, Texas, on 6 February 1855, during which year she was already giving readings from Shakespeare, advertised in the 'Liberty Gazette'. 'Ada Theodore' also published three poems and some liberationist pieces on the situation of women in that journal. On 23 November 1855 another poem, 'New Advertisement', written from Austin, proclaimed her wish to find a 'beau ideal'. It is possible that this poem could have been seen by Alexander Isaac Menken, then a pit musician and conductor, from a wealthy Jewish Cincinnati dry goods family, who eventually married Ada on 3 April 1856 at Livingston, Polk, Texas. She then became Adah Isaacs (adding an 'h' to her own and an 's' to her husband's name) Menken, under which name she performed on the stage for the rest of her life. Mr Kneass was apparently conveniently forgotten. 
Adah Menken's first recorded stage appearance was with the amateur Crescent Dramatic Association of New Orleans in 1856. She was then taken on for leading parts by James S. Charles for his stock company, touring Texan towns. Poems and articles were also written for the 'New Orleans Sunday Delta' and the 'Cincinnati Israelite', some dated in Hebrew, and Adah was accepted into the Cincinnati Jewish community. Meanwhile her husband had become her agent, and he booked her for Dayton, Ohio, in her own version of the Jack Sheppard story, 'Sixteen-String Jack', which was an immediate success, especially with the local militia. Adah had ambitions to try her luck in New York and, leaving Menken behind for ever, went there in 1859 to play Widow Cheerly in Andrew Cherry's 'The Soldier's Daughter'. Here she met and married, thinking herself divorced by rabbinical diploma, on 3 September 1859, John Carmel Heenan, 'the Benicia Boy', a prizefighter also looking for public recognition. Scandal followed her when Alexander Menken announced that, although he was currently seeking a divorce, at the time of the Heenan marriage Adah was still his wife. Heenan left for an important contest in England and returned with another woman on his arm, Adah meanwhile having suffered a miscarriage. A further divorce took place in November 1861. 
Menken consorted with the literati and toured Milwaukee, Detroit, Albany, and Chicago in 'The Soldier's Daughter', Douglas Jerrold's 'Black-Eyed Susan', and J. T. Haines's 'The French Spy', plays which she repeated throughout her life. Her greatest success everywhere, however, was as the hero of H. M. Milner's 'Mazeppa', based on Byron's poem, at the climax of which she appeared strapped to a running horse and clad to give the appearance of nakedness. Captain John B. Smith launched this play on 7 June 1861 at the Green Street Theatre, Albany, where it was enthusiastically received; the exposure of the actress's shapely body and the scandalized pleasure it evoked only enhanced the popularity of the piece. Her press manager at this time and for the rest of her life was Edwin James of the 'New York Clipper', whom she addressed as 'brother' and to whom she wrote regularly. The play transferred to the Broadway Theatre, opening on 13 June. On 24 September 1862 she married again; her new husband was Robert Henry Newell, the literary editor of the New York 'Sunday Mercury', but she found that his expectations of her retirement to domestic bliss in Jersey City did not conform with her own, and she left for New York after a week. She then resumed her stage career in Baltimore, giving some anxiety to her manager through her Confederate leanings. But she had set her heart on appearances in California, which she hoped would lead to an engagement in London. 'Mazeppa' was again sold out at the Opera House in San Francisco and in Sacramento; Newell was present and seeking reconciliation, and she was again surrounded by writers such as Mark Twain and Bret Harte. Adah then bought a brownstone house in New York, at 458 Seventh Avenue. James managed to arrange an engagement at Astley's Amphitheatre in London, though at a much lower salary than that to which Adah was by now accustomed, and she set sail for England on 3 April 1864, having in the meantime organized a divorce from Newell. 
Adah Menken first settled in London at Bunyard's Private Hotel in Norfolk Street, but soon moved to a suite at the Westminster Palace Hotel, where she prepared for the opening night of 'Mazeppa' on 3 October. Her appearance garnered mixed notices, but during the run (which lasted until December) she became accepted by bohemian society and held court at her 'literary salon' at the hotel. Paris beckoned, and Menken departed, armed with introductions from Charles Fechter to Gautier and Alexandre Dumas 'pere' but no theatrical engagement eventuated. On her return to London a provincial tour was arranged, to Glasgow, Liverpool, and Leeds, of 'The Children of the Sun', a poor play written for her by the American actor John Brougham. By October 1865 she had another lover, 'Captain' James Paul Barkley, a handsome, wealthy American addicted to gambling, whom she had probably met on the boat coming to England and whom she entertained in her house, 255 Brompton Road. When he fell ill in New York she returned there, and appeared again in 'Mazeppa' at the Broadway Theatre with a guaranteed $12,000 for twenty-four performances. When she found herself pregnant, she married Barkley, on 19 August 1866. The marriage lasted for three days. Menken then departed again for Paris without her husband. There is no record of the birth, probably in November 1866, of their son, Louis Dudevant Victor Emmanuel, whose godmother was George Sand, and reports vary as to whether he died in that same year or was adopted by an English family and his name changed. Menken's stay in Paris was notorious both for her affair with Alexandre Dumas 'pere' and for her mute role in 'The Pirates of the Savannah'. A disastrous visit to Vienna later in 1867 followed, where she was the victim of antisemitism, an account of which, since admitted to be fabricated, is contained in Samuel Edwards's (Gerson) 'Queen of the Plaza' (1964). By the autumn Menken was in London pursuing the publication of a collection of her poems entitled 'Infelicia', dedicated to Dickens. A strange affair with Algernon Charles Swinburne soon began, and Menken is said to be the 'Dolorida' in his poem of that name. 'Mazeppa' was again put on at Sadler's Wells, the last performance being on 30 May 1868. Menken then accepted an offer to appear in Paris, preceded by a holiday at Le Havre, since she was depressed and exhausted by the London engagement, in the course of which she had been involved in a stage accident, and was probably already suffering from cancer. She became ill during rehearsals for 'The Pirates' and died on 10 August 1868, attended by a rabbi and a devoted servant in a hotel in the rue Caumartin. She had insisted that the Orthodox embargo on a post-mortem be observed, and various rumours circulated as to the cause of her death -- tuberculosis, peritonitis, or cancer. She was buried in the Jewish section of the Pere Lachaise cemetery but later transferred by Edwin James, with a donation from Barkley, to the cemetery at Montparnasse, where a stone was erected bearing her desired enigmatical inscription, 'Thou knowest'. 


@@@@@


doc= 18663


Samuel Middiman (1750-1831) on plates published under his name only. Middiman was apprenticed in 1767 to William Byrne (1743-1805), an engraver who had studied with Aliamet and Wille in Paris, and who worked for Boydell in the later 1760s. Middiman is also said to have worked with Woollett and Bartolozzi. He exhibited at the Free Society of Artists in 1771 and showed drawings and prints with the Society of Artists from 1772 to 1777, giving addresses in St James's Square and then Wells Street, Oxford Road. In 1780-82 and 1795-7 he exhibited drawings and stained drawings at the academy, giving addresses in Margaret Street, Winchester Row, and Warren Place. On 5 April 1788 he married Martha Woodyer at St Pancras. Middiman produced three large plates and one smaller illustration for the 'Shakspeare Gallery'. As a specialist landscape etcher his skills were much in demand, and he is said to have worked on many plates issued under the sole name of other engravers, for instance John Pye. He produced the fifty-three plates for 'Select Views in Great Britain' (1814) and sixteen plates for 'Picturesque Castles and Abbeys in England and Wales' (1807-11). About 1812 he gave up engraving and appears to have turned to landscape painting, exhibiting pictures at the British Institution in 1810-11 and again in 1824. He died on 20 December 1831 at Cirencester Place, Westbourne Park. 


@@@@@


doc= 18863


Mo Choe mac Luachain (d. 497) of Nendrum, feast day 23 June. The tensions in the relationship of local east Ulster churches are well brought out by the story of Patrick's relationship with Miliucc maccu Buain (Boin), his master when a slave, and his friend 


@@@@@


doc= 18864


Mo Choemoc mac Beoain (d. 656), founder of Leamakevoge (Liath Mo Choemoc, Liath Mor, Leigh), was the other major saint of Ele. His feast day is recorded as 13 March in 'Felire Oengusso'. Unlike Cronan, Mo Choemoc was not related by birth to the Eli. According to the genealogies his father, Beoan, belonged to the Conmaicne of Connacht, while his mother, Ness, of the Desi, was Ite's sister. According to the twelfth- or thirteenth-century Latin life of the saint, his father owed his life to Ite's intervention and Mo Choemoc's birth came about through her prophecy. He was raised in Ui Chonaill Gabra and fostered by Ite. Like many other saints in the lives, he was tutored by Comgall of Bangor, before eventually founding his own monastery. It seems likely that Mo Choemoc's cult, like Ite's, owed much to the Corco Oche who were displaced by the Ui Chonaill. Mo Choemoc is frequently linked with Mo Lua from Corco Oche. Overall, though, Mo Choemoc's life is firmly concerned with the monastic politics of Ele and its neighbours. Several structures, dating from the eleventh to the fifteenth centuries, can still be seen at Leamakevoge. 


@@@@@


doc= 18865


Mo Chua mac Becain (d. 694), the patron saint of Balla in modern co. Mayo, the most important church of the kingdom of Cerae. His cult, celebrated with a feast day on 30 March, was reinforced by a Middle Irish life, and the enduring significance of his church is attested by the remains of a round tower. 


@@@@@


doc= 18889


Moenu (d. 572), bishop of Clonfert, whose feast day is 1 March and who predeceased Brendan, was probably a Briton, Cummene Fota is said to have belonged to the Eoganacht Locha Lein. This gives some colour to the notion that Ardfert was already controlled by the Eoganacht Locha Lein in the mid-seventh century; Cummene Fota's abbacy may thus reflect an enduring bond between Brendan's two principal foundations, giving the opportunity for a member of a west Munster dynasty, Eoganacht Locha Lein, to become abbot of Clonfert and successor of Brendan. Cummene is likely to have been the author of the penitential of Cummian which had a wide influence, not only in Ireland, but also in England and Francia. His life is late, but there are several early stories in which Cummene Fota plays a role, notably the ninth-century love story of two poets, Liadain and Cuirithir. 


@@@@@


doc= 18894


Mo Laga mac Duib Dligid (fl. late 6th cent.?), son of Dub Dliged of Tulach Min Mo Laga (Labbamolaga, Templemolaga). He belonged to the Ui Chuscraid branch of the Fir Maige and his church lay on their lands. His mother, Minchollait, came from the Caenraige, a minor people. Mo Laga is commemorated on 20 January in 'Felire Oengusso'. The Irish life of the saint, a production heavily influenced by saga, brings him into contact with Cummene Fota and Mac Da Cherda, as well as the seventh-century king of Munster Cu Cen Mathair (died 665). Throughout the life he is represented as the special patron of Fir Maige, yet his cult seems to have spread beyond them. The patron of Singland (Saingil) near Limerick is identically named but affiliated to the Dal Cais. This affiliation, however, represents Dal Cais dominance in this area and their appropriation of the cult. 


@@@@@


doc= 18895


Mo Laisse mac Nad Froich (d. 564), whose feast day is 12 September, was even more remote. The Latin and Irish lives both imply that Devenish was in an area subject to the Sil nDaimeni branch of the Ui Chremthainn, but the Irish life contains at the end an account of the wanderings of a people called the Dartrige. The explanation is given by an annal entry for 869 in 'Chronicum Scotorum' giving the obit of Martan of the Dartrige of Daiminis, abbot of Clonmacnoise and Daiminis. Devenish, therefore, was situated within the client people of Dartrige, who, in the later middle ages, would take over the area formerly known as Fernmag, while the Ui Nad Sluaig, rulers of Fernmag, moved further south-east, into south Monaghan, where the barony of Farney is named after their later lands. The Latin life does not give Mo Laisse's descent; in the genealogies of the saints his pedigree makes him a member of the Ui Choelbad, the most powerful dynasty among the Cruithni of counties Antrim and Down. The Irish life, on the other hand, claims that Mo Laisse belonged to the Eoganachta of Munster and also gives a story about his birth taken straight from an origin legend of the Eoganachta; the explanation for this change may lie in the legend given at the end of the Irish life according to which the Dartrige were exiles from Munster. The lives are largely taken up with a series of miracle stories, with no obvious structure, punctuated by major incidents in the saint's career: his education under Finnian of Clonard, his triumph over a pagan king called Conall Derg (of Sil nDaimeni according to the Irish life), and by a pilgrimage to Rome on his own behalf and also on behalf of his foster brother, Maedoc of Ferns. From Rome he brought back relics of Peter and Paul, Laurence, and Clement, thus rivalling Armagh, and placed them in his cemetery, so that all those buried on Devenish would be as if buried in Rome. Before a brief account of his death, the life records his acting as confessor to Columba and as commanding him to go into exile so that he might win as many souls from damnation as he had, by bringing about the battle of Cul Dreimne, caused to be sent to hell. 'And thus arose the practice that all the heirs of St Columba should show reverence and respect to the heirs of St Lasren' (Plummer, 'Vitae sanctorum', vol. 2). 


@@@@@


doc= 18913


Henry Mollineux (d. 1720) was born at Lydiate, near Ormskirk, Lancashire. His date of birth and parentage are uncertain. He may be either or neither of two Henry Molynex who were baptized in Aughton by Ormskirk: the son of Edward (14 August 1652) or, perhaps less likely, the son of Robert (28 September 1662). He was also a Quaker, and suffered imprisonment in 1684, 1691, and 1692 (Mollineux A8'v', B7'r', C'r'). On his marriage certificate he is listed as a yeoman. He was the author of 'Anti-Christ Unveiled' (1695), 'An Invitation from the Spirit of Christ' (1696), and 'Popery Exposed' (1718), in addition to his testimony to Mary (included in 'Fruits of Retirement', sig. A8 'v'-B8 'v'). Henry also contributed to the 'Collection of Roger Haydock's Works' (1700). In 1698 he took part in a ministering campaign to Scotland, travelling with Daniel Rigby and Joseph Penington. He died at Lydiate on 16 February 1720. 


@@@@@


doc= 19051


Alexander Montgomery, first Lord Montgomery (d. 1470). Alexander's wife, Margaret, was a daughter of Sir Thomas Boyd of Kilmarnock, head of another important Cunningham family. As part of the king's assertion of control over the territories under the sway of the lordship of the Isles, Alexander was in February 1430 appointed joint keeper of Kintyre and Knapdale in Argyll with his brother-in-law, Sir Robert Cunningham of Kilmaurs ['see under 'Cunningham family (per. c.1340-1631)]; in this role the pair had custody of castles Sween and Skipness. Sir Robert seems to have been dead by February 1431, and in 1447 Alexander Montgomery rendered an account at the king's exchequer for the last twelve years as bailie of Cunningham, having presumably regained possession of the office under the indenture of 1425. From 1436 on Alexander was a frequent envoy to England, and during the minority of James II, 'c'.1445, he became a lord of parliament as Alexander, Lord Montgomery, probably by 1438 and certainly by 1445. Between 1442 and 1444 he was keeper of Brodick Castle on Arran, and he seems to have held other lands on the island, as well as receiving various further grants of land from the crown. 
On 31 January 1449, just before the end of the king's minority, when governance was still in the hands of the Livingstons and the earl of Douglas, Lord Montgomery's son Alexander, master of Montgomery, received a royal grant of the office of bailie of Cunningham, thereby sparking a feud with the Cunninghams of Kilmaurs, which was to continue murderously for over 150 years until settled by royal arbitration in 1609. The initial phase of the feud was ended in the winter of 1454-5, after the death in 1452 of the master of Montgomery (who thus predeceased his father). The king, who was now of age to act for himself, ratified the families' agreement that Alexander Cunningham of Kilmaurs should exercise the office until the lawful age of Alexander Montgomery, the master's son, at which point the matter would be put to 'a declaration of rycht' before the king and his council, who would declare who should 'bruik office fra thinefurth for ever maire' (NA Scot., GD 148/1/12). Alexander was the son of the master's marriage with Catherine, daughter of Gilbert Kennedy of Dunure and Cassillis ['see under 'Kennedy family] in Carrick, south Ayrshire. In June 1466 the younger Alexander was retoured heir to his father in the bailiary of Cunningham. Significantly, this process did not take place in Ayrshire but before sheriffs 'in hac parte' at Linlithgow, suggesting that trouble with the Cunninghams of Kilmaurs was anticipated. Nothing is known of any process of right concerning the office at this time or, indeed, about whether Alexander was ever able to make good his claim to be bailie of Cunningham. He seems to have been dead before 1470, the year of the death of his grandfather, Lord Montgomery. When Alexander's son Hugh Montgomery, later first earl of Eglinton, was infeft in the principal family estates of Eglinton, Ardrossan, and Eaglesham in 1484, it was as heir to Lord Montgomery rather than to his father, suggesting that the latter had predeceased the former. 
The Montgomerys provide a good example of a long-established landowning family in the south-west of Scotland achieving political significance following the ascent of the Stewarts to the throne, which left something of a power vacuum locally, but also drew the family closer to the central government of the day. The feud with the Cunninghams of Kilmaurs is the main illustration of the local power struggle, but there was an interaction with national politics inasmuch as royal favour (as well as the premature deaths of successive heirs) clearly played a significant part in determining which family held the upper hand in that struggle from time to time. 


@@@@@


doc= 19062


John Montgomery of Eaglesham (d. 1400/01) is the first member of the family who achieved more than local eminence and from whom its descent can be followed with some certainty. Froissart's account of the battle of Otterburn in 1388 narrates how Montgomery captured Sir Henry Percy (Hotspur) in the course of hand-to-hand fighting. Montgomery is also said to have built the castle of Polnoon at the 'caput' of his principal estate of Eaglesham in Renfrewshire, near Glasgow, as or with the proceeds of Percy's ransom. Although these stories gain no support from record evidence, Montgomery did have 'ix hunder punde of Inglish gold' to lend James Lindsay in 1389 (Fraser, 'Eglinton', 2, no. 22). He married Elizabeth, the only daughter and heir of Sir Hugh Eglinton of Eglinton, prominent servant of both David II and Robert II. Through Elizabeth, Montgomery acquired the neighbouring west Cunningham estates of Eglinton and Ardrossan, together with the offices of bailie of Cunningham and chamberlain of the burgh of Irvine, which Sir Hugh had been granted by Robert Stewart before he became king. 
John received a pension for the year to May 1400, but was dead by 4 July 1401, when his son 


@@@@@


doc= 19553


Muru mac Feradaig (fl. c.600-c.650), was Fahan on the east (Inishowen) side of Lough Swilly. Although Muru's floruit was the first half of the seventh century, his obit is unrecorded and he was not included in the martyrologies of Tallaght and Oengus. His feast day (12 March) is first given in the twelfth-century martyrology of Gorman. On the other hand he is given a prominent place among the saints of Cenel nEogain in the genealogies of the saints. The only surviving narrative about him is a late Middle Irish (perhaps twelfth-century) text included in the fragmentary annals of Ireland, in which the saint appears as a friend and confessor of Aed Uaridnach, Cenel nEogain king of Tara from 605 to 612. The bell associated with Muru is in the Wallace Collection in London, while his staff is in the National Museum in Dublin. In terms of relics and sculpture, therefore, the cult of the saint would appear to have been vigorous, which only makes more puzzling the virtual absence of textual evidence for someone who was, after all, one of the principal saints of an outstandingly powerful and enduring royal dynasty. 


@@@@@


doc= 19634


John Samuel Murray (1778-1843), publisher, was born on 27 November 1778 at 32 Fleet Street, London, the eldest and only surviving legitimate son of John [i] Murray and his second wife, Hester. He was educated at private schools in Cobham, Uxbridge, Edinburgh, Margate, Gosport, and finally in Kennington, London. While at Gosport Murray lost the sight in his right eye when it was accidentally pierced by his writing master's penknife. During visits home he was put to work in the bookshop. 
When his father died in November 1793 Murray, who was not quite fifteen, was apprenticed to Samuel Highley, his father's assistant, and an agreement was drawn up by which Murray, when he came of age in 1799, would become a full partner of Highley. Under this arrangement the business continued along much the same lines as under its founder, focusing primarily on medical works. Murray became free of the Stationers' Company on 2 December 1800, and was immediately cloathed in the livery. By this time the firm of Murray and Highley had amassed over $2300 in capital stock, shares, and copyrights. However, the two partners 'disagreed on too many important matters to work together effectively or live happily in the same house' (Zachs, 248). On 24 March 1803, following arbitration, they formally separated, Highley establishing himself as a medical publisher a few doors down at 24 Fleet Street. 
Murray's first publication of importance after the dissolution of the partnership was 'The Revolutionary Plutarch', which was warmly received. In 1805 an old family friend, Mrs Maria Eliza Rundell, offered him a collection of recipes which he published as 'A New System of Domestic Cookery'. It was an immediate success. Although Mrs Rundell originally had regarded the work as a 'free gift' to Murray (Smiles, 2.121), its copyright became a bone of contention unresolved until 1823, when Murray paid her $2000. 
In 1803 Murray began a correspondence with the Edinburgh publisher Archibald Constable. Soon afterwards a close working relationship developed, and Murray took over from Longmans the London agency of Constable's publications, including the 'Edinburgh Review'. When Constable offered Walter Scott $1000 for the copyright of 'Marmion', a quarter share was offered to William Miller of 50 Albemarle Street (to where Murray moved in 1812) and the other quarter to Murray, which he took up. However, the business relationship between Murray and Constable began to sour over financial matters and finally broke off in 1813. 
In February 1809 Murray launched the 'Quarterly Review', a tory counterblast to Constable's 'Edinburgh Review', with William Gifford as its first editor and Walter Scott as an adviser and supporter. Because Gifford was an unbusinesslike editor, and the publication of the 'Quarterly' was often delayed, it was several years before it succeeded. One of the most influential journals of the age, it did not cease publication until 1967. Among the important early contributors were John Wilson Croker, John Barrow, and Robert Southey. Gifford resigned in 1824 and was succeeded briefly by John Taylor Coleridge. J. G. Lockhart, Scott's son-in-law, then took up the editorship. Murray's attempt at a daily newspaper in 1825, 'The Representative', was a costly failure. Young Benjamin Disraeli, the editor, persuaded him to take a half share, but competition was too great, and debts forced Murray to sell his recently acquired house in Whitehall Place. The coolness that this caused in Murray's long-standing family friendship with Isaac D'Israeli was soon repaired. 
During visits to Edinburgh, Murray courted Anne (1782-1845), daughter of the late Charles Elliot, the Scottish bookseller with whom his father had done much business. They were married in Edinburgh on 6 March 1807, and their son John [iii] ['see below'] was born in London on 16 April 1808, the first of five children. 
Murray's move to 50 Albemarle Street in June 1812 placed him at the centre of London literary life. He purchased the early eighteenth-century house from William Miller for just under $4000, pledging his copyright in Rundell's 'Domestic Cookery' and Scott's 'Marmion' until the purchase was paid off in 1821. The elegant drawing room became a meeting place for many of the chief literary and political figures of the day, among them Thomas Moore, George Crabbe, Robert Southey, Madame de Stael, George Canning, and Benjamin Disraeli. It was there on 7 April 1815 that Lord Byron and Walter Scott first met. 
No author is more closely associated with the house of Murray than Byron. On his return to England in July 1811 the poet gave the first two cantos of 'Childe Harold's Pilgrimage' to Robert Charles Dallas, who was duly impressed and offered them without success to the publisher William Miller. He then took the manuscript to Murray, who paid Dallas $500 for the copyright and published the poem in March 1812. In the wake of 'Childe Harold''s success, a warm relationship developed between poet and publisher. Byron's best-known works appeared under the firm's imprint, and Murray, who paid out more than $15,000 for Byron's copyrights, prospered from the sale of his works. In July 1819 he published with some trepidation the first two cantos of 'Don Juan', and with considerably more, cantos 3-5 in August 1821. Thereafter Murray refused to have anything further to do with the poem. With the breakdown of Byron's marriage in 1816 and his (self-) exile in Italy, their friendship was sustained in a correspondence that is one of the most lively and revealing of the period ('Byron's Letters and Journals', ed. L. Marchand, 1973-94). However, this friendship collapsed in 1822 over Murray's editing (on the advice of Gifford and Croker) of Byron's poetry and his careless handling of the text. Nor were matters helped by Byron's increasing outspokenness, Murray's concern with his own rising reputation, and the difficulty in resolving differences at a distance. 
In 1820 Moore was offered 2000 guineas by Murray for Byron's memoir, which the poet had given him on the condition that it was not published in his lifetime. Gifford advised the publisher that some of it was unfit for publication, and after Byron's death a meeting was held on 17 May 1824 at Albemarle Street at which, after heated discussion, it was reluctantly agreed to burn the manuscript. Those present were Murray, his son John, Moore, John Cam Hobhouse, and representatives of Lady Byron and Augusta Leigh. 
Murray's range of publications was very wide. His judgement, supported by the recommendations of his distinguished literary advisers, was usually good. In addition to the 'Quarterly Review', Murray issued the 'Journal of Science and the Arts' for the Royal Institution, and from 1813 the 'Navy List', describing himself as 'Bookseller to the Admiralty'. Murray's 'Family Library', published between 1829 and 1834, was a venture in producing cheaper books for a wider reading public. This series of almost fifty volumes, priced at 5's'. each, largely contained new works rather than reprints. 
Among the better-known poets and playwrights in Murray's lists were Crabbe (to whom he was very generous), Coleridge, Gally Knight, Fanny Kemble, and Felicia Hemans. Among scientists he published Humphry Davy, Michael Faraday, Charles Babbage, Roderick Murchison, Mary Somerville, and Charles Lyell, whose 'Principles of Geology' (1830) was in print for most of the century and who introduced Charles Darwin to Murray. Among political economists Murray published Thomas Malthus, David Ricardo, and John Austin, whose brilliant wife, Sarah, translated many works from the German for Murray. 
Another popular speciality of the firm was travel literature. Murray published books on Africa by Mungo Park, John Lewis Burckhardt, and Dixon Denham and Hugh Clapperton. In the field of polar exploration Sir John Barrow and Sir John Franklin were Murray authors. He also published Sir Gardner Wilkinson on ancient Egypt, William Martin Leake on Morea, T. Stamford Raffles on Java, and Elizabeth Rigby (Lady Eastlake) on Russia. Mariana Starke's 'Travels on the Continent', first published in 1820, was a precursor to the popular Murray 'Handbook' series later developed by John [iii] Murray. Murray also published the travel writings of Mrs Maria Graham (Lady Callcott), better known for her enduring 'Little Arthur's History of England'. 
In 1814 Murray published Jane Austen's 'Emma' and the second edition of 'Mansfield Park' for the author, charging her his commission of 10 per cent. On the same terms he issued 'Northanger Abbey' and 'Persuasion' posthumously. He brought out Madame de Stael's 'De l'Allemagne' at great speed in 1813, commissioning at least seven printers for the English and French three-volume sets. The novels of the indomitable Frances Trollope were also published by Murray, and it was with his influence that her son Anthony obtained employment with the Post Office. 
Murray issued several part-publications, in which illustrations were an important element. For these he engaged such well-known artists as J. M. W. Turner, A. W. Callcott, Charles Barry, and the engravers William and Edward Finden on several projects. A number of these illustrated books -- notably beginning in 1819 with James Hakewill's 'Picturesque Tour of Italy', and continuing with the popular 'Landscape Illustrations' of Byron and of the 'Bible' -- were issued in parts in very large numbers. 
The extensive record Murray left of his career as a publisher -- correspondence, ledgers, daybooks, subscription books, records of trade dinners -- shows him businesslike and systematic in his dealings with authors, employees, and other traders. Such was his success 'that he is sometimes mistakenly credited with having established the house' (Zachs, 1). Murray was a founder member of the Athenaeum Club. He died on 27 June 1843, leaving all his property, including his profitable share in the Stationers' Company English stock, to his wife, Anne, who died two years later. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery, London. 



@@@@@


doc= 19637


John Murray (1808-1892), publisher, was born on 16 April 1808 at 32 Fleet Street, London, the eldest of the five children of John [ii] Murray and his wife, Anne. From 1819 to 1826 he was educated at Charterhouse School. In 1827 he spent a year at Edinburgh University, where his chief study was of geology and mineralogy. He also explored much of Scotland, making careful notes of features of interest and setting a pattern for future travels. 
In the following year Murray embarked on his career in the family publishing house at 50 Albemarle Street, London. Visits to the continent from 1829 prepared the way for his first major publishing initiative. Struck by the difficulty of obtaining the kind of information he wanted, he filled notebooks with history, architecture, geology, and practical details. On his return he arranged his material along routes and compiled general accounts of the countries concerned, leading to the highly successful series of Murray 'handbooks'. Before the project outgrew the capacities of one man, he prepared three handbooks himself, dealing with the Netherlands, Belgium, Germany, and Switzerland; another, on France, followed later. The series was launched in 1836, at an auspicious time when railways were beginning to open up new possibilities for travel. Within fifteen years these red handbooks covered nearly the whole of the continent. Karl Baedeker, in producing his own guides, acknowledged his debt to the Murray model. 
The handbooks fitted well with the publishing policy that developed during Murray's early years with the firm. His father, chastened by memories of financial setbacks in the 1820s, cast an increasingly jaundiced eye on verse and fiction and chose to opt out of that volatile if expanding market. This disposition was shared by the son: he had met Byron, Scott, and Goethe, but cared little for novels (other than Scott's) or poetry. Physically, too, his field of vision had long been constricted, and Lord Ernle described him as having 'the most strained and tired-looking eyes' he had ever seen (Paston, xiii). This did not prevent him grappling diligently with manuscripts and small print. He was a less adventurous man of business than his father had been in his heyday, but more methodical. Though initially kept in the background, he conducted most of the office correspondence and played a leading role as his father's health failed. On becoming head of the firm in June 1843 he found that his father's will left all property to his mother, putting him in the position of having to buy the business back from her and pay annual interest in the mean time. He felt obliged to postpone thoughts of marriage, and only after his mother's death did he propose to Marion Smith (1815-1893), an Edinburgh banker's daughter whom he had known for many years. They married on 6 July 1847; 50 Albemarle Street remained his home. Two daughters and two sons survived to maturity. In due course the sons, John [iv] ['see below'] and Hallam, joined their father and his cousin Robert Cooke as partners in the firm. In 1851, out of profits from the handbooks, Murray bought 4 acres at Wimbledon on which he built a house. He named it Newstead after Byron's Newstead Abbey, and endowed it with a fine library. From then on the family spent the summer months there. Both at Albemarle Street and in Wimbledon the Murrays entertained frequently, bringing together well-known people from a variety of backgrounds, regardless of whether they had any business connection with the firm. 
What Murray did inherit from his father was high standing in the publishing world, a select back list, and a considerable number of distinguished friends and authors who were staunch supporters, such as Henry Hallam, Dean Milman, Sir Charles Lyell, Sir John Barrow, and Lord Mahon (later Earl Stanhope), while J. G. Lockhart and John Wilson Croker continued to act as pillars of the 'Quarterly Review'. Murray's accession brought no major policy changes. Travel, history, biography, and memoirs remained the staple of the business. Nor did the 'Quarterly''s politics change, although its tone became less partisan after Croker's retirement. When Gladstone complained in 1868 about some rough handling in its pages, Murray reminded his friend that it was not the 'Quarterly' that had changed over the decades, for it 'continues doggedly to its old Conservative principles' (Paston, 208). One project did offer an immediate opportunity to signalize the change of management in 1843. This was the idea, discussed in only general terms before his father's death, of a cheap series aimed in part but not wholly at colonial customers, to take advantage of the 1842 'Copyright Act''s provisions against foreign piracy of British copyright works. Three months after Murray's accession, his 'Colonial and Home Library' made a scrambled debut with a new edition of George Borrow's 'The Bible in Spain' as its flagship title. Colonial sales failed to live up to expectations, but home demand was sufficient to ensure that the series survived for some sixty years, although in an attenuated form. 
The solid Murray reputation attracted a continuing flow of manuscripts. Much of the routine of assessing and retouching new material fell to one or other of Murray's readers or literary advisers. Since 1841 Frances Trollope's brother Henry Milton had acted in that capacity; he was succeeded in 1850 by his son John (later Sir John Milton). The firm's concentration on non-fiction meant that certain types of manuscript were shut out almost automatically. The survivors had to circumvent a number of other pitfalls. Murray was a loyal, old-fashioned churchman, and would have nothing to do with irreligion or anything that appeared offensive to morals or good taste. He refused Kinglake's 'Eothen' because of its 'wicked spirit of jesting at everything' (CUL, Add. 7633.4, 1844) and Harriet Martineau's 'Eastern Life: Present and Past' because it was 'a work of infidel tendency' (Murray letter-book, 29 Feb 1848). When published elsewhere, both succeeded, and stirred no outcry. Murray was also a stickler for authenticity. Herman Melville, whose 'Typee' and 'Omoo' he published, was one travel writer who was pressed for evidence that he had actually experienced all he described, and was dropped after he appeared to stray into the world of romance. On the other hand, Murray, once convinced, was quick to spring to the defence of an author such as Paul Du Chaillu, whose stories of gorillas in his 'Explorations and Adventures in Central Africa' were initially scoffed at by disbelievers. 
The 1840s had seen an infusion of new attitudes into British publishing, but Murray was conservative in business. He won only hollow victories from litigation against those who ignored his claim to copyright in certain American authors, an area shrouded in legal confusion. He was a strong upholder of retail price maintenance, until that was overthrown in 1852 by an arbitration decision (none the sweeter for coming from three Murray authors led by Lord Campbell). His response to new developments sometimes seemed improvised, as with 'Murray's Railway Reading', consisting mostly of reprinted works issued irregularly from 1851 and varying in size, price, and binding. 
None the less, Murray achieved considerable success in the firm's chosen niche, aided by his authors' recognition of fair dealing. Among those he enlisted were George Melville, Charles Darwin, Lord Campbell, A. H. Layard, Robert Curzon, John Motley, Samuel Smiles, David Livingstone, George Grote, Isabella Bird, Paul Belloni Du Chaillu, Dean Arthur Stanley, and Heinrich Schliemann -- a spread of names typical of the areas in which Murray's commercial and personal interests lay. In November 1859 he managed to put two best-sellers on sale on the same day, one being Darwin's 'Origin of Species', perhaps the most momentous book of the century, and the other Samuel Smiles's 'Self-Help', synonymous with the Victorian social ethic. A number of these authors, alongside other notable writers, also appeared in the pages of the 'Quarterly Review', edited by Lockhart until Whitwell Elwin took over in 1853. Another stalwart of Albemarle Street, William Smith, combined editing the 'Quarterly' from 1867 to 1893 with maintaining his remarkable array of dictionaries, in which Murray invested much capital. 
Publishing an author like Darwin was scarcely undertaken in a crusading spirit. The manuscript of 'The Origin of Species' left Murray perplexed and sceptical, but he prudently suppressed his doubts and forged a relationship with Darwin that was profitable to both. Lyell's 'Principles of Geology', published by his father in Murray's early days with the firm, and popular ever since, had laid some of the foundations on which Darwin built. Geology was Murray's favourite hobby, but it was also one of the most strife-ridden sciences of his day. Concerned to leave geological room for an act of creation, he wrote his 'Scepticism in Geology' to counteract Lyell's concept of a world slowly and constantly changing, and issued it under a pseudonym (Verifier) in 1877. 
Apart from the 'Quarterly Review', which long outlived him, Murray's experience with periodicals was disappointing. In 1869 he provided the capital for a new literary monthly, 'The Academy', but could not persuade its editor, Charles Appleton, to lighten its severely scholarly tone. Murray withdrew from the venture within a year, but did not abandon the idea of having his own monthly. When 'Murray's Magazine' appeared in January 1887, he made sure it was pitched at a more accessible level; and, as serialization had become a standard part of the magazine formula, the house ban on fiction was suddenly breached. In 1887 Murray took over, from Blackwoods, Emily Lawless's Irish novel 'Hurrish', and used her next novel, 'Major Lawrence, F.L.S.', as the opening serial in the new magazine. Five more followed from other authors, but before the fifth had run its course the magazine closed in December 1891. 
Throughout his life one of Murray's chief pleasures was foreign travel, and one of his great restoratives was walking. He was elected a member of the Alpine Club in 1858. A man of robust constitution, he never formally retired from active publishing, but when he was eighty-three his health began seriously to decline. He died at 50 Albemarle Street on 2 April 1892 and was buried on 6 April at St Mary's Church, Wimbledon. He lacked the panache of his father in his glory days, but Elizabeth Rigby's assessment at the time of his father's death proved accurate: 'in all that concerns the stability of the great publishing-house, his son is quite fitted to take his place' (Paston, 38). 



@@@@@


doc= 19838


Nechtan Morbet (d. 481?), Erip's son, who would have reigned about the middle of the fifth century, but associates it with the successor of St Brigit (died 523) at Kildare -- an undoubted anachronism. Lists in another group attribute the building of Abernethy to one of Brude's immediate successors, Garnat, son of Domnach (or the like), or Nectan, son of Irb. It can only be supposed that, in the late Pictish period or later, Abernethy was believed to have been founded by a king called Nechtan. 
In 616 AEthelfrith, king of Northumbria, died in battle, and according to Bede his young sons sought refuge among the Scots and Picts. During most of the seventeen years that they spent in exile the Pictish king was Ciniod, son of Luchtren. The oldest of the exiled brothers, Eanfrith, became the father of a later Pictish king. For more than twenty years after Ciniod the kingship was held successively by three brothers whose father, Uid, could, chronologically, have been the warrior named Gwid in the Old Welsh poem 'Gododdin'. The third son of Uid, named Talorg, was succeeded by 


@@@@@


doc= 19886


Thomas Nelson junior (1822-1892) controlled the firm of Thomas Nelson & Sons throughout the second half of the nineteenth century. William Nelson was born in Edinburgh on 13 December 1816 and was educated at the high school, where he won the classical gold medal. In 1835 he abandoned his studies at Edinburgh University to help his ailing father run the business. Thomas Nelson was also born in Edinburgh, on 25 December 1822, and followed his eldest brother through Edinburgh high school, leaving at seventeen to assist William. They gave fresh energy to the expansion of the firm, which still dealt only in reprints. William concentrated on marketing, Thomas on editing and production. 
In 1844, at Thomas senior's request, Thomas junior opened a London office at 35 Paternoster Row, the place of his father's apprenticeship. Peter Nelson ran this branch for a time but was never made a partner. A new printing house at Hope Park in Edinburgh was built in 1845, where the complete book manufacturing process was carried out under one roof, with a payroll of over 400 employees. In 1850 Thomas perfected a rotary press, demonstrated at the Great Exhibition in the following year, but because he refused to patent his invention, little fame and no fortune resulted from the many clones which competitors built. A continuous web of paper-fed cylinders holding curved stereotype plates passed the printed paper under a serrated knife for cutting into sheets: a principle on which all newspaper presses were based until well into the twentieth century. Thomas also undertook experiments with coated paper for use with half-tone blocks. 
On 24 July 1851 William married at St Cuthbert's Church, Edinburgh, Catherine Inglis (died 1904), daughter of Robert Inglis of Kirkmay, Fife. They had two sons (neither of whom entered the family business) and four daughters. 
In 1854 Thomas -- normally the stay-at-home brother -- established at William's suggestion a branch of Thomas Nelson & Sons in New York at 42 Bleecker Street, the first branch of a British publishing house in the USA. It later proved a sound investment for reasons not altogether to do with publishing, providing opportunities for investment and for profitable imports during the American Civil War. 
In his early days with the firm William reduced stock holdings by rebinding reprints in a more attractive cloth finish, taking to the road himself to sell them, travelling as far as Liverpool, via Carlisle, on his first expedition. The repackaging, coupled with an increased discount, was successful: booksellers who may have earlier despised Nelsons' list now subscribed eagerly. Perhaps also publishing a cheap reprint of a work too popular to ignore, MacKnight on the epistles, blackmailed them into recognizing the upstart firm. 
Thomas Nelson & Sons continued to expand and now began publishing stories of adventure and travel for young people, 'moral books', and educational titles generally. The former were especially suitable as Sunday school and church, or indeed weekday school, prizes, featuring elevating and wholesome contents, attractive presentation, and reasonable price. The work of R. M. Ballantyne fitted well into this category. 'The Young Fur Traders' (1856) was written at the suggestion of William Nelson out of Ballantyne's own experiences with the Hudson's Bay Company, the first of seven major titles including 'Coral Island' (1858) published by Nelsons. Harriet Beecher Stowe was another moral, humane Nelson author, while illustrators included artists like Landseer and David Scott. Lesser-known figures important in their time were Charlotte Maria Tucker, who used the pseudonym A. L. O. E. (A Lady of England), and Evelyn Everett-Green. The former was, like Ballantyne, possessed of a Christian mission in her writing. She was, also like Ballantyne, extremely prolific: Nelsons advertised forty-seven of her titles, new and reprints, in 1875: by 1894 there were sixty. Copyright was bought outright on acceptance of the manuscript, the author receiving no other payment or royalty from Nelsons. 
Ballantyne protested against such exploitation, reputedly calling William 'a mean old codger' (Quayle, 95). This is in contrast with William's personal benevolence towards the indigent, especially towards the dependants of former employees. Ballantyne certainly felt that he was the victim of sharp practice when he set the popularity of works issued by Nelsons against the sums paid for their copyright: $50 for 'The Young Fur Traders', $60 for his second novel 'Ungava' (1857) and for 'Coral Island', rising to $75 for 'Martin Rattler' (1858). When in 1860 Nelsons refused, apparently with a sad lack of commercial foresight, to allow him to retain the copyright in a new work, he took the only sanction open to him and removed future titles to another publisher. Nelsons further refused, in 1865, to allow him to buy back the copyright to his early titles, which continued to be best-sellers, and Ballantyne saw not a penny more for them. 
Thomas Nelson senior died on 23 March 1861, after a period of failing health. His sons had taken on all responsibility for the firm over the previous ten years, and the secondhand bookshop had by this time grown into a business giving work to hundreds. 
On 30 April 1868 Thomas Nelson junior married Jessie (1846-1919), daughter of James Kemp of Manchester and South America. They had five children: a son, Thomas Graeme, who died aged eighteen months; two other sons, Thomas Arthur (1877-1917) ['see below'] and Ian Theodore (1878-1958) ['see below'], who later carried on the family business; and two daughters. Thomas Nelson was politically liberal, and a member of the Free Church of Scotland, but had few or no interests outside his work: his obituary in 'The Scotsman' comments that he had no desire for holidays, and found it impossible to delegate. 
William continued to travel widely for both business and leisure, visiting the American offshoot on several occasions, and on one transcontinental tour in 1870 narrowly escaped capture by raiding Sioux. Although not a 'public man', he, like his brother, espoused liberal politics, and was particularly known for his support of the restoration of historic buildings in Edinburgh, including parts of Edinburgh Castle and St Bernard's Well on the Water of Leith. 
A fire devastated Hope Park in 1878, causing damage estimated between $100,000 and $200,000, only partly covered by insurance. William Nelson witnessed the destruction: the fire had broken out in the back of the building at about three in the morning, and the whole building was soon in flames. By the time that William arrived at the scene just over an hour later, the roof had already fallen in and the flames, fanned by a strong east wind, carried the fire rapidly throughout the works. 'Not a book or sheet of paper was saved' (Wilson, 173-4). 
Within two months Thomas Nelson & Sons were back in operation, albeit on a limited scale, and within two years the production works moved to a new site at Parkside near Arthur's Seat in Edinburgh. The calamity brought the fortuitous benefit of investment in new plant from which a flood of inexpensive reprints, schoolbooks, prize books, and religious books poured -- with the corollary of low profit margins. From 1878 to 1881 fiction represented, again, according to John Dempster's calculations, 40 per cent of the books printed but only 10 per cent of the firm's total profit. Furthermore, 17 per cent of the fiction titles produced 53 per cent of the profit. The inescapable conclusion is that most of the fiction published by Nelsons, non-copyright reprints notwithstanding, made very little money. 
The 'Education Acts' after 1870 stimulated tremendous demand for good, inexpensive learning materials, and Nelsons responded with the 'Royal Readers' series, which sold in vast quantities throughout the British empire and was followed by the 'Royal School' series. The educational market was monitored through correspondence with educationists, contacts with school boards at home and abroad, and inspecting the products of rivals such as Blackie and Arnold. Between 1878 and 1881 educational books represented 25 per cent of total output but, according to calculations by John Dempster, yielded 88 per cent of the firm's total profit. Nelsons introduced the first school atlases and Thomas is credited with the introduction into these of lines of latitude and longitude, and of the scale in English miles. (Not long before his death he bought a controlling interest in John Bartholomew & Co., the cartographical and geographical specialists.) 'The Highroads of History' (1907), 'The Highroads of Literature', and 'The Highroads of Geography' (both 1911) remained on the company's back list for over forty years. Nelsons also published periodicals, the most successful being the 'Children's Paper', issued from 1855 until 1925. From 1895 the 'Practical Teacher' appeared under its imprint, carrying, like many other Nelsons periodicals, a high proportion of advertising for Nelsons' publications: possibly they were regarded partly as a promotional medium for the firm. 
William died on 10 September 1887 and Thomas on 20 October 1892. Both were millionaires. The obituary of Thomas published in 'The Bookseller' stresses the high production values of the Nelsons' books: 'they were better printed, better illustrated and more tastefully bound than any other books of their class' ('The Bookseller', 7 Nov 1892). 
Until Thomas Nelson junior's two sons, Tommy and Ian, could take over the business, the firm was directed under trusteeship by their Canadian cousin George Brown, who later continued as partner with them. John Buchan noted that he revolutionized the financial side of the business, introducing an up-to-date American accounting system. 



@@@@@


doc= 19889


William Nelson (1816-1887) and 


@@@@@


doc= 20118


John Nichols (1745-1826), printer and writer. Nichols was born on 2 February 1745 in Islington, Middlesex, the eldest of six children of Edward Nichols (1719-1779), baker, and his wife, Anne (1719-1783), daughter of Thomas Wilmot of Beckingham, Lincolnshire. Only John and his sister Anne survived to maturity. He was educated at John Shield's Academy for Young Gentlemen in Islington ('c'.1749-1757). He was originally destined for a naval career but his uncle, Thomas Wilmot, an officer under the command of Admiral Barrington, who was to have preferred him, died in 1751, and so on leaving school Nichols joined the Bowyer printing office, founded in 1699, and was bound apprentice at Stationers' Hall, on 6 February 1759. His master, William Bowyer the younger, who had been educated at Cambridge and had, 'for more than half a century, stood unrivalled as a learned printer' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 3.269), set about furthering his new apprentice's education by setting him Latin exercises, accompanying him to scientific lectures, and introducing him to the authors whose works were passing through his press. Nichols had a retentive memory and was eager to learn; from his youth he was quick at everything: 'he read with rapidity... he spoke quickly, and that whether in the reciprocity of conversation or... in a set speech.' He also wrote 'with great rapidity; but this, he used jocularly to allow,... did not tend to improve his hand' (Chalmers). He was soon placed in a position of trust, and in 1765 his master sent him to Cambridge to test his business acumen by trying to negotiate the purchase of a share in the management of the university press. The negotiations fell through, but Bowyer was impressed with how the young man handled the business. When he came out of his time on 4 March 1766 (he was freed at Stationers' Hall) Bowyer returned half the apprenticeship fee to his father, an accepted practice where an apprentice satisfied the conditions. Bowyer's partnership with his relative James Emonson had ended acrimoniously in 1760 and his only surviving son, Thomas, had rejected his father and the business; so on 7 April 1766 Bowyer took Nichols into partnership, and in 1767 they moved from the cramped quarters in Whitefriars to larger premises in Red Lion Passage, Fleet Street. 
At St Giles-in-the-Fields, Westminster, on 22 June 1766 Nichols married Anne (1737-1776), daughter of William Cradock of Leicester, with whom he had three children. Only two, Anne (died 1815), who married the antiquary and architect John Pridden, and Sarah, lived to maturity. His wife died in childbirth on 18 February 1776, and on 11 June 1778 Nichols remarried at St Mary's, Hinckley, Leicestershire. His second wife was Martha (1756-1788), daughter of William Green of Hinckley, with whom he had seven children. Bishop Thomas Percy was godfather to a son who died young; a second son, John Bowyer Nichols ['see below'], later succeeded his father in the business; and four daughters also survived. 
William Bowyer died in 1777 and Nichols, his executor, became proprietor of one the largest printing houses in London. They had printed the House of Commons 'Votes' or agenda papers since 1729, and in 1767 they were appointed printers of the House of Lords 'Journals'. For many years they were printers to the Society of Antiquaries and the Royal Society but both commissions were lost at the end of the century; the Antiquaries, for whom they had printed from 1736, grew dissatisfied with the Nichols press and in 1798 moved to the cheaper and more fashionable press of William Bensley. Likewise the Royal Society, for whom the firm had printed since 1761, transferred to the 'fine' printer William Bulmer in 1791. But these were rare failures. In 1773 the government commissioned the Bowyer press to print a type facsimile of the 'Domesday Book'. Nichols designed the type and saw the work through the press during the ten years it took to produce. 'On the correctness and beauty of this important work I am content to stake my typographical credit,' Nichols wrote (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 2.265); it is still considered remarkably accurate and complete. 
In June 1778 Nichols purchased a share in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' from the sister of its founder, Edward Cave. At first he had half the printing and all the folding and stitching of each issue, but in 1780 he became sole printer and took over much of the editorial responsibility from Cave's brother-in-law, David Henry, who owned the remaining shares; shortly before his death in 1792 Henry surrendered the entire editorial control to Nichols. This put him in a very strong position: the lucrative and prestigious 'Gentleman's Magazine' was a key component of the Nichols press, which kept tight control of its editorial policy and production until the family sold the property to J. H. Parker of Oxford in 1856. 
It might be said of Nichols, as Dr Johnson said of Cave, that 'he never looked out of the window but with a view to the 'Gentleman's Magazine'' (Boswell, 'Life'). His editorial guidance of the 'Gentleman's Magazine' is manifest throughout the years of his proprietorship. His first action on taking control was to double its size; Richard Gough had been reviews editor from 1786, and Nichols now printed longer reviews, as well as giving space to literary and antiquarian contributions from readers. He gave more prominence to the obituary columns and was indefatigable in his search for data, which he encouraged his readers to check. He was fascinated by biographical facts and anecdotes and he got his readers to produce information for both the 'Magazine' and his other writings. His method was to question the accuracy of his contributors in footnotes, introducing topics he was interested in under a variety of pseudonyms and then correcting his own mistakes and eliciting further information in footnotes to footnotes. By 1794 this section had become what Nichols proudly called 'a body of biography'. John Wolcot, writing under the pseudonym Peter Pindar, might satirize 'John Nichols, the death hunter', but scholars ever since have owed him an incalculable debt. The contributors to the 'Dictionary of National Biography' lifted whole phrases and paragraphs from Nichols for inclusion in their biographical articles and the 'Gentleman's Magazine' is given as a source some 7000 times. 
Nichols's reputation as an editor, biographer, and antiquary grew with the expansion of his printing business and was inextricably linked to it. As a youth he was always scribbling poetry and with William Bowyer's encouragement he published two slim volumes, 'The Buds of Parnassus' and 'Islington', in 1763. His first important editorial work was a supplementary volume to the works of Jonathan Swift in 1775 which formed volume 17 of the trade edition of Swift's works and contained an index to the whole. Further supplementary volumes followed in 1776 and 1779. This led him to a general interest in the editorial process and by a study of the work of earlier Swift editors and a close reading of the 'Journal to Stella' Nichols was able to improve the accuracy and orderliness of Swift's original texts. The list of missing works which he added to his supplement of 1779 impressed Edmond Malone and is still useful today. His interest in Hogarth derived from Bowyer's association with the artist, while Nichols's biography exemplifies his editorial and scholarly method, only affordable by an author who was his own printer. Volume 4 of Walpole's 'Anecdotes of Painting in England' (1780) had stimulated public interest in Hogarth. In the following year Nichols published, with the assistance of George Steevens and Isaac Reed, 'Biographical anecdotes of Mr Hogarth, and a catalogue of his works, with occasional remarks' (1781), followed by enlarged editions in 1782 and 1785. Even the critical Walpole praised the work. The fourth edition, 'Biographical Anecdotes of William Hogarth' (1810), 'in two handsome quarto volumes, illustrated with 160 beautiful plates' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 3.9n.), remains a key work. 
William Bowyer's proposal in 1764 to add to Tonson's edition of 'The Tatler' and 'The Spectator' turned Nichols's attention to the works of Steele, and between 1789 and 1797 he printed a number of Steele's periodicals, both on his own and jointly with a consortium of other booksellers. He bought a number of Steele's letters for his edition of the 'Correspondence of Sir Richard Steele' (1797) which he later donated to the British Museum. 
Nichols made extensive use of the papers of George Hardinge and the elder and younger Samuel Pegge, culminating in a new, enlarged edition of the younger Pegge's 'Curialia' in 1806 and of the 'Miscellaneous Works in Prose and Verse of George Hardinge' in 1818. Among Nichols's other edited works are 'Letters on Various Subjects to and from William Nicholson' (1809), Samuel Pegge's 'Anonymania' (1809), and a new edition, with the assistance of Malone, of Fuller's 'History of the Worthies of England' (1811). 
Nichols was an avid collector of literary manuscripts, which he then edited and printed. His wide circle of friends, readers, and contributors had confidence in his integrity and judgement and he was thus enabled to get hold of manuscript material for the obituary pages of the 'Gentleman's Magazine' which might not have been entrusted to other publishers. He also bought heavily at sales and, as literary executor of William Bowyer, George Hardinge, and Samuel Pegge, acquired further collections. His editing of one group of documents might lead to the donation of related material which he would incorporate in further, enlarged editions. 'The Epistolary Correspondence of Francis Atterbury' (1783) is a case in point; it originated in the purchase of a single manuscript which he enlarged by transcribing the bishop's letters in the British Museum and then published. This produced further original material from Atterbury's relations and other 'sources of equal authenticity' which culminated in a five-volume edition of Atterbury's letters in 1799. 
For Nichols, work and social life were one and the same thing, and many of those for whom he printed, often inherited from Bowyer, became his friends and helped him in his publishing projects. His method was to assess the market for a work while he pursued his own 'harmless pleasure' of editing the works of lesser known authors. Such was the case with the 'Original Works of William King' which he edited in 1776; he followed this up by printing a 'Select Collection of Miscellaneous Poems', which he edited between 1780 and 1782 with the assistance of Joseph Warton and bishops Percy and Lowth. It contained biographical notices of over 150 persons and was intended to supplement the poetical collections of James Dodsley, George Pearch, and Samuel Johnson. He printed Johnson's 'Lives of the English Poets', for which he contributed biographical details, and was drawn into Johnson's circle and joined his convivial Essex Head Club, founded in 1783. Nichols gave Boswell material for the 'Life of Johnson' and subsequently donated his correspondence with Johnson to the British Museum. 
Nichols's love of antiquarianism, encouraged by Bowyer, cannot be dissociated from his career as a printer and editor. He was passionately concerned with disseminating historical source material which might otherwise be lost. The Bowyer-Nichols press was at the heart of the output of monumental county histories. It was through printing the first edition of John Hutchins's 'History and Antiquities of Dorset', which Nichols saw through the press between 1770 and 1774, that he first met Richard Gough, a pioneer local historian. Gough was quick to see Nichols as an ally in his plan to publicize the antiquities of Britain, and Nichols became his closest friend. During twenty years they travelled through England visiting sites of historic interest, and collaborating on many projects, of which the most ambitious was the 'Bibliotheca Topographica Britannica', which appeared in fifty-two numbers between 1780 and 1790. The highly successful 'Miscellaneous Antiquities' followed (1791-1800), with Gough the chief contributor. Its opening number was a series of questions seeking information from lovers of antiquities; then came Edward Rowe Mores's 'History and Antiquities of Tunstall in Kent', which proved that a scholarly local study could have more than local appeal. Nichols drew on manuscripts in his hands or on his own historical research for other titles in the series. Gough contributed a seminal article on 'the progress of sale catalogues' to volume 3 of the 'Literary Anecdotes' and Nichols one of the first attempts at a history of the Stationers' Company to the same volume. Nichols felt keenly Gough's death in 1809. As his executor he oversaw Gough's bequest of his enormous collections of local history to the Bodleian Library. Nichols worked with other antiquaries such as William Cole of Milton and A. C. Ducarel, who provided Nichols with material for his work 'Royal Wills' and for the 'History and antiquities of Lambeth parish' in 'Bibliotheca Topographica Britannica', 39 (1786), which drew on Ducarel's histories of the archbishop's palaces of Croydon and Lambeth. 
Nichols's reputation as an antiquary and county historian rests principally on 'The History and Antiquities of the County of Leicester'. He had family connections with Leicestershire and visited there regularly. This gave him a special interest in that county, while, as a Londoner, he could remain detached. In printing county histories of Dorset, Worcestershire, and Cornwall, he had learned how to arrange the material which he collected assiduously over many years, using his contacts through the 'Gentleman's Magazine' to assemble a team of over 100 writers whose work he combined with research of his own and the unpublished manuscript histories of Leicestershire by William Burton, Francis Peck, and Richard Farmer. He was at pains to include documents of county-wide interest, ranging from his own extracts from 'Domesday' to more recent government statistics, which provided points of comparison between different parishes. His novel method of illustrating the work derived from his experience as a printer; by using a border of coats of arms round views of buildings, sculptures, and artefacts his plates provided his readers with virtually a printed county museum. Nichols had begun characteristically with a series of fifty-two short studies printed in the 'Bibliotheca Topographica Britannica' (1780-90), which gradually grew into a multi-volume work in spite of the loss of much material in the fire at his printing house in 1808, which cost Nichols at least $5000. He saw the work as his most important; it has not been superseded and remains one of the best county histories. 
It is as chronicler of the book trade that Nichols is pre-eminent. His interest in printing history began when he and Bowyer edited the 'Origin of Printing, in Two Essays' by Conyers Middleton and Gerard Meerman (1774); a supplement by A. C. Ducarel was added in 1781. In the same year came 'The biographical memoirs of William Ged, including a particular account of his progress in the art of block printing' (1781). A peak year for Nichols was 1778, when he purchased the 'Gentleman's Magazine'; published Edward Rowes Mores's 'Dissertation of Type Founders and Type Founderies', having bought the manuscript and blocks at Mores's posthumous sale; and, as a private tribute to his master and partner, published a fifty-two-page pamphlet in an edition of twenty copies, 'The Anecdotes, Biographical and Literary of the Late Mr William Bowyer'. This he enlarged as 'Biographical and Literary Anecdotes of William Bowyer, Printer... and Many of his Learned Friends' (1782). Nichols considered it the first edition of what in the course of thirty-four years grew to be the monumental 'Literary Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century' (9 vols., 1812-15) and 'Illustrations of the Literary History of the Eighteenth Century' (8 vols., 1817-58), of which four volumes came out in his lifetime and the rest were completed by his son and grandson. He used the 'Gentleman's Magazine' to elicit new material, asking his readers, usually under a pseudonym, for information, and by this means assembled a wealth of anecdote and biography incorporating letters and data as they came to hand. At times the reader is overwhelmed with a mass of footnotes and footnotes to footnotes; and Walpole, while praising Nichols's meticulousness, waspishly wished that 'he would not dub so many 'great'. I have known several of his heroes, who were very little men' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 8.259). Taken together, however, these two works remain Nichols's most enduring monument. 
Nichols was active in the Stationers' Company throughout his career, reaching the 'summit of his ambition' when he was made master in 1804. He was well known in the trade and, as owner of one the major printing houses engaged in official printing, was deeply involved in negotiating rates of pay and conditions during the unrest in the trade after 1785. He was also involved in many charities; in 1786 he helped to get a monument erected to John Howard in St Paul's Cathedral, and in 1793 he helped to get land purchased for a sea-bathing infirmary for 'scrophulous diseases' at Margate, Kent. He was a registrar of the Royal Literary Fund and was involved in the foundation of the Royal Humane Society, on both of whose committees his son later represented him; he subscribed to local charities in St Bride's, in the City of London, and in his native village of Islington, Middlesex. He was elected an honorary member of the Society of Antiquaries of Edinburgh in 1781 and of Perth in 1785. In 1810 he was admitted a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London. 
On 8 January 1807 Nichols fell and fractured his thigh, and in the following year, on 8 February, the printing office and warehouse in Red Lion Passage were destroyed by fire with the loss of some $30,000, of which $10,000 was uninsured. The entire book stock in the warehouse was consumed, including all the numbers of the 'Gentleman's Magazine' dating back to 1783. It says much for Nichols's fortitude and his standing in the trade that at the age of sixty-three and with the help of his son, John Bowyer Nichols, he was able to recover his business and continue his numerous personal printing enterprises. Many, including Luke Hansard, offered him the use of their presses until he could find new premises. He had moved back to Islington in 1803, intending to pursue his own writing interests, but his letters to his son show that he retained control of the firm and its routine business, continuing to check proofs and liaise with other members of the book trade to the end. 
Portraits of Nichols in later life depict a short, amiable man, inclined to stoutness. He possessed, however, immense energy and a powerful memory. In private life he was popular and convivial. Boswell once described him as 'joyous to a pitch of bacchanalian vivacity' ('The Yale Edition of the Private Papers of James Boswell', vol. 4, 1986, 412). According to Hart he was the 'archetype of the successful industrious apprentice' ('Minor Lives', xx) who became master of a flourishing printing house and was known and liked by most of the leading literary and antiquarian figures of the day. Walpole admired his modesty and intelligence and to Gibbon he was 'the last, or one of the last of the learned printers in Europe' (Edward Gibbon to John Nichols, 24 Feb 1792; Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 8.557). His printing office became a focus: many correspondents who met there left manuscripts to be called for. As well as editing over 150 works by other men he contributed innumerable articles to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and wrote works containing more biographical information than all his contemporaries combined. Behind his works lay his belief that 'every book should contain within itself its necessary explanation' (Kuist, 'Works', 19), thus saving the reader the trouble of referring elsewhere. He died on 26 November 1826 at his home in Highbury Place, Islington, and was buried on 5 December in the churchyard of St Mary's, Islington. 



@@@@@


doc= 20119


John Bowyer Nichols (1779-1863), printer and antiquary, was born on 15 July 1779 in Red Lion Passage, Fleet Street, London, only son among the five surviving children of John Nichols and his second wife, Martha Green. His childhood was spent largely with his maternal grandfather and his great-uncle, William Iliffe, at Hinckley. From about 1784 to 1790 he was taught by the Revd William Brown at Stoke Golding, Leicestershire, and moved to St Paul's School, London, on 9 October 1790. His father bound him apprentice on 6 August 1793 while he was still at school; on leaving school in September 1796 he entered his father's printing office. On 5 August 1800 he was freed at Stationers' Hall and was made a partner in the family business. He married, at St Bride's, Fleet Street, London, on 6 June 1805, Eliza (1784-1846), daughter of John Baker, apothecary of Camberwell, Surrey, with whom he had fourteen children; three sons and five daughters survived. 
J. B. Nichols started to represent his father in business in 1802. He continued to live at Red Lion Passage after his father moved to Islington, but between 1808 and 1811 he and his family found accommodation in Thavies Inn while the fire-damaged print rooms and warehouse were refurbished and the presses were moved into their living quarters above the printing office. He took an active part in managing the printing business and in producing the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. William Bray, who completed Owen Manning's 'History and Antiquities of Surrey', praised Nichols's 'attention and accuracy' in revising proof sheets to the second volume in 1809 (Manning and Bray, 'Surrey', vol. 2). Between 1811 and 1815 he and his father edited volumes 3 and 4 of the second edition of William Hutchins's 'History and Antiquities of Dorset', the entire stock of volumes 1 and 2, as well as part of volume 3 which was unpublished, having perished in the warehouse fire. The firm continued the Bowyer press tradition of publishing county histories, useful experience for a budding antiquary. J. B. Nichols printed most of the major early nineteenth-century works in the field, in which he was personally interested as an antiquary and on which he lavished his typographical skill. Samuel Bentley, J. B. Nichols's cousin, joined the firm between 1812 and 1818. In 1819 the younger man oversaw a move from the premises in Red Lion Passage to 25 Parliament Street, Westminster, where the press was more conveniently situated for printing the House of Commons 'Votes', which was night work and always required with urgency. 
When his father died in 1826 J. B. Nichols became sole owner of the printing house. The Nicholses had been reappointed printers to the Society of Antiquaries in 1821 and J. B. Nichols inherited lucrative printing contracts for the 'Votes' and the 'Journals' of the Lords. He was held in high regard for his honourable dealings and mild manner, but this did not protect him from attack during the select committees on printing for the Commons of 1828 and 1833. Luke Graves Hansard lamented his 'lack of judicious explanation' (Ford and Ford, 38) when the committee questioned him about his methods and high cost of printing. 
J. B. Nichols was closely associated all his working life with editing and printing the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. In 1833 he purchased the remaining shares from the descendants of Edward Cave and David Henry and in the following year transferred a portion of the property to William Pickering, publisher, of Piccadilly. A new series was begun under an editorial team which included John Mitford, Sir Frederick Madden, J. T. Mansel, John Bruce, and A. J. Kempe, but J. B. Nichols and his son John Gough Nichols ['see below'] retained ultimate control. In 1850 J. B. Nichols bought back Pickering's share and in 1856 sold the entire property to J. H. Parker of Oxford. 
Contemporaries compared J. B. Nichols's industry to the editorial energy of his father. He took over many of his father's literary works and those of his father's friends. He shared his father's interest in the history of the book trade and in 1818 edited 'The Life and Errors of John Dunton', to which he added an index. From 1825 he helped his father edit and print Joseph Cradock's 'Literary and Miscellaneous Memoirs', and after Cradock's death in 1826 completed volumes 3 and 4. Hansard told him: 'you have added to their interest by the beauty of your typography' (letter to J. B. Nichols, 15 Jan 1828). Cradock was godfather to Nichols's second son, Robert Cradock Nichols (1824-1892), and Nichols was one of Cradock's executors. In 1828 J. B. Nichols completed the fifth volume of the 'Literary Illustrations', which had been left unfinished at John Nichols's death in 1826. Drawing on his father's and Richard Gough's large accumulation of family and business papers, J. B. Nichols edited three further volumes in 1831, 1848, and 1858. He made use of his father's 'Biographical Anecdotes of Mr Hogarth' (1781) to compile his 'Anecdotes of William Hogarth' (1833) and his own collection of paintings contained several works by the artist. 
J. B. Nichols was an active and popular antiquary. In 1818 he was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and he frequently spoke and exhibited at their meetings. From 1829 he was an original member of the Noviomagians, the Antiquaries' select and convivial dining club. He regularly hosted their feasts and held amateur dramatics at his home. In 1819, during a brief appointment as printer to the corporation of London, he published 'A Brief Account of the Guildhall of the City of London'; he revised and brought up to date Ducarel's 'Account of the Royal Hospital and Collegiate Church of St Katharine, near the Tower' (1824). His 'Historical Notices of Fonthill Abbey, Wiltshire' (1836), compiled from the earlier works of his lifelong friend John Britton and of John Rutter, brought the history of that abbey down to the time of its destruction. Two years later he compiled 'Illustrations of Her Majesty's Palace at Brighton, Formerly the Pavilion', which included a description of the palace by E. W. Brayley. On the death in 1833 of J. T. Smith, keeper of prints at the British Museum, Nichols purchased a series of unpublished etchings which Smith had prepared for a continuation of 'Vagabondiana'. He included a memoir of Smith in the collection of 'The Cries of London', which he edited with the assistance of Francis Douce in 1838. He became a friend of Sir Richard Colt Hoare through printing his 'Wiltshire' and other of his works and was a frequent visitor at Stourhead. His catalogue of the Stourhead library was privately printed in 1840 and formed the basis of a lecture on the history and contents of the library delivered on his behalf to the Wiltshire Archaeological and Natural History Society in 1854. In 1843 he edited a second edition of Richard Yates's 'History and Antiquities of the Abbey of St Edmunds Bury'. 
J. B. Nichols kept detailed journals of the many tours of Britain and Europe he made throughout his life, visiting places of historic or printing interest, and he encouraged other members of his family to do the same. After the death of John Nichols, Dawson Turner approached J. B. Nichols with a view to purchasing the papers and letters accumulated by his father as editor of the 'Gentleman's Magazine', 'Literary Anecdotes', and other of his works. Nichols refused the offer and over the years collected and had bound as 'Family records' thousands of letters and associated ephemera which he identified and annotated. He was, in effect, the family archivist, and the large collections of Nichols papers now scattered among public repositories and private collections would not have survived without his assiduity and care. In addition he accumulated a large library of history and topography which included thousands of illustrations, rubbings, and maps arranged by county in portfolios, which John Britton, John Adey Repton, and Maria Hackett used in their research, and he formed an important collection of artefacts ranging from Norman Romanesque sculpture to a Renaissance chimney-piece from Theobalds, Hertfordshire, which had belonged to Richard Gough. 
J. B. Nichols followed in his father's footsteps in being involved in good works and learned societies. He continued to serve on the committees of the Margate Infirmary, the Royal Literary Fund, and the Royal Humane Society. He filled various public offices in Westminster and Hammersmith. He was an original member of the Camden Society, whose proceedings he printed, and he also belonged to the Archaeological Institute, the Numismatic Society, the Royal Society of Literature, the Athenaeum Club, and the Linnean, the Zoological, and the Horticultural societies. J. B. Nichols was called to the court of the Stationers' Company in 1840 and was master of the company in 1850. 
In later life J. B. Nichols went blind and was cared for by his eldest daughter, Mary, who was his amanuensis and helped him in assembling the family archive. She was an exhibiting artist and amateur photographer in her own right. He died at his home at Hanger Hill, Ealing, Middlesex, on 19 October 1863 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 24 October. 



@@@@@


doc= 20120


John Gough Nichols (1806-1873), printer and antiquary, was born on 22 May 1806 at Red Lion Passage, Fleet Street, London, the eldest son of John Bowyer Nichols and his wife, Eliza. Richard Gough was his godfather. J. G. Nichols received his earliest education at the school of Miss Roper in Islington, Middlesex, and was then educated by Dr Waite in Lewisham, Kent, from 1814 to 1816; in January 1817 he was sent to the Merchant Taylors' School, London, which he left in 1824 to join the family printing firm in Parliament Street, Westminster. On 22 July 1843 at Chiswick, Middlesex, he married Lucy (1821-1907), eldest daughter of Commander Frederick Lewis RN of Chiswick, with whom he had three children, of whom a son and a daughter survived. 
Like his father and grandfather before him, J. G. Nichols took an active part in running the printing office with its contracts with the government and learned societies. He continued the close association with the 'Gentleman's Magazine', which he helped to edit from 1826; he continued to have ultimate managerial control over it after the responsibility was shared out between 1834 and 1850. He was sole editor from 1850 until it was sold in 1856, when he continued to be a contributor. Well aware of the importance of the obituary columns, he strove to promote them all his life, and wrote numerous obituary articles. When away from home he combed the local papers for biographical details likely to have been missed by the London papers. He was founding editor of the 'Collectanea Topographica et Genealogica' (1834-43), the 'Topographer and Genealogist' (1846-58), the 'Herald and Genealogist' (1863-74), and the 'Register and Magazine of Biography' (1869). In all these he sought to print, preserve, and make accessible original sources of interest to local historians. 
J. G. Nichols's enthusiasm for antiquities began in childhood. He attended meetings of the Society of Antiquaries with his father from the age of twelve and was a skilled palaeographer by the time he left school. In 1826 he assisted his grandfather with the 'Progresses of James I' and he completed it (1828) after the latter's death. His first separate publication, 'Autographs of Royal, Noble, Learned and Remarkable Personages' (1829), which contains extracts from more than 600 manuscript letters, did much to stimulate contemporary interest in autograph collecting and is still of scholarly interest today. 
J. G. Nichols shared the family interest in county history. He assisted W. L. Bowles in the 'Annals and Antiquities of Lacock Abbey' (1834) and in 1837 he contributed an account of 'The hundred of Alderbury' to Colt Hoare's 'History of Modern Wiltshire'. He printed the third edition, edited by Shipp and Hodson, of Hutchins's 'History of Dorset' (4 vols., 1861-74); he was at work on the second edition of T. D. Whitaker's 'History of Whalley' (2 vols., 1872-6) when he died. While researching his pioneering study 'Examples of Decorative Tiles, Sometimes termed Encaustic' (1841-5) J. G. Nichols corresponded with architects and china manufacturers such as Minton. His work provided an important link between archaeologists and clergymen wishing to restore their churches and was influential in reviving the art of tile making for contemporary church decoration. 
J. G. Nichols was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1835. Among his many contributions to 'Archaeologia' may be noted his comments on the work of Holbein after the discovery of his will in 1862. He was a member of the committee which considered the authenticity of the Paston letters in 1865. He was an honorary fellow of the societies of Antiquaries of Newcastle and of Scotland and corresponding fellow of both the Massachusetts History Society and the New England Genealogical Society. He visited his friend Robert Surtees in 1830, and helped to found the Surtees Society in 1834. He also helped to found the Camden Society (1838), the Archaeological Institute (1844), and the London and Middlesex Archaeological Society (1855). He was a member of the Numismatic Society, the Surrey Archaeological Society, and the Shakespeare Society. He was a prolific contributor to all their publications. His editions of the 'Chronicle of Calais in the Reigns of Henry VII and Henry VIII' (CS, 35), 'The Diary of Henry Machin, 1550-63' (CS, 42), and 'The Narratives of the Days of the Reformation chiefly from the Manuscripts of John Fox' (CS, 77) were among some eighteen contributions made to the society's publications. He compiled a 'Descriptive Catalogue' of the society's works (1862). For the Roxburghe Club he edited 'Literary Remains of Edward VI' (1857-8), 'The Boke of Noblesse addressed to Edward IV, 1475' (1860), and 'The Legend of Sir Nicholas Throckmorton' (1874). 
The Nicholses were close friends of the Herrick family, and between 1843 and 1862 J. G. Nichols arranged their family estate and personal papers, manorial rolls, and exchequer records, 1616-23, housed at Beaumanor Park, Leicestershire. The official warrants alone comprised 2300 documents, which Nichols had bound in sixteen volumes. 
J. G. Nichols represented the firm in Liverpool in 1823, when he visited Matthew Gregson. He travelled widely in Britain and on the continent; he toured the north of England and Scotland in 1830, visited Gloucester in 1832, when he stayed with T. D. Fosbroke, made numerous tours of Oxfordshire, Berkshire, Wiltshire, and Leicestershire in the course of his research, and toured Germany with John Rivington in 1841 and Ireland in 1853. He made several visits to France. He was elected to the general committee of the Royal Literary Fund in 1836 and was a trustee of the Printers' Pension Corporation from 1845. For many years he was a director of the York Buildings Waterworks Company, latterly serving as its chairman and director. He was also a governor of the Grey Coat and Blue Coat schools, Westminster. He was called to the court of the Stationers' Company in 1865 and was under-warden of the company at the time of his death. 
John Gough Nichols, like his father and grandfather before him, spent a lifetime as a working printer and proprietor of one of London's major printing offices, but he is best-known as a compiler, editor, author, and printer of archaeological and heraldic works. He died of cancer at his home, Holmwood Park, Dorking, Surrey, on 14 November 1873 and was buried on 19 November at the east end of Holmwood church. 
The printing business remained in the Nichols family's hands after the death of J. G. Nichols. Initially it was managed by his son, John Bruce Nichols (1848-1929), in partnership with his uncle, Robert Cradock Nichols (1824-1892), but from 1898 until his death in 1929 he was joined by his own son, John Cradock Morgan Nichols (1876-1962). In 1897 the firm moved from Parliament Street to larger premises in Orchard Street. In 1930 the business became a private limited company known as J. B. Nichols & Sons Ltd, with John Cradock Morgan Nichols at the helm. In addition to its parliamentary contracts the company also printed for the houses of the convocation of Canterbury, the national assembly of the Church of England, Harrow School, the Royal College of Music, and the Surveyor's Institution. The company ceased trading in December 1939 and much of its parliamentary work was absorbed by the Stationery Office. 


@@@@@


doc= 20137


Isaac Nicholson (1789-1848), wood-engraver, was born at Melmerby, Cumberland, baptized at Melmerby on 8 March 1789, and bound on 18 August 1804, completing his time on 6 July 1811. He was the only wood-engraver apprentice to remain in Newcastle all his life, continuing in the workshop for some time before setting up on his own. He worked on the reproductive cuts for Thornton's 'Herbal' (1810) and on some of the blocks for 'Recreations in Natural History' (1815) which had been prepared by Luke Clennell: these display all the vigour and freedom of Clennell's draughtsmanship but the cutting moves towards black line reproduction, which is often seen in Nicholson's small vignettes, where backgrounds of rock predominate, and in his groups of bunched foliage. A few of the cuts in the 'Fables of Aesop' (1818) were from his hand and merit Bewick's record in the 'Memoir': 'both a good Apprentice & a good Artist -- his engravings on Wood, are clearly or honestly cut, as well as being accurately done from his patterns'. He also did much work for Emerson Charnley, the Newcastle bookseller, in particular the vignettes for his 'Select Fables' of 1820, and for the titles of a long series of annual 'Fisher's Garlands', too often attributed to Bewick, although many were engraved after Bewick's death. One was a blatant copy of one of the finest tailpieces in the 'Birds', the angler in the river, and roused Bewick to turn to the law for redress (letter to Charnley, 22 May 1826). To compare the two provides a valuable means of observing Bewick's mastery. Nicholson died on 18 October 1848. 


@@@@@


doc= 20244


Non (fl. 6th cent.); as the mother of St David she became known as Non Fendigaid (Non the Blessed). Miracles attended the pregnancy, and David was born during a thunderstorm, supposedly on the cliffs near St David's. An Irish bishop, Ailbe, baptized the boy. He was brought up by his uncle Guistlianus and ordained to the priesthood. David then moved on for further study to 'Winctilantquendi', where his teacher was one Paulens, who encouraged him towards monasticism. He therefore founded twelve 'monasteria', nine of which Rhigyfarch names: Glastonbury, Bath, Crowland, Repton, Colfa, Glascwm, Leominster, Raglan, and Llangyfelach. David returned to his uncle, but, following an angelic warning, then moved to Vallis Rosina (Mynyw), with a few companions, where he founded his chief monastery, in the teeth of opposition from the local ruler. Rhigyfarch outlines the manner of life ('conversatio') at the monastery, where the monks held all property in common and performed manual labour. David's miracles are then recounted: two concern the creation of wells, the others involve Irish saints, Maedoc of Ferns in Leinster, here said to be one of David's disciples, Barre (probably the patron saint of Cork in Munster), and Mo Domnoc of Tibberaghny in Osraige. An angel then transported David and two companions to Jerusalem. The story then moves back to Wales, where David addressed the Synod of Llanddewibrefi, when a dove came down and rested on his shoulder, and the so-called synod of victory. David died at his own monastery, allegedly at the age of 147, and was buried there. Various efforts were subsequently made to calculate his date of death, of which 589 and 601 carry most plausibility, though without finality. 


@@@@@


doc= 20255


Thomas Starling Norgate (1807-1893), was born at Hethersett on 30 December 1807. He was educated at Norwich grammar school under Edward Valpy (1764-1832) and at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1827 and graduated BA in 1832. He was curate successively of Runton, Briningham, Cley next the Sea, and Banningham, all in Norfolk, and was collated rector of Sparham, Norfolk, in 1840. He married Caroline Roxalana, daughter of Francis Cremer Woodrow; they had five children. He was the author of three translations of Homeric poems; 'Batrachomyomachia: an Homeric Fable Reproduced in Dramatic Blank Verse' (1863); the 'Odyssey' (1863); and the 'Iliad' (1864). He died at Sparham on 25 November 1893. 


@@@@@


doc= 20380


Laurence Nowell (c.1516-1576), who became dean of Lichfield, and who had the same paternal grandparents. The latter Laurence Nowell was the third son of John Nowell (died 1526) of Read Hall, Whalley, Lancashire, and his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Kay of Rochdale. After entering Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1536, he migrated to Cambridge University to study logic, graduating BA in 1542. Oxford incorporated this BA and awarded him an MA in 1544. Two years later he became master of the grammar school at Sutton Coldfield, Warwickshire. In 1550 the town's corporation, as the school's patrons, charged him in chancery with neglect of duty, but he appealed to the privy council, which issued an order forbidding the warden and fellowship of Sutton to remove him from office. In November 1550 Nicholas Ridley, bishop of London, ordained him deacon. Upon Queen Mary's accession he took shelter with Sir John Perrot in Pembrokeshire and later joined his brother Alexander Nowell on the continent, though it is not known where Laurence finally took refuge. In 1558, when he returned home, he was promoted archdeacon of Derby, and in 1560 dean of Lichfield. In the convocation of 1563 he voted with Alexander, now dean of St Paul's, to modify church ceremonies. That year he obtained the prebend of Ferring in Chichester Cathedral and the rectories of Haughton and Drayton Basset in Staffordshire. In 1566 he received a prebend in York Minster, and in 1567 pleaded with Archbishop Matthew Parker on behalf of two nonconformists. 


@@@@@


doc= 20395


Nugent, Richard, third Baron Delvin (d. 1538), governor of Ireland, was the son and heir of Christopher Nugent, second Baron Delvin, and Anne Preston, daughter of Robert, first Viscount Gormanston. The title's origins are obscure, but the feudal barony of Delvin was later deemed to include a peerage, making Richard Nugent twelfth feudal baron of Delvin and third Lord Delvin. He was perhaps under age when his father died of plague in 1478, but he was among the lords of Ireland circularized by Richard III in September 1484. Perhaps first summoned to the Irish parliament in 1486, he attended the parliaments of 1491, 1493, and 1499 when he was fined 40's'. for absence from the second session at Castledermot. In May 1488 he was pardoned with other pale magnates for his role in the Lambert Simnel conspiracy the previous year. 
The location of Delvin's estates in the north-west marches of Meath, notably the small but strategically situated barony of Delvin, meant that he was a key figure in the defence of the Meath Englishry, and by the 1490s his military reputation was growing. On 25 June 1496, as English military activity in Ireland wound down in the aftermath of Poynings's expedition, Delvin was appointed chief captain of the king's forces, with a salary of $200 a year, pending Kildare's reappointment as governor. At the battle of Knockdoe in August 1504, he commanded the English cavalry stationed on the left flank of the main battle, and in the preliminary skirmishing he slew one of the Burkes with a casting spear. He apparently also served on the peace commission for Meath, and by 1522 he was a member of the king's council, although not normally a regular attender. 
Despite his military prowess and political reliability, however, Delvin's meagre landed patrimony and localized 'manraed' hampered his attempts to play more than a local role in the lordship's politics. He was one of the five or six most prominent Meath landowners, but despite recent acquisitions of marchland there, his exposed Westmeath estates yielded no more than $80 a year, with perhaps the same from lands in co. Louth, and $30 annually from scattered co. Dublin estates. Thus, after the king had chosen Delvin as acting governor of Ireland -- in the absence of the earls of Kildare and Ormond, who were summoned to court in another attempt to reconcile their differences -- he was soon in difficulties. In preparation for this new role, Delvin's landed influence in Westmeath was in September 1526 consolidated by a fifty-year lease for $10 annually of the manors of Belgard and Four, of which he had earlier had the custody and which were worth $44 a year. He had been absent from Ireland since June, presumably at court, but he assumed office in 1527, nominally as Kildare's deputy, superseding the earl's brother, Sir Thomas Fitzgerald. His relations with Kildare were so poor, however, that in 1524 the earl had been compelled to undertake not to stir up any war against him. 
None the less, despite the weakness of his position, Delvin dealt high-handedly as governor with the Gaelic border chiefs. In retaliation for robberies on the Englishry -- stirred up by Kildare's supporters 'in the hope he should the rather come home' -- Delvin withheld the blackrents traditionally paid to O'Connor Faly and O'Neill, against the council's advice ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 4, no. 3698). Consequently, 'this poor londe hathe taken great lostes and damagies this winter', according to Archbishop Inge and Chief Justice Bermingham in February 1528. Highlighting Delvin's inadequacies, they complained that 'the vice deputy is nat of power [i.e. lacks tenants] to defende the Englisshrie'. He extended the incidence of coign and livery, so that 'the poor people is ferr more chargid and oppressed by hym than they have been, thErll of Kildare being here'. Moreover, Delvin 'hathe no great londes of his owne' and without the parliamentary subsidy which had recently expired, the revenues barely sufficed to pay officers' salaries ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 2.126). 
Continuing raids by O'Connor Faly eventually led to a parley on 12 May 1528, by Sir William Darcy's border castle of Rathyn, where Delvin was kidnapped by the chief, his footmen slain, and his horsemen wounded or taken prisoner. O'Connor then refused to release the baron without a ransom and restoration of his blackrent. Lord Butler, who visited him at O'Connor's house on safe conduct, reported that Delvin was closely confined and only allowed to speak with him openly in Irish, so that their conversation could be understood. In the emergency Sir Thomas Fitzgerald was initially elected chief captain in Delvin's place, until the earl of Ossory's appointment as deputy in August. Yet by February 1529, when the deputy secured the council's agreement to peace with O'Connor and the restoration of his blackrent in return for Delvin's release, much of Meath had been wasted and destroyed by the chief. 
After his release Delvin apparently withdrew from high politics. In November 1529 he agreed the marriage of his son and heir, Christopher, to Marian or Marion St Lawrence, Lord Howth's daughter, providing a jointure worth 20 marks annually in return for a dowry of 220 marks. Christopher died in 1531 but had nine children, presumably through an earlier marriage, including Richard, later fourth baron. Following the death of his first wife, Isabella Fitzgerald, Kildare's cousin, Delvin married Elizabeth St Lawrence (died 1559), presumably Marion's sister, probably on 4 February 1531. In June 1534, however, another emergency following Thomas Fitzgerald's resignation and rebellion saw the veteran captain again elected governor by the council. He served unavailingly for eight weeks as the rebels consolidated their hold on the pale. Following the arrival of Lord Deputy Skeffington with the king's army in October, Delvin's local knowledge and military experience were more fruitfully employed in breaking down rebel resistance. Given command of one of the army garrisons, Delvin had by spring 1535 a general oversight of the defence of Meath. He participated in the final expedition to the borders of Offaly, signing the letter of 27 August to the king which described Thomas Fitzgerald's surrender, and later received 40 marks as the king's reward for his services. 
Despite his advanced age Delvin remained remarkably active in the aftermath of the revolt, supervising the defence of Westmeath and participating in occasional expeditions. In May 1536, when he came up to parliament, Lord Deputy Grey refused Delvin and Lord Butler licence to repair to court because, after Ossory, they were 'the best and politic captains of the Englishry' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 2.317). Delvin distinguished himself in the deputy's hosting against O'Connor in June 1537, detaching O'Molloy, Mageoghegan, and O'Melaghlin, the chief's 'uir-rioghtha' (vassal-chiefs) from him before conducting the army by an unusual route into Offaly, where the Dangan, O'Connor's strong new castle, was captured and razed. A similar hosting the following November was less successful, however, and tension developed between Grey and Delvin, resulting in a complete breach between them during a third hosting against O'Connor in February 1538. Against the advice of experienced marchers, Grey led the army into Offaly by a dangerous ford of the River Barrow, then in flood, ordering them to swim their horses across, whereupon some were lost. The baron, 'being an old man and an ancient captain', with other Meath lords refused to cross, at which Grey called them traitors and had them stripped of their horses, harness, and weapons, and left to shift for themselves in enemy country. This notorious incident later formed one of the more serious charges against Grey in 1540, but Delvin 'toke suche grief and fantasie of the said myshandelinges, and especiallie that the lorde deputie callid him traitor' that he never recovered ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 3.37-8). He lingered until 28 February 1538, and was buried in the local church of Castletown Delvin. His grandson Richard, then aged fourteen, succeeded him as fourth baron; but of his surviving younger sons, Thomas had already emerged as a resourceful marcher during his father's lifetime, and William, executor of his father's will, was the last prior of Fore and rector of Trim and Ardnurgher. Delvin's widow, Elizabeth, lived until 1 March 1559. 
Later Tudor barons of Delvin had a pronounced interest in the Gaelic language and culture, but it is unclear whether the third baron shared these, beyond speaking the language. He was certainly a familiar figure in the Gaelic world, respected as 'ridire crodha cogthach' ('a brave and warlike knight') who provided 'sgiath didin ocus cliath ghaeithe Ghall re Gaeidheluibh' ('a shield of shelter and a windbreak to the English against the Irish'; 'Annals of Loch Ce', 2.310-11). Among the Englishry, Delvin epitomized the traditional virtues of a border baron -- a shrewd mind, a good captain, a loyal English subject with numerous retainers -- at a time when these qualities were in short supply among the palesmen. Sir Anthony St Leger, reporting his death (eighteen days prematurely, as it transpired), described him as 'oon of the best marchers of this countre', adding that 'the kyngis highnes hath a grete losse of hym' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 2.546). 


@@@@@


doc= 20396


Nugent, Nicholas (d. 1582), judge, was the fifth son of Sir Christopher Nugent and Marian or Marion, daughter of Nicholas St Lawrence, third Baron Howth. Having entered Lincoln's Inn in 1558, he was involved in 1560 in an altercation with two other students from Ireland, Robert Dillon and John Talbot, for which he was bound over to keep the peace. This animosity between Dillon and Nugent, grounded in personal and familial rivalry, was eventually to lead to Nugent's downfall. 
Nugent's service to the crown in Ireland began when he was named as a commissioner for determining the title to certain lands on 19 November 1564. His appointment during pleasure to the office of chief solicitor to the crown on 5 December 1566 was in the place of Lucas Dillon (the cousin of Robert Dillon), recently created attorney-general. With the two Dillons and twenty-three other leading judges and lawyers from the pale, Nugent shared in the renewal of the royal lease of the Blackfriars or King's Inns near Dublin in January 1567. Although the lawyers' aspirations to establish a system of legal training there may have come to nothing, the influence of their profession on the reform programme of the early Elizabethan period was significant. Nugent, for example, served on a number of government commissions in the 1560s and 1570s for establishing the political and legal writ of the Tudor administration in Munster, Connaught, and the north midlands. 
The advancement of Nugent's legal career was undoubtedly aided by his marriage to Ellen (died 1615), daughter of Sir John Plunkett, chief justice of the queen's bench, and widow of Walter Marward, baron of Skreen, co. Meath. The couple had at least one son, Richard ['see below'], and Nugent also took on the wardship of his stepdaughter, Jenet Marward. On 18 October 1570 he was created second baron of the exchequer, but his service on the bench was jeopardized by his growing involvement in the campaign of the leading landowners of the pale against cess, the government's policy of arbitrary taxation for the victualling of the army in Ireland. He was twice imprisoned in Dublin Castle in 1577 and 1578 for his recalcitrance, and was eventually deprived of his office by the lord deputy, Sir Henry Sidney. On Sidney's retirement he was appointed to the office of chief justice of common pleas on the recommendation of the lord chancellor, Sir William Gerard. While popular with many of the gentry of the pale, Nugent's appointment was bitterly resented by Robert Dillon, who had regarded the job as his entitlement. 
With the support of higher officials in Dublin such as Sir Henry Wallop (who asserted that Gerard had received $100 as a bribe from Nugent), Dillon succeeded in overturning the appointment and securing his own elevation in 1581. Against the background of the Nugent conspiracy led by his nephew William Nugent (1550-1625), who had married Nicholas's stepdaughter after a dramatic abduction, Nicholas was vulnerable to the charge of complicity, especially as he had been made responsible by the Irish privy council for William's younger son Christopher. In the course of his negotiations over the boy, Nugent had had dealings with one John Cusack of Ellistonrede, co. Meath. Cusack had played a conspicuous part in William Nugent's rebellion but turned state's evidence on the promise of a pardon. On Cusack's information Nicholas Nugent and Edward Cusack, son and heir of Sir Thomas Cusack, were committed to Dublin Castle on 28 January 1582. 
They were tried before a special commission at Trim on 4 April. The only witness against Nugent was John Cusack, by whom he was charged with being privy to William Nugent's rebellion and with planning the assassination of Sir Robert and Sir Lucas Dillon. Nugent objected that the evidence of one witness -- his personal enemy -- was insufficient. His objection being overruled, Nugent denied the truth of Cusack's accusations, and he also denied some admissions he had apparently made earlier to Sir Lucas Dillon and Sir Geoffrey Fenton. The lord deputy, Arthur, Lord Grey of Wilton, who 'sate upon the benche to see justice more equally ministered' ('CSP Ire.', '1574-85', 364), addressed the jury before it retired. When it appeared that the jury was in favour of an acquittal, Sir Robert brought pressure on the members to find Nugent guilty of treason. Judgment followed, and on the eve of Easter (6 April 1582) Nugent was hanged, 'to which death he went resolutely and patiently, protesting that sith he was not found trewe, as he said he ought to have been, he had no longinge to live in infamy' (BL, Sloane MS 4793, fol. 132). 
Nugent's conviction and execution, widely regarded as a travesty of justice, were engineered by his bitter rival, Sir Robert Dillon, with the connivance of senior figures in the Dublin administration. After his death his widow, Ellen, succeeded in obtaining a reversal of his attainder, despite the opposition of Wallop, and on 27 August 1584 the queen granted his estate to her for life. The heir to Nicholas and Ellen Nugent was Richard Nugent (b. 1564/5, d. in or after 1615). At the time of the Nugent conspiracy in 1581 (when he was sixteen), he was taken hostage by the Irish privy council as a surety for the delivery of his cousin, son of the leading insurgent, William Nugent. He was released on recognizances of $1000. He married Anne, daughter of Christopher Bath of Rathfeigh, co. Meath, and had at least one child, Christopher. In keeping with the literary traditions within the Nugent family, Richard was, like his first cousin William, an accomplished poet. He was apparently the author of 'Rich. Nugent's Cynthia, containing direfull sonnets, madrigalls and passionate intercourses, describing his repudiate affections expressed in loves owne language'. The work was printed by Thomas Purfoot for Henry Tomes in London in 1604. Richard succeeded his mother to the Nugent estate on 9 November 1615 but the extent of his tenure is uncertain, as is the date of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 20397


Nugent, Richard, first earl of Westmeath (1583-1642), nobleman, was the eldest of six sons of Christopher Nugent, fifth Baron Delvin (1544-1602), and Lady Mary or Marie (died 1610/11), daughter of Gerald Fitzgerald, eleventh earl of Kildare, and succeeded to his father's title, aged nineteen, in October 1602. He was knighted at Dublin Castle on 29 December 1603, and in or before 1604 married Jane, daughter of Christopher Plunkett, Lord Killeen, and Genet Dillon. They had five sons, of whom the eldest, Christopher, was born in 1604, and two daughters. 
Delvin was implicated in the conspiracy which was uncovered after the 'flight of the earls' in 1607, having promised Rory O'Donnell, earl of Tyrconnell, that he would help to seize Dublin Castle if Spanish military aid was forthcoming. The main reason for his plotting seems to have been that the government forced him to surrender title to certain lands in Longford. He was imprisoned in Dublin Castle in November 1607 but escaped and fled to co. Cavan. From there he wrote to Lord Deputy Chichester (himself accused of abetting the escape) asking pardon for his inchoate plotting and pleading youth and 'naivete' as an excuse. Unable to capture him, and fearful of the return of the earls of Tyrone and Tyrconnell with outside military assistance, Chichester promised him a pardon if he submitted. He did so in May 1608, and then went to court where his conduct was forgiven and he was granted lands in recompense for those he had surrendered by royal command. 
Delvin again incurred the displeasure of the government in 1613. 'Unmindful of his majesty's great favour to him' ('Calendar of the Carew Manuscripts', 1603-23, 275), he participated in Catholic protests against the creation of new boroughs to secure a protestant majority in the new parliament. In 1620 he was one of three Irish representatives who had some success in petitioning James I with, the latter noted approvingly, 'much modesty, humility and discretion' ('CSP Ire.', '1614-25', 282) against new alehouse licensing arrangements. Evidently Delvin regained royal favour since he was created earl of Westmeath on 4 September 1621. His attempt, from December 1623 to April 1624, to mobilize opposition to a proposed plantation in Ossory aroused the hostility of Lord Deputy Falkland, who was particularly stung by Westmeath's prescient claim that this was a prelude to a larger plantation in Connaught. It is unlikely to be coincidence that informers now emerged to allege, variously, that Westmeath claimed to be king of Ireland, that he was in correspondence with Spain, and that he would be the next lord deputy. Embarrassed by the allegations, the earl was required to satisfy himself with 'private exercise of his conscience', not to 'set himself up hereafter in the conceit of the multitude' (ibid., 488) and to go to London to clear his name. 
War with Spain in 1625, and later with France, and the threat of invasion created the apparent opportunity for Irish Catholics to extract concessions from the crown. Following the refusal of the government to entrust defence to local trained bands in 1626, Westmeath played a leading role in attempts to secure guarantees of religious toleration in return for subsidizing an expanded standing army. Arriving in London in March 1626, he and Sir John Bath presented Catholic grievances to Charles I. They secured what seemed to be significant concessions with the enumeration of 'matters of grace and bounty' including the promise to replace the oath of supremacy with an oath of allegiance as a qualification for formal inheritance of estates, office-holding, and the practice of law. The Catholic leadership as a whole, however, did not consider the concessions adequate, and in May 1627 Westmeath was sent again to England, where he persuaded Charles I to agree to discuss the wider ramifications of his policy with a full delegation. He took part in another delegation, in 1628, which secured additional concessions including, crucially, the promise to renounce crown titles to land of more than sixty years' standing. Ultimately, however, these latter 'graces' were withheld and a period of repression followed. 
In 1632 Westmeath lobbied successfully to be chosen to go to England to present a statement of Catholic grievances to Wentworth, the newly appointed lord deputy. He was granted a royal audience and returned despite the efforts of the administration in Dublin to have him detained in London, citing as their reason that he was 'a vehement papist and of a popular carriage among the Irish... none of that religion appears in more eminency upon all occasions for the papists' ('CSP Ire.', '1625-32', 689). Wentworth's subsequent denial of the promised 'graces' and the impotence of parliamentary opposition were among the longer-term factors which alienated the Old English and precipitated their involvement in the 1641 rising. It also marked the end of Westmeath's political activism. 
Westmeath held back from personal involvement in the rising despite the pleas of the Catholic lords of the pale that he raise 1000 men to reinforce their siege of Drogheda. While one of his sons armed many of the household servants and brought them to the siege with 'the said Earl's privity' (TCD, MS 820, fol. 65), that was the extent of Westmeath's involvement. In June 1642 Ormond, the commander of the king's army, rested his army for a few days at the earl's castle at Clonyn while marching reinforcements to relieve Athlone. While Ormond was there Westmeath pleaded unsuccessfully with him for the life of an elderly Catholic priest taken in a clash with insurgent troops. This expedition proved to be the high-water mark of the government's counter-attack and Westmeath's co-operation with Ormond now exposed him to revenge attacks. Shortly afterwards insurgent cavalry intercepted him while fleeing to the nearest government garrison at Trim, dragged him out of his coach, and shot him in the thigh. He died of his wounds and subsequent manhandling, apparently some time in the summer of 1642, and was probably buried at Clonyn. His will, dated 2 October 1640, was proved by his widow, Countess Jane, on 12 February 1643. Christopher Nugent, Lord Delvin, their eldest son and heir, having died in 1625, their grandson Richard Nugent succeeded to the earldom. 


@@@@@


doc= 20398


Nugent, Richard, second earl of Westmeath (1626-1684), army officer, was the only son of Christopher Nugent, styled Lord Delvin ('c'.1604-1625), and his wife, Lady Anne MacDonnell (died before 1676), eldest daughter of Randal MacDonnell, first earl of Antrim (d. 1636). On his father's death Richard Nugent became heir to his grandfather, also Richard Nugent (1583-1642), first earl of Westmeath. In or before 1641 he married Mary (1623-1672), daughter of Sir Thomas Nugent of Moyrath. 
In England at the time of his grandfather's death in 1642, Westmeath was detained at Beaumaris while seeking passage to Ireland. He was not permitted to proceed home until after the cessation of September 1643 between the confederate Catholics and the earl of Ormond, Charles I's representative in Ireland. In July 1645 he raised a regiment of infantry and a troop of horse to take part in the proposed confederate expeditionary force to Cheshire to assist Charles I. When the expedition was cancelled in the spring of 1646, the expeditionary regiments were incorporated into the confederate armies, with Westmeath being commissioned as a colonel in the Leinster army. In December 1646, at the confederate blockade of Dublin, he and Clanricarde acted as go-betweens for Ormond in the latter's attempt to detach the Leinster army from its allegiance to the confederate supreme council and foil the proposed attack on Dublin. The attack was abandoned, but Westmeath was subsequently reconciled to the confederates. He was present, on 7 August 1647, with most of his regiment at Dungan's Hill when the Leinster confederate army was destroyed by the parliamentarian commander Michael Jones. He was taken prisoner but subsequently exchanged for Viscount Montgomery. In 1648 he again sided with the Ormondist party against the papal nuncio, Rinuccini, and the clericalist party during the renewal of confederate internal conflict, heading the list of those recorded as taking the June 1648 oath to uphold the supreme council against Rinuccini's excommunication. In October 1648 he was appointed one of the commissioners to negotiate a peace treaty with Ormond, concluded the following January. Westmeath was appointed a field marshal by the supreme council in January 1649 and by 1650 had been given command of all forces in Leinster within the new pan-royalist alliance headed by Ormond. Following Ormond's departure for France in December 1650, Westmeath gave his support to Ormond's deputy, the earl of Clanricarde. 
Westmeath's conduct of the war was the subject of criticism from the clericalist party. He was, claimed the author of the 'Aphorismical discovery', 'a man that never gathered an army into the field since he was appointed general, nor any party did stick unto himself that did act worth 6died; rather worked all the means possible for faction, dispersion, rent, and division' (Gilbert, 'Contemporary history'). He was blamed for not taking proper measures for the defence of Finnea, for not relieving Ballynacargy, co. Cavan, and for bringing about the surrender of his Leinster army to parliament on 12 May 1652, on conditions known as the articles of Kilkenny. That there may have been truth in the clericalist jibes is suggested by his subsequent petition to parliament that he be allowed to keep his estate, or a portion of it, because of his loyalty 'so different from all other Catholics of this Nation' and because 'he attended to the advancement & interests of England'. Although listed among those to be excluded from pardon for life and estate by the 'Act for the Settling of Ireland' of August 1652, on 13 April 1653 he obtained an order to enjoy such parts of his estate as lay waste and undisposed of, and on 16 November the order was extended to the enjoyment of a full third of his estate. Having raised his regiment for the Spanish service as permitted by the articles of Kilkenny, he obtained a pass permitting him to transport himself and two servants, with travelling arms and necessaries, to and from Flanders, provided he gave notice of his arrival to the governor of the place where he should first land. He appears to have taken advantage of this permission. On the apprehension of fresh disturbances in the summer of 1659 he was, with other leading royalists, placed under arrest. He recovered his liberty and his estates at the Restoration, but seems to have taken no further interest in politics. In 1680 he rebuilt the chapel of Fore, to be a place of burial for himself and his posterity, and, dying in 1684, was interred there. 
Besides two sons who died in infancy, Westmeath had four sons and five daughters. Christopher, Lord Delvin, his eldest son, married Mary, eldest daughter of Richard Butler of Kilcash, co. Tipperary, and, predeceasing his father, left Richard, third earl of Westmeath, who died in holy orders in 1714; Thomas Nugent, fourth earl of Westmeath (1668/9-1752); and John Nugent, fifth earl of Westmeath (1671/2-1754). The second earl's other children were Thomas Nugent, created Baron Nugent of Riverstown (d. 1715); Joseph, a captain in the service of France; William, MP for County Westmeath in 1689, and killed at Cavan in 1690; Mary, who married Henry, second Viscount Kingsland; Anne, who married, first, Lucas, sixth Viscount Dillon, and, secondly, Sir William Talbot of Cartown, co. Meath; Alison, who married Henry Dowdall of Brownstown, co. Meath; Elizabeth, who died young; and Jane, who married Alexander MacDonell, called Macgregor of Dromersnaw, co. Leitrim. 


@@@@@


doc= 20399


Nugent, Robert Craggs, Earl Nugent (1709-1788), politician and poet, was born Robert Nugent, the only surviving son of Michael Nugent (died 1739), landowner, of Carlanstown, co. Meath, and his wife, Mary, youngest daughter of Robert Barnewall, styled ninth Baron Trimleston of Ireland. Born into an old Roman Catholic gentry family he was educated at Fagan's academy in Dublin. As a young man he allegedly seduced his cousin Clare Nugent, who gave birth to an illegitimate son, Robert, in 1730. He fled to London that year to avoid marrying her and he always refused to recognize her child. When the latter subsequently became a debtor in the Fleet prison he published 'The unnatural father, or, The persecuted son: a candid narrative of the most unparalleled sufferings of Robert Nugent jnr. by the means and procurement of his own father' (1755). Despite the embarrassment caused Nugent remained unmoved by the young man's plight. 
Nugent became a tutor in the household of Justin Plunkett, fifth earl of Fingall, whose sister Lady Emilia (died 1731) he married on 14 July 1730. She was the second daughter of Peter Plunkett, fourth earl of Fingall, and Frances Hales. She died in childbed on 16 August 1731, survived by their son, Edmund (died 1771). Shortly afterwards Nugent abandoned Roman Catholicism to enter the Church of England. He had always lamented that his family estate in 'the wildest part of Ireland' was 'great in bulk and small in revenue' (Jucker, 162) but even before he inherited it, on his father's death in 1739, he had greatly improved his finances through his second marriage, on 23 March 1737. His bride was the wealthy and twice widowed Anne (1697-1756), daughter and coheir of James Craggs (bap. 1657, d. 1721), postmaster-general, and Elizabeth Richards ('c'.1662-1712), and sister and coheir of James Craggs (1686-1721), secretary of state. Her only son, James (1715-1769), from her first marriage, to John Newsham (1673-1724) of Chadshunt, Warwickshire, unsurprisingly coveted the Craggs fortune and did everything in his power to prevent his mother's marriage to Nugent until she had settled $50,000 on him. Her second husband, John Knight (1686?-1733), had controlled one of the parliamentary seats at St Mawes, Cornwall, and owned a substantial estate at Gosfield, Essex, which he bequeathed to her following the death of their only son, John, in 1727. On his marriage to Anne, Nugent assumed the additional name of Craggs but a match that gave him wealth, landed estate, and parliamentary influence was not a personal success. Once it was obvious that the marriage was destined to remain childless Nugent made no attempt to remain faithful to his less than attractive wife and acted the part of 'a man of consideration, fortune and fashion, living in the highest company of the metropolis' ('Memoirs of... Wraxall', 1.94). He also maintained a house at 11 North Parade, Bath, and amused himself by forming an extensive park at Gosfield, which in later years won high praise from Arthur Young. Poetry provided a further outlet when Alexander Pope, who was already well known to Anne, befriended him. Nugent's 'Ode to William Pulteney' (1739), which described his religious conversion from 'error's poison'd springs', achieved great fame throughout the eighteenth century. However, Thomas Gray strongly doubted whether it was actually Nugent's own composition and the suspicion grew that he had paid David Mallett to write it. An initially admiring Horace Walpole thus recorded waspishly: 'Nugent had lost the reputation of a great poet, by writing works of his own' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of the Reign of George the Second', 1.46). 
By the late 1730s Nugent had become embroiled in politics. Anne had introduced him to Lord Chesterfield, who encouraged both his hostility to Sir Robert Walpole and his election as MP for St Mawes at the general election of 1741. Horace Walpole soon noted that he was talking 'a prodigious deal of nonsense in behalf of English liberty' ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 1.151). Contemporary correspondence is full of references to his frequent, sometimes chaotic, but often witty speeches. Shortly after his re-election for St Mawes in 1747 he was appointed comptroller of the household to Frederick, prince of Wales, who borrowed money in return for promising Nugent high office in his projected administrations. However, Nugent exasperated Frederick by clashing with Egmont over a possible accommodation with Pelham's ministry. This readiness to negotiate facilitated Nugent's reconciliation with government shortly after Frederick's death on 20 March 1751. The following May he supported the 'Regency Bill' and in June he successfully acted as an intermediary between Granville and Pelham, who both sought unsuccessfully to reward him with a lucrative office. Shortly afterwards he reintroduced a bill for the naturalization of foreign protestants, which he had first attempted in 1747. In Horace Walpole's characteristically partial appraisal of the occasion: 'The Irishman's style was floridly bombast; his impudence as great as if he had been honest... he affected unbounded good humour and it was unbounded but by much secret malice, which sometimes broke out in boisterous railing, oftener vented itself in still-born satires... Nugent's attachments were to Lord Granville; but all his flattery addressed to Mr. Pelham, whom he mimicked in candour, as he oftener resembled Lord Granville in ranting. (Walpole, 'Memoirs of the Reign of George the Second', 1.45-6)' Nugent also spoke in favour of the bill for the naturalization of the Jews in April 1753. However, he vigorously opposed the ministry over Hardwicke's marriage bill the next month, asking: 'Will you confine the great people to marry merely among one another and prevent them from getting a little wholesome blood which they so much want? Will you marry disease to distemper?' ('Buckinghamshire MSS', 314). 
As the general election of 1754 approached, Nugent's interest in questions concerning trade and navigation began to attract extra-parliamentary attention. In particular the Bristol merchants noted the sharp contrast between his championship of the out-ports and the silence of their existing representatives on such issues. They therefore invited him to contest the constituency. There was considerable prestige to be derived from sitting for the second city in the kingdom but Nugent demurred when the whigs requested a large contribution towards the likely costs of the election. With a safe borough of his own and a similar offer to stand at Liverpool he was able to drive a hard bargain. Before he consented the Bristol merchants agreed to indemnify him up to the sum of $10,000, while Newcastle's ministry appointed him a lord of the Treasury on 6 April 1754. After a hard contest Nugent was elected head of the poll, whereupon he vacated St Mawes, where he had returned himself as an insurance policy. For the next twenty years he was 'intrusted with the nomination to every place and employment in the disposal of government within the city of Bristol' (Tucker, 16) and was careful to promote local citizens, in contrast to previous practice. Throughout the 1754 parliament he remained one of Newcastle's most stalwart supporters. He reiterated his belief in the duke's fundamentally honourable nature so frequently that on 12 May 1756 a nauseated Horace Walpole recorded that Nugent 'added his usual panegyric on the honesty of the Duke of Newcastle' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of the Reign of George the Second', 2.193). Nugent remained at the Treasury until December 1759, in which month he was sworn of the privy council. In January 1760 he was promoted to the lucrative sinecure of joint vice-treasurer of Ireland. 
The late 1750s brought further changes to Nugent's personal life. He wasted little time when his unloved wife, Anne, died on 22 November 1756. On 2 January 1757 he carried off his third bride, the wealthy Elizabeth (1719/20-1792), widow of Augustus Berkeley, fourth earl of Berkeley, and daughter of Henry Drax (1693?-1755) of Ellerton Abbey, Yorkshire, and his wife, Elizabeth Ernle. Personal happiness, however, continued to elude him. Suspicion of his wife's alleged affairs led Nugent to disown Louisa, the second of their two daughters, and the couple ultimately lived apart for many years. Contemporaries were none the less so struck by Nugent's evident skill in marrying rich widows that Horace Walpole invented the word Nugentize to describe the phenomenon. Meanwhile the poet Richard Glover aptly recalled 'a jovial and voluptuous Irishman, who had left Popery for the Protestant religion, money, and widows' (Duppa, 47). 
A financially inspired compromise ensured Nugent's unopposed return at Bristol in both 1761 and 1768. On the accession of George III he transferred his allegiance to Bute and Grenville, taking with him a small connection of quasi-followers, consisting of his son Edmund and three relatives through marriage: James Colleton (1709?-1790), Thomas Drax (1721?-1789), and Edward Eliot (1727-1804). He soon found himself supporting contentious issues such as the cider excise and general warrants, while being lambasted as an unreliable, self-seeking time-server. As Lord George Sackville commented: 'Nobody can depend upon his attachment. His great aim is to keep his present employment, and upon the least appearance of ministerial jumbles he is in violent agitation till he has found a safe harbour' ('Stopford-Sackville MSS', 1.95). On the formation of the Rockingham administration in July 1765 Nugent reluctantly resigned to pre-empt his likely dismissal. George Grenville was delighted to learn that they retained 'the same sentiments... with regard to... public opinions' ('Additional Grenville Papers', 313) and together they opposed the ministry's repeal of the Stamp and Cider Acts and Dowdeswell's new window tax. On 7 February 1766 Nugent castigated 'those who call law option, and attempt to disrupt the legislative authority of this country' ('Parliamentary diaries of Nathaniel Ryder', 290). Throughout his career Nugent strove to relieve Ireland of impediments to its trade. On 17 June 1766 he expressed his fear to Grenville that the 'American Duties Act' would have an adverse effect, adding characteristically that this was 'the genuine production of the maiden and spotless Treasury. But I must not laugh; it hurts my bowels' ('Grenville Papers', 3.249). 
Yet only five months later Grenville suddenly found his friend's language 'so different' and his opinions 'so contrary' ('Grenville Papers', 3.382) that he could draw only one conclusion. Chatham had targeted Nugent as a former king's friend who might bolster his recently formed administration. On 4 December 1766 Nugent accordingly became first lord of trade, and on 19 January 1767 he was raised to the Irish peerage as Viscount Clare. On 27 February he 'spoke with encomium of Lord Chatham' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of the Reign of George the Third', 2.299) in critical response to the manner in which the temporarily united opposition had just forced through a reduction in the land tax. Clare retained his post at the Board of Trade when Lord Hillsborough became American secretary in January 1768 but resigned it six months later, when he resumed that of joint vice-treasurer of Ireland. Thereafter he spoke on the government side on all the important questions of the period. In addition he occasionally addressed issues in a manner that revealed a surprisingly compassionate side to his nature. Thus on 2 March 1774 he intervened in a debate on a bill to prevent vexatious removals of the poor, in which he blamed the poor laws for the high number of executions in London. His Bristol seat was still generally thought to be safe in 1774, when he received influential support from the publication of Josiah Tucker's 'Review of Lord Vis. Clare's Conduct as Representative of Bristol' (1774). However he withdrew his candidature at the close of the first day's poll. On 15 January 1775 his Bristol successor and political opponent, Edmund Burke, identified the key factor when he noted that any residual gratitude to Clare was 'not for his American politics, but for his attention to the local interests and commercial welfare of this city' ('Correspondence', 3.96). Burke subsequently disparaged 'the disciples of Lord Clare' as 'the worst sort of Tories, the Sunshine gentlemen of the last reign' (ibid., 207), and mockingly agreed when someone called 'the days of Lord Clare 'Golden'; for to him (the member) they certainly were such' (ibid., 239). 
Throughout these years Clare maintained his interest in poetry. He eagerly sought the acquaintance of Oliver Goldsmith when the latter achieved distinction with 'The Traveller' in 1764. Goldsmith subsequently visited him and a close friendship developed. When Clare sent him a gift of venison from Gosfield Park the kindness of a jovial Irish peer was immortalized in the posthumously published 'The Haunch of Venison, a Poetical Epistle to Lord Clare' (1776). Clare continued to compose poetry, including the anonymous 'Faith' (1774). His 'Verses to the Queen' (1775), sent to accompany a new year's gift of some Irish manufactures, was reciprocated by the anonymous 'The Genius of Ireland, a New Year's Gift to Lord Clare' (1775). More substantial royal recognition followed on 21 July 1776, when he was promoted Earl Nugent in the Irish peerage. Nathaniel Wraxall, who was visiting Gosfield at the time, recorded his impressions of the new earl: 'Of an athletic frame and a vigorous constitution, 'though very advanced in years, he was exempt from any infirmity, possessing a stentorian voice, with great animal spirits and vast powers of conversation. He was a man of very considerable natural abilities, though not of a very cultivated mind... He spoke fluently, as well as with energy and force, was accounted an able debater, and possessed a species of eloquence altogether unembarrassed by any false modesty or timidity. ('Memoirs of... Wraxall', 1.91)' In addition he remained possessed of 'a coarse and often licentious wit, which no place nor company prevented him from indulging, and the effect of which was augmented by an Irish accent that never forsook him' (ibid., 93). 
Following his judicious retreat from Bristol, Clare returned himself for St Mawes at the general elections of 1774 and, as Earl Nugent, those of 1780 and 1784. His emphatic opposition to the economic reform movement led Lord George Gordon to call him 'the old rat of the constitution' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.'), to which he responded by observing that a rat 'always cautiously avoided gnawing through the sides of the vessel: it never made a hole which would endanger the ship' (ibid.). He continued to speak frequently on American affairs. On 23 January 1775 he 'ridiculed the opinion of those who said we had a right to tax America yet ought not to exercise it' (Almon, 1.108). In late 1777, following news of the surrender of Saratoga, he outlined the enormous issues he saw at stake: 'The contest now was not whether America should be dependent on the British Parliament, but whether Great Britain or America should be independent. Both could not be so, for such would be the power of that vast continent across the Atlantic that was her independence established this island must expect to be made a dependent province. (ibid., 8.29-30)' Unlike some of his colleagues he was realistic and pragmatic enough to recognize a lost cause, even as early as 6 April 1780, and on 27 November 1781 he observed that 'it would be more advisable even to acknowledge their independency than to go on playing the same losing game against them' (Debrett, 5.41). News of the Yorktown disaster confirmed this conviction but he felt unable to vote against Lord North, with whom he resigned in March 1782. 
Nugent's professed inclination was now to support measures, not men. Accordingly in 1783 he declined to be one of the sixteen founding knights of the Order of St Patrick and also refused Pitt's offer of 'an office of emolument' ('Rutland MSS', 3.158). However, he seemed genuinely unable to grasp the deep antagonism between Pitt and Fox. On 29 January 1784 he praised both Pitt's ministry and Fox's abilities but reflected critically on 'the administration of a dictator' who had been 'the author of the East India bill' (Debrett, 13.22-4). On 20 February he urged a positive union between the two rivals. Recalling how Granville and Pelham had successfully resolved their differences over dinner and some fine wines, Nugent unrealistically offered his house for a similar purpose: 'They may even if they please get gloriously drunk. And I will answer for it, over the bottle their punctilios and distrust will vanish, while confidence will spring up where diffidence previously existed' ('Memoirs of... Wraxall', 3.305). In June 1784, only three months into the new parliament, Nugent took the Chiltern Hundreds and retired from politics. 
In his final years Nugent returned to the Roman Catholic faith. He died at the house of General O'Donnel in Rutland Square, Dublin, on 14 October 1788 and was buried at Gosfield on 26 October. The bulk of his personal property, worth over $200,000, and his interest at St Mawes went to his daughter Mary Elizabeth (died 1812), who was created Baroness Nugent of Carlanstown in her own right on 26 December 1800. She had married George Grenville ['see 'Grenville, George Nugent-Temple, first marquess of Buckingham (1753-1813)], by then marquess of Buckingham; he succeeded to the Nugent earldom, the real estate (which carried an annual rental of over $14,000), and took the name Nugent. 


@@@@@


doc= 20400


Nugent, Thomas, first Baron Nugent of Riverston (d. 1715), judge, was the second son of Richard Nugent, second earl of Westmeath (1626-1684), army officer, and his wife, Mary (1623-1672), daughter of Sir Thomas Nugent, bt, of Moyrath, Westmeath. Born into a prominent Old English family with a strong legal tradition, he was domiciled at Clonyn, Westmeath, when he entered the Inner Temple in 1669; he was admitted to King's Inns in Dublin on 21 November 1674 and practised as a barrister. In 1680 (probably in September) he married a member of another leading Old English family, Marianna (1662-1735), daughter of Henry Barnewall, second Viscount Barnewall of Kingsland. They had several daughters and two sons. 
After the accession of James II, Nugent was one of a number of Catholic barristers to become king's counsel (12 September 1685). The second earl of Clarendon, who came to Ireland as viceroy in January 1686, treated him as a representative of the Roman Catholic interest. When Nugent was made a judge of the king's bench (23 April 1686), Clarendon wrote of his being 'a man of birth indeed... but no lawyer, and so will do harm upon the account of his learning' ('Correspondence', 1.356). On taking his seat he was reported by Clarendon to have had a wrangle with another judge, Sir John Lyndon, about precedence, 'as brisk as if it had been between two women' (ibid.). In May 1686 he was appointed to the Irish privy council, and in October of the following year, with Tyrconnell now lord lieutenant, he was made chief justice of the king's bench. The court of king's bench under his tenure was regarded by William King and others as promoting the Catholic interest at the expense of protestants. He was alleged to have declared it treasonous to possess weapons without licence, when in fact a fine of $20 was the highest penalty prescribed by law. On another occasion he was said by William King to have declared the robbery of protestants to be necessary for the furtherance of James II's policy. Clarendon recorded some instances of what he saw as judicial partiality, though he admitted that Nugent had shown humanity in a particular case. 
Early in 1688, with the king's approval, Tyrconnell sent Nugent to England with Chief Baron Rice carrying alternative draft bills for the modification of the Restoration land settlement. According to William King, they were met in London by a hostile mob who escorted them with potatoes fixed on sticks, amid cries of 'make room for the Irish ambassadors' (King, chap. 3, section 12, 2). They returned to Ireland in April with a draft bill of settlement. Preparations for an Irish parliament were soon under way, but events in England intervened and by August the calling of an Irish parliament had been indefinitely postponed. 
Nugent's response to William of Orange's intervention in England was robust. In a charge to the Dublin grand jury he was said to have expressed a hope that William's followers would soon be 'hung up all over England' in 'bunches like a rope of onions' (Ingram, 43). Holding the assizes at Cork in March 1689 he ordered the protestant people of Bandon, who had declared for William III and attacked the Jacobite garrison on 22 February, to be indicted for high treason, but he was persuaded by General Justin MacCarthy into respecting Bandon's capitulation. After James II had landed at Kinsale on 12 March 1689 he consulted Nugent in the presence of both Avaux and Melfort. 
With a parliament summoned for May, James signed a warrant on 3 April 1689 for a writ of summons to Nugent to sit in the House of Lords as Baron Nugent of Riverston, one of the rare occasions when a writ of summons created a hereditary peerage by express words. On 13 May, six days after the opening of parliament, Nugent introduced a bill for the repeal of the 'Restoration Acts of Settlement and Explanation', a far more sweeping measure than the draft bill he had brought back from London the previous year. He was generally active in the House of Lords, frequently presiding at committees. On 6 July, two weeks before parliament was prorogued, he was appointed a commissioner of the Irish Treasury (renewed 17 June 1690), and he continued to sit on the bench, taking the spring assizes in Connaught in 1690. He was at Limerick during or soon after William's abortive siege, and in September 1690 he was appointed to act as secretary for war when Sir Richard Nagle travelled to France with Tyrconnell for consultations. During Tyrconnell's absence Nugent was dismissed from office by Berwick acting under Sarsfield's influence, though he was soon restored by Tyrconnell on his return in January 1691. Regarded as a personal adherent of the Jacobite viceroy, he was accused by the anti-peace party of holding secret and treasonable communication with the Williamites. After Tyrconnell's death in August 1691 he seems to have played no significant part in the negotiations that led to the treaty of Limerick (3 October 1691), though he was covered by its terms, retained his estates, and was granted a licence to carry arms -- all of which suggests that he was not regarded with particular animosity in post-war protestant Ireland, despite the antagonism he had aroused as a judge in the later 1680s. 
With the war over, Nugent's public career was at an end. Although his barony was treated as invalid by the Williamite authorities, both he and his sons who succeeded him were referred to as Baron Nugent of Riverston. When he died in May 1715 he was succeeded by his elder son, Richard Hyacinth Nugent (died 1738), who in turn was succeeded by his younger brother, William (died 1756). The title was merged with the earldom of Westmeath in 1839. 


@@@@@


doc= 20401


Nugent, Thomas, fourth earl of Westmeath (1668/9-1752), army officer, was the second son of Christopher Nugent, Lord Delvin (died before 1680), the eldest son of Richard Nugent, second earl of Westmeath (1626-1684), and of his wife, Mary (1640/41-1737), eldest daughter of Richard Butler of Kilcash, co. Tipperary, and niece of James Butler, first duke of Ormond. His elder brother, Richard Nugent (died 1714), was a Capuchin friar in France, and on the death of his grandfather in 1684 Thomas succeeded to the extensive family estates centred on his residence at Clonyn, Delvin, co. Westmeath. From then on he was generally styled earl of Westmeath, taking his seat as such in the upper house of the 1689 Irish parliament, by royal dispensation as he was under age. In 1684, aged sixteen, he married Margaret (died 1700), only daughter of Sir John Bellew, later Baron Bellew of Duleek. They had eleven children, of whom two sons and two daughters survived to adulthood. 
Westmeath travelled abroad for a few years, returning to Ireland to enter the army, which was being expanded in the crisis preceding the Williamite wars. He served first as lieutenant-colonel of the earl of Tyrone's infantry regiment, and from the summer of 1689 as colonel of the infantry regiment raised by Colonel Francis Toole, which in 1690 he led at the battle of the Boyne and the first siege of Limerick. For the 1691 campaign he transferred to command of a cavalry regiment and fought at the battle of Aughrim. He steered a middle line between the defeatist and militant factions on the Jacobite side, approving the acquittal by court martial of Brigadier Henry Luttrell on a charge of corresponding with the enemy, but supporting the arrest of Brigadier Robert Clifford for failing to obstruct the passage of the Williamites across the Shannon. When the Jacobites asked for terms on 23 September, he hurried to Limerick from the nearby cavalry camp, dining with Ginkel while passing through the Williamite lines. Subsequently he was one of four Jacobite peers exchanged as hostages during the negotiations which led to the treaty of Limerick. He was attainted in both England and Ireland for his participation in the war, but in 1692 he was pardoned under the Limerick articles and recovered his estates. Thereafter, as a Roman Catholic, he was excluded from public life. In 1705 he sought a pass for himself and his son to travel to Holland in order to settle his son there for education. 
Westmeath's eldest daughter, Mary (died 1725), married Francis (Bermingham), Lord Athenry, and her son, Thomas, was created earl of Louth in 1759. His second daughter, Catherine (died 1756), married Andrew Nugent of Dysart, co. Westmeath, and was the mother of Lavalin Nugent. Westmeath died, aged about eighty-three, on 30 June 1752. As he was predeceased by both his sons, Christopher, Lord Delvin (died 1752), who was unmarried, and John (died 1725), his title passed briefly to his brother, the soldier John Nugent, and on his death to his son Thomas (1714-1792), who took his seat in the House of Lords, having conformed to the established church in order to avoid the adverse inheritance implications of the penal laws. 


@@@@@


doc= 20402


Nugent, Thomas (c.1700-1772), writer and traveller, was born in Ireland, and apparently graduated from Trinity College, Dublin, but spent most of his life in London. Comments in his works show him to have been a protestant, and an ardent supporter of the Hanoverian constitutional settlement. In 1765 he received from the University of Aberdeen the honorary degree of LLD, and in 1767 was made a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He has been confused with Johnson's friend and Edmund Burke's father-in-law, Dr Christopher Nugent (1698-1775), to whom he may have been related, and who is mentioned in Thomas Nugent's will. 
Nugent was a prolific author and a skilful translator. He wrote so much that he thought it had taken its toll on his health. In his lifetime he was perhaps best known for his 'New Pocket Dictionary of the French and English Languages' (1767), which went to at least twenty-eight editions. After his death, in Britain and more especially in Germany, he was best known for 'The history of Vandalia: containing the ancient and present state of the country of Mecklenburg, its revolutions under the Venedi and the Saxons, with the succession and memorable actions of its sovereigns' (3 vols., 1766-73); 'Travels through Germany, with a particular account of the courts of Mecklenburg: in a series of letters to a friend' (2 vols., 1768); and 'The Grand Tour, or a Journey through the Netherlands, Germany, Italy, and France' (4 vols., 1749). 'Travels through Germany' presents a mixture of history, topographical descriptions, quotations from other authors, and anecdotes about the trials of daily life. Above all he seeks to describe the 'customs and manners' of the people (p. 5). There are flashes of humour as when he, a doctor of law, remarks, 'As Hamburg is over-stocked with most commodities, so it is with lawyers' (p. 61). The work is in epistolary form, ostensibly unrevised for the press, but his standard disclaimer wears very thin, notably when his ship strikes a sandbank in the middle of the night as he is returning to England, and his immediate impulse is to recite an ode of Horace. 'Travels through Germany' describes much that is entertaining from the author's own travels, while 'The Grand Tour' is a guidebook in the much narrower sense of providing information on inns, road and boat connections, and sights to visit. It is a compilation of his own experience and that of others reproduced in duodecimo for ease of packing. He uses the format later popularized by Murray and the 'Blue Guides' of taking in sights by means of a series of tours from the capital. Among Nugent's very numerous translations, mostly from French, his translation of Benvenuto Cellini's autobiography (2 vols., 1771) attracted considerable attention and ran through several editions. 
Nugent made his will on 24 April 1772 and died in his rooms at Gray's Inn on 27 April 1772. His residuary legatee and sole executor was Mary Hooper, spinster, 'for her long and faithful service and attendance'. He appears to have been unmarried and childless. 


@@@@@


doc= 20403


Marianne Nunn (1778-1847), born on 17 May 1778, also wrote hymns and is remembered for her adaptation of John Newton's hymn 'One there is above all others, O how he loves' to the Welsh tune 'Ar hyd y nos'. The original appeared in John Nunn's 'Psalms and Hymns'; in various variant versions it remained popular as a children's hymn into the early twentieth century. Marianne Nunn died, unmarried, in 1847. Her younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 20404


Nunn family (per. c.1815-1847), hymn writers, were the children of John Nunn of Colchester. The eldest son, another John Nunn (1782-1861), was born in Colchester on 23 May 1782 and was educated at St John's College, Cambridge, from 1802, graduating BA in 1806. He married Elizabeth, daughter of William Tipton of Shrewsbury. After serving various curacies he became domestic chaplain to the earl of Galway (1849-53) and rector of Thorndon, Suffolk, in 1854, where he died on 15 April 1861; he was buried at Thorndon. Nunn was a friend and fellow curate of Patrick Bronte. In 1817 he published 'Psalms and Hymns', which was reprinted several times, the last edition appearing in 1861. It contained several hymns by Nunn himself, but these soon passed out of use. Nunn's sister, Marianne Nunn (1778-1847), born on 17 May 1778, also wrote hymns and is remembered for her adaptation of John Newton's hymn 'One there is above all others, O how he loves' to the Welsh tune 'Ar hyd y nos'. The original appeared in John Nunn's 'Psalms and Hymns'; in various variant versions it remained popular as a children's hymn into the early twentieth century. Marianne Nunn died, unmarried, in 1847. Her younger brother, William Nunn (1786-1840), was born on 13 May 1786 and educated at St John's College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1814 and MA in 1817. Ordained priest in 1814, he served as the incumbent of St Clement's Episcopalian Chapel in Manchester from 1818. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Philip Vaughan of Kidwelly, on 14 June 1819; they had at least two sons. William Nunn wrote several hymns, of which the most popular were 'O could we touch the sacred lyre' and 'The gospel comes, ordained of God'. Both appeared in his 1827 'Selection of Psalms and Hymns'. He died in Manchester on 9 March 1840, and was buried at All Saints' Church there. 


@@@@@


doc= 20405


Nunna (fl. 692-714?), who acknowledged the overlordship of the new West Saxon king, Ine. According to one version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', Nunna was a kinsman of King Ine, and collaborated with him in an assault on Cornwall in 710. Two of Nunna's earlier charters are also attested by a King 


@@@@@


doc= 20406


Nunneley, Thomas (1809-1870), surgeon, born at Market Harborough, Leicestershire, in March 1809, was the son of John Nunneley, a gentleman of property in Leicestershire, descended from a Shropshire family. He was educated privately, a spinal complaint necessitating a long course of treatment, and was apprenticed to a surgeon in Wellingborough, Northamptonshire. He afterwards became a student at Guy's Hospital, London, where he met and later became a close friend of Sir Astley Paston Cooper, and served as surgical dresser to Charles Aston Key. He was admitted a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries on 12 July 1832, and became a member (1832) and one of the first honorary fellows (1843) of the Royal College of Surgeons of England. As soon as he had obtained his licence to practise, he travelled to Paris to increase his professional knowledge. On his return to England he applied unsuccessfully to be house surgeon to the Leeds General Infirmary, but as an opportunity for practice became available in that town, he settled there, and was soon afterwards appointed surgeon to the Eye and Ear Hospital, a post he successfully occupied for twenty years. In the Leeds school of medicine he lectured on anatomy and physiology, and later on surgery, until 1866. He was appointed surgeon to the Leeds General Infirmary in 1864. For three years he was a member of the Leeds town council, and for many years was an active member of the Leeds Philosophical and Literary Society. 
Nunneley was one of the earliest surgeons outside London to specialize in ophthalmic surgery, and was among the first to attempt excision of the tongue. He was clear, vigorous, and logical as a writer, at times holding opinions obstinately. His energy and excessive determination were exhibited during his final illness, in performing one operation, then going aside to vomit, but returning to perform another operation. He was a decisive professional witness in favour of William Palmer (1825-1856), who was convicted of poisoning J. P. Cook by strychnine in 1856, and against William Dove, who poisoned his wife with the same drug in the course of that same year. 
Nunneley's chief work was 'The Organs of Vision, their Anatomy and Physiology' (1858), which sold poorly after adverse criticism in professional journals, which appears to have been due to personal animosity. He also published works on erysipelas, anaesthetic agents, and the effects of hydrocyanic acid. 
Nunneley continued to work until three weeks before his death from uraemia on 1 June 1870 in Leeds. He was buried at Woodhouse cemetery, Leeds. Nothing is known of his family life, except that he had a son, John Albert, also a surgeon. 


@@@@@


doc= 20407


Nuthall, Thomas (bap. 1716, d. 1775), lawyer and public official, was baptized on 22 April 1716 at the Presbyterian meeting house in Norwich, Norfolk, the only surviving son of Benjamin Nuthall, merchant (twice mayor of Norwich, in 1721 and 1749) and his second wife, Mary; Benjamin Nuthall had three surviving children from his first marriage and seventeen in all. It is not known where he was educated or where he trained as a solicitor. On 12 October 1736, at St Peter Mancroft, Norwich, he married Lucy Scott ('bap'. 1716, died 1761), only surviving child of Edward Scott (died 1727/8) and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Pearse (died 1746). She was the heiress to $2000 as well as property in Norwich and Diss. His Norfolk background may have helped him win his first official post from Sir Robert Walpole's ministry, as registrar of warrants in the Excise Office (1740). In 1749 he became receiver-general for hackney coaches. Nuthall also transacted legal business for at least two Norfolk politicians: Charles, third Viscount Townshend, and the elder Horace Walpole, the diplomat, as well as for Charles Yorke. In 1751 Nuthall was engaged by the younger Horace Walpole to provide legal support for his scheme to detach the heiress Margaret Nicoll from her guardians, with the intention that she should marry George Walpole, third earl of Orford. The younger Horace became convinced that Nuthall was working against the family interest, to Nuthall's frustration, and the marriage plan collapsed in acrimony. 
Nuthall's own marriage was the subject of an action he brought against Arthur Griesdale, warehouseman, of Ludgate Hill, in March 1756, accusing him of an adulterous relationship with Nuthall's wife. Griesdale was found guilty, and Nuthall was divorced by act of parliament on 1 February 1757. On 24 November that year at St Helen's, Bishopsgate, London, Nuthall married Susanna Custance, 'nee' Press (1728/9-1761), widow of Hambleton Custance (died 1757) and daughter of John Press, like Nuthall's father and his first wife's father a Norwich merchant. 
A more successful relationship developed between Nuthall and William Pitt. Nuthall drew up Pitt's marriage settlement in 1754. By 1762 he was negotiating on behalf of Pitt with Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle, over the terms by which they might collaborate in bringing down the ministry of John Stuart, third earl of Bute. Nuthall received a series of appointments which he attributed to Pitt, his 'great benefactor and patron' ('Correspondence of William Pitt', 2.325n.). These included the position of solicitor to the East India Company. On the retirement of Philip Carteret Webb in July 1765 he was appointed solicitor to the Treasury, an appointment through which Charles Watson-Wentworth, second marquess of Rockingham, hoped to win Pitt's support for his ministry. Nuthall characterized himself as a loyal follower of Pitt, writing that he would resign his offices if he were called upon to 'do anything that I can even surmise to be repugnant to your generous and constitutional principles' (ibid.). 
Nuthall's moment came in February 1766 when Rockingham used him as an intermediary in an attempt to bring Pitt into the ministry. The period of negotiation, when much government business was on hold, has been called the 'Nuthall interlude' (Sherrard, 206). Nuthall expressed his relief when the negotiations were done, agreeing with Pitt that 'ambassadorship is a troublesome trade' ('Correspondence of William Pitt', 2.401). He seems to have avoided political intrigue after that date, corresponding with Pitt over the scheme he had devised as ranger of Enfield Chase for conserving its oak trees for the construction of naval vessels. Pitt commended his plan, but the scheme failed to survive Nuthall's death, and the chase was divided and disafforested by act of parliament in 1777. 
In August 1767 Nuthall drew up the power of attorney through which Pitt's wife, Hester, could direct her husband's financial affairs. Nuthall's good relationship with Pitt (from 1766 earl of Chatham) was seriously damaged in 1772, when he revealed to Chatham that he had mismanaged the mortgage agreement that had enabled Chatham to buy an estate at Hayes in Kent from Thomas Walpole. The purchase had been financed by a loan from Chatham's brother-in-law, Richard Grenville-Temple, second Earl Temple. Temple assessed Nuthall as 'that facetious man of business in so many departments... whose fellow is not easily to be met with' (Smith, 4.545) and listed further examples of incompetence, including Nuthall's failure to have Chatham's marriage settlement witnessed. 
Nuthall seems to have been in partnership with a solicitor called John Skirrow at Lincoln's Inn in 1766; he later nominated Skirrow one of his executors. Nuthall's death was unexpected. Returning to London from Bath on 7 March 1775, his coach was attacked by a highwayman on Hounslow Heath, Middlesex. The attacker left when Nuthall returned fire. On reaching an inn at Hounslow, Nuthall wrote a description of the man for Sir John Fielding, but 'had scarcely closed his letter when he suddenly expired' ('Correspondence of William Pitt', 2.166n.). His will drawn up on 14 January 1774 mentioned his third wife Jane, 'nee' Spencer, from Hadley, near Epsom in Surrey and two young illegitimate sons, Thomas, aged four in 1774, who was at school at Chigwell in Essex, and John, with his nurse in Chelsea. An adult son, Robert, was also mentioned, and he too may have been illegitimate. 
Nuthall's death exposed further irregularities in his conduct. Following a complaint by the deputy Treasury solicitor, Thomas Francis, the Treasury prevented administration being granted to Nuthall's executors. Francis successfully proved that he was owed $2002 15's'. in unpaid expenses and a further $3282 18's'. in unpaid fees, as Nuthall had deferred finalizing his accounts since his second year in office. The Treasury appointed Francis and William Masterman as trustees with the task of realizing Nuthall's debt from his effects; by February 1776 they had raised $2239 16's'. 6died Horace Walpole, never one to forget a grudge, wrote in 1775 that Nuthall 'had embezzled $19,000' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 41.311). 
Nuthall did not share the antiquarian interest in legal precedents that made his predecessor at the Treasury, Webb, a highly regarded government servant. His use was as a political man of business, who maintained excellent relations with Pitt for a number of years, but events proved that his skills, when tested, were limited. 


@@@@@


doc= 20408


Nutt, Joseph (bap. 1700, d. 1775), surveyor of highways, son of Robert Nutt and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Cooper, was born in Hinckley, Leicestershire, and was baptized there on 2 October 1700. He was educated at the free grammar school, Hinckley, and was subsequently apprenticed to John Parr, a local apothecary. He went on to study in London hospitals before returning to Hinckley, where he became successful and popular, frequently treating the poor for nothing. Having been elected as a surveyor of highways for Hinckley parish, he introduced a system of periodically flooding the roads, producing a firm, substantial, and smooth surface for the considerable local traffic generated by the nearby coal mines. The regular flooding also benefited adjacent farmland. 
Nutt's procedure was resisted; there were efforts to eject him from office, and he was subjected to ridicule, but the success of his methods ensured considerable local support. His opinion as a land valuer was also highly regarded locally. John Dyer, the poet, was a friend of Nutt, and celebrated his useful talents in his poem 'The Fleece' (1757). 
Nutt married Susannah Goode (1714-1799) on 25 December 1774. He died at Hinckley on 16 October 1775, and was buried in the churchyard. By his will he left six oak trees to provide, within forty years of his death, the fabric for a new market place for Hinckley, with a school and town hall above it. 


@@@@@


doc= 20409


Nuttall, Josiah (1770-1849), naturalist, was baptized at Heywood, Lancashire, the son of John Nuttall, a handloom weaver. Early in life he became a collector of birds, a close observer of nature, and in time an expert taxidermist. For some years he worked in the museum of the antiquary William Bullock ('b'. 'c'.1780, died after 1827) of Liverpool, and subsequently at the Royal Institution in the same town. 
When Nuttall had raised sufficient means, he purchased property in his native village, where he retired with a good collection of British and foreign birds. Here he turned his attention to literary pursuits, and in 1845 published an epic poem entitled 'Belshazzar, a wild rhapsody and incoherent remonstrance, abruptly written on seeing Haydon's celebrated picture of Belshazzar's feast', a work as curious in itself as in its title. He died unmarried at Heywood on 6 September 1849. 


@@@@@


doc= 20410


Nuttall, Thomas (1786-1859), botanist, was born on 5 January 1786 at Long Preston, near Settle, Yorkshire, the first of three children of James Nuttall (died 1798) and his wife, Margaret (1759-1841), daughter of Richard Hardacre and Agnes, 'nee' Taylor. He was educated at the local village school, leaving when fourteen years old to begin a seven-year apprenticeship under his uncle Jonas Nuttall, printer, in Liverpool. About this time he became interested in natural history and undertook excursions to investigate the botany and geology of the Craven district, west Yorkshire. In 1807 he moved to London, but the following year sailed for Philadelphia where he soon became devoted to the study of American natural history, especially botany, partly through his early association with Benjamin Smith Barton. 
In the spring of 1811 Nuttall joined the expedition of John Jacob Astor's Pacific Fur Company, travelling up the Missouri River for 1500 miles and plant collecting in hostile Indian territory. The results of this trip resulted in Nuttall's pioneering American flora, 'The Genera of North American Plants, and a Catalogue of the Species, to the Year 1817' (1818). In the autumn of 1811 he sailed for England, not returning to Philadelphia until 1815. From 1818 to 1820 he botanized along the Arkansas River. In 1822 he was appointed curator of the botanical garden at Cambridge, Massachusetts, and lecturer in natural history at Harvard University. However, in 1834 he left Harvard to join Nathaniel Jarvis Wyeth's second expedition to Oregon, and subsequently collected plants along the Californian coast and in Hawaii before returning to Boston, via Cape Horn, in September 1836. From his return until 1841 he lived mainly at Philadelphia. 
In early 1842 Nuttall returned to England, where, apart from a short trip to Philadelphia in 1847-8, he lived at his family estate, Nutgrove, Sutton, near St Helens, Lancashire. Here he devoted himself largely to horticulture. From 1856 his health declined; he suffered from rheumatism and acute gastritis, but died at Nutgrove Hall, apparently from chronic bronchitis, on 10 September 1859. Nuttall never married and was always reticent about his private life. 
Nuttall became a fellow of the Linnean Society, London, in 1813, and in 1817 was elected to both the Academy of Natural Sciences and the American Philosophical Society. He remains 'the preeminent figure in the discovery of the flora of the American West' (Thomas), but he also made important contributions to zoology, geology, ornithology, and ecology. His more important published works include a three-volume appendix to a new edition of F. A. Michaux's 'The North American Sylva' (1842-9). He also published some twenty-eight papers, including three on geology, mainly in the 'Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia' and the 'Transactions of the American Philosophical Society'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20411


Nuttall, Thomas (1828-1890), army officer, born in London on 7 October 1828, was son of George R. Nuttall MD, one of the physicians of the Westminster Dispensary. His mother was daughter of Mr Mansfield of Midmar Castle, Aberdeenshire. He was sent to a private school at Aberdeen, but his character is said to have been formed chiefly by his mother, a good and clever woman. He sailed for India as an infantry cadet on 2 August 1845, and was posted as ensign in the 29th Bombay native infantry from that date. He became lieutenant in the regiment on 26 June 1847 and captain on 23 November 1856. From December 1851 to November 1856 he was adjutant of his regiment. As captain of the regimental light company, he was detached with the light battalion of the army in the Persian expedition of 1857. He returned to Bombay in May that year, and in August rejoined his regiment at Belgaum. 
During the Indian mutiny and after, from 9 November 1857 to 25 March 1861, Nuttall was detached on special police duty against disaffected Bhils and Kolis in the Nasik districts. He organized and disciplined a corps of one of the most war-like peoples of the Deccan, the Kolis of the Western Ghats, which did excellent service and was engaged in many skirmishes. The assistant collector at Nasik reported that the dispersion of the Bhil rebels and the prompt suppression of the Peint rebellion were entirely due to Nuttall's exertions, and for two years he and his men endured much hardship and privation. He five times received the commendation of government. 
From June 1860 to August 1865 Nuttall was police superintendent successively at Kaira, Sholapur, and Kaladgi, having in the meantime been transferred to the Bombay staff corps (June 1865). He received the brevet of major in the same year. In September 1865 he went on sick leave to England, and returned to India in April 1867, when he resumed his police duties at Kaladgi, and in October was appointed second in command of the Land Transport Corps in the Abyssinian expedition, with which he did good service at Koumeylee; he was mentioned in dispatches and promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel. From August 1868 to February 1871 he served with the 25th Bombay native infantry, and from April 1871 to April 1876 with the 22nd Bombay native infantry as second in command and then as commanding officer, during a portion of which time (from 8 May to 30 October 1871) he was in temporary command of the Neemuch brigade. He became lieutenant-colonel on 2 August 1871 and brevet colonel on 3 December 1873. On 5 April 1876 he became acting commandant, and on 25 January 1877 commandant, of the Sind frontier force, with headquarters at Jacobabad. 
On 20 November 1878 Nuttall was appointed brigadier-general in the Afghan expeditionary force, and commanded his brigade in the Pishin valley and at the occupation of Kandahar. After the departure of Sir Michael Biddulph and Lieutenant-General Sir Donald Stewart he commanded the brigade of all arms left for the occupation of Kandahar. After the 2nd division of the army was broken up he commanded a brigade left at Vitakri until 17 May, when it also was broken up, and he returned to his post on the Upper Sind frontier. When the Anglo-Afghan War entered its second phase Nuttall was appointed brigadier-general of the cavalry brigade formed at Kandahar in May 1880, and commanded it in the action at Girishk, on the Helmand, on 14 July 1880, in the cavalry affair of the 23rd, and in the disastrous battle of Maiwand on 27 July, after which he was criticized for his handling of his brigade. He was in the sortie of 16 August from Kandahar (mentioned in dispatches), commanded the east face of the city during the defence (mentioned in dispatches), and took part in the battle of Kandahar and pursuit of the Afghan army on 1 September 1880. He became a major-general in 1885 and lieutenant-general in 1887. 
Nuttall was a popular, active, and energetic officer. Although not an outstanding cavalry leader he was one of the best riders and swordsmen in the Indian army, a frequent competitor at, as well as patron of, contests in skill at arms, and a renowned shikari with hogspear and rifle. He married, at Camberwell, London, on 7 February 1867, Caroline Latimer Elliot, daughter of Dr Elliot of Denmark Hill, and they had a son. Nuttall died at Newton Farm, Wardhouse, Insch, Aberdeenshire, on 30 August 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 20412


Nuttall, William (d. 1840), topographer, son of John Nuttall, master fuller, was born at Rochdale, Lancashire. He kept a school in that town for many years and lived opposite St James's Church, Whitworth Road. He married three times, the last time unhappily. His first wife was Mary, daughter of William Dutton of Morton Wood, Shropshire. They had two daughters. 
Nuttall wrote 'Le voyageur, or, The Genuine History of Charles Manley' (1806) and 'Rochdale, a Fragment, with Notes, Intended as an Introduction to the History of Rochdale', which was published in 1810. It is in doggerel verse, and is curious as the first attempt at a history of the town. In his opening address to George Gordon, Lord Byron, baron of Rochdale, he claimed to have 'nothing in view but the Welfare of my Fellow Townsmen, and a desire to render myself useful to Mankind'. The manuscript of his intended history of Rochdale was utilized by Edward Baines in his 'History of Lancashire', but Baines made no acknowledgement of this in his preface. 
About 1828 Nuttall moved to Oldham but, overcome by poverty, he committed suicide in 1840. He was buried in Oldham churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 20413


Nutter, William (1759?-1802), engraver and draughtsman, is said to have been a pupil of John Raphael Smith and may have worked on stipples published under Smith's name in the 1780s. His name appears on a few prints published by Smith after 1785, including Smith's own design 'The Moralist' (1787). He went on to engrave many good dotted plates after contemporary artists, twelve of them for the printseller Emanuel Matthias Diemar or his widow. 'The Benevolent Cottager' (1788) after Francis Wheatley, 'Sunday Morning, a Cottage Family Going to Church' (1795) after William Redmore Bigg, and 'Rosebud, or, The Judgment of Paris' (1796) after Richard Westall, are typical enough of his better plates. 'The Destruction of the Bastille' (1792) after Henry Singleton and 'The Burial of General Fraser' (1794) after John Graham were unusually large and ambitious historical subjects. Nutter was a prolific engraver of the leading miniaturist Samuel Shelley, including those prepared for 'The Cabinet of Genius' (1787), a collection of poems each adorned with an original design by Shelley. Much of Nutter's other output consisted of portraits, but he exhibited some allegorical designs at the Royal Academy in 1782 and 1783. He died, unmarried, at his residence in Somers Town, London, on 14 March 1802 and was buried in the dissenters' ground of Whitefield's Tabernacle, Tottenham Court Road. In his will he left $50 in trust for 'the charity called the Sick Mans Friend at Whitefields Chapel' (fol. 420'v') besides other small gifts to his professional colleagues. 


@@@@@


doc= 20414


Nutting, Joseph (1660-1722), engraver, was born in 1660, though nothing is known of his parents. He served as an apprentice to John Savage about 1680 before setting up in business as a printmaker and printseller in Fleet Street, at the Gold and Blue Fans, near Salisbury Court. His output consisted mainly of portraits of near-contemporaries, such as Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey and John Locke, although one of his best prints is of Nicholas Monk, bishop of Hereford (died 1661), and another shows Charles I with a group of his most prominent supporters (1706). Since Nutting worked extensively for the book trade, it is not surprising that many portraits by him were used as frontispieces, including those of Thomas Greenhill ('The Art of Embalming', 1705), Sir Bartholomew Shower ('The Reports of Sir Bartholomew Shower of Cases Adjudg'd in the Court of King's Bench', 1708), and Dr Henry Sacheverell ('The Tryal of Dr Henry Sacheverell before the House of Peers', 1710). He also engraved other subjects, among them topographical plates for John Slezer's 'Theatrum Scotiae' (1693, 1710), an unusually large three-sheet 'New Prospect of the North Side of the City of London, with New Bedlam and Moore Fields' ('c'.1690), and a book of penmanship (untraced). According to Vertue, Nutting was still working in London in 1713. He died in 1722. 


@@@@@


doc= 20415


Nye, John (bap. 1620, d. 1686?), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, was baptized on 26 March 1620 at Cobham, Surrey, where his father, Henry Nye ('bap'. 1588, died 1643) was vicar; his mother's name was probably Lettice. Within a few months of John's birth Henry Nye moved to Clapham, Sussex, where he continued as rector until his death in August or September 1643. John matriculated from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 12 December 1634, aged fourteen, and graduated BA on 26 May 1638. He was back in Clapham when late in 1641 or early in 1642 he signed the protestation issued by the House of Commons. On 4 January 1647 he was 'approved on his former examination' (Mitchell and Struthers, 318) by the Westminster assembly, of which his uncle Philip Nye (d. 1672) was a prominent member, presumably preparatory to serving the latter in his ministry at Acton, Middlesex, a position he was certainly holding by 1650. By the summer of 1647 he married Elizabeth (died 1654), the second daughter of another leading figure in the assembly, Stephen Marshall (1594/5?-1655); their son Stephen Nye was born in 1647 or early in 1648 and a second son, John, in 1650 or early 1651. 
By mid-1654 Nye was minister of Cottenham, Cambridgeshire; his wife was buried there on 2 August. That year he was appointed assistant to the county's commission of triers and ejectors and he became an active member of the voluntary association of ministers in the county. On 25 June 1656 at nearby Willingham he married Elizabeth, sister of the rector of the parish, Nathaniel Bradshaw (died 1690), who was a fellow member of the commission. 
At the Restoration the sequestered rector of Cottenham, John Manby, was reinstated. Nye was ordained priest at Chichester on 25 June 1661 and the same day presented to the vicarage of Great Chishill, Cambridgeshire. Unlike his uncle, who was an Independent, and his brother-in-law Bradshaw, who was ejected, Nye subscribed to the 'Act of Uniformity' in 1662, signing on 22 July as a chaplain of the Savoy, London. On 27 August he became rector of Quendon, acquiring an additional Essex living at Rickling in 1674; his son John, who was ordained deacon in London in May 1670 and priest at Peterborough in May 1676, served as his curate. It was from Quendon that on 25 October 1675 he signed the preface to 'A Display of Divine Heraldry Vindicating the Foundation of the Christian Religion' (1678). Although he assured the 'Christian Reader' that Jesus's miracles 'infallibly prove him to be the Christ of God, though we could not shew by what Ancestors he descended from Abraham and David' (sig. A2), the work was a discussion of the differing genealogies of Jesus given in the gospels of 'Matthew' and 'Luke' which concluded that they 'are as a Golden key to open the truth of the Story, without which it is impossible to read the Scriptures with true understanding' (pp. 51-2). In contrast to his son Stephen later, he rejected the Socinian viewpoint and asserted both the divine and the human nature of Christ. Nye made his will on 8 November 1681, and probably died in 1686; the will was proved on 25 August that year. He was survived by his second wife, whom he made executor, by his son Stephen, and by three daughters, Elizabeth, Joanna, and Catherine; he left landed property in Cambridgeshire and Essex. 
Nye has sometimes been confused with his first cousin 


@@@@@


doc= 20416


Nye, Nathaniel (bap. 1624), mathematician and master gunner, was baptized at St Martin's, Birmingham, on 18 April 1624, the son of Allen Nye. A list of governors of King Edward VI's School, Birmingham, for 1638 includes an Allen Nye, who may have been Nathaniel's father. Nathaniel Nye wrote 'A New Almanacke and Prognostication' for 1642; 'A Prognostication' and 'A New Almanacke and Prognostication' for 1643, calculated for 'the fair and populous Town of Birmicham', in which he describes himself as 'Mathematitian, Practitioner of Astronomy'; and two almanacs for 1645. 
Against the background of Birmingham's arms trades in the civil war, Nye developed an interest in gunnery. In 1643 he tested a Birmingham cannon, and he described an experiment with a saker which he carried out in the Deritend area of the town in March 1645. Following the parliamentarian capture of Evesham in May 1645 Nye held the post of master gunner to the garrison there, and he directed the artillery at the siege of Worcester, from May to July 1646. He then served with the parliamentarian garrison of the city, for he was described as 'Master Gunner of the City of Worcester' on the title page of his book, 'The Art of Gunnery', published in 1647. Nye's avowed intention in writing the book was to restore the reputation of gunners, which had suffered through the appointment of men because of their connections rather than their ability. Arguing that it was as easy to fire a piece of ordnance as a musket, he provided a detailed practical guide to the preparation and employment of artillery, stressing the importance of arithmetic and geometry. The book's second section, with a separate title page, is entitled 'A treatise of artificiall fire-works for warre and recreation', and includes information on treatments for gunpowder burns. While pointing out that the book was written from his own experiences, he also acknowledged his debt to earlier writers on the use of artillery and preparation of fireworks: William Bourne, John Bate, John Babington, Robert Norton, Niccolo Tartaglia, and Thomas Malthus. The works on arithmetic to which he refers the reader include those by Robert Recorde and Marcus Jordanus. 
Nye also had a practical interest in cartography, and recommended that a gunner should have a map of the environs of his garrison that marked all prominent features within range of the defences. He had copies of such plans for Worcester and Coventry, although they are not included in the book. While he does not state that they were prepared by him, that is implied. 
Despite his service with the parliamentarian forces, Nye dedicated 'The Art of Gunnery' to the prominent royalist and member of the king's household Montague Bertie, second earl of Lindsey. In the dedication he mentions 'the particular service I ever did owe and beare to your Lordship and Noble Family', although the nature of the connection is unknown. Further editions appeared in 1648 and 1670. The frontispiece is a portrait of Nye by Wenceslaus Hollar, drawn in 1644. Nothing is known of Nye's life after 1647. 


@@@@@


doc= 20417


Nye, Philip (bap. 1595, d. 1672), Independent minister, was born in Sussex and baptized on 19 January 1595, the ninth of eleven children of John Nye (died 1626) of Hayes, Slinfold, Sussex, and his wife, Dorothy West (died 1622). Like his elder brother, Henry Nye (1589-1645), vicar of Cobham, Sussex, from 1615 to 1620 and rector of Clapham, Sussex, from 1620, Nye entered Brasenose College, Oxford, matriculating on 28 June 1616. He transferred to Magdalen Hall, where he was placed under 'a puritanical tutor' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.963) and earned the reputation of 'a very hard student' ('Nonconformist's Memorial', 1.96). He graduated BA on 24 April 1619 and proceeded MA on 9 May 1622. He apparently began to preach in 1620. On 20 May 1624 he married Judith Keddington (died 1680?); they had at least five sons and two daughters. In 1627 he became curate of All Hallows Staining, and in 1630 was lecturer at St Michael Cornhill, both in London. 
In 1632 Nye was one of those who tried to persuade John Cotton, then in hiding in London, to conform but by August 1633 Nye himself was suspect as a nonconformist and it was rumoured that he would go with John Davenport to New England. He seems, however, to have remained in England: daughters were baptized at Hackney in March 1635 and June 1636, and in London he was associated with puritan colonizing ventures and through them forged early connections with influential dissidents. Already in 1632 he had links with Providence Island and in the same year was one of those to whom the earl of Warwick, as president of the Council for New England, granted joint tenancy of lands along the Connecticut River; over five years sales of cattle there netted $161 15's'. for Nye. 
Some potential colonizers were disturbed by reports from Massachusetts Bay of the 'blurring of civil and religious jurisdictions', a theme to which Nye and other Independents frequently returned (K. O. Kupperman, 'Providence Island, 1630-1641', 1993, 326). The Connecticut River patentees prepared to act, and in the summer of 1635 Nye was a confidential intermediary and financial agent for the projected settlement, ensuring, as he said, that the younger John Winthrop, its governor, would enjoy 'all the advantages the busines will afford for your comfortable and creditfull going on in this project' ('Winthrop Papers', 3.201). In September Nye reported on 'Gentlemen of the North' who were 'in a way of selling off their estates with the greatest expedicion' (ibid., 3.211), and in November 1636 he represented other gentlemen who, in the interests of God and profit, were prepared to supply clothing to the colony at a reasonable rate in return for a monopoly of the trade. He was thus already engaged as a trusted agent whose skills in management and negotiation served both God and Mammon. 
Nye's interest in New England survived the outbreak of civil war. In 1645 he and other Independents wrote to the general court in Boston deploring its persecution of Anabaptists. They pointed out that they themselves benefited from toleration 'from them whose established lawes and orders about the worship of god we Dissent from' and that persecution by beneficiaries of such liberty would only encourage those who favoured 'such severityes' to employ them against the Independents ('Winthrop Papers', 5.24). 
Between 1636 and 1639 Nye and Thomas Goodwin published in London six of the works of Richard Sibbes, but by 1639 Nye was in the Netherlands, where he remained until 1640 as one of three ministers of an Independent church in Arnhem. Its prosperous congregation included some of the 'Gentlemen of the North' from Yorkshire, and three of its members had been fellow Connecticut patentees with Nye. John Archer was 'pastor' and Goodwin and Nye 'teachers', an arrangement later espoused by Nye for Independent congregations in England. Indeed, the Arnhem church was to become a model for later Independents. Only the truly godly -- so judged after thorough scrutiny -- were admitted, and the church provided an exemplary case of dispute resolution to which Nye and the Independent cadre in the Westminster assembly later reverted in their 'Apologeticall Narration'. Nye's role in settling a conflict in the English church in Rotterdam demonstrated, they believed, that disputes within individual congregations could be resolved by the mediation of peer congregations without reference to an authoritative external body. His record was less pacific in his own church, where his censure of one member led to a long-running dispute and charges of 'pride [and] want of charity' (Edwards, 36). 
By 1640 Nye, already in middle age, held fully formed views on church government and church-state relations, and was committed to a church organization of non-parochial gathered churches rather than one of parochial congregationalism. When the times began to change in England most of the Arnhem congregation dispersed homewards, where Independents were for the first time confronted by the complex problem of the relation between gathered churches and a national parochial church system. Nye went first to Hull where his influence alarmed the orthodox and led to the formation of a small Independent church in May 1643. An unfriendly witness declared that after his return Nye 'lived a great part of his time... in Noblemen's families' (Edwards, 217) where he cultivated useful connections. By April 1642 the earl of Manchester, Warwick's son-in-law, had presented him to the living of Kimbolton, Huntingdonshire; in that month Nye was chosen as one of the county's two representatives to the Westminster assembly. 
Henceforth Nye's career centred on London and national religious politics. Until then he had preached little there, but according to Thomas Edwards he had 'acted the State-parasite and played the polititian the more,... dealing in private, under hand, and hand to hand with some men of note' (Edwards, 217). He quickly emerged as a powerful Independent leader. In 1643 he and the eminent presbyterian Stephen Marshall accompanied the parliamentary commissioners to Edinburgh to negotiate Scottish entry into the war; there he praised the solemn league and covenant as 'warranted by both human and divine story' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.963). Nevertheless he recognized English reservations, and in a letter to the Westminster assembly he and Marshall claimed the agreement had been drawn up with such 'warinesse... there might be no bogling at it' ('A Letter from Mr. Marshall, and Mr. Nye', 1643, 2). On his return to London he presented the draft agreement to parliament on 25 September 1643. His speech before the reading of the covenant, together with Alexander Henderson's on the same occasion, was printed by order of parliament as 'The Covenant with a Narrative of the Proceedings and Solemn Manner of Taking it' (London, 1643) and 'Two Speeches Delivered before the Subscribing of the Covenant' (Edinburgh, 1643). 
Although he strongly supported the solemn league and covenant, Nye stopped short of advocacy of a presbyterian system; instead his tone was moderate and he deplored the bitterness of debates over church government. Independents were alarmed, but he exerted his influence to abort their petition of protest. The royalists acknowledged his standing in late 1643 when they vainly attempted to lure him and Goodwin to their side with offers of toleration, preferment, and a royal chaplaincy for Nye. Nye, however, renewed his advocacy of the covenant with an exhortation read in the House of Commons on 9 February 1644, now emphasizing the 'righteousnesse' of the Scots and the dangers from 'Popish and Prelatick Projectors' ('An Exhortation to the Taking of the Solemne League and Covenant', 1644, 6). 
In the Westminster assembly, Nye was a leader of the small band of Independent clergy whose disproportionate influence enabled them to obstruct the presbyterian programme and, Edmund Calamy complained, buy time for their party to gain ground in the army and parliament ('Nonconformist's Memorial', 1.9). In November 1643 London ministers petitioned the Westminster assembly against gathered churches, a breach of the agreement reached in 1641 that religious differences between allies would not be publicly aired. With the other leading 'Dissenting Brethren' (Goodwin, Sidrach Simpson, Jeremiah Burroughes, and William Bridge, all returned emigres) Nye published 'An Apologeticall Narration'. They made much of the moral authority bestowed by exile and stressed their clerical respectability in order to dissociate themselves from Brownists. They emphasized their Englishness, distinguishing themselves from churches abroad, including that of Scotland, and argued against rigidity and making 'present judgement and practice a binding law... for the future' (Goodwin and others, 10). Doctrine had been settled by 'the good old Non-conformists' (ibid., 4); instead they concentrated on their programme for church government, advocating autonomous, gathered congregations exempt from any external 'Presbyteriall' authority to excommunicate either churches or individuals. To the dismay of the Scots they accepted civil authority over the church, and in 1644 Nye argued in the Westminster assembly for 'the inconsistency of a presbytery with a civil state' (Tolmie, 96). Although his speech to parliament on his return from Scotland in 1643 was reprinted in January 1646 as 'The Excellency and Lawfulnesse of the Solemne League', his Independent credentials remained untarnished, perhaps in part because of the work's moderate tone. In 1644 Nye and Goodwin in a preface to John Cotton's 'The Keyes of the Kingdom of Heaven' defended the Independent ''Middle-Way'... between... 'Brownisme', and the Presbyteriall-government' ('To the reader', Cotton), and defended the autonomy of the individual church. They also struggled to delineate the respective powers of pastors, elders, and brethren of the gathered church. 
Nye wrote the preface to the Westminster assembly's 'Directory for the Publique Worship of God' and he preached, albeit infrequently (six times between 1643 and 1653), before parliament. He also preached a Sunday morning and a weekly lecture at St Margaret's, Westminster, and gave a termly lecture in Westminster Abbey. In 1643 parliament installed him in the rectory of Acton, Middlesex, on the ejection of the incumbent, Dr Daniel Featley. In 1646 Nye was a member of the committee for sending ministers into the northern parts of the kingdom, and in December 1647 he and Stephen Marshall accompanied the commissioners to the king on the Isle of Wight. He was also one of the 'pestilent 'Firebrands' of 'Sedition'' dispatched to calm the restive army in the winter of 1647-8 ('Mercurius Elenticus', 12-19 Jan 1648, 59). 
At the debate in the general council of the army at Whitehall on 14 December 1648, on whether the power of the civil magistrate derived from God and could be exercised in matters of religion, Nye was allied with Henry Ireton against the radicals. He allowed extensive powers to the magistrate, for authority to act in a commonwealth did 'nott in the least lie in the Ministeriall power butt in the Legislative power'. These powers were 'conveyed to him by the people'; hence 'the thinges of our God' that were 'of publique good and publique concernment' were legitimate areas for magisterial action ('Clarke Papers', 2.118-19). If the magistrate lacked a positive right to determine and enforce true religion, he none the less had negative powers to act against false religion. 
Nye protested in 1648 against a personal treaty with the king. Although he was said to object to Pride's Purge and the king's execution, Cromwell employed Nye in 1649 to negotiate with the London presbyterians and to try to persuade secluded members to return to parliament. He joined with presbyterians in 1651 in their vain intervention on behalf of Christopher Love, and again in 1652 in opposing Fifth Monarchist attacks on tithes and a national church. With John Owen and others he presented the 'Humble Proposal' for a religious settlement to the Rump and later the Barebones parliaments. Their approach, favouring toleration for those who accepted the 'fundamentals' of Christianity, met with Cromwell's approval, and Nye's career prospered under his regime. He was a member of the commissions appointed in 1654 to 'try' candidates for livings and to eject the undesirable. Anthony Sadler's record of his own failed candidature, 'Inquisitio Anglicana' (1654), reveals Nye's cross-examination as hectoring and inquisitorial, an impression not refuted by the defence published anonymously by Nye's son John Nye ['see under 'Nye, John], who served as his clerk. In 1655, against the wishes of the parishioners, Cromwell gave the living of St Bartholomew by the Exchange to Nye and his gathered church. The parishioners complained that they were now excluded, for both pulpit and pews had been taken over by 'strainge congregacons' (Shaw, 2.133). They withheld their tithes and the rancorous dispute continued until the Restoration. 
Nye was prominent in the Savoy conference of 1658 and was one of the leaders who drafted its 'Declaration of the Faith and Order' of English congregational churches (1659). He participated in efforts to reconcile Independents and presbyterians but was prepared to make few compromises. Richard Baxter recognized his 'very great power' with the Independents but Nye rebuffed efforts to achieve agreement 'between the Honest and Moderate' of both parties, remaining elusive and ultimately intransigent ('Calendar', 1.298-9). He objected that Baxter's criterion for admission to church membership -- 'a credible profession of faith & holinesse' -- failed to meet the need for 'deeper discoverie', and he rejected any association based on a covenant regarding church practice, 'for hee said... hee was borne free & why should hee come under bonds?' (ibid., 1.306). Owen's 'Pride, & Mr. Philip Nye's Policie', said Baxter, 'increased the flame, & kept open our wounds' (G. Nuttall, 'The MS of 'Reliquiae Baxterianae'', 'Journal of Ecclesiastical History', 6, 1995, 78). 
At the Restoration, Nye was initially excluded from clemency because he 'had acted so highly... against the king, and had been instrumental in bringing all things into confusion' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.964). In the end his life was spared on condition that he never again hold civil or ecclesiastical office. In May 1660 he signed an address to Charles II, and in the same year he published 'Beames of Former Light' (1660) in which, although he argued against using the threat of ejection to enforce conformity, he still acknowledged the magistrate's powers in religion. He later fruitlessly urged Baxter to join him in 'owning' the king's proposed declaration of indulgence. He remained, however, an object of mistrust and he was accused of corruption and abuse of power as a trier. In 1662, in his only personal statement, he defended himself in a brief pamphlet entitled 'The Case of Philip Nye, Minister, Humbly Tendered to the Consideration of the Parliament' and appealed for sympathy: he had been a preacher for forty years, was now infirm and dependent on voluntary contributions, and had a wife and three children (all in fact now adult) to provide for. 
In 1662 Nye published 'The Lawfulness of the Oath of Supremacy', which argued for the king's power in ecclesiastical affairs and reiterated his earlier views on the legitimate powers of the civil magistrate to protect 'a gospel-Ministry' and regulate the practice of religion ('Lawfulness', 1683, 25). The work revealed both caution in the face of restored monarchy and the alarm induced in an orderly and authoritarian cleric by interregnum radicalism and 'unseemly' religious proceedings ('Beames', 4). He denied coercive power to the clergy but allowed it to the civil power. Outward conformity, he now said, was a means to 'restrain our inbred corruption' and while it could not save it could 'work preparatively to Conversion'. Christ's presence in men's souls was made manifest in their outward behaviour: politeness, civility, and 'Civil Relations' had become signs of godliness ('Lawfulness', 25-8). 
Posthumously published works apparently dating from this period of Nye's 'unhappy leisure' similarly accommodated the Independent position to changed political circumstances. He argued that church members might legitimately hear the sermons of ministers of the established church and, in a work diplomatically dedicated to James II by Nye's son Henry in 1687, he asserted the king's right to dispense with penal laws in religion. He was also reported to have written 'a compleat history of the old Puritan Dissenters' which burned in the fire of London in 1666 ('Nonconformist's Memorial', 1.97). Nye returned to London after the fire. In 1669 he was a lecturer in the Hackney combination, and in April 1672 he was licensed to preach in an Independent church in which he served as 'doctor' and John Loder as pastor. He died at Brompton in September 1672 and was buried on 27 September at St Michael Cornhill. 
In an age of vivid clerical personalities Nye's remains elusive. The works published in his lifetime were largely co-operative and programmatic; those few of his sermons that found their way into print had a specific political purpose. His long-standing partnerships, notably with Goodwin and Marshall -- whose daughter married his nephew John Nye (bap. 1620, d. 1686?) -- and his rapid emergence as an influential figure in religious politics indicate force of intellect and personality as well as political skill, yet the absence of affectionate or admiring tributes is notable. Instead assessments ranged from wary to hostile. Baxter thought Nye able but deplored the exclusive rigour of his Christianity, noting that at Acton he admitted so few to the communion that this 'rigour made the People think hardly of [him]' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', ed. M. Sylvester, 1696, 3.46). Calamy praised Nye's thorough knowledge of 'the Disciplinarian controversy', and Nye had the reputation 'of a man of uncommon depth, who was seldom or never outreached, but... was of too warm a spirit' ('Nonconformist's Memorial', 1.96-7). 
Nye's enemies said that he grew rich through greed and corruption. Wood claimed that parliament gave him $500 after his expedition to the king at Carisbrooke Castle, and a living worth $400 per annum. He certainly had 4's'. a day for expenses as a member of the Westminster assembly, and $120 per annum for his lectureships at St Margaret's, Westminster, and the abbey. There were presumably other similar payments, and when bishops' lands were sold in 1651 Nye bought land in Yorkshire and, with a partner, a manor in Somerset for $722. On the other hand, he paid rent for the house assigned to him in Westminster; some grants were contingent on raising money from designated sources (sometimes problematic); and his income from lecturing appears to have been significantly less than that of a star preacher such as Marshall. 
Nye was 'a great politician' (D. Neal, 'The History of the Puritans', 5 vols., 1822, 4.416) who was disliked for his 'policie and subtility' (Edwards, 242); he was one of the 'two politic pulpit-drivers of Independency' ('Clarke Papers', 2.75n.a). He was clearly a skilled political manager whose belief in the legitimate power of the civil magistrate facilitated flexibility in changed secular circumstances, while at the same time he remained intransigent in those religious matters that absorbed his attention, namely the government and organization of gathered churches. He was a libertarian in his demands for the unfettered autonomy of each church, but he was not a democrat. Authority in the church lay in the elders, a few 'select persons' (never women, excluded from power by ''Statute-law' of Christ'), and in particular in the minister who alone had 'a Ministeriall Doctrinall authority' over all its members ''to instruct, rebuke', [and] exhort with all authority' (Cotton). These views, joined with Nye's determination, religious inflexibility, and exclusiveness, help to explain the quarrels that marked his career and the reservations of more moderate and ecumenical colleagues. His surviving legacy was not in England but, through the influence of the 'Declaration of Faith' of the Savoy conference, in the congregational churches of New England. 


@@@@@


doc= 20418


Nye, Stephen (1647/8-1719), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was the elder son of John Nye (bap. 1620, d. 1686?), Church of England clergyman, and his first wife, Elizabeth Marshall (died 1654). Nye's parentage linked him to leading puritan figures of the 1640s: his father's uncle was Philip Nye (whom the father was assisting at Acton, Middlesex, about the time of Stephen's birth), and his mother's father, Stephen Marshall. Ironically, John Nye was the author of an anti-Socinian tract. 
Nye went to school in Cambridge before being admitted sizar at Magdalene College, Cambridge, on 11 March 1662, aged fourteen. After graduating BA in 1666, he was ordained deacon by the bishop of London in March 1667 and ordained priest by the bishop of Ely on 24 December 1671. On 25 March 1679 he became rector of Little Hormead, Hertfordshire, a poor living with a population of about 100 inhabitants. Here he spent the rest of his life, and here on 15 February 1690 he baptized his only child with his wife, Mary (died 1713/14). Nye regularly read the service, preached 'once every Lord's day', and had 'an opportunity very seldom lacking of supplying some neighbouring cure' ('DNB'). It is clear from his will that he possessed a library of books, of which he undoubtedly made good use. 
Nye early counted the businessman and philanthropist Thomas Firmin a close friend, and influenced his theological stance in the trinitarian controversy prompted by Sherlock's 'Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity' (1690). He wrote a number of tracts which were published at Firmin's expense. A ready and erudite writer, he adopted a Sabellian attitude, regarding the persons of the Trinity as several modes of the one God. At the same time he stoutly defended his right to adhere to the Church of England. Publishing anonymously, as was then necessary to avoid legal punishment and social discrimination, he was the first writer to employ the term 'unitarian' in the English language. This was in his 'Brief History of the Unitarians, called also Socinians, in Four Letters to a Friend' (1687). The friend was Firmin, and an appended letter was by Henry Hedworth, layman and pamphleteer and follower of John Biddle (Bidle). Biddle had published the 'Racovian Catechism' (in Latin) in 1652, a work based upon the writings of the Italian reformer Faustus Socinus, who denied both the deity and the pre-existence of Christ. 
The so-called 'Unitarian Tracts' (from 1694 onwards), to which Nye (and possibly also John Locke) contributed, were published and bound into at least five collections. Nye's 'Considerations on the Explications of the Doctrine of the Trinity' (1694), addressed to Hedworth, and his 'Institutions Considering the Holy Trinity' (1703), which the author considered his most mature work, were widely circulated. Nye was also the author of 'Some Thoughts upon Dr Sherlock's Vindication of the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity' (1696), using phrases and quotations from Socinian scholars. In this tract he wrote, characteristically: 'I am neither a Papist nor a Lutheran, a Calvinist nor a Socinian... I am a Christian. I side only with Truth... and take shelter in the bosom of that Catholic Church which stands independently of anything under the name of a Party. (p. 18)' Nye's intention throughout was to define the doctrine of the Trinity in a way acceptable to the growing number of Anglican clergymen who found themselves unable to accept a doctrine capable of a tritheistic interpretation. Like John Locke, he believed in the truth and reasonableness of Christianity and not in metaphysical dogma. The writers of the tracts invariably used the term 'unitarian' in an inclusive sense, covering Sebellians, Arians, unitarianism, and Socinians, though the last of these names was regularly employed by the orthodox as a term of reproach and abuse. Nye is notable for propounding the principle common to unitarians and the Dutch and Irish remonstrants, that consciences ought to be free in matters of faith. 
In 1712 Nye drew up a manuscript account of the glebe and tithes of Little Hormead, about which there had been disputes. His health declined, and he died on 6 January 1719. He was buried at Little Hormead four days later. In his will he remembered not only his family but his 'trusty friends and neighbours' and showed his concern for 'the poor'. His wife, Mary, predeceased him by five years. 


@@@@@


doc= 20419


Nyndge, Alexander (fl. 1574), demoniac, was the son of William Nyndge, a gentleman of Herringswell, Suffolk. William was the wealthiest inhabitant of Herringswell, according to the subsidy assessment of 1568. What fame Alexander Nyndge has he owes to his brother, Edward, who not only directed the exorcism of Alexander but published an account of it. Edward, who was about thirty years old at the time of his brother's possession, had graduated MA from Christ's College, Cambridge, and was subsequently a fellow of Gonville and Caius College. 
His education probably explains Edward's commanding role in his brother's exorcism, despite the presence of his parents and the town curate. On 20 January 1574, about 7 p.m., Alexander had a seizure. Edward was immediately convinced that this seizure was the work of an evil spirit. Edward addressed the spirit, telling him that he was a master of arts of Cambridge and ordering him by the death and passion of Christ to state why he was troubling Alexander. Getting no response, Edward had neighbours brought in and led them in prayer. Edward once again commanded the spirit, in the name of Jesus, to speak. A voice, deeper than Alexander's usual voice, issued from Edward's brother and said that he came for Alexander's soul. The people present began to pray to God and the Virgin Mary, whereupon Edward sharply rebuked them, declaring that such prayers 'offend God'. In obedience to Edward's instructions pieces of paper with biblical verses written on them were laid on Alexander's body and the windows were left open. Alexander's convulsions ceased about 11 p.m., and Edward declared that the demon was cast out of his brother. But in the next nine hours, Alexander had two fits. Finally, Edward instructed the town curate to read from the 'Bible' while the bystanders prayed. This time the exorcism was successful, though in a second edition of his account of his brother's possession, published in 1615, Edward stated that Alexander was tormented by demons for a further six months, until 23 July. Nothing further is known of either Alexander or Edward Nyndge. 
The exorcism of Alexander Nyndge contained a mixture of folkloric elements (the placing of biblical verses on Alexander's body) and the characteristics of later puritan exorcisms (the reliance on group prayer to expel the demon). And Edward Nyndge, with his instant diagnosis of possession, his control of his brother's exorcism, and his concern to see that it did not involve practices which would 'offend God', was a precursor of such later puritan exorcists as John Foxe and John Darrell. 


@@@@@


doc= 20420


John Nyren (fl. 1827-1830), an officer in HM customs and author of 'Tables of the Duties, Bounties, and Drawbacks of Customs' (1827; 4th edn, 1830), was a first cousin of the cricket historian. The two were confused in the catalogue of the British Museum Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 20421


Nyren, John (1764-1837), cricket historian, son of Richard Nyren (1734-1797) ['see under 'Hambledon cricket club] and his wife, Frances Pennycud ('c'.1740- 'c'.1830), of Slindon, in Sussex, was almost certainly born in the parish of Catherington, two miles east of Hambledon, Hampshire, on 15 December 1764. From about 1762 his parents lived at the Hut (later renamed the Bat and Ball inn), which overlooked the Hambledon cricket ground, Broadhalfpenny Down. The Nyrens bore the Sussex name variously known as Nieren or Niering -- the latter being the name borne by John's grandfather. Research in the 1960s by Edmund Esdaile challenged the earlier view that they were of Jacobite origin and kinsmen of the Nairnes who supported the Jacobite risings in 1715. There remains, nevertheless, the testimony of John Nyren's granddaughter Mary Nyren, who recalled being told that her grandfather had compared watch-chain seals with William, Lord Nairne, towards the end of his life and found the crests on them were identical (Lucas, 99). Richard Nyren, whom his son later called 'a thorough-bred old English yeoman', had learned his cricket from his uncle Richard Newland at Slindon. He became 'the chosen General of all the matches' acting as secretary to the Hambledon cricket club and playing an intermediary role between its aristocratic patrons and the players themselves. As a player, he scored 98 for Hambledon against Surrey in 1775 and 70 against England in 1776 but he is known chiefly for his stewardship of the club's affairs and his role as landlord of the Bat and Ball inn and, from about 1770, the George inn in the centre of Hambledon village, to where the family moved. 
John Nyren was educated by a Jesuit who taught him a little Latin, 'but I was a better hand at the fiddle'. He interested himself in cricket at an early age, 'being since 1778 a sort of farmer's pony to my native club of Hambledon'. He was a left-handed batsman who played a few times for Hambledon in the 1780s. He joined the newly formed Homerton club, then second in importance only to the slightly older Marylebone Cricket Club, and is first listed on a score sheet in 1801. For Homerton against the MCC at Lord's in that year he made 49. He played for England from 1802 to 1805 and appeared for the Gentlemen in 1806 in the first ever match against the Players. Cricket was for him a 'recreation, not an occupation'. His last match of importance was for Lord Frederick Beauclerk's eleven at Lord's in 1817 against a team raised by William Ward. It was to Ward that Nyren later dedicated the book on which his reputation rests. This was 'The Young Cricketer's Tutor... to which is added 'The Cricketers of my Time'', 'the whole collected and edited by C. C. Clarke' (1833). 
By the time of the book's publication Nyren was 'still a sort of youth at seventy, hale and vigorous and with a merry twinkle of his eye'. He had become part of a cultural and social circle that included Leigh Hunt (who wrote those words in 1834), Charles Lamb, the organist, composer, and publisher Vincent Novello, and Novello's son-in-law the Shakespearian scholar Charles Cowden Clarke. While he played the violin and talked music with Novello, Nyren chatted on cricket to Clarke and out of their conversations emerged the book. The first part is severely functional and didactic but the second sees the old Hambledon club and its great players through the rose-coloured spectacles of nostalgia at a distance of some forty years. Nyren evokes their way of life as much as their cricket, and provides what John Arlott called one of 'the few peasant portraits in the language'. 
There are Tom Walker and his brother Harry -- 'never sure came two such unadulterated rustics into a civilized community'; John Small who charmed 'a vicious bull' with his fiddle; George Leer, the longstop, 'as sure of the ball as if he had been a sandbank'; Tom Sueter, 'the manliest and most graceful of hitters' and the sweetest of tenors; David Harris, the bowler, whom 'Phidias would have taken as a model'; Lamborn, the shepherd, 'a plain-spoken bumpkin' whose off-breaks were too good for the duke of Dorset; and William Beldham (Silver Billy), the only Hambledon player to survive into the photographic age. 
These men have passed into the folklore of cricket history yet intriguing questions remain about their biographer. Talented as he undoubtedly was as a musician, it seems doubtful that he could have aspired to such flights of fancy as a writer. He readily conceded Clarke's editorship and his friend must have had the wit and wisdom to capture the romantic enthusiasm of the spoken word. Mrs Cowden Clarke in her autobiography, 'My Long Life' (1896), recalled 'the chuckling pride' with which Nyren told his tale to her husband. The book won instant praise from the reviewers, including Hunt in the 'London Journal' and John Mitford in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. It ran to eleven editions in twenty-five years. Over a hundred years later Arlott wrote that it was 'one of the very few books ever written on any game which [could] stand squarely upon its merits outside the literature of sport'. 
John Nyren left Hambledon on his marriage in 1791 to Cleopha Copp (1772/3-1835), a 'wealthy' young woman of German parentage. They settled in Portsea, Hampshire, before moving to Bromley by Bow in Middlesex and then to Battersea. He was a calico printer on a large scale until his premises were burnt down. During the years of his literary and musical friendships he lived in Cheyne Walk, Chelsea. According to Nyren's granddaughter he met at Lord's the sixth Lord Nairne (whose attainted title George IV had restored), which is how the two men came to compare watch-chains. In 1830 he is recorded at Battersea, Surrey, and is listed as a partner in a firm manufacturing chemicals, vinegar, and other products. 
Some seventy years after Nyren's death the essayist E. V. Lucas became acquainted with his granddaughter, who set down her memories for him. Nyren had 'an instinctive admiration of everything good and tasteful, both in nature and art'. He was a good enough composer to have three of his pieces published by Novello, including an 'Ave verum', and he had been for thirteen years choirmaster at St Mary Moorfields, where Novello himself was organist. 
Nyren's wife predeceased him. They had three daughters, one of whom -- Mary A. Nyren (1798/9-1848) -- became abbess of the English convent at Bruges. Nyren died at Bromley by Bow, on 28 June 1837 and was buried in Bromley churchyard. 




@@@@@


doc= 20422


Oakeley, Sir Charles, first baronet (1751-1826), administrator in India, second son of William Oakeley (died 1803), rector of Forton, Staffordshire, and his wife, Christian (died 1790), daughter of Sir Patrick Strachan, was born at the rectory, Forton, on 27 February 1751. After attending Shrewsbury School, he obtained, through his father's friend, Lady Clive, a nomination to a writership on the East India Company's Madras establishment. He was appointed in October 1766, and arrived in Madras on 6 June 1767. For five or six years he was assistant to the secretary to the civil department; in January 1773 he was promoted to succeed Mr Goodlad in the secretaryship; and in May 1777 he was given the corresponding post in the military and political department, combined with the offices of judge advocate-general and translator. That year, on 19 October, he married Helena (died 1839), only daughter of Robert Beatson of Kilrie, Fife, a woman of great energy and artistic talent. Oakeley's superiors noted his diligence, but he was compelled to resign in November 1780 because of ill health. 
In the summer of 1781, when Lord Macartney, the governor of Madras, had succeeded in obtaining from the nawab of Arcot an assignment of his revenues to defray the expenses of the war in the Carnatic, a committee, called the committee of assigned revenue, was appointed to superintend the collection of the revenues. Of this committee Oakeley was made president. He began his duties in January 1782. In spite of the hostility of the nawab's servants and subjects, and of the great extent of Haidar Ali's conquests in the territories of the nawab, the board succeeded in raising the Arcot contribution to the war fund from 11/4 'pagodas' to nearly 44 'pagodas'. Most of this was used to feed the company's army, but a considerable surplus was handed over to the nawab on the conclusion of the war in March 1784. For these services the committee was publicly thanked by the governor-general and the council of Bengal; and even Burke, in his speech 'on the Nabob of Arcot's debts' spoke of its services in high terms. 
Oakeley's achievements in Arcot led to his appointment in April 1786 by Sir Archibald Campbell to the presidency of the new board of revenue of Madras. Family affairs, however, compelled him to resign early in 1788, and in February 1789 he sailed for Europe on board the 'Manship'. Although he had been twenty-two years in India, he still lacked seniority in membership in the council, so had little expectation of promotion. Pitt and Dundas, however, to whom Campbell had recommended him, pressed him to return, and, the court of directors having in 1789 placed on record its high appreciation of his services, he was in April 1790 appointed to succeed General Medows as governor of Madras, and was also gazetted a baronet on 5 June. It was expected that Medows would be transferred to the governorship of Bengal, and Oakeley was accordingly sworn in as governor. But when the news arrived of the outbreak of fresh hostilities with Tipu Sultan, Medows's transfer was postponed, and Oakeley was placed second in council at Madras. He arrived in Madras on 15 October 1790 and, finding General Medows in the field, assumed, in his absence, charge of the civil administration of Madras, a task made doubly difficult by the great and constant needs of the army, and the extreme financial embarrassment of the company's Madras exchequer. As this was largely due to lack of public confidence in the government, Oakeley, instead of borrowing from Bengal or Europe, proceeded to improve the administration of Madras. He retrenched expenses, enforced a more efficient collection of revenue, and exacted a subsidy of 10 lakhs (Rs 1 million) per annum from the raja of Travancore, on the grounds that the company was defending him against Tipu. But perhaps the measure which most tended to restore public credit was the resumption of cash payments for all army and public obligations, which had previously been made only in the case of the most pressing debts. The only exception which he made was in the case of his own official salary, which remained unpaid until the close of the war, though he had meantime to borrow money at 12 per cent for his own private expenses. 
These measures were taken only just in time. On 26 May 1791 Lord Cornwallis, the governor-general, had come south to take charge of the army, but was forced to retire from Seringapatam, destroying his battering train for lack of transport. Heavy requisitions were consequently made on the Madras government for draught cattle, stores, and funds. Fortunately, Oakeley's reforms had enabled the presidency revenue to meet a large portion of the expenses of the war: Cornwallis's needs were promptly and amply met. Oakeley poured into the field of operations money, grain, and cattle. Cornwallis recognized the value of this assistance, and the Bengal presidency benefited greatly by the ability of Madras to bear so large a part of the burden. On the conclusion of the war in March 1792 General Medows left Madras, and Oakeley entered on the full authority of governor. Cornwallis did not, in fact, have a very high opinion of Oakeley's ability to carry out needed reforms in Madras, but he concluded that at least he was the best of the company's servants ('Correspondence of... Cornwallis', 2.170). 
Oakeley first attacked the question of the company's debt. Accordingly, when the news reached India, in June 1793, of the outbreak of war with France, a fully equipped army was promptly dispatched against Pondicherry, and 5 lakhs of 'pagodas' (about Rs 1,750,000) remitted to Bengal without damaging the government's credit. The Pondicherry expedition was planned and directed by the Madras government, and had in fact been undertaken on Oakeley's own responsibility some weeks in advance of instructions from Britain, and as soon as the news of the outbreak of war arrived overland. It was successfully completed by the fall of Pondicherry in August 1793. On 7 September 1794 Oakeley handed over the government to Lord Hobart. He returned to England, where he received, on 5 August 1795, the thanks of the court of directors for his eminent services. Not the least of these was his revenue work, which, however painful its immediate impact on the peasants, laid the foundation for a modern system of government in the Madras region. 
Always much attached to the region in which he had spent his early years, Oakeley settled at The Abbey, Shrewsbury, near his father, who was now rector of Holy Cross, Shrewsbury, and lived there until in 1810 he moved to the bishop's palace, Lichfield. A seat in parliament had been offered him by Sir William Pulteney during his visit to England in 1789, but the offer was declined. Shortly after his final return he was informally sounded as to his willingness to be considered for the governor-generalship; this he also declined. He corresponded with Dundas on Indian affairs from time to time, but for the most part occupied himself with classical studies and with the education of his sons. At the time of the expected invasion by Napoleon Bonaparte, Oakeley commanded a volunteer regiment of foot raised in Shrewsbury. 
Although he had served the East India Company in Madras at a time when it was a byword for corruption and oppression, people who knew him after his return to England spoke of his 'fervent and unaffected piety' and his generosity in support of local charitable institutions ('GM', 371). Having been acquainted with the educational work in Madras of Dr Andrew Bell, he assisted in the establishment of the National Society's schools on Bell's system in Shrewsbury and Lichfield. He died at his home, the bishop's palace, Lichfield, on 7 September 1826, and was buried privately at Forton. There is a monument to his memory by Chantrey in Lichfield Cathedral. 
The Oakeleys had eleven children, ten of whom survived him, including his sons Sir Herbert Oakeley and Frederick Oakeley; a third son, Henry, became a judge of the supreme court, Calcutta, and predeceased his father by a few months, dying on 2 May 1826. 


@@@@@


doc= 20423


Oakeley, Frederick (1802-1880), Roman Catholic convert, priest, and author, was born on 5 September 1802, at the Abbey House, Shrewsbury, the eleventh and youngest child of Sir Charles Oakeley, first baronet (1751-1826), former governor of Madras, and his wife, Helena (died 1839), only daughter of Robert Beatson. His elder brother, Sir Herbert Oakeley, third baronet, later became a Church of England clergyman. In 1806 he broke the thigh bone in his right leg, which left him with a pronounced limp for the rest of his life, and ill health continued throughout his childhood. Apart from a short period as a day scholar at the grammar school in Lichfield in 1814, he was educated by his parents at home until he was sent to a private tutor, Charles Sumner, later bishop of Winchester, in 1817. In June 1820 Oakeley matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, gaining a second class degree in 'literae humaniores' in 1824. After graduation he decided to stay at Oxford and study for a college fellowship. He won the chancellor's Latin and English essay prizes in 1825 and 1827 respectively, and the Ellerton theological prize also in 1827. 
He was elected as chaplain fellow of Balliol in March 1827. He was ordained deacon by the bishop of London at the Chapel Royal, Whitehall, and priest one week later, by his former tutor Charles Sumner, now bishop of Llandaff. In 1830 he became tutor and catechetical lecturer at Balliol, and in 1832 a prebendary of Lichfield Cathedral. Among his students at Balliol was Archibald Campbell Tait, for whom he retained a lifelong friendship. In 1831 he was select preacher at Oxford, and in 1835 one of the public examiners to the university. In 1837, on the recommendation of Edward Pusey, Bishop C. J. Blomfield of London appointed him preacher for the University of Oxford at the Chapel Royal, Whitehall. On this appointment Oakeley resigned his tutorship, but retained his fellowship and his prebendal stall at Lichfield until he joined the Roman Catholic church in 1845. He was a friend of John Henry Newman through their membership of a small dining club which met in the years 1829-33, but Oakeley's period of evangelicalism from about 1830 to 1835 ensured that he played no role in the earliest days of the Oxford Movement. His growing attraction to the movement was due partly to his friendship with William George Ward, a fellow of Balliol from 1834, and partly to the influence of Froude's 'Remains', published in 1838. Oakeley and Ward became firm friends and almost inseparable companions during their remaining years in the Church of England. Oakeley's Whitehall sermons were published in 1839 and prefaced by a long essay in which he declared his commitment to the principles of the Oxford Movement. In July 1839 he was licensed as minister of Margaret Chapel, the predecessor of All Saints, Margaret Street, and moved to London. 
During his six years at Margaret Street (1839-45) Oakeley transformed an undistinguished little chapel into a centre of musical and liturgical excellence. Among his congregation were Edward Bellasis, Alexander Beresford-Hope, and William Ewart Gladstone. After his arrival at Margaret Street, the Oxford Movement took on the appearance of two movements -- one at Oxford concerned with doctrine, and the other at London concerned with ceremonial -- and Oakeley's great strength was as a competent and acknowledged authority on liturgy. Writing more than fifty years later, R. W. Church (371) remembered Oakeley as 'the first to realize the capacities of the Anglican ritual for impressive devotional use, and his services are still remembered by some as having realized for them in a way never since surpassed, the secrets and consolations of the worship of the Church.' Oakeley had a love of music, inherited from his mother, and formed a choir. Samuel Wilberforce visited the chapel in 1844 and was critical of everything except the Gregorian chanting, which he found 'quite marvellously beautiful' (A. R. Ashwell and R. G. Wilberforce, 'Life of Samuel Wilberforce', 1880, 1.237). In 1843 Oakeley published a preface on antiphonal chanting to Richard Redhead's 'Laudes diurnae', and his English translation of 'Adeste fideles' ('O come, all ye faithful') in 1841 guaranteed him an abiding place in English hymnology. 
After the publication of 'Tract 90' in 1841, Oakeley became the most prominent member of an unofficial 'Romeward' section of the Oxford Movement, a new and younger generation that caused much embarrassment to Newman. In the same year he published a controversial article on Bishop Jewel in the 'British Critic'. The article was heavily critical of the English sixteenth-century protestant reformers and prompted William Palmer to write the first history of the Oxford Movement. The year 1845 was a turning point in Oakeley's life. The publication of Ward's 'Ideal of a Christian Church' in 1844 fuelled increasing agitation against the Romeward movement. In response Oakeley published a tract in which he asserted a claim 'to hold, as distinct from teaching, all Roman doctrine'. He was cited before the court of arches by the bishop of London and, although he resigned his licence before the trial began, he was suspended on 30 June 1845 from all clerical duty in the province of Canterbury until he had 'retracted his errors'. 
In September 1845 Oakeley joined Newman's community at Littlemore and, on 29 October, he was received into the Roman Catholic church in the little chapel at St Clement's over Magdalen Bridge, Oxford, three weeks after Newman. On 1 November he was confirmed, with Newman, at Oscott, and was a seminarian at St Edmund's College, near Ware, from January 1846 to August 1848. In the summer of 1848 he joined the staff of St George's Cathedral, Southwark. On 22 January 1850 he was made missionary rector of St John's Church, Duncan Terrace, Islington; the church had opened in 1843 and was still heavily in debt. He remained there, increasingly lame and with failing eyesight until his death, ministering to a large Irish congregation who affectionately called him 'our Father O'Kelly'. He received no preferment beyond being created a canon of the diocese of Westminster in 1852. R. W. Church went to see him and regretted this fact: 'The Romans made nothing of him, but sent him up to Islington to live poorly in a poor house with two Irish colleagues, with just a print or two and a few books remaining of the Oxford wreck, which was the overthrow of his old idea of life. (B. A. Smith, 'Dean Church: the Anglican Response to Newman', 1958, 225)' He continued to publish many works on aspects of liturgy and devotion, notably 'The Ceremonies of the Mass' (1855), a standard work at Rome, where it was translated into Italian by Lorenzo Santarelli. He was elected a member of the Roman Academy of Letters in 1868. He remained in touch with Newman, Ward, and the other converts of 1845 until the end of his life, and from the mid-1850s he renewed his links with Tait, warmly congratulating him on his appointment as bishop of London in 1856 and archbishop of Canterbury in 1868. The two men remained fond of each other, despite their divergence, and Oakeley could sometimes be persuaded to dine quietly with his former pupil at Fulham and Lambeth palaces. In 1872 he was invited to dine at high table in Balliol College, and was touched by Tait's speech, in which the archbishop said how much he owed to his former tutor. 
Oakeley died at 39 Duncan Terrace, Islington, on 29 January 1880, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. To his contemporaries he was a memorable figure. Newman, in his 'Apologia', was impressed by his literary ability and classical cast of mind, while R. W. Church recalled his patience, kindness, and gentle humour. Others left more vivid portraits: Thomas Mozley (2.5) remembered him 'limping about the streets of London... a misshapen fabric of bare bones upon which hung some very shabby canonicals. Yet his eye was bright, and his voice, though sorrowful, was kind, and he was always glad to meet an old friend.' E. Bourne (p. 361) remembered him as being 'short in stature and halting in gait, with a rough shock head and features deeply lined.... His first word arrested the attention, and the fascination increased with every sentence that he uttered. His sincerity was so evident... his reasoning so lucid and his choice of language so exquisite -- that when his sharp metallic voice ceased to be heard... all remained clearly fixed upon the mind for future meditation.' 



@@@@@


doc= 20424


Oakeley, Sir Herbert, third baronet (1791-1845), Church of England clergyman, third son of Sir Charles Oakeley, first baronet (1751-1826), and his wife, Helena, 'nee' Beatson (died 1839), was born at Madras, where his father was governor, on 10 February 1791. Frederick Oakeley, the Tractarian and convert to Rome, was his younger brother. His parents took him to England in 1794, and, after some years at Westminster School, he entered Christ Church, Oxford. In 1810 he took a first class in 'literae humaniores'; he graduated BA on 23 February 1811 and obtained a senior studentship. At the installation of Lord Grenville as chancellor on 6 July in the same year he recited, in the Sheldonian Theatre, with excellent effect, a congratulatory ode of his own composition. He proceeded MA on 4 November 1813. Having been ordained, he became in 1814 domestic chaplain to William Howley, then bishop of London, to whom he owed his subsequent preferment, and lived with the bishop for twelve years, until his marriage. He was presented by Bishop Howley to the vicarage of Ealing in 1822, and to the prebendal stall of Wenlock's Barn in St Paul's Cathedral. On 5 June 1826 Oakeley was married at St Margaret's Church, Westminster, to Atholl Keturah Murray (1801-1844), daughter of the Revd Lord Charles Murray Aynsley, and niece of John, fourth duke of Atholl, and then took up his residence at Ealing. By the death without male issue of his elder brother, Charles, who had held the baronetcy only three years, he succeeded in 1830 to the title. 
In 1834 Howley, now archbishop of Canterbury, presented Oakeley to the valuable rectory of Bocking in Essex, a living held by Lady Oakeley's father in her childhood. The living then carried with it the right of jurisdiction, under the title of dean and as commissary of the archbishop of Canterbury, over the Essex and Suffolk parishes, which were extra-diocesan and constituted the archbishop's peculiar. This jurisdiction was abolished shortly after Sir Herbert's death. Both at Ealing and at Bocking, Oakeley was one of the first to carry out what became a general system of parochial organization, the innovations including district visitors, weekday services, and Sunday schools. Bocking contained many nonconformists, with whom Oakeley became engaged in lively disputes about church rates; none the less, he was held in general esteem. In 1841 he succeeded Archdeacon Lyall as archdeacon of Colchester, and when the bishopric of Gibraltar was founded in 1842, it was offered to him and declined. Oakeley was unusually reticent in print, for his time, but in 1836 he edited his father's memoirs; he also had privately printed a number of his poems. On 26 January 1844 Oakeley's wife died, and he was so much affected by her loss that he died also in London on 27 March 1845. He left three daughters and four sons, of whom the eldest, Charles William, succeeded to the title and the second, Sir Herbert Stanley Oakeley (1830-1903), became professor of music in the University of Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 20425


Sir Henry Oakes, second baronet (1756-1827), army officer in the East India Company, was born at Exeter on 11 July 1756. He received an India cadetship on 8 February 1775 and was appointed a second lieutenant in the Bombay army on 18 May 1775. Thereafter he saw extensive service in India, serving in Gujarat in 1775-6, in the Poona expedition of 1778, and at the sieges of Tellicherry, Onore, Mangalore, and Bednur in 1780-81. He was adjutant-general of General Mathew's force, which on 28 April 1783 surrendered at Bednur, where he was taken prisoner by Tipu Sultan of Mysore. After his release in 1784 the Madras government made him captain-commandant of a sepoy battalion on 10 June 1784. Following its disbandment, Oakes commanded the grenadiers of the 2nd Bombay European regiment, and in September 1788 was transferred to the 12th Bombay native infantry. In 1790 he served with this regiment, first as quartermaster-general and later as commissary of supplies. He was present at the sieges of Cannanore and Seringapatam in 1791, at Cotapore in Malabar, and later in Palghautcherry with troops under Major John Cuppage in October 1791. In October 1792 he became deputy adjutant-general of the Bombay army, and on 9 December 1792 he married Dorothea (died 1837), the daughter of General George Bowles of Mount Prospect, co. Cork, Ireland; they had four sons and two daughters. In 1796 he received the title of adjutant-general, having attained the rank of major on 6 May 1795 and lieutenant-colonel on 8 January 1796. 


@@@@@


doc= 20426


Oakes, Sir Hildebrand, first baronet (1754-1822), army officer, was born on 19 January 1754 at Exeter, Devon, the eldest son of Lieutenant-Colonel Hildebrand Oakes (1733-1797), late of the 33rd foot, and his wife, Sarah (died 1775), the daughter of Henry Cornelison of Braxted Lodge, Essex. He was made ensign in the 33rd foot (later the Duke of Wellington's regiment) on 23 December 1767 and promoted lieutenant in April 1771. In December 1775 he accompanied his regiment to America, where he served under Lord Cornwallis. He was present at the attack on Charlestown in June 1776, was promoted captain on 8 August following, and served throughout the American War of Independence until the peace. He returned to England in May 1784. 
In May 1786 Oakes was aide-de camp to Major-General Bruce on the staff in Ireland. On 18 November 1790 he was promoted brevet major, then on 13 September 1791 major in the 66th foot. In February 1792 he took temporary command of his regiment at St Vincent in the West Indies, whence he embarked with it to Gibraltar. On the arrival of a new lieutenant-colonel in February 1794 he returned to England, becoming a brevet lieutenant-colonel on 1 March. Oakes served as aide-de-camp to Sir Charles Stuart in Corsica in April, became deputy quartermaster-general there in May, and was promoted quartermaster-general of the army in the Mediterranean in June 1794. Although on 12 November 1795 he was made lieutenant-colonel of the 66th foot, he was transferred to the 26th ten days later; at the same time he retained his staff position in Corsica until June 1796. On 3 December 1796 he became quartermaster-general to Stuart's forces in Portugal, and on 1 January 1798 was made brevet colonel. He was promoted brigadier during the capture of Minorca. 
Oakes joined Sir Ralph Abercromby's army in the Mediterranean in August 1800, serving with distinction in the Egyptian campaign of 1801 as second in command of the reserve under Sir John Moore. On 21 March he was wounded at the battle of Alexandria. For this service he was included in the votes of thanks from parliament. Between October 1802 and August 1804 he was brigadier-general at Malta, and on 10 November 1804 he became lieutenant-governor and commandant at Portsmouth. Promoted major-general on 1 January 1805, in June Oakes was appointed a commissioner of military inquiry, whose reports appeared in the parliamentary papers ('Parl. papers', 1806-7, 2). On 11 July 1806 he was appointed major-general on the staff and quartermaster-general to the army in the Mediterranean. After returning home from Sicily with the troops under Moore in December 1807 he was given command of the Malta garrison in March 1808 and received the local rank of lieutenant-general on 30 April 1810. In May 1810 Oakes accepted the civil and military commissionership of the island, but he did so reluctantly, telling Hudson Lowe, 'I shall not be sorry when the appointment passes into other hands' (Gregory, 319). Nevertheless he held the post until ill health forced him to relinquish it to Sir Thomas Maitland in October 1813, when he returned home. He became a lieutenant-general on 4 June 1811 and a baronet in recognition of his service on 2 November 1813. The outbreak of plague in Malta, which killed 5000 people, occurred during Oakes's government in 1813. 
In January 1814 Oakes was appointed lieutenant-general of the ordnance, a post he retained until his death, and in May 1820 he was made GCB. His other appointments included colonel of the 1st garrison battalion (23 November 1803) and colonel of the 3rd West India (24 April 1806). On the death of Sir Thomas Moore he succeeded to the colonelcy of the 52nd light infantry on 25 January 1809. He was a member of the consolidated board of general officers, and one of the commissioners of the Chelsea Hospital and the Royal Military College. He died, unmarried, at Hereford Street, Mayfair, London, on 9 September 1822, and was succeeded by his younger brother Henry Oakes. 


Oakes returned home on sick leave in 1798, but went again to India in 1802 and became colonel of the 7th Bombay native infantry. Once more ill health forced him to go back to England, but he was in India again in 1807, as military auditor-general at Bombay. However, he was soon obliged to return home. On 25 July 1810 he became major-general and on 4 June 1814 lieutenant-general. In his last years his ill health led increasingly to bouts of insanity, and on 1 November 1827 he killed himself with a pistol in the stable of his home at Mitcham, Surrey. His widow died on 24 May 1837. 


@@@@@


doc= 20427


Oakes, John Wright (1820-1887), landscape painter, was born on 9 July 1820 at Sproston House, near Middlewich, Cheshire. He was educated in Liverpool and studied art under John Bishop at the Liverpool Mechanics' Institute. He was then apprenticed to a house decorator and followed this trade until about 1846, when he turned full-time to painting. At about the same time, or shortly afterwards, he married. His wife had a successful corset-making business, and it may have been her wealth, rather than a growing reputation, that enabled him to relinquish his trade. 
Oakes's earliest works were fruit pieces. He first exhibited at the Liverpool Academy in 1839 with 'Fruit', priced at 5 guineas. About 1843 he began painting landscapes, making studies among the sand dunes and beaches of the Wallasey peninsula. An early work was entitled 'Sketch on the Lancashire Coast'. Oakes began modestly but developed 'a brilliant, almost unerring, sense of composition, a fine perception of light, atmosphere, and colour and the poetry of nature' (Bryan, 'Painters', 4.31). Many of his landscapes were dark and heavy in colour, but these characteristics were less evident in his larger and finer canvasses. As he progressed he made less use of heavy impasto and bitumen, artifices common in his earlier works. His favourite locations were in Scotland, Ireland, Devon, and particularly Wales, where he painted many pictures of mountain, moorland, and coastal scenery. A few pictures of Swiss subjects, painted during a foreign tour, were much less successful than the studies of countryside that he knew well, such as north Wales and Anglesey. 
In 1846 Oakes exhibited ten landscapes of local or Welsh subjects at Liverpool Academy, of which he was elected an associate the following year. He became a full member in 1850 and served as its honorary secretary from 1853 to 1855. A man of 'practical sagacity' (Bryan, 'Painters', 4.30), he was described as 'probably the best secretary that the Academy ever had' (Marillier, 183). The practice of pricing pictures in the academy catalogue was introduced during his regime. In 1855 he moved to London and afterwards seldom exhibited in Liverpool. The Walker Art Gallery possesses one of his landscapes, 'A North Devon Glen', depicting a group of cattle in a shady pool lit by an autumn sun. 
In 1847 Oakes sent 'Nant Frangcon, Carnarvonshire' to the British Institution; it was his first work to be exhibited in London. It was followed in 1848, at the Royal Academy, by 'On the River Greta, Keswick'. Thereafter he was represented at the Royal Academy almost every year until his death, exhibiting a total of ninety works there. He also sent twenty-eight pictures to the British Institution, eleven to Suffolk Street, and over twenty-four to galleries elsewhere in London. Oakes painted in watercolours as well as oils, and in 1874 he was elected an associate of the Institute of Painters in Water Colours. He resigned in 1875, doubtless prompted by ambition to be elected an associate of the Royal Academy. He was elected ARA the following year, but was never elected a full academician. Among his best works were 'The Bass Rock in Calm' (1867), 'a fine sunset picture' (Marillier, 187); 'Moreton Mill' (1869), a sea piece with fishing boats on a transparent green sea; and 'The Reaper's Rest' (1886), a large canvas depicting swallows circling over a pool of water, against a background of cornfields and trees. 
Oakes was 'of sturdy appearance, more like a sea-captain than a painter, much marked by small-pox' (Bryan, 'Painters', 4.31). Serious and retiring by nature, he habitually wore an elegant frock coat and black satin waistcoat. He was unusual in that he did not allow people to watch him paint, although he did sketch with other artists, notably his close friend John Bishop. From 1881 Oakes suffered chronic ill health due to asthma, which greatly interfered with his art. He nevertheless continued to paint, and in 1883 he was elected an honorary member of the Royal Scottish Academy. Oakes died at his residence, Leam House, 34 Addison Road, Kensington, on 8 July 1887, and was buried in Brompton cemetery. He left a daughter, Emily. There was a sale of his remaining pictures at Christies on 10 March 1888, which realized almost $4000. His painting 'The Warren' was exhibited posthumously at the Royal Academy that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 20428


Thomas Oakes (1644-1719), politician in America, brother of Urian Oakes, was born in Cambridge, Massachusetts, on 18 June 1644. He graduated from Harvard with the class of 1662, then trained as a physician. One of the colony's most prominent doctors, he also became active in government. In 1689 Boston elected him to the Massachusetts house of representatives, which chose him as speaker. Between 1690 and 1692, he was part of a mission to the royal court to secure a new charter for the Massachusetts Bay Colony. Upon his return from London, Oakes fell foul of Governor Joseph Dudley, who repeatedly nullified his election to the governor's council. Oakes died in Wellfleet, Massachusetts, on 15 July 1719. His wife, Martha ('c'.1649-1719), had died the previous April. 


@@@@@


doc= 20429


Oakes, Urian (c.1631-1681), ejected minister and college head, was born in England, possibly in or near London, the son of Edward Oakes ('c'.1604-1689), yeoman and Massachusetts Bay Colony representative, and his wife, Jane (died after 1691). The English origins of the Oakes family are obscure; the family does not emerge from the shadows until 1640, when Edward and Jane arrived in Cambridge, Massachusetts, with at least two children including Urian, then about nine years old. Edward Oakes quickly became a community leader; he served Cambridge as a selectman beginning in 1642 and as a representative to the colony's general court from 1659. During King Philip's War he was an officer in the Massachusetts militia. 
After local preparation Oakes entered Harvard College in 1645. He graduated four years later and became a tutor at the college while he read for the ministry. He received his master's degree in 1652. Like many of his Harvard contemporaries, Oakes believed that his best opportunities for a good settlement lay in England. He returned home in 1654 and served briefly as a private chaplain before settling in the parish of Titchfield, Hampshire, in 1656. This sojourn lasted until 1662, when he fell victim to the 'Act of Uniformity', was deprived of his living, and forbidden to preach. Oakes briefly became the master of the grammar school in Southwick, Hampshire, where he ministered to a nonconformist congregation with Richard Symmonds, the ejected curate there. Oakes must have married during his early years in Titchfield, because his eldest son, also Urian, was born in or about 1657. Two other children were born in England, a son, Edward, and a daughter, Hannah. Tradition holds that Oakes's wife was Ruth, the daughter of the theologian William Ames, but there is no evidence to support this conclusion, and his wife's identity is uncertain. She was dead by 1669. 
Jonathan Mitchell, the minister to the church in Cambridge, Massachusetts, died in 1668, and in the ensuing months Oakes was invited to return as Mitchell's successor. He travelled to Cambridge during the summer of 1671 and was installed as the church's pastor the following November 8. From his new pulpit he expressed the fear, common among New England's puritan clergy in the 1670s, that the region was suffering severely from spiritual and moral decay. In his four published sermons he warned New Englanders that their lapses of faith and conduct jeopardized both their individual prospects for salvation and their community's special relationship with God, who had made them, they believed, his chosen people in succession to the tribes of Israel. As a minister of one of the six original towns of the colony, Oakes automatically assumed a seat on one of Harvard College's two governing bodies, the board of overseers; in 1672 he was also elected to the other, the corporation, which oversaw the institution's daily affairs. Oakes promptly resigned from the corporation when he lost confidence in President Leonard Hoar, whose stern administration alienated most of the undergraduates. Hoar in turn resigned the presidency in 1675 when it became apparent that he could not regain the respect of the students. 
Widely respected as New England's most capable Latinist and the minister of one of the region's most visible churches, Oakes was an obvious candidate to succeed to Harvard's presidency. Reluctant to give up his church, however, and aware of rumours that he had intentionally undermined Hoar through his resignation from the corporation, Urian accepted the position only on an acting basis while the college's governors attempted to make a permanent appointment. When several candidates refused the office, Urian finally acceded in 1680, making it a condition that he would retain his pulpit. 
As president Oakes oversaw a small institution. Only thirty-one students graduated during his presidency, although this number included several of the colony's future leaders, notably Cotton Mather. The second Harvard Hall (1678), the college's major edifice until it was destroyed by fire in 1764, was completed during Oakes's tenure. Surviving addresses in Latin (in which he punned on his short stature) and a printed elegy in English confirm his reputation as an eloquent orator as well as the most capable poet of his era in New England. Oakes died of a fever at Cambridge on 25 July 1681, and was buried there. 




@@@@@


doc= 20430


Oakley, Edward (d. in or before 1765), architect, was first recorded in 1721 as an unsuccessful applicant for the post of clerk of works at the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. This was presumably after his return from a period of 'civil service' abroad, where, he claimed, he had 'long contemplated a famous Republick', most likely in Venice (E. Oakley, 'The Magazine of Architecture, Perspective, and Sculpture', 1730, pt 2, preface). 
Organized freemasonry occupied much of Oakley's time from 1724 to about 1731. He was one of the founders of the lodge of the Nag's Head and Star in Carmarthen, south Wales, in 1724 or 1725 and its senior warden in 1726. But the centre of his masonic activity was the lodge at the Three Compasses (or Carpenters' Arms) in Silver Street, London, of which he was senior warden in 1725 and later master. The speech he delivered to this lodge on 31 December 1728 was one of the earliest to define the qualifications and duties of members of the fraternity, laying stress on the dissemination of architectural knowledge through lectures and books. It gained considerable authority among a widespread audience of operatives in the building trades by its publication in Benjamin Cole's popular, pocket-size edition of 'The Ancient Constitutions of the Free and Accepted Masons' (1728-9). 
Oakley practised what he preached: in 1730 he published 'The Magazine of Architecture, Perspective, and Sculpture', containing 'the most material Precepts from our best Authors... reduced... to the Easiest Practice'. For the benefit of craftsmen who could not afford this impressive folio he issued a second edition between October 1732 and May 1733 in sixteen fortnightly instalments costing 12died each. His final contribution, 'Every man a compleat builder, or, Easy rules and proportions for drawing and working the several parts of architecture', published in 1766, was a reissue of W. Robinson's 'Proportional Architecture' (1733) to which he added practical material lifted without acknowledgement from other authors. 
As a builder in his own right, Oakley is not memorable. Though he advertised his services as a surveyor, measurer, designer, draughtsman, and manager of buildings, he did not make a name for himself in any of these fields. He competed unsuccessfully for the design of Westminster Bridge in 1735 and submitted the same indifferent designs in 1756 for Blackfriars Bridge with the same negative result. An engraving of the latter scheme was published in William Maitland's 'History of London' (1756). The greenhouses and hothouses at Chelsea Physic Garden are the only buildings known to have been executed to his designs, of which he published an engraving by Benjamin Cole. They were begun in 1732 and finished in 1734. Oakley probably died in 1765; he was described as 'the late Edward Oakley' in a publisher's advertisement dated 20 November 1765 for his last book, 'Every Man a Compleat Builder' (1766). 


@@@@@


doc= 20431


Oakley, John (1834-1890), dean of Manchester, son of John Oakley, estate and land agent, of Blackheath, Kent, was born at Frindsbury, near Rochester, Kent, on 28 October 1834. He was educated at Rochester Cathedral school, and afterwards at Hereford grammar school. He entered Brasenose College, Oxford, as an exhibitioner in 1852 and graduated BA in 1857 (MA, 1859). He was an ebullient president of the Oxford Union for the Michaelmas term of 1856, during which he was sent down for non-attendance at college chapel. His father intended him for the profession of civil engineer, and for a short time he worked in an engineer's office at Chatham, but his own leanings were towards the church. 
In 1858 he was ordained deacon, and had his first curacy at St Luke's, Berwick Street, Soho, London. After ordination to the priesthood in 1859 he served as curate at St James's, Piccadilly, while acting as secretary to the London diocesan board of education and as a promoter of the London Lay Helpers' Association. On 21 January 1861 he married Clara, daughter of Joseph Phelps of Madeira; they had a large family. 
In 1867 Oakley was appointed vicar of the slum parish of St Saviour, Hoxton, London, where he remained until 1881 and proved a zealous and popular pastor. He was a committed high-churchman, but his ritualism aroused no opposition. A follower of Frederick Denison Maurice, his views on political and social questions were essentially liberal and he had genuine sympathy with working people and with the cause of the trade unions. He served as chairman of several conferences of trade union members and other parties. His popular touch earned him the compliment of a costermonger who dubbed him 'the poor bloke's parson'. 
In 1881 Oakley accepted the offer of the deanery of Carlisle from W. E. Gladstone, one of whose sons was curate at Hoxton. Before leaving London, Oakley received an address and testimonial from a large number of clergy and laity. He remained at Carlisle for only two years, but this was long enough to make his mark as an innovator who sat light to the dignity of his office and eschewed gaiters. In November 1883 he was appointed dean of Manchester at a time of considerable difficulty, on account of legal disputes between the cathedral chapter and the Manchester rectors, and the prosecution and imprisonment of the ritualist S. F. Green, whose cause Oakley defended in opposition to Bishop James Fraser. In Manchester, as in London and Carlisle, movements that aimed to improve the condition of the working classes won his wholehearted support, even if this meant conflict with the more conservative members of his flock. Oakley cultivated ecumenical relations with the free churches and with Roman Catholics, took a keen interest in local education, and was a frequent contributor on church matters to the 'Manchester Guardian'. His articles for that newspaper, signed Vicesimus, include a memoir (14 November 1883) of his friend H. N. Oxenham (1829-1888). Besides many separate sermons and papers, he published 'The Christian Aspect and Application of the Decalogue' (1865) and ''The Conscience Clause': its History, Terms, Effect and Principle' (1866). 
Oakley's commanding figure, approachable manner, and fine countenance impressed all who met him. His health, however, was undermined by the strain of incessant activity, and he died, aged only fifty-five, at Deganwy, near Llandudno, on 10 June 1890. He was buried at Chislehurst, Kent, and a stained glass window was erected by public subscription to his memory in the south aisle of Manchester Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 20432


Oakley, Octavius (1800-1867), watercolour painter, was born in Bermondsey, London, on 27 April 1800, the eighth child of a wealthy London wool merchant. Intended for a medical career, he was sent to the school of Dr Nicholas at Ealing, but when his father's business collapsed after the price of wool fell in 1815 he was placed instead with a cloth manufacturer near Leeds. He had shown in any case a marked distaste for medicine, and he displayed no greater liking for the wool trade, his real interest being art. Of 'somewhat elegant appearance, and comparatively slight in physique, the 'fine London chap'' struggled to gain acceptance in his new surroundings (Roget, 2.269) and found solace in making pencil sketches of his acquaintances. As his skill increased he began to charge for his work, and when the sitters became numerous he set up as a professional artist. He later learned to work in watercolour, developing 'a vigorous and bold style of painting, amounting sometimes almost to coarseness' ('Art Journal'). 
Oakley's portraits of Yorkshire farmers gained wide repute, and when he moved to Derby, about 1825, he soon found aristocratic patrons. At Chatsworth, where he was invited to stay, he painted the duke of Devonshire and many of his distinguished guests. He also executed a watercolour portrait of Sir George Sitwell of Renishaw, great-grandfather of Sir Osbert Sitwell, who reproduced it in his memoir 'Left Hand, Right Hand' (1945): 'finely drawn and composed... it shows Oakley as a worthy successor to Henry Edridge' (Hardie, 98). Between 1826 and 1832 Oakley exhibited seventeen portraits at the Royal Academy, including those of Lord Melbourne (1829) and the duke of Rutland (1831). In addition he painted landscapes and rustic figures, singly and in groups, and for a number of years he abandoned the position of a fashionable portrait painter to concentrate on Gipsy subjects, earning him the nickname Gipsy Oakley. 
Before the move to Derby, Oakley had married Maria Moseley, with whom he had three daughters, the last born about 1832. Maria Oakley's premature death meant the breakup of the family home, and Oakley spent a brief time in London in 1836 before settling in a villa in Holly Walk, Leamington, from where he continued his Gipsy studies. He later married again, his second wife being Mary Ann Oakley (died 1900). In or about 1841 he was persuaded by artist friends to move to London, and shortly afterwards, on 4 February 1842, he was elected an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours; he became a full member on 10 June 1844. Oakley's 'clean, smooth and highly finished drawings' (Hardie, 268) became a familiar sight at Pall Mall East, where he exhibited 210 studies of rustic figures and landscapes, some of which were executed during visits to Guernsey and Sark in the Channel Islands. In the late 1840s he went with Paul Naftel to north Wales, where they sat at the feet of David Cox. In London he painted Italian organ boys, and he also resumed his portraiture, sending thirteen works to the Royal Academy between 1842 and 1860. Among them was 'Mrs Octavius Oakley' (1860). He died at his home, 7 Chepstow Villas, Bayswater, on 1 March 1867, survived by his widow, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. His remaining works were sold at Christies on 11 and 12 March 1869. Examples of Oakley's works are held in the British Museum and Victoria and Albert Museum, London; Blackburn Art Gallery; Grundy Art Gallery, Liverpool; and Newport Art Gallery. 
Each of Oakley's three daughters was a painter. The eldest, Agnes Oakley (1829-1866), who was active from about 1854, painted flowers and still life and exhibited five watercolours at Suffolk Street, including 'Study of Roses' and 'Ptarmigan and Grey Men'. Maria Louisa Oakley, Mrs Mark Anthony Bourdin (1830-1929), painted flowers and fruit and exhibited five watercolours at Suffolk Street, among them 'Study in a Garden' and 'Study of Camellias'. The youngest, Isabel Oakley ['see 'Naftel, Isabel, 'under' Naftel, Paul Jacob], who was baptized in Derby on 20 July 1832, painted portraits, genre, landscapes, and flowers, and married the watercolour painter Paul Jacob Naftel (1817-1891). 


@@@@@


doc= 20433


Oakman, John (c.1748-1793), engraver and writer of songs and novels, was born at Hendon, Middlesex. He received a grammar-school education and was apprenticed to the map engraver Emanuel Bowen. He left before completing his indenture, having proved troublesome to his master; furthermore, he seduced Bowen's daughter, whom he married when he came of age. Oakman next opened a shop in the Haymarket with Darley and Harry Howard in order to sell their caricatures and humorous prints; he supplemented his income by writing bawdy novels, for which he also cut plates. 'The Life and Adventures of Benjamin Brass' (1765), based in part on Oakman's own early career, was rapidly followed by others of the kind. 'The Adventures of William Williams, an African Prince' emerged from his getting to know Williams in Liverpool gaol (for undefined misdeeds); the book enjoyed some contemporary success, especially among the Quakers, for its attack on the institution of slavery. 
Equally prolific and more successful as a songwriter, Oakman was credited with many of the pieces sung at Vauxhall Gardens and Bermondsey Spa, and with others of a moral character for children; in addition he published collections of fables. Having travelled on foot throughout England and Wales, he had a fund of droll stories to relate about his experiences. His poverty was relieved from time to time by Christopher Anstey, author of 'The Bath Guide', by Anstey's father, and by a Mr Hughes for whom he wrote burlettas. Oakman's dislike of the settled life prevented his living in the comfort his songwriting might have afforded him. He died in October 1793 at the house of his sister, who kept a butcher's shop in one of the several King streets in Westminster, and was buried at Holy Trinity Minories. 


@@@@@


doc= 20434


Oasland, Henry (bap. 1625, d. 1703), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Lower Snead Farm, Rock, near Bewdley, in Worcestershire, the second son of 'Edward Osland and Elizabeth his wife', and he was baptized in Rock church on 22 May 1625. His father, a substantial yeoman, owned Lower Snead Farm. Henry was educated at Bewdley grammar school and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was greatly influenced by the master, Thomas Hill. Oasland had a conversion experience while attending the sermons of Samuel Hammond, fellow of Magdalene College, Cambridge. After conversion Oasland, as his manuscript autobiography records, felt contrition for the time he had spent in his youth in dancing, archery, and stage plays. He was admitted a sizar at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 27 April 1646, and graduated BA in 1650 and MA in 1653. 
On new year's day 1650 Oasland attended the famous disputation on infant baptism between Richard Baxter and the anti-paedobaptist John Tombes, held in Bewdley Chapel. For a brief period Oasland officiated at Sheriffhales in Shropshire, in the absence of the incumbent, and later in 1650, having refused the post twice already, he accepted the position of curate at Bewdley Chapel, where he remained until his ejection in 1662. He was ordained in 1651 at St Bartholomew by the Exchange in London. 
There can be no doubt that the dominant influence on Henry Oasland during his Bewdley ministry was Richard Baxter, the minister in nearby Kidderminster. After the inception of the Worcestershire Association of ministers in 1652 Oasland was one of Baxter's chief supporters and helpers. Baxter thought him 'the most lively, fervent, moving Preacher in all the County' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.91). In 1653 Oasland was able to alert Baxter to the need to write about the contribution that magistrates could make to clerical discipline, a topic that Baxter discussed at length in the years 1656-9. 
Oasland's letters to Baxter, together with other evidence, reveal the problems that he faced in Bewdley: the interference of John Boraston, rector of Ribbesford (his ecclesiastical superior) and the attitude of the Bewdley Baptists, to whom he wrote two letters in 1652 urging them to recognize his authority. He wanted to institute church discipline and pastoral oversight on the pattern of what Baxter was doing in Kidderminster, but felt that his opportunities at Bewdley were severely limited, though he does seem to have achieved a considerable measure of success. At one point he wanted to form a 'private' church out of his congregation, an idea that Baxter opposed -- successfully, it seems ('Correspondence of Richard Baxter' 1.121). Calamy says that Oasland catechized the children of Bewdley on Thursdays, and if he was late in coming from Baxter's lecture, they would go and meet him and bring him to the town 'in a sort of triumphant manner' (Calamy, 'Continuation', 2.886). 
On 24 July 1660 Oasland married Mary Bradley, 'nee' Henzey (died 1706), at Old Swinford church. A widow, she was the daughter of the Stourbridge glass maker Joshua Henzey. In November 1661 Oasland was arrested because of his alleged involvement in the so-called Packington plot, an alleged presbyterian rising. He remained a prisoner until April 1662. On Bartholomew day, 24 August, he preached his farewell sermon. After his ejection he lived both in Stourbridge and in Bewdley. He continued, says Baxter, 'Preaching up and down privately where he can have opportunity, with Zeal and Diligence' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.91), and Calamy recorded that 'He has often preach'd to a numerous Congregation of Nailors and Colliers, &c., in a Place surrounded by a Mud-wall, and he stood under a Tree' (Calamy, 'Continuation', 2.890). He preached in most of the midland counties. 
The sufferings of the nonconformists at this period led Oasland, like many others, to become impatient of the non-separating nonconformity favoured by Richard Baxter. In 1670 the differences between the two friends widened into an at least temporary breach, in which Oasland wrote to a friend about Baxter, 'No man hath so lost himself', and Baxter wrote to Oasland accusing him of 'servility and people-pleasing' ('Correspondence of Richard Baxter' 2.92, 93). Under the declaration of indulgence of 1672 Oasland's houses at Bewdley and Oaken in Codsall, Staffordshire, were licensed for presbyterian worship. The declaration was withdrawn in 1673, but the situation of nonconformists was eventually to improve after the passing of the 'Act of Toleration' in 1689. Oasland continued preaching until about a fortnight before his death, at Wordsley, Kingswinford, in Staffordshire, on 19 October 1703. When he was buried in Kingswinford church, no fewer than twelve funeral sermons were preached for him. 
Henry Oasland died intestate, but there is an inventory of his goods (totalling nearly $38), taken on 1 November 1703, at the record office in Lichfield. In the parlour chamber are 'some old books', valued at $5 6's'. 8died The most interesting item is 'the decedent's Interest in the Coal Works', worth $18 12's'. 6died The 'Coal Works' in question were probably at Wordsley in Kingswinford, where Oasland was living at the time of his death. Henry Oasland has perhaps two main claims to our attention. He was a key member of the Worcestershire Association of ministers in the 1650s, and he was, after 1662, a nonconformist preacher in the heroic mould. In addition, his spiritual autobiography (which deserves to be far better known) offers a remarkable insight into the mentality of a seventeenth-century puritan. 


@@@@@


doc= 20435


Oastler, Richard (1789-1861), factory reformer, was born on 20 December 1789 in St Peter's Square, Leeds, the eighth and last child of Robert Oastler (1748-1820), a local linen merchant, and his wife, Sarah Scurr (died 1828). Of his mother's family little is known save that they were devout and respected middle-class folk who had been established in Leeds for many years. The Oastlers were yeoman farmers and freeholders of the parish of Kirby Wiske in the North Riding of Yorkshire. Robert Oastler had lived in Kirby Wiske until the age of sixteen, when his youthful embrace of Methodism led to an estrangement from his father. Disinherited, Robert went to the nearby market town of Thirsk, where he was raised by an uncle who shared his evangelical fervour. A chance acquaintance with John Wesley in 1766 'ripened into a more than common friendship' (Driver, 5), and by the time Richard was born in 1789, his father was a well-known leader of the local Methodist community. On the occasion of his last visit to Yorkshire in 1790, Wesley is said to have blessed young Richard Oastler in his arms. True or not, Oastler's entire upbringing reflected the spirit of that blessing, 'for from the moment of his birth he was breathing the air of deepest piety' (ibid., 13). 
From the age of nine Oastler attended the Moravian boarding-school at Fulneck, near Leeds, where his tutor, Henry Steinhauer, left a deep impression on him as a man of real religious feeling. On quitting Fulneck aged seventeen, Oastler meant to become a barrister, but his father had prohibitive scruples about the law, and after a failed effort as an architect's apprentice in Wakefield, Oastler settled down as a commission agent, a sort of middleman, that is, between the wholesale houses of Leeds and the small retailers in the towns and villages of the West Riding. Before long he ranked among the principal merchants in Leeds, 'respected for his sterling integrity and honour and considered as one whose superior talents for business would shortly raise him to affluence and distinction' (Bull). In 1816 Oastler married Mary Tatham (1793-1845), the daughter of a wealthy Wesleyan lace manufacturer in Nottingham. They had two children, Sarah and Robert, both of whom died in infancy in 1819. 
The circumstances of Oastler's life changed abruptly in 1820. His business failed and in February that year he was declared bankrupt. After his father's death in July 1820 he was appointed to succeed him as steward to Thomas Thornhill, the absentee squire of Fixby, near Huddersfield. Up to now, everything about Oastler's life -- his Methodism, his commercial acumen, his political progressivism -- had reflected his urban and middle-class upbringing. The assured social order of the landed estate was completely new to him, but he took to it at once, abjuring his radical Wesleyanism in favour of tory Anglicanism. Indeed, in Thornhill's absence Oastler became quite the squire 'manque'. He revived old manorial customs such as rent day and harvest fair. He rode the fields, got to know the tenants, and carefully disbursed alms among the cottagers. Community, family, and custom became his social ideals, as his awareness of the continuities of history deepened and his prejudices against trade and industry hardened. Of his essential nostalgia there can be no doubt. But nostalgia can generate social protest as much as social complacency, as Oastler's contemporaries were shortly to discover. 
As it happened, Oastler had for some time been a prominent abolitionist, a well-known supporter of William Wilberforce's crusade against slavery in the colonies. Yet he was wholly ignorant, he later claimed, of the cruelties routinely practised in English textile mills when he rode over to Bradford in September 1830 to visit his friend John Wood. As the celebrated legend of 'Oastler's awakening' would have it, Wood told Oastler about the appalling conditions in the Bradford mills, and Oastler, aghast and unbelieving, at once (29 September 1830) dashed off the letter to the 'Leeds Mercury' on 'Yorkshire slavery' that started the factory movement. The facts were probably less dramatic. Oastler's father had long been acquainted with the conditions of labour in the mills. Oastler himself had already joined with Michael Sadler in various sorts of philanthropic work among unemployed operatives in Leeds. And across the Pennines, in Lancashire, the factory movement was already well under way. Still, there is no discounting the dramatic effect of Oastler's intervention. For the first time a prominent local citizen of impeccably abolitionist credentials had asserted that: 'thousands of our fellow creatures and fellow subjects, both male and female, the miserable inhabitants of a 'Yorkshire' 'town'... are this very moment existing in a state of slavery 'more horrid' than are the victims of that hellish system -- ''colonial slavery''. (Cole, 85)' The effect of these words, coming as they did at a time when, as Samuel Kydd remembered, 'England was moved from centre to circumference with appeals on behalf of the liberation of West Indian slaves' (Kydd, 1.108-9), was to turn factory reform into a compelling national issue. 
In February 1831, largely in response to the factory furore that Oastler had provoked, John Cam Hobhouse, the radical MP for Westminster, announced a bill providing for an eleven-and-a-half-hour day for all textile workers under the age of eighteen. In Glasgow and Halifax woollen masters at once organized a campaign of resistance, and Hobhouse, fearful of losing his bill altogether, agreed to confine its provisions to cotton mills. Oastler was outraged, and in a manifesto significantly addressed 'to the Working Classes of the West Riding', he urged workers to take the issue of factory reform into their own hands. Within weeks scores of short time committees had sprung up across Yorkshire, closely patterned on the Wesleyan 'class meetings' and ambitiously pledged to a universal ten-hour day. June 1831 saw the sealing of the famous Fixby Hall compact, whereby Oastler and the workers of Huddersfield agreed to work together, without regard to party or sect, toward the ten-hour day. More than the effective beginning of the factory movement, the Fixby compact marked the birth of the idea of tory democracy. Still an unrepentant tory whose motto was 'The Altar, the Throne, and the Cottage', Oastler nevertheless now came forward as insurgent and rebel, the quintessential tory radical. 
With the defection of Hobhouse, parliamentary leadership of the factory movement fell to Michael Sadler, an old friend of Oastler's and one who shared his radically paternalist disposition. Sadler at once introduced a 'Ten Hours Bill' into the still unreformed parliament, only to see it shunted into a select committee of inquiry. Oastler testified at length before Sadler's committee, and in April 1832 he took the chief part in organizing the 'pilgrimage to York', the first of many outdoor marches and meetings that he was to dominate by force of his imposing stature -- he was over 6 feet tall -- and a voice 'stentorian in its power and yet flexible, with a flow of language rapid and abundant' (T. A. Trollope, 'What I Remember', 1887, 2.13). In outdoor demagoguery, in fact, Oastler now discovered his true calling. An essentially unsophisticated man, broad-shouldered, fresh-complexioned, abounding in joviality and health, and animated by an unequivocal moral code, he had, his biographer says, an oratorical power amounting 'almost to genius' (Driver, 127). It was this, more than anything, that earned him the sobriquet of the Factory King. 
The factory movement suffered a serious set-back in December 1832, when, despite Oastler's best efforts on his behalf, Michael Sadler lost his seat at the general election following the passage of the 'Reform Bill'. Sponsorship of Sadler's bill fell to Lord Ashley, later the seventh earl of Shaftesbury. The new whig government, meanwhile, anxious to appease the factory reformers without alienating manufacturers, appointed a royal commission of inquiry into the factory question. Oastler, furious at what he regarded as needless temporizing, at once organized a boycott of the commission's proceedings. Undaunted, the commissioners compiled a report that essentially confirmed Sadler's and Ashley's assertions, and in July 1833 the government carried a bill that, while it left the question of adult labour untouched, provided a twelve-hour day for workers between thirteen and eighteen years of age, and an eight-hour day for those under thirteen. 
The period following the passage of 'Althorp's Act' (as it came to be known) was one of confusion and disarray for the factory movement, as textile workers throughout the north were drawn into Robert Owen's elaborate schemes for the establishment of a 'new moral world'. In late 1833 John Fielden, the radical MP for Oldham, joined with Owen in organizing a general strike for eight hours, but Oastler stood aside from this effort. Paternalist that he was, he abhorred strikes and trade unions as much as he did the chimera of universal suffrage, and thus it was with grimly mixed satisfaction that he watched the collapse, in 1834, of Owen's grandiosely conceived Grand National Consolidated Trades Union. His own attention, meanwhile, had been distracted by the (to his mind) awful spectre of the new poor law. In his view, outdoor relief to the needy was a solemn obligation enjoined by God and tradition on the local community. To see that obligation abdicated in favour of 'the workhouse test' was more than he could bear, and when the time came, when the poor law commissioners in London attempted to impose their deterrent logic on the north, he would show to what lengths of turbulent defiance tory radicalism could extend. 
Meanwhile, the government's attempt, in 1835, to repeal one of the provisions of 'Althorp's Act' had dramatically revived the factory movement and restored Oastler to the popular attention he craved. At a meeting organized by the Blackburn short time committee in September 1836, he taxed the magistrates with their refusal to enforce the 'Factory Acts' and threatened to show the factory children how to apply their grandmothers' old knitting-needles to the spindles 'in a way which will teach these law-defying millowner magistrates to have respect even to 'Oastler's law'' (Driver, 327). Not surprisingly, this incitement to sabotage raised a great outcry, and Oastler found himself under the constant surveillance of the Home Office. Up to now, he had generally had his employer's support in his public commitments, but after the publication of 'The Law or the Needle' (1836), relations between the two men were increasingly strained. When Oastler's campaign against the new poor law proved equally incendiary, Thornhill dismissed him from his position as steward (28 May 1838) and initiated legal proceedings against him for recovery of debts accumulated during his stewardship at Fixby. Pretext though they were, the debts were real and, unable to pay them, Oastler was committed to the Fleet prison for three and a half years on 9 December 1840. 
From his prison cell Oastler edited a weekly newspaper, the 'Fleet Papers', in which he mixed accounts of his personal troubles with attacks on the whigs and the new poor law. But 'the pen was not Oastler's natural weapon' (Cole, 102); for all its energy the 'Fleet Papers' exerted little influence. In 1842 his friends and admirers started an 'Oastler liberation fund' that amounted to $2500 by the end of 1843. The balance of his debts secured by Fielden, Oastler was freed in February 1844. Though lately eclipsed by Chartism, the factory movement was then at its height, but Oastler, ill and depressed, had little more to do with it. After his wife died in 1845 he retired to Guildford, in Surrey, on a small income provided by his friends. From 1851 to 1855 he edited a magazine, 'The Home', 'addressed primarily to working-class families and consecrated to disseminating the message of Christian Tory Democracy' (Driver, 513). His last years passed quietly, and he died in obscurity, of a heart attack, at Harrogate, Yorkshire, on 22 August 1861. He was buried (probably on 24 August) at St Stephen's Church, Kirkstall, near Leeds, and is remembered not as a thinker, nor as a writer, but as 'the embodiment of a folk-dream which had an especial cogency in the days of transition to an industrial economy' (ibid., 128-9). Homestead and hall, church and cottage, craftsmanship and harmony of function: these were the things that possessed his imagination, and in their name, paradoxically enough, Richard Oastler for ten turbulent years trod the edges of revolution. 


@@@@@


doc= 20436


Oates, Francis (1840-1875), traveller and naturalist, the second of three sons of Edward Oates of Meanwoodside, near Leeds, Yorkshire, and Susan, daughter of Edward Grace of Burley, in the same county, was born at Meanwoodside on 6 April 1840. Always known as Frank, he matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 9 February 1861, but took no degree, owing to bad health. For some years from 1864 he was an invalid. In 1871 he travelled in North and Central America, where he made a collection of birds and insects. On his return in 1872 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. On 5 March 1873, accompanied by his brother W. E. Oates, he sailed from Southampton for Natal hoping to make a journey to the Zambezi, and, if possible, to some of the unexplored country to the north to study the geography and zoology. He left Pietermaritzburg on 16 May 1873 and spent some time in the Matabele (Ndebele) country north of the Limpopo River. Three attempts to proceed were frustrated by the weather and the opposition of the local people. Finally, starting on 3 November 1874, he arrived on the banks of the Zambezi on 31 December, and made large collections of specimens of natural history. He was one of the first outsiders to see the Victoria Falls in full flood; but no entries are found in his journal after his arrival there. The unhealthy season came on, and Oates contracted a fever. After an illness of twelve days, he died when near the Makalaka kraal, about 80 miles north of the Tati River, on 5 February 1875, and was buried the following morning. Dr. A Bradshaw, who happened to be in the neighbourhood, attended him, and saw to the safety of his collections. Oates's journals were edited and published by his brother Charles George Oates in 1881, under the title of 'Matabele Land and the Victoria Falls'. A second, enlarged, edition (1889) has appendices by experts on the natural history collections which proved of more value than the text itself. 


