@@@@@


doc= 20437


Oates, Titus (1649-1705), informer, was born at Oakham, Rutland, a younger son of Samuel Oates (bap. 1614, d. 1683), Baptist preacher, and his wife, Lucy (died in or after 1697), a midwife from Hastings. His father, son of a Church of England clergyman in Norfolk, was a radical preacher in several counties, including Rutland, in the 1640s and chaplain to Colonel Pride's regiment in the 1650s. At the time of the Restoration in 1660 the family was living in Hastings and decided to rejoin the Church of England, Titus and his brother Constant being baptized at All Saints' Church, Hastings, on 20 November 1660. Titus also had an elder brother, Samuel, and two sisters, Hannah and Anne. 
Domestic violence and his father's dislike of him marred Oates's early life. He was later described as a dull, unlovable child who suffered from convulsions, a runny nose, and a tendency to dribble. In 1664 he attended Merchant Taylors' School in London as a free scholar under the tuition of William Smith, whom he later accused of playing a part in the Popish Plot. Smith found Oates a dullard and, discovering that Oates had cheated him of his tuition fees, subsequently expelled him. In 1665 he attended a school at Seddlescombe, some 6 miles from Hastings, and in June 1667 he went up to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he gained a further reputation for stupidity, homosexuality, and a 'Canting Fanatical way' (Elliot, 1-2). Oates transferred to St John's College in 1669, but fared no better. He left Cambridge without a degree in 1669, but having become skilled in mendacity. 
Oates falsely claimed to hold a BA degree and in due course the bishop of London licensed him to preach. Oates took holy orders at Ely in May 1670 and was made vicar at Bobbing in Kent in March 1673. His coarse temper and odd lifestyle soon caused divisions with the parishioners and he was dismissed from the living, returning to Hastings, where he became curate to his father, who had obtained the living at All Saints' about 1666. At Easter 1675 Oates accused the local schoolmaster, William Parker, of sodomy with one of his pupils. Oates wanted Parker's post but the accusation was false and resulted in Oates being bound over to appear at the next sessions on a charge of perjury. He fled to London and sought refuge as a naval chaplain in 1675 on the ship 'Adventure' bound for Tangier. It was during his visit to Tangier, Oates later claimed, that he heard the first rumours of the Popish Plot that was to make his name. However, on his return to England in 1676 Oates was expelled from the navy for homosexual practices and went to London. There he took up with his father, who had left his living in the wake of the Parker affair. In August 1676 his former tutor William Smith met Oates in the company of a Catholic actor named Matthew Medburne. Shortly afterwards Oates was arrested and returned to Hastings to await his trial for perjury, but he escaped again and went back to London, where he renewed his acquaintance with Medburne and other members of a Catholic club in Fuller's Rents. Through this acquaintance, in 1676 Oates managed to obtain the post of chaplain to the protestants in the household of a Catholic nobleman, Henry Howard, earl of Norwich and future sixth duke of Norfolk. Although much admired for his theatrical preaching, he soon lost his position. In spite of his protestant upbringing, on 3 March 1677 Oates was received into the Roman Catholic church by Father Berry, alias Hutchinson, an apparently mentally unbalanced priest. 
There is little doubt that Oates's conversion to Roman Catholicism was insincere. He later wrote: 'I myself was lulled asleep, by the allurements of the Popish Syrenes, and the bewitching sorceries of the Man of sin... But as Joseph was sold to AEgypt for the Preservation of his Brethren, so was I laid aside, by the permission of Divine providence, for the safety both of my King and country. (T.O., 1)' In reality he was probably motivated by the poverty in which he found himself, a craving for acceptance, and the potential for blackmail. Oates claimed that he soon became a prominent courier for the Jesuit order, but his conversion did little for his career and he remained unemployed. It was at this time that he was also introduced, via his father, to Dr Israel Tonge, an eccentric former clergyman and fervent anti-papist obsessed with the Jesuit menace and the author of several treatises on the subject. Oates proved ecumenical enough to sponge money from protestant as well as Catholic clergy, and willingly offered to co-author pamphlets with Tonge against the Catholics. In the role of a poverty stricken convert Oates also took to begging from the Catholic priests at Somerset House and repaid their kindness with theft: he stole some of the host, which he afterwards boasted that he used as wafers to seal his letters. In April 1677 Oates had his first good stroke of fortune in a meeting with Father Richard Strange, the provincial of the Jesuits in England, who arranged for him to attend the English Jesuit College at Valladolid in Spain. The reasons for this assistance are unclear. J. P. Kenyon speculated that Strange was also homosexual and consequently felt obliged to help Oates, but it may be that Oates, an accomplished liar, convinced Strange of his worth. By this stage in his career Oates had created a past for himself in which he was the former recipient of a rich benefice of the Church of England but had given it all up for the Church of Rome. Under the alias of Titus Ambrose or Ambrosius, Oates arrived in Bilbao in May 1677 and at the English College at Valladolid in June, where he was received by Father Manuel de Calatayud, who later noted: 'I admitted him, very much against the grain though it was... Little more than a month went by, and he was in so much of a hurry to begin his mischief that I was obliged to expel him from the College. He was a curse. What I went through and suffered from that man, God alone knows. (Williams, 49)' While at Valladolid Oates met William Bedloe, his future partner in the plot. It is possible that he had known Bedloe during his time in the earl of Norwich's household. In Spain the pair were reacquainted before Bedloe stole some money from Oates and absconded for other adventures. The idea that they concocted most of the evidence of the Popish Plot at this point is unlikely, but their acquaintance was to be renewed in London in 1678. 
Oates soon returned to England, claiming to have received a doctorate from the University of Salamanca. At the height of his fame he was ridiculed as the Salamanca doctor, but out of vanity he retained the spurious doctorate until the end of his life. 
Oates resumed his begging lifestyle until Father Strange decided once more to indulge his odd client and arranged for him to attend the Catholic seminary at St Omer in December 1677. Oates, travelling under the name of Samson Lucy, swiftly revealed both his ignorance and unsuitability for the school; the institution found great difficulty in accommodating the 28-year-old tobacco chewing, foul-mouthed, and coarse tempered Oates. He was disliked by most of the students, one of whom 'broke a pan about his head for recreation' ('State trials', 10.1110). 
While at St Omer, Oates begged to be admitted to the Jesuit order and to keep him quiet was briefly sent to another Jesuit seminary, where he caused so much trouble that he was sent straight back to St Omer. His private investigations also allowed him to learn much (and invent the rest) about the order's councils in England; although his later claim that he was trusted to carry their correspondence is highly unlikely. He also claimed that he attended a significant Jesuit 'consult' in London in April but in reality he was at St Omer until June 1678, when he was in fact expelled from the seminary by the new English Jesuit provincial, Father Thomas Harcourt, alias Whitebread. In July 1678 a desperate Oates returned to London and promptly renewed his acquaintance with Israel Tonge. It was once suspected by many historians that Tonge was the prime mover of the Popish Plot evidence that followed and indeed that it was Tonge who prompted Oates. In fact Oates, the stronger character, had his own bitter need for vengeance against those who he now believed had continually slighted him and Tonge became merely a sounding board for his own crude prejudices. 
Initially Oates sought only to regale Tonge with tales of his own desperate struggles with the papists and even flattered the older man into believing that Tonge was a target for Jesuit vengeance due to his writings against the Catholics. Tonge asked him to write it all down and Oates, eager to have an audience, did so. In forty-three articles or depositions Oates revealed for the first time the nature of the so-called Popish Plot. He claimed to have been informed at various times by rather garrulous, or plainly stupid, Roman Catholics of plans to murder Charles II and his brother James, duke of York (unless as a Catholic the latter agreed to the plot), by bullet or poison. A number of attempts had already been made to kill the king by would-be assassins John Grove and Thomas Pickering, whose silver bullets were continually foiled by poor guns and failing flints. Large sums of money were also to be made available for the scheme. He also had tales of potential Scottish, English, and Irish rebellions, and a Europe-wide conspiracy guaranteed to alarm any rabid anti-Catholic. He backed up his accusations with much, apparently concrete, detail about the secret comings and goings of both himself and his Catholic friends. Oates was also to claim that he had seen numerous letters detailing the plot and yet, as the duke of York later pointed out, he 'kept not so much as one for a proof' (Clarke, 1.522). Most of Oates's revelations stemmed from either his vivid imagination, with a distinct twist of bitterness against his former Catholic friends, or from the previously published accounts of real or imagined plots from the 1660s with their tales of gathering rebel armies, secret commissions, and planned assassinations. By far the most significant aspect of the revelations was Oates's tale of a secret conclave of the Jesuits held at the White Horse tavern in London on 24 April 1678, at which he claimed to have been present and where matters of treason were discussed. 
At Tonge's request Oates gave him a copy of the articles and on 11 August 1678 he also furtively left another copy under the wainscot at the home of Sir Richard Barker, Tonge's former landlord and another rabid anti-papist. At this point Oates may also have attempted to sell his tale to the Jesuits in the hope of making money out of them, but he was rebuffed. Tonge was now anxious to reveal all to Charles II directly and involved his friend Christopher Kirkby, who was acquainted with the king, in the scheme. Kirkby approached Charles in St James's Park on the morning of 13 August 1678 with revelations of a popish plot. Charles promptly passed the information to his first minister, the earl of Danby, who interrogated both Kirkby and Tonge and appears to have guessed immediately that a shrewder mind than either of theirs was responsible for the information. Danby sought to discover this person's name but Tonge, believing that Danby was not taking the plot seriously was reluctant to reveal Oates as his informant. Ever full of 'projects and notions' Tonge subsequently attempted to seek other ways of bringing the plot to the notice of the public ('Burnet's History', 2.156). Tonge then unsuccessfully tried to embroil Sir Joseph Williamson in the affair before being advised by some 'honourable friends' to bring Oates before the Westminster magistrate Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey to have his evidence legally sworn (I. Tonge, 'Journal of the plot, 1678', in Greene, 35). On 6 September 1678 Godfrey reluctantly took the Oates depositions, but seems to have guessed the false nature of the evidence. Then on 28-9 September 1678 first Tonge, and then Oates, came before the privy council for investigation. Oates seized the opportunity to reveal still more of the fabricated plot, having by this time expanded his accusations to eighty-one articles. Despite the presence, and the shrewd questioning, of Charles II, Oates's lies convinced the privy council, especially when he revealed that the duchess of York's secretary Edward Coleman had handled money for the plot and had also been in correspondence with Father la Chaise, Louis XIV's confessor. Oates had, in Coleman, unluckily for the latter, hit upon one of the more likely figures for a serious Catholic plot. In accusing Coleman he may have been prompted by leading questions from Danby, or he may have heard independently something of the secretary's activities, for Coleman was a prominent Catholic eager to see the re-establishment of his church in England. Oates sought to please his audience with ever more audacious revelations, which were also, however, increasingly complex and inconsistent. The duke of York later noted with some dismay that Oates was always allowed the 'liberty... of contradicting at pleasure what he had sworne before' (Clarke, 1.521), while Sir Henry Coventry, who saw Oates give his evidence, noted that 'If he [Oates] be a liar, he is the greatest and adroitest I ever saw, and yet it is a stupendous thing to think what vast concerns are like to depend upon the evidence of one young man who hath twice changed his religion' ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 4.207). In spite of any doubts the privy council may have had they soon sent Oates speeding 'hither and thither, accompanied by soldiers, and enjoying complete power to imprison those he chose... his greatest pleasure was to be feared by everyone and to harm as many as possible' (Walner, 1.202). The Jesuit fathers William Ireland and John Fenwick were arrested. Thomas Pickering, a Benedictine lay brother, and John Grove were also caught up in Oates's net. The Jesuit William Harcourt, who was ill, was left in his lodgings with a guard at the door. Oates was given lodgings in Whitehall and an initial pension of $40 per month. The seizure of Coleman's papers appeared to confirm some of Oates's tale and, although he did not even recognize Coleman when he appeared before the council, he grew bolder. Further apparent confirmation of the reality of the plot followed with the mysterious death of Edmund Godfrey in October 1678 and the actions of the House of Commons, when, in the same month, they tried to take over the investigation of the plot and turned it into a real crisis. 
Oates was summoned before the House of Commons in October 1678 and subsequently made further appearances. He impressed the house with the apparent solidity of his stories and his confident delivery. A mixture of boldness and bluster he always tried to mix some elements of the truth, however tenuous and convoluted, into his statements and when in doubt would construct yet another lie. With his flexible memory new revelations from Oates could never be ruled out and he increasingly struck out against those who had antagonized him in the past. In case such men were thought too insignificant to organize any plot he also added the names of the so-called five Popish lords as the main conspirators: Bellasis, Petre, Powis, Stafford, and Arundel. As a result he received the thanks of parliament for his pains in discovering the plot. The duke of York noted that Oates 'did not positively accuse any Lord, till he had been before the Commons, and that he saw how they relished it; nor did he till then, give them their different implyements, which how fit they were for, all the world might judge' (Clarke, 1.521). In any event such matters convinced an audience already primed to believe such tales through decades of anti-Catholic propaganda. Serious investigations into the plot soon revealed the obvious contradictions in Oates's tales, and many later commentators challenged Oates to 'Tell us how all this heterogeneous Medley can be reconciled to common sense... all those hidden incongruities, Absurdities, Amusements, and Contradictions, that have composed your Testimony, in which you have over and over again been buffoon'd' ('Eikon brotoloigou, or, The Picture of Titus Oates DD Drawn to the Life in a Letter to Himself', 1697, 16). His apparent openness about having been a sinner, moreover, and his claim that he had repented, as well as his continued, though unwarranted, use of clerical dress, gave him dignity. Oates depicted himself as a man who had seen the light and braved many dangers to save the nation. His initial grasp of very complex and detailed evidence was also impressive. Indeed, so complex did the story become that it was soon necessary to print collated versions to give the public at least some understanding of the threats involved. 
The arrival of William Bedloe on the scene in November 1678, eager to add his own evidence about the plot, meant that Oates had to adjust his story somewhat, but this rivalry did not prevent him joining Bedloe in an attempt to implicate the queen in the plot that same month. This was going too far for some in the government and for a short while Oates was confined to his lodgings and his papers seized. Oates had a tense relationship with other important informers. Bedloe, for a time, somewhat stole his glory, although Tonge and Kirkby were swiftly ignored, while Miles Prance was merely described as a 'blockhead' (W. Smith, 'Contrivances of the fanatical Conspirators in Carrying on their Treasons under the Umbrage of the Popish Plot, Laid Open', 1685, 25). The trial of Edward Coleman on 27 November 1678 saw Oates make his first attempt as a chief witness in a legal setting. This first trial set a precedent for the others in that during the course of the proceedings flimsy evidence was accepted as certain fact. Oates remained vague on the details, and apparently made up his story as he went along, weaving in new material with the old. In the trials of Grove, Pickering, and Ireland on 17 December 1678, Oates's evidence was on more stable ground, as many of those involved could not deny knowing him and printed versions of his story were now available for him to use as a crib. 
Although Oates was given helpful judges and many other prompts his perjuries often became obvious in court. Evidence was given to show that he was in St Omer in April 1678 and therefore could not have attended any secret Jesuit consult in London on 24 April, let alone have seen Father Ireland there, as he claimed. Oates often sought refuge in stories of poor light, or his failing eyesight, or his selective memory, thus enabling him to claim blithely that he did not recognize people. If this failed then he turned to headaches and became unwell. The inherent problems with Oates's evidence were ignored by a legal system all too obviously keen to convict these men and they were executed on 3 February 1679. In April 1679 Oates's sixty-eight-page version of the plot was officially published by order of the House of Lords. He appeared as a witness in more trials in June, including that of the Catholic lawyer, Richard Langhorne. All of the accused were convicted and executed. In the trial of the queen's physician, Sir George Wakeman, in July 1679, however, he overreached himself in his evidence and the judge, Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, disparaged him. Both Oates and Bedloe attempted revenge by presenting articles implicating Scroggs in the plot to the privy council in January 1680 but failed utterly when Scroggs ably defended himself. At Viscount Stafford's trial on 30 November in the same year Oates resorted to stating that he needed to give his evidence 'to his own method and be uninterrupted', however, 'he spoke positively... with many shrewd circumstances, nor could any cross-questions discompose him' ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 5, 1908, 513). 
Oates at the height of his career had been responsible in one way or another for the deaths of some thirty-five men. By 1681 however the tide had begun to turn against him and he lost several cases of libel against those who attacked his opinions or person. One hostile contemporary gave a description of him at this time suggesting a most repulsive appearance: '[his] off leg behind is somewhat shorter than the other... his face a Rainbow colour, and the rest of his body black: Two slouching ears... His mouth is in the middle of his face, exactly between the upper part of his forehead and the lower part of his chin; He hath a short neck... a thin Chin, and somewhat sharp. ('A Hue and Cry')' By 1682 Oates's pension had been reduced and he was forced to take refuge in the City. With the plot in collapse by 1683 many of the informers now suffered the consequences of their actions. William Bedloe had died in 1680, as had Israel Tonge, but others were available for punishment. Titus Oates was finally arrested at the Amsterdam coffee house on 10 May 1684 on a charge of 'scandalum magnatum' after a suit by the duke of York, whom Oates had called a traitor. Fined $100,000 after refusing to plead Oates was placed in the Compter in default of payment and was later moved to the king's bench prison. In October and December 1684 he was presented on charges of perjury. The trial was delayed by the death of Charles II on 6 February 1685 but finally took place on 8-9 May 1685. His 'behaviour during the trial was very confident: many hott words pass'd between the chief justice [Jeffries] and him' (Luttrell, 1.342). Oates was convicted on two counts: that he had falsely sworn on 8-12 August 1678 to a 'consult' of Jesuits at the White Horse tavern and that he had also falsely sworn to the presence of William Ireland in London on the same dates. A week later he was sentenced. He was to be imprisoned for life, divested of his canonical garb for ever and brought to Westminster Hall with a paper on his head with the inscription: 'Titus Oates convicted upon full evidence of two horrid perjuries' (ibid., 343). He was also placed in the pillory in Palace Yard, Westminster, on 19 May and was roundly pelted with eggs and other rubbish. This part of the sentence was to be repeated five times every year of his life in different parts of London. As part of the first round of his punishment, on 20 May Oates was led at the cart's tail and whipped from Aldgate to Newgate 'with hideous bellowings, and [he] swooned several times with the greatness of the anguish' (L. Echard, 'History of England', 3 vols., 3rd edn, 1720, vol. 3, p. 1054). On 22 May he was whipped again from Newgate to Tyburn. Oates later claimed that he had 'suffer'd some thousands of stripes' (W. H. Hart, 'Petitions of Dr Titus Oates', 'N&Q', 2nd ser., 2, 1856, 282). He had survived this torture only through the care of his surgeon and in spite of further cruelties by his gaolers who, while he was still weak, got into his cell and pulled the bandages from his back. He had also been placed in 'the Hole or Dungeon of the sd prison' (ibid.) loaded down with irons, despite his gout, and had apparently become subject to convulsions. Oates was lodged in the king's bench and remained there for three years. Rumours of his death were given out in 1688, but in fact the revolution of that year temporarily revived his fortunes. 
After the flight of James II and the revolution Oates was released from prison in December 1688. He then sought succour from several 'Noblemen and Gentlemen, Citizens and others... for his support and maintenance' (W. H. Hart, 'Petitions of Dr Titus Oates', 'N&Q', 2nd ser., 2, 1856, 282). He also sought reinstatement as the idol of the public and saviour of the nation. He stated his grievances in various petitions to the House of Lords but, impatient at delays, he also petitioned the Commons. He then fell foul of the House of Lords for breach of privilege and was soon back in gaol. On 30 May 1689 he once more came before the Lords but refused, out of conscience he said, to give up his claim to hold the degree of doctor of divinity from Salamanca and was sent back to the king's bench prison. His case made little progress, becoming caught up in the post-revolution rivalry between the houses. His obstreperous and unpleasant character also hindered his cause, and when eventually released in August 1689 he remained a convicted perjurer. Despite this William III ordered $40 a month to be paid to Oates out of secret service funds, which sum Oates was said to have thought rather mean spirited. This pension lasted from 1689 to 1692 and was then retrenched. 
In these later years Oates moved into a house in Axe Yard, Westminster, and sought to promote himself mainly through writing pamphlets retelling the story of the plot. He took care to condemn both Charles II, now safely dead, as a papist, and James II. He also stressed his own courage as a martyr in the face of adversity. His new bogey was a Franco-Jacobite plot and he took to associating with whigs such as Aaron Smith, John Arnold, John Tutchin, and also the former government agent, William Fuller. Fuller, no novice at spying, lodged with Oates and under his tutelage claimed knowledge of a Jacobite plot, but was later discredited. Oates seems to have acted as mentor to a number of zealous anti-Catholic individuals who frequently met at his house. 
As a result of his involvement with Fuller, and his furious anti-Jacobite writings, Oates's pension was cut and to save his finances he married Rebecca ('b'. 1669/70, died in or after 1705), daughter of John Weld, a wealthy London draper, on 17 August 1693 at St Mary Magdalen, Old Fish Street, amid much satirical comment and in spite of the strong rumours that Oates was homosexual. One of the milder satires against him claimed that he married only because he had been 'touched in [his] conscience for some juvenile gambols that shall be nameless... and made a vow to sow his wild oats, and not hide the talent which God had plentifully given him in an Italian napkin' (Brown, 2-3). Rebecca was a 'young gentlewoman in the citty, worth 2000 'l'' (Luttrell, 3.165). The couple had one child, baptized Rebecca on 3 October 1700. According to rumour Oates also had an illegitimate son by another woman in the king's bench prison in 1688. 
Although in September 1693 Oates's new wife was received at court and kissed the queen's hand, he allegedly ran through his wife's fortune in less than six months and in May 1694 claimed that he had few clothes left to wear and 'not one shilling to buy my poor wife and family bread. I am in debt 508 'l', and must the latter end of this month go to prison and there starve' ('Downshire MSS', 1.661). He received a gift of $100 in July 1694, but by December 1697 he was once more claiming poverty and that 'He had a poor aged mother to maintain, and his wife and family will be turn'd out of doors, and [he would] perish in Prison' (W. H. Hart, 'Petitions of Dr Titus Oates', 'N&Q', 2nd ser., 2, 1856, 282). He asked for a payment of his arrears and received a restoration of his pension to $300 per annum and $1000 to pay his debts. 
In June 1696 Oates had decided to alter his religion once more and return to the Baptist church of his father. Lengthy negotiations with elders of the congregation which met in Virginia Street finally led to his admission into the church in summer 1698, with the generous concession that he could continue to wear his Church of England clerical robes. He took to preaching before his brethren and, with his morbid tales of Catholic abominations, proved popular. Unfortunately he fell out with the congregation in October 1699 over arrangements for the funeral of Hester Parker, a rich widow. Mrs Parker had heartily disliked Oates and consequently he was not invited to the funeral nor asked to preach the funeral sermon. On the day of the sermon, however, Oates prevented it from taking place by suddenly occupying the pulpit and preaching on an entirely unrelated topic, while the congregation's bewilderment turned to anger. This farcical situation, so typical of Oates, was compounded when he encouraged Mrs Parker's husband to contest her will, which had left most of her estate to two members of the congregation. Eventually he caused so much trouble that he was expelled from the sect in November 1701. Trouble continued to dog Oates's later career. In June 1702, while visiting the court of requests, he was confronted by the printer Eleanor James, who had been affronted at hearing him criticize the Church of England, and making 'scandalous and reflecting Expressions' about Charles II and God, while wearing his usual canonical robes ('An account of the proceedings against Dr Titus Oates', 'Scarce and Valuable Tracts... Lord Somers', 4.420-22). Oates, whose violence was never far below the surface, lost his temper and struck her with his cane. He was indicted at the Westminster quarter sessions on 2 July 1702. Claiming poverty he was fined 6 marks and dismissed, but 'not without a severe check for acting so irreverently and unbecoming his profession' (ibid.). After this incident little is known about Oates's final years. He appears to have died in obscurity, largely unnoticed by most commentators, at Axe Yard on 13 July 1705. His widow was granted administration of his estate on 16 August 1705. 
Oates remains an unusual figure in British history and there are a number of explanations for both his personality and career. Early writers were repelled as much by his homosexuality as by his personality. Moreover, his unusual appearance and his abrasive manner meant that he could scarcely be ignored. With his limp, red face, bull neck, nasal drawl, and harsh and brassy voice he proved a raucous and difficult personality. Roger North noted that Oates's 'common conversation was larded with lewd oaths, Blasphemy, saucy atheistical, and in every way offensive discourse' (R. North, 'Examen, or, An Enquiry into the Credit and Merits of Pretended Complete History', 1740, 224). Oates's actions have usually been explained as a psychotic's revenge but, given the hostility and rejection which he encountered almost constantly, could equally well be seen as, in part at least, a desire for acceptance and respectability. Oates remained a fantasist: a man who saw himself in the role of the saviour of the nation, fighting demon popes and Jesuits. In his writings he often depicted himself as a man of action, daring to say or do what others would not. He was the secret hero who, despite his outward appearance, managed to infiltrate a most dangerous conspiracy. For a time Oates succeeded beyond his dreams and was genuinely honoured as the saviour of the nation, but the sordid reality of his life in which there were no great secrets to uncover, only back alley meetings, stealing, begging, and poverty, vice, fear, and hatred, and above all failure, soon caught up with him. 


@@@@@


doc= 20438


O'Beirne, Thomas Lewis (1749-1823), Church of Ireland bishop of Meath, was born a Roman Catholic in Farnagh, co. Longford, the son of Lewis O'Beirne, farmer, of Longford, and Margaret O'Meagher of Cloona, co. Tipperary. As several generations of his family had been educated abroad, and his grand-uncle, Thomas O'Beirne, was bishop of the Catholic diocese of Ardagh (1739-47), it can be assumed that the O'Beirnes were reasonably circumstanced. Following his early education at Ardagh diocesan school, in 1763 Thomas was sent to the College des Lombards in Paris, where he performed well academically. Many Irish students at the college, his brother Denis included, became Catholic priests; O'Beirne had two other brothers, one of whom joined the East India Company, and at least two sisters. It is not clear if it was Thomas's intention to become a priest, but, after his return home to recuperate from illness in 1768, a chance meeting with John Hinchcliffe, the Church of England bishop of Peterborough, set O'Beirne on the journey that was to result in his making his recantation, taking orders, and entering Trinity College, Cambridge, as a ten-year man in 1773. He received a BD degree in 1783. 
O'Beirne's first benefice was the college living of Grendon, Northamptonshire, which he held for two years until he was appointed chaplain in the fleet under Lord Howe in 1776. This brought him to America, where he preached a striking discourse at St Paul's, New York, the only church which was preserved from the flames during the calamitous fire of September 1776. On his return to England, O'Beirne vindicated the brothers Howe against criticism of their conduct in the tract 'A Candid and Impartial Narrative of the Transactions of the Fleet under Lord Howe' (1779) by impugning the accuracy of the information they were given. Lord Howe was instrumental in securing him the crown living of West Deeping in Lincolnshire in 1779, but his introduction to Lord Fitzwilliam and other Rockingham whigs led him to write in 1780 for the periodical 'The Englishman', and to contribute to a daily newspaper a series of articles critical of Lord North, the first six of which were reprinted as a pamphlet. Having proved himself as a controversialist, O'Beirne produced three further pamphlets anonymously in quick succession -- 'A Short History of the Last Session of Parliament' (1780), 'Considerations on the Late Disturbances, by a Consistent Whig' (1780), and 'Considerations on the Principles of Naval Discipline and Courts-Martial, in which the Doctrines of the House of Commons and the Conduct of the Courts-Martial on Admiral Keppel and Sir Hugh Palliser are Compared' (1781). For the theatre he adapted from the French play 'Le dissipateur', by Destouches, a comedy entitled 'The Generous Impostor', which ran for seven nights at Drury Lane in November 1780. O'Beirne assisted the duchess of Devonshire in translating and adapting for the English stage two dramas from the French, but they met with no success. He was also the author of an ode to Lord Northampton, and of some minor contributions to the 'Rolliad', most of which, he reflected later, were 'deservedly consigned to oblivion' ('Public Characters', 159). 
Having proved his value to the whigs, in 1782 O'Beirne attended the duke of Portland, the viceroy of Ireland, as chaplain and private secretary. While in Ireland he secured a promise of 'the living of Longford' ('Correspondence of Edmund Burke', 5.29) on the demise of its incumbent. He had to wait nine years; in the meantime Edmund Burke's intercession ensured the restoration of the stipend he had received from Earl Fitzwilliam prior to his Irish appointment. This guaranteed that O'Beirne remained active in whig circles, and he became Portland's private secretary once again in 1783 when that statesman became the first lord of the Treasury. This time Portland ensured that O'Beirne was looked after: on his last day in office the duke gave him the valuable livings of Whittingham and Stanfordham. These enabled O'Beirne to provide for himself and for his wife, Jane, the only surviving child of Francis Stuart, brother of the eighth earl of Moray. They married on 17 November 1783, and had one son and two daughters. 
Out of power, O'Beirne played an important part in the whigs' efforts to force William Pitt from office by galvanizing opposition to the prime minister's scheme for a commercial union with Ireland in 1785. He wrote 'A Reply to the Late Treasury Pamphlet Entitled 'The Proposed System of Trade with Ireland Explained'' (1785), and was responsible for liaising with and supplying the Irish opposition with ideas and materials. Health problems during the winter of 1785 obliged him to spend some time on the continent, but this did not prove efficacious and he returned to Longford, resigned his English livings, and, on their becoming vacant in 1791, took up the rich benefices of Templemichael, which he had been promised in 1782, and Mohill. He spent the next three years ministering in the parish in which he was born and in which his brother Denis was the Catholic parish priest. His ambition was the episcopal bench, and the way was cleared when he became first chaplain and private secretary to Earl Fitzwilliam upon his appointment as viceroy in 1794. Shortly afterwards O'Beirne was rewarded by the bishopric of Ossory, to which he was consecrated at Christ Church, Dublin, on 1 February 1795. 
O'Beirne's hope that 'a change of disposition towards them in the government' (O'Beirne to Portland, August 1794, Portland MSS) would induce propertied Catholics to align themselves with the crown was negated by the recall of Fitzwilliam. This so depressed him that he vowed 'to devote himself to the duties' (O'Beirne to Fitzwilliam, 30 March 1796, Fitzwilliam MSS) of his diocese, and to this end he convened meetings of his clergy to debate theological issues. There was no escaping politics, however, and as Ireland became more disorderly, O'Beirne's disenchantment with the Irish whigs grew. He felt at the time that Grattan had pressed the question of Catholic emancipation with too much vigour in 1794-5; by the spring of 1797 he freely attributed Catholic disaffection to Grattan's advocacy of policies which O'Beirne deemed to be more appropriate to a United Irishman than to a whig, and he sundered his connections with the Irish whigs. 
O'Beirne's growing conservatism, which facilitated his translation from Ossory to the more lucrative diocese of Meath in December 1798, was also manifest in his advocacy of the inclusion of protestants on the board of the Catholic seminary at Maynooth and, when an act of union was being agitated, in his proposal that the Church of Ireland and the Church of England should also be unified. His contention that this would render the Church of Ireland 'unassailable to our adversaries' reflected his intensifying perception that his church was a 'persecuted church' (O'Beirne to D. Ryder, first earl of Harrowby, 12 Nov 1816, Harrowby MSS). He contrived to defend its position in a number of controversial tracts -- 'A Letter to Dr Troy' (1805), 'A Letter from an Irish Dignitary... on the Subject of Tithes' (1807), 'A Letter to Canning on his Proposed Motion on Catholic Emancipation' (1812), and 'A Letter to the Earl of Fingal' (1813) -- but he made a greater impact as a pastor. Between his appointment as bishop of Meath and his death in February 1823, fifty-seven churches and seventy-two glebe houses were built, and he produced three volumes of collected sermons (1799, 1813, and 1821). By appointing to vacant benefices on the ground of merit, enforcing personal residence, reviving the office of rural dean, and insisting upon the stricter examination of candidates for ordination, O'Beirne left the church in the diocese considerably stronger than he found it. He died at Lee House, Ardbraccan, Navan, on 17 February 1823, and was buried in the local churchyard, in the same vault as Bishop Pococke. 


@@@@@


doc= 20439


Ua Brain, Tigernach (d. 1088), abbot of Clonmacnoise and supposed annalist, as well as heading that major Irish midland monastery was also abbot of the somewhat less important Roscommon. His name has been misleadingly attached to the so-called annals of Tigernach on account of a note in Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Rawlinson B.488, the sole surviving manuscript of the annals for the period after the emperor Antoninus Pius. Under 1088, the year in which the annals of Ulster records his death, the manuscript (of the fourteenth century) has a note saying that Tigernach wrote the text up to that point. This does not make it clear whether he was simply the scribe or also the annalist; the second is perhaps the more likely. In another set of annals, 'Chronicum Scotorum', he is said to have been 'the heir of Ciaran and of Comman', namely abbot of both Clonmacnoise and Roscommon, and to have belonged to the Sil Muiredaig, the descendants of Muiredach Muillethan (died 702), the ruling dynasty of the Connachta. The Ui Brain were a branch that had no share in the kingship enjoyed by their kinsmen but had, instead, gone into the church. The earliest attested member of the Ui Brain to be abbot of Clonmacnoise died in 989; another who was abbot of Roscommon died in 1170 and yet another in 1234; the ecclesiastical prominence of the Ui Brain was, therefore, long-standing. Clonmacnoise had had property within Connacht ever since the seventh century; and in the eleventh was the pre-eminent church of the province. Tigernach's abbacy was an example of the close link between Clonmacnoise, itself in Mide, and the Connachta; it could maintain close relations with the rulers of two provinces because they were normally in alliance. Annals, such as those which pass under the name of Tigernach, were carried forward by a succession of annalists; Tigernach Ua Brain may have been one such, but the importance of his office and his own distinguished family background give the annals of Tigernach for the generation before 1088 an added interest. 


@@@@@


doc= 20440


O'Brien, Barnabas, sixth earl of Thomond (1590/91-1657), nobleman, was the second son of Donough O'Brien, fourth earl of Thomond (d. 1624), and his second wife, Lady Elizabeth (died 1618), fourth daughter of Gerald Fitzgerald, eleventh earl of Kildare. His elder brother, Henry, fifth earl of Thomond, who succeeded to the earldom on his father's death in 1624, was a strenuous adherent of the government in Ireland and was warmly commended by Strafford for his loyalty. He died without male issue in 1639. Barnabas O'Brien matriculated from Brasenose College, Oxford, on 20 February 1605, aged fourteen, and entered Lincoln's Inn in 1613. On 17 July 1615, at Easton Neston, Northamptonshire, he married Mary ('bap'. 1592, died 1675), youngest daughter of Sir George Fermor and widow of James, Lord Crichton of Sanquhar. At some point he purchased the manor of Great Billing, Northamptonshire, and was resident in the county for a time, being appointed a JP. He entered the Irish parliament in 1613 as a member for Coleraine. In 1634 he was returned as an MP for County Clare but, being compelled to go to England for a time, a writ was issued for a fresh election and he was, it seems, succeeded by his uncle Daniel O'Brien, later Viscount Clare. He was also returned for Carlow borough and for Ennis. 
In 1639 O'Brien succeeded his brother as sixth earl, and was made governor of co. Clare on 21 November the same year, the governorship to merge with that of Munster after his death. A protestant, he was appointed to the Irish privy council. Following the outbreak of the 1641 rising, he presided over a county meeting which resulted in plans to raise troops and obtain arms against the insurgents. His lenient stance as governor 'perhaps as much the result of want of authority as of personal inclination', however, saw the rising spread to Clare and by January 1642 the county had declared for the insurgents (Clarke, 194-5). Residing quietly in his principal stronghold, Bunratty Castle, he sheltered local protestants and English. In spite of the support given to the confederacy by his kinsmen he did not sign the oath of association and remained in frequent communication with Ormond, the lord lieutenant. The confederate leadership planned, unsuccessfully, to gain control of his person and castle through his kinsmen, principally his uncle Sir Daniel O'Brien. In 1644 their supreme council forbade his tenants to pay their rents to him, or his agents to collect them, and announced their intention to set his lands. On 3 May 1645 Charles I created him marquess of Billing under the privy seal, but the patent never passed the great seal. 
In March 1646 Thomond admitted to Bunratty troops sent by the English parliamentarians (though he later claimed he was not aware in advance of their coming), in spite of the earl of Glamorgan's remonstrances and appeals to his loyalty. He went to live in England and, petitioning parliament, claimed always to have opposed the rebellion and to have sustained considerable losses through seizure of his lands, and through expenditure on troops early in the war and after the arrival of the parliamentarian garrison. His petition for recompense was at least partially granted, and he apparently gave no cause for suspicion to the Commonwealth or protectorate regimes. He died in November 1657 and was buried on 15 November, in Great Billing. In his will, dated 1 July 1657, he complained of his impoverishment, and left some bequests to Great Billing, 'which would have been greater had my losses and sufferings in Ireland been less' (Royal Irish Academy, MS 3.A.40, fol. 161). The will was proved in England on 6 February, and in Ireland on 28 April 1658. He left one son, Henry (1621-1691), his successor, and one daughter, Penelope, who married Henry Mordaunt, second earl of Peterborough. The seventh earl matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, on 19 August 1636, aged fifteen. He was governor of co. Clare in 1661-70 and again from 1679, and died at Billing on 2 May 1691. 


@@@@@


doc= 20441


O Briain, Brian Ruadh (d. 1277), king of Thomond, was the son of Conchobhar O Briain and his wife, Mor, a member of the Mac Con Mara family. He succeeded his father as king in 1268, without opposition according to the 'Caithreim Thoirdhealbhaigh' ('The triumphs of Toirdelbach'), a work written in the mid-fourteenth century to support the claims of the descendants of Brian's brother Tadg against those of Brian. Thomond was at that time in a highly disturbed state, and in 1270 the situation worsened when O Briain began to attack the nearby English settlements just north of the Shannon, around Clare and Bunratty. In 1270 he captured Castle Clare. It is notable that at the same time, further north, Aedh O Conchobair was making significant progress against the de Burghs in Connacht. The English made four attempts over the next few years to settle the country, taking hostages from Brian O Briain, but the situation was obviously unstable and the need for a strong central English authority was apparent. On 26 January 1276 Thomas de Clare, brother of the earl of Gloucester and a close friend of Edward I, was granted the whole of Thomond. He was also close to the Fitzgeralds, being married to the daughter of Maurice fitz Maurice Fitzgerald (died 1286). 
In 1275 Sioda mac Neill mac Conmara, who had proclaimed Brian Ruadh O Briain king, rose against him in the interests of Brian's nephew Toirdelbach. Their forces expelled Brian from his stronghold at Clonroad and he was forced to flee across the Shannon with his son Donnchad and others who were loyal to him. Needing an ally, he turned to Thomas de Clare. By this act he brought the rivalry between the Fitzgeralds and the de Burghs into play: it was only a short time before Toirdelbach allied himself with the de Burghs of Connacht. O Briain appears to have offered a significant amount of land to Clare for his help: 'all lands between Limerick and Athsolus' according to the 'Caithreim' (Mac Craith, 2.6). Meeting at Limerick, the allied forces successfully took Clonroad, although Toirdelbach was absent at the time. Gathering more support, Brian continued his advance towards Quin (in what is now Clare). The opponents eventually met at Moygressan in 1277, where the allied forces were defeated by Toirdelbach after a long battle. In some disorder, the opposing forces retreated to the new Clare stronghold of Bunratty. 
What happened next is unclear. According to the 'Caithreim', Clare's wife was furious at the death of her brother Patrick at Moygressan, and demanded the execution of Brian O Briain. Since her father, Maurice fitz Maurice, was also present, Clare acquiesced and executed Brian on 11 May. The 'Caithreim' says that he was killed on a gibbet. The story that he was drawn between horses is unlikely: it first emerges in the later O Neill 'Remonstrance' to Pope John XXII, but would almost certainly have been used by the author of the 'Caithreim', had he known of it, because his chief purpose was to show the perfidy of the Clares and the folly of Brian Ruadh. The more reliable annals of Inisfallen do not give this version, but do suggest that the execution took place with the complicity of some of Brian's own captains. 
Although the sons of Brian O Briain, led by his heir, Donnchad, took their revenge by attacking the Clares at Quin the next year, they could not do without Clare support for long. The alliance was soon renewed and the civil war continued against Toirdelbach. In 1281 a settlement was made between the two factions but conflict soon flared up again and continued off and on until 1317, when Brian's descendant triumphed. The war had a serious long-term effect on the powers of the region, both Gaelic and English, but the real losers in the long run were the Clares, whose power was undermined by the de Burghs to such an extent that when the dispute was finally settled, the Ui Briain were able to expel both families from Thomond. 


@@@@@


doc= 20442


O'Brien, Charles, styled fifth Viscount Clare (1670-1706), Jacobite army officer, was born at Carrigaholt, Ireland, a younger son of Daniel O'Brien, styled third Viscount Clare (c.1630-1690), and Philadelphia ('bap'. 1644, died in or after 1699), daughter of Francis Lennard, fourteenth Baron Dacre. Nothing is known of his early years or education. The O'Brien family were Roman Catholics and strong supporters of the Stuart cause, for which Daniel had fought at the battle of the Boyne (1690) and had thereafter had his title forfeited. After the revolution of 1688 Charles commanded a regiment of foot in James II's army in Ireland, one of several regiments raised by his father on behalf of the deposed king in 1689 and 1690. Taking command of a cavalry regiment in 1691, he served at the second siege of Limerick. 
Having joined James II in France in 1692, O'Brien first served as a captain in the king's 'gardes du corps', and was subsequently attached to the queen of England's regiment of 'dragons-a-pied', of which he became the colonel on the death of Francis O'Carroll at the battle of Marsaglia in Italy on 4 October 1693. His elder brother, Daniel, the fourth viscount, was mortally wounded on the same occasion, and Charles succeeded to the title. On 8 April 1696 he became colonel of the Clare regiment, so named in honour of his family, and he served at the siege of Valenza in Lombardy and on the Meuse during the campaigns of 1696 and 1697. On 9 January 1697 at St Germain-en-Laye he married Charlotte (died in or after 1714), eldest daughter of Henry Bulkeley, master of the household to Charles II and James II, and Sophia Stuart. His support of the Jacobites led to his being attainted before 1699. 
When the War of the Spanish Succession broke out Clare joined the army of Germany, was promoted brigadier-general on 2 April 1703, and took a distinguished part in the rout of the imperialists at the battle of Hochstadt on 20 September 1703. Early in 1704 he was promoted major-general and commanded the Irish regiments of Clare, Lee, and Dorrington at the battle of Blenheim, cutting his way out of the village of Oberklau, and escaping with his three regiments, in admirable order, to the Rhine. Appointed 'marechal-de-camp' on 26 October 1704, Clare joined the army of the Moselle in Flanders. He was wounded at Ramillies eighteen months later and died at Brussels on 23 May 1706. Following his burial in the city's Irish monastery a monument to his memory was erected by his widow in the church of the Holy Cross at Louvain. She married on 19 July 1712 at St Germain-en-Laye Count Daniel O'Mahony, who died two years later, leaving her a widow once more. Clare was survived by a daughter, Laura, who married the comte de Breteuil, and a son, Charles O'Brien, styled sixth Viscount Clare, and later styled ninth earl of Thomond, who succeeded him in the title. The command of the Clare regiment devolved upon its lieutenant-colonel, a kinsman of the Clare family, Murrough O'Brien, but 6000 livres p.a. were set apart by order of Louis XIV, out of the emoluments of the position, for the maintenance of the young viscount. 


@@@@@


doc= 20443


O'Brien, Charles, styled ninth earl of Thomond (1699-1761), army officer in the French service, was born at St Germain-en-Laye and baptized there on 17 March 1699, the eldest son of Charles O'Brien, styled fifth Viscount Clare (1670-1706), outlawed in Ireland for his role in the Williamite wars, and his wife, Charlotte, eldest daughter of Henry Bulkeley, master of the household to James II. In 1703, as a child, Charles was commissioned captain and attached to the Franco-Irish regiment commanded by his father, to whose title he succeeded in 1706. He was a page at the French court. His active military career commenced in Spain in 1719 with the duke of Berwick, whose second wife was his mother's sister. He was present at the sieges of Fuenterrabia, San Sebastian, Urgel, and Roses. In August 1720 he was appointed to command the regiment of Clare, remaining its colonel proprietor throughout the rest of his life. He visited his kinsman, the eighth earl of Thomond, in England on several occasions and was presented to George I. He might have had his father's attainder reversed to become Thomond's heir, save for his refusal to conform to the established church. He did, however, inherit $20,000 on Thomond's death in 1741, styling himself thereafter as ninth earl of Thomond. He continued to maintain an exact and up-to-date knowledge of his family's former estate in Ireland, which he cherished hopes of recovering. Although he retained formal relations with James III (James Francis Edward Stuart), the Pretender, he took little active part in Jacobite politics, concentrating instead on his career in the French army. In 1733 he served under Berwick on the Rhine. He was promoted brevet brigadier of infantry in 1734, and at the siege of Philippsburg the same year he was grazed on the shoulder by the cannon shot that killed Berwick. He was advanced to brevet 'marechal de camp' in 1738 and was appointed inspector-general of infantry in 1741. He was posted to Bohemia the same year, displaying much resolution and bravery in the unsuccessful defence of Linz in 1742. After his release from captivity, Clare transferred to the army of the Rhine and fought at Dettingen in 1743. In the following year he was promoted lieutenant-general and transferred to Flanders, where he took part in several sieges. The Irish brigade under his command played a notable part in the French victories at Fontenoy (1745), Rocoux (1746), and Laffeldt (1747). 
In 1745 a plan to send Clare to England to second the efforts of Prince Charles Edward Stuart in Scotland was frustrated by British naval superiority. He was made a chevalier of the order of the Holy Ghost in 1747 and was appointed governor of Neuf-Brisach in 1756. In recognition of his distinguished military record Clare was created a marshal of France on 24 February 1757. In November 1757 he was appointed to command the troops on the Mediterranean coast and made commander-in-chief of Languedoc. A year later he was accorded the honour of 'entree' to the king of France's bedchamber. In 1759 he featured prominently in French plans for an invasion of the British Isles, but the defeat of the French fleet forced the abandonment of this project. He was described as 'a gay flattering audacious Frenchman [who] was thought an Adonis by a set of ladies' (GEC, 'Peerage', 3.254). Clare married late in life, on 10 March 1755, Marie Genvieve Louise (1737-1763), daughter of Francois (Gauthier), marquis de Chiffreville, Normandy. His own means were 'very unconsiderable' (Fagan, 2.186), and his wife brought him a substantial fortune, which in time was expected to increase by inheritance. They had two children: Charles, seventh Viscount Clare (1761-1774), who died unmarried, and Antoinette Charlotte Marie Septimanie ('b'. 1758), who married the duc de Choiseul-Praslin. Clare died of a fever at Montpellier on 9 September 1761. 


@@@@@


doc= 20444


O Briain, Conchobhar (d. 1268), king of Thomond, succeeded his father, Donnchad Cairprech O Briain, in 1242. The early years of his reign were dominated by a series of royal grants which threatened to move a great deal of the Ui Briain lands, already essentially limited to modern co. Clare, into Anglo-Norman hands. Pleas to Henry III had little effect (Ireland had been granted to Henry's son Edward in 1254), and in 1257 a wave of invasions into Thomond threatened to overwhelm Conchobhar. He and his more militant son Tadg seem to have held firm against these, and the following year Conchobhar raided into Galway and destroyed manors of the English Fitzgerald family, while Tadg went to a meeting at Caeluisce with Brian O Neill, recorded in the annals and, in rather more detail, in the 'Caithreim Thoirdhealbhaigh' ('The triumphs of Toirdelbach'). This was written in the mid-fourteenth century, to promote the history of the descendants of Tadg over those of his brother Brian, and to vilify the treacherous Clares, Brian's erstwhile allies. The 'Caithreim' relates that the meeting fell apart when Tadg's gift of a hundred horses to O Neill (a traditional claim to supremacy, and thus, in this context, to the high-kingship) was returned with two hundred more. 
In 1259 Tadg died, an event described by the annals as 'good news to the foreigners' (annals of Inisfallen, s.a. 1260, 'recte' 1259). According to the 'Caithreim', Conchobhar O Briain fell into a deep depression and no longer appeared in public, as a result of which his subjects ceased paying their royal dues. This story, however, may stem from the 'Caithreim's' concern to promote Tadg's importance: certainly Conchobhar had a notable success against the Fitzgeralds when they invaded in 1260, though in 1261 he seems to have made his peace. He attempted to reassert his authority in the context of intensified rivalries between the great Anglo-Irish lords, particularly between the de Burghs and the Fitzgeralds. These may have been exacerbated by the absence of central control during the barons' war in England. After the seizure of the justiciar by Maurice fitz Maurice Fitzgerald (died 1286) and Maurice Fitzgerald (died 1268) in December 1264, Ireland descended into civil war, and the Gaelic lords must have seen their opportunity. Conchobhar O Briain mustered his forces and raided across the Shannon for tribute, bringing it back to a newly constructed stronghold at Clonroad. 
Soon after, in 1268, O Briain raided northwards once more. This time, though, he was attacked by Diarmait, son of Muirchertach O Briain, at Belaclugga, and he and many of his family and followers were killed, on 22 May 1268 according to the annals of Inisfallen. The 'Caithreim' account ascribes the attack to 'Conor 'carrach' O Lochlainn', but the annals seem clear that the only O Lochlainn mentioned, Dublochlann O Lochlainn, was on Conchobhar's side and that Diarmait, whose death soon after they record with an air of satisfaction, was the attacker. The body was taken to the monastery of East Burren or Corcomrua and buried there, where an effigy survives. 
With his wife Mor, a member of the Mac Con Mara family, Conchobhar O Briain had three known sons, Tadg, Seonin, and Brian Ruadh O Briain, of whom only Brian survived to succeed. His daughter and her son with Ruaidri O Grada were killed alongside Conchobhar and Seonin at Belaclugga. Tadg's son Toirdelbach survived however, and the struggle between his family and that of Brian Ruadh for the leadership of the Ui Briain was to dominate Thomond for many years. 


@@@@@


doc= 20445


O'Brien, Conor, lord of Thomond (d. 1539), chieftain, was the eldest of eight children of Turlough Donn O'Brien (died 1528), lord of Thomond, and Raghnailt, daughter of John MacNamara, chief of Clancullen. His father was O'Brien chief of Thomond. Conor acceded to the chieftaincy of one of Ireland's largest and most powerful Gaelic clans upon his father's death. An ambitious and truculent chief, Turlough had extended O'Brien influence east of the Shannon -- beyond the traditional boundaries of Thomond -- into Limerick and Tipperary, exacting 'blackrents' from the former and threatening Butler influence in the latter. O'Brien's bridge, a physical manifestation of Turlough's ambition, was constructed in 1506 to facilitate the movement of troops and supplies over the Shannon. Efforts made by Thomas Butler, seventh earl of Ormond, and Gerald Fitzgerald, eighth earl of Kildare, in 1499 and 1510 respectively, to arrest O'Brien expansion were largely unsuccessful; it was hoped that Conor would prove a more tractable chief whose ambition would be confined to Thomond. 
Conor's accession to the O'Brien chieftaincy had been assured for over a decade. He emerged as a client of Gerald Fitzgerald, ninth earl of Kildare, in 1515. In return, he received gifts of horses and by the early 1520s was resident in Kildare's lands at Castlecurry, co. Kildare, where he threatened his Butler neighbours. The nomination of his brother Murrough O'Brien (d. 1551) as tanist -- following the vacancy left by the death of another brother, Donough, in 1531 -- obviated any immediate internal rivalry while his marriages strengthened his hand in both Connaught and Munster. He married first Annabella (died 'c'.1520), youngest daughter of Ulick Burke of Clanricarde and Egelina, daughter of Hugh Courtenay, with whom he had an only son, Donough. He then married Ellice, daughter of Maurice Fitzgerald, ninth earl of Desmond, and Ellen, daughter of Maurice Roche, Viscount Roche of Fermoy, with whom he had five sons, Donald, Turlough, Teig, Murrough, and Mortagh. Conor was in a secure and commanding position. 
By 1528 the lordship of Thomond had become polarized between feuding Geraldine and Butler interests. O'Brien's marital ties to Desmond and continued affiliation with Kildare placed him firmly within the former camp. His eldest son, Donough, sensing that his stepbrothers' interests would be pursued ahead of his own, sought allies in unlikely quarters: he married Helen, daughter of Piers Butler, earl of Ossory, in 1533. The O'Briens were divided by the rebellion in 1534 of Thomas Fitzgerald, tenth earl of Kildare; Conor supported him while Donough supported Ossory. 
O'Brien brushed aside resistance from Donough and his Butler allies, ravaging Butler lands as the rebellion gathered momentum. In July, O'Brien petitioned Charles V for military assistance claiming that his family was of Spanish descent and that they had 'never ceased to oppose the pride of the English' ('LP Henry VIII', 7, no. 999). He offered to submit to the emperor's authority and place some 15,000 men at his disposal. Foreign aid, however, was not forthcoming and the arrival of a relief army under Sir William Skeffington, the lord deputy, dashed any hopes of a Geraldine victory. Kildare sought refuge in Thomond, Connaught, and contemplated sailing to Spain to solicit aid from Charles. Recognizing the futility and the potential repercussions of such a gesture, O'Brien counselled against the voyage; Kildare surrendered in August 1535. O'Brien wrote, in English, to Henry VIII in October begging his forgiveness for harbouring the earl and offered to serve the king's representative in Ireland. O'Brien's power and autonomy survived the immediate aftermath of the rebellion intact. 
Lord Leonard Grey, the new lord deputy, guided by Donough, Conor's son, marched to the Shannon in August 1536 and destroyed O'Brien's bridge. The expedition, however, was egregiously under-funded and the soldiers refused to cross the Shannon. Grey returned to Dublin having done little to limit O'Brien's power. O'Brien adopted an increasingly defiant posture by refusing to surrender either the young Fitzgerald heir, who received succour in Thomond for six months, or the treasure entrusted to him by Kildare before his surrender. The Irish privy council reported to Sir Thomas Cromwell, principal secretary, that O'Brien 'thinketh it not to be his duty to recognise the King's Majesty, neither yet to abide any indifferent or reasonable order upon any wrong by him done to the King and his subjects' (Brewer and Bullen, no. 88). O'Brien could afford such insouciance so long as his clan remained united behind his leadership and the government refused to expend its limited resources on a major military campaign. Grey made another expedition to the Shannon in June 1538 destroying a rebuilt bridge, but managed only to secure from O'Brien a year-long truce. O'Brien died in December 1539. Murrough, his tanist, was elected chief. Conor was the last independent O'Brien chief before the introduction of the surrender and regrant initiative that saw his successors created earls of Thomond following their submission to the king. 


@@@@@


doc= 20446


O'Brien, Conor, third earl of Thomond (c.1535-1581), landowner and rebel, was the eldest son of Donough O'Brien, second earl of Thomond ('c'.1515-1553), and Helen, youngest daughter of Piers Butler, eighth earl of Ormond. He was the first O'Brien to inherit the earldom since Sir Anthony St Leger, the lord deputy, engineered a compromise in 1543 whereby Donough O'Brien succeeded his uncle Murrough O'Brien, first earl of Thomond, as second earl. The first earl's title of baron of Inchiquin was vested in his male descendants. Donough O'Brien's stepbrother Donnell O'Brien, however, gained little from the compromise and murdered him in April 1553 following the former's successful bid to have the earldom permanently vested in his male descendants. Conor O'Brien was thus challenged by his uncle Donnell O'Brien who was recognized by many clansmen to have succeeded by the Gaelic custom of tanistry -- a development that the 1543 compromise had aimed to avoid. The more experienced Donnell O'Brien, supported by his brothers Tadhg and Donough O'Brien, quickly gained the upper hand among the divided O'Briens. The government, which could not be seen to allow Gaelic custom to overrule English law, interceded on Conor O'Brien's behalf in the summer of 1558, when Thomas Radcliffe, third earl of Sussex, lord deputy, forcibly installed him as third earl of Thomond. Yet Thomond's position was dangerously reliant on English support. 
Tadhg and Donough O'Brien, supported by Gerald Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond, assembled a force and defeated Thomond and his ally, Richard Burke, second earl of Clanricarde, at Cnoc Fuarchoilli (Spancel Hill), near Ennis. The attempted coup was thwarted, however, after Sir William Fitzwilliam, lord justice, intervened. This allowed Thomond a brief respite during which he could consolidate his position; but despite earning praise from the government for accompanying Fitzwilliam on an expedition against Shane O'Neill in August 1561 he failed to win unilateral support among the O'Briens. His marriages, moreover, failed to secure any powerful allies. He married first Ellen (died 1560), daughter of Donald MacCarthy More and widow of James Fitzgerald, thirteenth earl of Desmond, whose claim to Desmond lands only aggravated relations with the Geraldines. They had no children. He later married Una (died 1589), daughter of Turlough Mac I Brien Arra, with whom he had three sons and three daughters; his eldest son, Donough O'Brien (d. 1624), the young baron of Ibrackan, was raised at court. In 1562 Tadhg and Donnell O'Brien mounted another challenge to Thomond's leadership. They received support from Desmond, while the earl again turned to the government. English ordnance lent to Thomond ensured his survival, but it was clear that the threat posed by his half-uncles had to be addressed. 
In September 1564 Thomond and the crown offered Donnell O'Brien a truce on generous terms that amounted to virtual joint rule of Thomond. O'Brien was not satisfied because he was not given recognition or a peerage and resumed hostilities in the spring of 1565. Thomond outfought him with English ordnance. 
O'Brien surrendered his claim to the lordship of Thomond in April 1565 settling for possession of Corcomroe. Thomond was still not secure. The government, moreover, had become sceptical of his abilities: visiting Munster in 1566 Sir Henry Sidney, lord deputy, noted the utter desolation of Thomond, and in 1567 blamed the earl's 'lack of discretion and insufficiency to govern' for co. Limerick's desolation (TNA: PRO, SP 63/20/66). Thomond became alienated and receptive to overtures from James Fitzmaurice who rebelled in June 1569. 
Sir Edmund Fitton was concurrently appointed president of Connaught and set about erecting Thomond into the county of Clare and annexing it to Connaught. This, coupled with his appointment of Tadhg O'Brien as sheriff of co. Clare, pushed Thomond into a desperate attempt to restore his authority. In February 1570 he drove Fitton out of Ennis and arrested Tadhg and Donnell O'Brien, and William Martin, the provost-marshal. He quickly linked his actions to those of Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk, and the northern earls, proclaiming 'he woulde do nothinge with the lord deputie nor lord president but as the Duke of Norfolk would say' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/30/15). His rebellion was short-lived as his kinsman and former ally Thomas Butler, tenth earl of Ormond, was immediately dispatched to bring order to Thomond. He fled to France in June after failing to secure the restoration of his possessions and was subsequently proclaimed a rebel. 
In Paris, Thomond became acquainted with Sir Henry Norris, the English ambassador. He hoped that Norris would intercede with Elizabeth I for his pardon. Norris, however, approached the situation with caution, closely watching Thomond's behaviour while keeping the queen fully abreast of his actions. Though Thomond wrote to Elizabeth begging for clemency and claimed that he arrived in France 'without ani intention to practise with the French', it became clear to Norris that he was willing to practise with anyone who suggested intrigue (TNA: PRO, SP 63/30/72). Norris noted 'he is tractable enough and rather apt to follow perilous counsel than to be a deviser therof' ('CSP for.', no. 1110). Elizabeth would not grant his pardon, but realized that he posed a more serious threat while in France and, through Norris, implored him to return to Ireland. He reluctantly departed following promises that his grievances would receive a favourable hearing upon his return. 
Thomond returned to Ireland in December and was pardoned by Sidney after publicly confessing his treason. The following April he surrendered his lands to the queen and obtained leave to travel to court to solicit their restoration. He received a warrant for the restoration in June 1573, but was prevented from travelling to court due to his own precarious position in Thomond. In 1572 Thomond hanged three poets in his territory. Though an isolated incident it earned him the enmity of the Gaelic learned classes who vilified him in verse: 'The earl of the I Bhriain, an enemy of the schools, is the most dangerous of monsters; he is a monster whom no man should trust; he is instructed in petty stratagems. (O Cuiv, 132)' Thomond's enemies among the O'Briens, moreover, had not melted away and the two factions clashed at Ard na gCabog, in Thomond, in 1573. The fighting continued intermittently until April 1576 when Sidney was once again forced to intervene. Despite the earl's favourable disposition toward the government, the lord deputy had to acknowledge Donnell O'Brien's superior position and ability. He insisted that Thomond surrender his authority to O'Brien who was made sheriff of co. Clare. Spent from years of feuding and in no position to challenge O'Brien militarily, Thomond sought an audience with Elizabeth to press his claims and those of his son. He repaired to England in autumn 1577 and in October a warrant for a new patent was issued upholding the terms of his former patent. His son's succession assured, he remained on good terms with the government despite the introduction of composition during his absence. He died in January 1581 and was buried in the abbey of Ennis, co. Clare. He was succeeded by Ibrackan. In a life marked by contradiction and struggle Thomond failed to exert control over his kinsmen and was uncomfortable with his transition from Gaelic chief to English landlord. Yet his ultimate acceptance of English sovereignty allowed his son, later president of Munster, to acquiesce more fully in English rule. The four masters note that he was: 'the first man of the descendants of Cormac Cas who had sat in his father's place over that portion of Munster possessed by the descendants of Lughaidh Meann, a junior branch [of his family], who had wrested the government of his principality from the hands of his seniors, according to the laws, regulations, and ordinances of the sovereign of England. ('AFM', s.a. 1580)' 



@@@@@


doc= 20447


O'Brien, Daniel, first Viscount Clare (1577?-1663), politician and soldier, was the third and youngest son of Conor O'Brien, third earl of Thomond (c.1535-1581), and his second wife, Una 
(Owyne; died 1589)
, daughter of Turlough Mac I Brien Arra of co. Tipperary. Unlike his protestant brother Donough O'Brien and his nephews, Henry and Barnabas O'Brien, he remained a staunch Catholic throughout his life. During the Nine Years' War he fought for the crown. In 1598 he defended his brother Donough's estates in co. Clare from rebels under the command of the earl of Tyrone but was forced to surrender Ibrickan Castle in 1599. He was wounded during the assault, and the insurgents took him prisoner, but released him a week later. On the return of his brother Donough from England, O'Brien fought alongside him for the remainder of the war and in July 1604 received a knighthood and lands for his loyalty; henceforth he was known for most of his adult life as Sir Daniel O'Brien of Moyarta and Carrigholt. In 1600 he married Lady Catherine, third daughter of Gerald Fitzgerald, sixteenth earl of Desmond; they had four sons and seven daughters. 
In 1613 O'Brien sat as MP for County Clare and became involved in the furore over the election of the speaker of the House of Commons, allegedly holding the Catholic candidate, Sir John Everard, in the chair. Summoned to England to answer for his conduct, he escaped with a reprimand (perhaps due to the influence of Donough, who had been dispatched to court as an agent for the government). In 1634 he was re-elected MP for County Clare in place of his nephew Barnabas who had gone to England, but clashed with Lord Deputy Wentworth in parliament over the proposed plantation of Connaught. Increasingly the Anglicizing and tenurial policies of the earls of Thomond aroused O'Brien's ire and he complained that the fourth earl had forcibly acquired lands from McNamarras prior to 1624, 'being then Lord President of Munster and so powerful that [none] could or dare oppose him in any his actions', and that the fifth earl was 'so powerful, so wealthy and allied and befriended with all the gent[lemen] Freeholders in the several countries of this kingdom as your supplicant [O'Brien] may not expect any indifference of trial to be had by course of common law' (petition of February 1637, Thomond papers, Petworth House Archives, W. Sussex RO). 
O'Brien was an active confederate during the 1640s, and regularly sat in the general assemblies. He took part in the siege of Ballyally Castle, co. Clare, but in 1645 his nephew Barnabas pre-empted his attempt to seize Bunratty Castle by surrendering it to forces loyal to parliament. His own castle of Carrigholt, co. Clare, fell to the Cromwellians on 7 November 1651. Despite this he appears to have reached an accommodation with the Cromwellian army and was one of twenty-six major Catholic landowners to secure an exemption from the 'Act for the Settling of Ireland' (1652), perhaps thanks to the marriages of two of his sons to prominent protestant families. The influence enjoyed by his grandson Daniel O'Brien at the exiled royalist court ensured that O'Brien was named in Charles II's 'gracious declaration' (30 November 1660), and raised to the peerage as Baron Moyarta and Viscount Clare in 1662 (patent of 11 July). He died the following year. His heir, Donough, predeceased him, and Conor ('c'.1605- 'c'.1670), his second son, succeeded to the viscountcy. Like his father Conor had been an active confederate, representing County Clare on the supreme council. He married his third cousin, Honora, daughter of Daniel O'Brien of Dough, and had seven daughters and one son, Daniel. Thanks to the latter's royalist contacts, the 'Act of Settlement' (1662) and the 'Act for Explanation' (1665) restored the family to their pre-war estates and to a house in Limerick. An extant lease of 1667 suggests that the second viscount was an 'improving' landlord, requiring his tenants to enclose an acre of land with a stone wall, to build a stone house, and to plough any land 'after the English manner' (Ainsworth, 365). 


@@@@@


doc= 20448


O'Brien, Daniel, styled third Viscount Clare (c.1630-1690), army officer, was the only son among eight children of Conor O'Brien, later second Viscount Clare ('c'.1605- 'c'.1670), and his wife, Honora (died in or after 1701), daughter of Daniel O'Brien of Dough, co. Clare. Nothing is known of his education or early life, except that during the interregnum he served for a time in the Spanish army. He also attended the exiled Charles II, with whom he possessed sufficient influence at the Restoration to secure a peerage for his paternal grandfather, Sir Daniel O'Brien, third son of the second earl of Thomond, together with the restoration of his immense estate in co. Clare. 
O'Brien succeeded to both title and estate upon the death of his father. His principal residence was Carrigaholt Castle on the Shannon estuary, where he strove to become 'the greatest breeder of horses in the king's dominions' (O'Brien, 182). He married in or before 1670 Philadelphia ('bap'. 1644, died in or after 1699), daughter of Francis Lennard, fourteenth Baron Dacre (1619-1662). Two sons were born of the marriage: Daniel O'Brien, styled fourth Viscount Clare ('c'.1669-1693), and Charles O'Brien, styled fifth Viscount Clare (1670-1706). 
The marriage of Clare's brother-in-law Thomas Lennard, fifteenth Lord Dacre and later earl of Sussex, to a bastard daughter of Charles II probably helped to influence his appointment in 1674 as colonel of a new Irish regiment in the Anglo-Dutch brigade. The following year he was accused of spying for the French and lost his command. As a Francophile and a Roman Catholic, he was disliked by the duke of Ormond, who viewed with scepticism his claim, during the Titus Oates terror, that he was a protestant who was active in hunting priests. He took the deception too far in 1681 when he organized a petition in Ireland to condemn Charles II's prorogation of the whig-dominated English parliament during the exclusion crisis. This provoked the king to order his removal from the Irish bench as a justice of the peace and from his command of a militia troop. He remained out of favour for the remainder of Charles's reign. 
In 1689, when James II attempted to recover his lost thrones with Irish Catholic support, Clare was made an Irish privy councillor and lord lieutenant of co. Clare. In the same year he attended the Irish parliament, as did his elder son, Daniel, who represented County Clare in the Commons. Clare made a notable contribution to the enlargement of the Irish army, raising a dragoon regiment, mounted from the resources of his horse farm, and two infantry regiments commanded by his sons. He initially commanded the regiments in Cork, but his harsh treatment of the local merchants displeased James, and he was replaced in February 1690. In July he commanded his regiment on the right of the Jacobite position at the battle of the Boyne. It was alleged that his dragoons were the first to flee the scene, but later they redeemed their reputation by helping to escort the French artillery to safety. However, the setbacks of the campaign increased Clare's disillusionment with the Jacobite leadership, and in August 1690 he wrote to Louvois, who held him in some regard, begging Louis XIV to take over Ireland and win it back from William. Despite this he was a member of the military council appointed to advise the duke of Berwick, who became commander of the Irish army in September 1690. 
Clare died on 19 or 21 November 1690, probably at Carrigaholt Castle. Having been outlawed with his sons for high treason, his estate of 30,000 acres in Clare was confiscated after the war. His son and successor, Daniel, styled fourth Viscount Clare, was wounded in action with his regiment at the battle of Marsaglia, and died at Pignerol in 1693. He in turn was succeeded by his younger brother, Charles. 


@@@@@


doc= 20449


Ua Briain, Domnall Mor (d. 1194), king of Thomond, was the son of Toirdelbach Ua Briain (died 1167), king of Thomond. He became king in 1168, blinding his brother, Brian, in the same year. His marriage to Orlaith, daughter of Diarmait Mac Murchada (died 1171), king of Leinster, may be presumed to have taken place following his accession and Mac Murchada's return from exile with Anglo-Norman mercenaries. In 1170 Mac Murchada sent Anglo-Norman forces to assist Ua Briain in repelling an invasion by Ruaidri Ua Conchobair, king of Connacht, and contender for the high-kingship. The following year Ruaidri took hostages from Domnall and they besieged the Anglo-Norman garrison in Dublin together; but subsequently Ua Briain campaigned in Osraige with his brother-in-law, Richard fitz Gilbert, earl of Pembroke and lord of Striguil, known as Strongbow. On Henry II's arrival, Ua Briain submitted to him, thereby rejecting the high-kingship of Ruaidri Ua Conchobair. 
In 1173 Ua Briain destroyed the castle of Kilkenny following the retreat to Waterford by the Anglo-Norman garrison in advance of his forces and the next year he overcame an Anglo-Norman raiding party at Thurles, which suffered heavy casualties. In 1175 he treacherously slew a son of Mac Gilla Patraic, king of Osraige, and blinded dynastic rivals, Diarmait and Mathgamain Ua Briain, in his residence at Caislen Ui Chonaing (Castleconnell, Limerick). Ruaidri Ua Conchobair took retaliatory action for this deed by attempting to remove Ua Briain from the kingship of Thomond. Ruaidri may have sought to use the treaty of Windsor, negotiated with Henry II in 1175, to wrest control of the city of Limerick from Domnall; but the Anglo-Norman garrison (which installed itself in Limerick in 1175) abandoned the city to Ua Briain in 1176 and Limerick was not retaken by Anglo-Normans until after his death. The importance of his control of Limerick is evidenced by his use of the title king of Limerick in his charters; he was described likewise by Gerald of Wales and in the so-called 'Song of Dermot and the Earl'. During the expedition to Ireland of John, son of Henry II, in 1185, the Anglo-Norman garrison of Ardfinnan was twice attacked and suffered fatalities at Ua Briain's hands, although he himself incurred casualties inflicted by the Anglo-Norman garrison of Tibberaghny. In 1192 he won a significant military victory over an Anglo-Norman force at Thurles and in 1193 the castle of Briginis (Breckinish Island in the Shannon estuary) was built by Anglo-Normans 'with the consent of Ua Briain' as a check on Domnall Mac Carthaig, king of Desmond. 
An original charter in favour of the Cistercian abbey of Holycross, which Ua Briain founded, survives, as well as a charter-text in favour of Brictius, bishop of Limerick. He was responsible for embellishing St Mary's Cathedral in Limerick as well as the cathedral church of St Flannan, Killaloe, of which his brother, Consaidin, was bishop from 1179 to 1194. Ua Briain successfully reconstituted the kingship of Thomond, which had been seriously weakened following the defeat incurred by his father, Toirdelbach, at the battle of Moin Mor in 1151. In 1177 Henry II made a speculative grant of the 'kingdom of Limerick' to Philip de Briouze but it remained unrealized during Domnall's lifetime. He retained his kingdom intact against incursions by the Meic Carthaig of Desmond, the Meic Gilla Patraic of Osraige, and the Ui Conchobair of Connacht, as well as by Anglo-Normans. Some annals style him king of Munster at his death in 1194. Domnall's death was followed by bitter disputes between his three sons. It was ultimately the second of these, Donnchad Cairprech O Briain, who established himself as king of Thomond, while his elder brother, Muirchertach Finn, became king of Limerick. 


@@@@@


doc= 20450


O'Brien, Donat Henchy (1785-1857), naval officer, second son of Michael O'Brien of Ennistimon, co. Clare, was born in Ireland in March 1785 into a family claiming descent from one of the ancient kings of Ireland. He entered the navy in 1796, on the 'Overyssel' (64 guns), in which, despite his youth, he was employed on boat service. In 1799 he was put in command of a hoy laden with stone, to be sunk at the entrance of Goree harbour so as to block in three enemy line-of-battle ships. In a sudden squall the hoy sank in the wrong place at the wrong time, and O'Brien and his men were with difficulty rescued. He passed his examination in February 1803, and a year later was master's mate of the frigate 'Hussar' when she was wrecked on the Ile de Sein on 8 February 1804. O'Brien was sent as a prisoner of war to Verdun, where he remained for three years before trying to escape. Two of his attempts failed, owing to severe hardship from cold, wet, and hunger; a third attempt proved successful, and in November 1808 he, with Henry Ashworth and another companion, reached Trieste, and finally boarded the 'Amphion', from which he was sent to Malta. There he joined the 'Ocean' (98 guns), flagship of Lord Collingwood. The latter promoted him, on 29 March 1809, lieutenant of the 'Warrior' (74 guns), in which he served at the capture of the Ionian Islands. In March 1810 he was appointed to the 'Amphion', and was still in her in the action off Lissa, in the Adriatic, on 13 March 1811, when a British frigate squadron under Captain William Hoste defeated a larger Franco-Venetian force. In November 1811 he followed Hoste to the 'Bacchante' (38 guns) and, after repeatedly distinguishing himself in the arduous and dashing service of the frigates and their boats, was promoted commander on 22 January 1813. In 1814 O'Brien published 'The narrative of Captain O'Brien, R.N., containing an account of his shipwreck, captivity, and escape from France'. 
From 1818 to 1821 O'Brien commanded the 'Slaney' (20 guns), on the South American station, which then included the west coast. On 5 March 1821 he was promoted captain, though the news did not reach him for some months. In October he was relieved in the 'Slaney', and returned to England. He married, on 28 June 1825, Hannah, youngest daughter of John Walmsley of Castle Mere in Lancashire; they had seven children. In 1839 he published, in two volumes, 'My Adventures during the Late War'. In conjunction, to some extent, with the similar narratives by Edward Boys and Henry Ashworth, it formed the basis for part of Marryat's 'Peter Simple'. 
O'Brien had no further service after 1821, but was promoted rear-admiral on the reserved list on 8 March 1852. He died at Yew House, Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire, on 13 May 1857. A memorial window was placed in Broxbourne church. 


@@@@@


doc= 20451


O Briain, Donnchad Cairprech (d. 1242), king of Thomond, was one of three surviving sons of Domnall Mor Ua Briain, king of Thomond (d. 1194). It is not certain when Donnchad became king, but he appears to have emerged as the leading member of his turbulent family when King John knighted him in 1210. Longevity was not a notable feature of leadership in the Gaelic world, yet Donnchad successfully held his ground for more than thirty years in the face of internal strife and the wiles of his Irish and Norman foes. This was no mean achievement in circumstances where the Normans were triumphant everywhere along his borders. 
O Briain's early years were preoccupied with the struggles for the succession. His brother Muirchertach appears to have succeeded to the kingship in 1194, but almost immediately there was fraternal strife. A third brother, Conchobhar, emerged as the initial victor by capturing Donnchad in 1196, allying himself with the Normans in the following year, and seizing the kingship from Muirchertach in 1198. His triumph was short-lived, for in 1202 he was killed by his deposed brother's followers. Trouble broke out afresh in 1207, when Muirchertach, who had attacked Norman castles in northern Tipperary, was betrayed by Donnchad to the English of Limerick. He remained in captivity until his release in 1210. 
Political ascendancy was reinforced by royal favour. King John knighted O Briain at Waterford in 1210, and thereafter appears to have regarded him as a tenant-in-chief, holding land for an annual rent of 60 marks. He immediately awarded him the custody of William de Burgh's strategic castle of Carrigogunnell, near Limerick, possibly because O Briain was married to William's daughter. It also suggests that John intended to use O Briain to counter the ambitions of the Norman lords in north Munster. Nevertheless, he stopped short of recognizing him as king of Thomond: royal writs addressed to Donnchad during John's reign conspicuously avoided the title. Nor was O Briain granted exclusive lordship of Thomond. The king retained three cantreds in Corcu Baiscinn and the cantred of Tradree, which he granted to the justiciar, John de Gray, who in turn granted them to Reginald of Finegal and Thomas fitz Adam. Muirchertach O Briain seems to have been regarded in royal sources as a tenant-in-chief also, holding territory in Thomond by annual rent. 
Donnchad O Briain was careful to avoid direct conflict with either the crown or the great Norman lords. Only once did he incur royal disfavour, when in 1234 he made fine for having sided with William (II) Marshal. For this lapse he paid heavily when Thomond was ravaged by the justiciar in the following year. He allied himself with the Normans in raids on the Mac Carthaigh kingdom of Desmond in 1201, 1206, and 1214, while in 1225 and 1230 he was similarly involved in invasions of Connacht. His father had been no friend of the Mac Carthaighs, so the outlines of traditional rivalries are discernible behind such alliances. Much the same is probably true of O Briain's interventions in Connacht in support of the sons of Cathal Croibhdhearg O Conchobhair, whose wife, Mor (died 1217/18) was Donnchad's sister. It was no doubt on the basis of his prosecution of traditional rivalries that O Briain earned the approval of the chronicler in the annals of Inisfallen on his death in 1242: 'there was not during his time a better Munsterman, or one more affable, or of greater retinue, or better provided with victuals than he'. According to Sir James Ware (died 1666), Donnchad was buried in the Dominican convent, Limerick. 
O Briain was predeceased by his wife, Sadh (died 1240), daughter of O Cennetig. An earlier marriage to an unnamed daughter of William de Burgh is attested only by a comparatively late Gaelic source. His son Conchobhar O Briain (d. 1268) succeeded him as king of Thomond. His remaining sons, Muirchertach and Tairdelbhach, died in 1242. His daughter Sadb, wife of Sefraid O Donnchada, was killed in 1253. 


@@@@@


doc= 20452


Mac Briain, Donnchad (d. 1064), king of Munster, was the son of Brian Boruma (d. 1014) and of Gormlaith (died 1030), the sister of Mael Morda Ua Faelain, king of Leinster, and former wife of Olaf (Amlaib), king of the Dublin vikings. The battle of Clontarf in 1014 greatly weakened Brian's descendants, the Ui Briain of Dal Cais in north Munster. This was a time of intense competition among the provincial Irish kings and Mac Briain had great difficulty in retaining power over Munster. He had little prospect of continuing his father's attempts to extend control over much of Ireland and faced internal opposition. His half-brother Tadc was an equal claimant to the kingship and several Munster dynasties began to assert themselves at this time. In 1023 Donnchad had Tadc assassinated and at this point he began to show his power. In 1025 he marched north into Connacht, plundered the capital Cruachu, and returned with hostages. The following year he began to extend his influence to the east, taking hostages from Meath, Brega, Norse Dublin, and Leinster, and returned with the king of Osraige to Kincora, an Ui Briain stronghold. A significant recognition of his authority is recorded in this year when Abbot Amalgaid of Armagh and his 'venerable clerics' (annals of Inisfallen, s.a. 1026) spent Easter at Kincora. 
Events in east Munster and Leinster cut short Donnchad Mac Briain's advance. Toward the end of the decade the kingdom of Osraige reached the zenith of its power under Donnchad Mac Gilla Padraig. The ruling Leinster dynasty of Ui Dunlainge lost out to the rising Ui Chennselaig led by the dynamic Diarmait mac Mael na mBo, whose wife was Derbforgaill (died 1080), Donnchad Mac Briain's daughter. Both Mac Gilla Padraig and Diarmait -- frequently acting together -- resisted the ambitions of the king of Munster. From this point, Mac Briain's influence was contained to the north-west by the powerful Aed Ua Conchobair, king of Connacht, and balanced by Diarmait mac Mael na mBo in Leinster to the south-east. However, it was the emergence of Toirdelbach Ua Briain, the son of his assassinated brother, that brought about the powerful combination of these two forces and Mac Briain's downfall. 
In 1051 Aed Ua Conchobair invaded Munster and Donnchad Mac Briain's son Domnall Ban died in the encounter. Although Aed and Diarmait mac Mael na mBo were Donnchad's natural enemies, it is likely that their concerted attacks on Munster about 1054 were the result of Toirdelbach Ua Briain's intrigues. In that year Aed, with the support of Toirdelbach, attacked north Munster while Diarmait and the men of Osraige attacked from the east. In 1058 Toirdelbach, with the backing of Diarmait, again marched against his uncle. Donnchad had no choice but to flee before their advance, preferring to burn the city of Limerick rather than see it fall into their hands. When he did engage his enemies shortly after, at the battle of Sliab Crot, he suffered defeat. These events probably forced on Donnchad the realization of how destructive a joint assault could be. To outmanoeuvre Toirdelbach and escape such combined attacks in the future, Donnchad submitted to King Aed of Connacht in 1060. The tactic was unsuccessful, for in 1061 Aed destroyed Donnchad's fort of Kincora and burned the Dal Cais ecclesiastical centre of Killaloe. Diarmait of Leinster and Toirdelbach marched into Munster and secured the submission of the nobles of the plain of Munster. Donnchad's son, Murchad in Sceith Girr ('Murchad of the Short Shield'), resisted Toirdelbach without success. When Diarmait departed, Toirdelbach was confronted by an army put in the field by Donnchad and his son. Again, Toirdelbach emerged victorious and was soon supported by the return of Diarmait. Mac Briain acknowledged defeat and left on pilgrimage for Rome, where he died in 1064. He is buried in the church of Santo Stefano Rotondo on the Caelian Hill, where a later plaque records him as king of Cashel and Thomond. 
Although Donnchad Mac Briain's career has been seen as disappointing when compared to that of his father, Brian Boruma, he did manage to secure his position as king of Munster and retained the kingship for four decades. In the early, dynamic, period of his career he attempted to continue his father's campaign to control Leinster and the east, a campaign that was realized in the reigns of his nephew Toirdelbach Ua Briain and great-nephew Muirchertach Ua Briain. An entry inserted in the annals of Inisfallen recording Mac Briain's marriage in 1032 to a daughter of Ragnall testifies to his interest in establishing dynastic links with the Norse. The genealogies in the 'Book of Lecan' record that Donnchad had twelve sons, and elsewhere Gormlaith, daughter of Ua Donnocain, king of Ara, is named as Murchad's mother. Donnchad's activity in proclaiming ecclesiastical ordinances and his convening of a Munster synod show a ruler intent on extending royal prerogatives and also point the way to the reforming practices of his Ui Briain successors, who made Munster the centre of church reform. The annals of Inisfallen record how Donnchad enacted a law in 1040 which attempted to enforce strict sabbatarianism. The annals of the four masters refer to a Munster synod held in 1050 at Killaloe under Donnchad's presidency 'where they enacted a law and a restraint upon every injustice, from small to great. God gave peace and favourable weather in consequence of this law' ('AFM', s.a. 1050). Despite the exaggeration that can be expected from such sources, Donnchad Mac Briain's career was indeed largely peaceful. At a time when a ruler's success was measured by his ability to wage war, perhaps a different criterion should be applied to Donnchad and due recognition be given to his achievement in maintaining both peace and his grip on power. 


@@@@@


doc= 20453


O'Brien, Donough, fourth earl of Thomond (d. 1624), nobleman, was the eldest son of Conor O'Brien, third earl of Thomond (d. 1581), and his second wife, Una (died 1589), daughter of Turlough Mac I Brien Arra of Arra, co. Tipperary. He was educated at Elizabeth's court and was described as 'as truly English as if he had been born in Middlesex' ('CSP Ire.', '1600', 111). He was still at the court in 1577 when he was mentioned in a new patent granted to his father (7 October) as baron of Ibrickan in Clare. Shired by Sir Henry Sidney in 1565, the county was then added to the province of Connaught. Due to Donough O'Brien's persistence in seeking the county's removal from Connaught jurisdiction it was assigned to Munster in 1602. O'Brien succeeded his father as fourth earl of Thomond in 1581 and returned to Ireland the following year. By 1585 new arrangements for the government of the province, known as the composition of Connaught, were introduced. These involved the introduction of rent payments instead of dues and services, and abolished the names, styles, and titles of native Irish authorities. Thomond was declared overlord of the main portion of his lordship but did not secure a palatine jurisdiction like that held by the earls of Ormond or Desmond, though it was said that 'he lookith for like libertyes in 'Toomond'' (Collins, 1.226). Rather, two large areas were put under the control of collateral branches of the O'Briens. Early suspicions of his loyalty on his return to Ireland may have stemmed from these divisions of patrimonial lands. However, he proved that his loyalty was in no doubt, shrewdly calculating that he had more to gain as an earl with an English-style title than as the Gaelic O'Brien. Accordingly he was assiduous in his attendance on the lord deputy, Sir John Perrot, in 1584, and in April 1585 he attended the parliament in Dublin. He keenly promoted English reforms and subdued rival O'Briens, and was appointed to the Connaught council in 1588. 
Thomond played a prominent part as a staunch ally of the crown during the war against Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone. In July 1595 he commanded a large force to the Erne fords and succeeded in penetrating the territory of Tyrone's ally Red Hugh O'Donnell in modern Donegal, but had to withdraw the following month. In September 1596 the then lord deputy Sir William Russell sent him to aid in the defence of Newry with five companies of foot soldiers and 145 horse. In 1597 he accompanied Russell and commanded in the campaigns of Russell's successor, Thomas, Lord Burgh, mainly on the borders of Ulster at the Blackwater Fort. For most of 1598 he was back in London during a year in which O'Neill's victories encouraged insurrection throughout Ireland. On 6 December he was given a royal warrant to command the forces of Munster, but under the jurisdiction of Sir Thomas Norris, lord president of the province. 
In Clare, Thomond's brother Tadhg or Teige O'Brien of Dromore had been accused of seeking aid for the O'Neill cause from the king of Spain. He was imprisoned in Limerick and released on protesting his loyalty, but joined Red Hugh O'Donnell when, in 1599, he reinvested north Connaught and again invaded Clare. O'Donnell captured most of the castles, ravaged the countryside, and took prisoner Thomond's other, youngest, brother Daniel O'Brien, who was defending the territory in his absence. On his return from England, Thomond spent three months in Kilkenny with his kinsman the earl of Ormond collecting forces and ordnance from Limerick to recover his possessions and avenge his brother's capture. That summer he laid siege to such castles as resisted. Dunbeg, defending the Bay of Dunmore, surrendered to him instantly but he had the entire garrison hanged in couples on trees. During the remainder of the year he accompanied the new chief governor, the second earl of Essex, on his Munster progress, was appointed governor of co. Clare on 15 August, and made a member of the Munster council on 22 September. He vigorously assisted Sir George Carew, president of Munster, in the prosecution of the war throughout 1600. In April, while in a parley with Owen McRory O'More which ended in a melee, he and Carew narrowly escaped capture and though Thomond received a pike wound in the back, he managed to save Carew's life. He was also in the thick of the action against Florence MacCarthy Reagh (confirmed as the MacCarthy More by Hugh O'Neill), helping to bring him to submission in May 1600. In June he was in Clare repulsing further O'Donnell raids. He entertained the new lord deputy, Mountjoy, at Bunratty Castle, which he was later to refortify and glaze. In February 1601 he held an assize in Limerick at which sixteen men were hanged. Again he went to England to pursue his causes, especially to get his patrimonial lands transferred into Munster. Fynes Moryson, Mountjoy's secretary, thought Thomond much preferred attendance at court to action in the field, a comment perhaps occasioned by the usual delays in England in getting reinforcements to Ireland. 
At length Thomond set off from Bristol with 1000 foot and 100 horse and, though some of his ships were blown off course, made a landing at Castlehaven on 11 November 1601. He proceeded to encamp on the west side of Kinsale on Ballincubby Hill to prevent a junction between the besieged Spaniards and O'Donnell, and took a prominent part in the ensuing siege and battle. After the Spanish surrender he proceeded to mop up pockets of resistance in the Bantry Bay area. The siege of Dunboy (11-18 June), which had been fortified by Donal O'Sullivan Beare and was resolutely held by its constable, Richard MacGeoghegan, was his last great military action. On its final capitulation on 18 June 1602 he hanged fifty-eight of the survivors. 
Once again Thomond sailed for England and in recognition of his 'forward services' his demand for the transfer of Clare was granted, despite the opposition of the lord deputy and the Irish council. He returned to Ireland in early October 1602 and, as a further reward, the queen ordered his name be placed next to those of the lord deputy and the lord chief justice in commissions of oyer and terminer and gaol delivery. In September 1603 his governorship of co. Clare was confirmed and he was appointed to the Irish privy council. On 30 July 1604 he was appointed constable of Carlow, and subsequently given a grant of that manor. In the 1613 parliament he strongly supported the protestant party in opposition to the recusants in the disputes over the election of the speaker to the Irish House of Commons, although he had previously blocked the attempt of the administration to exclude certain Catholic Munster peers from parliament. On 6 May 1615 he became lord president of Munster. He proved an energetic lord president, moved the presidency headquarters to Limerick, and acquired former plantation lands in co. Limerick. He became one of the sureties for Florence MacCarthy Reagh, who, since his surrender in 1600, had been in the Tower, where he wrote on the antiquities and prehistory of Ireland and dedicated these studies to Thomond. 
Thomond was married twice, first to Eveleen or Ellen (died 1583), daughter of Maurice Roche, Viscount Fermoy. By his second marriage, to Lady Elizabeth (died 1618), fourth daughter of Gerard Fitzgerald, eleventh earl of Kildare, he had two sons, Henry, fifth earl (died 1639), and Barnabas or Barnaby O'Brien, sixth earl of Thomond (1590/91-1657). Tadhg O'Brien survived until at least 20 January 1642, while Daniel O'Brien, later first Viscount Clare, became a leading confederate. Elizabeth, countess of Thomond, died on 12 January 1618 and her husband on 5 September 1624. He was buried in St Mary's Cathedral, Limerick, where a fine monument with a marble incised inscription was erected to his memory by his son Henry; it was destroyed in 1642, and re-erected by Henry, the seventh earl, in 1678. In a letter of 27 September 1600 George Carey, Lord Hunsdon, had written: 'If the rest of the Irish nobility had followed the example of my noble friend the Earl of Thomond her Majesty's expenses and losses had never been as they are and will be. His services hath proceeded out of a true nobleness of mind and from no great encouragement received from hence. (Brewer and Bullen, 3.450)' 



@@@@@


doc= 20454


O'Brien, Edward (1808-1840), author, third son of the nine children of Sir Edward O'Brien, fourth baronet (1773-1837), of Dromoland, co. Clare, and his wife, Charlotte (died 1856), daughter of William Smith of Cahirmoyle, co. Limerick, was born at Dromoland on 6 December 1808. Through his father, the MP for Ennis and County Clare, he could claim descent from Brian Boru and the kings of Thomond. His elder brother was William Smith O'Brien, the Irish rebel leader, while a younger sister, Harriet Monsell, became the founder of the Anglican community of St John Baptist at Clewer. After education at Bewdley, Worcestershire, he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, on 1 February 1825 and there read law, graduating BA in 1829 and MA in 1832. He was a friend and contemporary at Cambridge of Richard Monckton Milnes and, like his brother William before him, was elected to membership of the Apostles. Having been admitted to the Inner Temple on 30 January 1828, he entered King's Inn, Dublin, the following year and was called to the Irish bar in 1832. 
As a young man O'Brien underwent a religious crisis, on which he corresponded with Richard Whately, Robert Southey, and R. C. Trench, but having recovered his Christian faith dedicated himself to charitable work and founded a night refuge in Dublin for the destitute poor. His one literary work, 'The lawyer: his character and rule of holy life, after the manner of George Herbert's country parson', published posthumously in 1842, was an idealized depiction, in the archaic language of Herbert and Hooker, of the Christian lawyer's 'high and holy calling'. On 15 August 1839 O'Brien married Louisa Susan, daughter of James Massy-Dawson MP, of Ballynacourty, co. Tipperary. He died of a sudden fever on 19 May 1840 at Whitkirk vicarage, Yorkshire, the home of his brother-in-law, the Revd A. Martineau, leaving his widow in what a contemporary obituarist termed 'a peculiarly interesting and delicate situation'. She bore a son three months after his death. His friend Aubrey de Vere contributed an introduction to 'The Lawyer' and in his later 'Recollections' paid tribute to the author's 'benevolence and candour'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20455


O'Brien, Henry (1808-1835), antiquary, was born in co. Kerry. His parentage is unknown. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1831. In 1832 he wrote a dissertation on 'The round towers of Ireland' for the prize offered by the Royal Irish Academy. Although he did not win the prize, he was awarded a small gratuity. In 1833 he published a translation of a work by Estengo Villanueva, under the title 'Phoenician Ireland', but his introduction and notes were ridiculed as fanciful by a reviewer in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. In 1834 he published 'The round towers of Ireland, or, The mysteries of freemasonry, of Sabaism, and of Budhism for the first time unveiled'. The object of this work (which was an expanded version of his prize essay) was to show that the round towers were Buddhistic remains. The book was condemned as wild and extravagant in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and by George Petrie, a fellow Irish antiquary. Thomas Moore wrote a hostile review in the 'Edinburgh Review', and, in response O'Brien accused Moore of appropriating his discoveries in his 'History of Ireland'. F. S. Mahony, known as Father Prout, a warm friend and admirer of O'Brien's, came to his defence in 'The Reliques of Father Prout' (1836). 
Enthusiastic and self-deluding, O'Brien spoke of compiling a dictionary of Celtic, a subject of which he knew nothing. He also announced that he was writing a book on the pyramids of Egypt but it was never published. He died on 28 June 1835 in the house of a friend, at The Hermitage, Hanwell, Middlesex. He was buried in Hanwell churchyard. A fanciful sketch by Daniel Maclise of O'Brien lying on his deathbed appeared in Prout's 'Reliques'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20456


O'Bryen, James, third marquess of Thomond (1769-1855), naval officer, was second son of Edward O'Bryen (died March 1801), army captain, and his wife, Mary Carrick. His uncle, Murrough O'Bryen, was first marquess of Thomond. As a captain's servant, O'Bryen entered the navy on 17 April 1783 on the 'Hebe', stationed in the channel. From 1786 to 1789 he was a midshipman in the frigates 'Pegasus' and 'Andromeda', both commanded by the duke of Clarence, under whom he also served with the Channel Fleet in the 'Valiant' in 1790. Promoted lieutenant on 19 November 1790, O'Bryen joined, in succession, on the home station, the 'London' (98 guns), the 'Artois' (38 guns), and the 'Brunswick' (74 guns). In the last he was present at Cornwallis's retreat from a greatly superior French force off Brest on 16 and 17 June 1795. On 5 December 1796 he was promoted to command the sloop 'Childers'. 
O'Bryen married, on 25 November 1800, Eliza Bridgman (died 14 Feb 1802), second daughter of James Willyams of Carnanton, Cornwall. From 1800 to 1804 he commanded the 'Emerald' (36 guns), on the West Indian station, where, on 24 June 1803, he captured the 'Enfant Prodigue', a French schooner of 16 guns, and in the spring of 1804 distinguished himself in forwarding the supplies at the capture of Surinam, as well as by defeating a projected enemy expedition against Antigua. In 1806, while in the West Indies, he married Jane Horsford (died 8 Sept 1843), daughter of Thomas Ottley, and widow of Valentine Horne Horsford, of Antigua. In February 1808 his uncle, the marquess, died and his brother, William, succeeded to the title. O'Bryen was advanced to the same precedency as if his father had succeeded to the marquessate of Thomond, and he was henceforth known as Lord James O'Bryen. From September 1813 until November 1815 he served in the channel in the 'Warspite' (74 guns). He became rear-admiral in 1825. 
On the accession of William IV, O'Bryen was made a lord of the bedchamber, and was made GCH on 13 May 1831. He was made vice-admiral in 1837 and succeeded his brother, William O'Bryen, on 21 August 1846, as the third marquess of Thomond in the Irish peerage. In January 1847, at Bath, he married Anne Fane (died 22 Oct 1874), daughter of William Flint, sister of Sir Charles William Flint, and widow of Rear-Admiral Fane. He became a full admiral on 13 May 1847, and an admiral of the red in 1853. He died at his home near Bath on 3 July 1855, and was buried in the catacombs of St Saviour's Church, Walcot, Bath, on 10 July. O'Bryen left no children, so the marquessate of Thomond became extinct; of his subsidiary titles the earldom of Inchiquin became extinct but the barony of Inchiquin devolved to a male heir. 


@@@@@


doc= 20457


O'Brien, James (1804-1864), Chartist, was born at Granard, co. Longford, Ireland, in early February 1804, the second son of Daniel O'Brien and his wife, Mary Kearney. His father, who was a wine and spirit merchant and a tobacco manufacturer in co. Longford, failed in business during O'Brien's childhood, and died soon after. O'Brien was educated at the local parochial school and then at Edgeworthstown School, which had been promoted by Richard Lovell Edgeworth. He then went to Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1829. He entered the King's Inns, Dublin, and then went to London, where he was admitted as a law student at Gray's Inn in March 1830. In London he met Henry Hunt and William Cobbett. 
In 1831 Henry Hetherington started up and edited the 'Poor Man's Guardian', but O'Brien became its effective editor and also contributed to Hetherington's 'Poor Man's Conservative'. He signed his articles Bronterre, and from this moment called himself James Bronterre O'Brien. At first O'Brien adopted many of William Cobbett's views on the national debt and the currency, but soon he began to develop his own ideas. He read widely in the literature of the French Revolution, and visited France on three occasions in 1837-8. In 1836 his translated edition of Buonarotti's 'History of Babeuf's Conspiracy' was published and in 1838 the first volume of his eulogistic 'Life of Robespierre' appeared. By this time O'Brien's own opinions were insurrectionary and socialistic. In 1837 he began 'Bronterre's National Reformer', which soon failed, and in 1838 'The Operative', which ended publication in July 1839. He had, meanwhile, married in the mid-1830s (the name of his wife is not known); he had four children. 
From the beginning of the Chartist movement O'Brien was one of its most prominent figures. He was a member of the original London Working Man's Association, and was a delegate to the Chartist meeting in Palace Yard (17 September 1838) which opened the campaign in London. In 1838 he joined Feargus O'Connor at the 'Northern Star', and toured the country as a 'missionary' lecturer. Although regarded as a physical-force advocate, O'Brien was careful not to overstep the limits of the law. As he put it in the draft of the Chartist convention's address (8 May 1839), 'it was his intention to tell the people to arm without saying so in so many words'. He represented the Chartists of Manchester at the Chartist convention in the spring of 1839, and opposed the plan for a general strike. 
As a result of the Newport rising of November 1839 a number of trials for sedition took place in the spring of 1840. O'Brien acted in his own defence and was acquitted at Newcastle in February on a charge of conspiracy, but was found guilty at Liverpool in April of seditious speaking. He was sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment. Towards the end of his sentence O'Brien and Feargus O'Connor both began to communicate with the press, and carried on a controversy with one another as to the best policy for Chartists to pursue at the general election of 1841. O'Connor advocated an active alliance with the Conservatives, while O'Brien opposed this. Although still in prison O'Brien stood as a Chartist candidate at Newcastle upon Tyne in the general election. 
Released in September 1841, O'Brien continued the series of bitter personal quarrels with O'Connor, whom he later called the Dictator. O'Connor in turn nicknamed him the Starved Viper. O'Brien resumed his journalistic career, using various editorships to put forward his views on currency reform and continue his attack on O'Connor. He edited the 'British Statesman' between June and December 1842, and in 1845 became editor of the 'National Reformer'. During the Chartist campaign against the Anti-Corn Law League, O'Brien argued that free trade would lower prices, and so increase the proportion of the national wealth that landlords and owners of stock were able to appropriate. In the 'National Reformer' he advocated 'symbolic money' and 'banks of credit accessible to all classes' (Gammage, 280). He opposed O'Connor's land scheme, and joined in with the moderate reform programme of the National Complete Suffrage Union. 
O'Brien was one of the delegates at the Chartist convention which met on 4 April 1848. He spoke strongly against physical force. However, on 9 April he withdrew from the convention on the grounds that the convention was likely to 'go too fast' (Plummer, 191) and collide with the government. After the failure of the Chartist petition in 1848, O'Brien worked with G. W. M. Reynolds on 'Reynolds' Political Instructor' and 'Reynolds' Weekly News'. In October 1849 he used the former journal to launch his National Reform League, which advocated nationalization of the land and the monetary system. During the 1850s O'Brien lived on his lecturing at the Eclectic Institute in Denmark Street, Soho, but never gave up the hope of more regular journalistic employment. His own weekly paper, the 'Power of the Pence', ran for five months during the winter and early spring of 1848-9, and during the following decade he hoped for work on papers as diverse as those of Reynolds, the Cobdenite 'Morning Star', and 'The Empire'. O'Brien also remained politically active during the 1850s. He wrote several pamphlets -- on Lord Palmerston, Lord Overstone, Napoleon Bonaparte, and Robespierre. He was a member of the Stop-the-War-League during the Crimean War, travelled to Tiverton in April 1857 with the intention of contesting Lord Palmerston's seat (he later withdrew), and in May 1858 established the National Political Union, which reiterated the call for the 'Charter'. O'Brien's later years were beset with poverty and alcohol-related illness. On several occasions his books were seized for debt. In February 1862 Charles Bradlaugh lectured for the 'Bronterre O'Brien testimonial fund'. 
O'Brien died at his home in Pentonville, London, on 23 December 1864. His wife survived him. In 1885 several of his followers published a series of his newspaper articles in book form, under the title of 'The Rise, Progress, and Phases of Human Slavery'. As Graham Wallas noted, O'Brien was one of the few Chartists whose radicalism was the product of an original mind. Posterity has treated him unkindly. His alcoholism and embittered personal relationships leave the impression of a rancorous and impracticable politician. But he was one of the few non-Utopian socialists in England. He developed a vision of an alternative society which was based on a definitive programme of nationalization of the land and of the monetary system. He was also probably the only Chartist who had any conception of popular insurrection and the means by which the labouring classes might appropriate power through a temporary dictatorship. For all his failings and idiosyncrasies O'Brien was a powerful character. He gained a large personal following among the artisans of Soho, who, in the aftermath of his death, became involved in both the Reform League and the First International. 


@@@@@


doc= 20458


O'Brien, James Thomas (1792-1874), Church of Ireland bishop of Ossory, Ferns, and Leighlin, born at New Ross, co. Wexford, on 27 September 1792, was the son of Michael Burke O'Brien (died 1826), a corporation officer with the title of deputy sovereign of New Ross, and Dorothy, daughter of Thomas Kough. His father, who came originally from co. Clare, was descended, although he himself became a protestant, from a Roman Catholic branch of the O'Brien family, which had been deprived of its property by the penal laws. James was educated at the endowed school at New Ross, which was supported by the corporation, and entered Trinity College, Dublin, as a pensioner in November 1810. A portion of the cost of his education was defrayed by the borough of New Ross; in September 1826 he refunded the amount -- $116 -- and was voted the freedom of the borough and a gold box. O'Brien obtained a scholarship at Trinity College in 1813 and graduated BA with gold medal in 1815. He was especially distinguished in mathematics, and in 1820 obtained a fellowship; having taken holy orders, he was created DD in 1831. He was one of the six Dublin University preachers from 1828 to 1842, and became Archbishop King's lecturer in 1833, when the divinity school in the university was thoroughly reorganized. 
O'Brien maintained strongly evangelical views throughout his life. He was well read in the works of the reformers and their opponents, and in those of Bishop Butler and the deists. His university sermons of 1829 and 1830 on the Reformation doctrine of justification by faith became, when published in 1833, a standard work. He lectured on 'The evidences of religion, with a special reference to sceptical and infidel attempts to invalidate them, and the Socinian controversy'. In 1836 he married Ellen (died 1906), second daughter of Edward Pennefather, lord chief justice of Ireland. They had eight sons and five daughters. O'Brien resigned his fellowship in the same year, and became vicar of Clonderhorka, Raphoe, but moved in 1837 to the vicarage of Arboe, co. Tyrone, which he held until 1841. On 9 November 1841 he was nominated dean of Cork, and instituted on 5 January 1842. On 9 March in the same year he was made bishop of the united dioceses of Ossory, Ferns, and Leighlin. 
O'Brien was a daily worshipper in his cathedral. He seldom preached or spoke except at the meetings of the Church Education Society (of which he was an active champion); the society was the Church of Ireland's response to the national schools, of which he was correspondingly critical. Naturally opposed to the Oxford Movement, he did what he could to stem its advance in sermons and writings between 1840 and 1850, singling out Newman for especial disparagement. In 1850 appeared his 'Tractarianism: its Present State, and the Only Safeguard Against it'. 'Tract 90' he described as 'shifting, evasive, and disingenuous' (Carroll, 16). To the disestablishment of the Irish church O'Brien opposed a well-sustained resistance, and Archbishop Trench of Dublin acknowledged the value of his advice in the course of the struggle. When disestablishment came, O'Brien helped to reorganize the church, and cautioned his evangelical friends in their efforts to revise the prayer book in accordance with their own principles -- for instance, where infant baptism was concerned -- fearing 'lest, in raising bulwarks against ritualism and popery, the Church itself should be narrowed' (Warren, 21). 
O'Brien's chief work, 'An Attempt to Explain the Doctrine of Justification by Faith Only, in Ten Sermons' (1833), ran to five editions. His primary and second charges, 1842 and 1845, published in London, and directed in great part against Tractarianism, each went to several editions. In 1833 he attacked Edward Irving's views in 'Two Sermons Relating to the Human Nature of our Blessed Lord', which were re-published in 1873 with a 'Plea from the Bible and the Bible Alone for the Doctrine of Baptismal Regeneration'. His charge of 1848 (published in 1850) discussed, 'inter alia', the alliance between church and state. 
O'Brien died at 49 Thurloe Square, London, on 12 December 1874, and was buried in the churchyard of St Canice's Cathedral, Kilkenny, on 19 December. His successor, Dr Robert Gregg, in his primary charge praised O'Brien's 'unvarying consistency, calm judgement, and chastened self-restraint'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20459


O'Brien, John (1701-1769), Roman Catholic bishop of Cloyne and Ross and lexicographer, was born in Ballyvoddy, near Glanworth, co. Cork, the son of Thomas O'Brien, a farmer, and his wife, Eleanor McEniry. His parents, both of good descent, were well connected both at home and on the continent. By 1720 he had already left for France to study for the priesthood, principally at the Irish College in Toulouse, where he was permitted to hear confessions in April 1727, evidence of his recent ordination. At the University of Toulouse he graduated bachelor of divinity in 1733, being already a doctor of both civil and canon law. From 1733 to 1737 he travelled widely in France and Spain as tutor to the sons of several aristocratic Irish expatriates, namely Simon Connock, governor in the Spanish service; Thomas Fitzgerald, the Spanish ambassador in London; and Arthur Dillon, lieutenant-general in the Irish brigade. 
On O'Brien's return to Ireland in 1738, his first employment was as parish priest of Castlelyons and Rathcormack, co. Cork. These parishes belonged to Cloyne, a diocese then subject to the bishop of Cork. Very soon he was also named archdeacon and vicar-general. He was to reside at Castlelyons, close to the still thriving centre of Gaelic literature Carraig na bFear, for most of his life. 
By papal brief dated 10 January 1748, O'Brien became bishop of Cloyne and Ross, two areas physically separated by the diocese of Cork. To repair church structure and discipline undermined by penal laws over the preceding fifty years, he published in 1756 an elaborate set of diocesan statutes entitled 'Monita pastoralia et statuta ecclesiastica'. Their aim was to foster a well-trained and zealous body of priests whose first duty would be to preach and catechize. The statutes also sought to improve the behaviour of the laity with regard both to their religious duties and to some aspects of their social behaviour: superstitions, faction-fighting even at funerals, and meetings by night at holy wells. Clandestine marriages were severely condemned. A second and shorter work, 'Vindiciae quarundum consuetudinum', published with the 'Monita', was sent to Rome as a spirited defence of Irish bishops, accused of non-residence and neglect of their duties, against their hidden slanderers. 
O'Brien's work of diocesan renewal was hampered for twenty years by the unhelpful interference of James Butler, the coadjutor-bishop of Cashel from 1750 and archbishop from 1757; sometimes he was delated to the civil authorities by unworthy priests whom he had tried to discipline. He also had to grapple with problems arising from the activities of the Whiteboys, a secret and supposedly Catholic network of agrarian terrorists. To counteract the Whiteboys he issued a stern pastoral letter to his clergy in 1762. To improve clerical education he established bursaries in 1764 at the Irish colleges of Paris and Louvain. Despite his reputation as a disciplinarian, he retained the loyalty of his priests. During the years 1765 and 1766 he personally conducted a general mission for his two dioceses, spending four months in the field each autumn with a band of confessors. Ireland had seldom seen missions of this kind before, nor would it often see them again. 
O'Brien wrote a treatise on the history of Munster, thought to have been that published by Charles Vallancey under his own name in the fourth volume of his 'Collectanea' in 1774. With the help of a scholar named O Conaire he also compiled the manuscript generally known as the 'Dublin annals of Inisfallen'. His great work, however, was as general editor of an Irish dictionary, 'Focaloir Gaoidhilge-Sax-Bhearla, or, An Irish-English Dictionary', compiled by other scholars under his supervision before 1762, and eventually printed at Paris in 1768. This too was intended to help the church, for O'Brien believed that the preservation of the faith in Ireland depended essentially on the preservation of the native language. Inspired by the works of Edward Lluyd and Conor O'Begly, he drew on earlier compilations but omitted several thousand words then in use. His dictionary contains valuable historical and genealogical information and useful definitions, but is marred by fanciful etymologies and a lack of grammatical detail. 
Partly because of ill health and partly to escape the powerful Nagle family, protectors of a dissolute priest accused of using the confessional to seduce female tenants of the Nagles, O'Brien left Ireland for ever in the summer of 1767. Having first made his way to Paris to oversee the printing of his dictionary in 1768, he died on 13 March 1769 at Lyons, where he was buried in the church of St Martin d'Ainay. 


@@@@@


doc= 20460


O'Brien, Sir Lucius Henry, third baronet (1733-1795), politician, was born on 2 September 1733, in Dromoland, co. Clare, Ireland, a member of a younger branch of the O'Briens, earls of Thomond and of Inchiquin. He was the eldest son of Sir Edward O'Brien, second baronet (died 1765), of Dromoland, politician, who represented County Clare in the Irish House of Commons for thirty years, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Hugh Hickman of Fenloe. He matriculated at Trinity College, Dublin, on 9 July 1748, graduated BA in the spring of 1752, and, after entering the Middle Temple on 18 September 1753, was called to the Irish bar on 17 November 1758. He married, on 26 May 1768, Anne (died 'c'.1798), daughter of Robert French (1716-1779), the prominent patriot MP of Monivae, co. Galway, and his wife, Nicola Acheson (died 1762). They had six daughters and five sons. 
O'Brien entered parliament in 1763 as member for Ennis borough and in the same year announced his arrival with a long speech in a debate over tithes, in which he described the condition of the country, which was subsequently quoted by Lecky in his 'History of England'. He became friends with Charles Lucas, the patriot MP, and soon became a prominent member of the parliamentary opposition. According to Barrington: 'By means of a rational understanding and very extensive and accurate commercial information he acquired a considerable degree of public reputation, though his language was bad -- his address miserable and his figure and action unmeaning and whimsical -- yet, as his matter was generally good, his reasoning sound, and his conduct frequently spirited and independent, he was attended to with respect, and in return always conveyed considerable information. (Barrington, 1.213-14)' In 1765 O'Brien succeeded his father as third baronet; in March of the following year he was placed at the head of a committee to prepare and introduce a bill making the judges' offices tenable 'quamdiu se bene gesserint', and not as previously in Ireland during the king's pleasure. The bill was passed, being a popular opposition measure, but did not receive the assent of the English privy council until 1782. In 1768 O'Brien contested his father's seat, County Clare, at the cost of $2000; he was elected, and represented the county until 1776, when he was returned for Ennis. When, however, Hugh Dillon Massy, one of the members for County Clare, was unseated O'Brien was returned in his stead and chose to sit for the county. 
O'Brien busied himself with endeavours to remove the restrictions on trade between England and Ireland, and made frequent speeches on the subject in parliament in opposition to the government; but his speeches lacked lucidity, and his audience was said to be seldom the wiser for them. He visited England in 1778-9 in pursuance of the same object. In the same year he reported to the lord lieutenant on the state of co. Clare, and was one of the first to urge the arming of the militia to meet the expected invasion of Ireland. Following the lead of Charlemont, he headed the volunteer movement in co. Clare, though somewhat reluctantly given the weakness of protestant numbers in the county, and took an active part in the agitation for Irish legislative independence. In 1780 he led the opposition to the government in the matter of the import duties between Portugal and Ireland, and in 1782 he supported Grattan's motion for an address to the king in favour of legislative independence. He was never a fully devoted member of Grattan's patriots and instead concentrated his energies on economic improvement both on his debt-ridden estate and in the surrounding counties through the medium of internal navigation. Like Robert French, his patriotism was much more of the economic than the constitutional kind, which made him a potential government supporter and also a rather old-fashioned kind of country gentleman when in opposition. 
Perhaps because of limited advocacy of the popular cause, O'Brien was defeated at County Clare in 1783 by a leading county volunteer; he was, however, returned for a purchased seat in Tuam, which he represented until 1790. In 1787 he was sworn of the privy council and appointed clerk of the crown and hanaper in the high court of chancery. He was regarded as a supporter, if a somewhat unreliable one, of the government. He took a prominent part in the debates on Pitt's proposals for removing the restrictions on Irish trade, and also on the regency question of 1788, and in both cases took the patriot side. In 1790 he was returned for Ennis, and he represented it until his death. In 1791 he moved a resolution for the more satisfactory trying of election petitions, and his last recorded speech in parliament was made in March of the same year on the subject of India trade. Arthur Young acknowledged his indebtedness to O'Brien, at whose house he stayed, and who was indefatigable in procuring materials for Young's 'Tour in Ireland'. O'Brien died on 15 January 1795 at Dromoland, where he was buried. He was succeeded by his eldest son, Edward O'Brien, fourth baronet (1773-1837), who was the father of William Smith O'Brien (1803-1864), Irish nationalist, and Edward O'Brien (1808-1840), author. 


@@@@@


doc= 20461


O'Brien, Matthew (1814-1855), mathematician, was born at Ennis, co. Clare, Ireland, the son of Matthew O'Brien MD. He was first educated at Dublin where he attended Trinity College from 1830 to 1834, and then entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1834, graduating as third wrangler in 1838. He was elected a fellow of Caius in 1840 but resigned in the following year. At Caius he overlapped with two other notable mathematicians, George Green and Robert Murphy. 
O'Brien was professor of mathematics and natural philosophy at King's College, London, from 1844 to 1854, serving also as lecturer in practical astronomy at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, from 1849 to 1854, and as professor of mathematics at Woolwich, from 1854 to 1855. He wrote four books and sixteen papers. His texts 'An Elementary Treatise on the Differential Calculus' (1842) and 'A Treatise on Plane Coordinate Geometry' (1844) are good examples of expository writing of their time. The calculus text uses limits to define the basic concepts and to prove the necessary theorems. His papers mainly concerned astronomy and mathematical physics. 
The most interesting aspect of O'Brien's work is the development of the algebraic properties of vectors. Hamilton's work on quaternions inspired many contemporaries to produce a similar theory for three-dimensional vectors. Most of these were unsuccessful because their authors tried to include both multiplication and division of vectors into their systems. O'Brien avoided this trap (in two papers published in 1849 in the 'Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society'), distinguishing clearly the vector and scalar products and eschewing the division of vectors. Further, he introduced notations for the two products and one corresponding to the Laplacian operator igreekLetterDelta. He applied his vector algebra in an effective manner to solve problems in mechanics and geometry. His work, which in some measure anticipated that of Gibbs in the 1880s, had little influence on contemporaries. 
Nothing is known of O'Brien's personal and family life. He died at Petit Menage, Jersey, on 22 August 1855. 


@@@@@


doc= 20462


O'Brien, Murrough, first earl of Thomond (d. 1551), chieftain and rebel, was the third son of Turlough Donn O'Brien (died 1528), lord of Thomond, and Raghnailt, daughter of John MacNamara, chief of Clancullen. In 1531 Murrough became tanist to his older brother Conor O'Brien, the O'Brien chief, filling the vacancy left by the death of his brother Donough. Murrough lived in Inchiquin, co. Clare, from 1531. He controlled the strategically important lands near the Shannon, including O'Brien's bridge. The bridge -- constructed by his father in 1506 to facilitate the movement of goods and supplies across the Shannon -- was a symbol of O'Brien strength and its destruction the objective of repeated government expeditions. In the summer of 1538 Lord Leonard Grey, the lord deputy, secured a year-long truce with Conor who subsequently aided the deputy in an invasion of Murrough's country and presided over the bridge's destruction. Conor's independent negotiations with Grey coupled with his belated attempt to divert the succession to his sons with his second wife, Ellice, daughter of Maurice Fitzgerald, ninth earl of Desmond, alienated Murrough and many clansmen. Conor died in 1539 and Murrough succeeded by custom of tanistry. 
Grey's aggressive behaviour and his suspected complicity with Conor pushed Murrough O'Brien into confederacy with Con Bacach O'Neill and Manus O'Donnell, whose nominal aim was the restoration of Thomas Fitzgerald, tenth earl of Kildare. O'Brien's entry broadened the Geraldine league's support outside Ulster. This rare mustering of Gaelic strength was a worrying development for the government and demanded immediate action. Grey was consequently summoned to court in April. He was replaced by Sir Anthony St Leger who, shortly after his arrival in July, embarked on a markedly more conciliatory initiative to defuse the confederacy. O'Brien proved receptive and met St Leger at Limerick in early 1541. 
St Leger spoke plainly to O'Brien, offering him peace and future stability in exchange for his acknowledgement of Henry VIII's laws and sovereignty. He insisted, moreover, that O'Brien's authority be confined to west of the Shannon and assured him that failure to comply would result in war. The submission of other nobles and chieftains left O'Brien with little choice; he asked for time to consider, however, and retired to Thomond in Munster. In November he wrote directly to Henry professing his loyalty and requested a pardon. He also expressed an interest in personally submitting to the king whom he desired to see 'above all creatures on yerthe lyvinge, now in myne old days; whiche sight I dowbt not but shall prolonge my lyff' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 3.345). Yet O'Brien failed to include his decision regarding the limitation of his authority. In February 1542 he attended the lord deputy in Limerick and finally agreed to the limitation of his authority to west of the Shannon. Though St Leger described O'Brien as 'a very sobre man, and very like to contynewe Your Majesties trewe subjecte', he recognized that O'Neill's submission two months earlier had exercised a profound effect upon his decision (ibid., 3.363). 
The application for a peerage -- the next stage of submission in St Leger's policy of surrender and regrant -- presented several problems. O'Brien was married to Eleanor, daughter of Sir Thomas Fitzgerald, knight of Glyn, with whom he had four sons and three daughters. He had succeeded by tanistry and under English law his legitimate male descendants would inherit his peerage. This, however, would deny Donough O'Brien -- Conor's eldest son and ally to the crown -- any possibility of succession. To avoid a succession dispute upon O'Brien's death St Leger devised a far-sighted solution: O'Brien would be created earl of Thomond and Baron Inchiquin for life with the latter title reverting to his eldest son, Dermod; his nephew Donough would concurrently be created baron of Ibrackan until Murrough's death when he would become earl of Thomond. The king accepted the unorthodox solution but warned that 'the heire of thErle of Thomond, from hensforth, must abide his tyme to be admitted as a member of our Parlyment, till his father or parent shalbe decessed' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 3.395). O'Brien, accompanied by Ulick Burke and Donough, repaired to England -- their expenses covered by Ir$100 loaned by St Leger -- where they were on 1 July 1543 created earl of Thomond, earl of Clanricarde, and Baron Ibrackan respectively. Their acceptance of English titles, however, was not wholly welcomed: 'Banbha's Siol mBriain under Murrough's chieftaincy are covenanted to the King of England; they have turned their backs on their ancestral inheritance -- it is a pitiful surrender. (O Cuiv, 272)' Thomond maintained the peace for the duration of the 1540s, functioning as an extension of the government in Munster, which was seldom touched by the Tudor regime. In the late 1540s he settled disputes among the O'Carrolls and Burkes on behalf of the lord deputy and lent his protection to several towns in Munster. In reward he received all the suppressed religious houses in Thomond, property near Dublin, and, in August 1543, a place on the Irish privy council. He remained a close supporter of St Leger's regime. He died, probably at Inchiquin, some time between 26 June and 28 October 1551. 
Despite his compliance with Tudor rule, the annals recorded that Thomond was a brave and wealthy man. His nephew Donough succeeded as earl of Thomond while his son Dermod succeeded as Lord Inchiquin; but despite St Leger's ingenious statecraft the factions arising from Conor O'Brien's two marriages reared their head when in 1553 the second earl died following an attack launched by his stepbrothers. Murrough O'Brien's ostensibly successful transformation from Gaelic chief to English earl was not universally accepted and the next generation inherited the divisive legacy of surrender and regrant. 


@@@@@


doc= 20463


O'Brien, Murrough, first earl of Inchiquin (c.1614-1674), nobleman and army officer, was the eldest son of Dermod O'Brien, fifth Baron Inchiquin (1594-1624), and his wife, Ellen, eldest daughter of Sir Edmond Fitzgerald of Cloyne. 
Murrough O'Brien's ancestry was distinguished on both sides. The O'Briens claimed descent from the earliest kings of Ireland, and the family name was derived from the eleventh-century king Brian Boru, who died at the battle of Clontarf in 1014. On his mother's side Inchiquin was from Anglo-Norman stock, and was a descendant of the earls of Desmond. The patrimonial estates were concentrated in counties Clare and Limerick -- traditional strongholds of the O'Briens of Thomond and the Fitzgeralds of Desmond, respectively -- but the accidents of heredity had greatly reduced their value to the young baron. His grandfather Murrough, the fourth baron, had succeeded as a minor, and on his death at Erne in July 1597 (fighting for Elizabeth I) left a two-year-old heir; the fifth baron had died aged thirty, and Murrough came to the title at about the age of ten, in 1624. This succession of minors inevitably created a series of wardships, as well as the removal of jointure lands by surviving dowagers; both helped to weaken the family estate -- a situation which afflicted many other Gaelic and Old English families at this time, most notably the earls of Kildare. 
Like his contemporary George Fitzgerald, sixteenth earl of Kildare, Inchiquin soon found himself subject to government policies which encouraged the acquisition of Catholic wardships by eminent protestant settlers, who were to bring up the young nobles in the new faith and as loyal vassals of the crown. At first Inchiquin's wardship was held by an Old English protestant, Patrick Fitzmaurice, baron of Kerry and Lixnaw, but in February 1632 Charles I gave the estate to the president of Munster, Sir William St Leger. As well as continuing his protestant upbringing, St Leger seems to have intended a programme of investment in Inchiquin's estates, reclaiming mortgages and securing titles in much the same way as Richard Boyle, first earl of Cork, tried to strengthen the earls of Kildare and Barrymore in the same period. As with Cork, the keystone of St Leger's plan was the marriage of the native lord with his own daughter, Elizabeth (died 1685), and the wedding took place in October 1635 -- nine months before the king gave Inchiquin livery of his lands on 23 June 1636. The birth of a son and heir in winter 1637-8 was important not only to the St Legers but also to the protestant community in Munster. The child, named William after his grandfather, was christened at the St Leger seat of Doneraile in January 1638, and his godparents were Sir William St Leger and the earl of Cork, as well as Cork's daughter, Alice, countess of Barrymore. 
A later writer referred to Inchiquin as 'the ingrafted, inoculated and artificial scion taken from that venerable old stock' ('Egmont MSS', 1.191), and there is no doubt that his relationship with St Leger was very close indeed. It may have been at St Leger's behest that Inchiquin went abroad (presumably in early 1638) to gain military experience with the Spanish forces in Italy. Inchiquin had returned to Ireland by the beginning of 1640, taking his seat in the Irish House of Lords in the parliament which met in March of that year. On 2 April, in a further sign of St Leger's trust, Inchiquin was made vice-president of Munster. This promotion may have contributed to the decline in relations between the president and the earl of Cork, which had started in the late 1630s. Cork was concerned at St Leger's increasing influence in the province, and his suspicions were further aroused by reports that the president 'tides too much with the Irish' (NL Ire., MS 12813/579) -- possibly a reference to the growing importance of Inchiquin in the Munster council. This importance, and the tensions which it created, grew markedly with the outbreak of the Irish rising in October 1641. 
As president of Munster, St Leger had command of the protestant forces there, but he could do little without the co-operation of the earl of Cork, the wealthiest and most influential landowner in the province. At first the two men agreed to bury their differences, and Inchiquin soon came to the fore as one of the few protestant officers with previous military experience. In April 1642, for example, he led a counter-attack against the Catholic forces under Donough MacCarthy, Viscount Muskerry, who were besieging Cork, forcing them to withdraw from the area. In July 1642 St Leger died after a short illness, but he had already passed orders giving the management of the province to a council of war dominated by his allies, including Inchiquin. With St Leger's death, Inchiquin tried to stage a coup against Cork and his sons, but the ploy was foiled by the lords justices in Dublin, who instead opted to give joint control of civilian affairs to Inchiquin and Cork's son-in-law, David Fitz-David Barry, earl of Barrymore. Inchiquin remained commander of the government forces in Munster. Despite continuing tensions, this arrangement seems to have worked, and Inchiquin's victory over Richard Butler, Lord Mountgarret, at the battle of Liscarrol in September 1642 was achieved with the full support of the Boyle family. The victory had divisive results, however. Barrymore was mortally wounded, and when he died civilian power became concentrated in Inchiquin's hands. Furthermore, after lobbying by Inchiquin's agents in England, on 29 September parliament promoted Inchiquin to be captain-general of Munster. In response the Boyles went on the offensive, with Cork accusing the vice-president of colluding with the confederate Catholics, insinuating that he was 'unnecessarily cordial to his popish cousins in the Irish camp' (D. Townsend, 'The Life and Letters of the Great Earl of Cork', 1904, 413). In November 1642 Cork's sons Richard and Roger Boyle, Lord Dungarvan and Lord Broghill, were sent to London in an attempt to discredit Inchiquin, and in the hope of having one of the Boyles appointed to the vacant presidency of Munster. Their failure to achieve either goal may have been the result of lobbying by Inchiquin's main ally in parliament, William Jephson, whose own 'cousins' at Westminster included John Pym and Arthur Goodwin. 
The factionalism in Munster in 1642-3 was not the only factor weakening the protestant position there. With the onset of the civil war in England, the willingness of the king or parliament to provide men, money, and supplies for Ireland was greatly reduced. As Inchiquin told the earl of Ormond in December 1642, the English were 'so involved in their own danger that a word of Ireland will not be heard' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 4, fol. 83'r'). In the next nine months the crisis deepened, and Inchiquin, with other commanders, was forced to take Ormond's lead and sign a cessation of arms with the confederates in September 1643. Apart from relieving the immediate pressures of supply, the cessation was designed to release troops to reinforce the king's armies in England, and over the next few months Inchiquin sent five regiments across the Irish Sea. As a result, Inchiquin was indicted in November 1643 for treason by the English parliament. In recompense he hoped that the king would confirm his position in Munster by making him lord president, and in January 1644 he travelled to the royal court at Oxford to claim his reward. Arriving there on 10 February he discovered that the king had already promised the presidency to an outsider: Jerome Weston, second earl of Portland. Worse still, there were rumours that Lord Dungarvan (now second earl of Cork) was negotiating to buy the office from Portland. Although Portland eventually refused to sell the presidency, the damage had been done. As one commentator told Ormond on 19 February, 'Lord Inchiquin is returning as full of anger as his buttons will endure' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 9, fol. 243). In his absence, Inchiquin's reputation at Oxford received another blow, with allegations by the confederate agents (including Viscount Muskerry) that he was already 'rather for the Parliament than the king's cause' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 11, fol. 214). This climate of distrust was exacerbated by local tensions in Munster, where the protestants felt increasingly under pressure from the confederates, who refused to abide by the terms of the cessation of arms. The flashpoint came in July, when news broke of a conspiracy by the Irish to seize Cork and the other protestant towns. Inchiquin responded by expelling all Catholics from the towns, and, fearing reprisals, put his forces on a war footing. With his confidence in the king and his policies already diminished, there seemed only one chance for the Munster protestants; and on 17 July 1644 Inchiquin and his officers wrote to parliament announcing their rejection of the cessation, and their abandonment of the king's cause. 
If Inchiquin thought the defection to parliament would solve his immediate military problems, he was very much mistaken. With the English civil war still raging, there were few resources available for Munster, and every shipload had to be wrung out of the parliamentarian authorities with intensive lobbying. In one respect Inchiquin got what he wanted from Westminster -- in January 1645 he was appointed parliament's lord president of Munster -- but even that promotion lacked the royal authority needed to command the loyalty of the province. In the three years after the defection, from summer 1644 until summer 1647, Inchiquin could only play a defensive role in the Irish war; and it was only the incompetence of the confederates which prevented the Munster enclave from being overrun. These local tensions provided the ground base for the factionalism which soon re-emerged among the Munster protestants, and which once again focused on Inchiquin's feud with the Boyle family. The leadership of the Boyle interest in Munster had shifted in 1644, with Roger, Lord Broghill, taking over from his brother, Richard, second earl of Cork, who remained in England. Indeed, Broghill rejected his brother's royalism, and joined Inchiquin's defection to parliament in July 1644. This amity with Inchiquin did not last, however, and by the end of the year serious disagreements had again emerged between the two factions. 
The causes of hatred between the two men were various. First, Inchiquin's relations with the Irish and with the royalists at Dublin were far more equivocal than Broghill's. By September 1644 Inchiquin, starved of funds by parliament, had started to explore 'ad hoc' cessations with the local confederates, and in the winter made a deal with Viscount Muskerry, which lasted until spring 1645. He was even in contact with James Touchet, third earl of Castlehaven, during the latter's campaign against the Munster protestants in the next few months. Equally, although publicly rejecting the king, Inchiquin continued to correspond with his lord lieutenant, the marquess of Ormond. In June 1645 Inchiquin employed his brother-in-law, Dean Michael Boyle, to travel to Dublin to negotiate with Ormond, and told the bishop of Cloyne that he was willing to contemplate joining a final peace settlement between the royalists and the confederates. Broghill, who trusted that parliament could be persuaded to fund the Irish war, rejected any peace initiatives with the confederates, and condemned Ormond for his dealings with them. The seizure of letters in July 1645, revealing royalist hopes that Inchiquin could be persuaded to rejoin the king, hardened Broghill's hostility towards the president. 
The second cause of disagreement between the two was religion. While Broghill and his friends were convinced of the need for the solemn league and covenant to be taken by the Munster soldiers, Inchiquin was less enthusiastic, not least because the royalists treated subscription to it as proof of disloyalty. In a list of Irish protestants who had taken the covenant (drawn up in April 1645) Inchiquin is conspicuous by his absence (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 14, fol. 425). While Broghill was becoming increasingly hardline in his attitudes, Inchiquin remained attached to the Church of Ireland. He protected the clergy within the Munster garrisons, and protested to Cloyne in 1645 that his attachment to parliament was merely pragmatic: 'I do profess that I do earnestly desire the continuance of the same government in the church that we have hitherto had, yet I doubt there is no possibility to enjoy the liberty of our religion of this kingdom, but by adhering to those who as yet pretend to pull down episcopacy, which in that cause I could much rather tolerate. (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 63, fol. 341'v')' A third cause of tension between Inchiquin and Broghill was the increasing convergence of Irish and English politics. The emergence in England of two 'parties' during 1644 and 1645 -- known as the 'presbyterians' and 'Independents' -- encouraged the existing factions within the Irish protestant community to align themselves with one side or the other. Inchiquin, in part reacting to Broghill's connections with the Independents, grew closer to the presbyterians. Inchiquin's friends at Westminster included Irish presbyterians such as William Jephson, Sir Robert King, and Sir Philip Perceval; and he, with Ormond, became a key player in attempts by the English presbyterian leadership to promote a 'British' solution to Ireland, involving Irish royalists and the Ulster Scots as well as English troops loyal to parliament. The appointment of a Star Chamber committee of Irish affairs in July 1645, created and dominated by William Jephson, Sir John Clotworthy, and their allies, at last promised to take Munster seriously, and through the winter there were efforts to raise men and send money to Inchiquin's beleaguered garrisons. Yet the presbyterian ascendancy was short-lived, and the Independents soon came to control Irish affairs. The appointment of the Independent peer Philip Sidney, Viscount Lisle, as parliament's lord lieutenant in April 1646 widened the rift between Inchiquin and Broghill. Lisle challenged Ormond's authority, and his policies were from the start hostile to Inchiquin. The new Irish committee soon fell into Independent hands; plans were advanced to give Broghill an independent command in Munster; and a concerted propaganda campaign undermined the president's authority and questioned his allegiance. Inchiquin went to London to defend his position, but to no avail. In February 1647 Lisle crossed to Munster and took control of the province from his deputy, in a move condemned by Inchiquin as having 'the semblance rather of a conquest than of relief' ('Egmont MSS', 1.367-8). In matters of policy Lisle deferred to Broghill, who, as Inchiquin bemoaned, was now 'commanding all things at his pleasure, so as my lord lieutenant puts the execution of my place in effect into his hands' ('Egmont MSS', 1.380). Inchiquin's officers were replaced, his troops dispersed, and his advice ignored. It was only as a result of factional changes in England, and the seizure of power by the presbyterians in the new year of 1647, that Inchiquin's position began to improve. Lisle's year-long commission was not renewed and in April, Inchiquin, assisted by soldiers still loyal to him, forced the former lieutenant and his entourage to return to England. 
The departure of Lisle left Inchiquin in charge of Munster, but it did not bring his troubles to an end. Broghill, assisted by his brother-in-law Sir Arthur Loftus, with the encouragement of Sir John Temple and other Irish Independents, spent much of the summer trying to blacken Inchiquin's name. A mark of their success was Inchiquin's inclusion in the articles presented against the eleven members in June, saying that the presbyterians had deliberately suppressed charges of high treason against the president. Inchiquin was accused of harbouring papists, of allowing mass to be said publicly, and of plotting to join the confederates. He was also attacked for his ethnic background. Ignoring his claims that his Irishness was 'my misfortune, not my fault' ('Egmont MSS', 1.377), his enemies repeatedly linked ethnicity with disloyalty, characterizing Inchiquin as 'an Irish general' and one of the 'natural Irish', and thus not to be trusted ('A letter from Lieutenant Colonel Knight in the province of Munster', 22 July 1647, BL, E.399(23), pp. 4, 12). 
Inchiquin's position in summer 1647 was further undermined by the departure of Ormond, who had surrendered Dublin to parliament under articles signed in June, and left Ireland in July; and by the dramatic failure of the presbyterians to stage a coup at Westminster -- an attempt which, in early August, brought the Independents back to power in the wake of the New Model Army's march on London. Irish affairs at Westminster were again under the control of Broghill and his Independent friends, and the prospects for Inchiquin looked bleak. His response was to go on the offensive. If he could not defeat his critics in London he could strengthen his position in Munster, and this he proceeded to do, launching a major campaign into counties Waterford and Tipperary. During summer 1647 he had captured Dungarvan and Cappoquin, and by September was marching north-east, probably intending a strike against the confederate capital at Kilkenny. Lack of artillery meant that the advance came to a halt before Clonmel by the end of the month, but 'en route' Inchiquin had taken the Rock of Cashel, where his troops massacred the defenders and desecrated the cathedral. In this bold campaign Inchiquin seems to have had two intentions: to create 'Lebensraum' for his soldiers, securing control over a wider area in an effort to make them independent of outside resources; and to demonstrate to parliament and to the Irish protestants that he was still committed to their cause. For the Irish, however, his main intention seemed to be to shed blood and commit sacrilege. In the eyes of the ordinary people he became infamous as Murchadh na dToitean, or Murrough of the Burnings; and to the clergy he was 'the most hateful enemy of the Catholic religion' (Murphy, 'Inchiquin's changes of religion', 62). Alarmed by Inchiquin's victories, the confederate council ordered their Munster commander, Theobald Taaffe, Viscount Taaffe, to advance on the Munster ports. Inchiquin met him at Knocknanuss, near Mallow in co. Cork, on 13 November. With a smaller force he attacked the confederate army and routed it, killing 4000 men. 
Despite Inchiquin's military successes, he was increasingly marginalized by the English parliamentarians during winter 1647-8. This was caused by a general lack of interest in Irish affairs at Westminster once Dublin had been secured in July 1647, compounded by the influence over the dominant Independent faction enjoyed by Inchiquin's enemies, including Lord Broghill. The immediate effect was a reduction in the amount of money and supplies allowed to the president. In January 1648 Inchiquin complained to Speaker Lenthall that he could not control enough territory to feed his existing forces, and asked for support from England or, failing that, permission to send some of his English troops home and to make conditions with the confederates 'for the rest of the wretched English who cannot remove hence with their families, but must submit to a worse than Egyptian or Turkish servitude' ('Portland MSS', 1.443-4). Such appeals grew stronger over the next few months -- as did Inchiquin's alarm at events in England, where the Independents and the army seemed intent on forcing radical changes to the government and religion. These two factors pushed Inchiquin into signing a truce with the confederate forces in Munster, agreed in April and ratified in May 1648. 
In signing the truce Inchiquin had rejected parliament and returned to his allegiance to the king; yet in doing so his focus was not on high politics, but on the practicalities of keeping his army together. His first move was to purge the officer corps. This was designed to bring the Munster army firmly under his control, and thus emphasize its importance as the most experienced -- and most successful -- protestant army in Ireland. The purge also gave him high-profile hostages, including Sir William Fenton, Colonel Edmund Temple, and Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Phayre, who could be used as a possible bargaining tool with parliament -- a point made all the more important by the presence of Inchiquin's own son and heir, William O'Brien, Lord O'Brien, in prison in London. Beyond this it is uncertain how far Inchiquin planned to go. Although there were fears that he planned an amphibious assault on Cornwall in support of the English insurgents, and rumours that he was in league with the confederates and the Scots, there is little evidence that Inchiquin could afford the luxury of thinking in 'British' terms in the summer of 1648. At this stage the most pressing need was to secure his truce with the confederates and to gain much-needed supplies for his men, many of whom 'have died of hunger, after they had a while lived upon cats and dogs as many do now' ('Ormonde MSS', 6.550). 
While Inchiquin was concentrating on his immediate problems in Munster, his truce was having dramatic consequences at Kilkenny. The agreement, ratified by the supreme council on 20 May 1648, finally destroyed the uneasy relationship between the papal nuncio, Cardinal Rinuccini, and the Old English. A week later, the nuncio declared his opposition to the cessation and threatened to excommunicate anyone subscribing to it. With that, he fled to the Ulster forces of Owen Roe O'Neill, currently occupying western Leinster. The split ensured that any future peace treaty would not involve a large part of the Catholic forces in Ireland, and would thereby prevent an army being sent to aid Charles I in the other kingdoms. Inchiquin, from a purely local standpoint, greeted the breakdown of the confederate alliance not as a disaster, but as an opportunity. On 15 July he wrote to the parliamentarian commander Michael Jones at Dublin, urging him to make his own truce, and to join the king. In turn Jones invited Inchiquin to return to parliament. Inchiquin soon recovered from the rebuff. Armed with a new commission as lord president of Munster (sent from the prince of Wales on 2 July), he prepared for a new royalist offensive, and urged Ormond to return from the continent. Ormond's arrival at Cork, on 2 October, provided Inchiquin with much-needed supplies, and allowed a combined campaign with the Catholic forces under Ulick de Burgh, earl of Clanricarde, against O'Neill's men in Leinster. 
But Inchiquin's renewed optimism was soon dented by news of a mutiny within the Munster garrisons. This was not so much a protest about pay and conditions as a reflection of deep-seated concerns among the officers that Inchiquin was to strike a deal with the Catholics which would threaten their religion. The leaders of the mutiny soon made contact with Jones and even O'Neill, and parliament sent agents to try to stir up discontent, including Inchiquin's former hostage Edmund Temple. The mutiny was put down with little trouble, but its effects were important. First, it cast doubt on Inchiquin's value as an ally to the confederates, and, according to Ormond, set back the peace negotiations by a precious few weeks. It also reduced the ability of the royalists to plan a concerted campaign across the three kingdoms, despite Inchiquin's hope that the presbyterians in England might be persuaded to rebel once more. Worse still, Ormond was forced to ask the prince of Wales to withdraw his fleet to the Munster coast, to prevent further trouble. The level of discontent is revealed by Inchiquin's insistence that the Church of Ireland clergy sign a declaration of loyalty (on 5 January 1649), and promise not to preach against the royalist cause. Inchiquin remained nervous even after the execution of the king, which had forced agreement in Ireland (under the second Ormond peace) and demanded a vigorous response. In February 1649 he feared the growing tensions between protestants and Catholics in Munster and was advised by the confederates once again to purge his army. There were also concerns about the level of supplies allowed to Inchiquin's men, and in March 1649 -- nearly a year after his defection to the king -- the president was still complaining of the sufferings of his men, and the urgency of relief. 
Inchiquin still enjoyed great authority over his army, but only when he commanded in person. The joint offensive of March 1649, which saw Inchiquin in league with Clanricarde, Taaffe, and Castlehaven in a successful bid to push O'Neill out of Leinster, was followed by a drive through the midlands, capturing Queen's county on 16 May, and forcing the garrisons at Trim and Dundalk to capitulate. On 4 July, Inchiquin captured Drogheda by siege and, leaving a force to garrison the town, his army rejoined Ormond, encamped before Dublin. Victory seemed assured as long as Inchiquin was present, and his field army lived up to expectations. But the new campaign had taken Inchiquin away from the Munster garrisons for five months, and there were fears of a new mutiny, compounded by rumours that Oliver Cromwell intended to target Munster first. On 27 July, Inchiquin was ordered to take two cavalry regiments south, and when Michael Jones confronted Ormond at Rathmines on 2 August, the lord lieutenant lacked his ablest commander. Inchiquin's men fought well during the battle, but in the aftermath of defeat they deserted to parliament in droves. Inchiquin, now at Cork, managed to hold his garrisons for a few months more, but with the English army's advance south he began to lose control. Cromwellian agents had been in Munster since the summer, and on 16 October, Inchiquin had imprisoned Colonel Richard Townsend, Colonel William Warden, and Colonel John Giffard, fearing that they were in contact with Lord Broghill and other enemies with local influence. On 26 October there were reports that Inchiquin had been barred by his own troops from entering Cork, Youghal, Dungarvan, and Bandon. By 14 November the towns had agreed articles with Cromwell, and received English garrisons, rejoicing at 'the happy uniting of all of us, with those of your army; which God hath been pleased in a wonderful manner to bring to pass' (BL, Add. MS 25287, fol. 41). The agreement allowed for two foot regiments and a double regiment of horse to be raised from the Munster forces to fight alongside Cromwell's troops. Inchiquin's enemy Lord Broghill, who had joined Cromwell just before the invasion, persuaded Bandon and Kinsale to reject Inchiquin and, as a sign of his victory, requisitioned the president's house in Cork for use as his private residence. 
With the surrender of the Munster ports, Inchiquin was left with little territory and few troops. In the new year of 1650 he gathered the remnants of his army -- perhaps 2000 men -- at Kilmallock in co. Limerick, and began raiding the English quarters in co. Cork. When Cromwell marched north against the confederate armies he had to leave Broghill with a strong force to keep Inchiquin in check. In March 1650 Inchiquin was caught near Mallow by cavalry under Broghill and Henry Cromwell, and routed. It was perhaps appropriate that the final annihilation of Inchiquin's army should be at the hands of his old adversary -- and so close to the site of his own great victory at Knocknanuss. After the battle at Mallow, Inchiquin retreated into Connaught, eventually joining Ormond. Without an army, the two were at a disadvantage when negotiating with the increasingly hostile Catholic commanders, who offended Inchiquin in August by accusing him of betraying Munster to Cromwell. The refusal to give Inchiquin another command, and the appointment of Emer MacMahon, Catholic bishop of Clogher, as O'Neill's successor in the north, were further signs that there was little room for protestant royalists in Ireland. In a bid to create still more division within the royalist camp, Cromwell offered safe-conduct passes to both Ormond and Inchiquin, but they were refused, and Inchiquin followed the lord lieutenant into exile in France in December 1650. 
During the 1650s Inchiquin remained on the continent, in an exile which was only in part self-imposed. Unlike many other former Irish royalists (notably the second earl of Cork, who returned to Munster in 1651), Inchiquin had been condemned as a traitor by parliament in April 1649 and excepted from pardon in August 1652, and there was no prospect of regaining his estates or retaining his position as president of Munster. Not that life in France was entirely comfortable: immediately on his arrival Inchiquin was faced with accusations, levelled by Sir Lewis Dyve, that he had acted dishonourably in Munster. These had been quashed as early as in May 1651, but it was not until April 1652 -- and then only with Ormond's intervention -- that Inchiquin received letters from the king attesting to his loyalty. In the meantime Inchiquin spent most of his time at Caen, where other protestants, including Ormond, had settled. It was probably Ormond's influence which secured Inchiquin a place on the king's council in May 1652, and his ally, Sir Edward Hyde, considered Inchiquin as 'a gallant gentleman, of good parts and great industry, and a temper fit to struggle with the affairs on all sides we are to contend with'. The appointment was against the wishes of the Catholics at court, mindful of Inchiquin's part in the sack of Cashel and other atrocities, and as Hyde added, 'I believe neither the queen, Lord Jermyn nor Lord Wilmot are much pleased with it' ('Clarendon State Papers', 3.67). The Irish exiles, and especially the priests, also opposed Inchiquin, using their influence to block his appointment to a senior military command in France in 1653, on the ground that he was 'a murderer of priests, friars and such like' (Thurloe, 1.562). Inchiquin was given command of one or two French regiments at this time, but Mazarin had to wait before offering him a more important post. Despite Catholic hostility, Inchiquin attended the royal council in 1653-4, and, after a warrant signed by the king on 4 May 1654, on 21 October he was created Baron O'Brien of Burren and earl of Inchiquin. 
The grant of an earldom was the high point of Inchiquin's favour at the hands of Charles II. From 1654 onwards, however, he became increasingly distanced from those with influence around the king. There were two reasons for this. First, in autumn 1654 Inchiquin returned to a military career, serving in Catalonia as governor of the areas controlled by France, and encouraging Irish soldiers to defect from the Spanish to the French service. His duties took him away from Paris for long periods (1654-5, 1656-7, and 1657-8), and may have allowed his enemies to slander him unchecked. The second reason for Inchiquin's loss of influence at court was confessional. On his return to Paris in summer 1657, Inchiquin declared his conversion to the Church of Rome. The trigger for this may have been a period of acute illness, and his decision came as a complete surprise, not least to his wife, who was a convinced protestant. There followed a period of deep tension within the family. The English ambassador, William Lockhart, writing in July 1657, said the countess and her son Lord O'Brien 'have been so persecuted by her husband and the Roman Catholics' (Thurloe, 6.385) that he felt obliged to offer her a pass to travel to England. This is substantiated by Sir Edward Nicholas, who commented: 'I am very sorry for the Earl of Inchiquin's care to make his sons as himself papists, but it is no marvel to hear that a zealous presbyter proves a bigot in popery' (letter of 19/29 June 1657, BL, Sir Richard Browne papers, uncatalogued). There followed a period of high drama, when Inchiquin, with the queen mother's support, abducted his younger son, Charles O'Brien, from Lockhart's house, where he had taken refuge. By December the French court had forced him to return the boy and threatened to banish the father from the realm. Soon afterwards the countess fled to England with her children, and for a brief period Lord O'Brien even returned to Ireland, before rejoining his father on the continent at the end of the year. Although Lord O'Brien remained a protestant, Charles and the youngest son, John, had reportedly 'turned Catholic' by 1659 ('Egmont MSS', 1.603). Inchiquin's conversion not only alienated his wife, it also lost him the support of men like Ormond and Hyde, who remained attached to the established church. By September 1658 Inchiquin complained that Ormond was treating him with 'contempt' and 'distrust' ('Clarendon State Papers', 3.414). In consolation, his conversion had made him more acceptable to the Catholics around the queen mother, but their influence was at a low ebb. From 1658, therefore, Inchiquin found himself increasingly isolated at court, and his hopes of being included in royalist plans to invade England had little chance of being realized. In 1659 Inchiquin corresponded with the countess of Dysart and other royalists in England, with Hyde in Holland, and with James, duke of York, but his letters show that he was no longer included in the innermost counsels of the exiled king. 
Frustrated by his lack of progress at court, Inchiquin during 1659 again looked for military employment in foreign service. The peace negotiations between France and Spain effectively removed him from the governorship of the disputed province of Catalonia, and he was forced to look further afield. By July 1659 he had been offered command of a Portuguese army, and in September he decided to accept, although he promised to return if the king needed his help in an invasion of England. Arriving at La Rochelle at the end of October, he took ship for Portugal but was captured by an Algerian corsair off the Spanish coast after a battle in which Lord O'Brien lost an eye. Inchiquin remained in prison during the Restoration, and was released only with the intervention of Charles II's council in summer 1660. His son remained in Algiers until November, when the king finally agreed to pay the ransom. The whole episode seems to have confirmed Inchiquin in his devotion to Catholicism, and gave him further cause to atone for his past sins. During his captivity he wrote to two priests, confessing to one that 'no punishment is severe enough for such a persecutor of the church as I have been' (Murphy, 'Inchiquin's changes of religion', 63). After the Restoration, Inchiquin was firm in his new faith, and was not tempted to reconvert to the established church, although he still had hopes of political preferment. Instead, he became high steward in the household of the queen mother, and used his influence to curry favour with the king, who agreed to restore him to his estates in Ireland, and compensated him for his military arrears before 1649 and for his sufferings since then. In 1662-3 Inchiquin accepted a position as commander of English troops sent to Portugal. This second Portuguese expedition was nearly as disastrous as the first. The Portuguese accused him of treachery (by agreeing to defect, with his troops, to Spanish service) and his brother, Christopher O'Brien, was imprisoned. Inchiquin protested that, although the Spaniards had approached him, he had refused to treat with them, and had advised the English government to withdraw altogether. By May 1663, with Inchiquin back in Limerick, Charles II relieved him of the command, leaving the earl to petition Secretary Bennet for yet another letter from the king stating his confidence in him. This may have been the last straw for Charles II. In later years Inchiquin continued to receive royal favour, but he was never again employed in an official capacity. 
From 1663 Inchiquin lived in Munster in a state of semi-retirement, rebuilding his estates in counties Clare and Limerick, and preferring as a residence Rostellan Castle near Cork city. He remained an important member of the Catholic community in Munster, and signed the remonstrance to the king from the Irish Catholic nobles and gentry protesting their loyalty in 1666. In his will, written in 1673, he left money for the friars at Ennis, co. Clare, presumably for masses to be said for his soul. Yet during the last years of his life Inchiquin made every effort to reintegrate himself and his family into the old protestant community he had rejected so dramatically at his conversion a few years before. Central to this was his successful attempt to make friends with his former enemy, Lord Broghill, now earl of Orrery. Orrery, who had finally achieved the presidency of Munster (for which Inchiquin, as a Catholic, was disqualified) in 1660, was now the most powerful man in the province, and, despite their earlier enmity, in 1665 a match was arranged between his daughter, Margaret Boyle, and Inchiquin's heir, William, Lord O'Brien. The initiative seems to have come from Inchiquin, but Orrery saw the merit of the plan. Like St Leger thirty years earlier, Orrery recognized the significance of the ancient O'Brien clan, and valued their influence over the native Irish in the region. He also had no objection to Lord O'Brien, who remained a protestant despite his father's conversion, and he may have shared the proselytizing ambitions of his father, the first earl of Cork. The late 1660s and early 1670s thus saw the Boyles and the O'Briens again working together, but this time without the underlying rivalry, ethnic tension, and religious animosity which had done so much to hamper the protestant cause in the 1640s. In 1667 Orrery used his position to restore Inchiquin to possession of Rostellan, which had been seized by those who claimed a legal right themselves. In 1669, when Orrery was faced with impeachment proceedings in England, this incident was used against him; but in his defence he was able not only to defend his own actions, but also Inchiquin's honour. In 1672, when he got wind of a presbyterian plot against the Irish government, Inchiquin sent his servant 50 miles to where Orrery was staying, to warn him of it. In 1679, just before his death, Orrery further cemented relations between the two houses with the marriage of his younger son, Henry, with Inchiquin's youngest daughter, Mary O'Brien. 
This amicable relationship with Orrery was not matched by a reconciliation between Inchiquin and his wife, who remained bitterly opposed to his Catholicism. A measure of their unhappiness can be seen in their choice of burial places. Inchiquin, who died on 9 September 1674, had asked to be buried in Limerick Cathedral, probably intending to join his ancestors in the O'Brien tomb there; his countess chose to be buried with the St Legers, in the church which her father had built at Doneraile. Their separation in death is poignant testimony to the failure of this particular attempt to mix Catholic oil with protestant water. It also highlights the personal, political, and confessional tensions which dogged Inchiquin throughout his eventful life. 


@@@@@


doc= 20464


Ua Briain, Muirchertach (c.1050-1119), king of Munster and high-king of Ireland, was of the Dal Cais dynasty of north Munster and was the son of Toirdelbach Ua Briain (1009-1086) and Derbfhorgaill (died 1098), daughter of Tadc Mac Gilla Padraig, king of Osraige. According to the uncorroborated statement of the annals of Ulster, he was born in 1050. Like his great-grandfather Brian Boruma, Muirchertach tried to make the idea of the high-kingship of Ireland a political reality. He secured his position in the south, and extended Ui Briain control into the midlands and Connacht for a time, but failed to bring to heel Domnall Ua Lochlainn, king of Cenel nEogain in the north. His control of Dublin, his activities in the Irish Sea region, and his courtship of Armagh's clerics all played a part, and he also made use of propaganda: the 'Cogad Gaedel re Gallaib' ('War of the Irish with the foreigners') presented Brian Boruma as the nation's defence against the viking onslaught and Muirchertach as his worthy successor. The national extent of his aspirations is seen in his ruthless treatment of weaker kingdoms and his dealings with the church. He presided over the early formal stages of ecclesiastical reform and the attempt to create a national, diocesan institution. 
As the eleventh century progressed and competition among the major dynasties intensified, the Norse towns became increasingly important in the struggle for power. Toirdelbach Ua Briain made Limerick in the west his capital and in 1075 appointed Muirchertach ruler of Dublin in the east. But when Toirdelbach sent his forces north under Muirchertach, they suffered defeat at Ard Monainn. Toirdelbach realized that a more cautious approach was required. A master of the policy of divide and rule, he tried to keep the Cenel nEogain in check by supporting their rivals, the Ulaid. This had some success, but the events of 1084 showed Muirchertach that it would not do as a long-term strategy. 
In that year Muirchertach defeated Donnchad Ua Ruairc of Connacht at the battle of Moin Cruinneoige. Among the casualties on Ua Ruairc's side was Cennetig Ua Briain whose grandfather, Donnchad mac Briain, had been ousted from the kingship of Munster by Toirdelbach. Cennetig, as Toirdelbach's bitter opponent, was appointed king of Telach Oc by the Cenel nEogain in response to Toirdelbach's support for the Ulaid. His fighting on behalf of Ua Ruairc was an ominous sign, for it indicated that Domnall Ua Lochlainn, king of Cenel nEogain, had reached an understanding with Ua Ruairc. The capable Domnall was a problem with which Muirchertach would have to deal directly. 
This was forcefully brought home to Muirchertach Ua Briain after his father's death in 1086. Munster was divided between three of Toirdelbach's sons: Muirchertach, Tadc, and their half-brother Diarmait. Tadc outlived his father by a month, but despite being given control over Waterford and its hinterland, Diarmait continued to cause trouble for Muirchertach, who was trying to establish himself in the south. He defeated Donnchad, king of Leinster, in 1087 but two naval expeditions against Connacht failed. Domnall Ua Lochlainn reacted quickly. The alliance with Connacht materialized and the combined forces marched into north Munster, destroying Kincora, the Ui Briain stronghold. Muirchertach was preoccupied with events in the east where Munster dominance had declined since the death of Toirdelbach. A fleet sent to settle his score with Connacht was trapped by Ruaidri Ua Conchobair, king of Connacht, and Domnall Ua Mail Shechnaill, king of Meath, who together marched into north Munster. This was the second major attack into the Ui Briain heartland in two years. Muirchertach had no choice but to agree to peace terms with Domnall Ua Lochlainn. 
In 1092 Ruaidri Ua Conchobair was blinded by the Ui Flaithbertaig. This was a major development. Muirchertach Ua Briain moved decisively and attacked Connacht, expelling the Ui Chonchobair, and appointing a puppet king. With Connacht under Muirchertach's control and ruled by an appointee with no traditional rights, the king of Meath recognized that the political map was being redrawn in Muirchertach's favour and submitted to him. 
These signs of Ua Briain's growing power caused alarm in the north. The inevitable confrontation between Domnall Ua Lochlainn and Muirchertach occurred at Dublin in 1094. Domnall, supported by the Ulaid, by Ua Mail Shechnaill of Meath, and by a fleet of ninety ships supplied by Godred (or Gofraid), Norse king of Dublin and the Isles (that is, Man and the islands off the west Scottish coast), routed the Munster forces. However the Ulaid -- one-time allies of the Ui Briain -- remembered their old loyalties and Domnall's alliance dissolved. Muirchertach then took measures against Dublin and Meath. He expelled Meath's rulers and, to ensure future compliance, divided the kingdom and appointed two puppet kings. This was a highly significant development. Meath was an ancient kingdom, but Muirchertach's casual disdain revealed a new attitude to kingship. No matter how venerable their titles, the rights of lesser kings were to be subordinated to the ambitions of the dominant dynasties in competition for the kingship of all Ireland. Godred was banished from Dublin and died in 1095. Bereft of their leader, the nobles of the Isles dispatched an embassy to Muirchertach requesting a regent to serve for Godred's son's minority. Dublin led the Munster kings deep into the politics of the Irish Sea province and this request is the measure of their success in establishing overlordship here. Muirchertach sent Domnall, son of his brother Tadc, to Dublin: Domnall's mother was the daughter of the former Norse king of Man, Echmarcach Mac Ragnaill, who accompanied Donnchad mac Briain, Muirchertach's great-uncle, on his pilgrimage to Rome in 1064. Muirchertach then asserted his authority over Connacht in the west by expelling the dynasty to which the Ui Chonchobair belonged and set up Domnall Ua Ruairc as king. The high point of Muirchertach's career followed these successes. The Munster king who could force acknowledgement of his supremacy in the north would be rewarded with recognition as king of all Ireland. Control of the eastern seaboard and Irish Sea trade would bring rewards of a material nature. Muirchertach redoubled his efforts against Domnall Ua Lochlainn in the north. However, in the east, his growing power caused the king of Norway, Magnus Barelegs, to be anxious about his interests in the region and he arrived in 1098 to defend them. 
The hostility between Muirchertach Ua Briain and Domnall Ua Lochlainn entered a new phase with Muirchertach on the offensive. He led his army north in 1097 but, as happened repeatedly in later attacks, the abbot of Armagh intervened. In 1101 Muirchertach assembled an army from Munster, Leinster, Connacht, Meath, and Osraige and boldly asserted his supremacy by destroying Ailech, the Cenel nEogain capital, and returning along the Slige Midluachra, the ancient route from Ulster to Tara. However, he failed to force Domnall into submission. Magnus of Norway reappeared on a second expedition in 1102. His arrival on the Isle of Man and his designs on Dublin brought him too close for Munster comfort. But Magnus realized that if he were to make gains in Ireland, there were easier pickings in the north. He reached some understanding with Muirchertach, symbolized by the marriage of his son, Sigurd, to Muirchertach's daughter, and both Muirchertach and Magnus launched co-ordinated campaigns northward in 1103. 
Muirchertach's and Domnall's forces faced each other for a week when Muirchertach imprudently split his army, sending one contingent south, while he himself with another harried the surrounding territories, perhaps in an attempt to draw out Domnall. In his absence, Domnall decisively defeated the remaining contingent in the battle of Mag Coba, on 5 August. Magnus was killed in a separate skirmish with the Ulaid. These campaigns of the early twelfth century were the closest Muirchertach would come to achieving his ambition of imposing his authority on the whole of Ireland. 
As part of their development of the notion of 'imperium', kings of England laid claim to Dublin and, by extension, to much of Ireland. Control of Dublin led the Munster kings in the opposite direction and Muirchertach Ua Briain was drawn deep into Welsh politics. A succession of Welsh rulers, including Rhys ap Tewdwr, king of Deheubarth, his son Gruffudd (who remained under Muirchertach's protection in Ireland until 'c'.1115), Cadwgan ap Bleddyn, king of Powys, and his son Owain, sought Munster support and, in difficult times, refuge in Ireland. Gruffudd ap Cynan was born in Dublin and left in 1075 when Muirchertach ruled it. He gained control of Gwynedd with the help of a Waterford fleet. Among the Norman invaders against whom the Welsh sought Munster help was Robert de Belleme, earl of Shrewsbury. By 1102 Robert was gathering support for his challenge to Henry I. He sent Gerald of Windsor to Ireland to seek Muirchertach's assistance. The agreement was formalized with the marriage of Robert's brother, Arnulf de Montgomery, to another of Muirchertach's daughters. A letter survives from Muirchertach to Archbishop Anselm of Canterbury, thanking him for intervening with Henry on behalf of his son-in-law after Robert's failure. 
This period also saw the attempt to reorganize the church. Muirchertach presided over the synods of Cashel (1101) and Raith Bressail (1111). Important measures were adopted at Cashel to free the church from secular control. As a token of support, Muirchertach gave the Rock of Cashel, a site of great symbolic significance, to the church. His motives have been long debated. Cashel was associated with the Eoganachta, the dynasty ousted by the Ui Briain. In handing over Cashel Muirchertach was neutralizing its political associations. However, at a time when a diocesan church was emerging, the grant was a shrewd move if Muirchertach wanted an ecclesiastical office of first importance situated in his territories. His generosity paid dividends, for the Synod of Raith Bressail legislated for the creation of a diocesan organization, with metropolitan sees at Armagh and Cashel. Muirchertach took an active role in important ecclesiastical appointments, seeing to the promotion of men of proven ability and reforming zeal like Bishop Domnall Ua hEnna of Killaloe and Mael Muire Ua Dunain, 'preeminent bishop in Munster'. He was probably involved in the selection of Donngus (Donatus) Ua hAingli and Samuel Ua hAingli as bishops of Dublin and his name appears on the letter to Anselm requesting the consecration of Mael Isa (Malchus) Ua hAinmire as first bishop of Waterford in 1096. After 1111 Mael Isa became the first archbishop of Cashel. Muirchertach was also behind the appointment of Gilla Espaig (Gilbertus) as first bishop of Limerick and had a hand in the consecration in Munster of Cellach (Celsus) Mac Aeda as bishop of Armagh in 1106. 
Muirchertach Ua Briain's advance suffered a rude check after he fell gravely ill in 1114. Domnall Ua Lochlainn and Toirdelbach Ua Conchobair of Connacht mustered a great army and defeated the Munstermen. However, the allies quarrelled, and Domnall had no choice but to treat for a year's truce. Muirchertach faced an internal challenge from his own half-brother Diarmait, who deposed him. He recovered somewhat the following year and imprisoned Diarmait in Limerick, before marching into Leinster and then into Meath. In 1118 -- the year Diarmait died in Cork -- Ua Conchobair led his army into Munster. He applied Muirchertach's device for dealing with troublesome kingdoms to Munster and divided Munster between Tadc Mac Carthaigh and Diarmait's sons. Muirchertach's sons (at least one of whom, Domnall, was born of his father's union with Derbfhorgaill, daughter of Ua Laidcnen, king of Airgialla) were thereby excluded from the kingship. Muirchertach, who entered the monastery of Lismore, Waterford, as a penitent in 1116, died in March 1119 (the sources give variously the 8th, the 10th, and the 12th) and was buried at Killaloe, Clare. 
The reign of Muirchertach Ua Briain marked the apogee of Ui Briain influence in Munster, and of Munster dominance in Ireland. He was one of the first Irish kings to make his power felt outside Ireland, in the Irish Sea region, Wales, and western Scotland: King Edgar of Scotland was moved to send him the tribute of 'a camel, a beast of wondrous size' (annals of Inisfallen, s.a. 1105). He played a vital role in the creation of the national institution of the church, and in his correspondence Anselm of Canterbury referred to him as king of Ireland. A similar ambition with regard to the institution of kingship guided his actions in expelling weaker dynasties, dividing their kingdoms, and promoting puppet kings. Indeed, the complex web of alliance and counter-alliance that characterized the politics of his time is symptomatic not of a state of anarchy, but of the trauma that precedes the emergence of a new order. 


@@@@@


doc= 20465


O'Brien, Paul (1762/3-1820), Irish-language scholar and teacher, was born in the district of Breakey in co. Meath, near its border with co. Cavan; the names of his father and mother have not been preserved. In the late eighteenth century this district was a stronghold of Irish language and culture, with a number of poets -- Paul O'Brien's great-grandmother had been a sister of the greatest of them, Turlough Carolan (1670-1738) -- and a strong scribal tradition. It was therefore very natural that he should develop an interest in the Celtic languages and cultures. Precise dates are lacking, but it appears that, after being educated at local classical schools, in the early 1780s he travelled in Gaelic-speaking Scotland and to the Isle of Man. After his return to Ireland he went to Paris to study for the priesthood, presumably in the Irish College there. This must have been about 1790, for it is recorded that he had to flee home after a very short stay, as almost all the Irish seminaries were closed by the French Revolution at the end of 1792 and the beginning of 1793. 
In Ireland, St Patrick's College, Maynooth, opened as a Roman Catholic seminary in 1795, but for many years it was quite unable to provide as many places as had been lost in Europe, much less absorb those individuals who had been displaced. The college authorities naturally preferred younger students, and O'Brien, already mature in years, had to wait until 1801 before being accepted. Shortly afterwards, however, he began to be noted as a person who could impart a practical knowledge of the Irish language to those students for whom it was necessary in their ministry. In 1804 he was ordained priest and appointed professor of Irish. What was expected from his course was modest; his greatest problem was the scarcity of printed books, for the native tradition of Irish learning was still of necessity a manuscript one. He had to rely on two works printed in Paris, Hugh McCurtin's 'English-Irish Dictionary and Grammar' (1732) and Andrew Donlevy's bilingual 'Catechism' (1742). Copies of these were scarce, and this prompted him to write his own 'Practical Grammar of the Irish Language'. This was delivered in 1806 to Hugh Fitzpatrick, who was already styling himself 'publisher to the Roman Catholic College of Maynooth'. It had to wait for three years, appearing only in 1809, because Fitzpatrick was busy printing theological works for the college. The aim of the grammar, O'Brien himself said, was entirely practical, to help his students. It was heavily censured by John O'Donovan in the lengthy introduction to his own 'Grammar', published in 1845, as the worst he had met. This judgement is over-severe, but his comments on O'Brien's poetry as 'jungling rhyme' are well directed, though by this time traditional Irish poetry had in general degenerated. 
In the early nineteenth century efforts were made to modernize Irish literary culture specifically through printed editions of texts. O'Brien was active in a number of societies with this aim -- the short-lived Gaelic Society (1807) and Iberno-Celtic Society (1818), and the still-thriving Royal Irish Academy (1785). He did not live to complete a projected dictionary, dying at the college on 13 April 1820 at the age of fifty-seven. He was buried in the college cemetery. Regrettably, his books and manuscripts were auctioned and dispersed. He left fleeting but real impressions of a lively personality and a gifted teacher. In 1822, two years after his death, one of his pupils, John McEncroe, published a substantial reworking of Donlevy's 'Catechism', and another, Donal O'Sullivan, a translation of the 'Imitation of Christ'. It was to be near the end of the century before Maynooth got another professor of Irish as capable as Paul O'Brien. 


@@@@@


doc= 20466


O Briain, Donnchad (1425-1460), bishop of Killaloe, was mistakenly identified as Terence or Toirdhelbhach O Briain by James Ware (died 1666) and others. The second son of Toirdhelbhach O Briain, king of Thomond from 1446 to 1459, he owed his clerical promotion to his family connections. Before his provision to Killaloe on 26 July 1443, O Briain held parishes and prebends in Killaloe and Kilfenora without having been admitted to any holy order. In a petition to Pope Eugenius IV, the future bishop admitted that: 'in his youth he took part in battles and conflicts in which many were wounded and some killed, but neither wounded nor killed any one with his own hand; that less than two years ago, while playing on horseback a game of those parts in which the players throw sticks at one another's backs, his stick accidentally struck in the eye of one of the players, who looked round, and blinded him. ('CEPR letters', 9.331)' Given such an inauspicious beginning to a clerical career, it is not altogether surprising that he was accused of accepting a gift of two horses in return for appointing a priest to a vicarage. He was killed by a cousin at Ennis in 1460, no doubt in consequence of his involvement in family intrigues, and was probably buried in his cathedral at Killaloe. 


@@@@@


doc= 20467


O'Brien, Terence (1600-1651), Roman Catholic bishop of Emly, was born at Tuogh in Limerick (Emly diocese). His Old Irish family were descended from the ancient house of Thomond and held almost 1600 acres in the Limerick city area. With eleven siblings, O'Brien was initially educated by his pious mother and an aged priest who resided with his family. He was then placed under the care of his uncle, Maurice O'Brien, prior of the Limerick Dominicans, before joining the order in 1622 and receiving Albert as his religious name. His religious formation continued at the Dominican convent of St Peter Martyr in Toledo, where he spent eight years from 1622. He then returned to Ireland as an ordained priest and was successively prior of the Dominican convents at Lorrha (Tipperary) and Limerick city. 
By 1643 O'Brien was provincial of the Irish Dominicans and was one of two representatives of the province at the general Dominican chapter held in Rome in 1644. He was a prominent force at the chapter, displaying his commitment to reform of the Irish Dominicans through the revival of the order's ancient schools in Dublin, Limerick, Cashel, Athenry, and Coleraine. His enthusiasm did not go unnoticed, and he was appointed judge of controversies over conventual boundaries for Munster and was awarded an MA in theology at what became the Gregorian University in Rome. He returned to Ireland via Lisbon in order to visit the two Irish Dominican institutions there. A report that he had been appointed bishop of Emly recalled him to Ireland, but this preferment was delayed by the death of Pope Urban VIII in July 1644. 
At this time O'Brien became involved in the politics of the confederation, immediately displaying the political and religious allegiances which he would maintain until his death in 1651. As Dominican provincial, he signed the protest against the peace with Ormond in February 1646 on the grounds that it did not offer sufficient guarantees to Catholicism, and like many other Old Irish thus aligned himself with the papal party of the nuncio, Rinuccini. No doubt influenced by this support, Rinuccini twice recommended O'Brien for the episcopate as an individual of 'prudence and sagacity, who have been in Italy, and is so expert in the management of church revenues that happy results might be expected from his care' (O'Reilly, 235). 
O'Brien was appointed bishop of Emly on 11 March 1647 and consecrated in Kilkenny eight months later. Closely involved in confederate politics, he resided in or near Kilkenny in 1648, and was one of five bishops who recommended Thaddeus (Tadhg) O'Clery to Rome for the bishopric of Derry in May of that year. He may also have held a diocesan synod at this time. Yet his attention was primarily directed towards the negotiations between the confederation and the royalists, and his stance was consistently influenced by papal policy. In August 1648 he was among the bishops who signed the declaration against Inchiquin's truce, pronouncing its ratification as a 'deadly sin against the law of God and of his church' (Gilbert, 6.279). Supported by O'Brien, Rinuccini subsequently issued ecclesiastical censures, declaring excommunication against those who supported the truce. Still adhering to the nuncio, O'Brien then travelled to Galway to join him, but found that Rinuccini had sailed to the continent. As the war in Ireland entered its final phase, O'Brien then attended the meeting of bishops at Clonmacnoise in December 1649. Faced with the arrival of Cromwell in Ireland, the bishops, although deeply divided, succeeded in agreeing a call for loyalty to Ormond. O'Brien's disquiet with this position became clear in his subscription to the declaration of Jamestown just eight months later, which released the people from their duty of obedience to Ormond and excommunicated all those who persisted in following him. He was also involved in the desperate plan to offer the title of protector royal to the duke of Lorraine in return for military aid against Cromwell, although the negotiations never came to fruition. 
The situation was now acute, not least in O'Brien's own diocese of Emly, which was controlled by the English army. The bishop spent the remainder of his life in Limerick city, which was under siege by Ireton's forces during the summer of 1651. O'Brien worked intensively during this period to buoy up the spirit of the Limerick citizens, urging stubborn resistance to the besieging army. His refusal of the terms of surrender offered by Ireton meant that when the city capitulated (29 October 1651) he was among the twenty-two citizens excluded by name from protection of life and property. Reputedly, O'Brien refused a bribe of $40,000 and a safe passage from Limerick, though this appears to be part of the hagiographic tradition which emerged following his death. Having been discovered in the city hospital, where he was administering to the sick, O'Brien was executed in Limerick on 31 October 1651 and his head exposed on St John's Gate in the city. He was finally buried, some years later, in or near the old Dominican priory of Limerick. Subsequent hagiography has stressed O'Brien's place within Irish martyrology and nationalism on the basis of his staunch support for Catholicism against the royalist and parliamentary forces, upon his care of the plague-ridden of Limerick during the 1651 siege, and upon his manner of death and the miraculous preservation of his hair and flesh for several years. Certainly his active tenures as prior and then bishop reveal O'Brien as a man of initiative, stringent in his demands upon himself and others, acting on behalf of Catholics and acutely aware of the political and religious issues at stake during the civil wars. 


@@@@@


doc= 20468


Ua Briain, Toirdelbach (1009-1086), king of Munster, was the son of Tadc mac Briain, and grandson of Brian Boruma. His mother was Mor, daughter of Gilla Brigte Ua Mail Muaid (died 1071), king of Cenel Fiachach. The death of Brian Boruma in 1014 and the dispute for succession among his sons, Donnchad Mac Briain and Tadc, weakened the Ui Briain. Donnchad had Tadc, Toirdelbach's father, assassinated in 1023 so as to become king of Munster. His enemy, the dynamic Diarmait mac Mael na mBo, emerged as king of Leinster. Diarmait encouraged opposition to Donnchad by supporting his rival and nephew, Toirdelbach. Toirdelbach united Diarmait's hostility to Donnchad with that of Aed Ua Conchobair, king of Connacht. Donnchad was caught between Diarmait in the south-east and Aed in the north-west. Combined assaults began in the mid-1050s. In 1063 Donnchad succumbed and left on pilgrimage to Rome, where he died. Toirdelbach Ua Briain became king of Munster with Diarmait's backing but his ability in co-ordinating opposition to Donnchad showed he would be more than Diarmait's creature. This explains Diarmait's continued involvement in Munster: capable allies require careful management. 
Toirdelbach Ua Briain sought to control Connacht by encouraging competition between the Ui Conchobair and Ui Ruairc. Manipulating these dissensions prepared him for events in Leinster. The death of Diarmait mac Mael na mBo in 1072 was unexpected, but Toirdelbach may not have been unprepared, for the king of Leinster was by then an old man. Toirdelbach's direction of events shows the full extent of his considerable strength and ability. He moved quickly and, by promoting rival candidates, fractured the power base Diarmait had created. He consolidated his position in the south by installing his sons Diarmait and Muirchertach Ua Briain as 'duces' in the viking ports of Waterford and Dublin and made Limerick his capital. By 1075 Ireland south of a line from Dublin in the east to Limerick in the west was firmly under his control. He now turned his attention northward. 
Ua Briain extended control over Meath in 1073 following the death of its king, Conchobar Ua Mael Shechnaill. However, the limits of his power were demonstrated in 1075 when he ventured further north and was defeated by the Airgialla. A more cautious policy was needed. Northern opposition could be contained by encouraging rivalry between the Cenel nEogain and the Ulaid. The Ulaid had been in alliance with Diarmait mac Mael na mBo. It was natural for them to transfer that allegiance to Toirdelbach, his successor as leader in the south. He received Donnsleibe Ua hEochada and Aed Meranach Ua hEochada of the Ulaid in Limerick. At this time the Cenel nEogain promoted Conchobar Ua Briain and, later, his brother Cennetig, grandsons of Donnchad Mac Briain and Toirdelbach's rivals, to their kingship. The presence of these Ui Briain in the north is therefore symptomatic, not of Toirdelbach's power but of the complex web of strategic alliances that was very much a feature of the power structure in Ireland. If Toirdelbach planned on fragmenting the Ulster polity by promoting the Ulaid, the Cenel nEogain responded by making kings of Toirdelbach's enemies. But despite his capable manipulation of political tensions, Toirdelbach failed in 1079 to recognize the opportunity presented by the arrival of a number of Jews at his court. The purpose of their journey was probably commercial but he chose not to use their capital to finance his ambitions and 'they were sent back again over the sea' (annals of Inisfallen, s.a. 1079). 
In 1080 Mael Shechnaill, king of Meath, submitted to Toirdelbach Ua Briain as security against Donnchad Ua Ruairc of Connacht. In 1084 the Munstermen marched into Meath. Ua Ruairc launched a successful counter-attack into Munster and pushed as far as Leinster. Toirdelbach's son Muirchertach defeated him near Leixlip and brought his severed head to Limerick as a trophy. Cennetig Ua Briain, fighting on Ua Ruairc's side, was among the casualties. Toirdelbach fell ill in the following year and suffered the loss of his hair. He died on 14 July 1086 at Kincora (in what is now Clare) and, despite his failure in the north, the annals of Ulster style him king of Ireland in his obit. The same dignity is accorded him in letters from Pope Gregory VII and Archbishop Lanfranc of Canterbury, who wanted him to support church reform. The entry in the annals of St Mary's Abbey, Dublin, recording the selection of Donngus (Donatus) as bishop of Dublin in 1085 by Terdylvacus, king of Ireland (Gilbert, 250), reflects Toirdelbach's controlling interest and also represents the beginnings of the movement for ecclesiastical reform under royal patronage in the south. His title was disputed among his sons Diarmait, Tadc, and Muirchertach. Derbfhorgaill (died 1098), daughter of Tadc Mac Gilla Padraig, was mother of Tadc, and of Muirchertach, who succeeded Toirdelbach. Diarmait's mother was Dubchoblaig of the Ui Chennselaig, rulers of Leinster. Gormlaith (died 1076), daughter of Ua Fogarta of southern Eile, is also recorded as one of Toirdelbach's wives. 
Toirdelbach Ua Briain's expert reading of the political landscape and quick, decisive reaction to political developments re-established the Ui Briain of Dal Cais as the dominant dynasty in Ireland. As competition increased and access to power became limited to fewer dynasties, the exploitation of internal rivalry became an important means for powerful men to direct affairs in rival kingdoms. This manipulation of tensions was a constant feature of Toirdelbach's career; he was himself subjected to it and used his enemies' difficulties to good effect. 


@@@@@


doc= 20469


O'Brien, William, second earl of Inchiquin (c.1640-1692), colonial governor, was the son of the soldier Murrough O'Brien, known as Murchadh na dToitean ('Murrough of the Burnings'), first earl of Inchiquin (c.1614-1674), and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1685), daughter of Sir William St Leger, president of Munster. Brought up in London at the house of Sir Philip Percival, his father's friend, he was a companion to his guardian's son, afterwards Sir John Percival. In 1648 he was briefly confined in the Tower of London following his father's change of allegiance to the royalists and seizure of Lord Broghill's children as hostages. In 1658 Henry Cromwell reported that O'Brien had come to him in Ireland without pass or permission. 
O'Brien's early manhood was spent with his father in the service of France, especially in Catalonia. In February 1660 he accompanied his father on his way to Lisbon with a French force intended to assist the Portuguese against Spain. Near Lisbon, their vessel was boarded by an Algerian corsair. In the fight that ensued he lost an eye by a shot, and with his father was brought prisoner to Algiers. At the request of Lady Inchiquin the English council of state sought their release. The earl at once returned to England, but his son remained a hostage until the following year when he was freed on payment of a hefty ransom. O'Brien married first, in December 1665, Lady Margaret (died 1683), third daughter of Roger Boyle, first earl of Orrery, who bore him four children: William (1666-1719), his successor, Henry (died in infancy), James (died 1693), and Margaret. His wife was a lady-in-waiting to Mary of Orange at The Hague in 1680, but died in December 1683 and was buried in London. His second wife was Elizabeth (1651-1718), widow of the third Baron Herbert of Cherbury and a daughter and coheir of George Bryges, sixth Baron Chandos, but there were no children of this marriage. 
O'Brien was appointed a member of the Irish privy council in 1671. In 1674 he was appointed governor and vice-admiral of Tangier and became colonel of the 2nd Tangier regiment of foot. However, in the clashes with the Moors he displayed little military capability, and in 1675 he was responsible for rashly committing part of the garrison to a cattle raid which cost 150 casualties. Thereafter he was frequently absent in England. In 1680, having failed to prevent the outer fortifications of Tangier from being overrun, he was recalled under something of a cloud, but mollified Charles II with a gift of a pair of ostriches. In 1674, on the death of his father, he succeeded to the earldom of Inchiquin and inherited an immense estate of 60,000 acres in Munster. This included the family home of Rostellan Castle overlooking Cork harbour, where he resided after his return from Tangier. Although his estate was valued at $2500 per annum, he appears to have been in considerable debt, and unsuccessfully attempted to push his eldest son into marriage with the daughter of a wealthy London merchant who was prepared to pay a large dowry. 
Inchiquin was omitted from the Irish privy council after the accession of James II in 1685. At the revolution of 1688 he took the side of William and Mary, and early in 1689, with his Boyle relatives, played a leading role in the armed resistance of the Munster protestants to Tyrconnell's Jacobite regime in Ireland. General Justin MacCarthy suppressed the Munster Williamites, but allowed Inchiquin to leave Cork for England with a considerable sum of money. This was against King James's wishes, but MacCarthy may have been influenced by the fact that his father, Lord Muskerry, and Inchiquin's father had been old comrades in arms. Soon afterwards Inchiquin and his eldest son were among the several thousand protestants attainted by James II's Irish parliament. In London he offered his services to William, and in September 1689 he was appointed governor and vice-admiral of Jamaica, where, accompanied by his wife and younger son, he landed on 31 May 1690. His salary was $2000 per annum. 
The nineteen months of Inchiquin's personal rule that followed were beset by difficulties, which he struggled to overcome. He re-established the law courts which had not functioned for two years and suppressed a revolt by 500 slaves on one of the inland plantations. Concerned that Jamaica would be prey to French attack, he asked for warships from England and in the meantime fitted out five sloops and a captured vessel to counter growing French strength on neighbouring Hispaniola. The treasury was empty, and he was soon at loggerheads with the 'turbulent and pernicious advisers' who formed the executive council ('CSP col.', 13.295). In August 1691 he angrily dissolved the island's assembly after a six-week session, following clashes over what he claimed were its attempts to undermine his authority and deprive him of revenue. His proposal for a land tax was rejected, and he refused to countenance a tax on the lucrative slave trade which the assembly put forward as an alternative. It was afterwards alleged that Inchiquin benefited personally from the trade, amassing as much as $15,000 during his time in Jamaica. His health deteriorated, and he sought leave to return to England. But on 16 January 1692, 'after a long indisposition through fever and ague which ended in a flux', he died at Santiago de la Vega, Jamaica, where he was buried the same day in the parish church (ibid., 597). 


@@@@@


doc= 20470


O'Brien, William (1738?-1815), actor and playwright, the son of a fencing master, was related to the O'Briens, viscounts Clare, who, having lost their fortunes supporting the Stuart cause, joined the Irish brigade in France. He was apparently 'bred' to the fencing profession but abandoned it for the stage. While performing in Dublin the handsome young actor was recruited by David Garrick to replace Henry Woodward, and on 3 October 1758 he made his debut at Drury Lane, as Captain Brazen in Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer'. For the next six seasons he played 'what Garrick could never reach, coxcombs and men of fashion' (Walpole, 38.524). 
Coached by Garrick, O'Brien quickly became a favourite with London audiences, noted for his easy, natural style and charming, polished manners. It was claimed that 'in the drawing of his sword he threw all other performers at a wonderful distance, by his swiftness, grace, and superiour elegance' (Genest, 4.537). Between 1758 and 1764 he played comic parts, specializing in 'harlequin' and fine gentlemen. He created the original roles of Felix in John Hill's 'The Rout', Young Clackit in Garrick's 'The Guardian', Lovel in James Townley's 'High Life below Stairs', Edgar in John Hawkesworth's 'Edgar and Emmeline', Belmour in William Whitehead's 'The School for Lovers', and Colonel Tamper in the elder George Colman's 'The Deuce is in Him'. His Mercutio was considered second only to that of Woodward. On 19 October 1763 his Sir Andrew Aguecheek was so comical that one of the sentinels flanking the stage laughed until he fell over, to the unbridled merriment of the house. 
On 5 April 1764 O'Brien appeared as Fribble in Garrick's 'Miss in her Teens' in what was to be his last performance. Two nights later, on Saturday 7 April 1764, he was unavailable to play his assigned part of Lovel in 'High Life below Stairs', having that morning married by stratagem at St Paul's Church, Covent Garden, without the knowledge or consent of her family, Lady Susanna Sarah Louisa Fox-Strangways (1743-1827), the daughter of Stephen Fox-Strangways, first earl of Ilchester, and Elizabeth, the daughter of Thomas Strangways Horner. Lady Susan Strangways, as she was known, was the niece of Henry Fox, later first Lord Holland, and a cousin of Charles James Fox, who had a youthful romantic attachment to her. W. M. Thackeray appears to have based the character of Hagan, the Irish actor who marries Lady Maria Esmond in 'The Virginians', on O'Brien. Following his marriage, O'Brien withdrew from the stage. 
Mr and Lady Susan O'Brien, as they were known, having alienated Lord Ilchester through their impetuous marriage, sailed for America in September 1764, and endured a voluntary exile first in New York, where they were aided financially by Lord Holland and Lady Ilchester, and later in Philadelphia and Quebec. A colonial post under the New York governor, Sir Henry Moore, was secured for O'Brien, and in May 1768 he was made secretary and provost-master-general of Bermuda. The couple returned to England in 1770. Soon after, O'Brien was dismissed from a post under the Ordnance because they refused to return to America. 
O'Brien launched a career as a playwright with 'Cross Purposes' (1772), a farce based on J. de La Font's 'Les trois freres rivaux' (1713), and 'The Duel' (1772), a comedy adapted from M. J. Sedaine's 'Le philosophe sans le savoir' (1765). 'Cross Purposes', an afterpiece in two acts with realistic, conversational dialogue, was 'acted with great applause' at Covent Garden (Davies, 2.245) on Saturday 5 December 1772. Three nights later, on 8 December 1772, while 'Cross Purposes' again played at Covent Garden, 'The Duel', as mainpiece, opened at Drury Lane. 'The parties engaged in this 'Duel', not giving the audience 'satisfaction', were put under an 'arrest'' (Oulton, 1.9). The play was hissed during the second act and subsequently withdrawn, though some said that it was 'unjustly condemned' (Genest, 5.343) and 'deserved a much better fate than it met with' (Davies, 2.245). 'Cross Purposes', however, remained a popular afterpiece for half a century. 
O'Brien wrote no more for the stage, but a satirical, sometimes bawdy work known as the 'Lusorium' ('O'Brien's Lusorium', 1782; 'The Lusorium', 2nd edn, 1783; 'O'Brien's Lusorium', 3rd edn, 1796) and a pamphlet postscript ('The End of the Lusorium', 1798) have been attributed to him. It is far more probable that they are by the 'C. [Charles?] O'Brien' whose name appears in the imprint of the second edition. 'C. O'Brien', printer, stationer, book and music seller, may also have been a minor actor and singer at Sadler's Wells in the 1790s. 
After studying unsuccessfully for the law between 1781 and 1783, William O'Brien returned with his wife to Stinsford House, an estate owned by the Strangways family near Dorchester, Dorset, and in later life he attempted to 'sink the player, and to bury in oblivion those years of his life which are the most worth being remembered' (Genest, 4.537). He formed a close friendship with his neighbour William Morton Pitt jun. MP. O'Brien was made commissioner for the island of St Domingo and then granted, through the influence of the earl of Ilchester, with whom over the years the O'Briens had been reconciled, the post of receiver-general of taxes for Dorset, which he held until his death, on 2 September 1815, at Stinsford House. He was buried at Stinsford church on 9 September. O'Brien left his estate to his wife, Lady Susan, his 'faithful and inseparable companion' (Hutchins, 2.567), who died aged eighty-three in 1827. They apparently had no children. O'Brien was eulogized in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' as 'a model of the polished gentleman to those who have attempted the same line of character' and the 'most perfect representative of the Man of Fashion that had ever been seen on the stage' ('GM', 1st ser., 85, 1815, 285). 


@@@@@


doc= 20471


O'Brien, William Smith (1803-1864), Irish nationalist, was born on 17 October 1803 at Dromoland Castle, near Newmarket-on-Fergus, co. Clare, the second son of Sir Edward O'Brien, fourth baronet (1773-1837), and his wife, Charlotte (1781-1856), elder daughter of William Smith of Cahirmoyle (or Cahermoyle). The author Edward O'Brien was a younger brother. William was descended from the medieval Irish high king Brian Boruma. In the eighteenth century the Dromoland O'Briens, a junior branch of the family, had played a leading role in the all-protestant Irish parliament and voted to end many of the penal laws against the Catholic majority. Sir Edward O'Brien opposed the 1800 'Act of Union' with Great Britain, but ultimately accepted it as a 'fait accompli' and attended parliament at Westminster. William's maternal grandfather, an attorney providing loans to the O'Briens and other gentry, accumulated a large estate based on Cahirmoyle in co. Limerick. The decision of his parents to allocate to William his mother's property resulted in the addition of Smith to his name, though he normally signed himself William S. O'Brien. 
O'Brien attended a preparatory school in Kent, and later accompanied his elder brother, Lucius (later thirteenth Baron Inchiquin), to Harrow School in 1813. In his later teens he studied at a private educational establishment run by a Mr Scott at Great Harborough, before following Lucius to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1821. He graduated in 1826 and was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1827. In 1828 Sir Edward nominated William for the pocket borough of Ennis. He joined his brother Lucius, sitting for County Clare. William, a more enthusiastic member than Lucius, made his maiden speech on 3 June 1828, supporting paper currency. Acceding to the wishes of his liberal tory father, O'Brien voted regularly with the Wellington ministry, but only after it had passed Catholic emancipation. 
Irish politics were transformed when Daniel O'Connell won the 1828 County Clare by-election, defeating the senior member for County Clare, Vesey Fitzgerald, who was supported by the Dromoland O'Briens. O'Connell, disqualified as a Catholic, successfully encouraged the Catholic tenants to defy their landlords at the polls. In parliament on 3 July 1828, William supported Catholic claims and revealed his membership of O'Connell's Catholic Association, but deplored O'Connell's threat to the legitimate political interests of local co. Clare landlords. A careless statement that all Clare gentry had opposed O'Connell, re-elected after Catholic emancipation in 1829, led to a duel on 30 July 1829 with Thomas Steele, a minor Clare landholder who passionately supported O'Connell. 
At the general election of 1830, Sir Edward O'Brien forced, against opposition, the re-election of William for the borough of Ennis, subsequently conceded to the O'Briens' ally Vesey Fitzgerald in the election of 1831. Meanwhile O'Brien fought a second duel with W. R. Mahon on behalf of his brother Lucius, accused of fabricating evidence against a political rival ('Limerick Evening Post and Clare Standard', 22 March 1831). Campaigning for his father, who tried to regain the seat of County Clare, O'Brien missed a vital division on the whig government's new 'Reform Bill', but he voted with the reformers on 19 April 1831. His 'Irish Poor Law Bill' of 8 February 1831, supported by a pamphlet, 'Plan for the Relief of the Poor in Ireland' (1831) was dropped. He was a founder member of Edward Gibbon Wakefield's National Colonisation Society and defended the East India Company's monopoly in a strongly imperialistic pamphlet, 'Considerations Relative to the Renewal of the East-India Company's Charter' (1830). On 2 June 1840 he expounded Wakefield's views at length in the House of Commons, but the former's position on India had by then changed. 
Out of parliament after 1831, O'Brien turned down an invitation to stand for the reformed borough of Ennis; he was about to leave co. Clare for co. Limerick. Having paid off his mistress, Mary Anne Wilton, with whom he appears to have had two children, on 19 September 1832 he married Lucy Caroline Gabbett (1811-1861), eldest daughter of William Gabbett of High Park, co. Limerick, a former mayor of the city and an alderman until his death in 1864. The couple lived initially in Limerick City, where O'Brien achieved prominence campaigning for emigration, education, and port development. They then settled at Cahirmoyle with 5000 acres, where O'Brien, after joining O'Connell's Anti-Tory Association, was nominated by the Limerick Liberal Club. With its help he unseated a sitting member in the general election of 1835 and became an independent whig MP for County Limerick. He retained his seat easily in 1837; a tory petition, associated with the so-called 'Spottiswoode conspiracy', against Catholic clerical dictation on O'Brien's behalf was dropped. Normally voting with Melbourne's whig government, O'Brien continued to distance himself from O'Connell, despite the latter's support in the 1837 election. They differed on the need for an Irish poor law, O'Brien's desire to replace tithes to the minority Church of Ireland with payments to all churches, O'Brien's 'Registration of Voters' Bill', and O'Brien's opposition to repeal of the corn laws. O'Brien co-operated with Thomas Wyse on extensive non-denominational education reform. 
O'Connell's partisans nearly forced O'Brien out of parliament in 1839, when the latter voted against Melbourne's bill to suspend the Jamaica assembly. Melbourne's government, co-operating with O'Connell on Irish reform, resigned in favour of Sir Robert Peel's tories. When a Limerick Liberal meeting demanded their errant member's resignation, O'Brien convened a public meeting which supported his continuation as MP. The 'bedchamber crisis' returned the whigs to office, which they retained until they lost the 1841 election. While many Irish MPs supporting O'Connell were defeated, O'Brien was re-elected unopposed for County Limerick. 
Although O'Brien had established his independence of O'Connell, he now moved closer to his rival. In 1843 O'Connell held a series of 'monster' meetings throughout Ireland to demand repeal of the union. O'Brien resigned as JP on finding that others lost their commissions for attending O'Connell's gatherings. In June, O'Brien delivered a powerful speech, published by the Repeal Association, in which he indicted British rule in Ireland and urged religious equality, industrial development, and an extension of the franchise for Ireland. He foreshadowed an imminent mass conversion to repeal. In October 1843 O'Brien formally joined the association after O'Connell and his lieutenants had been charged with sedition. 
With O'Connell's blessing, O'Brien acted as 'de facto' leader of the Repeal Association during the former's trial and imprisonment until his conviction was overturned by the Lords in September 1844. Controlling the weekly Repeal Association meetings and establishing a parliamentary committee, which published a number of well-researched reports, O'Brien worked closely with a group of younger men led by Thomas Davis and associated with the influential 'Nation' newspaper, edited by Charles Gavan Duffy. 
Tension between 'Old' and 'Young' Ireland developed in early 1845, when Peel legislated for three Irish non-denominational university colleges. O'Brien and the Young Irelanders endorsed the principle, but O'Connell and his son John, supporting Catholic Archbishop John MacHale, were strongly opposed. Although O'Brien eventually voted against the bill when safeguards for Catholics were omitted, the Young Irelanders were now widely denounced as secularists. 
In 1846 O'Brien was strongly backed by the Young Irelanders when incarcerated for twenty-five days by the House of Commons for refusing to serve on a Scottish railway committee, irrelevant to Ireland. Together they opposed O'Connell's overtures to Lord John Russell's new whig government. When the Young Irelander Thomas Meagher was silenced at the Repeal Association in August 1846 for attacking O'Connell's 'peace provisions', which renounced the use of violence in all places and at all times, O'Brien initiated a split by walking out. 
The Young Irelanders reverted to newspaper propaganda, and O'Brien led by addressing his fellow landlords on 'Reproductive employment'. Here O'Brien, exculpating his class from major responsibility for the great potato famine (1845-9), demanded investment in Irish railways, colonization schemes, and useful works such as docks, piers, and canals. Local landlords, he claimed, were bankrupted by poor rates expended on futile relief schemes. In parliament O'Brien proved a relentless critic of Russell's 'laissez-faire' famine administration which distributed quotations from Adam Smith instead of food. 
After negotiations with O'Connell broke down in late 1846, O'Brien became the reluctant 'de facto' leader of the Young Irelanders' Irish Confederation, established in January 1847. The death of O'Connell in May 1847 increased the bitterness between the Repeal Association, now controlled by John O'Connell, and the confederation, accused of hastening the demise of the 'Liberator'. Leading a delegation to win over Orangemen in Belfast, O'Brien found his meetings disrupted by furious Catholics venerating O'Connell. At the general election of 1847 the Young Irelanders made little impact. Reluctant to stand again, O'Brien, in his absence, was narrowly re-elected for County Limerick. 
While famine deepened, the Irish Confederation split in January 1848. John Mitchel, demanding a rate strike, refused to accept the ten resolutions for constitutional action drawn up by O'Brien with the support of Gavan Duffy. The French revolution of February 1848 brought temporary unity as O'Brien and Duffy made a volte-face in favour of physical force. After a mass demonstration in Dublin on 21 March 1848, when O'Brien demanded arms and a national guard, he and others were indicted for sedition. Awaiting trial, in late March, O'Brien led a delegation to France, but was rebuffed by Lamartine's provisional government. Addressing a furious House of Commons on 10 April, O'Brien denied seeking military aid from France, but admitted advising the Irish to arm and welcomed aid from the Chartists. 
Stoned on 29 April in Limerick by a mob incensed at Mitchel's attacks on O'Connell, O'Brien recuperated at Cahirmoyle, and visited Dublin in bandages for his trial on 15 May. Like Meagher, he was discharged when his jury disagreed. On Mitchel's transportation for treason-felony on 27 May, O'Brien opposed an uprising in his favour. Instead, O'Brien promoted the union of the repealers and confederates in a new Irish League. Though not a member of the Dublin caucus planning rebellion in the autumn, or the elected executive of the clubs springing up to support the revolutionary movement, O'Brien welcomed the new Irish League with the question 'when will Ireland strike?' ('The Nation', 17 June 1848). Unfortunately, his claim that the new organization embodied all the objects of the confederation encouraged John O'Connell and other repealers to hold back when the league met on 11 July. 
O'Brien's hope for self-government through a show of force rather than insurrection was indicated by his leisurely tour of southern organizations in July 1848. At Cork he suggested that teaching men co-operation in bodies was more useful than instruction in military drill. O'Brien claimed to have been 'very cautious in the language used' (Davis, 'William Smith O'Brien: Ireland-1848-Tasmania', 21) at a meeting of the new Irish League in Dublin. 
The whig government arrested several leading Young Irelanders, including Duffy, and on 22 July suspended habeas corpus. In Wexford, O'Brien, advised of a warrant for his arrest, recognized three choices: accept arrest, escape, or initiate rebellion. Honour required the third, though he later believed the first more appropriate. The enthusiasm of towns such as Enniscorthy, Kilkenny, and especially Carrick-on-Suir was not translated into active assistance. Attempting to gather support in the co. Tipperary villages of Ballingarry, Mullinahone, and Killenaule, O'Brien was followed by several thousand potential defenders, who dropped away when he refused to commandeer provisions and the Catholic priests advised against him. A minor success was achieved at Killenaule by forcing a troop of hussars to pass, one by one, through a barricade. At a council of war at the Boulah Commons on 28 July, O'Brien told his lieutenants to disperse. Later it was suggested that there was a move to depose, or even assassinate, O'Brien. His most revolutionary action was to threaten the owners of the Boulah coal mines with dispossession if they did not raise the wages of the miners and lower their prices. 
On 29 July 1848 a party of forty-seven armed police, challenged by O'Brien's depleted force, barricaded themselves inside Widow McCormack's house at Farrenrory, near Ballingarry, taking her children as hostages. O'Brien was nearly killed in a parley with the police to secure the children when stone-throwing by his supporters evoked volleys of fire, killing two men. The rebel army disintegrated and O'Brien was obliged to escape on horseback when relief arrived for the police. Though pockets of resistance continued for some weeks in other areas, the rebellion was effectively over. The leaders were either arrested or forced to flee overseas. After being harboured for several days, O'Brien was arrested on 7 August at Thurles railway station, attempting to return home. 
At Clonmel court house in October 1848 O'Brien and his three colleagues Thomas Meagher, Patrick O'Donohoe, and Terence MacManus were sentenced to death for high treason. An aura of martyrdom enveloped the bungled rebellion. For the next eight months the convicted leaders lived in relative comfort, mostly in Richmond prison. Public opinion precluded execution. O'Brien's appeal through a writ of error was rejected and he was formally expelled from the House of Commons. Hopes for an early pardon were dashed when the government, by special legislation, against the wishes of the prisoners, commuted the sentence to transportation for life to Van Diemen's Land. 
The journey of O'Brien and his three colleagues on the naval sloop 'Swift' from Dublin to Van Diemen's Land, via the Cape of Good Hope, lasted from 9 July to 31 October 1849. O'Brien, unlike his companions, and three other Young Irelanders -- John Mitchel, Kevin O'Doherty, and John Martin -- initially refused to give his parole for a ticket-of-leave. As a result he was restricted to small cottages at the convict probation station at Ile Maria from November 1849 to August 1850, and the penal station of Port Arthur from August to November 1850. After two months' close confinement and isolation at Ile Maria, with very limited space for exercise, O'Brien's health deteriorated. Publicity on O'Brien's treatment fuelled a movement for his release, not only in the United Kingdom but also in the United States and Canada. Until an unsuccessful escape attempt in August 1850, he was allowed to take walks under supervision. In this period O'Brien was well treated by the superintendent, Samuel Lapham, and formed an embarrassing attachment to the latter's thirteen-year-old daughter Susan (later Susan Wood, an author). He read voraciously and kept a journal, later published as ''To Solitude Consigned': the Tasmanian Journal of William Smith O'Brien' (1995). At Port Arthur, O'Brien was restricted to a small garden for exercise. He finally took his ticket-of-leave, urged by a petition to him from friends in Hobart. He also hoped to help Lapham, sacked for lenience towards him, and pay off debts incurred by the escape attempt. From November 1850 to February 1851, and from January 1852 to March 1854, O'Brien lived comfortably at Elwin's Hotel, New Norfolk. He entertained friends and Young Ireland colleagues, including John Mitchel, and made numerous house visits to local settlers, especially the Irish landowner and prominent local politician Captain Michael Fenton (1789-1874), subsequently speaker of the Tasmanian house of assembly. From February to December 1851 O'Brien raised money by tutoring the sons of an Irish settler, Dr Henry Brock, at Red Rock, near Avoca. 
O'Brien was living at Richmond when conditional pardons, forbidding domicile in the United Kingdom, arrived for himself, John Martin, and Kevin O'Doherty, the other four Young Irelanders having escaped. Having left Tasmania on 6 July 1854 after dinners in his honour, O'Brien attended receptions in Melbourne and Geelong before proceeding to Brussels, via Madras and Egypt. In Brussels he published his two-volume 'Principles of Government, or, Meditations in Exile', in which he gave a favourable account of transportation as a punishment and showed little of the Irish rebel and much of the Wakefield imperialist. He included a model constitution for a self-governing Tasmania, originally published anonymously in a local paper, the 'Launceston Examiner' (30 August 1853). 
While touring Greece with his eldest son, Edward, in May 1856, O'Brien learned of his unconditional pardon, assisted by a petition signed by MPs of all parties. He returned to Ireland on 6 July 1856 amid great rejoicing. He had travelled extensively through France, Italy, and Switzerland during his European exile. 
Back in Ireland, O'Brien was offered nominations for Tipperary and other seats but rejected them as he required time with his family and considered attendance at Westminster futile. He preferred to educate by press and pamphlet, never renouncing his 1848 principles, but insisting that physical force was impossible while England remained at peace. In 1862 he unsuccessfully challenged Sir Robert Peel the younger, then Irish chief secretary, to a duel for sneering at his behaviour at Ballingarry ('The Nation', 1 March 1862). Though he participated in the funeral service of his lieutenant Terence MacManus in 1861, O'Brien gave no countenance to the secret, revolutionary Fenians who deliberately exploited the occasion. Instead, O'Brien fulfilled his duties as a landlord, chaired the Newcastle West poor-law guardians, encouraged industrial development and the arts, and wrote many articles for 'The Nation', then edited by A. M. Sullivan. His fame as an elder statesman and a martyr for Ireland ensured respect for his opinions and demonstrations in his favour as he moved about the country. 
Foreign affairs attracted much of O'Brien's attention. He denounced British repression during the Indian mutiny (1857), but was unsympathetic towards the Italian Risorgimento, and supported the papal temporal power. France under Napoleon III incurred his suspicions, and O'Brien debated with his fellow exile John Martin, who appeared to believe that war between France and England would help Ireland. O'Brien published the controversy in a pamphlet which effectively expressed his political philosophy, 'Correspondence between John Martin and William Smith O'Brien, Relative to a French Invasion' (1861). 
Most significant were O'Brien's views on America after a three-month tour of 7000 miles in the United States and Canada in early 1859. He encountered an enthusiastic response, not only from Irish Americans, but also from the leading politicians. Received by President James Buchanan, he met Lincoln's future secretary of state William Seward and future Confederate politicians, such as Alexander Stephens. He continued to deplore slavery in principle, though he was satisfied with what he saw in practice. In Canada he advised the French and Irish to work together. O'Brien expounded his experience in speeches in Dublin, later published as a pamphlet, 'Lectures on America' (1860). After the outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 O'Brien attempted to mediate between Seward, who politely rebuffed his suggestions for a ceasefire, and southern politicians. Though he disapproved of secession, O'Brien believed that, once a 'fait accompli', it could not be put down by force. The Irish should not be involved. He differed from his colleagues John Mitchel, an ardent partisan of the South, and Thomas Meagher, who commanded an Irish brigade for the North. 
O'Brien's comfortable existence was destroyed on 13 June 1861 by the death of his wife, Lucy. In 1848, to avoid the confiscation of his property after conviction for treason, he had placed it in trust with his brother Lucius and friend Woronzow Greig. A bitter dispute arose when they were unable to allow O'Brien control after Lucy's death. A compromise accepted in Chancery conferred Cahirmoyle on O'Brien's son Edward William (1837-1909), who agreed to pay his father the considerable annuity of $2000. Still furious with the trustees, O'Brien sadly resigned his responsibilities in Limerick and took up residence in Killiney, near Dublin, but spent much of his time in European travel. In late 1861 he visited Hungary and saw in action Ferenz Deak, working for the restoration of the ancient constitution denied by Austria. O'Brien approved heartily of Deak's passive resistance, which achieved success in 1867. In 1863 O'Brien visited Poland and gave an address, in aid of Polish exiles, on the country's repression by Russia; this was published as another pamphlet, 'Lecture on Poland' (1863). 
At the Penrhyn Arms at Bangor in Wales, on 18 June 1864, O'Brien died of a heart attack apparently brought on by a liver complaint. Though the family endeavoured to prevent a popular demonstration at the funeral, vast crowds followed the coffin as it was borne through Dublin for transport by rail to Cahirmoyle. The funeral and interment in the family mausoleum at Rathronan churchyard, co. Limerick, took place on 24 June, with O'Brien's brothers-in-law the Revds J. and R. Gabbett, reading the service. In 1870 a statue of William Smith O'Brien by Thomas Farrell in Caravazzi marble was unveiled by John Martin. It now stands close to that of Daniel O'Connell in O'Connell Street, Dublin. 
O'Brien was 5 feet 11 inches tall, an athletic figure, running to corpulence in later years. Of dark complexion, his hair was dark brown and his eyes grey. He had a very light Irish accent. A keen linguist, he had broad literary and historical interests. Though speaking only English and French fluently, O'Brien could 'understand with more or less facility' Latin, Greek (ancient and modern), Italian, German, Spanish, and the Gaelic of his ancestors, which he worked hard to acquire. In the right company he could be very sociable, and he was far from humourless. Although he was no rhetorician, O'Brien's speeches, logical and informative, were often enthusiastically received. He was proud of his prose, but not his poetry, of which he wrote a great deal. His writings show a sometimes vulnerable personality. O'Brien was no saint; apart from his Ile Maria dalliance, he had a mistress before marriage. His wife, Lucy, though otherwise devoted, had no sympathy with his politics. For his part, O'Brien showed some insensitivity by lecturing Lucy on her dislike of frequent pregnancies and lack of preparation for childbirth. Of their five sons and two daughters, only Robert Donough (1844-1917) and Charlotte Grace O'Brien (1845-1909) were publicly identified as Irish nationalists. As a father, Smith O'Brien, sometimes patriarchal, was relaxed towards ceremony and dress, and encouraged intelligence and the acquisition of marketable skills by his daughters. He allowed his daughter Lucy Josephine (1840-1907) to study classical languages like her brothers. Married to the Revd John Gwynn, subsequently regius professor of divinity at the University of Dublin, Lucy became the ancestor of a line of eminent scholars. 
Frankly admitting that pride was a serious failing, O'Brien declared: 'I should be a prouder man than I now am if I had been born the son of a chimney sweep, and had subsequently raised myself to distinction by my talents or by my public service' ('The Nation', 27 Sept 1862). He balanced pride with sympathy towards Vandiemonian convicts, whom he saw as victims of their poverty-stricken environments. He opposed feudal behaviour such as the uncovering of peasants before gentry. 
O'Brien's stubbornness, sincerity, and courage were universally acknowledged. He disclaimed originality, and acknowledged his adaptation of the ideas of others. Conservative in his basic thought, he was nevertheless prepared to modify opinions when convinced by argument. American democracy persuaded him to rethink some of his principles. As a liberal protestant, he was without sectarian prejudice. Supporting the common education of Catholics and protestants, he conceded public funds to Catholics if they insisted on separate institutions. 
O'Brien has often been regarded as a noble, if wooden, idealist. He was in fact a pragmatist who, adapting to the O'Connellite revolution in Ireland, turned it to his advantage and restored the national reputation of his family. A scholar and a critic rather than a man of action, O'Brien in his politics paradoxically combined a devotion to Ireland's self-government and cultural identity with a consistent belief in the British empire. He sympathized with indigenous peoples, especially black South Africans and Australian Aborigines, but denied that they could legitimately exclude European emigrants from their under-utilized territories. His final political position, endorsing Deak's passive resistance in Hungary, anticipated Arthur Griffith's 'Hungarian policy' and the Sinn Fein movement after 1905. 


@@@@@


doc= 20472


Ua Brolchain, Flaithbertach (d. 1175), abbot of Derry and head of Columban churches in Ireland, was an important exponent of ecclesiastical reform in twelfth-century Ireland. The Ui Brolchain were of the Cenel nEogain of the northern Ui Neill, but Flaithbertach's precise genealogical affiliation is not certain. Occasional reference to him as 'mac in epscuip hUi Bhrolchain' (that is, 'son of the bishop Ua Brolchain') suggests he was perhaps son of Mael Coluim Ua Brolchain (died 1122), or of Mael Brigte Ua Brolchain (died 1139), both styled 'bishop of Armagh' in the annals. He succeeded as abbot of Derry and 'coarb', or successor, of Colum Cille on the death of Mael Isu Ua Branain in 1150 and probably had the support of Gilla Meic Liac, reformist archbishop of Armagh and himself ex-abbot of Derry, as well as that of Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn, king of Cenel nEogain. Indeed, his success was very much linked to the patronage of Mac Lochlainn, and Ua Brolchain's genealogical connection with the Cenel nEogain (traditional supporters of Derry) was doubtless important in this regard. The title 'coarb' of Colum Cille had previously been bestowed on the abbots of Kells, not Derry, so clearly Ua Brolchain's succession marked an important moment. 
From the start Flaithbertach Ua Brolchain was active in asserting his jurisdiction as 'coarb', initially in the north of Ireland where Mac Lochlainn's influence extended. In 1150 he made a circuit ('cuairt') of Cenel nEogain, receiving tribute from Mac Lochlainn. This was followed in the next year by a circuit of Sil Cathasaig (in what is now co. Antrim), receiving tribute for its ruler Cu Ulad Ua Lainn, and in 1153 of Dal Cairpre and Ui Eachach Ulad (in modern co. Down), with tribute from the ruler Ua Duinn Sleibe. By 1157 Mac Lochlainn had achieved the status 'king of Ireland', and Ua Brolchain's situation was duly enhanced. Thus, in the very next year, at the Synod of Breemount, Meath, presided over by Gilla Meic Liac and the papal legate Gilla Crist Ua Connairche, he was recognized as head of all Columban churches in Ireland and given 'a chair', that is, status equivalent to a bishop. This was evidently an attempt by Gilla Meic Liac to make the relationship of the 'coarb' of Colum Cille to his churches analogous to that of a bishop to his diocese. In 1161 at an assembly of clerics and laymen at Dervor, Meath, Mac Lochlainn confirmed Ua Brolchain's jurisdiction over the Columban churches in Meath and Leinster (said thus to be free from exaction of secular dues); and in the same year he made a circuit of Osraige, thus confirming his jurisdiction in southern Ireland. In 1164, Ua Brolchain was invited by Somarlaide (Sumerled) Mac Gillai Adomnain, king of Argyll and the Isles, to become abbot of Iona. Since such a move would have disrupted the new organization being established in Ireland, it was opposed by Gilla Meic Liac and Mac Lochlainn and was never realized. 
Flaithbertach Ua Brolchain was also noted for extensive architectural work at Derry, in collaboration with his patron Mac Lochlainn. As early as 1155 the door of Derry church was made at his behest, but the main work was done between 1162 and 1164. In 1162 over eighty houses at Derry were demolished to enable the construction of an enclosing wall around the main ecclesiastical site. In 1163 a lime-kiln ('tene-aeil'), measuring 60 feet square, was constructed in the space of twenty days. Finally, in 1164 the great church ('tempull mor'), measuring 90 feet in length, was built in just forty days by Ua Brolchain and Mac Lochlainn. It seems that some of this work may have been in vain, for Derry suffered serious burning in 1166, ironically the same year that Mac Lochlainn was slain. Ua Brolchain sought to have his secular patron interred at Derry, but was overruled, since it was traditional for the Cenel nEogain kings to be buried at Armagh. Little is heard of Flaithbertach Ua Brolchain after this point and he himself died in 1175, in the 'dubreicles' or 'dark church' at Derry, following an unknown illness. 


@@@@@


doc= 20473


O Bruadair, Daibhi (c.1625-1698?), poet, has left little documentary evidence of his life apart from his poems. Even these have very little concrete information and so much of what can be said about him is speculation, however plausible. The surname O Bruadair may be an amalgamation of the Gaelic Ua/O (=grandson of) and the Norse Brodir and it occurs in several places in Ireland, especially in Munster and south-east Leinster. The surname is Anglicized as Bruder and Broderick. Daibhi was associated with both co. Cork and co. Limerick and the suggestion that he was born and brought up in the former is very likely. Some of his poems refer to the Barrys of Timoleague as being his early friends and patrons. His literary early connections are also with co. Cork. Although he did not belong to one of the hereditary families of learning he had obviously received training in one of the poetic schools which were in a state of great decline in the first half of the seventeenth century, probably the school of the O Dalaigh poetic clan at Blarney. His date of birth can be speculated by working back from the earliest of his poems that can be dated which is about 1648, suggesting that he may have been born about 1625 or even slightly earlier. His family seem to have been moderately well off as he often makes comparisons between the conditions of his early life and later hardships. There is no record of when he transferred to co. Limerick but it must have been in the 1650s or early 1660s when he looked for and received patronage from the well-to-do families of that territory, the Roches, Bourkes, and Fitzgeralds. 
As mentioned above O Bruadair did not belong to one of the hereditary families of traditional learning and before this period of decline this would have shut him out for ever from becoming a master of what he called the 'seada ruin' or mysterious treasures of traditional Irish lore. However one of the features of the decline was that those, like him, who were interested and able, took the place of the traditional families and acted as preservers and transmitters of that lore. They read and wrote Irish, making important copies of the few manuscripts there were, and taught others to do likewise. Some, like Daibhi, were inspired to add their own compositions to this work of preservation. Daibhi is known to have written manuscripts, making at least one copy of Geoffrey Keating's 'History of Ireland' and a copy of another historical compilation of the well-known O'Mulconry family of hereditary historians. Unfortunately there are only fragments of his scribal work still extant. 
O Bruadair also copied his own poems and Sean Stack, a scribe who copied them from Daibhi's hand, reports that the poet himself annotated them in English, although Stack was unwilling to 'stain his own book with English'. We have some proof of O Bruadair's knowledge of and competence in English. One of his patrons and a friend, Sir John Fitzgerald of Clenlish, co. Limerick, was implicated in the Popish Plot and Daibhi wrote a poem in Irish accompanied by a letter in English to Lord Chief Justice John Keating in 1682 thanking him for the fact that Fitzgerald and others had been acquitted. The letter not only shows him to be interested in affairs of political importance, it also contains some direct information about himself which is worth quoting: 'The Author of the Inclosed Poem is a man not concerned at all in the Weighty Affairs of this World, yet see'th an can smile or frown on things as well as any other fool. He is a great Lover and admirer of honest men, and as great a hater of the adverse party. He holdeth his abode in the proximity of a quiet Company, the Dead, being banished the Society of the living for want of means to rent so much as a House and Garden amongst them. He lives like a Sexton without Salary, in the Corner of a Churchyard, in a Cottage (thanks be to God) as well contented with his stock, which is only a little Dog, a Cat, and a Cock, as the Prince of Parma with all his Principalities. ('Poems', ed. MacErlean, 1.xxxiii-xxxiv)' Although O Bruadair above indicates his satisfaction with his lowly estate a poem composed, according to its title in 1674, 'Mairg nar chrean re maitheas saoghalta' ('Alas the person who did not save worldly wealth'), on the occasion of his fall from a comfortable position, also gives us personal information about him. The title declares him to be stricken with poverty ('i ndith costais') and tells us that his friends did not come to his aid. In it he contrasts his former condition when he had money to spend and was acceptable to all and sundry as both poet and wit with his present penury and isolation. Having lost his means of wealth, probably his entitlement to sufficient land, he has become an outcast and 'a horseman on foot'. Servants will no longer serve him drink and food and he must engage in manual labour with a spade which causes his knuckles to swell and gives him pains in his joints. The complaint is made even more effective as O Bruadair sees his suffering in contrast with the honour due to a poet and scholar in the Gaelic tradition. For example, a poet who was forced to travel on foot would be a disgrace not only to himself but also to all those who could be considered his potential patrons. This poem also mentions a wife and family but it is not known who the wife was nor how many children he had. 
O Bruadair's poetry spans almost the whole of the second half of the seventeenth century. This alone makes it of great importance. Altogether about seventy items exist which can be confidently ascribed to him and most of these have been published, with copious notes and literal, but sometimes untrustworthy, translations, in the three-volume edition by John C. MacErlean, (1910-17). These poems cover not only the demise of poetry and learning but also comprise a sharp and invaluable commentary on the politics and events of Irish history from Cromwell to the penal laws. His poetry clearly portrays each of the most important events and the major personalities with realistic changes of mood as the fortunes of the native Irish ebbed and flowed. It is notable that as his own fortunes changed for the worse his poetry became more eloquent and passionate. There is no direct evidence that he had read the political poetry in English of the period, like that of Abraham Cowley, or Samuel Butler's 'Hudibras', or the 'Poems on the Affairs of State', but the flavour of his work is very similar to all of these. He combines this sharp political commentary with a metrical and verbal virtuosity that has seldom been equalled in Irish. Some of his poems were translated into English by the Irish writer James Stephens, who described O Bruadair's poetry as 'an unending rebellious bawl which would be the most desolating utterance ever made by man, if it were not also the most gleeful'. A more recent, and equally free, verse translation of a selection of the poems was published by Michael Hartnett, an Irish poet hailing from the border region between Limerick and co. Kerry that was O Bruadair's home in the second part of his life. 
Like much else about O Bruadair's life the date of his death is uncertain. He is known to have followed the careers of the 'Wild Geese', military exiles who went to the continent after the treaty of Limerick, especially Patrick Sarsfield and his friend and patron Sir John Fitzgerald, the fortunes of both of whom he celebrated in poems. His last datable poem was composed in 1693 and most scholars believe he died about five years later in 1698. There is a tradition that he lived for a number of years longer. 


@@@@@


doc= 20474


O'Bryan, William (1778-1868), founder of the Bible Christians (Bryanites), was born on 6 February 1778 at Gunwen Farm, Luxulyan, Cornwall, the second son (and third of four children) of William Bryant (1733-1796) and his wife, Thomasine, 'nee' Lawry, prosperous church Methodist farmers and tinners. The family claimed -- probably mistakenly -- descent from one of Oliver Cromwell's Irish officers who had settled in Cornwall, a tradition which William junior cherished to such an extent that by about 1810 he had assumed the name O'Bryan. 
Bryant was educated at four local schools and then apprenticed to a St Austell draper, returning to Gunwen after the death of his father in 1796. Having undergone conversion experiences in May 1789 and November 1795, he had become a Wesleyan local preacher by 1803, the year in which he married, on 9 July, Catherine Cowlin (1781-1860). In 1808, following a crisis caused by the death of his infant son, Bryant commenced work as a freelance evangelist in mid-Cornwall, forming several societies around Newquay. He had aspirations to enter the Wesleyan ministry but was turned down by the Cornwall district meeting in 1810 on account of his family responsibilities. This set-back reinforced his natural tendency to defy authority. He preached in disregard of the circuit plan and even proposed that the ministry be supported by voluntary contributions; and in November 1810 he was expelled by the Wesleyans, ironically at Gunwen Chapel, which he himself had built on land he had donated. He then engaged in independent evangelism on the western edge of Bodmin Moor, creating a group of societies which were absorbed into the Bodmin and Liskeard circuits in 1814 when O'Bryan was reconciled with the Wesleyans. His irregular evangelistic activities in the Stratton mission on the Cornwall-Devon border from January 1815 soon led to further friction and a second expulsion, and on 1 October 1815 he established an autonomous circuit at Week St Mary, the creation of the first (Arminian) Bible Christian society following eight days later at Lake Farm, Shebbear. 
O'Bryan dominated the Bible Christian Connexion during its early years, seeing its membership grow from 237 in 1816 to 8054 in 1827 and spread beyond Devon and Cornwall. Its theology and polity were avowedly Methodist, although its use of women preachers was more distinctive. O'Bryan occupied the movement's key offices, including those of general superintendent (1819-26), president of conference (1819-27), book steward (1819-23), connexional editor (1822-8), and secretary of the general missionary committee (1821-2, 1825-6, 1828-9). He was also the author of its principal foundation documents, such as 'The Rules of Society' (1818), and the official hymnbook (1824), as well as the first editor of, and regular contributor to, the 'Arminian Magazine'. However, from 1824 there was increasing resistance to his autocratic rule, and disputes over his control of preachers and chapels and his casual approach to connexional and personal finances came to a head in 1828, when he relinquished the conference chair. After losing a further power struggle in 1829, O'Bryan separated with two itinerants and several hundred members, who reassumed the name of Arminian Bible Christians. 
On 4 September 1831 O'Bryan and most of his family sailed from Liverpool to emigrate to America; here he settled initially at Bethany, Connecticut, where two of his daughters kept a girls' school, and formed a Methodist circuit. For most of his American years, though, he was resident in New York and its vicinity, continuing to expound the gospel there and even undertaking preaching tours to Ohio and Canada, but never enjoying the scale of evangelistic success he had achieved in England. In 1835 most of those who had seceded in 1829 rejoined the Bible Christians, a condition of the reunion being that O'Bryan relinquished his copyright in the hymnbook and all other claims on the connexion in exchange for $85 and an annuity of $20. He visited England six times between 1834 and 1861, mainly to see relations and to renew old acquaintances in Devon and Cornwall, and latterly even preaching in Bible Christian chapels. He died at Brooklyn, New York, on 8 January 1868, and was buried in Greenwood cemetery, Brooklyn. William and Catherine O'Bryan had seven children, two sons and five daughters, one of whom, Mary ['see 'Thorne, Mary (1807-1883)], married Samuel Thorne, another prominent Bible Christian, and became a celebrated preacher in her own right. 


@@@@@


doc= 20475


O'Bryen, Dennis (1755-1832), playwright and political pamphleteer, was born in Ireland. He became a surgeon but relinquished the profession and settled in London. The work that first brought him notoriety was the ironical 'Defence of the earl of Shelburne from the reproaches of his numerous enemies, in a letter to Sir George Saville, bart., to which is added a postscript addressed to the earl of Stair' (1782; 2nd edn, 1783). Contrary to O'Bryen's title, the work was in fact a mock-defence and it provoked replies from William Petty, first marquess of Lansdowne. On 5 July 1783 O'Bryen's comedy 'A Friend in Need is a Friend Indeed' was performed at the Haymarket and thereafter eight times at the theatre. The play, which in some respects resembles Oliver Goldsmith's 'Good-Natured Man', received some unfavourable reviews and was never printed but it did give rise to a newspaper controversy between the author and the theatre manager George Colman the elder, who wrote the epilogue. During the early 1780s O'Bryen published two papers called 'The Reasoner' which subsequently appeared in several compilations, the first being attributed by the compiler to Lord Erskine, the second to Sheridan. Other works by O'Bryen include: 'A gleam of comfort to this distracted empire, demonstrating the fairness and reasonableness of national confidence in the present ministry' -- meaning the ministry of Pitt (1784); 'A View of the Commercial Treaty with France' (1786); 'Lines Written at Twickenham' (1788), followed in the same year by the anonymously published 'The prospect before us, being a series of papers upon the great question which now agitates the public mind', which was reproduced under the title 'The Regency Question' with a new preface, in consequence of the return of the king's insanity in 1810. In 1796 he published 'Utrum horum? The Government or the Country?' which rapidly passed through three editions. 
O'Bryen's political writings reflect his activism as a supporter of the Fox administration and his key role as Fox's 'public relations adviser' (Reid). On 11 February 1790 O'Bryen and others arranged a meeting to assuage the breach between Burke and Sheridan; the outcome was that it was agreed not to discuss the subject of the French Revolution in the House of Commons. It appears that in 1799 O'Bryen and Sheridan may have had dealings with Arthur O'Connor who was involved in a conspiracy to overthrow English rule in Ireland. It has been suggested that during O'Connor's trial O'Bryen and Sheridan instigated a fracas in the courtroom with the intention of aiding O'Connor's escape. The ensuing melee did not achieve this objective and in April 1799 O'Bryen and others stood trial on the charge of inciting a riot. The event was described by the attorney-general as 'one of the most heinous... in the history of our Law': O'Bryen was found not guilty but his fellow accused both received sentences (O'Toole). 
O'Bryen was an intimate of Sheridan although he took issue with his suitability to follow Fox as MP for Westminster and succeeded in winning 'Mr. Fox from his purpose' at the end of June 1802 (Fox to O'Bryen, BL, Add. MS 47566, fol. 67). On the change of ministry in 1806 he succeeded to the lucrative sinecure of deputy paymaster-general and he was appointed to the patent office of marshal of the Admiralty at the Cape of Good Hope, worth, it was said $4000 per annum. During the same year O'Bryen secured a $400 loan for Sheridan and in 1816 wrote in emotive terms to the 'Morning Post' calling for assistance for Sheridan. O'Bryen died at Margate on 13 August 1832 having resided at 21 Craven Street, Strand, London. His manuscripts and correspondence were sold after his death at auction by Mr Evans. 


@@@@@


doc= 20476


O'Bryen, Edward (b. in or before 1753, d. 1808), naval officer, details of whose parents and upbringing are unknown, served for nearly five years in the 'Aeolus' (36 guns) in the Mediterranean, and for more than three years in the East Indies, in the 'Prudent' (64 guns). He passed his examination on 9 August 1775, being then, according to his certificate, more than twenty-one. He was promoted lieutenant on 11 April 1778 and commanded the galley 'Ferret', part of Admiral Lord Howe's fleet in the encounter with d'Estaing at the battle of 11 August off Narragansett Bay. On 13 November he became a lieutenant in the 'Ostrich' (16 guns) and six months later, 2 June 1779, he became second lieutenant in the 'Ambuscade' (36 guns), attached to the Channel Fleet. On 1 March 1781 he was appointed first lieutenant to the 'Actaeon' (44 guns), serving on the Jamaica station, and on 17 March 1783 he was promoted commander of the sloop 'Jamaica' (16 guns). He was promoted to post rank on 14 June and on 6 August assumed command of the 'Resistance' (44 guns) which he brought home and paid off in 1784. 
During the peace O'Bryen was unemployed and it was not until 1 April 1795 that he was appointed captain of the 'Southampton' (32 guns), before moving in June to command the 'Windsor Castle' (90 guns), Rear-Admiral Robert Man's flagship, under Admiral William Hotham. The French put into Cadiz and were watched there by Man until 29 July 1796, when he left to rejoin Admiral John Jervis at San Fiorenzo. But Man neglected to bring essential stores from Gibraltar and Jervis sent him back there to remedy this. As Man returned he was sighted by a Spanish squadron and chased into Gibraltar. He called a council of his captains who decided to return to England. This 'extraordinary decision' (Laird Clowes, 4.287) reduced the Mediterranean Fleet by one third and left Jervis in a highly vulnerable position. When Man arrived home in the 'Windsor Castle' he was censured, ordered to strike his flag, and not employed afloat again. 
O'Bryen's association with this decision and the danger in which it placed Britain may explain why he was unemployed until 20 February 1797 when he was appointed to the 'Nassau' (64 guns). He took command on 28 April 1797 when the 'Nassau' was flying the flag of Vice-Admiral Richard Onslow at Yarmouth and formed part of the North Sea Fleet under Admiral Adam Duncan. Her crew, whose pay was nineteen months in arrears, were already mutinous and an attempt by O'Bryen to punish the insolent behaviour of one man by dismissing him from the ship was thwarted by the crew's resistance. The situation steadily deteriorated. The Nore mutineers sent delegates urging the North Sea Fleet to join them and on 26 May, when the 'Nassau' was ordered to sail to join Duncan, she refused. Two days later the crew determined to hang the boatswain and a seaman for opposing them. When O'Bryen's arguments had no effect, he 'hove his hanger overboard and said if they were going to hang an officer he should be the first or heave himself overboard' (Lloyd, 289), but the crew would not allow this and the arguments continued until O'Bryen 'left them distracted' (ibid.) and seemed intent on suicide. When the 'Nassau' ultimately followed other mutinous ships to Sheerness on 31 May, O'Bryen left her and though invited by the crew to return he refused to do so until the red flag had been hauled down. O'Bryen returned to the ship on 14 June 'on which the ship's company discovered the strongest inclination of regard and affection' (ibid., 295). 
Onslow had shifted his flag to the 'Adamant' (50 guns) after 26 May and on 25 July transferred to the 'Monarch' (74 guns). O'Bryen, who had been appointed his flag captain on 4 July, took a distinguished part in the battle of Camperdown on 11 October 1797. Leading the larboard division, the 'Monarch' approached the Dutch line and when O'Bryen reported he could see no gap to pass through Onslow replied 'the 'Monarch' will make a passage' (R. D. Franks, 'Admiral Sir Richard Onslow', 'Mariner's Mirror', 67, 1981, 335), and insisted no shot be fired until the Dutch vice-admiral was separated from the vessel astern of him. The 'Monarch' passed between the Dutch ships 'Jupiter' and 'Haarlem', firing into each and then concentrating on Rear-Admiral Reyntjes's 'Jupiter'. The Dutch frigate 'Monnikendam' gallantly but vainly threw herself between the two only to receive the full blast of 'Monarch's' second broadside. Onslow's concentration brought nine British ships against five Dutch, four of which surrendered within the next hour. The 'Monarch''s casualties, 36 killed, 100 wounded, her hull riddled with shot, are evidence that she bore the brunt of heavy fighting. O'Bryen himself refuted a later insinuation, made to George III, that Onslow was lucky to have him as his captain (Stirling, 1.55). But O'Bryen must have been very busy in the months following the battle, when Onslow took command of the North Sea Fleet, until Duncan rejoined in August 1798. The 'Monarch' returned to Yarmouth for repairs but was in the North Sea again in early October meeting heavy gales before being relieved in December. 
O'Bryen does not appear to have been employed between 1798 and the end of the war. He is said to have commanded the 'Kent' (74 guns) in the Mediterranean between 1801 and 1803, but was invalided in May of that year. He had no further service, retiring to his house at Cattisfield, Hampshire. He was married to Mary Alsop of London, who died some time in the spring of 1807, at Cattisfield, after a lingering illness, leaving a daughter, Mary. In April 1808 O'Bryen married Mrs Martha Charlotte Bradby of Cattisfield; they had no children, but an earlier liaison had left an illegitimate son, John Cavendish, to whom O'Bryen left 20 guineas in his will. 
Although O'Bryen was employed during the war with the American colonies, his slow promotion and unemployment between 1783 and 1795 illustrates a lack of influential patronage. However, his reputation as a brave and professional officer finally brought appointment, though on a station, the North Sea, not noted for prize money. The mutiny on the 'Nassau' was the result of long-standing grievances and the crew expressed their respect and affection for him. But to be associated with failure or mutiny, however blameless, was to have a black mark against one's name, no less significant for being invisible. Thereafter ill health prevented the possibility of a more exciting career in the Napoleonic wars. Promoted rear-admiral of the blue on 9 November 1805 and of the white on 28 April 1808, O'Bryen died on 18 December 1808 at Cattisfield. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 20477


O'Byrne, Fiach MacHugh (c.1544-1597), chieftain, was probably born at Ballinacor in co. Wicklow, the first child of Hugh MacShane O'Byrne ('c'.1525-1579), chief of the Gabhal Raghnaill branch of the O'Byrne clan, and his first wife, Sadhbh ('c'.1530- 'c'.1600), daughter of Phelim Buidhe MacLorcan O'Byrne. Fiach was heir both to his father's inaccessible lands centring on Glenmalure in the Wicklow Mountains and to the precarious political situation that had grown out of the treaty signed by his grandfather Shane Oge MacRedmund in 1542. The treaty saw the multi-branched O'Byrne clan unilaterally surrender its lands to the crown only to have them regranted under English law and custom. It became clear, however, that the senior O'Byrnes of Crioch Branach, occupying the more fertile lowlands east of the Gabhal Raghnaill, were unduly favoured under the terms of the treaty, while the junior branches, particularly the Gabhal Raghnaill, were marginalized. Moreover, Tudor rule at the local level had by the 1560s become intrusive and high-handed, providing a visible focal point for Gaelic anger. Thus Fiach inherited an increasingly acrimonious relationship both with the senior O'Byrnes and with the Tudor administration: his father commenced hostilities in both directions in order to establish the status denied to the Gabhal Raghnaill by the 1542 treaty. 
Fiach's early years were spent close to his father, whose reputation as a resourceful chief or 'wily' upstart had been growing. Fiach first appears in January 1563 when he was pardoned alongside his father for attempting to procure his neighbours' support in a rebellion against Lord Deputy Sussex; it was rumoured that Sussex planned to kill them in their beds at Christmas. The later 1560s saw similar pardons granted to Fiach as his father employed the dual strategy of acting aggressively toward the crown -- by capturing government officials, or by harbouring Irish rebels or exacting black rents -- and then securing a pardon for his actions. It was during this extension of Gabhal Raghnaill power, about 1565, that Fiach married Sadhbh ('c'.1550- 'c'.1581), daughter of a leading member of the Kavanaghs. His sister Margaret married Rory Oge O'More, leader of the expropriated O'More clan. These carefully planned marriages at once strengthened Hugh MacShane's hand and increased the frequency of co-ordinated Gaelic attacks against the crown. 
In April 1572 Fiach and his brother-in-law Brian MacCahir Kavanagh were implicated in the murder of Robert Browne, an influential south co. Wexford landlord. The incident's severity was greatly aggravated because Browne had married the daughter of Nicholas White, seneschal of Wexford. Worse still, White, who was at court when the murder occurred, attracted the queen's personal interest in the matter. Elizabeth demanded justice and in July, Francis Agard, seneschal of O'Byrne's country, attacked the Gabhal Raghnaill, killing Fiach's brother who had allegedly been present at the murder. There is no evidence that Fiach had any involvement in Browne's murder other than his association with the Kavanaghs. Nevertheless he offered to apprehend the murderers. The compromise, however, was undermined as the vengeful White attacked the Gabhal Raghnaill, pushing them and their Gaelic allies into open rebellion. The revolt was suppressed by February 1573, but only following a concerted effort by seneschals White and Agard who, in the end, agreed to pardon both Fiach and his father. The affair established Fiach's reputation as a principal Gaelic leader in Leinster who reputedly commanded 200 kerne. 
Fiach gradually eclipsed his father's influence. He pursued a more aggressive strategy toward his neighbours. The ageing Hugh MacShane, however, continued as the Gabhal Raghnaill chief, carrying out negotiations with government representatives while his son 'independently' committed depredations against them. In December 1575 Lord Deputy Henry Sidney, following a progress from Dublin to Waterford which was incessantly hampered by Fiach, wrote of the Janus-faced O'Byrnes, 'the father was with me without protection, but the son lyveth aloof' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/59/17). In 1578 Thomas Masterson, then seneschal of Wexford, invited Fiach to a conference where the latter's capture or murder was intended. But following the massacre at Mullaghmast, Fiach approached the meeting with ample circumspection and soon received intelligence that alerted him to Masterson's ploy. He launched a successful counter-attack that might have resulted in the capture and ransom of Masterson himself. The government, however, continued an aggressive campaign. Rory Oge and many of his followers were killed and Hugh MacShane and Fiach MacHugh eventually surrendered in September-October 1578. Fiach submitted at Christ Church where he recognized the new seneschal of the O'Byrnes, Sir Henry Harrington, as his 'captain'. Following this, Fiach and his father travelled to Castledermot, co. Kildare, where they submitted to Lord Justice Sir William Drury. These dual roles, as dangerous rebel and obedient client, played masterfully by Fiach and Hugh MacShane, were now ended. 
Fiach succeeded as chief of the Gabhal Raghnaill following his father's death in late 1579. The government now dealt with the Gabhal Raghnaill quite separately from the increasingly Anglicized senior O'Byrnes. Thus upon his accession Fiach had, in a way, achieved the distinction his father sought so desperately: he became the focus for Gaelic resistance in Leinster. Accordingly, in November 1579 the earl of Desmond -- in a desperate effort to extend his Munster rebellion to Leinster -- dispatched a letter to Fiach urging his support. Fiach did not throw in his lot with Desmond; instead he waited for more favourable circumstances to arise. This occurred rather unexpectedly when James Eustace, third Viscount Baltinglass, a landed Leinster gentleman imbued with Counter-Reformation Catholicism, tapped into Gaelic Leinster's disaffection with aggressive governmental policies and pledged to overthrow the queen in the pope's name. Fiach's religious devotion is difficult to gauge, but he at least paid lip-service to the zealous Baltinglass. By summer 1580 Fiach had allied himself with a leading member of the Crioch Branach O'Byrnes and some neighbouring O'Tooles and Kavanaghs. Fiach, belying his principal motivation, ravaged Wexford, thus taking revenge on seneschal Masterson who had in April murdered members of the Kavanagh clan. Thus a confluence of interests embodied by Fiach and Baltinglass brought a certain unity to Gaelic elements in Leinster while concurrently breathing life into Desmond's faltering rebellion. Yet Baltinglass failed to garner the active support of the pale gentry and the rebellion in Leinster lost momentum. 
The deputy elect, Arthur, Lord Grey of Wilton, eager to suppress the rebellion, impetuously pursued the rebels into the fastness of the Wicklow Mountains. With a large but inexperienced retinue, Grey was defeated at Glenmalure on 25 August 1580. English losses were not heavy but a disproportionate number of officers had fallen. The victory was total and instilled confidence in the rebels. Fiach had trebled his strength of a decade earlier, now commanding some 600 kerne. A comparison with the estimated forty kerne available to his great-grandfather less than a century earlier illustrates his startling rise. In the months following, Fiach and his allies burnt Wicklow and attacked several lowland targets, including a settlement within 6 miles of Dublin. Their hopes were quickly dashed, however: Grey received further reinforcements and slaughtered Desmond's foreign aid in November. Militarily the rebels were no match for an amply supplied Grey who by May 1581 had placed garrisons near Fiach's power base at Castlekevin and Kilcommon. Moreover, certain of the senior O'Byrnes fought for the crown, in one instance killing four of Fiach's best men, and they perhaps facilitated Grey's burning of Ballinacor in April. Following Baltinglass's flight to the continent Fiach came to terms with the government, being pardoned in September after unsuccessfully attempting to secure religious freedom and a pardon for Desmond. Fiach's considerable military capacity, though diminished, was not destroyed and he remained an unpredictable and largely autonomous presence near the centre of English power in Ireland. 
In the following years Fiach, watched closely by a suspicious government, kept the peace. In 1584 he renewed his submission to Lord Deputy Perrot and helped Harrington punish thieves who resided within his lands. Fiach posed few problems so long as his sovereignty was respected. By this time he had married a second time, to Rose ('c'.1558- 'c'.1600), daughter of Fiach O'Toole of Castlekevin. His four known legitimate children, however, were all born to him by Sadhbh. Fiach was the most powerful and prominent member of the O'Byrne clan following the death in 1580 of Dunlang MacEdmund, the last recognized chief of Crioch Branach. Thus it was Fiach whom the government summoned to attend parliament in April 1585 (although he did not sit), and who appeared before the deputy in English apparel in early 1586. Nevertheless Fiach, seated so near to Dublin, remained for successive English officials a glaring example of the failure of Tudor policy. In May 1587 Perrot petitioned the queen for: 'suche small allowance as heretofore I have requested in that behalf, I truste within one 6 or 8 weekes, to have his hedd or drive him into the sea and settle that parte that it shalbe no more a galle to Leynester. (TNA: PRO, SP 63/129/64)' But the campaign against Fiach did not materialize, and it later emerged that Perrot had explored the more inexpensive strategy of having him assassinated. His every move, real or exaggerated, aroused suspicion in Dublin. Ultimately, this led to his downfall. 
Even at peace Fiach was a conduit for disaffected elements in Leinster. He harboured known felons -- most notably his son-in-law Walter Reagh Fitzgerald -- and in 1591 his proximity to Dublin facilitated the escape of both his own pledges and the future O'Donnell chief Hugh Roe. He also intrigued with Spain, although the chances of 5000 Spanish troops appearing in Glenmalure were slender; it was Fiach's virtual independence and penchant to harbour rebels that were an embarrassing reality for the government. Yet the largely independent Gaelic dimension of Fiach's refuge must not be underestimated. Following the Anglicization of the Crioch Branach O'Byrnes and their abandonment of Gaelic chiefly succession, Fiach represented the bulwark of Gaelic culture in the district. This, combined with the autonomy enjoyed in Glenmalure in the face of English cultural and administrative encroachment, allowed for a flowering of Gaelic culture, manifested in poetry and song. Gaelic poets travelled from far and wide to receive the patronage of the last powerful Gaelic chief in Leinster: 'Baile na Corra ar gcuan sealga, seanroimh oinigh Innsi Neill; beag an t-iongnadh buadh ga bhuidhnibh, d'iolradh na sluagh suilbhir seimh' (TCD, MS 1288, fol. 107b: 'Ballinacor is our resort for the chase, ancient sanctuary of Innis-Neill's generosity; such is the multitude of its blithe and accomplished companies that 'tis small wonder though its denizens bear away the palm'). 
The inflow of expropriated clansmen and dissident English into such an environment undoubtedly politicized the situation; and in March 1594 Fiach's sons, along with the felon Walter Reagh, burnt to death Sir Pierce Fitzgerald, sheriff of Kildare, and his family at Ardree. In a gesture reminiscent of his father, Fiach disclaimed their actions and later -- following the arrival of the new deputy, Sir William Russell -- offered submission in return for confirmation of his lands by letters patent. It was, however, too late as Fitzgerald's murder, coupled with an outbreak of hostilities in Ulster, at last forced the government to address the reality of Fiach's autonomy. 
Russell, careful to avoid a repeat of the 1580 debacle, attacked an unsuspecting Ballinacor in January 1595. Fiach narrowly escaped, but the subsequent garrisoning of Ballinacor limited his manoeuvrability. The senior O'Byrnes supported the deputy, and Fiach's former ally, Hugh Duff O'Byrne, emerged, with government support, as Fiach's internal rival. Russell was determined to crush Fiach so that he might fully devote his energies to the worsening situation in Ulster. Fiach, however, repeatedly eluded capture despite Russell's sustained investment of time, money, and men in the Wicklow Mountains. The capture and execution of Walter Reagh in April 1595 failed to induce Fiach to surrender; but following the capture of his wife, Rose, Fiach surrendered his eldest son Turlough as a pledge for her release and presented himself before the deputy in November. Yet Fiach was not imprisoned (though Turlough was executed), and he successfully petitioned for a full pardon and the restoration of Ballinacor. He was considered a spent force, too old and weak to resume hostilities, and the government was eager to turn its attention towards Ulster. 
The agreed pardon, however, did not materialize and the aged Fiach threatened the government through depredations committed by his surviving sons and by negotiations with O'Neill. Communication between Fiach and the Ulster chiefs was by the mid-1590s well established and may have dated back to Baltinglass's rebellion. O'Neill doubtless exploited Fiach's proximity to Dublin, believing him capable of diverting large numbers of government troops away from the Ulster theatre. Fiach, for his part, used the threat of an alliance with O'Neill as a bargaining chip. In truth, co-ordinated military action and the dispatch of thousands of Ulster troops to Glenmalure were no more real than a Spanish landing there. Nevertheless, government preoccupation with Ulster facilitated Fiach's recapture of Ballinacor in September 1596. Russell was enraged and launched the first of several expeditions against Fiach, but once again achieved little save the desolation of much of the district. In January 1597 O'Neill criticized Fiach's persecution, stating that he had been included in a truce concluded between himself and Sir John Norris. Russell, however, disregarded O'Neill's protests and continued the hunt for Fiach. By this point Fiach was militarily broken, Russell frequently entering his country and returning unscathed. This dominance allowed Russell to gain valuable intelligence that revealed Fiach's movements. Thus on Sunday 8 May 1597 Russell's men, doubtless acting on such intelligence, descended upon a virtually unguarded Fiach, probably at a place called Farranerin, and killed him. A sergeant to Captain Lee beheaded him and brought his head to Russell, which, along with his quartered body, was displayed at Dublin Castle. The four masters noted succinctly: 'Fiacha mac Aodha mic Seaain o Ghleand Mhaoilugra do thuitim iar ttarraing ceilcce da combrathair fair ar furaileamh ard iustir na hereann Sir Uilliam Russel isin ceaid mi do shamhradh na bliadhna so' ('Fiagh, son of Hugh, son of John from Glenmalure, was slain in the first month of summer in this year, having been treacherously betrayed by his relative at the bidding of the chief justiciary of Ireland, Sir William Russell'; 'AFM', 'sub anno' 1597). 
Russell reported that the inhabitants of the district rejoiced at the death of their oppressor. Such sentiment, however, was not universal and may represent Russell's own eagerness to secure a propaganda victory. Captain Sir Edward Stanley, worried about the repercussions of Fiach's death, noted 'the people heare ther hearts be so hardened towards us that fewe of them rejoyseth at any good ceruice don' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/199/30). The prolonged campaign against Fiach did not bring the district under English control and his sons and followers allied themselves even more closely to O'Neill. In May 1599 Fiach's son and heir Phelim routed a force under Sir Henry Harrington between Ballinacor and Rathdrum, but received a full pardon in 1601, retaining certain Gabhal Raghnaill lands under English law. Thereafter Phelim, accepting the reality of the English conquest, adopted a more co-operative relationship with the government and sought to achieve recognition of his landed claims through English courts. The days of militant Gaelic resistance to English expansion in O'Byrne country ended with the death of Fiach, the failure of Tyrone's rebellion, and the completion of the Tudor conquest. 
Contemporary English chroniclers and later English historians ignored the significance of O'Byrne's career, depicting him as a savage thief, mindlessly raiding both his English and Irish neighbours from his mountain refuge. Ironically the preponderance of Irish nationalist historians, bent on correcting such perceived ethnocentrism, similarly ignored Fiach, perhaps regarding him more as an outlaw than a patriot. They concentrated instead on powerful, 'legitimate' chiefs geographically further removed from English influence. Only recently, coinciding with the four hundredth anniversary of Fiach's death, have historians begun to re-examine his career. Drawing on a meticulously researched, but largely forgotten, history of Fiach and the O'Byrnes written by Liam Price in the 1930s, a clearer picture of this remarkable figure is emerging, offering a window into a Gaelic culture coping not only with military encroachment, but also with cultural and religious Anglicization emanating from the adjacent pale. 


@@@@@


doc= 20478


O'Byrne, William Richard (1823-1896), naval biographer, was elder son of Robert O'Byrne, of Cabinteely, near Dublin, and his wife, Martha Trougher, daughter of Joseph Clarke of Norwich. His brother, Robert Henry O'Byrne, was the author of the 'Representative History of Great Britain and Ireland' (1848). He was educated at University College School, London (1838-9). 
O'Byrne was scarcely out of his teens and 'a civilian, previously unconnected with the Service' (O'Byrne, v), when he had the idea of compiling and publishing a record of the service of every living naval officer of the executive branch. Permitted access to Admiralty records, he worked at this for six years, publishing the first parts in 1845, and completed the volume of 1400 closely printed pages, on nearly 5000 officers, in 1849. The labour was great for the Admiralty records, his major source, were in a semi-chaotic state. He had extensive correspondence with his subjects, but he seems to have checked their statements against official documents in all cases. The 'Naval Biographical Dictionary' is a work of almost unparalleled accuracy -- a fact which Sir John Laughton had many occasions to test and to prove during the compilation of the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. A factual compilation, the dictionary is an invaluable reference work. It was not, however, a financial success for the author. An edition of 2000 was sold at 42's'. a copy; but out of the proceeds $100 was all that O'Byrne received for six years' labour and expenses. The Admiralty awarded him $100, and Sir Francis Thornhill Baring (Lord Northbrook) appointed him its librarian; but Baring left office shortly afterwards and his successor, the duke of Northumberland, refused to confirm the appointment. A testimonial from naval officers was started, and, at a meeting at the Royal United Service Institution, O'Byrne was presented with a piece of plate and a purse of $400. In 1857 he was specially elected a member of the Athenaeum. 
O'Byrne married, in 1851, Emily, eldest daughter of John Troughear Handy of Malmesbury, Wiltshire; they had one daughter. Mrs O'Byrne predeceased her husband. From about 1856 to 1880, O'Byrne was a navy agent in London with his brother, Robert (barrister, Lincoln's Inn), as O'Byrne Brothers. In 1859 he began a second edition of the dictionary, updated and containing data on officers of the civil branches of the service. This -- which was not as accurate as the first edition -- did not pay, and was not carried beyond the letter G, with the less regret on O'Byrne's part, as at about that time, on the death of his cousin Georgiana O'Byrne, he succeeded to the Cabinteely estate in co. Wicklow, which had been in the family for many generations, though probably not the fifty-four that was claimed. In 1872-3 he was high sheriff of Wicklow, and was Liberal MP for the county from 1874 to 1880. He favoured denominational education, further amendment of the 'Land Act' in Ireland, and Irish home rule. 
O'Byrne's property was heavily mortgaged, and on the depreciation of Irish land he was unable to pay the interest. The mortgagees foreclosed, and he was left practically destitute. Years of privation and struggle followed. In 1884 he was awarded $100 from the royal bounty, and tried to get the Admiralty to appoint him officially, at a regular salary, to prepare a new edition of his dictionary. The Admiralty refused to do this, or to help to further the project, as -- with their improved records system -- the work would be useless to them, while the fact that it would not pay a publisher to take it up seemed to show that the public did not want it. During his later years O'Byrne's health broke down, and he was mainly dependent on his daughter. In summer 1896 he was granted $125 from the royal bounty, but it was too late. He died at 258 Fulham Road, South Kensington, London, on 7 July 1896. His 'Biographical Dictionary' was reprinted in 1986 and remains a standard work of reference. 


@@@@@


doc= 20479


O'Cahan, Sir Donnell Ballagh (d. 1626?), chieftain, himself illiterate, was fostered in the household of Turlough Luineach O'Neill, and was the eldest son of Rory O'Cahan, being chosen ('doirdnead', 'was ordained'; 'AFM', s.a. 1598), after the latter's death on 14 April 1598, to succeed as lord of O'Cahan's country, which took in much of the modern co. Londonderry, in Ulster. His principal castle and demesne lands were near Limavady. The military might of O'Cahan was estimated variously, with figures of 140 horse and 400 foot being sometimes exceeded. O'Cahan was O'Neill's principal 'uriaght', or vassal, and had a special role in the O'Neill inauguration ceremony. 
Donnell O'Cahan succeeded during the Nine Years' War, in which he participated, and was to be the last O'Cahan lord in the Gaelic order. His role in the war was mainly a local one, and after Sir Henry Docwra was placed at Derry in 1600, he made a number of incursions into O'Cahan's country and took Enagh Castle in June 1601. In June 1602 O'Cahan sought negotiations with Sir Arthur Chichester, then bringing military pressure on him from Carrickfergus, and on 27 July Docwra procured his submission and consequent desertion of the O'Neill cause, itself weakened by the earlier Spanish failure at Kinsale. By its terms, approved by Lord Deputy Mountjoy, he should receive title under the crown to much of the lordship, but surrender significant parts, principally a substantial area opposite Derry, the castle at Coleraine, an area at Dungiven, and certain fishing rights. He received a grant of the custody of the restored land, but not an outright patent, on 20 October following, and, on 21 October, a pardon to himself, his then wife, Rosa, a daughter of Hugh O'Neill (formerly married to Hugh Roe O'Donnell), his family, chaplain, and other followers, and the inhabitants of O'Cahan's country. Thereafter he supported the English side with his forces. 
However, in the pacification of Ulster after 1603 (Mountjoy's final strategy), O'Neill was restored as earl of Tyrone, with the lands granted to him to include O'Cahan country. O'Cahan, still wanting independent ownership, felt betrayed by Docwra, the local commander, and by Mountjoy, who had now secured his recall. In addition, his relations soon deteriorated with O'Neill, who sought O'Cahan's full compliance. On 17 February 1607 O'Cahan reached an agreement with Tyrone whereby he should hold in freehold under him, but claim no other right or title, paying an annual rent of 200 cows, the easterly lands 'from the mountain [Slieve Gullion] to the Bann' to be held by the earl as assurance for its payment, and with O'Neill to arbitrate any disputes between O'Cahan and 'his gentlemen and followers' ('CSP Ire.', '1606-8', 110-11). However, on 4 March George Montgomery, the recently appointed bishop of Derry, whose primary aim was to secure title to the extensive termon lands as temporalities for the Church of Ireland, reported to Dublin that O'Cahan, desiring not to be in 'thrall if he might be free', still sought separate title under the crown, provided his country were not divided like Monaghan, 'of which he had some fear' (ibid., 125). The 'settlement' of Monaghan in 1591 had abolished MacMahon lordly power there by diffusing ownership among the heads of competing branches, and the Dublin government under Sir Arthur Chichester, wishing to extend its rule over the larger northern lords and reduce their power, had revived that settlement there in 1606. 
In May 1607 O'Cahan, encouraged by Montgomery, initiated a suit against Tyrone before the lord deputy and council. He claimed longstanding ancestral possession of O'Cahan's country, insisting that the O'Cahan obligation to the O'Neills had been essentially that of military service -- with 100 horse and 300 foot -- together with an annual tribute of twenty-one cows, and requested a separate patent of the entire area. Tyrone answered with an assertion that there was no such thing as O'Cahan's country, insisting that the O'Cahans had always been O'Neill tenants at sufferance, and, requesting a new patent to himself, appealed in like terms to the king. At hearing, the case became acrimonious with Tyrone snatching and tearing up a document of O'Cahan's, and a temporizing order was made, to be subject to royal instructions on the matter: O'Cahan should hold two-thirds and the earl one-third, namely the Maghery region in the south-east. O'Cahan was also knighted in Dublin on 28 June 1607. 
However, since both sought recourse to the king, so now London was plied with recommendations for a thoroughgoing settlement of landownership conducive to more effective rule and revenue raising. Montgomery, concerned for the security of himself and others at the remote outpost at Derry, recommended favour to O'Cahan, but also that he should be separated from O'Neill, as O'Doherty had been from O'Donnell, and retain to himself a substantial scope of land sufficient to be a baron, with more to be granted to the English military men who had stayed on since the war. The attorney-general, Sir John Davies, visualized a radical outcome which would reduce the landownership of both O'Cahan and O'Neill in tandem. Relying on the act of attainder of Shane O'Neill in 1569, he argued that present titles could be questioned, and ownership not only be dispersed among lesser Irish figures but, crucially, a body of new English proprietors be introduced also. Were this opportunity not taken, and O'Neill in particular not reduced to the 'moderate condition of other lords in Ireland and in England at this day', then there would be 'no commonwealth in Ulster' ('CSP Ire.', '1606-8', 212-13). In July the king decided that both should go to England in the autumn for a final determination in his presence, with Davies in attendance. The flight of the earls in September 1607 put paid to such potentialities and left O'Cahan in uncertainty. In the atmosphere of mutual suspicion and fear of conspiracy that followed, he kept distant from those placed in authority locally, and was absent when Davies, in preparation for plantation, brought about Tyrone's indictment at Strabane at the end of the year. On the view of London that he might 'shake the rod' (ibid., 399), Chichester had him arrested and brought to Dublin in February 1608. It was not surprising, he thought, that O'Cahan and others were inconstant and wavering because their priests assured them that the earls would return to renew warfare, and in March he was advised not to release him 'considering the corner he dwells in' (ibid., 434). 
After delays due to other business, O'Doherty's rising and vacillation, O'Cahan was indicted on six charges of treason, some deriving from evidence from ambitious relatives, including one that he had both intended to accompany O'Neill in flight and to join with him if he returned with foreign forces. When the parallel case against Niall Garbh O'Donnell, begun in June 1609, looked unlikely to secure a conviction, that against O'Cahan was deferred pending further instructions from London, and on 31 July a royal warrant was issued for both to be sent to England. He was dispatched, with the charges against him, at the end of October and placed in the Tower of London. From there, in 1610, he presented petitions against his confinement, denying complicity with O'Neill, and, in an impoverished state, tried in 1613 to raise income from cattle dispersed among now unresponsive followers, but did not gain his release. His incarceration eliminated a potential focus of opposition to plantation, and ensured that in the distinctive co. Londonderry plantation that followed from 1610, the Irish were restored to less land than in the other Ulster planted counties. 
O'Cahan's marriage to O'Neill's daughter fell victim to their dispute. His first wife, probably, was Mary, daughter of Sir Hugh MacManus O'Donnell, Lord of Tirconnell; she subsequently married Sir Teig O'Rourke. His second wife (even possibly his first liaison), and the mother of his sons, was Honora, herself an O'Cahan by birth. Donnell reverted to her after his third, and political, marriage to Rosa O'Neill broke down, and thus it was Honora who was referred to as O'Cahan's wife by the English privy council in September 1613. Honora was in London in 1613, and she and their sons, Rory and Donnell, were allocated land in freehold under the Londoners in 1611. Rory took part in an abortive plot in 1615, with the aim, it was alleged, of overthrowing the plantation in its infancy by burning some of the new settlements while saving a number of its leading figures as hostages for the release of his father and other Ulster prisoners, and was executed after conviction at the Derry assizes on 31 July 1615. Sir Donnell died in the Tower, probably in August 1626, and appears to have been buried there on 11 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 20480


O'Callaghan, Edmund Bailey (1800-1880), journalist and historian, the youngest of the six children of Owen O'Callaghan, merchant, was born in Mallow, co. Cork, about 1 March 1800, and was educated in his home town. About 1820 he went to Paris to study medicine and remained there for two years. In 1823 he emigrated to Canada, where in 1826 he obtained the post of apothecary at the Montreal General Hospital. Licensed to practise medicine in 1827, he was the surgeon at the Quebec emigrants' hospital from 1828 to 1829. At the same time he was actively involved in several societies for the relief and welfare of Irish immigrants. In 1830 he married Charlotte Augustina Crampe, an Irishwoman. She died in 1835, having borne one son who did not survive infancy. 
O'Callaghan soon became a spokesman and champion of the Irish community in Canada. In 1833 he moved to Montreal, where he became a close associate of Louis-Joseph Papineau, the leader of the nationalist Patriote Party, and in 1834 was appointed editor of 'The Vindicator', the party organ, in which he attacked the colonial government and sought to rally Irish support for the French Canadian cause. He was elected in the same year to the Canadian assembly as the member for Yamaska. His calls for agitation and civil disobedience contributed to the heightening of the political tension in the autumn of 1837, when his editorial offices were sacked by loyalists. When the revolutionary party met at Richelieu River in October to determine their final course of action, although O'Callaghan supported Papineau in condemning the resort to arms, he took the field with the rebels, and was in the action at St Denis on 23 November 1837. On the failure of the rising he fled with Papineau to the United States. 
O'Callaghan found such a congenial home in New York state that, when his companions returned to Canada under amnesty, he remained in Albany, where he practised as a doctor from 1839 to 1847. On 9 May 1841 he married Ellen Hawe, of Albany; there was one son of the marriage, who died in infancy. He continued his journalistic activity, and while researching some articles on anti-rent agitation for the 'Northern Light' became interested in the original Dutch land grants and other documents relating to the early history of New Amsterdam, which lay neglected in the office of the secretary of state. He learned Dutch in order to pursue his researches more widely, and in 1846 published the first volume of his 'History of New Netherland, or, New York under the Dutch', a work which marked a new epoch in American historiography. In 1848 he gave up medicine to become the archivist of the state of New York, and to edit the transcripts of documents copied from archives in The Hague and elsewhere by J. R. Brodhead. A selection of these was published in his four-volume 'Documentary History of the State of New York' (1849-51). The full translated collection was subsequently published as 'Documents Relative to the Colonial History of the State of New York', (11 vols., 1853-61). In these the French source material on the border dispute between New France and New York was made available for the first time. Earlier, in 1847, he had published a seminal paper which first drew attention to the importance of the Jesuit 'Relations' as sources for North American history. 
In 1870 O'Callaghan was persuaded by Mayor Abraham Oakey Hall to move to New York in order to edit the minute books of the city council, but the fall from power of his political patrons in the Tweed Ring scandal halted publication of the series in 1872. The fifteen manuscript volumes of the work have survived in the archives of the New York Historical Society. After 1877 he was, owing to an accident, confined to his house, 651 Lexington Avenue, New York, where he died on 29 May 1880. He was buried on 2 June in Calvary cemetery, New York. His library, containing a unique collection of Jesuit 'Relations', was sold on 4 December 1882 by Bangs & Co. of New York for $12,098. 
O'Callaghan was particularly gratified by the honorary degree of MD awarded to him in 1845 by the University of St Louis; it was his only medical qualification. A man of deep Catholic faith, he retained to the end of his life a strong sense of loyalty to his Irish homeland. The final harnessing of his energies to archival research resulted in work which put the early colonial history of North America on a solid foundation. 


@@@@@


doc= 20481


O'Callaghan, John Cornelius (1805-1883), journalist and historian, was born at Dublin, the son of John O'Callaghan, one of the first Catholics allowed to practise law in Ireland after the partial relaxation of the penal laws in 1793. He was educated at the Jesuit school of Clongowes Wood, co. Kildare, and afterwards at a private school at Blanchardstown, near Dublin. He was called to the Irish bar in 1829 but, preferring to pursue a literary career, did not practise. From 1831 to 1833 he contributed to 'The Comet', a weekly newspaper published in Dublin by the influential Comet Club. This paper, to which Daniel O'Connell also contributed, advocated the disestablishment of the Church of England in Ireland. When 'The Comet' ceased publication, O'Callaghan wrote for the 'Irish Monthly Magazine'. His pieces in these two journals, along with other writings, were collected and published as 'The Green Book, or, Gleanings from the Writing Desk of a Literary Agitator' (1840). When the Dublin 'Nation' was started in 1842 as the organ of the Young Ireland party, O'Callaghan joined the staff and he became an important contributor. The first number of the paper contained, under the pen name Gracchus, his poem 'The Exterminator's Song', subsequently republished in 'The Spirit of the Nation' (1845), a collection of the poetry of the Young Irelanders. 
O'Callaghan was best known as a historical writer and editor. In 1846 he published in Dublin for the Irish Archaeological Society an annotated edition of 'Macariae excidium, or, The Destruction of Cyprus'. This was a history, using disguised names, of the Williamite war of 1688-91, written in 1692 by Colonel Charles O'Kelly, an officer in James II's army. O'Callaghan's masterpiece, 'History of the Irish brigades in the service of France, from the revolution in Great Britain and Ireland under James II to the revolution in France under Louis XVI', was the result of over twenty-five years' research. It was published in Glasgow in 1870, after O'Callaghan failed to interest a Dublin publisher. Superseding an earlier work by Matthew O'Conor, this carefully researched if prolix study became a standard source. O'Callaghan also wrote 'The Irish in the English Army and Navy' (1843). As a writer he was verbose and addicted to an ornate style modelled upon the French Romantic historians whom he admired. But he was also an accurate, objective, fair, and thorough scholar, who painstakingly verified and critically evaluated his sources. 
O'Callaghan was keenly interested in Irish politics. He was a member of Daniel O'Connell's Loyal National Repeal Association, for which he designed a membership card in 1843. At one of O'Connell's 'monster meetings' in 1840 at Tara Hill, the crowning-place of ancient Irish kings, O'Callaghan and the sculptor John Hogan placed a laurel crown on the head of the 'Liberator'. Although attracted to the more radical Young Ireland party, O'Callaghan remained an admirer of O'Connell, who had aided his historical research. 
O'Callaghan died at his home, 15 Belvidere Place, Dublin, on 23 April 1883. Sir Charles Gavan Duffy, a colleague in Young Ireland, described him as tall, strong, and loud-voiced. 


@@@@@


doc= 20482


O'Callaghan, Sir Robert William (1777-1840), army officer, second son of Cornelius O'Callaghan, first Baron Lismore (1741-1797), and Frances (1757-1827), second daughter of Mr Speaker Ponsonby, was born in October 1777. He was descended from one of the few indigenous families in the Irish peerage. He was appointed ensign in the 128th regiment on 29 November 1794, and was transferred as lieutenant to the 30th light dragoons on 6 December 1794; he became captain on 31 January 1795. He was transferred to the 22nd light dragoons on 19 April 1796, was appointed major to the 40th regiment on 17 February 1803, and became lieutenant-colonel in the 39th regiment on 16 July 1803. In March 1805 he embarked in command of the 1st battalion of the 39th regiment, which had been selected to form part of the expedition destined for the Mediterranean under Lieutenant-General Sir James Craig, and subsequently went from Malta to Naples with the flank companies. When they returned to Malta in February 1806 he remained in Sicily, and at the battle of Maida (4 July 1806) he commanded a grenadier battalion, receiving after the victory a gold medal. At the end of August 1811 he went with the 1st battalion of the 39th from Sicily to join the army in the Peninsula, and attained the brevet rank of colonel. At the battle of Vitoria (21 June 1813) he was in temporary command of the brigade, and his gallant conduct was praised in Wellington's dispatches. He also commanded the brigade during the actions in the Pyrenees in July 1813, and was at the passage of the Nivelle and the Nive. His conduct at Garris (15 February 1814) was mentioned in dispatches. He was present at the victory of Orthez (27 February 1814), and received a gold cross with two clasps for Maida, Vitoria, Pyrenees, Nivelle, Nive, and Orthez. 
O'Callaghan was promoted major-general on 4 June 1814, and was made a KCB on 2 January 1815. He was appointed to the staff of the army in Flanders on 25 June 1815 and to the staff of the army in France on 22 April 1818, and commanded the troops in Scotland from 15 June 1825 to 22 July 1830. He was gazetted colonel of the 97th regiment on 7 September 1829, and was promoted lieutenant-general on 22 July 1830. He was appointed to command the army at Madras on 4 October 1830, and was made colonel of the 39th on 4 March 1833. In the spring of 1835, on the departure of Lord William Bentinck for England, he held for some months command of the troops in India, and was in command at Madras until October 1836. O'Callaghan was made GCB on 19 July 1838. He died, unmarried, in London on 9 June 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 20483


Ua Carain, Gilla in Choimded (d. 1180?), archbishop of Armagh, had previously been bishop of Raphoe; Gilla in Choimded means 'Servant of the Lord'. The date of his accession as bishop of Raphoe is not known, but it had certainly occurred by 1156-7 when he witnessed a charter of Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn, king of Cenel nEogain and claimant to the high-kingship of Ireland, in favour of the Cistercian abbey of Newry, in which he was styled bishop of Tir Conaill, a territory which was coterminous with the bishopric of Raphoe. Since no bishop of Tir Conaill (the land of the Cenel Conaill) or Raphoe is listed as having been present at the Synod of Kells, 1152, Ua Carain may have been consecrated by the papal legate, Cardinal Giovanni Paparo, immediately after that synod. He is listed as swearing fealty to Henry II in 1172, his forename latinized as Gilbertus. He was translated to the see of Armagh about 1175. In 1177 he was taken prisoner at the capture of Downpatrick by John de Courcy, when he was in the company of Mael Sechlainn Mac Lochlainn bearing the 'Canoin Phatraic' (believed to refer to the manuscript now known as the 'Book of Armagh'), but was released shortly afterwards. The date of his death is not known, but it may be deduced to have been earlier than February 1180, when a charter witnessed by Lorcan Ua Tuathail, archbishop of Dublin, as papal legate (who is known to have left for England in that month), was also witnessed by Ua Carain's successor, 'T' (Tommaltach, or Thomas), archbishop of Armagh. The text of a charter issued by Ua Carain confirmed Ballyboghill, Dublin, formerly held by his predecessor Cellach (archbishop of Armagh from 1105 to 1129), to St Mary's Abbey, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 20484


Carolan, Turlough (1670-1738), harper and composer, was born near Nobber, co. Meath, where his father (identified variously as John and Brian) was probably a small farmer and perhaps also an ironworker. When the young Carolan was in his early teens the family moved to Carrick-on-Shannon, co. Leitrim, and then to nearby Ballyfarnon, co. Roscommon, where his father's employers were the MacDermott Roe family who were to play a crucial role in the life and career of the young Carolan. Struck by the boy's intelligence Mrs MacDermott Roe arranged for his education. When an attack of smallpox left him blind, she had him trained as a harper by a namesake of hers, MacDermott Roe. After three years' training she launched him -- now twenty-one years old -- on his career as an itinerant harper, providing him with the necessities of his profession, including a horse and a guide. The MacDermott Roes remained his special patrons all his life -- for half a century. Their substantial house still stands at Alderford, beside Ballyfarnon. 
In Gaelic Ireland the professional harper had enjoyed a high social status, accorded an honour price by the Brehon (native) law -- legal acknowledgement (although below that of the bardic poet) of his position as the doyen of musicians in a society that took its music very seriously (with echoes of ancient belief in its supernatural dimensions). Not only was instrumental performance (solo or group) of the greatest importance in its own right, but the harp was also closely associated with the court performance of the learned bardic poetry, sung by the 'reacaire' accompanied by the harper. Carolan arrived on the scene about the time of the watershed treaty of Limerick (1691), which symbolized the final completion of the English conquest, with the elimination or dispossession of the native Irish-speaking Catholic aristocracy -- together with the institutions that flourished under their patronage -- and their replacement by protestant English and Scottish planters. Music-making native style was among the cultural features that survived for a time, including the playing of the harp, which continued to be 'an aristocratic pastime or accomplishment rather than a popular one' (MacLysaght, 35). Carolan moved about the country from one 'big house' to another, welcomed as an honoured guest. In a rural society where music was an integral part of life -- literally from the cradle to the grave -- with a passion for song and for dancing, where even the educated read little in the evenings because of poor lighting, and where the live musician was the only source of the art, his visit would have been a major cultural contribution. 
Carolan's forte was as a composer both of instrumental harp pieces (frequently dance music) and of songs in which he added simple verses to his own new tune. Although he enjoyed a fellowship and camaraderie with some of the Irish poets of the time, Carolan would not have been considered a poet by the 'cognoscenti'. Nevertheless his songs -- complete with amateurish verses -- were greatly relished not only by his flattered hosts but also by a wider public for whom song (often extempore) was a normal means of giving heightened expression to emotions of all kinds. Hence many of his songs passed into the oral folk repertoire where they were still alive more than a century later. Carolan was an exuberant personality of cheerful temperament with a ready wit -- satirical when called for -- and a puckish sense of humour which delighted in tales of the ludicrous. Storytelling may well have been part of his professional repertory, following what seems to have been the medieval tradition of the harpers (Murphy, 191). Charles O'Conor of Belanagare -- one of his greatest patrons, a protege of his on the harp, as well as being a noted scholar and man of affairs -- had a high regard for his innate intelligence: 'Very few I have ever known who had a more vigorous mind, but a mind undisciplined through the defect or rather absence of cultivation' (O'Sullivan, 'Carolan', 160). These characteristics, and the ethos of the time, are well presented in the musical drama (in Irish) 'Carolan', by Eoghan O Tuairisc, premiered in Dublin in 1979. 
Professionally Carolan would have been in great demand at special occasions such as weddings and christenings, and some of the personalized epithalamia he composed have survived. At the other end of the emotional spectrum, the medieval Gaelic harper was a central figure in the obsequies following the death of the chieftain, both playing his specially composed instrumental lament (Irish 'cumha') and accompanying the singing (by the 'reacaire') of the learned elegy ('marbhna' or 'tuireamh') composed by the bardic poet for the commemorative ceremony. In the few surviving laments that can confidently be ascribed to him (O'Sullivan, 'Carolan', nos. 206 ff.), Carolan combined these various functions, apparently singing his own elegy to his instrumental lament. 
Carolan acquired patrons all over Ireland. Remarkably these were drawn equally from both sides of the political and religious divide, including many of the new protestant planter families -- Crofton, Drew and Jones -- as well as the remnants of the old native Catholic aristocracy, for example the MacDermott Roe, O'Conor, and Maguire families. Carolan took the political situation as he found it and eschewed politics in his songs (in contrast with the Irish poets of his time). Nevertheless, as a devout Catholic, from a Gaelic background, it is clear that he was not without some partiality. Irish was still the vernacular language of most of rural Ireland, and Carolan did not learn English until he was 'advanced in years', and 'delivered himself but indifferently in that language' (O'Sullivan, 'Carolan', 1.157). With only one known exception all his songs were in Irish, even those for his English-speaking patrons who evidently understood them. 
Among Carolan's important patrons there was at least one protestant clergyman, Charles Massey, afterwards dean of Limerick from 1740 to 1766, whose grandfather, typically, 'came into this kingdom with a principal command in the army sent to suppress the rebellion in the year 1641' (J. Lodge, 'Peerage of Ireland', 1754). It is to Massey that we are indebted for the commissioning, in the 1720s, of the portrait of Carolan now in the National Gallery of Ireland (reproduced in O'Sullivan, 'Carolan', 1, frontispiece, artist's name unknown). 
In 1720 Dean Swift translated the words of a song by Carolan, 'Plearaca na Ruarcach' ('O'Rourke's feast', published in 1735; the words were, exceptionally, not Carolan's), most likely assisted by his close friend, fellow clergyman, and remarkable Irish scholar Anthony Raymond, vicar of Trim. Swift may well have known Carolan -- as claimed by folklore -- but this cannot be proven. 
Carolan married Mary Maguire (died 1733) of co. Fermanagh. They had a loving marriage, living at Mohill, co. Leitrim, where a public sculpture in bronze by Oisin Kelly was erected in memory of the harper. They had six daughters and a son. The latter became a harper (of little distinction), and later went to London bringing his father's harp with him. An Irish harp on exhibition at the O'Conor-Nash house at Clonalis, co. Roscommon (formerly home of the O'Conor Don) is claimed to be that of Carolan. His wife predeceased him by five years in 1733, and poignant verses of his, lamenting her, have survived. The relevant harp music (which no doubt he composed) is not known. 
Carolan died on 25 March 1738 at Alderford House, Ballyfarnon, the home of his lifelong patron Mrs MacDermott Roe. The vast and distinguished attendance at his funeral indicated the extent to which he had become a national figure. A modern monument, inscribed in Irish and in English, was erected to mark his grave in the medieval churchyard of Kilronan, co. Roscommon. 
Some 200 of Carolan's tunes were edited by Donal O'Sullivan (1958) -- the total that he succeeded in recovering from printed and manuscript sources. The Irish harping tradition had been handed on orally and aurally, unwritten. It was a new departure when in 1724 (during Carolan's lifetime) music publishers from outside that tradition John and William Neal printed 'A Collection of the most Celebrated Irish Tunes Proper for the Violin German Flute or Hautboy', including some of Carolan's tunes, their first printing. Other printings followed. Manuscript notation of his music was also commenced by collectors from outside the tradition, the earliest being Bunting, as late as 1792. Only the melody line of the tunes was recorded (O'Sullivan plausibly suggesting that 'it is probable that he would largely have recreated the accompaniment on every occasion that he played a particular tune' ('Carolan', 1.150)). Carolan's own Irish verses for many of these tunes have survived separately in manuscript (never underlaid to the notation) and been edited (O Maille, O'Sullivan, 'Bunting collection'), but the relationship of these to the tunes is often problematical. 
In Carolan's compositions the native style was frequently influenced by the continental music (including that of Vivaldi, Corelli, and Geminiani) popular in Ireland at the time and admired by Carolan himself. His music enjoyed a popular revival in Ireland in the late twentieth century (thanks especially to O'Sullivan's edition), but the most significant assessment of it must remain that of his own contemporaries who were in a position to evaluate it fully in context. 


@@@@@


doc= 20485


Ua Cerbaill, Mael Suthain (d. 1010), ecclesiastic, entitled in his obit 'chief scholar of Ireland', was one of the principal supporters of Brian Boruma, king successively of Dal Cais, Munster, and all Ireland. The names of his parents are unrecorded. Mael Suthain died in Achad Deo, Aghadoe, just to the north of Lough Leane in the west of Munster. This gives some weight to the claim made in a later addition to his obit in the annals of Ulster and in the annals of the four masters that he was also king of the Eoganacht Locha Lein (in the past, the leading dynasty of west Munster). He would thus have been following a tradition, long established in Munster, of combining high ecclesiastical office with kingship. The Ui Cherbaill were one of the kindreds which supplied kings of the Eoganacht Locha Lein in the eleventh century, so this addition may be true. Mael Suthain is, however, best known as the person who made an addition to the 'Book of Armagh' on behalf of Brian: 'Saint Patrick, when going to heaven, ordered that the whole fruit of his labour, as well of baptism and of causes as of alms, should be paid to the apostolic city which in Irish is named Ardd Macha. So I have found in the books of the Irish. I, namely Calvus Perennis [the Latinate form of Mael Suthain], have written in the sight of Brian, emperor of the Irish, and what I have written he has confirmed for all the kings of Cashel. (Kenney, 354)' The addition is likely to have been made in 1005, when Brian went on campaign to Armagh and left 20 ounces of gold on Patrick's altar and departed, 'taking with him the sureties of the men of Ireland' ('Ann. Ulster', s.a. 1005). 
The title here given to Brian echoes the imperial titulature of tenth-century kings of England and may well be a direct imitation. It is uncertain whether Brian had aspirations to extend his supremacy over the 'Scotti' of North Britain, as the choice of 'emperor of the Irish' ('Scotti') rather than 'of Ireland' as his title allows. What is certain is that Brian, by adopting a role as lay patron of Armagh and acknowledging Armagh's rights to revenue in virtue of its status as the apostolic city, effectively another Rome for the Irish, was making a statement which was seen as a corollary of his own status as 'emperor of the Irish'. There is a probably contemporary entry in the annals of Ulster (at this date an Armagh chronicle) stating that, in 1014, after Brian had been killed at the battle of Clontarf, the heir of Patrick (that is, the abbot of Armagh) came and removed the bodies of Brian and of his son Murchad to Armagh, buried them in a new tomb (like Christ), and 'for twelve nights the community of Patrick waked the bodies in honour of the buried king' ('Ann. Ulster', s.a. 1014, 2). The community of Patrick, for their part, gave Brian exceptional honours. 
Although Mael Suthain Ua Cerbaill accompanied Brian on his major expedition of 1005 to establish his overlordship over Ireland, he was not the most powerful cleric in Munster. That status was reserved for Brian's brother, Marcan, son of Cenneitig, a pluralist on a grand scale as abbot of Terryglass, Inis Celtra, and Killaloe, and described by one annalist as 'head of Munster so far as the clergy are concerned' ('Chronicum Scotorum', s.a. 1008, 'recte' 1010). Mael Suthain was, however, personally close to Brian, if those sources which describe him as his confessor are correct. Moreover, his power in west Munster would have helped to ensure that Brian had no serious opposition in that region. A poem on ecclesiastical and secular rank is attributed to him. He was also remembered in a short late-medieval tale which told how he was saved from hell by three pupils who came back from the dead to inform him that he was currently destined to perdition for three reasons: for the number of personal interpretations of scripture he had invented, for the number of women with whom he had had sex, and for giving up reciting the 'Altus prosator' attributed to St Columba. He reformed on all three counts and was saved. 
Mael Suthain Ua Cerbaill should be distinguished from a namesake whose death in 1031 is recorded in the annals of Ulster and the annals of the four masters. It remains unclear whether the latter source is correct in saying that this Mael Suthain Ua Cerbaill, rather than his presumably older contemporary, was confessor to Brian Boruma. 


@@@@@


doc= 20486


Ni Chearbhaill, Mairgreag (d. 1451), celebrated hostess, was the daughter of Tadhg O Cearbhaill (died 1407), chief of Eile, and married An Calbhach O Conchobhair Failghe (died 1458), chief of Uibh Fhailghe. In 1433, a year of general shortage, she gave two great feasts which earned her the nickname Mairgreag an Einigh ('Margaret of the Hospitality'), one on 26 March at Killeigh, Offaly, and the other on 15 August at Rathangan, Kildare, at opposite ends of her husband's territory, to which were invited 2700 members of the Irish learned families of bardic poets, historians, and musicians, 'besides gamesters and poore men'. On 26 March she also presented two golden chalices to the church at Killeigh and arranged for the fosterage of two orphans. She oversaw that occasion from the battlements of the church, dressed in cloth of gold, surrounded by her retainers, her judges and clergy, with her husband below on horseback, marshalling the guests. In 1445 Mairgreag joined a party of Irish and Anglo-Irish aristocrats on a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela. On her return she negotiated an exchange of prisoners with the Anglo-Irish government without her husband's permission in order to secure the release of the son of one of her fellow pilgrims and others. She herself had five sons, Conn (died 1440), Cathal (died 1448), Feidhlim (died 1451), Brian (died 1452), and Tadhg (died 1471); she also had two daughters, Mor (died 1452), wife of MacWilliam of Clanricarde, and Fionnghuala (died 1493), who married first Niall Garbh O Domhnaill (died 1439), king of Tir Conaill, and second Aodh Buidhe O Neill (died 1444), before retiring to become an Augustinian canoness at Killeigh. Extremely pious herself, Mairgreag commissioned the making of roads, bridges, churches, and missals 'to serve God and her soule', before dying of breast cancer in 1451. 


@@@@@


doc= 20487


Ockham, Nicholas (d. c.1320), Franciscan friar, theologian, and philosopher, was born in Ockham in Surrey. The course of his career suggests that he was born in the early 1240s. After joining the Franciscan order he was sent to Paris for his first theological studies, between 1270 and 1274, most likely attending the lectures of Roger Marston. He was subsequently closely linked to the so-called neo-Augustinians, adherents of the intellectual tradition of Alexander of Hales and Bonaventure, of whom Marston was one. It is probable that Ockham was a bachelor of the 'Bible' at Oxford in 1278 and 1279 and a bachelor of the 'Sentences' from 1280 to 1282. Finally he became the eighteenth regent master of the Franciscan school at Oxford, probably between 1286 and 1288. Almost nothing is known of his later life, but it has been argued that he died about 1320. 
Scholarly research in the late twentieth century has produced ten manuscript copies of Nicholas Ockham's commentary on the 'Sentences'. Questions, or parts thereof, from books 1-4 have been edited in various books and journals. Fifteen 'quaestiones disputatae' belonging to Nicholas are to be found divided between codex 158 and codex 196 of the municipal library of Assisi. Among these disputed questions is the 'Question on the plurality of forms'. This dispute, attributed to William Ockham by a number of early historians, is in fact the response of Nicholas to Thomas Sutton's 'Treatise against the plurality of forms'. Some of the other disputed questions fall naturally into groups, such as the four questions that are united in the edition entitled 'Quaestiones disputatae 'De dilectione Dei'' (1981). 


@@@@@


doc= 20488


Ochiltree, Michael (d. 1445x7), bishop of Dunblane, is of unknown origins. Described in 1429 as the son of a married man (a priest in another account) and an unmarried woman, he may have come from the barony of Ochiltree in the sheriffdom of Ayr. He was dean of Dunblane by 25 November 1420 and was provided to the see of Sodor in 1422, although this was never made effective. In 1424 he is recorded as the king's almoner-general, raising the possibility that he had taken service with James I before the latter's return to Scotland in that year. He had also obtained the degree of bachelor of canon law and held a tenement in Perth, a prebend and vicarage in the diocese of Dunkeld, and by 1427 a church in the diocese of Glasgow. On 22 June 1429 Ochiltree was provided to the see of Dunblane, made vacant by the death of William Stephenson, having been granted a dispensation for his illegitimate birth; he was consecrated between 4 July 1430 and 12 April 1431. On 24 January 1430 he was one of the commissioners appointed to negotiate a truce with England. 
Although not the premier ecclesiastic in Scotland, it was Ochiltree who crowned the young James II at Holyrood on 25 March 1437 following the assassination of James I, possibly because his loyalty to the late king and to the queen was unquestioned at a time of political turmoil. He was involved in negotiating the terms of the 'Appoyntement' of 4 September 1439, which laid down the conditions for the keeping of the young James II during his minority, and it was through the queen's patronage that Ochiltree obtained a royal charter consolidating the lands of his bishopric into a regality in 1442. On 16 August 1443 he was one of the prelates before whom Alexander Livingston purged himself of the killing of Sir Malcolm Fleming. Eighteen months later, on 5 February 1445, Ochiltree and the queen sought the arbitration of James Kennedy, bishop of St Andrews, in a suit concerning patronage. Ochiltree was present in the parliament held on 28 June 1445, but may have died shortly afterwards, as he does not appear again in the records and his successor, Robert Lauder, had been provided to the see of Dunblane by 27 October 1447. 


@@@@@


doc= 20489


Ochino, Bernardino (c.1487-1564/5), Capuchin friar and evangelical reformer, was, according to his later writings, born in Siena about 1487, the son of a barber, Domenico Tommasini. He is said to have taken his name from the district of Oca ('the goose'). 
Few details are recorded of Ochino's early life, but he probably entered the Franciscan Observant order about 1503. The seventeenth-century Capuchin historian Zaccaria Boverio asserts that Ochino later studied medicine at Perugia, where he became a friend of the future Pope Clement VII, but this claim cannot be verified. During the early 1520s, however, Ochino played a prominent role in the negotiations which resulted in the division of the Tuscan province of the Franciscan Observants (1523); he subsequently assumed the leadership of the newly formed province of Siena. At this stage Ochino was closely allied with the order's controversial general, Paolo Pisotti, whom he represented on several missions to the provincial chapter of Venice in 1531-2. Following Pisotti's removal from office in 1533, many of his former associates left the Franciscan Observants for the breakaway Capuchin order. Ochino was perhaps the best-known of the defectors, becoming a Capuchin some time in early 1534. 
Ochino quickly emerged as a leading figure within the new order, partly on the strength of his links with Vittoria Colonna, one of the early Capuchins' most important patrons. At a chapter-general in November 1535 he was elected the order's first definitor, and on 3 June 1538 he succeeded Bernardino d'Asti as general (a position in which he was confirmed three years later). During the second half of the 1530s Ochino presided over the consolidation of the Capuchins' position in Italy, but his achievements in this regard were overshadowed by his growing reputation as a preacher. Between 1534 and 1542, his itinerary took in Naples, Perugia, Venice, Florence, Lucca, Siena, Ferrara, Bologna, and Palermo; there is evidence that city magistrates competed fiercely for his services. The impact of Ochino's oratory on listeners was by all accounts dramatic. His preaching in Naples during Lent 1536 prompted one observer, Gregorio Rosso, to remark that it was enough to make the stones weep. 
It was during this first visit to Naples that Ochino became associated with the Spanish evangelical Juan de Valdes and his followers. Although Ochino may first have encountered evangelical ideas some years earlier, via contacts with the Augustinian preachers Agostino Mainardi and Giulio da Milano, he seems to have been particularly attracted by Valdes's syncretic approach, which combined a crypto-protestant understanding of justification with a spiritualism rooted in Franciscan tradition. Valdes, for his part, seized on Ochino's preaching as an opportunity to communicate his ideas to a wider public. The papal protonotary Pietro Carnesecchi later testified that when he was in Naples Ochino used to receive notes from Valdes on the evenings before he was due to preach, outlining the theme for the next day's sermon. 
The timing of Ochino's break with Catholic orthodoxy is difficult to establish with any precision. He himself later claimed that by the time of his defection to the Capuchins he had already renounced the papacy. Unfortunately, while in Italy Ochino published relatively few works against which that statement can be measured. Of the hundreds of sermons that he preached during the late 1530s and early 1540s, for example, only fifteen survive. These were published in two main collections: the 'Prediche nove', a series of sermons dating from Easter 1539 and first printed in Venice in March 1541; and the collection known as the 'Prediche lucchesi', also published in 1541, of which a single copy survives in the British Library. Ochino may also be the author of an anonymous 'Dialogo dil maestro e discepolo', published in Asti in 1540, and of a short text included in the Spanish manuscript version of Valdes's '110 Divine Considerations'. However, his best-known work of the period is a collection of dialogues, the 'Dialogi sette', first published by the Venetian printer Zoppino in 1540 (although some of the dialogues date back to 1536). The title page of the 'Dialogi sette' features a woodcut illustration of Ochino, bearded and in the habit of his order, praying before a crucifix. Although neither the sermons nor the dialogues are overtly heterodox, both are characterized by an emphasis on the crucified Christ at the expense of other traditional devotions, and appear to teach a mild doctrine of justification by faith. When considering these writings, one must also bear in mind Ochino's later claim that, while in Italy, he had been forced to preach Christ 'masked', revealing the true extent of his differences with Rome only to a trusted few. There is independent evidence of Ochino's secret proselytizing activity in the testimony of the Anabaptist Pietro Manelfi, who reported that Ochino had supplied him with copies of works by Luther and Melanchthon. 
In that context it is hardly surprising that doubts about Ochino's orthodoxy began to be voiced; at Easter 1539 he was forced to defend himself publicly against the allegation that he had denied the existence of purgatory. These charges gained new credibility when, while preaching in Venice during Lent 1542, Ochino condemned the continuing imprisonment of his fellow evangelical Giulio da Milano, who had been forced to make a public abjuration of heresy only a few months before. Ochino's comments were communicated to the curia, and in July he received a summons from Paul III to appear at Rome. At first he appeared intent on obeying, but in Florence he encountered Pietro Martire Vermigli, who persuaded him of the need for a decisive break with the Roman church. After discarding his clerical habit and informing Vittoria Colonna of his intentions (22 August), Ochino fled across the Alps to the safety of Morbegno in the Valtellina. From there he proceeded via Zurich to Geneva, where he arrived towards the end of September 1542. 
In Geneva Ochino was licensed to preach to the city's small Italian-speaking community, first at the chapel of the cardinal of Ostia in St Pierre and then at the church of St Gervais. In 1543 he married an exile from Lucca (she died in 1563, but her name is unknown), with whom he had at least six children. The eldest, Aurelia, who was born in Geneva, later married the Lucchese merchant Lorenzo Venturini. Ochino's very public apostasy had made him a target of Catholic polemicists, and during his first year in Geneva he was forced to issue a series of public defences of his actions ('Responsio ad Marcum Brixiensem', 'Responsio ad Mutium Justinopolitanum', 'Epistola alli Signori di Balia della citta di Siena', all 1543). Between October 1542 and August 1545 he also published seven short volumes of sermons in Italian; a short but trenchant attack on the papacy, the 'Imagine di Antechristo'; and a commentary on 'Romans' ('Espositione sopra la epistola di San Paolo alli Romani'). Like the other vernacular works published in the early years of his exile, all were clearly intended for an Italian readership. Most of the sermons, which set out Ochino's by now fully protestant understanding of faith, justification, and predestination, were later republished by Michael Isengrin in Basel as a two-volume edition of 'Prediche'. 
In August 1545 Ochino left Geneva, perhaps in search of a more lucrative posting; there is no evidence to suggest that his decision was prompted by doctrinal or personal differences with Calvin, who in April 1543 had declared himself perfectly satisfied of Ochino's orthodoxy. After short stays in Basel and Strasbourg, Ochino was offered a preaching position by the city council of Augsburg, with an annual stipend of 200 gulden (December 1545). Here he published a second major commentary, the 'Espositione sopra la epistola di Paolo a i Galati', and a number of shorter devotional works, which appeared only in German ('Ain Gesprech der flaischlichen Vernunfft'; 'Ain christliches schones und trostliches Bett'; 'Von der Hoffnung aines Christlichen gemuts'). In Augsburg Ochino also had contacts with local followers of the radical reformer Kaspar Schwenckfeld, who were attracted by the spiritualist aspects of his theology. However, his stay in the city was short-lived: in January 1547 Augsburg was besieged by the army of Charles V, who demanded, among other things, that Ochino be surrendered into imperial custody. Accompanied by another Italian exile, Francesco Stancaro, he fled to Basel, where he was received at the home of the printer Johannes Oporinus. The Spanish evangelical Francisco de Enzinas (Dryander) attempted to obtain a position for Ochino in Zurich, but these plans were superseded by an invitation from Thomas Cranmer to assist with the reformation of the English church. A similar offer was extended to Ochino's compatriot Vermigli, who accompanied him to London in November-December 1547. 
Ochino's activities in England are not particularly well documented. At first he lodged with Cranmer at Lambeth Palace, and in February 1548 the imperial ambassador Francois Van der Delft reported that he had begun preaching to London's Italian community. On 9 May that year he was appointed a prebendary of Canterbury, with an annual salary of 40 marks, although he remained resident in London. Shortly afterwards he secured Cranmer's backing for a plan to invite Wolfgang Musculus, another victim of the defeat of the Schmalkaldic League, to join the growing band of foreign theologians in England (the invitation was eventually declined). Ochino also cultivated links with the household of Princess Elizabeth; her manuscript translation into Latin of one of his Genevan sermons is held at the Bodleian Library. Ochino was one of several foreign theologians commissioned by Cranmer to write against the western rebellion in summer 1549. In the resulting 'Dialogus regis et populi', preserved among Cranmer's papers at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, he evinces a certain amount of sympathy for the rebels' socio-economic grievances, but condemns their resistance to the reform of worship (MS 340, 97-108). Four editions of Ochino's sermons in English were also published during Edward VI's reign, in translations by Richard Argentine and Anne Cooke, later Lady Bacon. Better known is his 'Tragoedie, or, Dialoge of the Uniuste Usurped Primacie of the Bishop of Rome', which appeared in two variant editions, published before and after the fall of Protector Somerset in October 1549. This semi-dramatic work, which survives only in the English translation by Cranmer's chaplain John Ponet, attempts over the course of nine scenes to expose the doctrine of papal supremacy as a satanic strategy for the undermining of Christ's church, now thankfully restored to its pristine state in England by the reforms of the young Josiah (that is, Edward VI) and his father. In its structure and subject matter, the 'Tragoedie' closely resembles the 'Pammachius' of Thomas Kirchmeyer, which had been translated into English by Ochino's friend John Bale. 
Following Mary's restoration of Catholicism, Ochino, like his compatriot Vermigli, was obliged to return to the continent. Passing through Geneva in October 1553, he is reported to have condemned the execution of Michael Servetus, 'quae res eum reddidit invisum' (S. Castellio, 'Contra libellum Calvini', 1612, sig. A6'r'). Once again, Ochino took up temporary residence in Basel, where a third volume of his 'Prediche' had appeared around 1550. This was now followed by the 'Apologi' (1544), a collection of anecdotes satirizing Catholic doctrine and devotional practices, and the fourth volume of the 'Prediche'. In June 1555 Ochino accepted an invitation from the Zurich council to take up a position as minister to the community of evangelical exiles from Locarno that had settled in the city. While in Zurich he published some of his most important theological works: the 'Syncerae et verae doctrinae de coena domini defensio' (1556), a defence of the Swiss reformed doctrine of the eucharist against the Lutheran Joachim Westphal; the 'Dialogo del purgatorio' (1556), in which a protestant 'Theodidatto' successfully rebuts arguments for the existence of purgatory proposed by representatives of five different Catholic religious orders; 'Il catechismo' (1561), written for the use of the Locarnese church; the 'Disputa intorno alla presenza del corpo di Giesu Christo nel sacramento' (1561), a collection of sermons aimed mainly against the mass; a fifth volume of 'Prediche' (1562); and the 'Laberinti del libero o ver servo arbitrio' (1560), which tackled the thorny question of predestination. Of interest are Ochino's continuing links with English reformers such as John Jewel and Thomas Sampson; when the newly enthroned Elizabeth I enraged her bishops by insisting on retaining a crucifix in her private chapel, Sampson urged Ochino to use his influence with the queen to persuade her to remove the offending object. Ochino subsequently dedicated his 'Laberinti' to Elizabeth, fondly recalling their earlier association. 
Although Ochino initially enjoyed good relations with Zurich's senior minister, Heinrich Bullinger (who had recommended his appointment), his later works suggest a growing disquiet with the theological drift of the Zurich church, and an interest in the ideas of dissident thinkers such as Sebastian Castellio and Lelio Sozzini. The 'Laberinti' and 'Disputa', in which Ochino followed Castellio in proposing that controversial questions (such as the relationship between divine predestination and the human will, and the mode of Christ's presence in the eucharist) be treated as adiaphora, caused some disquiet in orthodox reformed circles, but it was the unauthorized publication, in spring 1563, of Ochino's 'Dialogi XXX' that brought matters to a head. The 'Dialogi', which were translated into Latin by Castellio, contained devastating criticisms of the reformed understanding of justification, the atonement, and the sacraments (mitigated only to the extent that they were voiced by Ochino's fictional antagonists). Some passages in dialogue 19 indicate that Ochino was familiar with Lelio Sozzini's antitrinitarian commentary on the prologue to 'John's gospel'. However, it was dialogue 21, on polygamy, that gave most grounds for offence. When it was brought to Bullinger's attention by a group of Zurich merchants, he felt that he had no choice but to recommend to the city council that Ochino be dismissed (22 November 1563). 
After being refused sanctuary in Basel and Mulhouse, Ochino spent the winter in Nuremberg, where he penned his final work, the autograph of which is held at the British Library (Add. MS 28568). In this 'Dialogo della prudenza humana' he denounced the inhumanity of the Zurich theologians and magistrates, reiterating (this time openly) the criticisms of the reformed churches contained in the 'Dialogi XXX'. In spring 1564 he left Nuremberg for Poland, where he was welcomed by members of the minor (antitrinitarian) church in Cracow. However, in August, the Polish king Sigismund II issued the edict of Parczow, expelling non-Catholic foreigners from the realm. Forced into exile once more, Ochino found a haven with the Anabaptist community headed by Niccolo Paruta at Slavkov (Austerlitz) in Moravia. It was there, while preparing to take up an invitation to preach in Transylvania, that he is believed to have died in late 1564 or early 1565. 
In the century and a half following his death Ochino assumed an honoured place in antitrinitarian historiography, as one of the founding fathers of Socinianism. He was less favourably treated by his former colleagues in the mainstream reformed churches, for whom his 'betrayal' represented an acute embarrassment. Josias Simler, in 'De aeterno Dei filio' (1568), and Girolamo Zanchi, in 'De tribus Elohim' (1572) denounced his views on the Trinity, while Theodore Beza published a refutation of the dialogue on polygamy ('Tractatio de polygamia', 1568). During the 1650s Ochino's works enjoyed something of a revival in England; 'A Dialogue of Polygamy, Rendered into English by a Person of Quality' was published in London in 1657, and it has been suggested that Milton drew on the 'Dialogi XXX' for his views on the Trinity and marriage. Ochino later attracted interest from Pierre Bayle and from the eighteenth-century German antiquarian Johann Georg Schelhorn, who published a manuscript, now lost, of the 'Dialogo della prudenza humana'. Twentieth-century scholarship is divided over the extent of Ochino's differences with reformed orthodoxy -- exaggerated, perhaps, in the light of his expulsion from Zurich -- but his career remains emblematic of the difficulties that many Italian evangelicals of the early modern period experienced in exile. 


@@@@@


doc= 20490


Johann Rudolph Ochs (1673-1749/50), gem-engraver and sealcutter, from Bern, Switzerland. Johann Rudolph Ochs the elder worked for a time at the Royal Mint as assistant. Fussli (p. 474) described him as being 'appreciated as one of the great modern artists'. Johann Rudolph Ochs went back to Switzerland for a period, but returned to Britain in 1719 where he died in 1749 or 1750. 


@@@@@


doc= 20491


Ochs, John Ralph (1704-1788), medallist, was the son of 
Probably taught by his father, John Ralph Ochs was employed at the mint between 'c'.1727 and 1787. He was promoted to become third assistant engraver in 1757. He was still third engraver in 1768 when he was paid an annual salary of $80. As second engraver at the mint in 1779 Ochs was offered the position of first engraver after Richard Yeo's death that year. He declined owing to his advanced years and by 1786 he was incapable of working at all. In 1787 he retired at the age of eighty-three, having worked at the mint for more than fifty years. Hocking attributes the maundy money of George III (1763-86) to Ochs. Although he would, as chief engraver, have been entitled to an annual pension of $200, his position as assistant engraver would have paid him only $80 yearly. Lewis Pingo, the then chief engraver, proposed to give Ochs a higher pension in acknowledgement of his long working life at the mint, officially permitting him an annual pension of $120 and 6 guineas. 
On Ochs's death in 1788 his widow, Frances, was appointed office sweeper at the mint. Challis considers her salary of $10 yearly to have been generous, since she was elderly and infirm and not able to perform her official duties. As the widow of a mint engraver she continued to receive a pension until her death in 1806. 


@@@@@


doc= 20492


Ochterlony, Sir David, first baronet (1758-1825), army officer in the East India Company, was born on 12 February 1758 in Boston, Massachusetts. He was the eldest of three sons of David Ochterlony (died 1765), a Scottish-born merchant sea captain, and his American-born wife, Katherine (died 1783), daughter of Andrew Tyler and his wife, Miriam, 'nee' Pepperell. His father's family were associated with Tillyfroskie, Aberdeenshire; David's paternal grandfather, Alexander Ochterlony ('b'. 1695), was laird of Pitforthy, Forfarshire. His father, having lived for a time in Montrose, is first recorded in Boston in 1751, where he married Katherina. Although his father died insolvent in St Vincent in August 1765, the young David continued to live in the family property in Salem Street, Boston, and attended the Boston public Latin school. In 1770 his mother brought her three sons to England, where, on 7 March 1770, she married Isaac Heard, whom she may have met during his voyages to America in the 1750s. Heard arranged the settlement of the late David Ochterlony's debts and used his influence as Lancaster herald to send his stepson David to India in 1777 as a cadet. 
Ochterlony was commissioned on 7 February 1778 as ensign in the 31st Bengal native infantry, and was promoted to lieutenant later the same year. In 1781, while with the 24th native infantry, Ochterlony joined Colonel Thomas Deane Pearse's force, which marched 1100 miles from Bengal to Madras to reinforce Lieutenant-General Sir Eyre Coote's army engaged in war against the ruler of Mysore, Haidar Ali, and his French allies under Bussy. At Cuddalore on 25 June 1783 the 24th regiment, alone and in fierce hand-to-hand fighting, threw back a determined French attack. In the thick of the battle Ochterlony was wounded and taken prisoner. Following the death of Haidar Ali and the ratification of a treaty with his son Tipu Sultan (21 February 1784), the prisoners were released. Pearse and his troops marched back to Bengal, arriving in Calcutta on 15 January 1785. Ochterlony was appointed deputy judge-advocate-general with a Bengal army division in Dinapore. He served as a staff officer for the next eighteen years, being promoted captain on 7 January 1796 and major on 21 April 1800. Following the death of Ochterlony's mother on 30 August 1783, Isaac Heard remarried. In 1784 he became Garter principal king of arms, an influential appointment which he was to hold for thirty-eight years. Having no children of his own from either marriage, Heard derived from David Ochterlony 'all the satisfaction of a father, and experienced the warm attachment of a son' (Heard's obituary). They exchanged frequent correspondence and David Ochterlony wrote openly to Heard as his 'dear and most honoured friend and father', frankly disclosing his 'anti-matrimonial habits' (19 Jan 1817, Ochterlony MSS, priv. coll.). 
In 1803, on the outbreak of war with the Marathas, the commander-in-chief, Lord Lake, brought Ochterlony back on active service. As a lieutenant-colonel (18 March 1803) in command of the 2nd battalion 12th Bengal native infantry, Ochterlony showed such skilful leadership at the capture of the forts of Sasni, Bijaigarh, and Kachawa in the doab that Lake appointed him deputy adjutant-general of his forces. He was with Lake at the battles of Koil (19 August 1803) and Aligarh (4 September 1803), and the capture of Delhi (11 September 1803), which wrested the Mughal emperor, Shah Alam, and his court from Maratha influence. While Lake and his army moved on, Ochterlony was left at Delhi as provisional resident with responsibility for the protection of the city and fortress of Delhi and its environs, and for ensuring the safety of Shah Alam. He organized the repair of 7 miles of crumbling city walls and the fortification of strong defensive parapets, calling in Lieutenant-Colonel Burn from Saharanpur to take command of all the troops available, about 2500 men with eleven guns. Together they held off Holkar, a Maratha chief, and his army of 18,000 men and 160 guns for nine days until relieved. A general order of the commander-in-chief dated 24 October 1804 commended Burn and expressed the highest approbation of Ochterlony's wise and timely precautions, energy, and decision. 
The value of Ochterlony's service was recognized by his permanent appointment as resident at Delhi. His gallantry and courtly manners so earned Shah Alam's admiration that he was given the Mughal title of Nasir ud-Daula (defender of the state), and the town of Nasirabad was named after him. Like many of his British contemporaries in India, Ochterlony was very comfortable in Mughal-Hindustani culture but, contrary to legend, probably no more so than was customary for British officers who served for long periods at Indian courts. In what was to become the pattern of Ochterlony's career this period of success and recognition was followed by unwelcome news. In April 1806 a peremptory letter conveyed the governor-general's instruction to hand over the residency to a civil servant successor, Archibald Seton. Despite the protests of Lord Lake and Shah Alam, Ochterlony was assigned the command of the fortress and station of Allahabad, half-way between Calcutta and Delhi. As some compensation, no reduction was made in his emoluments as resident. 
Growing anxiety in London about possible French invasion of India via the north-west frontier revived Ochterlony's career on active service. On the instruction of the governor-general, Lord Minto, Charles Theophilus Metcalfe left Delhi on 28 July 1808 to seek the collaboration of the raja of Lahore, in a defensive pact. Ranjit Singh, a rising power in the Punjab, saw the British as an obstacle to the further spread of his influence in the Jumna-Sutlej Doab. The governor-general in council decided that Ranjit Singh's action in launching a third trans-Sutlej expedition on 25 September 1808 was a threat to the security of British possessions south of the Sutlej. Metcalfe was therefore instructed on 31 October 1808 to extend British protection to the Sikh chiefs south of the Sutlej; to require the raja of Lahore to withdraw his army across the river; and to establish a military post near the Punjab frontier. Ochterlony, who had met and befriended Metcalfe during Lake's campaign in 1803, was summoned from Allahabad to lead a military detachment to the Sutlej in support of Metcalfe. Ochterlony set out from Delhi on 27 January 1809, followed by a strong force under Major-General St Leger. 'En route' for Ludhiana he halted his detachment for five days, at the request of Ranjit Singh, while a headstrong Sikh commander was persuaded to cross the Sutlej. Unfortunately this brought a charge of insubordination from the commander-in-chief. Neil Benjamin Edmonstone, the governor-general's secretary, used his persuasive skills to defuse the incident, and with Metcalfe's strong support Ochterlony retained his command at Ludhiana. A treaty of perpetual friendship between the British and the raja of Lahore, concluded on 25 October 1809, put an end to Ranjit Singh's trans-Sutlej incursions. The importance of Ludhiana as a listening post was marked in 1810 by its upgrading to a political agency. At the same time Ochterlony was appointed agent to the governor-general and military commander there. He was promoted colonel on 1 January 1812. His immediate concern was the presence of Kaji Amar Singh Thapa's Nepalese army close to the northern borders of the lowland states protected by the British. Having been defeated by Ranjit Singh at Kangra in 1809 and forced to recross the Sutlej, the kaji had decided to secure the Nepalese hold on the thirty Cis-Sutlej Hill states with a network of defensive fortifications. Incidents which had occurred sporadically since 1806 along the imprecisely defined southern border of Nepalese territory brought a general state of tension. By 1813, when Lord Moira (later marquess of Hastings) became governor-general and commander-in-chief, there was already a prospect of war between Britain and Nepal. An incident at Butwal on 29 May 1814, in which a chief police officer and eighteen policemen were killed by the Nepalese, provided the provocation. 
Hastings, a general in his own right, planned for four divisions to invade Nepalese territory simultaneously. He appointed Ochterlony to command the third field division at Ludhiana with the rank of major-general. Ochterlony's orders were to destroy Kaji Amar Singh Thapa's army and to annihilate Gurkha influence and authority between the Jumna and the Sutlej. Hastings regarded these as 'objects of primary interest' ('Papers Respecting the Nepaul War', 702). Having toured the border territory in 1813 and gathered intelligence about Nepalese forces and their tactical skills and stockaded defences, Ochterlony was aware that he was faced with an entirely different species of warfare in steep and difficult mountainous country. He was also aware that to fulfil his orders he needed troops highly trained and experienced in mountain warfare, and that no such soldiers existed in the Bengal army. Ochterlony set out from Rupar, moving via Palasi (the capital of Hindur) towards Nalagarh. He took with him a formidable array of artillery, and resolved to spend whatever time was necessary surveying the terrain and, helped by the raja of Hindur's labour force, constructing roads for his guns. Breaches made by 6 pounder guns and the threat of heavier battering guns caused the garrison of Nalagarh Fort and of nearby Taragarh to surrender. Ochterlony took care to reassure the ninety-five prisoners of their personal safety and of 'everything which would reconcile them to their captors' (ibid., 453). Hastings left it to Ochterlony's discretion to offer service to enemy troops, subject to his ratification. On 24 January 1815 Ochterlony signed and sealed a memorandum of four propositions offered by Jeykishen, a Brahman provincial governor of Kumaon, to the effect that every man who joined the British from the Nepalese army with his musket would receive Rs 10 and be retained in the British service on the Nepalese rates of pay. Larger monetary rewards would be paid to Nepalese officers. Ochterlony informed Hastings of these arrangements in early April 1815, by which time he had in his camp a body of 324 men 'in whose fidelity he felt the most perfect confidence' (BL OIOC, H/653, 136). Ochterlony's proposal to form them into a 'Nusseree Pulteen' (Nasiri battalion, so named after his Mughal title) received Hastings's enthusiastic approval. 
In the meantime, Ochterlony had made steady and methodical progress capturing, sometimes with great difficulty, the forts across the precipitous ranges of the Cis-Sutlej hills. He drove each garrison to Malaun Fort, where, from intercepted letters, he knew that Kaji Amar Singh Thapa had elected to make his principal stand. Encamped at the foot of the Malaun hills, Ochterlony sent his troops, including the Nasiris, by night to occupy two undefended hilltops. From there, with feint attacks to mislead the kaji, he closed on a prominence overlooking Malaun Fort, beating off sustained and heroic counter-attacks with his field artillery. Under threat of Ochterlony's battering guns the kaji was forced to honourable surrender. Hostilities were brought to an end by a convention between Kaji Amar Singh Thapa and Ochterlony dated 15 May 1815. Clause 5 of this convention stated that Nepalese troops were at liberty to enter service with the British if they so wished and provided that the British chose to accept them. With the surrender of Malaun, Jaithak, and all other forts in the Jumna-Sutlej Doab, 4700 Nepalese soldiers joined the British. Of these perhaps 1500 were Gurkhas, the remainder being almost all Kumaonis and Garhwalis. Kaji Amar Singh Thapa and his son Ranjor Singh Thapa were given full military honours and were allowed to return to Nepal with their families and belongings. Ochterlony was appointed KCB and created a baronet. A grateful court of directors of the East India Company granted him an annual pension of $1000. 
When the Nepalese government refused to ratify a treaty signed at Sagauli on 2 December 1815, a second campaign became necessary and Ochterlony was given overall command of an army of 33,000 men and 100 guns. With little more than two months of the campaigning season in which to fulfil Hastings's objectives in the east, Ochterlony lost no time. Having quickly gathered his ordnance and pioneer companies, he deployed two brigades to left and right, and led the other two through dense forests of sal trees to the precipitous and heavily fortified hills of the Churia Ghati range. Finding his way blocked at the Bichraltar Pass, Ochterlony led a brigade up a very steep and narrow ravine, leaving his pioneers to construct a passage for unladen elephants and for manhandling guns. The sudden appearance of the British beyond the Bichraltar defences caused the Nepalese defenders to fall back on the main Nepalese position at Makwanpur. Having assembled two brigades and his heavy ordnance near Makwanpur, Ochterlony sent a strong force to occupy an abandoned hill position on the Makwanpur range. This he defended successfully with reinforcements and artillery against waves of Nepalese counter-attacks. The arrival of the other two brigades, the capture of Makwanpur Fort, and the consequent threat to the Katmandu valley persuaded the Nepalese government to ratify the treaty of Sagauli without further delay, thereby bringing the war to an end on 5 March 1816. Ochterlony's triumph was recognized by his promotion to GCB, by addresses in both houses of parliament, and by the augmentation of his coat of arms with the word Nipal. Hastings gave Ochterlony the privilege of forming the recruits from the Nepalese army into four battalions. The 1st and 2nd Nasiri and the Sirmur battalions were stationed in key forts in the Cis-Sutlej hills. The Kumaon battalion was based at Almora, near the Kumaon border with Nepal. 
Hastings now led an army of 120,000 with 300 guns to subdue the Maratha chiefs and associated roving Pindari hordes which had been laying waste British territory in central India. Ochterlony was given the important task of commanding a division protecting Delhi and supporting operations in Rajputana. His reputation and tactical skills persuaded Amir Khan, a Maratha chief who had ravaged Jaipur and neighbouring territory, to ratify a treaty. With his army disarmed and disbanded, Amir Khan became a peaceful ally of the British. In March 1818 Hastings appointed Ochterlony resident in Rajputana and commissioner-general to the Rajput states, with command of British troops. In December 1818 he was appointed resident at Delhi, and in 1822 he became resident of Malwa and Rajputana, basing his headquarters at Neemuch. 
Despite this recognition, Ochterlony's life from 1822 was full of sadness. With his health deteriorating he bade farewell to his grandson, Charles Metcalfe Ochterlony, aged four, who sailed for Scotland on 16 January 1822. On 11 August 1822 Ochterlony's only son, Roderick Peregrine Ochterlony, who had been his Persian interpreter from 1809 to 1815, died. In the same year Ochterlony received news of the death on 29 April 1822 of his beloved stepfather and confidant, Sir Isaac Heard. In 1823 Lord Hastings, with whom Ochterlony had the greatest rapport, was succeeded as governor-general, after a brief interim period, by Lord Amherst. With neither political nor military standing, Amherst had doubts about his own competence. By December 1823 Ochterlony's health had so seriously declined that he sought a less demanding post. The government in Calcutta, determined that he should retire completely, soon seized an opportunity. Early in 1824 Ochterlony complied with an earnest request by Baldeo Singh, raja of Bharatpur, to invest his infant son as his heir apparent. A year later, when Baldeo Singh died, his nephew Durjan Singh seized power. Ochterlony, long convinced of the need for swift and decisive action at times of unrest in India, issued a proclamation calling on the people to support their rightful ruler, and prepared to march on Bharatpur. Amherst, fearful of repeating Lake's disastrous failure to take Bharatpur in 1805, ordered Ochterlony to cancel his proclamation and to halt his troops. Deeply hurt by this treatment, Ochterlony felt himself 'abandoned and dishonoured' (Kaye, 2.137). He resigned his appointment and, having moved to Meerut for a change of air, died late on 14 July 1825. He was buried at St John's Church there on the next day. With Metcalfe's persuasion, the governor-general in council passed a resolution on 16 September 1825 which vindicated Ochterlony's action at Bharatpur. Metcalfe was present when a large army under Lord Combermere stormed and took Bharatpur fortress on 3 January 1826. Ochterlony's Nasiris and the Sirmur battalion were in the forefront of the assault. At a public meeting on 26 September 1825 Metcalfe had paid tribute to his great friend Ochterlony: 'Never, perhaps, was there another so universally admired as a public man, at the same time so generally and fervently beloved' (ibid., 132). 
Ochterlony never married, but is known to have had at least six children, a son and five daughters, with two or more Indian women. The tradition that Ochterlony took the evening air in Delhi with thirteen wives on thirteen elephants probably owes much to folklore. His two youngest daughters were born of Mahruttun, entitled Mubarak al-Nisa ('Blessed among women') and often called Begum Ochterlony. Ochterlony, 'who was uniformly spoken of as a kind, honourable and worthy man' (Heber, 2.19), showed care and affection for his family. His three elder daughters having married comfortably to East India Company officials, he provided funds in trust for his two youngest daughters. For his grandson, Charles Metcalfe Ochterlony, to whom the remainder of Ochterlony's baronetcy passed by second patent in 1823, he arranged guardians and the purchase of land and heritable estates in Scotland. In his will he left his estate and effects in India to Begum Ochterlony and thence to his two youngest daughters. Ochterlony paid no heed to acquiring a great fortune, but lived on his army and diplomatic emoluments. 


@@@@@


doc= 20493


Ockham, William (c.1287-1347), philosopher, theologian, and political theorist, later known as the Venerable Inceptor, was born at Ockham, north-east of Guildford in Surrey. 
Ockham entered the Franciscan order before the age of fourteen, and probably received his philosophical education at the Franciscan convent in London, which was the school for the London custody, one of seven divisions of the English province of the order. It was in London, at Southwark, that he was ordained subdeacon in 1306 by Robert Winchelsey, archbishop of Canterbury. If Ockham ever studied at Paris, for which there is no positive evidence, it would have been about 1310, as part of the quota of students in theology that each province was permitted to send to Paris for advanced training in theology, before either being appointed as a lector at a local convent, or being chosen to proceed to a theological degree at a university. Whether his initial theological education was solely in England or partially at Paris, he was eventually sent to Oxford, and in 1317-19 lectured on the 'Sentences' of Peter Lombard as bachelor of theology at Greyfriars. The 'Reportatio' of books 2-4 of his 'Sentences' commentary dates to this period. While at Oxford, in June 1318, he was granted a licence by the bishop of Lincoln to hear confessions. According to the Oxford curriculum, Ockham would have given his bachelor's lectures on the 'Bible' after completing those on the 'Sentences'. This would place his biblical lectures as bachelor in the academic year 1319-20, although nothing has remained from that scholastic activity. 
Between 1321 and 1324 Ockham was active in one of the order's schools as a lecturer in logic and natural philosophy, awaiting his opportunity to proceed to the doctorate at Oxford, or possibly Paris. These were the most productive years of an active life of writing. He revised his questions on the first book of the 'Sentences', which became known as his 'Ordinatio'. He lectured on Aristotle's logic, producing his 'Expositio aurea' and his 'Expositio super libros elenchorum'. He wrote his 'Expositio in libros physicorum' on Aristotle's 'Physics'. He engaged in quodlibetic disputations, the results of which form the first five series of disputations in his 'Quodlibeta septem'. He wrote a massive, revisionary, textbook in logic known as 'Summa logicae'. And he may well have begun one or both of his treatises on the eucharist ('De quantitate' and 'De corpore Christi', the first or both of which became known as 'De sacramento altaris'). These works were written in the same convent in which Walter Chatton was a lecturer in theology, and where Adam Wodeham was both a student in Chatton's classroom and an assistant ('socius') to Ockham. Both Chatton's 'Reportatio' on the 'Sentences' (1321-3), and his 'Lectura' on book 1 of the same work (1323-4), reveal a textual interdependence with Ockham's 'Quodlibeta' and 'Expositio in libros physicorum' that could only have resulted from close proximity in time and space. The location of this intense activity was probably the London convent, as Gedeon Gal has argued, although the Oxford convent cannot be excluded. 
Ockham's positions on the status of universal concepts, his belief that only substances and qualities were real entities, and the implications of these views for the doctrine of the eucharist had already been criticized by Walter Chatton by 1322. These discussions led Ockham to modify his view on universals, as well as to intensify his attack on the view that quantity, relation, place, time, and motion were real entities, apart from absolute substances and their qualities. 
Ockham's ideas soon attracted attention outside the schools as well. At a provincial chapter of his order, apparently at Cambridge in 1323, he was called upon to explain his views on thirteen propositions derived from his teaching on the Aristotelian categories, especially the category of 'relation'. While the annual provincial chapter for the English Franciscan province was normally held between mid-August and early September, and in 1323 was held at Bristol, the chapter at which Ockham responded may have been called specifically for that purpose and could, according to the calendar then in use, have occurred as late as March 1324. No action against Ockham is known to have resulted, but this internal inquiry may have led to the lodging of a complaint against his teaching at the papal court. 
Late in the spring of 1324 Ockham was apparently summoned to Avignon to have his writings, specifically his lectures on the 'Sentences', examined for heretical or erroneous teaching. It may be that his title, inceptor, meant that he was about to become regent master, probably at Oxford, in the following autumn term had he not been summoned to Avignon on charges of false teaching. However, the title inceptor was applied by the Franciscan William Woodford to three other Franciscan theologians, William Ware, Robert Cowton, and Walter Chatton, who had all, like Ockham, entered the order before the age of fourteen, but of whom only one (Chatton) is known to have become a regent master in theology. 
In the summer of 1324 Ockham crossed the channel, travelled to Provence (perhaps pausing briefly at the Franciscan convent at Paris on the way), and took up residence at the Avignon convent. There he came into association with several important Italian Franciscans: Francisco da Marchia, a Scotistic theologian and doctor of Paris; Bonagratia da Bergamo, procurator-general of the order; and Michele da Cesena, the minister-general of the order. The evaluation of the text of Ockham's 'Sentences' commentary, which he had brought with him to Avignon, was initially entrusted to John Lutterell, former chancellor of Oxford, who had arrived in Avignon the year before. Whether Lutterell's opposition to Ockham dated back to their time together at Oxford, or began at Avignon, is not known. Lutterell extracted fifty-six philosophical and theological statements from Ockham's work of before May 1325 that he felt were erroneous or heretical. Subsequently a commission was appointed to inspect Ockham's work in light of Lutterell's list. Those serving on the commission, in addition to Lutterell, were the Dominicans Raimond Beguin, Dominique Grenier, Durand de St Pourcain, and two Augustinian friars, the theologians Gregorio da Lucca and Jean Paignote. All of them were Paris doctors of theology and, with the exception of Paignote, were prelates or bishops-elect. 
This commission removed from consideration most of Ockham's statements on the ontological status of such categories as relation, time, motion, place, and quantity unless they were directly part of a theological proposition. The commission compiled a list of fifty-one propositions by 1326, which was subsequently altered and reduced to a list of forty-nine. In addition, the Cistercian bishop of Pamiers, Jacques Fournier (later Pope Benedict XII), who was also a doctor of theology from Paris, with considerable experience in rooting out heresy in his diocese, wrote a critical evaluation of Ockham's teaching based on these lists. In the end no formal condemnation took place, possibly because some of the positions on which Ockham was being accused of erroneous teaching had defenders, both on the commission and within the larger scholastic theological community, especially among Scotists. 
Although in no way a restriction on the ability of the commission to proceed, the situation was altered in 1328 when Ockham and several fellow Franciscans, specifically Michele da Cesena and Bonagratia da Bergamo, arrived at the conclusion that the position taken by Pope John XXII on the issue of the poverty of Christ and the apostles was heretical. Expecting no justice from a heretical pope, they fled Avignon for the Mediterranean port of Aigues-Mortes during the night of 26 May 1328. There they took sail for Genoa and Pisa, where they joined the entourage of Emperor Ludwig of Bavaria, the leading political opponent of the pope. Ockham and his companions were excommunicated, and John XXII eagerly but unsuccessfully sought their arrest and return to Avignon. Ockham remained with the imperial court when it returned from Italy to Munich, and he resided at the Franciscan convent in Munich for the remaining two decades of his life, never to return to England. 
The flight to Italy and Germany was not only a geographical relocation for Ockham; it marked a radical shift in his intellectual preoccupations. From then on Ockham concerned himself with the question of a heretical pope, the issues on which he based that view of John XXII, and the implications of those ideas for church polity. Among the many books and treatises on political theory that he produced in this period, the two most important were his 'Opus nonaginta dierum', written, as the title states, in ninety days, and his 'Dialogus'. In these works Ockham attacked John XXII's condemnation of the Franciscan doctrine of evangelical poverty as expressed in the papal constitutions 'Ad conditorem canonum' (8 December 1322), 'Cum inter nonullos' (12 November 1323), 'Quia quorundam' (10 November 1324), and 'Quia vir reprobus' (16 November 1329). In the climate of the imperial court and the Franciscan convent at Munich, fed by the views of Michele da Cesena and Marsiglio da Padua, the state and future of the church took precedence over other interests for Ockham. His earlier plan to write a commentary on Aristotle's 'Metaphysics', which had been on his agenda before leaving England, was dropped. While his philosophical and theological views continued to be debated at Oxford and Paris in the 1330s and 1340s, Ockham himself was silent on those subjects after 1328. 
When Michele da Cesena died in 1342, Ockham took possession of the seal of the Franciscan order, although he was not the order's minister-general in exile. Without recanting his position on papal heresy or on any other issue, Ockham died at Munich on 10 April 1347, two years before the black death struck that city, where he was buried. The seal was restored to the order by Ockham's assistant ('socius'), also named William (de Anglia), at the general chapter at Verona in June 1348, and the petition of the latter for reconciliation with the papacy was granted on 8 June 1349. 
Ockham left behind him a sizeable body of writings. In the area of theology these include a revised edition of his commentary on the first book of the 'Sentences' (his 'Ordinatio'), a 'reportatio' of his commentary on books 2-4 of the 'Sentences', his seven 'Quodlibeta' composed in England and Avignon, his questions on the eucharist, and various disputed questions. While all of these works contain material important to philosophy, they are essentially works in theology. Ockham's major writings in logic and natural philosophy are his 'Summa logicae', his commentaries on the logic of Porphyry and Aristotle, commentaries and questions on Aristotle's 'Physics', and his treatise on God's predestination and foreknowledge of future contingents. All these works have now been critically edited, a task only completed in 1988. 
Critical editions of Ockham's equally important works in political thought have been only partially realized. These include his 'Opus nonaginta dierum', his letter to the general chapter of the Franciscan order meeting at Assisi in 1334, his treatises against John XXII and Benedict XII, and his eight questions on the power of the pope ('Octo quaestiones de potestate papae'). His single most important work on the relation of church and state, his 'Dialogus de potestate imperiali et papali', except for certain sections that have been edited, is available only in the defective edition of Melchior Goldast published in 1614. A critical edition based on the manuscripts was in progress in 1998. 
Ockham's contributions to medieval thought lie in two areas, his philosophical and theological writings on the one hand, composed between 1317 and 1326, and his political writings on the other, composed after 1328. Since these coincide with two distinct periods in his life, they will be discussed in that order. 
In approaching Ockham's philosophical thought, it is important to keep in mind that it was the product of someone who was a theologian. His earliest philosophical views are contained in his lectures on the 'Sentences', which were a product of an academic requirement of the theological programme. Moreover, all his commentaries on Aristotle, as well as his 'Summa logicae', were written after he had lectured on the 'Sentences', and they were intended to be of use to those preparing for or practising theology, as he makes clear in his introduction to his 'Summa logicae'. Ockham was never a 'pure' philosopher, but rather one who used philosophical ideas as tools for theological enquiry. On the other hand, Ockham's theology, as was true for others of his and previous generations at Oxford and Paris, was heavily dependent on the tools of philosophical enquiry and analysis, and, in his case, on semantic theory. 
Somewhat over-confidently, Ockham assumed that proper philosophical and linguistic tools were capable of helping to solve certain types of theological and exegetical questions, and that one of the problems with the theology of the previous generation, particularly that of Henri de Ghent and John Duns Scotus, despite the many differences in the thought of those two individuals, was that their philosophical tools and approaches were inadequate for the task, or misled them. Thus Ockham shared many of Scotus's theological positions, such as his views on grace and justification, much of his sacramental theology, and his ethical theories, and he even reformulated some of Scotus's philosophical views, such as intuitive cognition. But he disapproved of Scotus's tendency to reify abstract nouns into existent entities, and to distinguish, within one and the same thing ('res'), non-identical features or entities ('formalitates') that had ontological status (a formal distinction 'ex parte rei') in between a real distinction and a mental distinction. For Ockham a formal distinction applied only to the distinction of persons in the Godhead, and should not be applied to the created order, or even to the divine attributes. 
Ockham employed a number of fundamental principles that shaped his approach to many problems in philosophy and theology. Each of these had a history in earlier thinkers, but their combination in Ockham gives a distinctive character to his thought. The first of these is his belief in the total transcendence of God, and, correspondingly, the complete contingency of the created order in all its aspects. Duns Scotus believed that the term 'being' had a meaning that was applicable both to God and creatures, and that this 'univocity' of being allowed theologians to make statements about God based on a concept of being that was derived from the created order. Ockham, by contrast, broke with the Platonic idea of the universe as a 'great chain of being', in which God and creation were linked together ontologically. For Ockham, only God was absolutely necessary; everything else, including the physical, metaphysical, and moral orders, was contingent and unnecessary. 
A second, related, principle already established in thirteenth-century theology, is the distinction between God's power considered from the standpoint of simple capacity ('potentia absoluta'), and that same power considered from the standpoint of divine volition and divine decrees ('potentia ordinata'). Ockham uses that distinction to identify and explore the non-necessary character of causal relationships and states of affairs in the orders of nature and salvation. Any entities that are individually distinct, such as fire and the combustion of a flammable substance, or acts done in a state of grace and God's acceptance of those actions as meritorious of eternal life, can be separated in such a way that one could exist without the other. As biblical miracles attest, God can produce or conserve directly any effect normally produced through secondary causality without the presence of that cause, just as he can produce or conserve a cause without its normal effects. God's power, considered simply or absolutely, extends to anything that does not involve a direct contradiction. Yet God does not act arbitrarily. God has bound himself to uphold and work within the natural and spiritual orders he established. The reliability and predictability of the laws of nature, which Ockham affirms, are the result of the reliability of God's promises to sustain the system he created. Their reliability is not grounded in the inherent, necessary, and eternal nature of things. In this regard Ockham is continuing the attack on the Greek philosophical view of the necessary character of natural relationships that began with the Parisian articles of 1270 and 1277. 
Ockham's belief that the laws of nature and grace were established by God and contingent on his will permits him to substitute a system of contractual efficacy in place of a system of inherent virtues or natures -- a third guiding principle in his thought. Ockham's notion of ascribed value, again inherited from thirteenth-century thinkers, which he applies to natural forces as well as sacramental efficacy, is another dimension to his attack on the Greek understanding of the nature of the universe and causal relationships. 
A fourth principle is Ockham's belief that the fundamental realities in the external world are individual substances and their qualities: as the world is composed of individually existing things, it is not individuation that requires explanation, but similarity and universality. 
The final principle, frequently referred to as 'Ockham's razor', is the principle of economy, or parsimony: plurality ought not to be posited without necessity ('pluralitas sine necessitate non est ponenda' -- the often cited phrase 'entia non sunt multiplicenda praeter necessitatem' is only an approximation to what Ockham actually wrote). This is not a principle of nature, since Ockham is convinced that God, for his own reasons, does many things in a more elaborate way that could have been done in a shorter or simpler way. The principle of economy is a hermeneutical principle, through which Ockham rejects assumptions and explanations in the argumentation of others that he feels are unnecessary. 
Since the fifteenth century Ockham's name has been linked with nominalism, which became an important current of thought in the universities of Europe in the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries. By 'nominalism' is usually meant a theory on the status of universal concepts and how they come to be known. As stated above, Ockham believed that the external world was composed of individual substances and qualities. Even a mental concept is universal only in the sense that it can be predicated of many individuals in external reality. Ockham did not believe that the similarity observed in individuals belonging to the same species was a creation of the mind superimposed on external reality, but was an accurate perception that individuals of the same species had similar qualities. For example, each individual human being is described as a rational animal. Yet the language through which that truth is affirmed, when expressed collectively, speaks of sharing a common nature, or having something in common. 
Such expressions for Ockham are true in the sense that they are a linguistic shorthand for a multitude of statements about individuals, but they are false if what is meant is that things actually share one common nature or have a nature in common. To be a citizen of a country does not mean that individuals share citizenship as an entity that inheres in them or is divided among them. For Ockham there are no common natures that exist apart from individuals or that inhere in individuals. Socrates is a rational animal, as is Plato. But they do not share rationality as a common nature or possession that makes them rational. The problem for Ockham was that these linguistic expressions were often mistaken for ontological realities. General terms such as 'rationality' are convenient ways of talking collectively about characteristics that individuals have individually. Similarly, propositions containing general terms are simplified equivalents of a collection of propositions containing singular terms. 
It is difficult to know whether Ockham's belief in the primacy of the individual and the ontological status of universals shaped his logic and natural philosophy, or whether his understanding of the relation of language and external reality led to his view of universal concepts. Ockham was opposed to any logic that assigned ontological status to parts of speech, linguistic expressions, or abstract nouns. The only realities for Ockham were substances and qualities, and the other Aristotelian categories, such as quantity, relation, place, motion, and time, were simply ways of describing substances and qualities, not separate entities in themselves. 
Ockham's interpretation of the Aristotelian categories led to a distinctive natural philosophy that set it apart from most previous interpretations, and from the common opinion of his day. Most contemporaries accepted the view that motion, time, place, space, relation, and quantity were things that existed separately from individual things that existed in time and space. For them the sequential flow of time would exist even if there were no things (and thus no events) to 'take place'. Similarly, the concept of motion had ontological status apart from things in motion, just as relation existed apart from things that were related. In fact, to talk about things 'in motion' or 'related' seemed to presuppose the existence of such things as 'motion' and 'relation' separate from real individuals. For Ockham, however, statements about things in time or in motion were again linguistic shorthand for a multitude of statements arranged sequentially. Similarly, the category of quantity was not an entity separate from things, but another way of saying that individual things were extended in space. It should be noted, however, that Ockham was opposed to atomism. He believed in the infinite divisibility of temporal and spatial continua. 
In the area of epistemology Ockham developed Duns Scotus's theory of intuitive cognition into a self-sufficient epistemology based on direct sense experience. In place of a multi-stage process, by which an essentially passive mind extracted and abstracted knowledge from sense images or 'species' that were thought to emanate from an object, Ockham gave primacy to the immediate intuitive (that is, sensory, especially visual) knowledge of individual things. Both sensible and intelligible species or images, which had formed the basis for much of thirteenth-century epistemology, were dismissed by Ockham as unnecessary elements in explaining knowledge by sense experience. While Ockham's contemporaries and successors accepted the idea of intuitive cognition, most retained species as part of the explanation of the process of knowing. Similarly, most were critical of Ockham's redefinition of intuitive cognition as that sense experience that informed human beings of the existence or non-existence of an object. For others, information about what was not present was part of reflection, and was derived from abstractive cognition. 
On the grounds that individual things are separate entities, and that God can preserve an effect without its normal cause or a cause without its normal effect, as biblical miracles attested, Ockham argues that one can have an intuitive cognition of something that is non-existent or no longer in existence. Despite the false witness of sense experience in this instance, Ockham's belief in certitude led him to espouse the position that the mind would be able to judge that the object was not in fact present. 
Much of Ockham's theology was derived from the Franciscan tradition, and from the writings of Duns Scotus in particular. God is not a debtor to man, or obliged in any absolute way to uphold or conform to the created orders of nature and grace. God remains free and exists outside time. Yet God has bound himself to uphold the created order, and to act within a system and according to rules that are of his own design. In the physical world this contingent, covenantal (as distinct from necessary) arrangement works through secondary causality. In the order of grace and salvation it works through ascribed value, that is, sacraments produce their proper effects not because of powers inherent in them, but because of the system God has ordained through which, when properly administered, grace is received. Only the eucharist, as the body and blood of Christ, has inherent virtue. Ockham also accepted Scotus's view that the presence of the habit of grace in the soul does not require God to grant the reward of eternal life. Absolutely speaking, God remains free to reject those in a state of grace and to reward those not in a state of grace. God has bound himself, however, to reward with eternal life only those who possess the habit of grace. This Scotistic doctrine of divine acceptation ('acceptatio divina') remained an important yet controversial element in Ockhamist theology throughout the late middle ages. 
The last area of Ockham's thought to be examined is his political theory, which occupied his attention during the last two decades of his life. Ockham's conviction that Pope John XXII had erred both in his condemnation of the Franciscan position on apostolic poverty (that Christ and the apostles owned nothing), and in his belief that the souls of the blessed did not enjoy the vision of the divine essence until the last judgment, led Ockham to re-examine a number of fundamental issues regarding temporal and political power. One of these was a penetrating analysis of the concepts of lordship ('dominium'), ownership, and use, through which Ockham defended the Franciscan position of a natural right of use that did not entail legal ownership. Another was the effect on the structure of the church and ecclesiastical authority of the possibility -- for Ockham a reality -- of the pope's falling into heresy. This led Ockham to revive and refine conciliar theories that had been worked out in canon law in the thirteenth century. 
Ockham's political philosophy has often been associated with that of Marsiglio da Padua as expounded in the latter's 'Defensor pacis' in 1324. Both were writing in the same period and were attached to the court of Ludwig of Bavaria, both were concerned with the relationship of church and state, and both were critical of the papacy. Ockham, however, was far more conservative than Jean de Paris or Marsiglio da Padua regarding the power and autonomy of secular government, and on the role that king or emperor might play in the governmental structure of the church. For Ockham the papacy was an institution founded by Christ, and the pope possessed a doctrinal and administrative authority in the church that exceeded that of the episcopate, priesthood, or doctors of theology. Monarchy, be it secular or papal, was the ideal form of government for Ockham. Yet it was scriptural truth that ultimately mattered on issues of doctrine. The question was over the appropriate authority for interpreting scripture and deciding what was doctrinal error, and also what mechanisms of redress existed in cases where the single monarchical authority proved inadequate for the task or had fallen into error. 
In the case of a pope who had erred into heresy, correction came through the doctrinal authority of the church as a whole. This might take the form of a general council which, in the absence of any other governmental authority, could be summoned by king or emperor. General councils, however, were not infallible. While God would not allow the church as a whole to fall into error, the interpretation and defence of true doctrine was not vested in any one person or group within the church. The only institution that came close to infallibility for Ockham, despite John XXII, was the papacy. 
In contrast to Marsiglio da Padua, Ockham defended a two-power political structure in which coercive temporal jurisdiction was vested in the secular monarch while spiritual jurisdiction was vested in the pope. The one did not have supreme or preferential authority over the other. Although Ockham and other political theorists of his age have often been criticized for discussing politics in the abstract -- what should be, rather than dealing with things as they are -- Ockham's two-power political world, and his reluctance to accord to any one institution or individual total sovereignty in society or doctrine, may have been more truly reflective of the real world in which he lived. 
Well before Ockham's death in 1347 his thought and reputation had attracted followers and produced vocal critics -- the former sometimes invoking his name for positions he did not maintain and the latter sometimes accusing him of holding or implying views he apparently did not intend. His name, alongside that of Scotus and a handful of others, remained at the centre of scholastic debate at Oxford until the late fourteenth century, although Ockhamism never became a dominant school of thought in fourteenth-century England, as was once thought. By the 1330s at Paris an as yet unidentified group of Ockhamists in the arts faculty emerged, espousing positions in logic and natural philosophy that were influenced by Ockham's writings but were not faithful reflections of his thought. The prohibitions on Ockham's writings, and the attempt in the faculty of arts to condemn members and ideas belonging to the Ockhamist sect, coincided with a papal suspension of university privileges and a demand for reform, which may have aided the anti-Ockhamist masters of arts in mobilizing opinion against writings and ideas linked to a major critic of the pope. 
The attempt to suppress Ockhamist ideas at Paris appears to have been only partially successful, since Ockham's natural philosophy had several defenders at Paris in the faculty of theology during the 1340s, and the statutes and oaths concerning his teaching were removed from registers of the arts faculty and nations in the 1350s. Ockham's ideas continued to be discussed at Paris as a legitimate part of contemporary scholastic thought until the end of that century, and were especially influential on the philosophy, theology, and political thought of Pierre d'Ailly. Although opposition to Ockham increased in the fifteenth century as a result of the rise of Albertism and the reawakening of Thomism and Platonic thought, he was recognized as a major authority by those who called themselves nominalists and adhered to the 'via moderna'. 
Thus although Ockham's thought remained controversial in the later middle ages, especially in the fields of epistemology, the doctrine of justification, and sacramental theology, he also continued into the sixteenth century to be regarded as a major theologian and philosopher. Theologians active on the eve of the Reformation, such as the Scot John Mair at Paris, and Gabriel Biel in Germany, counted themselves as Ockhamists. And although Martin Luther came to be particularly critical of Ockham's theology, he nevertheless acknowledged an indebtedness to Ockham, especially as transmitted through Biel. 
As philosophical and theological currents changed in the course of the sixteenth century, Ockham and late medieval nominalism declined in importance. But with the revival of interest in late medieval thought that took place in the second half of the twentieth century, Ockham has re-emerged as one of the major figures of scholastic thought, generally ranked on the level of Thomas Aquinas and John Duns Scotus. And from the standpoint of the philosophy of the 1980s and 1990s, Ockham's interest in terminist logic, linguistic theory, and semiotics has placed him in the forefront of those medieval thinkers used as sources in contemporary philosophical discussion. 


@@@@@


doc= 20494


Ockley, Simon (bap. 1679, d. 1720), orientalist, was baptized at Topsham, near Exeter, on 17 February 1679, the son of Thomas Okely of Great Ellingham, Norfolk, and his wife, Thomazin. Although he came of a gentleman's family, he struggled against poverty throughout his career, sometimes aided by patrons. The first of these, Sir Algernon Potts of Mannington in Norfolk, befriended him as a boy, and perhaps obtained his admission as a sizar to Queens' College, Cambridge, in February 1694. He took his BA in 1698, and already showed considerable linguistic talent. Perhaps in 1700, he was appointed to a Hebrew lectureship worth $10 annually. On 15 April 1696 he married Martha Austin (died 1728) at Knapwell in Cambridgeshire; six children were born to them between May 1702 and December 1708. 
Ockley took deacon's orders before he was twenty, and by 1701 was curate of Swavesey, near St Ives in Cambridgeshire, probably on the recommendation of Simon Patrick, bishop of Ely. In 1705 he was ordained priest, and was presented by Jesus College, Cambridge, to the living of Swavesey, worth $80 annually. He never received any further ecclesiastical preferment. He was admitted BD at Cambridge in 1710, and in the same year was appointed chaplain to Robert Harley, who in 1711 became earl of Oxford and lord high treasurer of England. Ockley was clearly out of his depth in high society, and in 1714 apologized at length to his patron for some obscure indiscretion in company, and defended himself against the imputation of 'sottishness'. He had indeed a propensity to get into scrapes. In September 1710 Ockley obliged William Whiston with the partial translation of an Arabic version of the 'Didascalia' (a fourth-century Christian work, the major part of a collection of ecclesiastical rules and customs, the apostolic constitutions, ascribed to the apostles). Whiston, as well as being Sir Isaac Newton's successor as Lucasian professor of mathematics, was devoted to the restoration of primitive Christianity, and regarded the 'Didascalia' as an essential support to his cause. Ockley soon realized that he was straying into dangerous company. Whiston, as a result of his theological opinions, was deprived of his chair, and banished from the university in October 1710. A sermon by Ockley (published in 1711) was probably aimed at Whiston, and an exculpatory letter written by him was printed by the author of a controversial pamphlet in 1712. 
Ockley's scholarly interests soon turned from Hebrew to Arabic, and more specifically to the early history of Islam. This shift was probably due to his acquaintance with Humphrey Prideaux, dean of Norwich, who published in 1697 a widely read biography of the Prophet, tendentiously entitled 'The True Nature of Imposture Display'd in the Life of Mahomet'. Ockley's move into wider fields was marked by his first publication, 'Introductio ad linguas orientales', printed at his own expense in 1706, and dedicated to Simon Patrick. In the preface to this work Ockley, like earlier advocates of the study of oriental languages, recommends them primarily as essential to the theologian. He resumed this theme in his inaugural lecture as Sir Thomas Adams's professor of Arabic, published in 1712. 
Two other publications appeared in these years. In 1707 Ockley published a 'History of the Present Jews throughout the World', translated from an Italian work by Leon Modena, a Venetian rabbi. Of greater significance was his translation of an Arabic fictitious work by Ibn Tufayl, a twelfth-century physician in Muslim Spain. The story of Hayy ibn Yaqzan describes the life of a solitary child growing up in a state of nature on a desert island, and his gradual acquirement of the practical skills and intellectual qualities of humanity, culminating in his attainment of a natural religion. Later contact with a believer in revelation showed that both faiths were fundamentally the same. This theme was congenial to some thinkers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The younger Edward Pococke, a son of the first Laudian professor of Arabic at Oxford, published the Arabic text with a Latin translation in 1671, under the title 'Philosophus autodidactus'. From this Latin, an English translation was made in 1674 by a Scottish Quaker, George Keith, through whom it influenced the Quaker theology of the period. Another English translation was made in 1686 by George Ashwell, an Anglican controversialist. Ockley's translation was intended as a counter-blast against such unorthodox views. He introduced his 'Improvement of Human Reason Exhibited in the Life of Hai Ebn Yokdhan' (1708) with an apologia stating that he was unwilling to undertake the translation as there were already two, by Ashwell and: 'by the Quaker, who imagin'd that there was something in it that favoured their Enthusiastick Notions. However, taking it for granted, that both these Translations were not made out of the Original Arabick, but out of the Latin; I did not question but they had mistaken the Sense of the Author in many places.... I at last ventur'd to translate it a-new. (Arberry, 23)' Not only did Ockley translate it, he also added an appendix: 'Lest otherwise, that Book, by me design'd for the Innocent, and not altogether unprofitable Diversion of the Reader, might accidentally prove a means of leading some into Error, who are not capable of judging aright; and of confirming others in their Mistakes, who... have the Misfortune to be led out of the way. (ibid.)' At the time the Bodleian Library was incomparably the richest storehouse of oriental manuscripts in the country, and it was therefore to Oxford that Ockley went to pursue his research into Arab history. There he caught the eye of the antiquarian Thomas Hearne, who stigmatized him as 'somewhat crazed' (T. Hearne, 'Remarks and Collections of Thomas Hearne', ed. C. E. Doble, 1889, 3.286), but noted his indefatigable industry and high reputation as an Arabist. Hearne mentions Ockley's two short visits to Oxford, in August 1701 and again in the spring of 1706, when he was incorporated MA on 15 April and stayed until 17 May. The reading he accomplished in these two visits, each of six weeks, provided him with the materials for the volume which he published in 1708 under the title 'The Conquest of Syria, Persia, and Aegypt by the Saracens', which dealt with Islamic history under the first three caliphs (632-56). In his preface he explained his reason for not commencing with the life of the Prophet: 'but that is already written by the Reverend and Learned Dr. Prideaux, now Dean of Norwich'. Evidently Ockley, although now far more erudite than Prideaux, did not wish to compete with the popular work of his former patron. However, in the introduction to his second volume, published ten years later, he hints at its limitations as being 'sufficient to give a general 'Idea' of the Man and his Pretensions, and admirably accomodated to his [Prideaux's] principal Design of shewing the Nature of an Imposture' (Ockley, 'History', 2.xxxv). Ockley's work on his first volume was, he believed, facilitated by his discovery of a manuscript purporting to be an account of the conquest of Syria by al-Waqidi (died 823), whom, he says, 'I have here endeavour'd to make speak English' (Ockley, 'Conquest', xix). Unfortunately for Ockley, later research has shown that this source on which he so much relied was written in the time of the crusades. 
In 1711 Ockley was appointed, probably through Harley's sponsorship, to the Sir Thomas Adams chair of Arabic, in which he succeeded John Luke (professor from 1685 to 1702) and Charles Wright (from 1702 to 1710), two academic nonentities. The one memorial of Luke's scholarship is indeed his erroneous assurance to Ockley concerning the great chronicler al-Tabari, that 'he had never met with him in the 'East', and that he was to be despaired of in Arabick' (Ockley, 'History', 2.xxxiii). Ockley had hoped to succeed Luke as professor, and his disappointment seems to have led to an estrangement from the fellows of Queens' College, as a result of which he lost preferment to a living in their gift. When he at last obtained the chair, his annual income was increased by $40. The post probably entailed little teaching in view of the decay of Arabic studies in eighteenth-century universities. 
In 1713 Ockley published an 'Account of South-West Barbary', allegedly based on the report of a Christian slave. Described by Arberry as 'a pot-boiler' (Arberry, 36), this book contains in an appendix Ockley's translation of two letters from the ruler of Morocco. Perhaps in consequence of this display of his competence in Arabic, Ockley was briefly employed by the government in 1714 to translate correspondence from the same ruler, Mawlay Isma'il (1672-1727), with whom England had commercial relations. Two of his translations, now in the Public Record Office, have been identified (Kararah, 82; Arberry, 36-8). However, Harley's fall from power in July 1714 lost Ockley his most influential patron, and he had no further employment under government. 
Ten years after the publication of 'The Conquest of Syria', Ockley produced a continuation entitled 'The History of the Saracens' (1718). Again he visited Oxford, this time for a stay of five months. He drew upon a fairly wide range of sources, and identified a fragment of the chronicle of al-Tabari, of which Luke had despaired. He also made extensive use of Bartholome d'Herbelot's 'Bibliotheque orientale', which had appeared in 1697, and which gave him access to Persian materials. Ockley speaks regretfully of his frequent attempts to perfect himself 'in that easy and delicate language', and of his ignorance of Turkish (Ockley, 'History', 2.xxxii). This second volume continues the account of early Islamic history from the fourth caliph, Ali, to the Umayyad 'Abd al-Malik (656-705). This point of termination, roughly half-way through the Umayyad caliphate, is by no means obvious or natural, but may well be explained by the growing difficulties of Ockley's daily life. The two volumes were republished in 1757 under the common title of 'The History of the Saracens', for the benefit of Ockley's daughter Anne. An anonymous 'Life of Mahomet', there prefixed to Ockley's own work, is ascribed by Arberry on internal evidence to his successor as Sir Thomas Adams's professor, Leonard Chappelow (Arberry, 29). 
Ockley's two volumes marked an important stage in the development of Arabic and Islamic studies. Earlier scholars had written in Latin for an international academic readership, but Ockley wrote in English for the instruction of his fellow countrymen, who not being, he says, 'sufficiently acquainted with that Nation, have entertain'd too mean an Opinion of them, looking upon them as meer Barbarians, which mistaken Notion of theirs, has hinder'd all further Enquiry concerning them' (Ockley, 'Conquest', xi). In the introduction to his second volume he gives some of the comments made on its predecessor: 'that it was the strangest Story they ever heard since they were born! They never met with such Folks in their Lives as these 'Arabians'! That they never heard of this Account before, which certainly they must have done of course if any body else had! A Reverend Dignitary asked me, If when I wrote that Book I had not lately been reading the History of 'Oliver Cromwell'! (Ockley, 'History', 2.xv)' Ockley's second volume is directly linked with the last of his patrons, Thomas Freke of Hannington Hall in Wiltshire. 'You', he says, 'were pleased first to invite me to that Work; and the Publick will be indebted to You, at least, that it was done so soon, if not that it was ever done at all' (Ockley, dedication to 'Sentences of Ali', in 'History', vol. 2). Freke had, it appears, in the first place invited Ockley to translate a collection of Arabic proverbs ascribed to the Caliph Ali. Collections so entitled formed a standard part of the pabulum for Arabic students of the period, but Ockley's translation was a selection made from a Bodleian manuscript. Freke paid the expenses of Ockley's stay in Oxford when he was preparing to write his second volume. When and how Ockley became acquainted with Freke is not clear, although Kararah says that he 'took great interest in oriental and especially Arabic studies' (Kararah, 85). 
When 'The History of the Saracens' came out, Ockley was held prisoner in Cambridge Castle for a debt of $200. His friends organized a collection on his behalf, to which Harley contributed $20, and Freke promised $40 by instalments 'if when your affairs are finally settled at Cambridge you will go to Oxford and translate all the sentences of Ali into English' (Arberry, 45). Ockley never fulfilled this last commission of his patron. He was released from gaol in the summer of 1718, and returned to Swavesey. He died there on 9 August 1720, and was buried in Swavesey the next day, leaving his family in destitution. His widow was also buried at Swavesey, on 2 August 1728. 
Ockley's work, undertaken with such difficulty in adverse circumstances, has long been superseded. Yet his lasting influence was not limited to the small circle of contemporary orientalists, to whom his books were in the first place addressed. He had a part in the formation of a greater historian of a later generation, Edward Gibbon, who wrote: 'Simon Ockley, an original in every sense, first opened my eyes; and I was led from one book to another, till I had ranged around the whole circle of Oriental history' (E. Gibbon, 'Autobiography, World's Classics', n.d., 32). 


@@@@@


doc= 20495


Ocland, Christopher (d. in or after 1590), writer, was a native of Buckinghamshire, though his parentage is unknown. When St Saviour's Grammar School in Southwark obtained its charter in 1562, Ocland became its first headmaster, and held the position for seven years. In 1571, when St Olave's Grammar School, located near by in the same borough, was founded, he was the first man to present himself for election to become its master, arriving with letters from Robert Horne, the bishop of Winchester, and William Fleetwood, the recorder of London. He was offered the post but, informed that there would be a fortnight's delay before he could enter on it, he refused 'and went on his way being angrie, and set the matter lighte' (Carrington, 27-9, 46; Ellis, 65). About 1574 Ocland became the first headmaster of Richard Pate's grammar school at Cheltenham; it is not known precisely when or why he left the post (Bell, 25). 
Ocland's principal work, 'Anglorum proelia' ('The Battles of the English'), a lengthy poem of almost 3500 Latin hexameters dealing with English military history from Edward III to Mary Tudor, was published at his own expense in 1580. Such a broad sweep of time means that detail is often lacking, but Ocland's clear Latin and lucid narrative style suggest that the book was written with a pedagogical intention. Apart from set speeches there is a minimum of literary embellishment, and the tone of Ocland's poem has been criticized as too little varied. He writes with enthusiasm, though, and with reverence for victorious monarchs: at Crecy, Edward III and his son the Black Prince embody English prowess in battle: '
Fulminat ense pater Princeps Edvardus, & eius 

Filius impubes; illoque Britannica virtus 

Quanta sit eluxit bello, quo millia caesa 

Triginta aut plus eo, campique cruore madebant. 
(King Edward blazes with his sword, as does his youthful son; British valour shone out to its full extent in that battle, in which thirty thousand or more were killed, and the fields were sodden with gore. Sig. F2'r')' 
''Eirenarchia', sive, Elizabetha' (1582) brought Ocland's versification of history up to date. The verse is in much the same vein as before, but the volume has interest as a historical poem dealing with recent events and for its treatment of contemporary figures -- it contains a brief, laudatory catalogue of the leading men of the day. This poem also contains more literary touches, in particular Anne Boleyn's dream prophesying the future of the Tudor dynasty and the triumph of protestantism (sig. B4'v'). 
The quality of Ocland's verse and his patriotic treatment of England's martial glory received commendation at court ('APC', 13.389). When 'Anglorum proelia' was reissued in 1582 with ''Eirenarchia'' (and, in some editions, Alexander Neville's Latin poem on Kett's rebellion), it was prefixed by letters, signed by members of the privy council and the ecclesiastical high commission, commanding that the book should be taught in every grammar and free school within the kingdom. While it is unclear how far this injunction was carried out (see Baldwin, 1.112; Clarke, 11), the book's influence can be traced in literary and historical works in Latin and the vernacular. The second edition of Raphael Holinshed's 'Chronicles' (1587), for example, draws freely from it, and Joshua Barnes, composing his Anglo-Latin epic on Edward III, the 'Franciad', a century later, cites Ocland on several occasions. 'Anglorum proelia' is also alluded to in the satires of Bishop Joseph Hall (bk 4, satire 3), and was acclaimed by William Webbe (Webbe, 30). ''Eirenarchia'' and 'Anglorum proelia' were popular enough at the time they were published to be rendered into English: 'The Valiant Actes and Victorious Battails of the English Nation' and 'Elizabeth Queene' were both translated by John Sharrock and emerged in 1585. In addition, ''Eirenarchia'' was still sufficiently well known in 1680 for its relation of Anne Boleyn's vision -- selected for its anti-Catholic sentiment -- to be translated anonymously as 'The Pope's Farewell, or, Queen Ann's Dream'. 
Ocland's narration of Elizabeth's reign in Latin verse continues in the final instalment of his series of historical poems, 'Elizabetheis' (1589), much of which is devoted to the events of the Armada year. His only other published work was 'The Fountaine and Welspring of All Variance, Sedition, and Deadlie Hate' (1589). This is a turgid tract of exegesis in English prose, which demonstrates that the descriptions of Babylon in the book of 'Revelation' signify Rome, and that sundry other passages from the same source indicate that the day of judgement is nigh. It has been conjectured that Ocland contributed to 'Certaine Notes Set Forth in Foure and Three Parts to be Song', printed by John Day in 1560 (reprinted 1565), but this was in fact the composer Robert Okeland ('fl'. 1532-1555) ('New Grove', 1980, 13.523). 
Poverty blighted Ocland's later career. In September 1589 he was penniless, residing at the sign of the George in Whitechapel, Middlesex, and on 13 October 1590 he wrote to Lord Burghley, begging for relief in his distress (Ellis, 70-74). He humbly desired that her majesty might give him a prebend or benefice -- suggesting that he was in holy orders -- and claimed that his literary labours had gone unrewarded. In the same letter he mentioned that a certain serjeant of London had a 'capias utlagatum' out for him over a debt that he owed. Anne, his wife, had been paralysed for upwards of three years, he wrote, and her malady worsened daily on account of the indigence of her children. He concluded: 'I teach schole at Grenewych, where my labor wyll not fynde me bread and drynck' ('DNB'). The letter also alludes to a new work in four books that Ocland had been working on, concerning the baseness of Catholicism and the persecution of protestants; it was never published. 
Christopher Ocland's is a sizeable 'oeuvre' that should not be overlooked. He was one of a number of schoolmaster Latin authors of the sixteenth century, but his importance stems from the high regard in which his historical verse was held, and for its long-lasting influence. 


@@@@@


doc= 20496


O Cleirigh, Cu Choigcriche (fl. 1624-1664), scholar and scribe, was the son of Diarmuid O Cleirigh, in turn the son of An Cosnamhach O Cleirigh. There has been considerable confusion between this Cu Choigcriche and a supposed son of Lughaidh O Cleirigh (author of 'Beatha Aodha Ruaidh', the life of Aodh Ruadh O Domhnaill) bearing the same name. Attempts to disentangle the two seem to lead to the conclusion that all, or virtually all, of the work ascribed to the son of Lughaidh was actually written by the son of Diarmuid. Indeed, the existence of the supposed 'son of Lughaidh' may be in doubt and it has been suggested that the son of Diarmuid may have been wrongly affiliated to Lughaidh in a nineteenth-century pedigree. (The matter is contentious and still awaits resolution.) Lughaidh O Cleirigh, in turn, had a brother named Cu Choigcriche (son of Mac Con) who left behind a number of poems. There seems to be no way of knowing whether the 'Coochogery O'Clery' who held land in the parish of Killybegs Lower in 1632 is to be identified with any of the aforementioned bearers of the name of Cu Choigcriche O Cleirigh. 
Cu Choigcriche, son of Diarmuid, is associated above all with the great work of scholarship which culminated in the production of the 'Annals of the kingdom of Ireland' (popularly known as the annals of the four masters), compiled between 1632 and 1636. He is named among the compilers as one of the principal assistants to his kinsman, the scholar and Franciscan lay brother Michel O Cleirigh. Even before Michel O Cleirigh's return to Ireland in 1626, Cu Choigcriche was involved in that great enterprise. As early as 1624 he had been engaged by the Franciscans of Donegal, in their place of refuge along the River Drowes, to arrange the martyrologies of Aonghus and O Gormain in the style of the Roman martyrology. He is mentioned in relation to the 'Seanchas riogh Ereann accus genealuighi na Naomh nEreannach', penned in Athlone in 1630 and concerned with the lives and pedigrees of the kings and saints of Ireland, and the revised version of the traditional accounts of successive settlement of Ireland, the 'Leabhar gabhala Eireann' ('Book of invasions') written in Lisgoole, near Enniskillen, in October 1631. In August 1633 'in the convent of Donegal' (on the banks of the River Drowes) he testified to the reliability of Brother Michel's copy of the martyrology of O Gormain. Some years after Michel O Cleirigh's return to Louvain (July 1637) Cu Choigcriche O Cleirigh and his fellow worker, Fear Feasa O Maoil Chonaire, appeared in August 1641 before a general chapter of the Franciscan order in Multyfarnham, co. Westmeath, and defended their work against the rather petty strictures of the young Franciscan Tuileagna O Maoil Chonaire. 
One Cu Choigcriche O Cleirigh composed poems about 1655 for Toirdhealbhach mac Cathbhairr and Calbhach Rua O Domhnaill, and Cu Choigcriche, son of Diarmuid, is known to have composed a poem in 1662 on the death of Maire, sister of Aodh Ruadh O Domhnaill. Manuscript works ascribed to Cu Choigcriche O Cleirigh, son of Lughaidh, but which may possibly be the work of the son of Diarmuid, consist of a copy of the 'topographical poems' of Seaan O Dubhagain and Giolla na Naomh O hUidhrin; the unique manuscript copy of Lughaidh O Cleirigh's life of Aodh Ruadh; a copy of the four masters' recension of 'Leabhar gabhala Eireann', the O'Clery book of genealogies; an important collection of verse and prose preserved in the National Library of Ireland (NL Ire., MS G 131); and manuscripts 2542-2543 in the Bibliotheque Royale, Brussels. 
Towards the end of his life Cu Choigcriche O Cleirigh was living in west Mayo, where, at Corr na hEilte (Gortnaheltia, parish of Addergoole), near Burrishoole, he penned his will in or about the year 1664. Now largely indecipherable and prefixed to his book of genealogies, his will recorded his intention to leave his possessions to his sons Diarmuid and Sean and directed that he be buried in Burrishoole friary, co. Mayo. There is no indication of the date of his death, but it probably occurred some time in the 1660s. 


@@@@@


doc= 20497


O Cleirigh, Lughaidh (fl. 1603-1616), Gaelic poet and historian, was one of five sons of Maccon O Cleirigh (died 1595), 'ollamh' (court poet) to the O'Donnells of Tir Conaill (co. Donegal). His mother is not known. The O Cleirighs were one of the last great learned families of Gaelic Ireland, the Tir Conaill branch having served the O'Donnells for over two centuries. The O Cleirigh genealogies appear in a seventeenth-century manuscript in which Lughaidh and his brothers are the last generation of the Tir Conaill branch to be included. 
Little is known of Lughaidh's life, other than that he was involved as a juror and commissioner in the land surveys in Donegal, leading up to the Ulster plantation. He is best known for his biography of Hugh Roe O'Donnell, which served as a source for the annals of the four masters. This undated biography covers O'Donnell's life from 1587 until his death in 1602. While it contains much detail not found in other sources, there are many errors, resulting from Lughaidh's desire to exaggerate O'Donnell's involvement with Hugh O'Neill in the Irish uprisings. 
Lughaidh also participated in the contention of the bards, which took place probably between 1616 and 1624. The contention began as a poetic dispute between Tadhg Mac Bruaideadha (Brody, Brodin, Mac Dire) and Lughaidh, composing in support of the south and north of Ireland respectively, with other poets soon joining in. The purpose of the contention is unclear, but may have been a sympathetic effort to promote a Gaelic culture that was fast disappearing under English rule, a fact that was not lost on the poets themselves, as witnessed by the often wistful tone of their compositions. In all, thirty poems were composed, four by Lughaidh. 
The date of Lughaidh's death is not known. Unlike that of his father and brother Duibhgeann, Lughaidh's death is not recorded in the 'Annals', suggesting that he was still alive in 1616, the terminal date of the 'Annals'. This is confirmed by the fact that the contention of the bards probably did not begin until 1616, and continued for a number of years. It has been suggested that Lughaidh had died by 1632 ('DNB'), but this is based on an assumption that he was the father of Cucoigriche O Cleirigh, and that the latter had inherited Lughaidh's land by that date. However, the idea that Cucoigriche was Lughaidh's son is based on a letter written in 1842 by John O'Clery to John O'Donovan, in which O'Clery presented himself as the direct descendant of Lughaidh. In his letter O'Clery cited a will written by 'Cucoigri', dated 1664, naming the testator's brother as 'Cairbre'. O'Clery identified both as the sons of Lughaidh, which O'Donovan accepted (O'Donovan, 'Genealogies', 395). However, it is not clear that the will is that of Cucoigriche O Cleirigh, and there is no corroborating evidence to support the suggestion that he was Lughaidh's son. 
O'Clery's letter also added to confusion over the author of the biography of O'Donnell. As one of the sources for the 'Annals', Lughaidh's work is identified in the 'Annals'' 'Testimonium' merely as the book of Lughaidh O Cleirigh, covering 1586 to 1602 (O'Donovan, 'Annals', 1.xii). This vague description eventually led scholars to believe that the biography was composed by Cucoigriche O Cleirigh, identified as one of the four masters, and in whose hand it appears to be. O'Clery supported this idea in his letter. O'Donovan, who published the 'Annals' in 1851, realized that Lughaidh had composed annals, which were used as a source by the four masters, but did not recognize these as the biography of Hugh O'Donnell, and in his edition he repeatedly referred to the 'Life of O'Donnell' as the work of Cucoigriche. Shortly afterwards, Eugene O'Curry correctly identified the 'book of Lughaidh O'Clerigh' as the biography of O'Donnell, believing Cucoigriche to have been the scribe, not the author (O'Curry, 22). 
Opinions about the style of Lughaidh's biography have also changed. Its language is archaic, apparently so even in its own day, as the four masters frequently used its facts but changed its style for their 'Annals'. This stiffness may have appealed to Victorian sentiments, as it was described in 1894 as being written in 'literary but not pedantic Irish,... free from the archaic and sometimes stilted diction found in parts of the 'Annals of the four masters'' ('DNB'). However, by the twentieth century, attitudes had changed (Hyde, 564), and more recently its style has been referred to variously as 'affected' (Foster, 38), 'disappointing' (Moody and others, 516), and 'repulsive' (Pender, 19). 


@@@@@


doc= 20498


O Cleirigh, Michel (b. in or after 1590?, d. 1643?), scribe and chronicler, was born at Kilbarron, near Ballyshannon in south co. Donegal, the youngest of four sons of Donnchadh, a grandson of Tuathal O Cleirigh (died 1512), and a member of a hereditary learned family; his mother was Onora Ultach. Given Tadhg as his baptismal name, he was known as Tadhg an tSleibhe ('Tadhg of the mountain') until, on entering religious life, he adopted the name Michel (Michael). Of two elder brothers, Uilliam and Conaire, very little is known, except that the latter was a scribe who collaborated for a time in Michel's greatest scholarly project. A third, Maolmhuire, born in 1588 or 1589, entered the Irish College at Salamanca in 1610 and became a Franciscan in 1616 in the Irish College of St Anthony at Louvain in the Spanish Netherlands; ordained a priest in 1619, he took the name Bernairdin, and by the 1630s was guardian of the Franciscan convent of Donegal, with which Michel was also associated. Tadhg himself seems to have received a thorough grounding in traditional Irish learning, probably in one of the few remaining Gaelic schools -- he indicates, for example, that he was taught by one Baothghalach Ruadh Mac Aodhagain, whose precise identity is uncertain but who may have conducted a school at Ballymacegan in north co. Tipperary. Tadhg followed his older brother to the continent, and it has been suggested that he served for a time as a soldier. He may be identical to the Don Tadeo Cleri to whom the Spanish authorities in July 1621 granted 2 crowns monthly on account of 'the persecution and loss of estate he had suffered for the Catholic cause in Ireland' (Breatnach, 13). He joined the Franciscan order as a lay brother some time before March 1623. Never ordained priest, he was known as An Brathair Bocht Michel ('the poor Brother Michael'). 
O Cleirigh was based at Louvain, where plans were already well advanced to gather for publication all available material on the lives of the early Irish saints. Directing this project was another Donegal man, Father Hugh Ward, who was supported and advised by his friend and colleague Father Patrick Fleming. It was they who in 1624 conceived the idea of 'sending Brother Clery to Ireland' (Breatnach, 11) to collect relevant source material in Irish or Latin and transmit it back to Louvain. In the summer of 1626, on Ward's election as guardian of St Anthony's, Brother Michel returned to his homeland. During his period of just over a decade at home, his principal base of operations was the so-called 'Franciscan convent of Donegal' -- which had been forced by intermittent persecution to relocate to a 'place of refuge' on the banks of the small River Drowes that marks the border between counties Donegal and Leitrim (and, therefore, between the provinces of Ulster and Connaught). Details of Brother Michel's activities and travels on his return to Ireland emerge from the numerous colophons, giving dates and places of writing, which he inserted into many of his works. 
It would appear that O Cleirigh spent much of his first year in Ireland in the convent 'at Drowes' (otherwise known as the convent of Donegal). The earliest datable piece transcribed by him was penned on 28 March 1627. By the late summer of 1627 (and possibly earlier) he had set out -- probably on horseback -- on the first of several journeys throughout Ireland. This took him to Dublin and its vicinity in August. In Drogheda he copied material -- including, it would seem, the early ninth-century martyrology of Tallaght -- from ten detached leaves of the twelfth-century 'Book of Leinster'. These leaves, probably found in the library of the Church of Ireland primate, Archbishop James Ussher, soon afterwards passed, via the convent of Donegal, to Louvain, but there is no information on O Cleirigh's presumed role in the transfer. 
Brother Michel moved on to the friary of Kildare, where in October he transcribed material from the main body of the 'Book of Leinster'. Some time later he returned to his base at Drowes. There, between January and late June 1628, he copied several texts, presumably from manuscripts he had collected, borrowed, or hastily transcribed during his journey through Leinster. His citation in May 1628 of one of the sources he used, 'Lebor na hUidre' -- the earliest surviving collection of early Irish prose texts -- is the first extant reference to that celebrated manuscript (dating from about 1100) since the year 1470. An important text whose transcription O Cleirigh completed in this year was the so-called short recension of the martyrology of Donegal, on which work had begun as early as 1624, two years before he returned to Ireland. 
Back in Dublin by mid-July 1628 Brother Michel transcribed several saints' lives. In co. Wicklow he copied a metrical account of St Coemgen (Kevin) of Glendalough and in mid-September, in co. Carlow, he copied a prose life of the same saint. He reached Cashel by early October and apparently remained in the south for more than a year: a letter to Hugh Ward in Louvain in January 1629 tells of 'your Brother Clery' having been sent to Ormond 'to write there for a time' and reports that he had 'made a collection of more than three or four hundred lives' (Breatnach, 19). During his Munster sojourn he visited the school of history and law conducted by Flann Mac Aodhagain at Ballymacegan, co. Tipperary. In February he was doing transcription work in the convent of the friars of Athlone, at Killinure, co. Westmeath, and in March, in the Franciscan house at Multyfarnham, co. Westmeath, he copied the twelfth-century propaganda tract 'Cogadh Gaedhel re Gallaibh'. In late spring he appears to have moved south again, to Clonmel and Wexford, where he copied further saints' lives, and on to Timoleague in west Cork, where, in mid-June, he copied from the great codex, the 'Book of Mac Carrthaig Riabach', now known as the 'Book of Lismore'. Later in June and early July he copied numerous texts in Cork city and then moved north, via counties Limerick and Clare (where he picked up some further items), reaching co. Galway by early October. There he consulted at least part of the great 'Book of Duniry', now known as the 'Leabhar Breac'. 
By mid-November 1629 Brother Michel was finally back at Drowes and there, during the winter, he penned some two dozen lives of saints and other texts -- many of them, no doubt, fair copies of works previously borrowed or hastily transcribed. In April he completed the final revised version of the great compilation 'Felire na naomh nErennach' (the longer recension of the martyrology of Donegal). 
Nothing is known of O Cleirigh's activity from mid-April to early October 1630. Then, for a month, he and three assistants -- Fearfeasa O Maolchonaire from co. Roscommon, Cu Choigcriche O Cleirigh from co. Donegal, and Cu Choigcriche O Duibhgeannain from co. Leitrim -- worked at Killinure, near Athlone, compiling, under the patronage of a local gentleman, Toirdhealbhach Mac Cochlain, the genealogical work 'Seanchas Riogh Ereann accus Genealuighi na naomh nEreannach' (also known as 'Reim Rioghraidhe na hEireann agus Seanchas a naomh' and by the Latin title 'Genealogiae regum et sanctorum Hiberniae'). On completion it received the approbation of a local scholar, Conall Mag Eochagain. By late December Brother Michel was back at Drowes and early in 1631 he penned extracts from the ninth-century martyrology of Oengus. 
From late October to late December 1631 Brother Michel, along with four assistants -- the three mentioned above and a Fermanagh scholar, Giolla Padraig O Luinin -- were working at Lisgoole, co. Fermanagh. Under the patronage of Briain Ruadh Mag Uidhir (Maguire), Baron of Enniskillen, they compiled a new recension of the medieval work of Irish pseudo-prehistory 'Leabhar gabhala Eireann' ('The book of conquest of Ireland'). This marked a new departure, with O Cleirigh beginning also to collect and transcribe secular material. 
Some time in 1632 work on assembling the largest of all sets of Irish annals commenced at Drowes, under the patronage of Fearghal O Gadhra, MP for co. Sligo. It resulted, over the next four years, in the compilation for which O Cleirigh is principally remembered, the enormous collection known as 'Annala Rioghachta Eireann' ('Annals of the kingdom of Ireland') but more popularly known, in reference to Brother Michel and his assistants, as the annals of the four masters. (The four in question were himself and the three principal assistants already named as working on the 'Reim Rioghraidhe' and 'Leabhar gabhala', but two others also helped: Muiris mac Torna Ui Mhaolchonaire, for a month, and Brother Michel's elder brother Conaire, for a slightly longer period.) The first portion of the work (to the year 1208) was completed before the close of 1632. Brother Michel appears not to have left Drowes throughout this year -- except for a possible brief visit to Ballymacegan, where, on 31 August, Flann Mac Aodhagain signed a short approbation for the 'Reim Rioghraidhe'. 
In August 1633 O Cleirigh copied the twelfth-century martyrology 'Feilire Ui Ghormain' at Drowes, but he probably spent most of this and the following year, 1634, assembling further materials for the annals. In summer 1634, however, he returned to co. Clare to collect more hagiographical material. While much of the next year, 1635, was devoted to compiling most of the second part of the annals (from 1208 down to the early seventeenth century), Brother Michel took time in May to copy a saint's life at Drowes and in November to copy (for a second time) the bulky volume 'Cogadh Gaedhel re Gallaibh'. In April 1636, also at Drowes, he penned a copy of the lengthy hagiographical poem 'Naoimhshenchus naomh Innsi Fail'. By the middle of August 1636 his and his team's epic labours on the annals were completed. 
In autumn 1636, having obtained the signatures of his Franciscan confreres in the convent of Donegal for the annals (of which two manuscript copies had been penned), O Cleirigh set off to seek approbations for his various works from scholars and ecclesiastical authorities. On his way south, in late October, he visited the Poor Clare sisters at Bethlehem, co. Westmeath, where he copied an Irish translation of part of the 'Rule of St Clare'. In November Flann Mac Aodhagain in Tipperary, Conchubhar Mac Bruaideadha in co. Clare, Archbishop Malachy O'Queely in Galway city, and Bishop Boethius MacEgan of Elphin, elsewhere in co. Galway, all provided glowing testimonials for 'Genealogiae regum et sanctorum Hiberniae', 'Felire na naomh nErennach', and the 'Annals'. Early 1637 saw O Cleirigh in Leinster, where Bishop Ross Mac Geoghegan of Kildare in January and Archbishop Thomas Fleming of Dublin in February also approved his writings. 
Early in 1637 Brother Michel may have returned briefly to co. Clare, where Conchubhar Mac Bruaideadha had just died, and he may also have returned to Drowes one last time before, in July, making his way to Carrickfergus, co. Antrim, where -- it is presumed -- he took ship for the continent. 
Just prior to his departure, O Cleirigh's great annalistic compilation was fiercely criticized by a fellow Franciscan, Tuileagna O Maolchonaire, who sought -- on rather petty grounds -- to prevent its publication and have the approbations withdrawn. Brother Michel made a reply, now lost, and the matter may have been discussed at a Franciscan chapter in Munster in 1638. In August 1641 Tuileagna and two of the compilers, Cu Choigcriche O Cleirigh and Fearfeasa O Maolchonaire, appeared at a provincial chapter at Multyfarnham. A committee that considered the charges decided against the accuser, but as late as 1646 Tuileagna was still persisting in his arguments with Fearfeasa. The fact that most of O Cleirigh's voluminous collections did not appear in print until the nineteenth, or even the twentieth, century -- and a good deal still remains unpublished -- was not, however, due to Tuileagna's objections but rather to the poverty and other difficulties, including illness and death, that dogged the Louvain project. And his confrere's criticisms may not have been the greatest risk run by Brother Michel: a contemporary remarked that it was 'no small miracle that Tadhg O Cleire was not hanged in Ireland, since everyone knew of his journeyings, and that he failed in nothing that he set out to do -- gathering everything into his granary' (O Maonaigh, 203). 
Michel O Cleirigh returned to Louvain some two years after Hugh Ward's untimely death, and work on the saints' lives was now being directed by the Inishowen man Father John Colgan, later responsible for the 'four masters' appellation. The only other thing known of O Cleirigh is that in autumn 1643 was published the only work of his to appear in print during his lifetime, a glossary entitled 'Focloir no sanasan nua'. After that, all is silence. It is thought that the humble, hard-working lay brother Michel O Cleirigh died in Louvain, at St Anthony's College, before the close of 1643, but even this is uncertain, as is the location of his grave. There is surely a great irony in the fact that this greatest recorder of the lives of holy men and others in the whole history of Ireland should himself have left such sparse biographical detail. His lasting monument, that for which he deserves to be remembered, is his voluminous manuscript writings, scattered between Ireland and Belgium, notably in the Bibliotheque Royale in Brussels. In the words of one leading authority, 'This humble Brother, who hid himself so completely while accomplishing so much... has written his name large across the history of his country, and has left it engraved indelibly on the hearts of his countrymen' (Jennings, 174). 


@@@@@


doc= 20499


O Cobhthaigh family (per. 1415-1586), Gaelic poets, were hereditary poets settled during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries in the barony of Rathconrath, Westmeath. Their work was frequently cited by other poets. Members of the family wrote works which survive or are mentioned in chronicles. 



@@@@@


doc= 20500


O'Connell, Daniel Charles, Count O'Connell in the French nobility (1745-1833), army officer in the French service, the youngest surviving son of Daniel O'Connell ('c'.1701-1770), landowner, and Maire O'Donoghue ('c'.1708-1795) of Derrynane, co. Kerry, was born in Derrynane on 21 May 1745, though August 1747 was the date cited during much of his lifetime. There is no specific information, but the fact that as a teenager he could read and write fluently and was conversant with French, English, and Latin indicates that he received some formal education. His career of choice was soldiering and his evident intention when he set off for Europe in 1760 was to join the imperial Austrian army. However, a chance encounter in Flanders resulted in his entering the French service as a boy cadet in the royal Swedish regiment. Promoted within a few months to the rank of sub-lieutenant, he was sufficiently confident of his future by 1764 to dismiss a suggestion from his brother Maurice that he should join the Spanish service as 'imprudent' on the grounds that it would oblige him 'to relinquish a sure establishment for an uncertainty' ('Last Colonel', 1.83). Having seen action in the German theatre during the later phases of the Seven Years' War, O'Connell augmented his military knowledge in the winter of 1765-6 in the prestigious military academy at Strasbourg, following which he was promoted above 'elder officers' (ibid., 1.99) to the rank of first lieutenant. This helped him to endure the seven uneventful years he spent with the royal Swedish in Alsace and his continuing dependence on financial support from home. His promotion to the rank of sous-aide-major in 1768 and, following his decision to join Lord Clare's Irish brigade in 1769, to that of aide-major represented progress, and he was posted in the early 1770s to the French East Indies. His failure to secure a regimental majority in 1773 led him to lament the lack of 'encouragement for merit and ability' (ibid., 1.174) in the French army, and his 'expectations' (ibid., 1.184) were dealt a further set-back when Clare's Irish brigade was dissolved in 1775. Made a second captain, he devoted his free time to study. His prospects in the French service seemed slim when his insightful observations on military discipline attracted official notice and resulted in his elevation to the brevet rank of colonel, and the award of the cross of St Louis and a small pension. This did not relieve him from financial dependence upon his brother, but it helped him in 1776 'to decline offers seemingly very advantageous made me by the emissary of the American congress' (ibid., 1.199). He was encouraged to reach this decision by his strong sense of loyalty to France, 'where I early found an asylum when refused one at home' (ibid., 1.207). He demonstrated his 'inviolable fidelity' (ibid., 1.207) to the French king when, following the outbreak of war with Great Britain in 1778, he rejoined the royal Swedish as a lieutenant-colonel and performed heroically during the capture of Minorca and the siege of Gibraltar in 1781-2. This was O'Connell's finest fighting hour, and it resulted in his promotion to the rank of colonel-commandant and the bestowal upon him of the distinction of the title count. 
Having finally attained a measure of financial security, a noble rank that gave him an entree to the highest levels of French society, and a military rank that ensured him a regimental command, O'Connell seemed set fair. His preference was for active military service. He was prepared, he informed his brother in 1785, 'cheerfully [to] spill the last drop' of his blood ('Last Colonel', 2.40) for Louis XVI but instead he was given the task of revising the military code. This was not complete when the country was plunged into revolution in the summer of 1789. The outbreak of the French Revolution was 'extreamly disadvantageous' to O'Connell and others like him who 'held... favours from [the] Court' (ibid., 2.89). In the short term his loyalty to France enabled him to bear the loss of his pension and to ignore the invitations of aristocratic acquaintances to conspire against the revolution. His promotion to major-general in the summer of 1791 seemed to suggest he might even profit by it, when his dislike of 'the changes that have taken place' and 'the state of military anarchy' he observed (ibid., 2.95) meant he would have preferred to have declined the honour. Under threat of arrest, he fled France in the summer of 1792 and joined the royalist army in Germany as a private, but by November he was in London. He managed to protect his French property from confiscation by providing a false alibi to the effect that he was in Ireland while he sized up his options. He determined to continue the struggle against the revolution, and a proposal he submitted to William Pitt in 1794 became the basis of a plan to establish an Irish brigade in the service of George III. O'Connell was appointed colonel of the 4th regiment of the proposed brigade, but administrative difficulties, some of which derived from opposition to the recruitment of Catholics in Ireland, meant that his intentions that the brigade would fight against the French were not realized. 
At the French chapel in King Street, Covent Garden, London, in 1796 O'Connell married Martha Gourand, countess of Bellevue (died 1807), despite the objections of his brother, and with this his life entered a quieter phase. He and his wife and stepchildren returned to France after the peace of Amiens, where the combination of his military income and his wife's wealth enabled him to live well. By 1813 he maintained that 'retirement, ease and study' were his 'sole enjoyments' ('Correspondence', 1.369), but his appointment as lieutenant-general in the army of France on the restoration of the Bourbons indicated that he was not entirely without consequence. He was not to soldier again, and he devoted his time thereafter to the care and advancement of his family. Having determined in 1801 to 'transfer... his ambition' (ibid., 1.52) to his nephew, Daniel O'Connell (1775-1847), then an emerging lawyer, he proved remarkably supportive financially of his fiscally profligate namesake. He was not always comfortable with his nephew's political tactics, but his belief in the 'justice and policy of Catholic Emancipation' (ibid., 1.369) and his manifest pleasure at Daniel O'Connell's rising 'reputation' (ibid., 2.408) ensured they remained on warm terms. His loyalty to the main branch of the Bourbons prevented him from taking an oath of allegiance to Louis-Philippe in 1830 and, though he became a naturalized Frenchman in 1831, he was deprived of his military pension. He lived thereafter at the Chateau Bellevue at Madon, near Blois, where he died on 9 July 1833. He was buried in the village cemetery at Conde, near Madon. 


@@@@@


doc= 20501


O'Connell, Daniel (1775-1847), Irish nationalist leader, was born on 6 August 1775 near Carhen, Cahirciveen, co. Kerry, the eldest of the ten children of Morgan O'Connell (1739-1809) and his wife, Catherine O'Mullane (1752-1817). 
The O'Connell family inhabited a series of overlapping cultures. They were Roman Catholics in a society in which a small minority of adherents of the protestant state church monopolized political privilege. The O'Connells in their turn enjoyed the privilege and prestige of landholding, which was emblematic of claims to an ancient Gaelic lineage. But their status was scarcely aristocratic: Derrynane House, the residence of Maurice O'Connell (1728-1825), alias Hunting Cap, O'Connell's uncle and the head of the family, was a sturdy pile that fell short of Georgian grandeur. And it was status bolstered rather than tarnished by trade: O'Connell's father was a farmer, merchant, and retailer as well as landowner and middleman; proximity to a remote, indented coastline had facilitated generations of profitable smuggling. France loomed large not only in commerce but as a land of opportunity where Catholicism was not a barrier to office-holding and a talented Irishman (or Corsican) with claims to a lineage at home could be admitted to privileges from which the vast majority of French subjects were excluded on the basis of birth. Another of the young O'Connell's uncles, also Daniel, was lieutenant-general in the service of Louis XVI and, from 1783, a count of France. The nephew of the count passed his earliest years in a herdsman's mud cabin, being fostered out to a retainer until he was four. In the foster family he was immersed in the Irish language, the dominant vernacular of the countryside that had already been replaced by English in his parents' house. 
Within a year or two of his return to Carhen, O'Connell's young life took a significant turn when he was sent to Derrynane to become informal heir to the childless Hunting Cap, and so to the effective headship of the extended family. Private instruction at Derrynane was followed in 1790-91 by a period in a one-teacher Catholic boarding-school near Cork. In August 1791 O'Connell and his brother Maurice arrived in Liege in the Austrian Netherlands, sent by Hunting Cap to have their education finished in the ambience of an English Catholic college. Unable to gain entry in Liege, they spent six weeks in Louvain before being admitted to the English College in St Omer, where they remained from October 1791 to August 1792, when they transferred to the English College at Douai. So O'Connell lived through the last disjointed months of an 'ancien regime' institution while the revolution gathered pace all around: the battle of Jemappes on 6 November 1792, which opened the way for French armies to enter the Austrian Netherlands, was fought within earshot of Douai. Meanwhile foreigners and those identified with the old order were streaming out of France. Belatedly, on 21 January 1793, the date of the execution of Louis XVI, the O'Connells joined the rush to cross the channel. 
The flight from Douai to London had major symbolic significance. Henceforth for the O'Connells and others like them opportunity would lie not in continental Europe but in the realm of George III. In 1792 the entry of Catholics to the Irish bar had been legislated for, and by the end of 1793 O'Connell was set on a legal career. He was enrolled at Lincoln's Inn from January 1794 to early 1796, following which he spent a term at Gray's Inn. While the inns monitored attendance at dinners, acquisition of legal knowledge was a matter for the aspiring lawyer himself. It was a responsibility that O'Connell undertook with determination through avid reading of the corpus of legal authorities from Blackstone down. Thus was founded the sound knowledge of the law on which so much of his future success was to be based. 
Legal texts apart, O'Connell at this time read voraciously, taking in the established classics -- Shakespeare, Gibbon, Voltaire -- and also the radical literature of the age. Exposed to works such as Paine's 'Age of Reason' and Godwin's 'Political Justice', and emboldened by acquaintance with individual devotees of the new thinking, O'Connell by the age of twenty had become a democratic radical. He kept at this time a diary that witnesses to a loss of conventional Christian faith and an intellectual conversion to deism. When in adult life he became a public figure devout Catholicism was integral to his persona, but the London-based radicalism of the mid-1790s was to remain part of his make-up. Typically of the young romantic, he not only committed his innermost thoughts to paper for a number of years, but planned to write a novel of high adventure. 
Intent on making his career in Ireland, O'Connell arrived in Dublin in May 1796 and immediately entered the King's Inns, where he completed his legal apprenticeship over the following two years. In a time of high political tension he was drawn to the radical world view of the burgeoning Society of United Irishmen and at the same time was repelled by the prospect of a violent revolution that would overthrow the social system on which his present and prospective status depended. His experience in France had undoubtedly coloured his view of revolution. In the panic following the attempted French landing at Bantry in December 1796 O'Connell enlisted with the lawyers' artillery, a volunteer corps dedicated to upholding the 'status quo'. This had no apparent implications for his radical views and he may have formally joined the United Irishmen in 1797. He certainly talked radical politics with some abandon, although he clearly was never close to the conspiratorial core. A few days after his call to the bar in May 1798, rebellion broke out in Wexford and spread quickly to other parts of the east and midlands. With the courts suspended, the new barrister made his way to co. Kerry. A bout of serious illness extended his stay and he was not back in Dublin until November 1798. 
O'Connell's career as a practising barrister began in 1799, when he set out on the Munster circuit as junior counsel. He proved to have an extraordinary capacity for the toil of producing quotidian legal documents and on circuit he displayed an instinctive talent for the theatre of forensic confrontation. He became in a relatively short number of years one of the most sought-after of barristers in the country, and eventually took special cases at venues outside the Munster circuit. It was as Counsellor O'Connell that he first acquired fame and admiration among the populace, and that was how a great many of his plebeian followers continued to refer to him even when from the late 1820s others preferred to salute him as the Liberator. 
In the autumn of 1800 O'Connell met and fell in love with Mary O'Connell (1778-1836) of Tralee, the daughter of a deceased third cousin, impoverished and without dowry. They entered into a pledge of engagement but kept the arrangement secret from all except a few friends. Hunting Cap was already planning a suitably profitable match for his heir apparent; an undowered marriage would threaten everything that the uncle had striven to secure for the extended family and in particular for O'Connell. While never wavering in his devotion to Mary, O'Connell was very slow to face the expected wrath of his family. They married at O'Connell's Dublin lodgings on 24 July 1802, after which Mary returned to Tralee. The relationship continued on a furtive basis until Mary's pregnancy forced disclosure. The family in general took the blow sufficiently well for Mary to be admitted to the parental home at Carhen following the birth of a son, Maurice, on 27 July 1803. Co-existence with her in-laws was not without its difficulties, but Mary had no home of her own until in November 1805 O'Connell set up house in Dublin at 1 Westland Row. By then another son, Morgan O'Connell (1804-1885), had been born and a daughter, Ellen (1805-1883), was about to arrive. Of eight further children, four would survive infancy: Catherine, called Kate (1807-1891); Elizabeth Mary, called Betsy (1810-1893); John O'Connell (1810-1858); and Daniel (1816-1897). 
O'Connell's relationship with his wife is marvellously documented in the more than 600 surviving letters they exchanged during their frequent periods of separation, not least when he was on circuit or, in later years, attending parliament at Westminster. They reveal ongoing struggles about domestic matters, always resolved amicably in the end, and his sharing with her of all the achievements and frustrations of his public life. As the record of a loving relationship that lost none of its freshness over a period of more than thirty years, they constitute a remarkable archive. 
O'Connell retained the headship of the extended family for which he had been destined, but his decision to marry improvidently altered the character of that position. Both the sorely aggrieved Hunting Cap and O'Connell's father changed their testamentary arrangements to his disadvantage, and to the benefit of his brothers. However, he would still inherit Derrynane and other properties from the uncle, while the inheritance from his father, which fell to him in 1809, included a lease of extensive portions of the Kerry estate of Trinity College, Dublin. As landlord and middleman his rent roll would run to thousands of pounds per annum. 
Hunting Cap lived long enough to enjoy seeing his protege achieve a near heroic public stature, but this did not encompass the financial competence for which the mentor had laboured. Perhaps because the tyranny of the uncle had destroyed his sense of responsibility in this respect, O'Connell never managed his financial affairs successfully. His income from his practice exceeded $1000 per annum by 1806 and moved upwards dramatically thereafter. But neither earned income, nor rents, nor even the national tribute that he was to receive from 1829 onwards, however compounded, could meet his outgoings. The acquisition in 1809 of 30 Merrion Square as a family residence was an extravagance, but O'Connell's basic financial problem was not caused by ostentatious living. He never made realistic cash flow projections, and out of vanity and kindness he was all too ready to lend and spend or to act as guarantor for loans, especially when caught up in the trammels of local society in his beloved co. Kerry. At the same time he borrowed recklessly and shamelessly from the rich and the plain, thinking only of immediate needs and never of the longer term. As a landlord he allowed customary outlays and clientilist practices to get in the way of efficient management of his estates. It is certain that his financial problems predate, and therefore cannot be blamed on, the absorption of his time by national politics. 
A serious reduction in rental income in the early 1820s occasioned by agricultural depression led O'Connell to send his wife and family in May 1822 to reside in France (at Pau and later at Tours). He visited them in September 1822 and again in October 1823, when he took them to see Paris. Soon the household was relocated to Southampton. This was meant as a staging post for a return to Dublin, which came to pass in May 1824 and was now represented in its turn as an economizing measure. O'Connell came into possession of Derrynane in 1825 following Hunting Cap's death. Soon his wife and family were installed there for half the year. To facilitate this supposedly expense-saving measure, O'Connell embarked on substantial and very expensive extension and refurbishment. 
It was as a boy in Derrynane in the 1780s that O'Connell became a student of politics and first cast himself as a political actor. The stage was that of the Irish parliament, independent after a fashion from 1782 and illuminated by the heroic-seeming Henry Grattan. When in 1799 and 1800 the proposed union threatened abolition of the Irish parliament, O'Connell was implacably opposed and utilized a rhetoric of independence newly coined in the 1790s. He was unmoved by the argument of prominent Catholics, including Hunting Cap, that union offered them and their co-religionists an escape from the dominance of the Irish protestant ascendancy. He did not at this time see himself as a Catholic but as a deist, and like the United Irishmen he was happy to proclaim that religious differentiation had no future as a factor in Irish politics. While he soon abandoned that conceit, opposition to the union was to remain one of the most consistent planks in his political platform. Even more central was his opposition to any resort to physical force as a means of undoing the union or remedying any of Ireland's problems. His own brush with the French Revolution, the vested interests of a lawyer and landowner, and sheer political pragmatism all supported such an outlook. Godwin's 'Political Justice' (1793) provided his ideological conviction about the futility of violence. With the passage of time he developed a detestation of bloodshed, based on humane and religious considerations. From the start he had a horror of social unrest and all his political work has to be assessed in the knowledge that avoiding or preventing social revolution was always uppermost in his mind. His uninhibited use for rhetorical purposes of past Irish military conflicts (with the exception of 1798) and his enthusiasm for the South American wars of national liberation in the 1810s and 1820s, and for the Belgian revolution of 1830, show the limits of his pacifism. In 1803, during the scare caused by Robert Emmet's abortive rising, O'Connell joined the Kerry yeomanry, as he had rallied to the crown forces in the panic of 1797. But he was to be bitterly disappointed by the news of Waterloo. O'Connell carried forward into the post-revolutionary era (which in Ireland had begun by 1800) a congeries of radical attitudes that mark him as a quintessential liberal: these included dislike of state involvement with religion, detestation of slavery, resentment of unearned privilege, and commitment to the principles of freedom of conscience, freedom of association, freedom of contract, and the sanctity of property rights. Between 1828 and 1831 he had an exchange of ideas with Jeremy Bentham in which he made clear his attachment to the views of the apostle of utilitarianism. 
For most middle-class Irish Catholics of O'Connell's own and earlier generations their civil disadvantage was a historical misfortune to be ameliorated as opportunity offered. For O'Connell, the product of the 1790s, it was also an affront to a universal principle and an intolerable barrier to himself as an individual. The initiation of the union on 1 January 1801 was not accompanied or followed by the abolition of Catholic disabilities. When the veteran campaigners for Catholic emancipation reassembled on 16 November 1804 as the Catholic Committee, they were joined by O'Connell, who made a sufficient impact to have himself appointed to the standing committee. Addressing the meeting, he explicitly cited the barriers to the progress of his own career posed by the existing state of the law, which effectively excluded Roman Catholics from parliament, all the high offices of state, and numerous positions of advantage including the inner bar. 
Joining a campaign for Catholic rights amounted to acceptance by O'Connell that the transcending of religious division had been a mirage. Separating his religious affiliation from his career was not an available option. He was thus publicly renewing his identification with a religion to whose tenets he did not then subscribe. It was to be another four or five years before he began to resolve the anomaly by resuming the practices of Catholicism, such as regular mass attendance and prayers, lenten fast, and abstinence from meat on Fridays. A freemason from 1799, he subsequently abandoned the brotherhood in obedience to papal pronouncement. In his later life he was notable for a piety more intense than anything that mere political expediency might have produced. 
O'Connell brought to the campaign for Catholic emancipation a sense of anger and impatience not shared by the older and partially aristocratic membership of the Catholic Committee. After the latest initiative had collapsed with the defeat of a relief bill at Westminster in May 1805, O'Connell's authority was strengthened as one of the few prominent Catholics who had discerned the false promise of the union. Between 1805 and 1808 his advocacy of a belligerent policy as against the moderation of the older members won him effective leadership but not total dominance of the Catholic Committee. The policy of continued petitioning forwarded by O'Connell resulted in May 1808 in another predictable parliamentary rebuff, but it also occasioned a compromise proposal by Irish whig MPs, which they believed to have episcopal support and under which the abolition of those legal disabilities affecting Catholics would be balanced by the concession to the government of a veto over Catholic episcopal appointments in Ireland. O'Connell took the lead in voicing opposition to this and, by vigorously stirring up lay Catholic opinion through the newspapers, he was mainly responsible for inducing the bishops to assemble in September 1808, when they repudiated the veto offer in which a number of them had been complicit. 
The next stimulus to agitation of the case for emancipation came in late 1810 with the prospect of a regency. Again the lead in formulating a petition was taken by O'Connell and again his hard line provoked the fears of moderates. His attempts to co-ordinate agitation on a countrywide basis provoked the civil authorities into efforts to restrict the operations of the Catholic Committee. There ensued a game of legalistic chess of a kind at which O'Connell excelled: even if he lost advantage he gained enormously in the admiration of supporters for his ability to challenge the government on its own ground. A typical ploy was the disbanding of the Catholic Committee at the end of 1811 and its replacement by the Catholic Board. 
When a new cabinet opposed to concessions for Catholics was formed in June 1812, the Catholic Board adopted a resolution intimating that the prince regent's judgement was controlled by the 'witchery' of his mistress, Lady Hertford. When shortly afterwards the Commons resolved to deal with the Catholic issue in the next session, O'Connell propelled the board into an intransigent 'all or nothing' stance. The 'Relief Bill' that followed in May 1813 predictably offered less than 'all' and was the occasion for another outpouring of Catholic resentment orchestrated by O'Connell and culminating again in an episcopal declaration that could be seen as following his dictation. In the event the bill did not proceed, but a significant element withdrew from the board in protest against O'Connell's intransigence. If he had been acting, instinctively or otherwise, to oust rivals for leadership by adopting an emotionally appealing line of policy he had certainly succeeded handsomely, even if it was at the expense of alienating a significant group of lay Catholic campaigners. But it must be recognized also that his stance on the veto question in these years was consistent with the radical attitudes to church-state relations that he had acquired in the 1790s. He had certainly pushed the bishops into a far more radical stance than they would have otherwise adopted. When in February 1814 a formal Vatican judgment warmly approved the principle of the veto, O'Connell set his well-practised tactics in motion and within months the bishops effectively repudiated the Roman position. In January 1815, in anticipation of a well-signalled papal rescript, O'Connell pushed his defiance of Roman compromise on the veto to new limits. When, in May 1815, Rome pronounced the acceptability of a veto, with the full authority of Pope Pius VII, the Irish Catholic bishops once again repudiated the possibility. 
Dublin Castle watched O'Connell anxiously. With the appointment of the youthful Robert Peel as chief secretary for Ireland in 1812, a gigantic antagonism was initiated. Peel systematically utilized the legal system to silence those newspapers that were the most effective vehicles of O'Connell's propaganda and in June 1814 he found a pretext to suppress the Catholic Board. O'Connell's impact on public life owed not a little to the brilliance, scurrility, and vehemence of his verbal and written assaults on opponents. The new chief secretary he instantly and woundingly derided as 'Orange Peel'. Defending John Magee, editor of the 'Dublin Evening Post', in court in July 1813 he subjected the attorney-general, William Saurin, to humiliating personal abuse. Throughout his career O'Connell's robust and inspired oratory, whether in court or on the public platform, was a potent factor in his popular standing. 
The bitterly personal conflict with the establishment led to O'Connell's participation in two affairs of honour in 1815. John D'Esterre was a merchant who chose to take insult at a remark of O'Connell's concerning Dublin corporation. On 1 February 1815 they faced one another with pistols at Bishop's Court, co. Kildare. D'Esterre was fatally wounded, an outcome that further enhanced O'Connell's heroic stature. He was subsequently affected by remorse at having killed a man and left a family bereft. That did not prevent him from being drawn into another affair later in 1815. This time his adversary was the chief secretary, who was deemed to have impugned O'Connell's honour with a remark in the Commons. In the event Peel travelled to the agreed venue -- Ostend -- while the authorities in London intercepted O'Connell on his way there. When another duel seemed imminent in 1817 face was saved on both sides when O'Connell made the distinction between political and personal criticism. In later years O'Connell repudiated duelling and condemned it as an affront to reason and religion. The fact that he was no longer prepared to offer the opportunity of exacting satisfaction in the time-honoured fashion to those whom he continued to insult came to be seen as further evidence of his want of gentlemanly qualities. 
In 1815 and the years immediately following the conditions for agitation were unfavourable. Having tried various other tactical devices, O'Connell in 1818 began to adopt an apparently more flexible line on the veto issue and to make friendly overtures to the aristocratic Catholic leaders and also to the whigs. On this basis he appeared to have achieved a working arrangement with Henry Grattan before the latter died in June 1820. But when in 1821, in an initiative beyond O'Connell's influence, the Commons was passing a bill for Catholic relief with provision for a veto, he endeavoured to stir up popular opposition to the measure. The intransigent anti-Catholic majority in the Lords came to O'Connell's aid by defeating the bill in April 1821. 
On the occasion of the visit to Ireland of George IV in August 1821 O'Connell joined with tories and Orangemen in extending a most loyal welcome. The affirmation of unswerving loyalty to the crown was one of the few fixed points of his political strategy; professing common cause with the Orangemen was a tactic employed only on occasion. When, at O'Connell's suggestion, the lord lieutenant, Lord Wellesley, prohibited an Orange march in Dublin on 4 November 1822 fierce protests ensued, culminating in the pelting of the lord lieutenant's box at the Theatre Royal with missiles. O'Connell joined ostentatiously in the consequent public meeting of notables of various persuasions to express disgust at the insult, and he was a member of the delegation deputed by the meeting to wait on the lord lieutenant with expressions of regret. 
In May 1823 O'Connell was a barrister of twenty-five years' standing and of universally acknowledged brilliance and capacity. Yet on the basis of his religious affiliation he was denied advancement beyond the lowest rung of the profession. That was the month in which he took the lead in founding a new Catholic Association. In preparation he had mended fences with Thomas Wyse and other notable Catholics previously alienated by his intransigent line on the veto. At O'Connell's insistence the new body had a stated objective much wider than the simple 'relief' or emancipation which would allow a small minority of Catholics like himself to proceed to inner bar, bench, or parliament: it was to address all the concerns of the Roman Catholic collectivity. This signalled the start of a mobilization of the populace for constitutional political ends which had little precedent anywhere, was contrary to the instincts of contemporary Liberals, and was to make O'Connell a historical figure of European significance. For some years he had been promoting aggregate meetings in provincial centres as weapons in his struggle with the vetoists, especially in the Munster towns which he himself visited on circuit. The Catholic Association was intended to provide for structured country-wide agitation. It was also intended to draw in the lower socio-economic classes. At a public meeting in Dublin on 15 June 1813 he had advocated, or at least predicted, popular mobilization; he now set about achieving this by introducing associate membership of the Catholic Association at 1died per month. Thus was instituted the 'Catholic rent'. A phenomenal organizational effort by O'Connell, making astute use of the Catholic parish structure, raised about $20,000 by early 1825. 
The impact of this mobilization on political opinion was evident when O'Connell led a delegation to London in February 1825. Whig and Catholic notables swarmed around him: on 6 March he was entertained to dinner with thirteen peers of the realm by the twelfth duke of Norfolk. In another form of compliment the government was busily putting through the 'Unlawful Societies (Ireland) Act' (6 Geo. IV c. 4), clearly intended to curb both the Catholic Association and the Orange order. More encouragingly, O'Connell was consulted by Sir Francis Burdett about his private member's bill proposing to grant Catholic emancipation. This was carried in the Commons but defeated in the Lords in May 1825. The upper house had merely postponed O'Connell's victory, ensuring that its impact on the political system would be all the more traumatic. O'Connell had consented to the inclusion in Burdett's measure of state payment of the Catholic clergy, and the suppression of the 40's'. freehold franchise in Irish counties. In compromising thus on his previous position of principle he left himself open to criticism from radical voices in Ireland, but he dealt easily with the opposition, and his return to Ireland in May 1825 was a triumph. He quickly set about reorganizing the Catholic Association on a basis that evaded the strictures of the recent act. 
The systematic mobilization achieved by O'Connell in 1824-5 was the basis for a momentous development in the general elections of 1826: in co. Waterford and a number of other constituencies Catholic 40's'. freeholders were put under irresistible pressure to vote for candidates declaring support for Catholic emancipation, even when this meant defying the established expectation that their landlords could command their votes. What was 'democratizing' about this was not so much independent action by 40's'. freeholders -- a small group, mainly consisting of farmers of some substance -- but that their votes were influenced by the opinion of the unenfranchised masses. When, in the wake of the 1826 elections, the chagrined landlords called in the arrears of rent owed by 40's'. freeholders who had defied them at the polls, O'Connell accepted the responsibility of the Catholic Association for these victims of its policy, and used this as a pretext for another round of fund-raising -- and another round of mobilization. 
The influence gained by O'Connell's mobilization of Catholic power in Ireland was demonstrated when he proceeded to give direction to various Irish county members during the months of manoeuvring at Westminster that preceded the emergence of Canning as prime minister in April 1827. Soon he was trying with limited success to influence the government's appointments to the Irish administration in Dublin Castle. O'Connell raised by a few notches the pressure he was now exerting on the political system at the very top by a resumption of campaigning. In the most impressive exercise to date meetings were held in about 1600 parishes on Sunday 13 January 1828. At least 1 million participants adopted the same precirculated resolutions. O'Connell's determination to maintain pressure was strengthened by the appointment of the duke of Wellington as prime minister (and his old antagonist Peel as home secretary) later in January: between whigs and tories O'Connell was instinctively partisan, and he went along with a resolution of the Catholic Association that henceforth every candidate supporting the government would be opposed at Irish elections. Vesey Fitzgerald, member for County Clare, was appointed to the new government as president of the Board of Trade and so had to seek re-election. Fitzgerald was a long-standing advocate of the Catholic cause and was so highly regarded among all classes in co. Clare that no local notable could be found to oppose him. In order to preserve the credibility of the Catholic Association's strictures O'Connell himself was prevailed upon to stand as a candidate, although as a Catholic he could not as the law stood take his seat if elected. The marshalling of the electorate from all corners of co. Clare to the poll in Ennis in the early days of July 1828 was a masterpiece of electoral logistics accompanied by an unprecedented carnival of popular politics. O'Connell was declared elected on 5 July with a vote of 2057 to 982. His subsequent journey from Ennis to Dublin was reminiscent of the homecoming of a victorious Roman general. 'They must crush us or conciliate us. There is no going on as we are'. So O'Connell declared to the Catholic Association on 10 July. It was now the task of the victor of Waterloo to persuade the king and numerous members of his own party that the Catholics would have to be conciliated. 
There ensued a period of high political tension during which O'Connell had to keep his organization on the boil while preventing it from spilling over. Word of the agreement of George IV and his ministers to concede emancipation was reported in early February 1829 and on 6 February O'Connell left for London. When the 'Roman Catholic Relief Bill' was published a month later, he was overjoyed that emancipation was not to be tied to any veto over ecclesiastical appointments or any scheme of state payment for the priesthood. The exclusion of the monarchy and a handful of high offices besides showed that pragmatism rather than principle was at work, but that caused him little distress. A few sops to disappointed prejudice in the form of restrictions on religious orders and on the use of ecclesiastical titles he dismissed (correctly) as unenforceable. Less easy to dismiss was the blow to O'Connell's interests contained in the 'Irish Parliamentary Election Bill', designed to accompany the relief measure onto the statute book. This raised the threshold for the county franchise from 40's'. to $10, thereby disenfranchising the bulk of his electoral battalions. He quickly accepted that his protests against this coup were futile and set about making the most of the achievement of Catholic emancipation, which received the royal assent on 13 April 1829. However, when O'Connell presented himself to the clerk of the House of Commons on 15 May, he was tendered the old oath of supremacy obnoxious to Roman Catholics, to which he declined to subscribe: the act applied only to those elected after its passage. On 18 May he was permitted to argue his case for immediate admission from the bar of the house. In the subsequent debate his election for County Clare was voided and a by-election called, with many hoping that the new, greatly reduced electorate would be less amenable to his influence. In the event he was returned unopposed for County Clare on 30 July 1829 and eventually took his seat on 4 February 1830. 
On entering parliament O'Connell largely, though not entirely, abandoned his legal career. Fittingly, just a few months before he had given the most famous of those forensic performances that would have assured him of folk-hero status even if he had never entered politics. This was at the Doneraile conspiracy trial before a special commission in Cork in October 1829, where popular amazement at his feats on behalf of the defence was enhanced by the fact that he was summoned to act while on vacation in Derrynane after the first batch of defendants had been convicted, and that he rushed the 90 miles to Cork in a celebrated overnight ride, dismounting outside the court house as the trial of the next batch began. Over the following days he jousted verbally with the prosecution team and reduced the crown witnesses to pathetic incoherence, with acquittals and commuted sentences as the outcome. In folk memory it became the Counsellor's finest hour. 
It was not only that the demands of parliament left O'Connell with less time for the courts: emancipation did not immediately secure for him the professional opening that his accomplishments merited. The first group of Catholics was called to the inner bar in October 1829 as the 'Relief Act' allowed, but O'Connell was not included. Whatever the indignity of continuing as a junior counsel, he could not have abandoned his legal income without having an alternative. In March 1829 an O'Connell testimonial fund was established, which enabled a grateful nation to display its appreciation by contributing up to $30,000. Henceforth he was the beneficiary of an annual tribute estimated to have averaged about $12,000. This arrangement owed everything to Patrick Vincent Fitzpatrick, O'Connell's financial manager from 1830, who brought some order to the still insoluble problem of finance. The tribute was spent indiscriminately on O'Connell's political business and on his private needs, now more insatiable than ever. Setting up his family was a major drain. It has been estimated that he spent up to $20,000 on marriage settlements alone. In 1834 he founded the national bank: eight years later he was forced to resign from the position of governor because of an overdraft exceeding $30,000. Another venture into business, the purchase of a small Dublin brewery, proved similarly unsuccessful. 
The extraordinary talents and skills that had served him so well in the courts and in Irish politics enabled O'Connell to become from the start an outstanding parliamentary performer. If none could deny his capacity, many mistrusted and despised him. He had forced his way in by invoking the power of the masses and he was dependent for his income on public subscriptions. The harshness of his vituperation against opponents and his wounding invective made matters worse. Disraeli, he opined, was surely descended from the impenitent thief of Calvary. If in the eyes of some of his fellow MPs he would always be an outcast, he had himself partly to blame. Some of the antagonism he encountered, such as that evinced by 'The Times', was so virulent and enduring that parallels would be difficult to find. 
The matters on which O'Connell campaigned during his parliamentary career were general liberal or radical issues, reforms specific to Ireland, and repeal of the 'Act of Union'. The excitement caused by the recent revolutions in France and Belgium prompted him to raise the flag of repeal at a series of public meetings in Munster in October 1830. However, with the advent of a whig government in November 1830 reform beckoned. Within a matter of months O'Connell had put repeal out of sight and was supporting the government's push for parliamentary reform. It was, however, an alliance marked by suspicion and uncertainty. O'Connell had even been arrested in January 1831 on a trumped-up conspiracy charge. By October 1831 he had been admitted to the inner bar and had secured the promise of a job for a son-in-law. The imminent 'reform' of the Irish administration intimated at the same time amounted to a redirection of spoils, but O'Connell himself had not pursued various possibilities for personal advancement that had been held out to him. In and out of parliament O'Connell identified with those seeking more thoroughgoing reform than the act of 1832 provided for. The corresponding Irish legislation (2 & 3 Will. IV c. 88) was particularly unadventurous, despite O'Connell's efforts to have it improved. Even as reform was being legislated, O'Connell was preparing to resume his agitation for repeal. 
O'Connell had fought the general election of May 1831 solely in the interest of reform: 'Reform and Negro emancipation' was his slogan, and he used his influence to assist the return of supporters of reform in a series of constituencies. At the general election of December 1832 his plan was to give his approval only to candidates declaring for repeal and signing a pledge to promote it if elected. By this device he formed a group of thirty-nine MPs, a prototype of the modern political party. While he had taken a strong anti-whig line on the hustings, he used his new-found strength not to oppose the whig government but to increase his bargaining power. A move by the government to trim the ecclesiastical establishment in Ireland delighted O'Connell both as an Irish Catholic and as a radical, although he denounced its final form in the 'Church Temporalities Act' as inadequate. When, early in 1833, the government introduced the 'Suppression of Disturbances (Ireland) Bill', which incorporated some very stringent measures, O'Connell and the more reliable of his followers mounted a stiff opposition, exploiting the procedures of parliament to force substantial amendments from the government. However, with the government in danger of losing its majority on other issues in the early summer of 1833, O'Connell and his followers rallied to its support in the voting lobbies. 
O'Connell had pioneered the independent Irish party, an institution that was to reappear in various forms later in the century. One of his problems in 1833 was that the raising in parliament of the party's ostensible 'raison d'etre', repeal, would simply produce an overwhelming rebuff, with inevitably demoralizing effects on his support in Ireland. Feargus O'Connor, repeal MP for Cork, caused considerable trouble for O'Connell by encouraging activists at home to demand that the repeal issue be raised. It was with difficulty that O'Connell held off the pressure in 1833 and eventually he did so only by agreeing to move in 1834. He presented a brave face when putting forward a motion, on 22 April 1834, for a select committee to inquire into the effects of the 'Act of Union'. He was humiliated but not surprised when this was defeated by 523 votes to 38. 
Consolation was soon at hand as the attrition of the government's support in the Commons placed O'Connell and his followers in a pivotal position, so that by early summer the placating of O'Connell was a prime issue for the cabinet. When Grey was replaced by Melbourne as prime minister in July 1834, O'Connell could claim to have influenced a change greatly to his liking. Over the following months he was encouraged to convey his likes and dislikes in the matter of Dublin Castle appointments to the whig inner circle. At the general election of January 1835 his platform was anti-toryism, and his weight was thrown behind whigs of every type where they were not in competition with his fellow repealers. He could claim subsequently to be the leader, at least informally, of a party of sixty and in the then fissiparous state of party allegiance this was enough to give him something akin to the balance of power in the Commons. Confirmation of his status came when he was invited to join an exploratory meeting of Liberal MPs on 18 February. The outcome of this and other contacts was an unwritten and unacknowledged understanding -- the so-called 'Lichfield House compact' -- under which all talk of repeal was put in abeyance, Melbourne's new government was assured of O'Connell's support when needed, and O'Connell's views would be heeded in the matter of Irish appointments and Irish legislation. 
The new administration entering in Dublin Castle represented a dream come true for O'Connell, even if nothing came of suggestions that he himself might be installed as holder of an appropriate office. Roman Catholic law officers (some soon to be judges) were appointed for the first time since the reign of James II. The protestant appointees all had Liberal credentials, thus ousting what O'Connell saw as an Orange ascendancy clique. Most significantly, the new regime was alive with the mission of bringing good government to Ireland, a mission epitomized by Thomas Drummond, under-secretary from 1835 to 1840. At county level the appointment of Liberals, Catholic and protestant, as sheriffs and resident magistrates followed. A nominee for the office of sheriff of co. Kerry was blocked at O'Connell's behest because he was obnoxious to the O'Connell family: Hunting Cap could scarcely have dreamed of such a reversal of fortunes. O'Connell relations shared in the redirected spoils of office but not to such an extent as to offend against the standards of the age. 
From 1828 onwards O'Connell had identified with popular radical and reform movements in Britain. In September 1835 his new relationship with the government provided an apposite context for a series of mass meetings in northern England and Scotland. Reform of the House of Lords was his theme, reflecting his frustration with the capacity of the upper house to prevent change. He had experienced this with the rejection of two Irish bills -- on tithes and municipal reform -- that he had triumphantly seen through the Commons. Favourable legislation was to prove the most difficult part of the Lichfield House compact to secure. Elaborate attempts to obtain measures on tithes and municipal government failed again in 1836. As the year ended, a deal about Irish measures was agreed between whigs and tories (whom the Lords would follow) that involved considerable compromise on O'Connell's part. Little enough progress had been made when the death of William IV occasioned a dissolution. At the consequent general election O'Connell's loose combination of assorted repealers, whigs, and Liberals gained a few extra seats in Ireland, but the results in Britain reduced the government's strength in the Commons. When the government responded to its new situation by definitively rejecting most planks of the British reformers' platform, O'Connell nevertheless remained loyal and so lost the sympathy of the radicals. The same disillusionment contributed to the emergence of a Dublin artisan movement which seriously challenged O'Connell's authority in late 1837 and which he crushed in January 1838, but only by calling on his substantial reserves of authority. 
On 21 February 1838 O'Connell and his sons were introduced to Queen Victoria at a levee in St James's Palace. It was an honour that he appreciated. Ostentatious expressions of loyalty to the young queen had been part of his stock-in-trade since her accession, and would continue to be. In legislative terms 1838 produced a 'Poor Relief Act' of great moment (which O'Connell had the luxury of opposing because it was supported by both sides of the house) and a 'Tithe Act' which was emasculated by the Lords. Tithes were an aspect of the establishment that upset Roman Catholic opinion generally much more than it did O'Connell, partly because they constituted a species of property. 
No surviving example of privilege in Ireland offended O'Connell more than the unreformed municipal corporations. Their abolition in 1840 placed city and town governments in the hands of elected councils, and provided O'Connell with the only opportunity in his career to hold an official executive office. A brilliantly organized campaign secured nearly 80 per cent of the seats on the new Dublin city council for his followers, and in November 1841 he became the first lord mayor of Dublin under the new dispensation, and the first Roman Catholic holder of the title since 1688. During the one-year term he proved himself to be an efficient administrator and he greatly enjoyed the pomp and public pageantry of the office. 
The disadvantage of O'Connell's connection with the government from 1835 was that it precluded him from agitation in Ireland and thereby threatened his influence in the country. As early as August 1838 he had attempted to get up an agitation compatible with support of the government in the form of the Precursor Society of Ireland. This was replaced in September 1839 by the Reform Registration Association. It was only because he had become convinced that the days of the government were numbered that O'Connell in August 1840 founded an organization devoted unequivocally to repeal, the Loyal National Repeal Association. At the general election of 1841 O'Connell and his adherents ran as repealers, for the first time since 1832, but co-operated with Liberals and anyone else opposing the tories. The final figure of eighteen repeal MPs (compared with thirty-nine in 1832) was an index of how the years of co-operation with government had blunted the appetite for repeal. It was O'Connell's last general election. He had represented County Clare (1829-30), County Waterford (1830-31), County Kerry (1831-2), Dublin City (1832-5), Kilkenny City (1836-7), and Dublin City again (1837-41). In 1841 he lost his Dublin City seat to the Conservatives but was returned for both Meath and Cork counties and chose to sit for the latter. 
With the tories returning to power, the years of influence at Westminster and Dublin Castle were over. O'Connell was ready with his response: a great campaign for repeal. The initial popular reaction was lukewarm. Having completed his term as lord mayor of Dublin, he turned his attention to the orchestration of a mass mobilization. By means of emissaries, correspondence, and the newspaper press the parochial structures of the Repeal Association were established throughout the land. The money began to flow and public demonstrations, ostensibly to petition for repeal, were organized. As 1843 progressed these meetings took on massive proportions and became elaborate set-piece triumphal processions for O'Connell. He addressed more than thirty such meetings, invariably delivering a lengthy address and playing with all his accumulated expertise on the emotions of the crowd, or as much of the crowd as could hear him: nobody can say with certainty how many attended these meetings but it certainly ran into hundreds of thousands on various occasions. Another of the great events of the year was a formal debate over three days in Dublin corporation, at which O'Connell himself spoke for four hours. 
The stated objective of the repeal campaign was the re-establishment of the Irish parliament so that Ireland would once again be ruled by its 'queen, lords and commons'. It would be naive to think that O'Connell was committed to a very specific formula. It might also be questioned whether his actual objective was to win repeal or to put himself in a position to bargain for something else: certainly flexibility was an enduring feature of his political outlook. The government had responded to the repeal campaign with caution before moving on 7 October to suppress the final 'monster' meeting of 1843 arranged to be held on the following day at Clontarf, near Dublin. Showing impressive logistical ability, O'Connell and his staff succeeded in turning back the long columns of supporters already converging on Dublin. This determination to stay within the law was poorly rewarded when, a few days later, O'Connell, his son John, and a number of other prominent repealers were arrested on a charge of conspiracy. After a three-week trial they were convicted on 10 February 1844. The sentence, handed down on 30 May, was for a fine of $2000 and one year of imprisonment. During the interval between trial and sentencing O'Connell had been to England, where he received a standing ovation from the opposition as he entered the Commons chamber. He was honoured with banquets and public demonstrations in London, Birmingham, Wolverhampton, and Liverpool. 
The incarceration of O'Connell and his comrades in Dublin's Richmond gaol was a mild form of detention: he occupied a suite in the governor's house and was allowed visitors as and when he pleased. The sentences were quashed by the House of Lords on 4 September 1844 on the grounds of unsatisfactory procedures in the formation of the jury. The journey from prison to the house on Merrion Square was an occasion for another of those triumphal processions that were such a marked feature of his public life and of the political culture which he had so largely formed. 
Meanwhile Peel had been endeavouring to sap some of the foundations of the repeal movement. During 1844 Dublin Castle took to conferring appointments on Roman Catholics not identified with O'Connell's movement. Legislation for a commission of charitable bequests allowed the Catholic church to secure in law its corporate property at the price of formal public participation in a government initiative. The dramatic improvement in the funding of Maynooth College in 1845 amounted to an endowment of the Roman Catholic church in Ireland, and significantly constrained the ability of the bishops to participate in any further repeal campaign. Legislation, again in 1845, to establish a series of new university colleges was calculated to appeal to middle-class interests, but the provision that they be non-denominational was contentious for church people of all persuasions. O'Connell chose to denounce the proposed institutions as the 'godless' colleges; this secured his support with the section of the Roman Catholic hierarchy most useful for the purposes of political agitation. It also provoked a conflict at the very heart of his own organization. 

'The Nation', launched in October 1842, was a weekly newspaper that had contributed immensely to the popularity of the repeal campaign. However, its editorial line and content, especially as formulated by Thomas Davis, were redolent of the romantic nationalism of European contemporaries and introduced an idealistic element quite alien to O'Connell's essentially pragmatic ideology. The proprietors, the leading contributors, and their close associates, who had almost all been born or grown up after Waterloo, were well read, well educated, and mainly middle-class, and came to be known collectively as Young Ireland. They included protestants (including Davis) in numbers greatly out of proportion to their representation in the repeal movement generally. From the time of O'Connell's imprisonment 'The Nation' became the focus of an independent and increasingly critical pole of influence. 
While O'Connell always maintained that his vision of Ireland was one where the state would guarantee the fullest freedom to all religions, in practice his repeal campaign was replete with Catholic overtones, not least in the role of the priests as key organizers throughout the provinces. These overtones offended Davis and already in the autumn of 1844 he and O'Connell had exchanged written recriminations centred on intimations of 'bigotry'. Davis saw the rejection of the non-denominational colleges by O'Connell and others as an instance of Catholic bigotry and developed an argument for the superiority, from a national viewpoint, of 'mixed education'. When the subject came up for discussion at a public meeting of the Repeal Association on 26 May 1845 a dramatic confrontation ensued, with O'Connell brutally decrying the right of 'The Nation' to speak for the Roman Catholic people of Ireland and asserting that he and 'Old Ireland' would stand by one another. In the past truculent performances like this had put down opposition. 
After a short attendance at the Commons in the summer of 1845 O'Connell set in train a revival of the repeal organization and in September and October meetings in the style, and approximating to the scale, of 1843 were held at four well-scattered venues. The feasibility of such demonstrations disappeared quite suddenly with the destruction of a large proportion of the potato crop that became evident from mid-September onwards. O'Connell's assessment of the problem was gloomy from the beginning and he was one of the principal movers of the Mansion House committee established in Dublin in October 1845 to promote relief measures. 
Soon the political situation seemed to brighten with the prospect of a return to power by the whigs. O'Connell spent most of the first half of 1846 at Westminster, preparing the ground for a renewal of his former alliance. Meanwhile 'The Nation' conducted an editorial barrage against this very prospect, in the name of a more principled nationalism, and O'Connell felt obliged to reassert his authority over the repeal movement. He chose the issue of physical force for his challenge: various Young Irelanders had been led by the logic of their romantic nationalism to imagine the theoretical prospect of a resort to arms to vindicate Irish national claims. At a general meeting of the Repeal Association on 13 July he proposed and had accepted -- over a few helpless protests from the Young Irelanders -- a motion repudiating not only any resort to physical force but any theoretical case for it under any circumstances. Within a few weeks the Young Irelanders had withdrawn from the association, not because they had any plans to employ violence but because they refused to accept any longer the authority of the domineering old leader. 
Meanwhile O'Connell was busily dealing with the new government of Lord John Russell to secure a share of the spoils of office for his assorted following of whigs, Liberals, Catholics, repealers, neighbours, acquaintances, and his son Morgan. He advocated the need to extend Castle patronage to Roman Catholic tradesmen, and not only to the professional middle classes. But gradualist, co-operative, clientilist politics was no answer to a mounting socio-economic catastrophe: the potato crop of 1846 had failed totally and with the consequent sharp rise in food prices affected both countryside and town. O'Connell took measures intended to provide for the needs of the tenants on his own estate and canvassed plans for meetings and co-ordinated action on the part of his fellow proprietors through the land. He asked Russell to provide money for public works, which would give employment, and the government responded by voting $450,000 for this on 17 August 1846. But even when forthcoming, the government's efforts were hopelessly mismanaged and many of those affected by the crisis who had the opportunity to respond in political terms blamed the government and recoiled from the whig alliance. In order to prevent the defection of a large section of the Loyal National Repeal Association O'Connell had to agree in December to consider proposals for a reconciliation with the Young Irelanders. 
On his annual, and last, sojourn in Derrynane in the autumn of 1846 O'Connell saw at first hand the desperate plight of the rural poor. He also saw the imminent collapse of much of the world he had inhabited for over seventy years. It was grimly appropriate, if entirely coincidental, that the same vacation witnessed the sudden collapse of his own physical strength. The deterioration of his voice and vigour was noticed by all when he returned to Dublin. O'Connell had been troubled by a tendency to corpulence throughout much of his life and had responded by taking regular walking exercise; in prison in 1844 he covered 3 miles daily on the yard. On his annual autumn vacations in Derrynane he followed his pack of beagles on foot over miles of challenging mountain terrain. His decline was caused not by any inevitable collapse of his remarkably robust constitution, but by an accidental brain infection. A late twentieth-century medical assessment, published as an appendix to a volume of biography, is decisive in ascribing the infection to the surgical treatment for piles he received in London in 1845 (O. MacDonagh, 'The Emancipist: Daniel O'Connell, 1830-47', 1989, 338-9). 
Back in Dublin in late 1846 O'Connell realized that his days were numbered. He reviewed his last will and made other final arrangements before leaving for London at the end of January 1847. Here he had strength for one final dramatic political act when on 8 February, trembling and barely audible, he addressed the Commons on the subject of the famine in Ireland. As his last appearance on the political stage it was entirely apposite. Gaining access to Westminster and achieving influence in its counsels had been his great achievement. His language, as always, suited his assessment of the particular circumstances: no cajoling now, nor rancour, but a sober statement of the plight of his country. He predicted with accuracy the likely loss of population and acknowledged that only parliament could halt the disaster. But he could not say how: parliament, he said, was bound to find a means. Within weeks parliament had passed legislation to provide for the public soup kitchens at which by summer 1847 up to 3 million people were being fed. Parliament and government could have done much better, but even their best would not have been enough. There can be few more tragic figures in modern history than the dying Daniel O'Connell who watched in early 1847 as his long decades of gargantuan political effort and achievement were turned to dust and ashes by a natural catastrophe. 
O'Connell's chaplain, Father John Miley, arrived from Dublin in mid-February and contributed to the decision that O'Connell should travel to Rome. His desperate physicians were recommending a sunny climate. Though deeply committed to papal authority in religious matters, O'Connell disapproved of the secular government of the papacy. The accession of the initially liberal Pius IX in 1846 was an apparent vindication of O'Connell's religious politics. After a few weeks of rest and preparation at Hastings, O'Connell set out for Rome on 22 March 1847, accompanied by Miley, his son Daniel, and a servant. They went by steamboat from Folkestone to Boulogne and thence by rail to Paris. O'Connell was visited in his hotel by the archbishop of Paris and by a delegation of liberal Catholic notables, with the comte de Montalembert at its head. He could barely respond to their compliments. From Paris to Marseilles the journey was by road: with an eleven-day break at Lyons it took five weeks. From Marseilles they took a boat to Genoa, where they arrived on 5 May. Throughout the journey crowds had turned out to admire the famous O'Connell but he scarcely noticed them. There were occasional bouts of raving, but when lucid he was in deep gloom. He had a fixation about the danger of being buried alive. But predominant was concern for his spiritual salvation. He insisted that Miley, the agent of final absolution, should not leave his sight. 
In his rooms at the Hotel Feder in Genoa, O'Connell's mental and physical condition worsened. By 8 May he had ceased to take food. After days of great turmoil peace of mind and body descended on 13 May, and on Saturday 15 May at 9.35 p.m. O'Connell died, fortified with the last rites of his church. In accordance with his wishes his embalmed heart was sent to Rome, where his passing was marked with all possible liturgical solemnity. His body was similarly received when it arrived in Dublin. Interment was in Glasnevin cemetery on 5 August 1847, first in a temporary grave, and from 1869 in the vault of a specially designed memorial dominated by a replica round tower 165 feet high. In due course the major street of Dublin was named O'Connell Street, with his large-scale statue and plinth, by J. H. Foley, the most prominent monument in the Irish capital. 
Apart from one of the non-dominant strains of Irish Catholic nationalism, O'Connell has not been the chosen prophet of any political grouping since the collapse of the repeal movement within a few years of his death. It might be said that he gave too many hostages to fortune, or that a character with so many facets is difficult to turn into an icon. Young Irelanders, such as John Mitchel and Charles Gavan Duffy, have spread far and wide an awareness of the deficiencies of his political strategies and tactics. W. E. H. Lecky, mindful of how O'Connell's efforts had, however unintentionally, exacerbated the polarization of Irish politics, wondered if on balance his career had been a blessing or a curse for Ireland. What nobody has seriously challenged is the largeness of his place in modern Irish history. Victorious nationalists of a later generation did not rename Dublin's main thoroughfare for any of their own leaders or heroes but for O'Connell. Indeed it might be said that neither partisan nor professional historians have adequately addressed the question of how much O'Connell created and how much he borrowed. Independently of scholars or politicians, O'Connell became in his lifetime and afterwards a folk hero. Historians aware of the historical record of a faithful husband and devout family man were puzzled by his reputation for fathering numerous bastards throughout the land (priggishly drawn down by W. B. Yeats for his own purposes) until experts pointed out that this is a standard feature of the depiction of the folk champion and has no necessary relation to historical facts. Similarly, tales of his prowess in the courts, in parliament, and in contests of various kinds abound in the folklore collections. 
While in popular esteem O'Connell is the quintessential Irish national champion, his international significance is underestimated. He was a key figure in the emergence of European democracy and no Irish person before or since has commanded so much attention on the continent as he did in his lifetime. Similarly forgotten to a large extent is his role as an advocate of the rights of those civilly disadvantaged such as Jews, black slaves, and Australian Aborigines. Universalist and nationalist, champion of the weak and truculent bully, man of principle and shameless opportunist, O'Connell remains, like Napoleon or Gladstone, one of those figures with whom historians will never even imagine that they have finished. 


@@@@@


doc= 20502


O'Connell, John (1810-1858), politician, third son of Daniel O'Connell (1775-1847) and his wife, Mary (1778-1836), was born in Dublin on 24 December 1810. His elder brother was Morgan O'Connell. He attended Clongowes Wood College, Trinity College, Dublin, and the King's Inns. Called to the bar in 1837, he had little opportunity to practise. Of Daniel O'Connell's sons he was the one most interested in politics, in which he was already active at the age of thirteen. He was returned to parliament for Youghal on 15 December 1832, as a supporter of his father's campaign for repeal of the 'Act of Union'. In 1835 he was re-elected, in spite of an unsuccessful petition against his return, and he went on to hold the seat until 1837. He was returned unopposed for Athlone on 4 August 1837; on 3 July 1841 he succeeded Joseph Hume in the representation of Kilkenny without a contest, and in August 1847 he was returned both for Kilkenny and for Limerick, and elected to sit for the latter constituency. On 28 March 1838 he had married Elizabeth, daughter of Dr James Ryan of Bray, co. Wicklow. They had eight children. 
During the early part of his career O'Connell took a very active part as his father's lieutenant in the repeal agitation. He prepared reports for the repeal association: 'Poor-Law Remedies' and 'Commercial Injustices to Ireland', both in 1843, and 'Fiscal Relations of the United Kingdom and Ireland' in 1844; also in the same year his 'An Argument for Ireland' was separately published; it reached a second edition in 1847. He also wrote for 'The Nation' his 'Repeal Dictionary', which was separately published in 1845. He was tried alongside his father in 1844, and shared his imprisonment in Richmond gaol, where he organized private theatricals and conducted a weekly paper for his fellow prisoners. He rode in his father's triumphal car when the prisoners were released on the success of their appeal to the House of Lords. During his father's frequent absences he was the effective head of the repeal association in Ireland. In this capacity he strenuously opposed the Young Ireland party, and incurred its bitter enmity. To the succession to his father's 'uncrowned kingship' he asserted almost dynastic claims. The Young Ireland party, willing to defer to the age and genius of the father, revolted against such pretensions on the part of his youthful and less able son. A bitter struggle ensued, but on his father's final departure from Ireland, O'Connell succeeded to the control, and, on the father's death in May 1847, to the titular leadership, of the association. The election of thirty-five MPs in August 1847 was a considerable achievement for the repealers. But the government's dismissal of repeal in April 1848 and the spread of revolution in Europe swung political opinion in Ireland away from O'Connell and towards the Young Irelanders. In 1849, with the revolutionary excitement over, O'Connell endeavoured to revive the repeal association, but in vain. With the Irish Catholic whigs taking up popular causes, he found himself on the opposite side, supporting the government. 
When a tenant-right agitation began to gain ground in 1850 O'Connell used his influence against it; and he gave great offence during the excitement produced by the 'Ecclesiastical Titles Bill' by voting with the government on the motion which led to the temporary fall of Russell's ministry in February 1851. The corporation of Limerick passed a resolution of censure on their member, and in August 1851 he accepted the Chiltern Hundreds to create a vacancy for the earl of Arundel, who in consequence of the secession of his father, the duke of Norfolk, from the Roman Catholic faith had resigned the family borough of Arundel on 16 July. On 21 December 1853 O'Connell re-entered parliament as member for Clonmel; but his position in the House of Commons was now one of insignificance. In February 1857 he quitted public life, on appointment to the clerkship of the Crown and Hanaper Office, Ireland; and on 24 May 1858 he died suddenly at his house in Tivoli Terrace, Gowran Hill, Kingstown, near Dublin, where he had lived for some years. He was buried in Glasnevin cemetery on 28 May, following a funeral that was reputedly the largest in Dublin since that of his father. Following his death a public testimonial raised $5000 in support of his family. 
O'Connell published a 'Life and Speeches' of his father (1846; 2nd edn, 1854) and 'Recollections and Experiences' of his own parliamentary career (1846). Before and after his death O'Connell provided Young Irelanders and other opponents of his father with an easy target for criticism and even ridicule, and his reputation has suffered accordingly. Attempting as he was to follow in the footsteps of a giant, his chances of making a favourable impact on the world were limited. 


@@@@@


doc= 20503


O'Connell, Sir Maurice Charles (1812-1879), soldier, administrator, and politician in Australia, was born on 13 January 1812 at the military barracks in what became Wynyard Square, Sydney. He was the eldest son of Sir Maurice Charles Philip O'Connell (1768-1848), lieutenant-governor of New South Wales, and his wife, Mary Putland (1782/3-1864), daughter of former governor William Bligh. In 1814 the family were transferred with his father's regiment to Ceylon, where Maurice lived until the age of seven, when he was sent for his education to Britain. He attended Dr Pinkney's School at East Sheen, Surrey, then Edinburgh high school, followed by studies in Dublin, then at the College Charlemagne in Paris. At the age of sixteen he joined the 73rd regiment, and later described himself as 'zealously devoted' (McDonald, 116) to the military profession. He served with his regiment in Gibraltar, Malta, and Jersey, and was made lieutenant in January 1834. On 23 July 1835 O'Connell married Eliza Emiline (1813-1903), daughter of Colonel Philip Le Geyt of the 63rd regiment. They had no children. 
In September 1835 O'Connell left for Spain as part of the British Legion, to fight in the First Carlist War, leading a regiment of volunteers he had raised in Ireland. During two years in Spain he rose to the rank of brigadier-general in the legion, and received three Spanish decorations. On returning to Britain he was reappointed a lieutenant in the 51st regiment, and in June 1838 purchased the commission of captain in the 28th regiment. Soon afterwards, he travelled to serve with his regiment in New South Wales in the company of his father, who had been appointed to the command of all military forces in the colony, and to whom he became assistant military secretary. In 1842, when his regiment was transferred to India, O'Connell chose to remain in New South Wales, before selling his commission two years later and becoming established as a horse breeder and pastoralist. 
O'Connell then took an interest in the politics of the colony, and in 1843 stood for a place in the newly created New South Wales legislative council. Although closely aligned with the 'exclusives' of the town ('Brisbane Courier', 24 March 1879, 3) and being a 'rather conservative' candidate (Shaw, 216), he also received significant support from the Irish population -- a result, it seems, of his family's connection with the Irish nationalist leader Daniel O'Connell, a cousin of his father. Rioting during the election by his sympathizers, including '500 supporters dressed in green' (McDonald, 118) who declared he 'was standing for the Roman Catholic church and freedom for Ireland' (Shaw, 216), was said to have lost him much support among other voters. He was defeated easily, but in August 1845 was elected to the council to represent the Port Phillip (later Victoria) district, an event that 'greatly gratified' the governor, George Gipps, as O'Connell had defeated a leading spokesman of the squatter opposition to the government (Shaw, 350). 
O'Connell remained in the council for three years, before being appointed crown lands commissioner for the Burnett pastoral district, then in the far north of the colonized area of Australia. In 1854 he was appointed official resident in the development of Port Curtis as a government post. The establishment of this post has been called 'one of Sydney's most devious acts of self-interest' (Fitzgerald, 109), as it clearly had the aim of fostering a township (to be known as Gladstone) as a capital for the soon to be formed colony of Queensland. It was feared in New South Wales that the likely southern location of the new capital, at Brisbane, would mean that the northern parts of the older colony would look to it rather than to Sydney. 
Excessive expenditure, with little return in terms of development, was incurred to achieve this aim, and for this O'Connell received the blame when the political atmosphere in New South Wales altered. Henry Parkes succeeded in having a select committee of inquiry into the post of resident established in August 1855. The committee criticized not only the apparent waste of government funds but also O'Connell's capabilities. Particularly condemned were his 'capriciousness and want of consideration' in dealing with those under him, and the fact that his inordinate 'love of power' affected his ability to encourage the district's development (McDonald, 97). The position of government resident was abolished, and O'Connell returned to the post of lands commissioner. He was briefly reinstated as resident in response to a gold rush in the area in 1858, but again relieved of the post when Queensland was established in late 1859. 
O'Connell resented the offer to return again to relatively junior positions and began a long campaign to receive compensation for the abolition of his post and the financial sacrifices he claimed his time at Port Curtis entailed. A later historian has suggested that his appointment to the Queensland legislative council in May 1860 was probably made 'for diplomatic reasons' (McDonald, 119). He was a minister without portfolio for three months in the Herbert government before being offered the presidency of the council in August 1860. As president, he acted in the place of the governor of the colony on four occasions, in gaps between viceregal appointments, and in 1868 was knighted. 
O'Connell was embroiled in controversy on two occasions during his time as president. As acting governor in 1871 he was accused of accepting a bribe for agreeing to dissolve parliament. The resultant debate brought into the open his parlous financial state, and he was forced to admit that unpaid debts owing to the Bank of Queensland on his pastoral properties meant that the bank's official liquidator was about to take action against him. In 1875 his family connections to Daniel O'Connell again led to political difficulties. He attended a function commemorating the centenary of the nationalist leader's birth. During the ceremonies a toast to the health of the pope preceded the loyal toast to the queen. This caused a degree of outrage, and O'Connell was forced quickly and clearly to restate his loyalty to the monarch. 
Most remembered of O'Connell was his tendency to appear 'hot of temper, sometimes inconsistent, inordinately proud' (McDonald, 88). Politically, he was 'very conservative... described as a high Tory' ('Brisbane Courier', 24 March 1879, 3). He was provincial grandmaster of the freemasons of the Irish constitution, colonel of the Queensland volunteer brigade, and president of the Australasian Association and the Queensland turf club. 
O'Connell remained president of the council until he died of throat cancer, while staying at Parliament House in Brisbane during renovations to his own home, on 23 March 1879. He was buried at Toowong cemetery, Brisbane, on 25 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 20504


O'Connell, Sir Maurice Charles Philip (1768-1848), army officer and colonial administrator in Australia, was born in co. Kerry, Ireland, the son of Charles Philip O'Connell. Tall, strapping, and penniless, the son of a younger son, he was dependent on the bounty of his kinsman, Count Daniel O'Connell, of the Irish brigade. With this support he studied for two or three years in Paris for the Roman Catholic priesthood, but in 1785 his father arranged his entry to a military school, and in 1792 he became a captain in the French emigre forces serving on the French frontier under the duke of Brunswick. 
When the Irish brigade was taken into British pay O'Connell was appointed captain in Daniel O'Connell's 4th regiment of the Irish brigade, from 1 October 1794, and served with it in the West Indies until it was broken up and he was put on half pay. On 12 May 1800 he obtained a company in the 1st West India regiment with which he served in Surinam, Grenada, and Dominica. In January 1805 he was promoted brevet major and transferred to the 5th regiment. He saw much action in the West Indies, and particularly distinguished himself at Roseau in Dominica in February 1805 when it was unsuccessfully attacked by greatly superior French forces. In October 1806 he was transferred to the 73rd regiment, of which he became lieutenant-colonel on 4 May 1809. 
In December 1809 the 1st battalion of the 73rd, with O'Connell in command, arrived in Port Jackson with the new governor of New South Wales, Lachlan Macquarie. O'Connell was commissioned lieutenant-governor in January 1810 and on 8 May, soon after his first arrival in Sydney, he married Mary Putland (1782/3-1864), daughter and lifelong defender of the deposed governor William Bligh and widow of Lieutenant John Putland. He was appointed a trustee of the Female Orphan Institution, steward of the racecourse, and president of the Philanthropic Society. But by August 1813 Macquarie was urging the removal of O'Connell and the 73rd regiment from the colony. 
In April 1814 O'Connell sailed for Ceylon with the regiment, which he commanded during the war in Kandy in 1815. He failed to obtain appointment to Van Diemen's Land as lieutenant-governor and retired on half pay on the return home of his troops. In 1819 he was promoted colonel, and in July 1830 major-general. He was knighted and made a KCH in 1834, became a lieutenant-general on 9 November 1841, and was appointed colonel of the 80th foot in 1844. 
O'Connell returned to Sydney in 1838 having been appointed to command the forces in New South Wales. On his arrival he was appointed to the executive and legislative councils. In 1843-4 he was a nominated member of the partly elected legislative council. When Governor Gipps departed in July 1846, O'Connell administered the government until the arrival of Sir Charles Fitzroy the next month. He was succeeded as commander of the forces in New South Wales by Major-General Wynyard in 1847. Thenceforth, he remained in the colony but took no part in public affairs. He died at Darlinghurst, Sydney, on 25 May 1848 and was buried at St James's Church, Sydney. His widow lived in Paris for some years and then in London, where she died in 1864. There were two sons and one daughter. The elder son was the well-known Australian statesman Sir Maurice Charles O'Connell. 


@@@@@


doc= 20505


O'Connell, Morgan (1804-1885), soldier and politician, second son of Daniel O'Connell (1775-1847) and his wife, Mary (1778-1836), was born in Tralee, co. Kerry, on 31 October 1804. Together with his elder brother, Maurice, he was a student at the Jesuit Clongowes Wood College from early 1815 but did not apply himself to his studies. In 1819 General John Devereux was in Dublin to enlist military aid for the revolution in South America. He succeeded in embodying the Irish South American legion, and O'Connell was one of the officers who purchased a commission in it. The second contingent of the legion reached the Spanish main in June 1820, with O'Connell in the position of aide-de-camp to Devereux. At Barranquilla in late August 1820 he obtained an introduction to Simon Bolivar, to whom he presented a letter of greeting and support from his father, dated 17 April 1820. Following a series of mishaps O'Connell arrived home safely in early 1822, still aged only seventeen. Apprenticeship to an attorney and cadetships in the French and British forces having been considered and rejected by the family, O'Connell set out on a career in the Austrian army. He served with them in northern Italy and in Hungary before returning to Ireland in 1830. 
On 19 December 1832 O'Connell entered parliament for County Meath as a supporter of his father's policy of repeal of the union, and continued to represent that constituency until January 1840, when he was appointed assistant registrar of deeds for Ireland. Soon after, he married, on 23 July 1840, Kate Mary, youngest daughter of Michael Balfe of South Park, co. Roscommon. They had no children. In 1846, following representations by his father, he was appointed registrar of deeds, a position he held until his retirement in 1869. During his parliamentary career he fought a duel with William, second Baron Alvanley, a lieutenant-colonel in the army, at Chalk Farm on 4 May 1835. A challenge had been sent by Alvanley to O'Connell's father, who, in accordance with a vow he had made after killing a man in a similar affair of honour, declined the meeting. Morgan thereupon took up the challenge: two shots each were exchanged, but neither party was hurt. Afterwards, in December 1835, O'Connell declined to meet a challenge from Benjamin Disraeli, in consequence of an attack made on Disraeli by Morgan's father. 
Morgan O'Connell died at his home, 12 St Stephen's Green, Dublin, on 20 January 1885, and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery on 23 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 20506


O'Connell, Moritz, Baron O'Connell in the nobility of the Holy Roman empire (1738-1830), army officer in the Austrian service, was born in Ireland; he was christened Murty ('recte' Muircheartach), but this name was subsequently changed to Moritz. The son of Maurice O'Connell of Tarmon, co. Kerry, and his wife, Mary O'Sullivan Beare, sister of Murty Oge O'Sullivan Beare; he was the grandson of John O'Connell, captain in the king's guard, who had fought at Limerick, Londonderry, Aughrim, and the Boyne. In spring 1761 Murty O'Connell travelled to the continent with his cousin and lifelong friend Daniel Charles O'Connell. A family ballad written at the time lamented the fact that Catholics were forced to leave Ireland to forward their careers; it urged: 'to the land of the lily [France] bear the shamrock of our isle, may they bloom above the blood stained rose [England]' (O'Connell, 1.69). However, it was to be Daniel's nephew, also Daniel O'Connell, who finally gained Catholic emancipation for Ireland. 
Both men served in the last two campaigns of the Seven Years' War, Moritz O'Connell as an Austrian officer in Marshal Daune's regiment of horse and his cousin as an officer in the French infantry regiment. O'Connell, who was known as Moritz in Austria, attracted the notice of Empress Maria Theresa while he was serving as a sentry in one of her palaces, and received the gift of a watch. He was soon transferred from his military duties to the imperial chamberlain's department. He held the office of imperial chamberlain for fifty-nine years under the emperors Joseph, Leopold, and Francis, and by 1806 he had been created a baron and had attained the rank of general. He married and had one daughter. O'Connell died in Vienna early in 1830, aged ninety-one, and left his property to his relative Geoffrey O'Connell of Cork. 


@@@@@


doc= 20507


O'Connell, Peter (1754/5-1826), Irish scholar and lexicographer, was born at Carne, now Money Point, about 5 miles east of Kilrush in co. Clare, in an Irish-speaking district. Nothing is known of his parents (he had a brother, Patrick) or his early education. A 'tall, gaunt, swarthy man, large-limbed and black-haired, dark-eyed, and strongly built' (Wall, 102), Peter O'Connell was a hedge-school master and scholar-scribe. Typically some of his extant manuscripts contain later verse, Ossianic tales, and devotional matter. Atypically he probably possessed more printed books than other scribes, and was more acquainted with contemporary scholarship. His interests evolved towards genealogy and, more notably, towards lexicography. He possessed Edward Lhuyd's 'Archaeologica Britannica' and James MacPherson's 'Temora', and knew William Shaw's 'Galic and English Dictionary' (1780). 
These books may have influenced O'Connell's remarkable decision in 1785, as he began work on an Irish-English dictionary, to travel in Ireland, the Scottish highlands, and Wales, and to spend time on studying records in Dublin and at the house of Charles O'Conor at Belanagare, co. Roscommon. He returned to co. Clare in 1800. In 1812 O'Connell accepted accommodation from Dr Simon O'Reardon of Limerick to work solely on the dictionary. He was assisted by Malachi O'Curry (Maoilsheachlainn O Comhraidhe), brother of the Irish scholar Eugene O'Curry (Eoghan O Comhraidhe) who knew O'Connell well. He remained in Limerick until 1819 when O'Reardon died. According to Seamus O Casaide it was most likely Dr O'Reardon's death, and not some disagreement between them, that led to O'Connell's departure and to the abandonment of preparations for the publication of his Irish dictionary. Thereafter O'Connell was obliged to return to Carne and resided for the rest of his life in his brother's house. He died aged seventy-one on 24 February 1826 and was buried at Burrane, near Killimer, Kilrush, co. Clare. 
After his death O'Connell's dictionary was acquired by James Hardiman, who 'had it transcribed for the press' by John O'Donovan (Hardiman, Egerton MS 83). In 1832 Hardiman sold his manuscripts to the British Museum (the autograph of the dictionary is now Egerton MS 83 and O'Donovan's two-volume transcript is Egerton MSS 84 and 85). It was never published, but was, nevertheless, O'Connell's greatest achievement. It does not distinguish the parts of speech, and citations are far too sporadic, but it is a comprehensive delineation of the Irish lexicon. Its definitions are authoritative, and Standish Hayes O'Grady was delighted to find in it proof that native scholarship, independently of German 'keltologues', understood the early infixed pronouns. It has been consulted with profit by later lexicographers and editors. O'Connell led the way for the generation which made the Irish-language heritage accessible to wider scholarship. For one of the greatest of that generation, Eugene O'Curry, he was 'the justly celebrated Irish scholar'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20508


Ua Conchobair, Aed (d. 1067), king of Connacht, was the son of Tadc in Eich Gil (died 1030), a member of the Sil Muiredaig branch of Ui Briuin Ai. He first appears in the historical record in 1036, when he slew his father's killer, but the kingship of eastern Connacht was held at this point by Art Uallach Ua Ruairc of Ui Briuin Breifne. Aed killed one of the latter's sons in 1039 (and another in 1047) and can be regarded as king of east Connacht following the death of Art Uallach in 1046. He extended his rule in 1051, when he blinded the king of west Connacht, whom he had held captive for a year, and thereupon took up residence in the west, probably on an island in Lough Corrib. 
Ua Conchobair now engaged in inter-provincial warfare, invading north Munster in 1051, felling the Tree of Mag Adair, the Dal Cais inauguration site; and although pursued by Donnchad mac Briain Boraime, the claimant to the high-kingship, he went unpunished, and indeed killed the latter's son at about this time. He raided here again in 1054, and ravaged Lorrha in 1058. Remarkably, Donnchad submitted to him in 1059, the annals recording a strange story for 1061, that Aed demolished Kincora and broke the wall of the well, eating its two salmon. 
However, 1061 saw a resurgence of opposition from west Connacht, by the Ui Fhlaithbertaig of Ui Briuin Seola, who deposed Aed Ua Conchobair from the kingship, having ousted him from his base on Lough Corrib. Although he regained power, returning to Cruachu bearing the head of his defeated rival, his position was weakened and he submitted to the king of the northern Ui Neill, Ardgar Mac Lochlainn, in 1063. In 1065, however, he defeated Ua Ruairc of Breifne and Ua Cellaig of Ui Maine after they had plundered Clonmacnoise, the annals suggesting that Aed was its patron. Although the Leinster-Munster alliance headed by Diarmait mac Mael na mBo and Toirdelbach Ua Briain is said to have paid him 30 ounces of gold for mutual aid in 1066, Aed's last triumph was his successful resistance to their invasion of Connacht in the following year. 
Ua Conchobair was killed a week later at the battle of Turlach Adnaig in Galway (receiving a particularly glowing obit in the annals of Tigernach), by Aed, son of Art Uallach Ua Ruairc, who succeeded him as king of Connacht. His wife was Caillech Caemgein, daughter of Ocan Ua Fallamain; a family of that name provided minor lords of Clann Uadach in Roscommon. With her he had his son Ruaidri Ua Conchobair, who recovered the kingship before 1076. 


@@@@@


doc= 20509


O'Connor, Arthur (1763-1852), Irish nationalist and political theorist, was born on 4 July 1763 at Connorville, near Bandon in co. Cork, the second youngest of nine children, four daughters and five sons, of Roger Conner (died 1798), MP, and Anne Longfield (died 1782), daughter of Robert Longfield MP and sister of Richard Longfield, made Viscount Longueville in 1800. Arthur and his brother Roger Conner ['see 'O'Connor, Roger] changed their surname to O'Connor in the 1780s. Arthur's upbringing and education were typical of the prosperous Munster Anglican gentry and he was steeped in their attitudes, including their notorious anti-Catholicism. His early schooling was at Bandon and at Mr Browne's school, Castlelyons, and he entered Trinity College, Dublin, as a pensioner in 1779. He delayed his legal education at the inns of court owing to his grief at his mother's death but was called to the Irish bar in 1788, though he never practised. His father broke up the family estate after his wife's death and Arthur's portion allowed him to buy his own property and build a house, Fort Arthur, in the vicinity of Kinsale. Through his uncle's political influence he was MP for Philipstown from 1790 and was appointed high sheriff of Cork for 1791. 
O'Connor's intellectual and cultural interests differentiated him from his class. He was an early and passionate enthusiast for Adam Smith's political economy. He renounced anti-Catholicism through his discovery, or perhaps invention, of his own descent from the O'Connors of co. Kerry, a Gaelic noble family. This motivated his connection with Charles O'Conor of Belangare and an interest in Irish antiquity. A visit to France in 1784 had convinced him that there the monarchy could not survive and he confirmed his enthusiasm for the French Revolution, despite an acquaintance with Edmund Burke, in a return journey in 1792, when he first met Lafayette. Yet these views did not prevent his uncle, Richard Longfield, from proposing to William Pitt in 1792 that O'Connor be given office in the Irish administration as part of the package of measures to encourage independent support for the ministry in the Irish House of Commons. 
The outbreak of war with France in 1793, for which, in common with much of the opposition, O'Connor blamed Pitt, strained his commitment to establishment politics. He finally broke with them after the debacle of the Fitzwilliam viceroyalty. The debate on the 'Catholic Emancipation Bill' in 1795 gave him a platform from which to announce his support of emancipation, manhood suffrage, and the full agenda of political reform, and from which to hint at separatism and the possibility of revolution: 'France must have lost her senses if she hesitates as to what part she must take: it is not an eighty-fourth department you will have moulded to her wishes; it is not simply 'La Vendee' you will have kindled in the bosom of your country. ('Arthur O'Connor's speech on the Catholic question, in the House of Commons, on the 4th of May 1795', 'The Beauties of the Press', 1800, 597)' This speech catapulted him to prominence in radical politics in England as much as in Ireland. He made lasting political friendships with Richard Brinsley Sheridan and Sir Francis Burdett as well as gaining entry to the Devonshire circle. His connections among the Foxites, including Charles James Fox himself, Lord Moira, and Sheridan, were his character witnesses when he was tried for treason at Maidstone in May 1798. 
O'Connor's politics would have made him a radical in England, but the political conditions in Ireland made a principled but pacific opposition to the government almost impossible. As political options polarized, few members of the establishment chose republicanism over protestant ascendancy; O'Connor and his friend Lord Edward Fitzgerald were the two most prominent members of the religious and political establishment to do so. In 1796 O'Connor joined the United Irishmen and travelled in company with Fitzgerald in May and June through Hamburg and Basel to Angers to negotiate a French invasion in support of an Irish rising. Building on Wolfe Tone's impressive diplomatic work, O'Connor and General Hoche agreed to French military support for an independent Irish republic. The result was the abortive landing at Bantry Bay in December 1796. 
O'Connor played little part in the planning for the 1798 rebellion. Though he represented Ulster on the United Irish Directory he could play little part in its deliberations. He was gaoled from February to August 1797 and then arrested at Margate, Kent while trying to travel to France in February 1798 and so was either incarcerated or abroad for most of this period. His major contribution was as the most sophisticated political thinker in the movement. He developed his ideas in the pages of his Dublin newspaper 'The Press' and in his most important pamphlet, 'The State of Ireland' (1798). His project was to reinterpret Irish social and political development in the context of general European trends. Working from the Scottish social theorists, especially Smith, he argued for an ideal of the nation as a productive community organized through an equality of political and civil rights. His work blended French universalist ideas of politics with British patterns of commercial development to create a commercial republicanism. O'Connor thought that the defects of the British constitutional order were most spectacularly evident in Ireland, but not confined to it. His eventual goal was to transform the British Isles into a comity of sister republics. The alternative, he argued, was state oppression punctuated by outbreaks of sectarian 'jacquerie'. O'Connor was by no means the only United Irishman who thought in terms of universal political principles and in an international context, but his work made the most original use of those principles in the complexity of the Irish situation. 
After the failure of the 1798 rebellion O'Connor was confined in Fort St George, along with twenty other prisoners, where previous disagreements between O'Connor and Thomas Addis Emmett over political tactics degenerated into personal antipathy. O'Connor had a domineering personality and an ironic disposition; Benjamin Constant wrote of him that 'he has something of the French defect of joking about his own opinion' (B. Constant, 'Journaux intimes', ed. A. Roulin and C. Roth, 1952, 189), and this made him a difficult partner in adversity. His personal fortunes did improve after his release to France on the peace of Amiens in 1802. Napoleon gave him the rank of 'general de division' in 1804, though without any command. He became part of the 'ideologue' circle and in 1807 married the writer Eliza Condorcet (1791-1867), the daughter of Sophie de Grouchy and Marie-Jean-Antoine-Nicolas de Caritat, marquis de Condorcet. His last publication was to be the definitive edition of Condorcet's works and he took the name Condorcet-O'Connor as the family title. In 1808 he and his wife bought the former chateau of Mirabeau pere at Le Bignon in the department of the Loiret. He took French nationality in 1818. 
Condorcet-O'Connor's later life was difficult. His three sons predeceased him and his relationship with his brother Roger collapsed over disputes about Roger's use of the power of attorney he had been given over Arthur's Irish property. This put a barrier between Arthur and Roger's son, Feargus O'Connor, leader of the Chartists. Furthermore, his reputation in Ireland suffered an eclipse. To the Irish public, Lord Longueville's judgement that 'of all bad men he is the worst' was too epigrammatic to resist. Though he initially made friendly contact with Daniel O'Connell during his visit to Ireland in 1834, he later condemned him as a tool of the Jesuits. Much of his later work, including his 'Monopoly, the Cause of All Evil' (1849), relapsed into rampant anti-Catholicism and he has not been included in the pantheon of national heroes. He died at Le Bignon on 25 April 1852, and was buried there in the park. 


@@@@@


doc= 20510


O'Connor, Brian (d. after 1559), chieftain and rebel, was probably born in Dangan in co. Offaly, the eldest son of Cahir O'Connor (died 1511), chieftain, and his first wife. Cahir was chieftain of the O'Connor Faly sept or clan from 1474 to 1511. The O'Connors emerged as the dominant midland sept in the mid-fifteenth century under the leadership of Cahir's grandfather Calvagh More O'Connor ('fl'. 1425-1458). Cahir lacked Calvagh's authority and junior O'Connor branches re-emerged as challengers for the lordship. Such discord within the sept attracted the predatory attentions of Gerald Fitzgerald, eighth earl of Kildare, who sought to establish Geraldine dominance over the midlands. He had Cahir assassinated in 1511, ousted the ruling O'Connors, and established a client regime under the MacTadhgs (Brian O'Connor's cousins). However, Offaly's minor septs still supported Cahir's family and Brian rose to power during the confinement in England of Gerald Fitzgerald, ninth earl of Kildare (1487-1534), from 1519 to 1523. After a brief succession struggle, the details of which are unknown, Brian was accepted by his sept as the O'Connor Faly by mid-1520. 
Brian dealt with the prospect of a MacTadhg restoration by supporting Geraldine interests, calculating that Kildare would accept his accession in return for O'Connor backing. In 1520-21 Brian assisted pro-Geraldine attacks on the pale. His strategy worked, and after Kildare's restoration in 1523 he formally became the earl's client, with Con Bacach O'Neill acting as 'slainte' or guarantor. Brian's marriage to Mary (died in or after 1596), eldest daughter of Kildare and his second wife, Elizabeth, before 1526, strengthened the alliance further. The couple had nine sons, including Cathal O'Connor ['see below'], and two daughters. Brian was closely identified with Geraldine interests from the 1520s and was Kildare's chief ally during the 1525 campaign against Mulroney O'Carroll. During Kildare's second detention in England (1526-30), Brian, acting on the earl's secret instructions, played the key role in demonstrating that the Irish lordship could not be governed without Geraldine co-operation. Throughout 1527-8 he ravaged the pale, famously shoeing his horse at Tara, co. Meath, and even captured the vice-deputy, Richard Nugent, third Baron Delvin, on 12 May 1528. It worked. Kildare was allowed to return to Ireland in 1530 in order to suppress 'confederacies that... Ochonour had made with divers great Hirishemen' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 2.127-8). He displayed his gratitude by bestowing gifts of horses and armour upon Brian. In addition Kildare persuaded the Irish privy council to resume payment of Brian's blackrent (cancelled in 1528) and to pardon his offences in November 1530. 
Brian's influence was at its zenith, secure from challengers within his lordship and the dominant lord in the midlands. However, his relationship with Kildare tied his fortunes inextricably with those of the Geraldines and this explains why, even as the Kildare revolt of 1534-5 collapsed, Brian remained loyal to the last. By mid-1535 only Brian's support allowed his brother-in-law Thomas Fitzgerald, tenth earl of Kildare (1513-1537), to continue in rebellion. This persuaded the government to maintain Brian's brother and tanist Cahir Roe O'Connor (died 1548), who had long sought to be lord, against the rebels. His defection proved decisive, and in August 1535 Kildare and Brian submitted. 
Despite his prominent role in the rebellion Brian escaped lightly: after humbly submitting and undertaking to live as a dutiful subject, he was fined 800 cattle. Thereafter, the government, preoccupied with reordering the pale, withdrew support for Cahir Roe, allowing Brian to restore his authority within Offaly. Cahir Roe was expelled from Offaly in 1536. This flagrant repudiation of his submission, coupled with his failure to pay his fine, persuaded the new lord deputy, Leonard Grey, Viscount Graney, to punish Brian. Therefore in May 1537 Graney, guided by Brian's former prisoner Delvin, invaded Offaly. He captured Brian's strongholds of Brackland and Dangan, and placed them, along with 'the governaunce of the countrie', in Cahir Roe's hands ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 2.442-5). Brian, who fled before the lord deputy, remained at large, dividing his time in exile between Offaly, Tipperary, and Leix. Although Graney believed Brian was 'more lyker a begger then he that ever was a captyn or ruler of a contre', and celebrated his reduced circumstances -- 'goyng from on [one] to another of hys olde frynds to have mete and drynke' -- Brian retained support among Offaly's lesser septs (ibid., 2.474-5). With their backing, and that of Ferganainm O'Carroll, the O'Dunne family, and the O'Meagher family, Brian regained the lordship in November 1537. Recognizing that Cahir Roe was unable to uphold his authority without substantial government assistance, and despite his earlier description of Brian as 'as ranke a traitour alwey to the King [Henry VIII] as can be divised', Graney accepted the political reality and thereafter sought to use Brian's regional influence to stabilize the midlands (ibid., 2.437-9). 
At his formal submission before the Irish privy council Brian renounced his blackrents, promised to pay rent to the king, and petitioned to be elevated to the peerage as baron of Offaly, with confirmation of title to his lands. For some time afterwards he remained quiet, but following Graney's fall he once more ravaged the pale in April and May 1540. Brian's duplicity had long exasperated the king, but, conscious of Brian's continuing influence among the midland septs, the new lord deputy, Sir Anthony St Leger, convinced the king to pardon him. In 1541 St Leger persuaded Brian to formally renew his submission and to accept government arbitration of his dispute with Cahir Roe. During the remainder of his first term of office St Leger overlooked Brian's minor indiscretions in the midlands, while Brian paid his rents and refrained from disturbing the pale. This accommodation -- which saw St Leger propose Brian's elevation to the peerage and grant him a house and lands in Dublin for his better maintenance while in attendance on the government -- prompted the lord deputy's Irish opponents to sardonically describe Brian as 'your lordshipes old frende'. 
However, when Brian attacked the pale in 1546, during St Leger's absence in England, he finally exhausted the government's patience. Upon his return in mid-1547 St Leger devastated Offaly twice, without engaging Brian in battle or receiving his submission. Although Brian escaped to Connaught, where he remained until early 1548, St Leger's punitive campaigns greatly eroded his support within Offaly, and upon his return he discovered 'that, through terror, no one dared to give [him] food or protection'. Although Brian continued in opposition until the following winter, 'having been abandoned by the Irish', he was forced to seek government support to regain his former authority ('AFM', s.a. 1547). To this purpose he submitted in November 1548. He was arrested and transferred to the Marshalsea prison in London, where he remained until 1554, although he was pardoned in February 1549. A programme of plantation was instituted in the midlands in his absence. Against this background his sons Donagh (died 1558) and Rory sought control of Offaly, but other O'Connor Faly kin-groups contested their claim and the lordship descended into anarchy. 
Although Brian escaped from London in early 1552, he was recaptured as he tried to cross the border with Scotland, and promptly returned to prison. His release was granted by Mary I after the intercession of his daughter Margaret, who 'went to England, relying on the number of her friends and relatives there, and her knowledge of the English language' ('AFM', s.a. 1553). The reality was that St Leger, anxious to settle Offaly, hoped Brian's restoration might end the disruptive succession struggle. On securing Rory as a pledge, the government permitted Brian to return to Ireland with Gerald Fitzgerald, eleventh earl of Kildare. However, Brian's influence was spent and when it became apparent that Rory's incarceration was undermining Donagh's position, St Leger swiftly arranged another exchange of hostages: Rory was released and Brian returned to Dublin Castle, where he died some time after 1559. He was survived by sons, among whom Donagh, Rory, Cormac ('fl'. 1550-1573), and Calvagh (died 1564) were the most prominent, and daughters. 




@@@@@


doc= 20511


O'Connor, Calvach, Don (1584-1655), clan leader, was the eldest son of Hugh O'Connor Don (died 1632) and his wife, Mary, daughter of Brian O'Rourke, lord of Breifne (co. Leitrim). The term don ('recte' donn, or brown) was used to distinguish this branch of the sept from the collateral O'Connor Roe ('recte' rua, or red) branch. In 1610 Hugh O'Connor Don executed a deed dividing his extensive territory, known as the Maghery ('Irish, machaire', plain) in North Roscommon between his sons Calvach and Hugh Oge. The division did not, however, receive royal sanction and was therefore delayed. Some time before 1616 Calvach married Mary, daughter of Sir Theobald Burke, or Tibbot na Long ('Irish, long', ship). O'Connor was apparently elected member of parliament for co. Roscommon for the 1613 parliament but the presiding officer called a second vote after most of O'Connor's voters had left the premises. With O'Connor's supporters allegedly prevented from returning by soldiers posted at the door, a candidate representing the New English interest was then elected. A government commission subsequently found that no impropriety had taken place. The finding was unsurprising in view of the government's determined, and successful, efforts to secure overall New English control of the Irish parliament. On Hugh O'Connor Don's death in 1632 his lands were finally divided between Calvach and his younger brother Hugh Oge. Calvach acquired the castle and demesne of Ballintober, co. Roscommon. 
Following the outbreak of the 1641 rising, Calvach O'Connor was present, on Christmas eve, at an attack on the abbey of Roscommon as the 'reputed general of Roscommon' (deposition of John Ridge, TCD, MS 830, fol. 4) under the overall command of Con O'Rourke of Leitrim. O'Connor received some popular acclamation as 'King of Connacht' (deposition of Elizabeth Holliwell, TCD, MS 830, fol. 35) -- a faint echo of the former prominence of the O'Connor Don lineage. Others, however, assumed a more prominent role. Con O'Rourke led the insurgent attack on Castle Coote, a strong government outpost south of Ballintober on the Galway border. In the course of this operation Hugh O'Connor Don, eldest son of Calvach, was taken prisoner in March/April 1642 when Charles Coote surprised the besiegers' camp at Creggs. Calvach O'Connor was one of those subscribing in January 1642 to an appeal to the earl of Clanricarde to assume leadership of the Connaught forces. However, his brother Hugh and Lucas Dillon took the leading role in these negotiations. 
According to Edmund Borlase, O'Connor remained inactive in the months following his son's capture 'though the tacit votes of that province did seem to own him as their king' (Borlase, 81). However, in July 1642 'he began to awake' (ibid.) and mobilized an army of about 2000 men at Ballintober. On the approach of government forces from Athlone a body of Irish pikemen attacked without waiting for support from their musketeers. The pikemen were driven back by superior firepower and the disordered formation routed by a cavalry charge and pursued back to Ballintober. 
O'Connor did not play a prominent part in the military or political affairs of the confederate Catholic regime established in 1642. He was elected a member of the general assembly of the confederates on three occasions during the 1640s. He was one of the individuals exempted by name from pardon by the Cromwellians in 1652. He died in 1655, leaving two sons, Hugh and Charles. His widow, as a person (notionally) transplanted to Connaught, secured 700 acres out of a total estate of about 6000 acres. 


@@@@@


doc= 20512


Cathal mac Conchobair (d. 1010), king of Connacht, was a member of the Sil Muiredaig branch of Ui Briuin Ai. He was son of the Conchobar from whom the Ui Chonchobair of Connacht, who ruled as kings of that province for much of the rest of the middle ages, take their name; though, as Conchobar's son, he was not 'ua' (or 'O') Conchobair (that is, grandson of Conchobar), but 'mac' Conchobair. When Cathal's father, Conchobar son of Tadc, died in 973, the kingship of Connacht was assumed by a certain Cathal son of Tadc, a first cousin once removed according to an eighteenth-century king-list (O'Flaherty, 133). However, he was killed by the Cenel nEogain (line 5768 of the 'Book of Leinster' says after a reign of three days) in the battle of Ceis Corainn. Cathal himself then presumably succeeded to the kingship, although nothing whatever is known of him until 1001, when he and the reigning high-king, Mael Sechnaill mac Domnaill of the southern Ui Neill, built a causeway across the Shannon at Athlone. Mael Sechnaill invaded Connacht at least three times during Cathal's reign, in 985, 992, and 998, but only formally received the hostages of Connacht in 998, when they were handed to him by Brian Boruma, king of Munster. In 1002, when Brian assumed the high-kingship, he himself is recorded as receiving the hostages of Connacht. Brian married Cathal's daughter, Dubchoblaig, who predeceased him in 1009, apparently childless. Cathal himself died in the following year. The annals say that he died in penitence, perhaps at Clonmacnoise, since the late king-list states that his death came two years after taking orders ('a dhul a nord crabhaidh'). He was succeeded as king of Connacht by his son, Tadc in Eich Gil. 


@@@@@


doc= 20513


O Conchobhair, Cathal (1152-1224), king of Connacht, was a son of Toirdelbach Mor Ua Conchobair (d. 1156), king of Connacht and high-king of Ireland. The third to rule Connacht after the Anglo-Normans arrived in Ireland, Cathal Croibhdhearg could not restore the high-kingship, but he secured a place for his kingdom within a wider world by obtaining rights and recognition from both the English crown and the papacy. He was honoured in several contemporary bardic poems and in the most majestic obituary eulogy in the Irish annals. 
According to his obituary, Cathal Croibhdhearg was born at Ballinchalla on Lough Mask, Mayo, and was three and a half years old when his father died. This places his birth in November 1152. Three of the many women with whom Toirdelbach had at least seventeen sons have been named as Cathal's mother. However, neither 'the daughter of MacDiarmata' (erroneously said to be also the mother of Cathal's much older brother Ruaidri Ua Conchobair), nor Derbforgaill, daughter of Domnall Mac Lochlainn (who died in 1151), is a convincing candidate; and the tradition that his mother was Gearrogingen hUi Mugroin, a concubine, is supported by an interpolation in the fifteenth-century 'Leabhar Donn'. However, much of the traditional story -- his exile as an agricultural labourer in Leinster as well as the witchcraft that caused his birthmark -- appears to be a fanciful construct. Ruaidri succeeded Toirdelbach and was himself succeeded in 1183 by his son Conchobhar Maonmhaighe, while Cathal was fostered by Tadhg Ua Concheanainn of the Ui Diarmada, one of the Siol Mhuireadhaigh chiefs who traditionally attended the king of Connacht's inauguration and formed his inner circle. It is noteworthy that Conchobhar Maonmhaighe was assassinated in 1189 by some of his own officials at the instigation of a rival, probably a brother, called Conchobhar of the Ui Diarmada. His son Cathal Carrach avenged his death, but it was Cathal Croibhdhearg who won the kingship. 
A poet patronized by Cathal Croibhdhearg O Conchobhair has given a striking, if somewhat idealized, image of him: 'He casts off the flower of his raiment while playing chess, he throws back his sleek soft hair with his long-fingered smooth red hand' (Greene and Kelly, 260). Clustering locks and tapering hands are standard bardic images, but the poets seem trustworthy when they say that Cathal's birthmark covered his left hand (which accounts for his epithet) and that he wore 'A crimson tunic like a red berry, a scarlet mantle decked with great ornaments, and a fine shirt like white chalk' (ibid.). Other items mentioned are his buskin with ornamental ribbing, his glove, and the ring on his left hand. O Conchobair married Mor (died 1217/18), daughter of Domnall Mor Ua Briain, king of Thomond. Two of their sons became kings of Connacht, Aodh ('r'. 1224-8) and Feidhlimidh ('r'. 1230-31 and 1233-65); their daughter Lasairfhiona (died 1282) married Domhnall Mor O Domhnaill, king of Tir Conaill. Other children were Taghd (died 1205), Toirdhealbhach (died 1214, a hostage with the Anglo-Normans), Sadhbh (died 1266), and the mysterious Ruaidri, who called Feidhlimidh his brother and Felix O Ruadhain, archbishop of Tuam, his uncle in a charter of 'c'.1230. 
O Conchobhair initially maintained his predecessor's hostile policy towards the Anglo-Normans, the treaty of Windsor (made on Ruaidri's submission to Henry II in 1175) having expired with Conchobhar Maonmhaighe's accession in 1183. After surviving a violent storm on Lough Ree in 1190 that claimed thirty-six of his men as his ship sank and fleet scattered, Cathal Croibhdhearg tried to revive the high-kingship by promoting himself as a national saviour, 'a beautiful salmon with red rounded fins' who would deal with the Anglo-Normans, described as 'blue shoals of coarse fish, ugly shapes' (O Cuiv, 'Eriu', 171). However, he found little demand for his services. He did send forces to aid the kings of Tir Conaill, Ulaid, and Desmond in 1195-6, but they were not used against the Anglo-Normans. 
In 1195, apparently after Count John had granted Connacht to William de Burgh, O Conchobhair burned castles in Tipperary where de Burgh had settlements. However, the same year he also revealed an understanding of Anglo-Norman society -- probably acquired from Anglo-Norman mercenaries employed in Connacht -- and a flair for diplomacy. Exploiting the jealousy caused by the grant, he made peace with Walter de Lacy and John de Courcy at Athlone. He also seems to have made a feudal grant of the cantred of Maonmhagh to Gilbert de Angulo, who provided him with military service. However, his attacks on Anglo-Norman settlements along and beyond the Shannon in 1199-1200 were very much in the Irish cattle-raid tradition. 
A series of military disasters made O Conchobhair seek long-term tenure under the English crown. He was routed leading off livestock in Westmeath and lost control of his kingdom in 1200 when de Burgh invaded it in support of Cathal Carrach. After he returned from northern Ireland in 1201 with Irish allies who deserted him, Cathal Carrach defeated his Anglo-Norman allies and he was imprisoned in Meath as security for wages. He did overthrow his rival in 1202 by making a (short-lived) alliance with de Burgh, and he was probably behind the massacre of de Burgh's troops in Connacht later that year. However, he offered no resistance to de Burgh's attacks in 1203. It was King John who stopped the conquest: he wanted a royal castle built at Athlone on the Shannon first. In 1205, during negotiations between the two kings, Cathal Croibhdhearg demanded that he hold one-third of Connacht in fee of the crown as a barony, and the remainder for tribute. By 1207 John had given him a charter. 
O Conchobhair tried to bridge the gap between Irish succession and Anglo-Norman primogeniture by making his son Aodh a co-ruler and calling him his heir. However, he offended King John in 1210 when, after assisting him against the Lacys, he arrived without Aodh, fearing for his safety when John offered to give Aodh his own charter. John seized hostages and had Athlone Castle built; but Cathal, after a serious illness, made amends with a fine and military service and spent Christmas with the justiciar, John de Gray. On 13 September 1215 John made grants of Connacht in fee both to O Conchobhair and to de Burgh's heir, Richard, warning Cathal that tenure depended on loyal service and assuring him that disseisin required the judgment of the king's court. When de Burgh tried to obtain seisin during Henry III's minority, O Conchobhair appealed to his uncle Hubert, justiciar of England; but when Walter de Lacy built Athleague Castle on the Shannon in 1221, Cathal knocked it down, allowing the garrison to leave first. However, despite this and a similar attack by the Connachtmen in 1223, O Conchobhair continued to receive royal protection, perhaps because the Lacy expansion into Breifne was unsanctioned. In 1224 the justiciar of Ireland vouched for his loyalty and supported his request that Aodh be given his own charter for Connacht as well as Breifne lands taken by the rebellious William de Lacy. The regency could not make permanent grants, but it granted Aodh the Breifne lands during pleasure. 
The papacy recognized O Conchobhair's royal rights even though it approved of English lordship over Ireland. In 1200-01 Innocent III confirmed, and warned him not to abuse, his prerogative to assent to ecclesiastical elections within his kingdom; he also answered his questions regarding sanctuary so authoritatively that his reply became 'Decretals', 3.49.6. However, Cathal's relationship with Felix O Ruadhain, elected archbishop of Tuam with the help of the papal legate in 1202, seems to have fluctuated. In 1213 Felix, whose diocesan reforms were controversial, was maintained by the justiciar during a period of exile; and in 1216 the pope seemed to rebuke O Conchobhair when he told him to help the archbishop to implement the decrees of the Lateran Council, suppress hereditary succession, and allow free elections. Whether Cathal was behind Felix's imprisonment on his return from Rome is unclear, but in 1220-21 Pope Honorius III granted Cathal and Aodh protection for themselves and their kingdom. His obituaries say that it was in Cathal's time that tithes were first levied in Ireland. 
Cathal Croibhdhearg O Conchobhair died on 27 May 1224. He was buried at the Cistercian house he had founded at Abbeyknockmoy, Galway, in 1190. The annals of Clonmacnoise say he died in Briole, Roscommon, but the other annals say that he died in the habit of a monk at Abbeyknockmoy. His other foundations were the Benedictine convent of Kilcreevanty ('c'.1200) -- which later became the chief Arroasian convent in Connacht -- and the Augustinian abbey of Ballintubber, Mayo (1216), a church that is still in use. The poets imply that Rathcroghan, in Roscommon, the traditional royal stronghold, was his chief seat. In the annals of Connacht's magnificent obituary eulogy, O Conchobhair is portrayed as fierce and feared, yet generous, peace-loving, pious, and pure, a model Celtic-Christian king with a reign of plenty. However, Cathal and his circle were more cosmopolitan than this characterization might suggest. It is significant that two bardic poems were written for him from abroad, one possibly from Scotland, where two of the poets he patronized sometimes resided, the other from near Monte Gargano, Italy, on the return portion of these two poets' pilgrimage to the Holy Land. One of them also visited the Roman curia. O Conchobhair seems to have had a highly developed, continental concept of royal prerogative. It is detectable in his relations with the papacy, in the growth of royal justice, and even, possibly, in the adoption of royal trappings not customarily used by Irish kings. The crowned head on a nave pier in Abbeyknockmoy -- with its fleurs-de-lis rising above the delicately wrought circlet and branching curled locks that seem to embody bardic ideals -- is thought to have been carved 'c'.1224, perhaps as a tribute to his benefactions. After Cathal's death, Aodh used the theocratic title 'Dei gratia' 'rex Connactie', while Feidhlimidh's effigy in the Dominican friary of Roscommon has a crown and sceptre with fleurs-de-lis. However, the story in the 'Histoire des ducs de Normandie' that Cathal graciously accepted King John's gift of a great warhorse in 1210, but removed the saddle before mounting it, cautions against exaggerating his acculturation. The use of a chancellor in Connacht predates his reign, but his administrative system was largely a homegrown product of the twelfth century that enabled the king of Connacht to become a more autocratic ruler. His reign was one of stability -- except for the years 1200-03 -- despite difficulties with a few sub-kings and rivals. 
Cathal Croibhdhearg O Conchobhair's death was a turning point. A widespread rebellion against Aodh in 1225 was suppressed with Anglo-Norman assistance but it revived Anglo-Norman interest in what now seemed a weak Connacht. After the conquest in 1235-6, Feidhlimidh held five cantreds (one-sixth of Connacht) of Henry III during pleasure, later less. Cathal's line through Aodh continued, but split into two rival branches, O Conchobhair Donn and O Conchobhair Ruadh, in 1384. The former has survived to the present, but the title 'king of Connacht' was not used after 1474. 
'A Vision of Connaught in the Thirteenth Century' by the poet James Clarence Mangan (1803-49) tells of the times of 'Cahal Mor of the Wine-red Hand'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20514


Cathal O'Connor (1540-1596), spy and rebel, was sent to Scotland when still a child and accompanied Henri Cleutin, seigneur d'Oysel, the French ambassador, to France in 1560. He petitioned Sir Francis Throckmorton for his restoration and was advised, in order to prove his loyalty to Elizabeth I, to join the household of Mary, queen of Scots, as a spy. He was rewarded with the restoration of lands in Offaly in 1563, including Castle Brackland, but joined the rebellion of James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald and Gerald fitz James Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond. He murdered Captain Henry Mackworth in 1582 and was forced to leave Ireland, first for Scotland, then for Spain. Cathal served Alessandro Farnese, duke of Parma, in the Netherlands but returned to Spain after the defeat of the Spanish Armada. He was known as Don Carlos, which caused unfortunate cases of mistaken identity because people thought that he was Philip II's only son with his first wife, and was granted an annual pension of 360 crowns. He continued to interest himself in Irish affairs, corresponding with Hugh O'Neill, second earl of Tyrone, and mediating for him with Philip. In November 1596 Cathal, along with his mother, wife, and children, joined the new armada planned for Ireland at Lisbon, and drowned when the ship carrying them was wrecked on the way there. 


@@@@@


doc= 20515


O'Connor, Feargus Edward (1796?-1855), Chartist leader, son of Roger O'Connor (1762-1834) and his second wife, Wilhelmina Bowen, of Connorville in the parish of Kinneigh, co. Cork, was born at Connorville, probably on 18 July 1796. Arthur O'Connor was his uncle. 
Feargus had three brothers (including Francisco Burdett O'Connor) and three sisters as well as a half-brother and half-sister from his father's earlier marriage. He came from a family of wealthy protestant landowners, although both his father and uncle changed their surnames from Conner to O'Connor and became United Irishmen. Feargus first attended school in London after his father's exile from Ireland in 1801 and was subsequently educated at several schools near Dublin. He probably went to Trinity College, Dublin, but did not take a degree. He lived on his father's Dangan Castle estate, co. Meath, where Roger O'Connor was allowed to return in 1803 and where as a young man Feargus pursued a keen interest in horse-racing. Around 1819 he was admitted to the King's Inns, Dublin, and in 1826 joined Gray's Inn, London; in 1830 he was admitted to the Irish bar, but he practised law only briefly. Around 1820 Feargus inherited the estate of Fort Robert, co. Cork, from his uncle Robert Conner. O'Connor was a reforming landlord and later claimed that he took part in Whiteboy activity. In 1822 he published his first political tract, 'A State of Ireland', in which he denounced corruption in local government. O'Connor did not participate in the movement for Catholic emancipation, but during the reform agitation of 1831-2 came forward as an advocate of Irish rights and democratic political reform. At this time his extraordinary talents as a public speaker first became evident. 
After the passing of the 'Reform Bill', O'Connor stormed the country organizing the registration of the new electorate. In the general election of December 1832 he was returned as a repealer at the head of the poll for co. Cork. As a member of Daniel O'Connell's repeal party, O'Connor was an outspoken critic of the whig government's policies in both Ireland and England. He soon allied himself with London's popular radicals and was involved in various radical campaigns, including those for press freedom and the return of the transported Dorchester labourers. In summer 1833 O'Connor clashed with O'Connell over the 'Liberator's' refusal to move a motion for the repeal of the union. O'Connell's faith in 'laissez-faire' political economy and hostility towards trade unionism further alienated O'Connor. He fully detailed his differences with O'Connell in his 'Series of Letters... to Daniel O'Connell', published in October 1836. O'Connor was re-elected for co. Cork in 1835, but was unseated in June 1835 owing to his lack of the necessary freehold property qualification. The same month he offered himself as a radical candidate for the seat at Oldham vacated by William Cobbett's death, and although he withdrew early on the first day's polling, his thirty-two votes were enough to secure victory for the tory candidate over Cobbett's son. O'Connor now embarked on a career primarily as a leader of English popular radicalism, although he continued to bring Irish issues to the fore. 
As an independent agitator O'Connor did more than any single leader to lay the groundwork for Chartism. Having founded the Marylebone Radical Association in September 1835, he toured the industrial north as its missionary in 1835 and 1836, establishing radical associations and campaigning for universal male suffrage, repeal of the newspaper stamp, abolition of the new poor law, and shorter factory hours. In November 1836 he became an honorary member of the London Working Men's Association (LWMA), and in March 1838 he supported the formation of the London Democratic Association, an ultra-radical rival to the LWMA. However, O'Connor increasingly turned his attention to the industrial districts of England and Scotland. Most significantly, in 1837 he established the 'Northern Star', a weekly newspaper published at Leeds. Within four weeks of the paper's first number (18 November 1837) the paper was returning a profit and within a year it was the most widely circulated provincial paper in the land. The 'Northern Star' became, in effect, Chartism's official journal, publishing not only O'Connor's weekly letter addressed to the 'unshaved chins, blistered hands, and fustian jackets', but a wide range of local Chartist news. In the columns of O'Connor's paper adherents became aware of the movement's national scope. The establishment of the 'Star' coincided with the height of the anti-poor law agitation in which O'Connor joined Richard Oastler and the Revd J. R. Stephens at large rallies characterized by violent rhetoric. O'Connor's influence was crucial during the spring of 1838 in committing the forces of northern working-class radicalism to the Birmingham Political Union's national petition, the 'People's Charter' drawn up by the LWMA, and plans for a national convention. He attended nearly all the 'monster' demonstrations from the late summer through the winter of 1838 that elected delegates to the convention. He assumed the role of national leader, co-ordinating and unifying the agitation. But O'Connor's close identification with the lawless tone of northern radicalism, his presence at torchlight meetings, and his refusal to dissociate himself from Stephens and from recommendations for popular arming, alarmed moderate leaders in Birmingham, London, and Scotland. O'Connor openly confronted his critics in their own districts, where he won overwhelming approval from the local rank and file. 
At the Chartist convention which assembled on 4 February 1839, O'Connor was from the beginning the chief figure, declaring the body to be 'the only constituted authority representing the people of this country' ('Charter', 24 Feb 1839, 76). The convention faltered over the question of what to do once parliament rejected the petition. O'Connor continually pressed the convention to take decisive action in conformity with his own strategy for attaining the 'Charter' through intimidation and the mere threat of violent conflict. In July 1839, however, after the convention had committed the movement to a 'national holiday', O'Connor's opposition was crucial in reversing this decision on the grounds that Chartists were unprepared for a showdown with government authorities and in substituting a token three-day strike. O'Connor probably knew something of the secret plans afoot for armed insurrection in autumn 1839, although he left for Ireland on 5 October and did not return to England until 2 November. He was not involved in the preparations for the Newport rising on 4 November and warned Chartists against clandestine associations. 
On 17 March 1840 O'Connor was found guilty at York assizes of seditious libel for speeches -- his own and those of others -- published in the 'Northern Star', and on 11 May he was sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment in York Castle. From prison he continued to write for the 'Northern Star'. Despite his relatively good treatment in prison, he fully exploited the popular image of the patriot martyr. In July 1840 the National Charter Association (NCA), Chartism's most important national association, was established. O'Connor strove to make it the party of all Chartists. He first joined the NCA executive in September 1843 as treasurer and was re-elected annually until 1851. On 30 August 1841 O'Connor was released from prison. Ever the populist showman, he emerged wearing a suit of working man's fustian to signal his allegiance to the people. 
Until after 1848 O'Connor had no real rivals for the loyalty and active support of Chartism's rank and file, who regarded his leadership as crucial to maintaining national unity. During the early 1840s, however, O'Connor clashed with various radical leaders over Chartism's direction. In spring 1841 he condemned 'Church Chartism, Teetotal Chartism, Knowledge Chartism, and Household Suffrage Chartism' ('Northern Star', 3 April 1841, 1), based on his fears that such tendencies could lead to sectarianism or compromise the movement. More serious was the split over the Complete Suffrage Union (CSU), a middle-class initiative launched by the Birmingham Liberal Joseph Sturge and aimed at uniting middle-class and working-class reformers. During 1842 various leaders, including William Lovett and James Bronterre O'Brien, welcomed the CSU. While O'Connor anticipated winning the 'industrious portion' of the middle class (principally shopkeepers) to Chartism, he viewed the complete suffrage move as an attempt to undermine his own leadership and Chartism's independence as a working-class movement. O'Connor again faced trial on 1 March 1843 at Lancaster, along with fifty-eight others, on charges of seditious conspiracy arising from the Chartist strikes that swept the industrial districts of the north and midlands in August 1842. O'Connor supported these strikes, although he held factory owners belonging to the Anti-Corn Law League responsible for their instigation. Convicted on one count, that of endeavouring to excite disaffection by unlawfully encouraging a stoppage of labour, O'Connor was never brought up for sentencing owing to a procedural error. 
As Chartism waned during the years 1843-7, O'Connor kept the suffrage demand to the fore, although he encouraged causes he deemed complementary. He supported Lord Ashley's factory bill, backed O'Connell's final push for repeal of the 'Act of Union', and rallied support for trade unionism. He opposed the Anti-Corn Law League, and in August 1844 he engaged Richard Cobden in public debate at Northampton. Increasingly, however, O'Connor stressed the importance of working people's alienation from the land. As early as 1841 he declared: 'Lock-up the land to-morrow, and I would not give you two pence for the Charter the next day' ('Northern Star', 24 July 1841, 1). In 1843 an NCA conference at Birmingham approved his proposal for establishing Chartist land communities, although it was not until April 1845 that the Chartist Co-operative Land Society was established. His scheme was to buy agricultural estates, divide them into smallholdings, and let the holdings by ballot. O'Connor elaborated his agrarian vision in his book 'A Practical Work on the Management of Small Farms', published in 1843, in the 'Northern Star', and in 'The Labourer' (4 vols., 1847-8), a monthly journal that he co-edited with Ernest Jones. The land plan is best understood in terms of long-standing popular radical interest in and ideas on the land and notions of collective self-reliance. After 1845 much of O'Connor's energy was absorbed by the land plan, raising money, trying to register the company as a friendly society, buying land, and supervising the building of cottages. On May Day 1847 settlers moved into O'Connorville, an estate near Watford, the first of five Chartist settlements (Charterville at Minster Lovell, near Oxford, survives largely intact). At the general election of July 1847 O'Connor was returned at Nottingham, becoming Chartism's first and only MP. 
In 1848, inspired in part by the revolution in France and bolstered by co-operation with Irish nationalists, Chartism again mobilized large numbers with O'Connor at its head. A third national petition was organized and a convention sat to co-ordinate Chartist strategy. O'Connor presided at the great Kennington Common demonstration on 10 April 1848 and managed to persuade the people to abandon the proposed procession to the House of Commons to present the petition, thus avoiding a violent confrontation with government troops, police, and a large middle-class force enrolled as special constables. That evening O'Connor presented the national petition to the Commons, claiming that it contained 5,706,000 signatures. O'Connor was greatly embarrassed when the committee on petitions reported that the total came to 1,975,496, a figure that included many bogus signatures. In summer 1848 a select committee of the House of Commons reported that the land company was illegal, although O'Connor was found to have sunk $3400 of his own money in the company. In fact, the company's legal problems arose directly from the refusal of parliament and the law courts to allow for a popularly owned and controlled association of smallholders. After 1848 Chartism went into sharp decline, although O'Connor remained a prominent leader, offering radical redirection without sanctioning socialism. 
Some time in 1851 O'Connor suffered the onset of serious mental illness, perhaps the final stage of syphilis. There is no indication that he was possessed of anything but fully sound mind before this. On his return from a visit to the United States in 1852, he struck two fellow members in the Commons, and was arrested and confined in the Palace of Westminster. In June 1852 he was admitted to Dr Harrington Tuke's asylum at Chiswick, where he remained until just before his death. O'Connor died on 30 August 1855 at his sister Harriet's home, 18 Albert Terrace, Notting Hill, London. Fifty thousand persons were reported to have attended his funeral on 10 September at Kensal Green. O'Connor never married, although in the 1830s it was rumoured that he and Louisa Nisbett, a celebrated actress, were lovers. He fathered several illegitimate children. Through much of his Chartist career he lived in Hammersmith, having leased his Irish estate; he died a poor man. His claim that he exhausted his personal wealth in the cause of radicalism is probably true. 
Physically imposing, possessed of enormous energy and gentlemanly bearing, O'Connor fitted the popular image of the gentleman orator. Although he wrote profusely for the 'Northern Star' and other Chartist journals and published over twenty political tracts, O'Connor was an activist rather than a theoretician. The early histories of Chartism portrayed him as vainglorious and irresponsible, a rabble-rouser who wrecked the work of Lovett and a small band of enlightened artisans. Recent studies, however, stress O'Connor's efforts to impart national unity, organizational coherence, and direction to a diverse political movement and recognize his extraordinary ascendancy over almost all sections of the movement as well as the degree to which he was held accountable to his followers. 


@@@@@


doc= 20516


O'Connor, Hugh, Don (1617-1669), soldier, was the eldest son of Calvach O'Connor Don (1584-1655) and his wife, Mary, daughter of Sir Theobald Bourke, or Tibbot 'na long' (of the ships). He in turn married Isabella Bourke. The name Don (from 'donn', 'brown') was used to distinguish this, the senior, branch of the sept from the O'Connor Roe ('rua', 'red') branch. At the outbreak of the 1641 rising Calvach assumed leadership of the Catholic insurgents in north Connaught with specific responsibility for co. Roscommon. As early as Christmas eve 1641 Hugh was present at an attack on the abbey of Roscommon as a colonel in the insurgent army, along with other detachments from Leitrim and Longford. According to the historian Edmund Borlase he was captured in January 1642 while besieging Castle Coote, a strong government outpost south of Ballintober on the Galway border. In fact, he was captured there later, in March/April 1642, most likely while making an unsuccessful cattle raid. His capture caused the insurgents to suspend hostilities until July 1642: '[Calvach] O'Conner Dun of Ballintobber, ever since his son was taken, till now had acted nothing, though the tacit votes of the province did seem to own him as their king' (Borlase, 81). Calvach O'Connor then mustered an army of more than 2000 infantry near Ballintober but the force was routed in a pre-emptive strike by government forces from Athlone. 
Hugh O'Connor was imprisoned at Castle Coote before being brought to Dublin in February 1643 for questioning. At his interrogation he justified the rising by the Roscommon gentry on the grounds that it was 'the King's pleasure that the said gentry should take up arms for that the Puritan Parliament of England would otherwise destroy them' (examination of Hugh O'Connor, 1643). He defended himself against accusations of having murdered Hugh Connaghan, a footman of Major Ormsby of Boyle, on the grounds that it was a justifiable act of war because Connaghan was intercepted bringing a message to Castle Coote. He was subsequently released, most likely after the cessation of September 1643. He retained the rank of colonel but did not serve with either of the two Connaught regiments which joined Castlehaven's Ulster expedition of 1644, in the 1645 expedition to recover Sligo, or in the 1646 campaign which finally secured all of co. Roscommon for the confederate Catholics. In July 1652 he was one of the royalist officers who concluded articles of surrender with the Cromwellians. A condition of the articles was that he could recruit his followers for the Spanish service. By June 1653 he had raised 200 soldiers but, while preparing to embark, he was again questioned about the alleged murder of Connaghan. On this occasion he offered the primary defence of alibi rather than justification, claiming that he was absent in Mayo when his father condemned Connaghan to death for, allegedly, having deserted from the insurgent army. He was acquitted and ultimately followed the exiled Charles II to France where he served as a captain in the duke of Gloucester's regiment. 
After the Restoration in 1660 he applied for the restoration of his estate of about 6000 acres but died in 1669 before the claim was decided. In 1683 his son Hugh 'og' recovered 1100 acres of the original estate. There are faint echoes of the former prominence of the O'Connor Don lineage in popular acclamation of Calvach as 'King of Connacht' (deposition of Elizabeth Holliwell), at the time of the rising. In the event, neither Calvach nor Hugh O'Connor lived up to popular expectations and the 'Old English' Bourkes, Dillons, and Taaffes assumed the leadership of the Catholic cause in Connaught. 


@@@@@


doc= 20517


O'Connor, James Arthur (1792-1841), artist, was born at 15 St Aston's Quay, Dublin. His father, William O'Connor (died 'c'.1807), was a printseller and engraver, and is likely to have trained him in his profession. O'Connor did not pursue a career in that field himself, however, but quickly took to landscape painting, in which he may have received some direction from the Irish painter William Sadler ('c'.1782-1839). He first exhibited in 1809, at the Dublin Society and the Society of Artists of Ireland. About 1812, he made the acquaintance of two young landscape painters, George Petrie and Francis Danby, and in 1813 these three friends made an expedition to London, where possibly all, and certainly Petrie, were presented to Benjamin West. Petrie soon left London for home, and a short time afterwards, O'Connor and Danby, having run out of money, followed his example, arriving on foot at Bristol, where Danby decided to stay, while O'Connor continued on to Dublin to care for his sisters, now orphaned. He exhibited regularly in Dublin and received some important commissions, including a series of sixteen paintings for the second marquess of Sligo and Lord Clanricarde. In 1818 O'Connor was also directly involved in the organization of the 'Exhibition of the artists of Ireland'. During this period he married a woman called Anastatia Agnes. Despite his heightened profile and receipt of a premium of 25 guineas from the Royal Irish Institute, O'Connor returned to London in 1822, sensing that it would afford him greater opportunities. His name appears in the catalogue of the Royal Academy for the first time that year, and on sixteen subsequent occasions, up to 1840. He also exhibited with the Society of British Artists, of which he was elected a member. His contributions were always landscapes. In May 1826 he proceeded to Brussels in the company of a dealer, and remained until the following year. While there he is reputed to have painted several successful pictures, but the expedition proved unfortunate as he was swindled out of a sum of money, possibly by the dealer himself. He continued to exhibit at the British Institution, the Society of British Artists, and the Royal Academy, and visited Ireland in 1830 (and possibly in 1828). In September 1832 O'Connor and his wife went to Paris, where he continued painting, with some success, until the following May. They planned to visit Italy, but decided on the advice and offers of lucrative introductions of a stranger, who also proved to be a swindler, to travel instead to the region of the Saar and Moselle in Germany. O'Connor was so delighted with the landscape that he abandoned his Italian tour altogether and stayed there for six months, travelling extensively and painting throughout. He and Anastatia arrived back in London on 1 November 1833. 
Over the next six years, O'Connor showed his work at the principal London exhibitions, but otherwise enjoyed at best moderate success. In 1839 his health began to decline, and his incapacitation led to considerable pecuniary difficulties, from which he was partly extricated by the generosity of Sir Charles Coote, who commissioned a picture and paid for it in advance. O'Connor was deeply appreciative of Coote's beneficence, and may have returned to Ireland before his death to paint a picture for him. He exhibited at the Royal Hibernian Academy for just the second time in 1840. O'Connor died at his home, 6 Marlborough Street, College Street, Brompton, on 7 January 1841, leaving his wife in financial straits. About fifty of his landscapes were sold at Christies on 12 February 1842, but none realized much money. According to his obituarist, O'Connor was 'a spirit of exceeding mildness; manly, ardent, unobtrusive, and sincere; generous in proclaiming contemporary merit, and unskilled and reluctant to put forth his own' ('Dublin Monthly Magazine', April 1842). 
Though O'Connor was committed almost exclusively to landscape, there is considerable variety in his work which ranged from topographical pictures such as 'View of Westport with Croagh Patrick' (1818; Westport House, co. Mayo), and 'Westport House' ('c'.1818; priv. coll.), to picturesque rural scenes which demonstrate his knowledge of and debt to the work of Claude such as 'Landscape with Mill' (1821; priv. coll.); 'A River Scene, Co. Wicklow' (1828; priv. coll.), and the romantic landscapes of 'Thunderstorm, the Frightened Wagoner' (1832) and 'The Poachers' (1835) (both National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin), all of which he executed with great facility and application. 


@@@@@


doc= 20518


O'Connor, John (1824-1887), lawyer and politician in Canada, was born on 21 January 1824 in Boston, Massachusetts, the son of John and Mary O'Connor, who had emigrated thence from co. Kerry, Ireland, in 1823. In 1828 they moved to the Roman Catholic settlement of Maidstone township, Essex county, Upper Canada. Unable to work on his parents' farm after an accident in which he lost his left leg, O'Connor began in 1848 to study law, first in Sandwich (Windsor) and then in Toronto. In April 1849 he married Mary Barrett; they had nine children. He was admitted to the bar of Upper Canada in 1854 and worked first in Windsor and then, from 1863 to 1865, in Toronto. He was very active in local politics in Essex in the 1860s, and represented the county in the legislative assembly in 1863 and again from 1867 to 1874. The only Irish Roman Catholic member at a time when Ontario's Irish Catholics were becoming an important political force, he had some success in forging a Catholic-Conservative alliance. From 1872 to 1873 he served in the government of Sir John A. Macdonald as president of the privy council, minister of inland revenue, and finally postmaster-general, but he was defeated in Essex in the federal election of 1874. 
O'Connor left Windsor to establish a legal practice in Ottawa, where he was again active in Irish Catholic affairs. He was found a safe seat in 1878 and was returned to parliament as the member for Russell and held a number of minor cabinet offices between 1878 and 1881. By this time illness prevented his regular attendance at cabinet meetings and debates and his cultivating his constituents. He pestered Macdonald for help, not least because he was in financial need. Macdonald dismissed him from his cabinet but was finally persuaded to appoint him judge of the court of queen's bench for Ontario on 11 September 1884, in which office he proved 'an embarrassment to both the government and the bench' (Swainson). While he was regarded by the legal profession as incompetent through illness and lack of practice, O'Connor saw himself as underpaid and generally ill-used. His action against the government for extra payment for legal work was being heard when he died at Cobourg, Ontario, on 3 November 1887. Swainson considers that his successes were won not because of his personal abilities or merits, but because he was the only person able to represent the Ontario Irish Catholics when their support mattered to the Conservative Party. 


@@@@@


doc= 20519


O'Connor, John (1830-1889), scene-painter and topographical painter, was born on 12 August 1830 in co. Londonderry, the third son of Francis O'Connor and his wife, Rose Cunningham; both his parents worked in the theatrical business. He was educated at the Church Educational Society's school in Dublin. Orphaned by 1842, he supported himself and his grandfather, Francis O'Connor, up to the latter's death in 1845. His mother's brother was lessee of the Belfast and Liverpool theatres and O'Connor assisted with scene painting and acted as call-boy at the Dublin theatre. In 1845 he joined a travelling group of actors as scene-painter but, to make a better living, he returned to Dublin and made silhouettes with the pantograph. In 1844 he painted scenery for Sir E. Tierney and in 1847 for the earl of Bective. On 2 April 1848 he arrived in London, having brought introductions to scene-painters, and afterwards worked at the Drury Lane Theatre. In October he became one of the scene-painters at the Haymarket Theatre, where John Baldwin Buckstone was manager and playwright between 1853 and 1878; he was principal scene-painter here from 1863 to 1878. 
O'Connor returned to Ireland in the summer of 1849 to paint scenes for the moving diorama of the visit of Queen Victoria to that country. The diorama was shown by Philip Phillips in 1850 at the Chinese Gallery at Hyde Park Corner, London, where O'Connor lived for over a year until the exhibition closed. In 1864 he painted the scenery for the Shakespeare tercentenary performances at Stratford upon Avon; he also designed tableaux vivants held at Cromwell House and elsewhere, including Shakespearian scenes (1874), 'The Tale of Troy' (1883), 'The Dream of Fair Women' (1884), the 'Masque of Painters' (1886), and the 'Masque of Flowers' (1887). At Cambridge, as a member of the Cambridge Amateur Dramatic Club, he painted scenery for productions of Greek dramas, including 'Ajax' (1882), 'The Birds' (1883), 'The Eumenides' (1886), and 'Oedipus tyrannus' (1887). He also produced scenery for private theatrical performances and had many patrons in London society. By the 1870s he had gained the reputation of being a most talented scene-painter, with few equals as a master of architectural design, and an admirable colourist. In 1878 he resigned from his post at the Haymarket Theatre in order to concentrate on conventional painting, though he later painted act-drops for Sadler's Wells Theatre and St James's Theatre and the 'Minuet' act-drop for the Haymarket Theatre. 
From 1853 to 1888 O'Connor exhibited oils and watercolours of architectural subjects at the Society of British Artists (twenty-six works), the British Institution (six works), and the New Watercolour Society (twelve works). He showed at the Royal Academy for the first time in 1857 and thereafter in most years, especially in the 1870s and 1880s, up to 1888. In 1855 he made the first of many visits to the continent, where he made studies for future pictures. He later travelled to France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and Algeria, and the majority of his exhibited works were of continental, mainly architectural, subjects. From 1855 to 1858 he was drawing-master at the London and South-Western Literary and Scientific Institution. During the Franco-Prussian War he was in Sedan; he published a first-hand description, 'Three days in Sedan', in 'The Dark Blue' in July 1871. During the Prussian occupation of Paris, he visited that city several times with the son of the duke of Sutherland, Lord Ronald Gower, a sculptor; in 1872 he took a studio with Gower at 47 Leicester Square, in the house formerly occupied by Sir Joshua Reynolds. In 1874 O'Connor was commissioned by the first duke of Westminster to decorate rooms at Eaton Hall with three large oil paintings (only two were apparently completed), and eight smaller views of Cliveden, Trentham, and Dunrobin for the first duchess's sitting-room (unrecorded in inventories in the 1920s, and untraced). Probably through his contacts with the Westminster and Sutherland families, he was commissioned to paint watercolours for Queen Victoria, 'The Marriage Procession of Princess Louise, 1871' and 'Queen Victoria Driving out of Buckingham Palace with the Duke and Duchess of Edinburgh, 1874' (both Royal Collection). He was among the artists who contributed to the decoration of Lawrence Alma-Tadema's house in St John's Wood, London. In 1878 he built a house and studio at 28 Abercorn Place, St John's Wood, where he lived until his health failed; in 1888 he went to live at Yateley, Hampshire. He became an associate of the Royal Hibernian Academy in 1883 and a member of the Royal Institute of Painters in Watercolour in 1887. O'Connor was married twice and had two sons from each marriage. He travelled to India to see the two younger ones, but soon after his return he died of paralysis on 23 May 1889 at his home, Heath Croft, in Yateley; he was buried in Finchley cemetery, Middlesex. Lord Ronald Gower wrote that 'he was not only a good artist, but a thoroughly good fellow, which is a much scarcer quality than the former' (Gower, 92). 


@@@@@


doc= 20520


O'Connor, Luke Smythe (1806-1873), army officer, born in Dublin on 15 April 1806, was appointed ensign in the 1st West India regiment on 27 April 1827, becoming lieutenant on 22 March 1831, captain on 17 January 1834, brevet major on 9 November 1846, major on 1 January 1847, brevet lieutenant-colonel on 3 February 1853, brevet colonel on 28 November 1854, regimental lieutenant-colonel on 21 September 1855, and major-general on 24 April 1866. All his regimental commissions were in the 1st West India, of which he was adjutant in 1833-4. When it was decided, in 1843, that the garrisons on the African west coast should be supplied by the West India regiments instead of by the 3rd West India alone, as previously, O'Connor was detached from Barbados to Sierra Leone with two companies of his regiment. In 1848, as major, O'Connor was sent from his regiment in Jamaica to British Honduras, where there were disturbances with the Yucatan. 
In September 1852 O'Connor was appointed governor of the Gambia, and was invested with the command of all the troops in west Africa. On his advice the headquarters were removed from Sierra Leone to Cape Coast Castle. He commanded detachments of the three West India regiments, black pensioners, Gambia militia, and seamen and marines against the Muslim rebels of Combos, stormed their stronghold of Sabajee on 1 June 1853, and acquired by treaty a considerable tract of territory, for which he received official praise from the government. On 16 July 1853 he attacked and repulsed a numerous force of Muslims under Omar Hadjee, the 'Black Prophet', during which action, out of 240 British, 29 were killed and 53 wounded. O'Connor was wounded with two shots through the right arm and one in the left shoulder, but remained in action. He subsequently commanded the combined British and French forces against the Muslim rebels of Upper and Lower Combos. After four hours' fighting in the pass of Boccow Kooka on 4 August 1855, he stormed the rebel stockade and routed the enemy, who lost some 500 men. He received the reward for distinguished service in 1855 and the CB on 4 February 1856. 
O'Connor was brigadier-general commanding the troops in Jamaica during the 1865 rebellion, and was thanked for his prompt and efficient measures by Governor Eyre, the legislative council and house of assembly, and by the magistrate and inhabitants of Kingston. He was president of the legislative council and senior member of the privy council of Jamaica in January 1867; he administered the government during the absence of Sir John Peter Grant and retired shortly afterwards. 
O'Connor married Anne Mitchell in 1856; she survived him. He died of dropsy and atrophy at 7 Racknitzstrasse, Dresden, Saxony, on 24 March 1873. 


@@@@@


doc= 20521


Ua Conchobair, Ruaidri (d. 1118), king of Connacht, was the son of Aed Ua Conchobair (d. 1067), a member of the Sil Muiredaig branch of Ui Briuin Ai, and of Caillech Caemgein, daughter of Ocan Ua Fallamain, probably of Clann Uadach in Roscommon. He first appears on record in 1076, described as king of Connacht, submitting to the Munster king, Toirdelbach Ua Briain, who expelled him from kingship three years later. He killed the king of west Connacht, Aed Ua Flaithbertaig, in 1079 and a family rival, Cathal Ua Conchobair, in 1082. At the battle of Conachail in 1087, assisted by the clergy of Clonmacnoise bearing the relics of St Ciaran, he defeated his father's vanquisher, Aed Ua Ruairc, thereby securing his family's hold on the kingship. By this stage he had probably married the first of at least four wives, the daughter of Ua hEgra of Luigne, who bore him at least one daughter. 
In 1088 Ua Conchobair fended off a land and sea invasion by Muirchertach Ua Briain, whose forces he slaughtered, and retaliated with three raids on Munster; then he submitted at Raith Cruachan to Ua Briain's rival for the high-kingship, Domnall Mac Lochlainn of Ailech, joining him on another such raid. In 1089 Ua Briain felled the sacred tree at Ruadbethach in Galway, though Ua Conchobair also blocked Ua Briain's attempted passage up the Shannon and joined forces with Domnall Ua Mail Shechnaill of Mide on a retaliatory naval raid, attacking Munster again in the two succeeding years. Clearly a threat to the authority of Muirchertach Ua Briain, Ua Conchobair was present when the latter gave hostages to Mac Lochlainn in 1090, joining him in his submission. However, his promising career was brought to a halt in 1092 when he was treacherously blinded by Flaithbertach Ua Flaithbertaig of west Connacht, his foster son with whom he had entered bonds of baptismal sponsorship on seven occasions. Revenge for the deed came when Ua Flaithbertaig was murdered six years later. 
Ua Briain took advantage of Ruaidri Ua Conchobair's plight to raid Connacht in 1092, though his invasion of the province two years later was unsuccessful. In 1093, Ruaidri's son Niall was killed by the Conmaicne; and in 1094 another son, Tadc (whose mother was a daughter of Eicnechan Ua Cuind of Muinter Gilgain, Longford), triumphed over their enemies in west Connacht at the battle of Fidnacha, though he was himself treacherously killed in 1097 by one of his own followers. Another son, Conchobar, was killed in or before 1103, by his own foster brother, a member of Clann Chosraig of Ui Briuin Seola. 
Thereafter another son of Ruaidri Ua Conchobair, Domnall -- whose mother was a daughter of Ua Conaing of Dal Cais -- came to prominence, participating as king of Connacht in Ua Briain's Mag Coba campaign of 1103; but the latter deposed him in 1106, whereupon the most famous of Ruaidri's sons, Toirdelbach Mor Ua Conchobair (whose mother, Mor (died 1088), was the daughter of Toirdelbach Ua Briain) was inaugurated as king and ruled until his death in 1156. Little is known of their father, Ruaidri, throughout all this time, other than that he died in Clonmacnoise in 1118; he may well have retired there after his blinding. 


@@@@@


doc= 20522


Ua Conchobair, Ruaidri (c.1116-1198), high-king of Ireland, was the son of Toirdelbach Ua Conchobair (1088-1156), king of Connacht and high-king, and of Caillech De, daughter of Ua hEidin, king of Ui Fiachrach Aidne. 
Ruaidri is first mentioned in 1136 when, aged about twenty, he was imprisoned by his father despite being under the protection of ecclesiastical sureties. In 1143 he was again taken prisoner by his brother, Conchobar, acting under the authority of their father, suggesting that Ruaidri already by that stage was bidding for succession to the kingship of Connacht. Conchobar was killed in 1144, while another brother, Tadg, died shortly after, following which Ruaidri was released from captivity through the intercession of the clergy. He may have been regarded as successor designate to the kingship from that date. In 1147 he led a great raid into Dartraige (in what is now co. Leitrim), and in a separate incident instigated the capture of a rival dynast, Domnall Ua Conchobair, by Toirdelbach Ua Briain, king of Thomond. In 1153, as part of his father's campaign against Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn, king of Cenel nEogain, and contender for the high-kingship, Ruaidri was in command of the battalions of west Connacht, when his camp at Fardrum (Westmeath) suffered a surprise attack from Mac Lochlainn's army. 
On his father's death in 1156 Ruaidri Ua Conchobair succeeded as king of Connacht, moving quickly to secure his position by blinding his brother Brian Breifnech and taking two other brothers, Brian Luignech and Muirchertach Muimnech, as prisoners. In 1157, while Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn, newly acknowledged as high-king, was campaigning to assert his dominance in Munster, Ruaidri hosted into Cenel nEogain in his absence, thereby signifying his intention to contest the high-kingship against Mac Lochlainn; Ruaidri then moved on to campaign himself in Munster, restoring Toirdelbach Ua Briain as king of Thomond, exacting hostages from Diarmait Mac Carthaig, king of Desmond, and retaining a large fleet on the Shannon, actions intended as a direct challenge to Mac Lochlainn's high-kingship. In 1158 Ruaidri sent a marauding fleet to Cenel nEogain. In 1159 his erection of a new bridge at Athlone, which afforded ready access into Mide, led to conflict at the site with Donnchad Ua Maelsechlainn, king of Mide, at which Ruaidri's son and potential successor ('ridamna'), Aed, lost his life. Later in the same year Ua Conchobair led an army against Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn to Ardee (Louth), where, however, he suffered a decisive defeat which Mac Lochlainn followed up with raiding in Connacht, destroying a series of strongholds. In 1160 a meeting between Mac Lochlainn and Ruaidri at Assaroe (Donegal) concluded without a truce. In 1161 Ruaidri hosted into Leinster and installed his own nominees in the north Leinster kingships of Ui Faelain and Ui Failge at the expense of Diarmait Mac Murchada, provincial king of Leinster. Ruaidri subsequently gave four hostages to Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn as high-king in return for a derogated overlordship of Breifne, Conmaicne, the western half of Mide, and the southern half of Ireland, though in 1162 Diarmait Ua Maelsechlainn paid 100 ounces of gold for the restoration to him of west Mide. In 1164, continuing with his father's policy of encastellation, Ua Conchobair erected a castle at Tuam and in 1166 he endowed a new gold reliquary for the shrine of St Manchan of Mohill (Leitrim), again imitative of his father's patronage of ecclesiastical art. 
Following the assassination of Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn in 1166 Ruaidri Ua Conchobair and Diarmait Mac Murchada, king of Leinster, emerged as the main contenders for the high-kingship. The decisive turning point in Ruaidri's favour was the wresting of control of the city of Dublin from Mac Murchada, who was exiled on 1 August 1166. Ua Conchobair was acknowledged as high-king at a major convention at Athlone in 1166, at which the allegiance of Dublin was secured by a stipend of 4000 cows from Ruaidri. In 1167 and 1168 he celebrated the traditional fair of Tailtiu at the ancient assembly site of Teltown (Meath) as a ceremonial assertion of his high-kingship. Another assembly at Athboy in 1167 was attended by the archbishops of Armagh, Tuam, and Dublin, and the kings of Breifne, Airgialla, Ulaid, Mide, and Dublin, whose combined forces reputedly numbered thirteen thousand horsed soldiers. Ua Conchobair had not yet, however, secured recognition from Cenel nEogain and, in pursuit of that objective, he dispatched a fleet to Derry and himself led a near national army into Cenel nEogain, where he effected a partition between the rival lineages of Mac Lochlainn and Ua Neill, with Niall Mac Lochlainn receiving the northern portion and Aed Ua Neill that south of Slieve Gullion. In 1168 the new kings of Cenel nEogain, accompanied by the abbot of Derry, were received by Ruaidri at Athlone and accepted stipend. In 1169 he donated an annual stipend of ten cows to support the teaching of students from Ireland and Scotland, a gesture intended to secure endorsement of his high-kingship from the primatial church of Armagh. 
Ruaidri Ua Conchobair's failure to prevent the return to Leinster in the autumn of 1167 of Diarmait Mac Murchada with Anglo-Norman mercenaries and the latter's recovery of his patrimonial kingdom of Ui Chennselaig (south Leinster) was to have momentous consequences: the Anglo-Norman commentator, Gerald of Wales, depicts Diarmait Mac Murchada on his return as determined 'to bring Connacht under his control together with the kingship of all Ireland' (Giraldus Cambrensis, 52). Ruaidri was content to host into Leinster and to exact compensation on behalf of his ally, Tigernan Ua Ruairc, king of Breifne, for Mac Murchada's abduction of the latter's wife in 1152, and to take hostages, including Mac Murchada's legitimate son and potential successor, Conchobar. Ruaidri was too preoccupied with asserting his authority in Munster, which he invaded and partitioned in 1168 between Domnall Ua Briain, king of Thomond, and Diarmait Mac Carthaig, king of Desmond, and in Mide, which he divided in 1169, assigning the eastern portion to Tigernan Ua Ruairc of Breifne and retaining the western half himself. In 1170 Ruaidri sought to penetrate Domnall Ua Briain's kingdom of Thomond, but the latter stalled the attempt by securing the assistance of an Anglo-Norman force provided by Diarmait Mac Murchada, who was his father-in-law. Following Ua Conchobair's failure to prevent Mac Murchada's capture of Dublin in September 1170 with the assistance of Richard fitz Gilbert, earl of Pembroke and lord of Striguil (known as Strongbow), Ruaidri executed Mac Murchada's hostaged son, Conchobar. After Mac Murchada's death in May 1171, Ruaidri besieged Dublin but again failed to dislodge the Anglo-Norman garrison, which succeeded in mounting a surprise sortie on his decamped army and lifting his blockade. The claim made by Gerald of Wales that Ruaidri submitted to Henry II during the latter's expedition to Ireland in 1171-2 is contradicted by the evidence both of the Irish annals and of other Anglo-Norman chroniclers. Henry may have planned an expedition against Connacht in the summer of 1172, but, if so, it was pre-empted by the rebellion of his son, which determined his withdrawal from Ireland shortly before Easter 1172. Henry's grants before his departure from Ireland of the lordships of Leinster and of Meath to Richard fitz Gilbert and Hugh de Lacy respectively and the consequent removal of these two former provincial kingdoms from the orbit of influence of Ruaidri Ua Conchobair effectively marked the end of his high-kingship. In 1173 Ruaidri's son, Conchobar Maenmaige, led a battalion from Connacht to aid Domnall Ua Briain in dislodging an Anglo-Norman garrison in Kilkenny, and in 1174 assisted Domnall in his victory over Anglo-Normans at Thurles, thereby demonstrating his capacities as prospective successor to the kingship of Connacht. Ruaidri himself led a major offensive into Mide in 1174, with the Connacht army augmented by forces from the kings of Cenel Conaill, Cenel nEogain, Breifne, Ulaid, and Airgialla, where he destroyed the newly erected Anglo-Norman strongholds at Trim and Duleek and raided as far as the confines of Dublin. It had little permanent effect, however, since in 1175 the castles were rebuilt and Anglo-Norman control of Mide was demonstrated by raiding as far as the Shannon. 
The failure of Ruaidri Ua Conchobair to achieve any permanent gain from that expedition, coupled with the difficulties of maintaining dominance over Ua Briain of Thomond, may have determined the strategy embodied in the treaty of Windsor: it was concluded on 6 October 1175 between Henry II and Ruaidri with Cadla Ua Dubhtaig, archbishop of Tuam, Cantordis, abbot of Clonfert, and Master Laurence, his chancellor, acting as Ruaidri's proxies. Henry II arrogated to himself overlordship of Leinster and Meath, while Ruaidri was to be over-king of the remainder of Ireland. Ua Conchobair became the liegeman of Henry and 'king under him', a position he was to retain as long as he should faithfully serve Henry and 'be ready at his service as his man' (Rymer, 'Foedera', 1.31-2). Ruaidri's main obligations as a subordinate of Henry were to collect and transmit tribute and to punish rebellious subordinates, but he was also entitled to seek military support from Henry II's garrisons in Ireland. The key clause in the treaty from Ruaidri's standpoint may have been the right afforded him to call on the constable of the king of England for military assistance. Shortly before 1 October 1175, that is even before the treaty had been formally ratified, Ua Conchobair secured an Anglo-Norman force to plunder Domnall Ua Briain's capital of Limerick, a key fortified gateway on the Shannon between Thomond and Connacht. However, when the Anglo-Norman garrison withdrew from Limerick in 1176, Ruaidri was obliged to reach an accommodation with Ua Briain. In 1177 an Anglo-Norman contingent from the Dublin garrison was invited into Connacht by Murchad, son of Ruaidri, who undertook to lead it to the capital, Tuam, while Ruaidri was absent on circuit in west Connacht (the annals of Boyle also implicate Conchobar Maenmaige). The attack was repulsed, and Murchad subsequently was blinded in punishment by his father. In 1178 a foraging party of Hugh de Lacy (d. 1186), first Anglo-Norman lord of Meath, turned back at Clonmacnoise for fear of Ruaidri. In 1179 a synod was convened at Clonfert by Lorcan Ua Tuathail (Laurence O'Toole), archbishop of Dublin and native papal legate, to proclaim the decrees of the Third Lateran Council, which he had attended. Lorcan was instrumental in securing the translation in early 1180 of Ruaidri's nephew Tommaltach Ua Conchobair, bishop of Elphin, to the primatial see of Armagh. This act implied that Ruaidri claimed a right to present to ecclesiastical offices that reflected his continued claim to the high-kingship. It was shortly after the installation of Tommaltach that Lorcan, who had witnessed the treaty of Windsor, travelled to England to negotiate with Henry II on Ruaidri's behalf, delivering a son as a hostage. Whether this mission should be linked to the treaty of Windsor is uncertain, since it is unclear how long it was deemed to be in operation. About 1180 a daughter of Ruaidri Ua Conchobair married Hugh de Lacy, the alliance, no doubt, intended to stabilize Ruaidri's eastern frontier, but it may have contributed to Ruaidri's difficulties with Henry, whose permission for the marriage Lacy had not sought. 
In 1183 Ruaidri Ua Conchobair retired from the kingship of Connacht and was replaced by his son, Conchobar Maenmaige. In 1185, however, Ruaidri attempted to recover the kingship by concluding an alliance with Domnall Ua Briain, king of Thomond, and securing the help of an Anglo-Norman force. This resulted in a temporary division of Connacht between himself and Conchobar Maenmaige, who, however, deposed him again. In 1188 John de Courcy hosted into Connacht, accompanied by two other sons of Ruaidri, rivals of Conchobar Maenmaige, possibly with the intention of supporting Ruaidri's restoration; but Conchobar Maenmaige repulsed their forces decisively. When Conchobar Maenmaige was assassinated the following year, supporters of Ruaidri staged another attempt to reinstate him, but it was his half-brother, Cathal Croibhdhearg O Conchobhair, who succeeded in taking the kingship. In 1191 Ruaidri unsuccessfully sought aid in Cenel Conaill, Cenel nEogain, Ulaid, among the Anglo-Normans in Meath, and in Munster to recover the kingship; eventually he was recalled from Munster by members of his kindred (the Sil Muiredaig) and allocated lands in Ui Fiachrach Aidne and Cenel Aeda na hEchtge in south Connacht. He died at Cong on 2 December 1198, aged eighty-two, and was buried on the left-hand side of the high altar at Clonmacnoise, his remains being reinterred in a stone coffin in 1207. The annals of Loch Ce and of Connacht, in recording the death of his son Aed in 1233, attribute the loss of the kingship of Connacht by his successors to the fact that the pope had offered Ruaidri an allowance of six married wives provided that he desisted from all other women, but that he had refused to accept. The criticism seems more appropriate to his father, Toirdelbach, for whom six wives can be named. The only wife of Ruaidri known by name is Dub Coblaid (died 1181), daughter of Tigernan Ua Ruairc, king of Breifne, reflective of the strong political alliance between Tigernan and Ruaidri. 
Ruaidri Ua Conchobair's assumption of the high-kingship in 1166, although initially spectacularly successful, was compromised by Anglo-Norman incursion into Ireland from 1167 onwards and his failure to retain control over events in Leinster. His negotiation of the treaty of Windsor with Henry II inaugurated the first partition of Ireland between native and incomer and spelt the end of an indigenous high-kingship of Ireland. Just as Ruaidri had challenged his own father for the regnal succession during the latter's reign, so he, in turn, was seriously undermined by intra-familial dissension and prospective successors bidding for power and after 1183 never recovered his position. 


@@@@@


doc= 20523


O'Connor, Roger (1762-1834), Irish nationalist, born at Connorville, co. Cork, was the son of Roger Conner (died 1798) of Connorville, MP for Bandonbridge, co. Cork, and Anne (died 1782), daughter of Robert Longfield MP, and sister of Richard Longfield, first Viscount Longueville. The Connor or, more correctly, Conner family was descended from a rich London merchant, and its claims to ancient Irish descent were totally spurious. Arthur O'Connor, the leading United Irishman, was Roger's younger brother and they were the only two of the nine children in the family to change their name to O'Connor. Roger entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1777, and was called to the English bar in 1784. 
O'Connor's early bias was in favour of the old tory regime; as a young man he entered the Muskerry yeomanry, and helped to hunt down 'Whiteboys'. He soon, however, changed his views and, with his brother Arthur, joined the United Irishmen, in which he displayed some gifts for organization; he was involved in setting up the short-lived radical newspaper 'The Harp of Eirinn'. In 1797 a warrant left Dublin Castle for his arrest, at the instance of his own brother Robert, who was an inveterate enemy of his two errant brothers. He was imprisoned at Cork, was tried and acquitted. On his liberation in April 1798 he went to London, with the intention, as he said, of 'residing there and avoiding any interference in politics'; but his brother Arthur had just been arrested at Margate, and the Home Office again decided on imprisoning Roger. He was sent from place to place in the custody of king's messengers, and on 2 June 1798 was finally committed to Newgate in Dublin. 
In April 1799, with his fellow prisoners T. A. Emmet, Chambers, his brother Arthur, and others, O'Connor was moved to Fort George in Scotland. In the same year he managed to publish 'Letters to the People of Great Britain'. After some years' imprisonment, during which his health suffered, he obtained an early release. While the brothers were in prison, the family home at Connorville had been looted by government forces who had lived there at free quarters during the rebellion, but Roger's claim for damages ($681 8's'. 8died, including $10 15's'. for grapes and other fruit) was disallowed. He renewed the claim in 1811, though this time the sum in question had grown to $2190: once again he failed to get compensation. In the meantime, he had rented Dangan Castle, Trim, co. Meath: this house burnt down shortly after he had taken out insurance for $5000 on it. As a result of Arthur's exile in France, Roger had been given by him full power of attorney to deal with his Irish property, but after an early remittance of $500 nothing further was sent. By the time that Arthur realized that he was being swindled, some, if not most, of the property had gone. At the end of the Napoleonic wars, and still unable to travel to Ireland himself, Arthur sent his wife, Eliza, daughter of the marquis de Condorcet, to confront Roger, but he proved adept at suppressing documentary evidence and she was forced to return empty-handed to France. Eventually a decree against Roger was obtained in the courts, but this had little value. In a sensational development, he was arrested at Trim in 1817 for having headed a band of his retainers in robbing the Galway coach. The son of O'Connor's agent later asserted that this raid was made by O'Connor not for money, but in quest of a packet of love letters written by his friend Sir Francis Burdett, which were likely to be used in evidence against Burdett at the suit of a peer who suspected him of criminal intimacy with his wife. Sir Francis Burdett hurried to Ireland as a witness on O'Connor's behalf at his trial at Trim, and Roger was acquitted. 
In 1822 O'Connor published 'The chronicles of Eri, being the history of the Gael, Sciot Iber, or Irish people: translated from the original manuscripts in the Phoenician dialect of the Scythian language'. The book is mainly, if not entirely, the fruit of O'Connor's imagination. Roger's portrait is prefixed with the description, 'O'Connor Cier-rige, head of his race, and O'Connor, chief of the prostrated people of this Nation. 'Soumis, pas vaincus'.' O'Connor is described as a man of fascinating manners and conversation, and he certainly made an impression on Sir Francis Burdett, but R. R. Madden, the biographer of the United Irishmen, considered that his wits were always more or less disordered. Throughout his life he professed himself to be a sceptic in religion, and declared that Voltaire was his god. He married, first, in 1784, Louisa Ann, daughter of Colonel Strachan; and second, in 1788, Wilhelmina, daughter of Nicholas Bowen of Bowenscourt. Francisco O'Connor, the supporter of South American independence movements, and Feargus O'Connor, the Chartist, were sons of the second marriage. O'Connor died at his home, Knockenmore Cottage, Kilcrea, co. Cork, on 27 January 1834, and was buried in Kilcrea Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 20524


Ua Conchobair, Toirdelbach Mor (1088-1156), high-king of Ireland, held from 'c'.1120 that precarious supremacy over most other rulers in Ireland which justified native historians in styling a series of dominant kings during the eleventh and twelfth centuries 'high-kings with opposition'. Toirdelbach was born in Connacht, the son of Ruaidri Ua Conchobair (died 1118; also known as Ruaidri na Saide Buide, or 'Rory of the Yellow Bitch'), king of Connacht, and Mor (died 1088), daughter of Toirdelbach Mor Ua Briain (d. 1086), king of Munster and 'high-king with opposition'. As 'Toirdelbach' was then very much an Ua Briain family name, the subject of this article was presumably called after his maternal grandfather, significantly so, in that Ua Briain had played a part in the defeat and death of Ruaidri na Saide Buide's father in 1067, before forcing Ruaidri himself to submit in 1076. The marriage of Ruaidri and Mor may have been brief. She died the year of her son Toirdelbach's birth, having earlier borne a daughter to another husband, Maelsechlainn Ua Maelsechlainn, king of Meath (died 1087). 
Also in 1088, Ruaidri changed allegiance to the rival northern high-king, Domnall Mac Lochlainn of Tir Eoghain (died 1121), and joined him on an invasion of Munster, razing the Ua Briain palace of Kincora, while Connacht was invaded by Toirdelbach Ua Briain's son and heir, Muirchertach. Four years later Ruaidri was blinded by the rebellious king of west Connacht, Ua Flaithbertaig, and in 1093 Muirchertach Ua Briain temporarily banished the whole Ua Conchobair family into Tir Eoghain, and installed in their patrimony a puppet-king from south Connacht, Gilla na noeb Ua hEidin (died 1100). The Ua Conchobair dynasty fought back, challenged not only by Ua Flaithbertaig, but by the Ua Ruairc king of east Connacht or Breifne, who also aspired to kingship of the whole province. In 1106 Domnall son of Ruaidri Ua Conchobair was declared to be deposed by his own subjects and his eighteen-year-old half-brother Toirdelbach was installed by Muirchertach Ua Briain, his maternal uncle, at 'Ath an termoinn' (perhaps near Termonbarry, Roscommon) as local ruler of the Ua Conchobair homeland of Sil Muiredaig (approximately what is now co. Roscommon and north-east co. Galway). The same year Muirchertach Ua Briain forcibly installed into the kingship of neighbouring Meath Murchad Ua Maelsechlainn, the father of Orlaith (died 1115) and Tailtiu (died 1127/1129), two early wives among the many, named and unnamed, of Toirdelbach Ua Conchobair. 
In his first recorded campaigns as king of the Sil Muiredaig against Ua Fergail of Conmaicne (modern co. Longford) in 1110 and against Termonn Da Beooc (St Patrick's Purgatory) and Lough Erne in 1111, Toirdelbach Ua Conchobair appears aligned with his maternal uncle, Ua Briain, and his father-in-law, Ua Maelsechlainn, against Ua Ruairc of Breifne and Domnall Mac Lochlainn, overlord of the north of Ireland, who inflicted a great raid on Connacht in 1110. However, in 1114 the high-king, Muirchertach Ua Briain, fell sick, and Toirdelbach, together with Murchad Ua Maelsechlainn, changed allegiance to Domnall Mac Lochlainn and joined him in an invasion of the Ua Briain homeland as far as Tulla, Clare, where Toirdelbach was instrumental in arranging a year's peace between Muirchertach's usurping brother, Diarmait Ua Briain, and the northern army. Subsequently the partially cured Muirchertach attempted to recover power by invading Leinster and Meath, while Ua Conchobair had to overcome a rebellion in Connacht led by his brother Domnall with Ua Fergail and Ua Briain support. No sooner was his brother captured than Toirdelbach himself was laid low for some time by an assassination attempt in west Connacht at Ath Bo, near Tuam. Yet this widespread opposition in itself marks the extension of Toirdelbach's rule from his family homeland of Sil Muiredaig to the whole province of Connacht. Before the end of 1115 he had delivered punishing raids against the Ua Briain territory of Thomond or north Munster, ravaged the Ua Fergail land of Conmaicne and the western part of Meath using a fleet on the River Shannon, and pressurized Murchad Ua Maelsechlainn into submission. At the close of this campaign he fasted at the church of Clonmacnoise and presented the community with a gilded drinking horn, a silver chalice, and a gilded copper paten. 
Continuing Ua Briain dynastic strife allowed Toirdelbach Ua Conchobair to invade Thomond and destroy the palace of Kincora in 1116 (releasing all prisoners taken on the campaign in honour of St Flannan, patron saint of Killaloe). On the death of Diarmait Ua Briain, acting king of Munster, in 1118, Toirdelbach led the armies of Connacht, Breifne, and Meath southwards as far as Glanmire, Cork, ostensibly to restore Muirchertach Ua Briain to power. Instead he concluded a treaty with Tadc Mac Carthaig to divide the province, allotting Desmond or south Munster to Mac Carthaig and Thomond to the sons of Diarmait Ua Briain. Subsequently Ua Conchobair joined Murchad Ua Maelsechlainn in subduing the province of Leinster and the Ostman kingdom of Dublin; and in 1119 he used the forces of Leinster to complete the subjugation of Munster, Muirchertach Ua Briain having finally died after five years of illness. This death revived Domnall Mac Lochlainn's claims to high-kingship, supported by Murchad Ua Maelsechlainn, king of Meath. In 1120 Ua Conchobair's initial attacks on Ua Maelsechlainn were halted by Mac Lochlainn's entry into Meath with an army, and Toirdelbach came to terms. Later in the year he built two bridges across the Shannon and one over the River Suck to facilitate raids from Connacht into Meath. He expelled Ua Maelsechlainn to the north, then celebrated the fair of Tailtiu, an obsolete ceremonial assembly traditionally associated with the high-kingship of Ireland. 
Ua Conchobair's overlordship had to be strenuously maintained. In 1121 he invaded Munster to reimpose his settlement, causing 'the people of Munster to cry aloud' ('Annals of Tigernach', 42), even plundering the reformed monastery of Lismore. Next year Enna Mac Murchada, king of Leinster, submitted. In 1123 Toirdelbach took hostages from the new king of Desmond, Cormac Mac Carthaig, but remained threatened until this king's death in 1138 by Mac Carthaig's persistent ambition to unite all Munster under his rule and exercise overlordship in Osraige and Leinster. Ua Conchobair responded to a revolt in 1124 by Ua Maelsechlainn, Mac Murchada, Mac Carthaig, and Tigernan Ua Ruairc, the new king of Breifne, by ravaging Meath, killing Mac Carthaig's hostages, and building three 'castles' in Connacht, at Dunlo (near Ballinasloe), at Galway, and at Collooney in Sligo. Public works were a feature of Ua Conchobair's reign, including, in 1129, a canal cut to drain the River Suck. Another characteristic was the division of subject territories and the imposition of nominated kings. In 1125 he joined with Ua Ruairc to banish Ua Maelsechlainn and divide the kingdom of Meath into three. Following the death of Enna Mac Murchada in 1126, he appointed his own son Conchobar Ua Conchobair king over Dublin and Leinster. When Leinster revolted the next year, Toirdelbach imposed another king of his choice there. However, in 1131 Cormac Mac Carthaig made a joint attack on Connacht with Conchobar Mac Lochlainn (died 1136), king of the north, and although Ua Conchobair repelled them, his power was effectively reduced to his own province for some years. His own son Conchobar Ua Conchobair, as king of Sil Muiredaig, and his vassal Ua Cellaig actually submitted to Murchad Ua Maelsechlainn, king of Meath, in 1135. By 1138 Toirdelbach recovered somewhat, invading Meath again in alliance with Ua Ruairc and Donnchad Ua Cearbaill, king of Airgialla. In 1140 he erected bridges across the Shannon at Athlone and Lanesborough; and the next year Murchad Ua Maelsechlainn renewed his submission. Then in 1143 Ua Conchobair arrested Ua Maelsechlainn, apparently for collaboration with Munster, and imposed his own son Conchobar Ua Conchobar as king over Meath. Six months later Conchobar was assassinated by a Meath chieftain, whereupon Toirdelbach, after a battle 'like the Day of Judgement', exacted a fine of 400 cows and divided Meath at first between Ua Ruairc, Diarmait Mac Murchada, and an Ua Maelsechlainn prince, then between Murchad Ua Maelsechlainn and a kinsman. 
Toirdelbach Ua Conchobair's relations with his other sons seem less affectionate. He allowed Conchobar to blind another son, Aed (whose mother was Derbforgaill (died 1151), daughter of Domnall Mac Lochlainn), and he imprisoned his eventual heir, Ruaidri Ua Conchobair, in 1136 and again in 1143, though forced to release him by the lay and clerical guarantors of the prince's original safe conduct. This was not the only occasion Ua Conchobair responded to clerical influence. He granted a great tribute to a relic of the Holy Cross brought to Ireland in 1123, and enshrined a portion at Roscommon; he ordered the construction of the Cross of Cong to house the same, or a similar relic; he endowed and walled the ecclesiastical settlement of Tuam in 1127 and hosted a metropolitan visitation of Connacht by the reformed archbishop of Armagh, Gelasius, in 1140 and again in 1151; and in his will he left 160 ounces of gold, 60 marks of silver, and all his moveable property, except weapons and drinking-horns, to various churches. The last years of Toirdelbach's life were made eventful by the rise of Muirchertach (died 1166), grandson of Domnall Mac Lochlainn, to rule the north and claim high-kingship of Ireland from 'c'.1149. In 1150 Ua Conchobair yielded hostages to Mac Lochlainn, receiving in exchange a portion of Meath. He immediately commenced a war of conquest against Toirdelbach Ua Briain (died 1167) culminating in a victory at Moin Mor (1152), followed by Ua Conchobair's redivision of Munster in 1153 between Mac Carthaig and Ua Briain kings, before Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn intervened to force the restoration of Toirdelbach Ua Briain. An inconclusive war broke out in 1154 between Mac Lochlainn and Toirdelbach Ua Conchobair, now ably assisted by his son Ruaidri. The rivalry was settled in Mac Lochlainn's favour by the death of Toirdelbach in 1156 at the age of sixty-eight. He was buried at Clonmacnoise, and his son Ruaidri succeeded him as king of Connacht, and after 1166 as high-king, though another son, Cathal Croibhdhearg O Conchobhair, became ancestor of the main O Conchobair line in post-Norman times. 


@@@@@


doc= 20525


O'Conor, Charles (1710-1791), antiquary and religious propagandist, was born on 1 January 1710 at Kilmactranny, co. Sligo, Ireland, the eldest son of Denis O'Conor (died 1750), farmer, and Mary O'Rourke (died 1760?), daughter of Tiernan O'Rourke, a colonel in the French army who was killed in the battle of Luzara in 1702. Both his paternal grandfather and great-uncle had fought on the Jacobite side in 1688-90. As a result, the family estate at Belanagare, co. Roscommon, was confiscated, but for technical reasons a significant portion of it was restored in 1703, although the family did not return to live there until the 1720s. The O'Conors of Belanagare were a prime example of the last remnants of the native Irish landowning nobility, particularly since they were descended from the last nominal high-king of Ireland, Ruaidhri O Conchobhair (Rory O'Conor). They continued the Gaelic tradition of artistic and scholarly patronage, and hence in the 1720s the young Charles received instruction from Dominic O Duigenan, one of a family of hereditary historians, under whose direction he first began to copy Gaelic manuscripts. His uncle, Thaddeus O'Rourke, Catholic bishop of Killala, was unable to move freely about the country in this period of strict state control of the clergy. He was thus free to supervise the education of his nephew, so that in addition to traditional Gaelic learning O'Conor attained proficiency in standard classical subjects, for which purpose he was also sent to the Skelton Academy in Dublin for a period. In addition he was taught music by Turlough O'Carolan, the famous harper, who availed of the O'Conors' patronage. 
On 8 December 1731 O'Conor married Catherine Fagan (died 1741), daughter of John Fagan, and settled on a farm in co. Roscommon. They had four children before Catherine's death in 1741. In 1750, on the death of his father, O'Conor took possession of the family estate at Belanagare. He was concerned to build up the estate and reported later in life that partly through land reclamation he had amassed somewhere between 700 and 800 acres of farming land. As a gentleman farmer he began to collect Gaelic manuscripts and to make copies and extracts of others. Among his collection was an original edition of the first part of the 'Annala rioghachta Eireann' by Micheal O Cleirigh and his assistants. Increasingly, he was asked by non-Gaelic-speaking historians to make extracts and translations from manuscripts in his possession. He was thus an important link in a tradition of scribal activity dating back to medieval times. 
In 1748 O'Conor's most famous antiquarian work, 'Dissertations on the Antient History of Ireland', first appeared anonymously in separate numbers; it was later published in book form in 1753. This series of essays on the pre-colonial period of Irish history was in the tradition of earlier works by Geoffrey Keating and Hugh MacCurtin, among others, which defended the early Irish against the charge of barbarism made by many, mainly English, writers. O'Conor aimed to show the 'indelible signatures of the Use of Govt and Letters in Ireland' long before the arrival of Christianity in the sixth century. Although he consulted the medieval Gaelic annals in his possession, his depiction of pre-colonial Ireland was mainly shaped by his political concerns, in particular the iniquities of the penal laws in force against Catholics in his own time. Thus he claimed that early Christian Ireland was a haven of religious toleration and 'true Liberty', where none was punished who 'submitted to the Laws of the Land' and where conversion was achieved by persuasion, 'the only Manner in which it can be conducted' (C. O'Conor, 'Dissertations on the Antient History of Ireland', 86-7). Reflecting his immersion in Enlightenment writing on progress, he argued that early Irish history was the story of the gradual triumph of liberty and virtue over faction and tyranny (ibid., x). 
A second edition of the book was published in 1766, but 'antient' was removed from the title and the text was amended in places quite significantly, to the extent that it should be treated as a separate work. Its central theme was unaltered, but the breathless writing style of the first edition was jettisoned in favour of a more polished one. More important, many of the changes involved the removal of passages which could be considered impolitic, such as one on the role of the Gaelic poets in stirring up rebellion after the Anglo-Norman conquest. The 1766 edition, which appeared under O'Conor's name, omitted the entire chapter on the colonial era and substituted for it an essay disputing the authenticity of James Macpherson's Ossian poems. 
In 1760 O'Conor gave over the main house and the management of the estate to his eldest son, Denis, and built a smaller house in the grounds which he called his 'hermitage'. For the last three decades of his life he divided his time between the hermitage and Dublin, where most of his friends and interests were. Together with his friend the historian John Curry and Thomas Wyse he founded the Catholic Committee in 1760 to represent Catholic interests and to press for the relaxation of the penal laws. O'Conor wrote anonymously a number of pamphlets in support of the Catholic cause, including 'A Counter Appeal to the People of Ireland' (1749) and 'The Case of the Roman Catholics of Ireland' (1755). Adopting an English protestant identity in most of these, he argued that the laws had a catastrophic economic effect by discouraging Catholic industry as well as investment. He also maintained that Irish Catholics were loyal subjects, and together with Curry and others he formulated addresses and petitions designed to show this. He was much involved in the drawing up of a test oath for Catholics, which was the basis of a 'Test Act' passed in 1774. 
Following the publication of the second edition of the 'Dissertations' O'Conor was acknowledged as the foremost Irish antiquary and had entry to some of the wealthiest and most influential protestant as well as Catholic circles at a time when the protestant elite was becoming interested in the Gaelic past. Thus he socialized with George Faulkner, the prominent Dublin printer, and with William Burton (later Burton Conyngham), teller of the exchequer and enthusiast for Gaelic antiquities. Thomas Leland, the librarian at Trinity College, Dublin, invited him to consult the library's great holdings of Gaelic manuscripts in 1766. He was invited to become a member of three protestant-sponsored learned societies concerned with antiquities, the short-lived select committee for antiquities of the Dublin Society (1772-4), the Hibernian Antiquarian Society (1778-83), and the Royal Irish Academy, which was founded in 1785. O'Conor's success in straddling these two worlds can be seen in a letter to his son of February 1779, in which he recounted attending a dinner party at William Burton's house where the topic was Irish antiquities, followed a few days later by his attendance at a meeting of the Catholic Committee. Yet in spite of this success O'Conor, as a Catholic, was vulnerable in very immediate ways to the penal laws against which he campaigned. In 1777 his youngest brother, Hugh, conformed to the Church of Ireland and sued for possession of the family property under laws relating to Catholic property. The case dragged on for eight years and was finally settled out of court, but Charles wasted much time and expense on it. At one point, just weeks after dining with William Burton, O'Conor was put under house arrest for his attorney's failure to comply with court requirements. 
O'Conor continued his antiquarian researches and writings well into his seventies, publishing, for example, three articles in Charles Vallancey's journal, 'Collectanea de Rebus Hibernicis', between 1782 and 1784. He was too feeble to make progress on his larger project, a history of Ireland from the earliest times up to the Restoration, which remained unpublished. He lived long enough to see many of the penal laws dismantled and in 1785 noted with satisfaction that 'no man is now forbid[den] the benefits of our Civil Constitution' ('Letters of Charles O'Conor of Belanagare', ed. C. C. Ward and R. E. Ward, 2.227). All his work had tended towards that object and for this reason his antiquarian writings, though having a certain significance in the history of scholarship, are immeasurably more important for giving a profound insight into Irish Catholic political concerns in the eighteenth century. 
O'Conor died at Belanagare on 1 July 1791. His grandson Charles O'Conor (1764-1828), Roman Catholic priest, wrote a life of him, the first volume of which was published in 1796 but quickly suppressed because of its polemical and inaccurate account. 


@@@@@


doc= 20526


O'Conor, Charles (1764-1828), Roman Catholic priest and scholar, was born on 15 March 1764 at Belanagare, co. Roscommon, the second of the six sons of Denis O'Conor (1732-1804), landowner, and his wife, Catherine Browne, daughter of Martin Browne of Cloonfad, co. Roscommon. His grandfather Charles O'Conor (1710-1791) of Belanagare was a greatly esteemed scholar and collector of Irish manuscripts. In 1760 he had handed over Belanagare to his son Denis, and during his grandson's childhood he lived nearby at the Hermitage. The grandson was intended for the church and in 1779 he was sent to the Irish College in Rome, where he was ordained and received a doctorate in divinity, before returning to Ireland in 1789. While in Rome he developed his scholarly tastes by working on the Vatican manuscripts and was commissioned to search out Irish manuscripts in Italy for the Royal Irish Academy. Presentation to the parish of Kilkeevan (Castlerea) lay with O'Conor Don, the head of his family, and in 1792 O'Conor was installed as parish priest there. He initiated the building of the first Roman Catholic chapel in the town of Castlerea. In 1796 he published the first volume of a life of his grandfather, 'Memoirs of the Life and Writings of the Late Charles O'Conor'. It was an outspoken work, as well as a confused and inaccurate one, and he quickly suppressed it. 
In 1788 the marquess of Buckingham, when he was lord lieutenant of Ireland, had promised O'Conor's grandfather a pension if he would give his manuscripts to the Royal Irish Academy. He wrote to his friend Charles Vallancey that he would bequeath them to the academy, but they passed to his second son, another Charles. However, O'Conor got his grandfather's books and papers. Buckingham did not forget the Irish manuscripts and in 1798 persuaded the family to give them to him, but against O'Conor's wishes. Eventually he too was persuaded, but so that he could continue his scholarly work on them it was arranged that he would accompany the manuscripts to Stowe in the guise of chaplain to the marchioness, Mary Elizabeth Buckingham. Initially his bishop gave him eighteen months' leave of absence from his parish and this was later extended, but by 1803 the bishop was referring to O'Conor as 'the late incumbent'. 
Life at Stowe was an escape for O'Conor from the grinding poverty of his flock at Castlerea and at least for a time moving among the great had its attractions. Besides this, O'Conor seems to have been very much attached to the Buckinghams. Several times the possibility of an Irish bishopric loomed -- Achonry twice (in 1803 and again in 1808) and Elphin (in 1810) -- but despite vigorous pressing by his family he disapproved of the methods of appointment and seems to have preferred the luxurious and scholarly life he led at Stowe. When the marchioness died in 1812 he lost his chapel, which returned to being a dressing-room, but by then he was well installed as librarian. The first marquess had built up a very large collection of important manuscripts and Sir John Soane was employed to remodel the library room into a magnificent gothick chamber. 
Residence at Stowe not only gave O'Conor access to his grandfather's Irish manuscripts but also made it relatively easy for him to use those in the British Museum and the Bodleian. His work 'Rerum Hibernicarum scriptores veteres' appeared in four volumes between 1814 and 1826. The first volume was devoted to a general survey of early Irish manuscripts, the others to the first edition in a Latin translation of the main Irish annals. O'Conor's scholarship was not equal to the task and by the later nineteenth century these volumes were no longer consulted, their value becoming historiographical. But for the first half of the nineteenth century their importance was considerable as the only gateway to early Irish history. The first volume, which revealed the existence of the early Irish manuscripts, included the first facsimile of the 'Book of Durrow' and initiated the controversy, which raged through most of the twentieth century, as to which manuscripts are Irish and which Anglo-Saxon. In 1818 O'Conor published a catalogue of the manuscript collection at Stowe in two volumes: 'Bibliotheca MS. Stowensis'. The manuscripts were sold to the fourth earl of Ashburnham in 1849. The fifth earl in turn sold them to the government in 1883, when they were divided: the Irish element went to the Royal Irish Academy, finally fulfilling the elder Charles O'Conor's promise of 1788, and the rest to the British Museum. 
Because the O'Conors were one of the few Irish Roman Catholic landed families to survive the seventeenth-century confiscations, they were expected to, and did, take an active part in the effort to achieve Catholic emancipation. O'Conor's grandfather was a prolific pamphleteer in the cause and even his father, Denis, who had no taste for politics, played his part; his older brother Owen, who succeeded to the headship of the family and the title O'Conor Don, was also very active. In O'Conor's time the subject of greatest controversy was whether the government could be allowed a veto in the appointment of bishops. In 1810, just at the time when his family had begun a serious campaign to have O'Conor appointed bishop of Elphin, he published the first of a series of seven letters in which he took a different line on this matter from his family, the bishops, and most of the Irish Roman Catholic laity, by decrying papal influence in appointments. The pamphlets entitled 'Columbanus ad Hibernos', some of book size, appeared successively between 1810 and 1816. Only the first was anonymous; later he did not hesitate to subscribe himself 'Rev. C. O'Conor D.D.'. The pamphlets involve lengthy disquisitions on Irish history, particularly in relation to the 1641 rebellion, where he took the side of Ormond and Clanricarde against Rinuccini, the papal nuncio. Such was the stir he created that John Douglass, vicar-general of the London district, his immediate ecclesiastical superior in England, withdrew his priestly faculties. And when he arrived in Ireland, to see about his publications and to work in Trinity College Library, John Troy, the archbishop of Dublin, did likewise. He appealed to the pope and eventually the interdict was lifted. 
O'Conor remained at Stowe for the rest of his active life, but when, in 1827, senility set in, he was moved to a Dublin asylum and finally to his old home at Belanagare, where he died on 29 July 1828. He was buried with his ancestors at Ballintubber Abbey, co. Roscommon. 


@@@@@


doc= 20527


O'Conor, Matthew (1773-1844), historian, the sixth son of Denis O'Conor (1732-1804) of Belanagare and Catherine, daughter of Martin Browne of Cloonfad, co. Roscommon, was born in co. Roscommon on 18 September 1773. Like his brother Charles O'Conor (1764-1828), he was intended for the priesthood, and studied in the English College at Rome, but unlike Charles, who duly entered the church, Matthew O'Conor adopted the legal profession and became eminent therein. He supplemented his practice at the bar by studying and writing upon subjects in connection with Irish history and there is some evidence that he always hankered after a military career. He married Priscilla Forbes in 1804 and they had five children: Denis (1808-1872), of Mount Druid, who was sheriff of his county in 1836; Arthur (died 1870), of the Palace, Elphin; Matthew, of Mount Allen; and two daughters, about whom nothing is known. 
O'Conor was the author of 'The history of the Irish Catholics from the settlement in 1691, with a view of the state of Ireland from the invasion of Henry II to the revolution' (Dublin, 1813). This work, which was polemical in tone, was based upon some valuable documents in the possession of the writer's grandfather Charles O'Conor of Belanagare, an antiquary and an early activist on behalf of Irish Catholics. 
The posthumously published 'Military history of the Irish nation; comprising memoirs of the Irish brigade in the service of France, with an appendix of official papers relative to the brigade from the archives at Paris' (Dublin, 1845) was part of a larger work contemplated by O'Conor. It goes down only to 1738, and, as a consequence of not being revised by the author, contains errors. But the work is based upon genuine research and on material presented to O'Conor by Colonel Montmorency Morres. It was a valuable contribution to military history, and was critically commended at the time, but was soon superseded by 'Irish Brigades in the Service of France' (1851), by John Cornelius O'Callaghan, and by later works. O'Conor died on 8 May 1844, probably at his seat, Mount Druid, co. Roscommon. 


@@@@@


doc= 20528


O'Conor, William Anderson (1820-1887), Church of England clergyman and author, was born in Cork. His family came from Roscommon, and spelt their surname O'Connor. After attending school in Cork for a short period he was dogged by ill health, which kept him at home for several years. Eventually, at nearly thirty years of age, he went to Trinity College, Dublin, with the intention of entering the ministry. His course there was, however, interrupted by his father's financial difficulties, and he resumed his studies by entering St Aidan's Theological College, Birkenhead, Cheshire, where he was appointed Latin lecturer. He did not finally graduate until 1864. After his ordination in 1853 he became curate first of St Nicholas's Church, Liverpool, and then, in 1854, of St Thomas's, Liverpool. From 1855 to 1858 he had sole charge of the church of St Michael and St Olave, Chester, and in 1858 he was appointed rector of St Simon and St Jude, Granby Row, Manchester, a very poor city parish, where he worked for the rest of his life. On 3 March 1859 he married Charlotte Boydell ('b'. 1829), daughter of Isaac Temple. They had no children. 
Several years after O'Conor settled in Manchester his eloquence and originality as a preacher began to attract attention. He worked hard as a parish priest but found his surroundings uncongenial and discouraging. He was said to find much relief in literary pursuits and in the society of men of literary tastes, among whom he shone as a witty and versatile conversationalist and writer. He became a frequent contributor to the 'Proceedings' of the Manchester Statistical Society and the Manchester Literary Club, and the many papers which he read to the latter were said to have been marked by originality, subtlety, and humour. As well as writing on literary subjects he published a number of sermons, biblical commentaries, and a 'History of the Irish People' (2 vols., 1882), which was arguably not so much a history as an indictment against English rule in Ireland. Originally a pamphlet, the work was revised and reprinted in 1886-7. He became involved in fashionable societies such as the Dramatic Reform Association and the Manchester Art Museum Committee. He also acted as a poor-law guardian for a time. 
In 1885 O'Conor went to Italy, in the hope that this would be beneficial to his health; while there he became chaplain of an Anglican church in Rome. After his return to England he was soon absorbed in work, but before long became ill again. He then went to Torquay, where he died on 22 March 1887 and where he was buried; his wife survived him. At the time of his death he was in straitened circumstances, his estate amounting to less than $250. 
O'Conor was a tall, slim man, his features pale and ascetic-looking. A good likeness of him was printed in Peter Okell's paper in the 'Manchester Quarterly' (January 1891). 


@@@@@


doc= 20529


Octa (fl. 512?), although in another version of the Kentish royal pedigree, in the so-called 'Anglian collection' of genealogies, it is Octa (Ocga) who is the son of Hengist and Oisc (Oese) who is the grandson. No activities are recorded for Octa, though his reign would have begun in 512, according to the chronicle reckoning for the length of AEsc's reign. 
It is only with the third generation from Hengist that there appears an individual who can with some certainty be identified as a king of Kent. The son of Octa (Bede) or Oese (Anglian collection) was 


@@@@@


doc= 20530


O'Cullane, John (1754-1816), poet, was born in co. Cork. He belonged to a family whose original territory was Ui Conaill Gabra, now the baronies of Upper and Lower Connello, co. Limerick. Many of them continued to live in the district in the nineteenth century, but the chief family of the clan was driven from their original estate and settled near Timoleague, co. Cork, where the family was finally dispossessed by the Boyles, earls of Cork. Several of the O'Cullanes were buried in the Franciscan priory of Timoleague. John O'Cullane's parents had a small farm, gave him a good education, and hoped that he would become a priest. He, however, preferred to be a schoolmaster, married, and had several children. His school was at Myross in Carbery. 
Two of O'Cullane's poems have been printed and translated -- 'An buachaill ban' ('The Fair-Haired Boy'), written in 1782, published in 1860 by John O'Daly, and 'Machtnadh an duin e dhoilghiosaidh' ('Meditation of the Sorrowful Person') which is printed in Irish (Hardiman, 2.234), and paraphrased in verse by Thomas Furlong and by Sir Samuel Ferguson. He also translated into Irish Campbell's 'Exile of Erin'. Many of his poems remained in manuscript, however, as did part of a history of Ireland that he had compiled, and part of an English-Irish dictionary. John O'Cullane died at Skibbereen, co. Cork, in 1816. 


@@@@@


doc= 20531


O'Curry, Eugene (1794-1862), Irish scholar, was born on 20 November 1794 at Dunaha, near Carrigaholt, co. Clare, Ireland, the third son of Eoghan O Comhrai (Eugene O'Curry), a farmer, and his wife, Cait Ui Chomhraidhe (Catherine O'Curry), Ni Mhadagain (Madigan) of Dunaha. 
O'Curry's father had spent some time as a wandering pedlar, and had acquired a deep interest in Irish folklore and music; the fact that he possessed a number of Irish manuscripts suggests that he was literate. There is no record of O'Curry's having received a formal education, but it seems likely that his father taught him to read and write, and the Irish scholar Peter O'Connell (Peadar O Conaill), who compiled an unpublished Irish-English dictionary with the help of O'Curry's brother Malachy (Maoilsheachlainn), used to visit the house. 
O'Curry worked on his father's farm, and was also a schoolmaster for a time. At the age of about thirty-three he got a post in the lunatic asylum at Limerick. He spent seven years in this employment, and married Anne Broughton of Broadford, co. Limerick, on 3 October 1824. It is clear that he was an enthusiastic supporter of Catholic emancipation at this period, and he wrote a poem congratulating Daniel O'Connell on his election to parliament in 1828. A year later he sent an address and historical poem to the Royal Irish Academy, which is preserved (MS 23 H 30, 91-5). 
O'Curry gradually established a reputation as an authority on Irish language and history, and a letter written to him by John O'Donovan in 1834 contains a request for information on the survival in Limerick of traditions relating to Muircheartach O Briain, king of Thomond. O'Donovan had been employed since 1830 on the topographical and historical section of the Irish Ordnance Survey, and recommended that O'Curry be appointed to the staff, though he expressed anxiety that the heavy work and travel might prove too much of a burden. He was appointed in 1835, and in fact did little travelling on behalf of the survey, remaining for the most part in Dublin. In January 1840 O'Donovan married Mary Anne, Mrs O'Curry's sister. 
The work of this section of the Ordnance Survey was stopped in 1842, though O'Donovan continued to be paid until his death as adviser on the forms of the place names used in the maps. Between 1842 and 1844 O'Curry was mainly employed in cataloguing the Irish manuscripts in the possession of the Royal Irish Academy. After this work was completed, he supported himself by transcribing manuscripts. For example, in 1848 he transcribed the 'Book of the O'Conor Don' for the Royal Irish Academy for a fee of $100. In 1849 he was likewise paid $100 for cataloguing the Irish manuscripts in the British Museum. It was he who transcribed the Irish manuscripts which O'Donovan edited in seven volumes between 1848 and 1851 as 'The Annals of the Kingdom of Ireland by the Four Masters'. 
The 1850s saw an improvement in O'Curry's financial situation, as well as increased recognition by other scholars. In 1851 he was elected a member of the Royal Irish Academy, in spite of O'Donovan's fears that his strongly expressed Catholic views might prevent some of the protestant members from voting in his favour. He contributed editions of Irish texts to a number of important publications. Thus he was responsible for the translation of the 'Rule of Columkille' in William Reeves's edition of 'Primate Colton's Visitation of the Diocese of Derry', published in 1850. He also provided the text and translation of the Irish poems in Reeves's 'Description of the Codex Maelbrighte' in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy' of 1851. The songs in the first volume of George Petrie's 'Collection of the Ancient Music of Ireland', published in 1855, were mostly edited or dictated by him. He also helped Petrie with the preparation of the second volume: in September 1857 he accompanied O'Donovan, Petrie, and some members of the British Association to the Aran Islands, where they recorded the words and tunes of local songs. Reeves's 1857 edition of 'Adamnan's Life of Columba' includes four poems relating to the saint which were edited and translated by O'Curry. 
As well as contributing to the publications of other scholars, O'Curry also published under his own name. Worthy of mention are his edition of the poem 'Ogum i llia uas lecht' in the 'Transactions of the Ossianic Society' for the year 1853, and of 'Cath Mhuighe Leana' ('The Battle of Magh Leana'), which was published by the Celtic Society in 1855. A number of Irish poems were edited by him in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy'. 
In 1854 the Catholic university was set up in Dublin by John Henry Newman, and in May of the same year O'Curry was appointed to the professorship of archaeology and Irish history. In 1855-6 he delivered a series of lectures -- which Newman regularly attended -- on the 'Manuscript materials of ancient Irish history'. This outstanding and still valuable work was published at the expense of the university in 1861. A later series of lectures, entitled 'On the manners and customs of the ancient Irish', was posthumously published by W. K. Sullivan in 1873. In 1858 he published a translation of 'The Sick-Bed of Cuchulainn and the Only Jealousy of Eimer' in 'Atlantis', the journal of the Catholic university. 
The transcription, editing, and translation of the Irish legal manuscripts was a massive undertaking, involving many scholars. In 1851 Dr James Henthorne Todd and Dr Charles Graves asked O'Curry to transcribe and translate a law text entitled 'Leabhar aicle' from a manuscript in the library of Trinity College, Dublin. They were so impressed with the result that they submitted in February 1852 a proposal to the government for the publication of all known law texts. O'Curry was sent to catalogue and collate the legal manuscripts in the British Museum and in the Bodleian Library. The first meeting of the commission for publishing the ancient laws and institutes was held in December 1852. Graves was chosen as secretary, and O'Donovan as editor. Not surprisingly, O'Curry was unhappy with this arrangement, and refused to work as a subordinate to O'Donovan. This disagreement was resolved by appointing both as co-editors, but it soured the hitherto cordial relations between the two men. None the less, the work of transcription proceeded at a fair pace, and was finished by October 1855. O'Curry's transcription comprised 2906 pages and that of O'Donovan 2491 pages. Problems relating to editorial policy further bedevilled the project. O'Curry had hoped that the brilliant Irish scholar Whitley Stokes might be persuaded to help. However, Stokes felt that his own legal knowledge was inadequate for taking on the task. In 1859 the commissioners appointed the lawyer William Neilson Hancock as co-editor, and in 1861 they agreed that he and O'Donovan should start editing the 'Senchas mar' texts without O'Curry. The idea seems to have been that O'Curry should continue to work on 'Leabhar aicle'. O'Curry refused, and urged that the principle of editorial co-responsibility should be retained. The death of O'Donovan on 10 December 1861 administered a severe blow to the project. Basic disagreements between Hancock and O'Curry persisted, and were still unresolved when O'Curry died of a heart attack, at his home, 2 Portland Street, Dublin, on 30 July 1862, leaving behind two sons and two daughters, whose mother had died earlier. He was buried three days later at Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. 

'The Ancient Laws and Institutes of Ireland' was published between 1865 and 1901; many of the work's flaws can be attributed to the premature deaths of O'Donovan and O'Curry, who were largely responsible for establishing sound Irish scholarship. O'Curry's industry and profound learning have ensured him a prominent place in the history of Irish studies. 


@@@@@


doc= 20532


O Dalaigh family (per. c.1100-c.1620), poets, apparently originated as local chieftains of Corcu Roide (roughly the barony of Corkaree, Westmeath). Five eminent 'ollamhain' ('master poets') of the surname are recorded during the twelfth century, the first of whom, Cu Chonnacht Ua Dalaig, described in the annals of Tigernach as 'the best poet in Ireland' died in 1139 as an old man in religious retirement at the ecclesiastical settlement of Clonard. Mael Isa Ua Dalaig (died 1185), whom the annals of Loch Ce call the 'master-poet of Ireland and Scotland, and high chieftain of Corcu Roide', also died in old age at Clonard. Two others, Ragnall (died 1161), and Gilla na Trinoiti (died 1165), are described as master poets for the kingdom of Desmond, or south Munster, indicating that they were court poets to the Mac Carthaig kings there. The family acquired in the course of this century an extraordinarily high reputation, being among the earliest practitioners of the newly regulated art of 'dan direach' ('strict composition'), though no extant texts attributed to its members predate the early thirteenth century. 
A number of fresh and elegant compositions ascribed to Muireadhach O Dalaigh (fl. 1213) of Lissadill, Sligo, date from this period. The two best-known (Bergin, nos. 20, 22) are: first, his address to the young Richard de Burgh (died 1243), 'Cred agaibh aoidhigh a gcein?' ('Whence comes it that ye have guests from afar?') in which he styles himself O Dalaigh Midhe, and petitions the Anglo-Norman lord for refuge from the anger of Domhnall O Domhnaill, king of Tir Conaill ('r'. 1208-41), whose servant he has killed in a quarrel; and, second, his lament for his dead wife, Maol Mheadha -- 'M'anam do sgar riomsa araoir' ('My soul parted from me last night'), mourning her as his first love, who during twenty years of marriage had borne him eleven children. The account of his life in the annals is a semi-legendary composition of a later century. It relates that he went to Scotland after his exile by O Domhnaill, and he has been claimed as the ancestor of the distinguished Scottish poetic family of MacMhuireadhaigh. Fifteenth-century Irish genealogies (Royal Irish Academy, MS 1233, fol. 36'r'- 'v') assert that Muireadhach of Lissadill was brother to the celebrated Donnchadh Mor O Dalaigh (d. 1244), 'a master of poetry who never has been excelled and never will be', according to the annals of Connacht, where it is also stated that he was buried in the Cistercian monastery of Boyle; another version of his obit says that he kept a guest house, or hostel for travellers, a charity commonly offered by Irish scholars at the top of their profession. Such was his reputation as a religious poet that many folk hymns and ballads of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries have been fathered on him, but a group of poems preserved in the fourteenth-century 'Book of Ui Mhaine' (McKenna, 'Dan De') are probably genuine compositions of Donnchadh Mor. They are long and austere, and do not translate well, but the Irish text corruscates with redundance of rhyme, since like all true bardic poetry it was intended for public recitation. In 'Gabham deachmhaidh ar ndana' Donnchadh Mor pledges to address a tithe of all his professional eulogies to God, and ends with a prayer that those learning or reciting his poem may receive heaven as their reward. Very few of his secular poems survive, the most striking being his lament for the death of his son Aonghus, 'Ar iasacht fhuaras Aonghus' ('I obtained Aonghus on loan'; MacCionaith, 'Dioghluim Dana', no. 69). Another possible example is a eulogy for the three sons of Mac Giollamhuire (a chief in north Down): 'Cuaine rioghna rug Eadaoin' ('Eadaoin bore a queen's litter [of whelps]'; Book of the Dean of Lismore, p. 75; NL Ire., MS 992, fol. 37), which ends with an envoi to Aodh, son of Aodh O Neill, who may be the king Aodh Meith O Neill (d. 1230). 
Some poems from late thirteenth- and early fourteenth-century Connacht are ascribed to Mac Cearbhaill Bhuidhe ('Son of Yellow-Haired Cearbhall'), perhaps for a time the title of the head of a particular line in the O Dalaigh family. Cearbhall Buidhe O Dalaigh himself died in 1245. His son Tadhg, court poet to Aodh son of Feidhlim O Conchobhair, king of Connacht, died in 1274, the same year as his patron. Another Mac Cearbhaill Bhuidhe, court poet to Aodh, son of Eoghan O Conchobhair, king of Connacht ('r'. 1296-1309), composed one, perhaps both, of two poems in honour of the king's palace (MacCionaith, no. 119; Quiggin, 333-52), the first variously ascribed to Cuchonnacht son of Cearbhall Buidhe, Aonghus son of Cearbhall Buidhe, or Aonghus son of Tadhg son of Cearbhall Buidhe, and the second attributed to Aonghus Ruadh O Dalaigh, or Aonghus son of Cearbhall Ruadh (Red-Haired Cearbhall) O Dalaigh. The other Mac Cearbhaill Bhuidhe poems are also of a high quality, but most remain unpublished. Genealogies indicate that the line of O Dalaigh Breifneach, who composed poems for the O Raighilligh chieftains in the late medieval and early modern period, descended from this section of the family. 
In the mid-fourteenth century the main line of O Dalaigh Midhe (O Dalaigh of Meath) divided, when its head, Aonghus Ruadh O Dalaigh (d. 1350), son of Donnchadh son of Aonghus son of Donnchadh Mor, quarrelled with a local chief in co. Westmeath, Ruaidhri O Maolmhuaidh (died 1383). In a poem to the latter, 'Ceangal do shioth riom a Ruaidhri' (McKenna, 'Irish bardic poems', 317-25), Aonghus Ruadh threatened that if the quarrel were not resolved, he would reside with the more prominent O Briain chieftains of Thomond, in modern co. Clare. The existence in 1415 of a line of O Dalaigh of Corcumroe, Clare, headed by Fearghal (died 1420), son of Tadhg son of Aonghus Ruadh, suggests that this threat was fulfilled. 
However, from the fourteenth century onwards the poetic gifts of the Meath, Breifne, and Corcumroe lines of the family were outshone by the Munster branches of O Dalaigh Fionn (O Dalaigh the Fair) and O Dalaigh Cairbreach (O Dalaigh of Carbery, barony, in west Cork). This trend began with the career of Gofraidh O Dalaigh Fionn (d. 1387), styled by the annals of Ulster 'Ollam Erenn re dan' ('chief master of Ireland in the art of poetry'). Educated by the Mac Craith poets of Thomond, he soon outdid his teachers, much to their disgust, as the poem 'Mairg chaitheas dlus re dalta' ('Woe to him who favours a pupil'; MacCionaith, no. 104) suggests. Gofraidh's earliest patron was Conchobhar O Briain (died 1328), but he also addressed chiefs of Tir Conaill and Ui Mhaine, besides Mac Carthaigh Mor, Mac Carthaigh Cairbreach, and their sub-chieftains, and was court poet to the first, second, and third earls of Desmond. His association with the third earl, Gerald the Rhymer 
(Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, died 1398)
, began during the latter's childhood and may have influenced the earl's subsequent development as an amateur poet in the Irish language. In some famous verses to the child Gerald and his father Maurice, the first earl, Gofraidh states: 'In the foreigners' poems we promise that the Irish shall be driven from Ireland, in the Irishmen's poems we promise that the foreigners shall be routed across the sea' (MacCionaith, no. 67). Religious poems and verse tracts on the composition of poetry are also attributed to him. 
By the sixteenth century a branch of the O Dalaigh family had settled at Pallis, Wexford. One member was Aonghus son of Doighre O Dalaigh ('fl'. 1598), poet to the Gabhal Raghnallach, or clan Ranelagh O'Byrnes. From this branch also came the semi-legendary lover of the seventeenth century, Cearbhall na mBan (Cearbhall of the Women). However most prominent at this time was the Munsterman Aonghus O Dalaigh Fionn (d. 1601x9), son of Amhlaoibh O Dalaigh Fionn and author of a lament for Domhnall Mac Carthaigh, earl of Clancare (died 1596): 'Soraidh led cheile a Chaisil' ('Farewell to thy Husband, O Cashel!'; 'Book of O'Conor Don', Royal Irish Academy, MS 2, fol. 363a), and one for the latter's son Tadhg, baron of Valencia (died 1587/8): 'A theachtaire thig o'n bhFrainnc' ('Messenger who comes from France'; Royal Irish Academy, MS 490, p. 151). After the earl's death O Dalaigh Fionn appears to have concentrated on religious compositions, becoming nicknamed Aonghus na Diadhachta (Aonghus of the Divinity). He ran a poetic school at his residence in Duhallow, under the patronage of the local chief, Domhnall O Caoimh, who died in the same year as his eminent protege. A contemporary, Aonghus Ruadh, or Aonghus na nAor (Aonghus of the Satires) O Dalaigh (died 1617) lived on the peninsula of Muntervary in West Carbery, and composed a libellous poem, 'The tribes of Ireland'. From the same period, Lochlainn ('fl'. 1596-1620) son of Tadhg Og O Dalaigh, probably of the O Dalaigh Breifneach branch, is a transitional figure, who composed genre poetry as well as eulogies for patrons, including a lament for the collapse of Gaelic society in the wake of the plantations, 'C'ait ar ghabhadar Gaoidhil?' ('Where have the Gaels gone?'), which mentions the new generation's indifference to his family's historic profession. 


@@@@@


doc= 20533


O Dalaigh, Aonghus (d. 1617), poet, was the author of 'Muintir fhiodhnacha na mionn', a long series of satirical quatrains on numerous Gaelic clerical and noble families. Although at least three well-known poets called Aonghus O Dalaigh flourished 'c'.1600, oral tradition locates the satirist as having lived on the Muntervary peninsula between Dunmanus Bay and Bantry Bay, co. Cork. This was the home of O Dalaigh Cairbreach, head of a cadet branch of the poetic dynasty of O Dalaigh. In 1852 substantial remains of the O Dalaigh Cairbreach school were still pointed out in the townland of Drumnea, parish of Kilcrohane, whereas tradition identified a smaller ruin in the townland of Corra, once part of a larger townland of Ballyroon, as the house of the Bard Ruadh. On these grounds Edward O'Reilly identified the Bard Ruadh with the Aonghus O Dalaigh of 'Ballyorroone', recorded in an inquisition at Old Castle in Cork (18 September 1624) as having died on 16 December 1617 (possibly in Ballyroon), leaving a legitimate son, Aonghus Og O Dalaigh. 
T. F. O'Rahilly argued that 'Eneas keaghe O Daly of Moyntervarye' mentioned in a fiant of 31 August 1590 was also a reference to the Bard Ruadh, though the adjective 'keaghe', 'caoch', 'squinting' or 'one-eyed' is not otherwise associated with the satirist. More convincingly, O'Rahilly cited a co. Cork reference in the patent rolls of James I (p. 32a) to 'Eneas Odaly otherwise Odaly of Cahir, yeoman' in 1604. The townland of Caher adjoins the modern townland of Ballyroon on the Muntervary peninsula, and the wording indicates that Aonghus became head of his kindred. 
The number of families lampooned in the only composition to be firmly associated with this author is too great to be explained by personal animus. O'Reilly retailed a theory that these scurrilous verses, in loose 'oglachas' metres, were commissioned by 'the agents of the Earl of Essex and Sir George Carew' (O'Reilly, clxxvii), but this is difficult to believe, since the verses actually eulogize rather than satirize the arch-rebel O Domhnaill and Mac Cana of north Armagh, and it is noteworthy that the rebellious Mag Uidhir chiefs of Fermanagh are passed over, while 'the English Maguire', Sir Conchobhar Ruadh, is savagely attacked. O Dalaigh's remark that should he satirize the O Domhnaill dynasty of Donegal, 'the race of Adam would not be a shelter to me' (O'Donovan, 55), suggests the years 1599-1600 as the date of composition, when O Domhnaill's troops were ravaging Munster. Like the hasty eulogy to O Domhnaill composed by Maoilin Og Mac Bruaideadha, O Dalaigh's lampoons could have been composed for the practical purpose of earning protection against the Ulster army, by ridiculing families in various parts of Ireland who had offended O Domhnaill by failing to support his uprising. However, as O'Donovan points out, the manuscripts containing the satires are late and full of variations, and as the style of versification is so crude, additional verses against particular families could have been added in the course of transmission. 


@@@@@


doc= 20534


O Dalaigh family (per. c.1100-c.1620), poets, apparently originated as local chieftains of Corcu Roide (roughly the barony of Corkaree, Westmeath). Five eminent 'ollamhain' ('master poets') of the surname are recorded during the twelfth century, the first of whom, Cu Chonnacht Ua Dalaig, described in the annals of Tigernach as 'the best poet in Ireland' died in 1139 as an old man in religious retirement at the ecclesiastical settlement of Clonard. Mael Isa Ua Dalaig (died 1185), whom the annals of Loch Ce call the 'master-poet of Ireland and Scotland, and high chieftain of Corcu Roide', also died in old age at Clonard. Two others, Ragnall (died 1161), and Gilla na Trinoiti (died 1165), are described as master poets for the kingdom of Desmond, or south Munster, indicating that they were court poets to the Mac Carthaig kings there. The family acquired in the course of this century an extraordinarily high reputation, being among the earliest practitioners of the newly regulated art of 'dan direach' ('strict composition'), though no extant texts attributed to its members predate the early thirteenth century. 
A number of fresh and elegant compositions ascribed to Muireadhach O Dalaigh (fl. 1213) of Lissadill, Sligo, date from this period. The two best-known (Bergin, nos. 20, 22) are: first, his address to the young Richard de Burgh (died 1243), 'Cred agaibh aoidhigh a gcein?' ('Whence comes it that ye have guests from afar?') in which he styles himself O Dalaigh Midhe, and petitions the Anglo-Norman lord for refuge from the anger of Domhnall O Domhnaill, king of Tir Conaill ('r'. 1208-41), whose servant he has killed in a quarrel; and, second, his lament for his dead wife, Maol Mheadha -- 'M'anam do sgar riomsa araoir' ('My soul parted from me last night'), mourning her as his first love, who during twenty years of marriage had borne him eleven children. The account of his life in the annals is a semi-legendary composition of a later century. It relates that he went to Scotland after his exile by O Domhnaill, and he has been claimed as the ancestor of the distinguished Scottish poetic family of MacMhuireadhaigh. Fifteenth-century Irish genealogies (Royal Irish Academy, MS 1233, fol. 36'r'- 'v') assert that Muireadhach of Lissadill was brother to the celebrated Donnchadh Mor O Dalaigh (d. 1244), 'a master of poetry who never has been excelled and never will be', according to the annals of Connacht, where it is also stated that he was buried in the Cistercian monastery of Boyle; another version of his obit says that he kept a guest house, or hostel for travellers, a charity commonly offered by Irish scholars at the top of their profession. Such was his reputation as a religious poet that many folk hymns and ballads of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries have been fathered on him, but a group of poems preserved in the fourteenth-century 'Book of Ui Mhaine' (McKenna, 'Dan De') are probably genuine compositions of Donnchadh Mor. They are long and austere, and do not translate well, but the Irish text corruscates with redundance of rhyme, since like all true bardic poetry it was intended for public recitation. In 'Gabham deachmhaidh ar ndana' Donnchadh Mor pledges to address a tithe of all his professional eulogies to God, and ends with a prayer that those learning or reciting his poem may receive heaven as their reward. Very few of his secular poems survive, the most striking being his lament for the death of his son Aonghus, 'Ar iasacht fhuaras Aonghus' ('I obtained Aonghus on loan'; MacCionaith, 'Dioghluim Dana', no. 69). Another possible example is a eulogy for the three sons of Mac Giollamhuire (a chief in north Down): 'Cuaine rioghna rug Eadaoin' ('Eadaoin bore a queen's litter [of whelps]'; Book of the Dean of Lismore, p. 75; NL Ire., MS 992, fol. 37), which ends with an envoi to Aodh, son of Aodh O Neill, who may be the king Aodh Meith O Neill (d. 1230). 
Some poems from late thirteenth- and early fourteenth-century Connacht are ascribed to Mac Cearbhaill Bhuidhe ('Son of Yellow-Haired Cearbhall'), perhaps for a time the title of the head of a particular line in the O Dalaigh family. Cearbhall Buidhe O Dalaigh himself died in 1245. His son Tadhg, court poet to Aodh son of Feidhlim O Conchobhair, king of Connacht, died in 1274, the same year as his patron. Another Mac Cearbhaill Bhuidhe, court poet to Aodh, son of Eoghan O Conchobhair, king of Connacht ('r'. 1296-1309), composed one, perhaps both, of two poems in honour of the king's palace (MacCionaith, no. 119; Quiggin, 333-52), the first variously ascribed to Cuchonnacht son of Cearbhall Buidhe, Aonghus son of Cearbhall Buidhe, or Aonghus son of Tadhg son of Cearbhall Buidhe, and the second attributed to Aonghus Ruadh O Dalaigh, or Aonghus son of Cearbhall Ruadh (Red-Haired Cearbhall) O Dalaigh. The other Mac Cearbhaill Bhuidhe poems are also of a high quality, but most remain unpublished. Genealogies indicate that the line of O Dalaigh Breifneach, who composed poems for the O Raighilligh chieftains in the late medieval and early modern period, descended from this section of the family. 
In the mid-fourteenth century the main line of O Dalaigh Midhe (O Dalaigh of Meath) divided, when its head, Aonghus Ruadh O Dalaigh (d. 1350), son of Donnchadh son of Aonghus son of Donnchadh Mor, quarrelled with a local chief in co. Westmeath, Ruaidhri O Maolmhuaidh (died 1383). In a poem to the latter, 'Ceangal do shioth riom a Ruaidhri' (McKenna, 'Irish bardic poems', 317-25), Aonghus Ruadh threatened that if the quarrel were not resolved, he would reside with the more prominent O Briain chieftains of Thomond, in modern co. Clare. The existence in 1415 of a line of O Dalaigh of Corcumroe, Clare, headed by Fearghal (died 1420), son of Tadhg son of Aonghus Ruadh, suggests that this threat was fulfilled. 
However, from the fourteenth century onwards the poetic gifts of the Meath, Breifne, and Corcumroe lines of the family were outshone by the Munster branches of O Dalaigh Fionn (O Dalaigh the Fair) and O Dalaigh Cairbreach (O Dalaigh of Carbery, barony, in west Cork). This trend began with the career of Gofraidh O Dalaigh Fionn (d. 1387), styled by the annals of Ulster 'Ollam Erenn re dan' ('chief master of Ireland in the art of poetry'). Educated by the Mac Craith poets of Thomond, he soon outdid his teachers, much to their disgust, as the poem 'Mairg chaitheas dlus re dalta' ('Woe to him who favours a pupil'; MacCionaith, no. 104) suggests. Gofraidh's earliest patron was Conchobhar O Briain (died 1328), but he also addressed chiefs of Tir Conaill and Ui Mhaine, besides Mac Carthaigh Mor, Mac Carthaigh Cairbreach, and their sub-chieftains, and was court poet to the first, second, and third earls of Desmond. His association with the third earl, Gerald the Rhymer 
(Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, died 1398)
, began during the latter's childhood and may have influenced the earl's subsequent development as an amateur poet in the Irish language. In some famous verses to the child Gerald and his father Maurice, the first earl, Gofraidh states: 'In the foreigners' poems we promise that the Irish shall be driven from Ireland, in the Irishmen's poems we promise that the foreigners shall be routed across the sea' (MacCionaith, no. 67). Religious poems and verse tracts on the composition of poetry are also attributed to him. 
By the sixteenth century a branch of the O Dalaigh family had settled at Pallis, Wexford. One member was Aonghus son of Doighre O Dalaigh ('fl'. 1598), poet to the Gabhal Raghnallach, or clan Ranelagh O'Byrnes. From this branch also came the semi-legendary lover of the seventeenth century, Cearbhall na mBan (Cearbhall of the Women). However most prominent at this time was the Munsterman Aonghus O Dalaigh Fionn (d. 1601x9), son of Amhlaoibh O Dalaigh Fionn and author of a lament for Domhnall Mac Carthaigh, earl of Clancare (died 1596): 'Soraidh led cheile a Chaisil' ('Farewell to thy Husband, O Cashel!'; 'Book of O'Conor Don', Royal Irish Academy, MS 2, fol. 363a), and one for the latter's son Tadhg, baron of Valencia (died 1587/8): 'A theachtaire thig o'n bhFrainnc' ('Messenger who comes from France'; Royal Irish Academy, MS 490, p. 151). After the earl's death O Dalaigh Fionn appears to have concentrated on religious compositions, becoming nicknamed Aonghus na Diadhachta (Aonghus of the Divinity). He ran a poetic school at his residence in Duhallow, under the patronage of the local chief, Domhnall O Caoimh, who died in the same year as his eminent protege. A contemporary, Aonghus Ruadh, or Aonghus na nAor (Aonghus of the Satires) O Dalaigh (died 1617) lived on the peninsula of Muntervary in West Carbery, and composed a libellous poem, 'The tribes of Ireland'. From the same period, Lochlainn ('fl'. 1596-1620) son of Tadhg Og O Dalaigh, probably of the O Dalaigh Breifneach branch, is a transitional figure, who composed genre poetry as well as eulogies for patrons, including a lament for the collapse of Gaelic society in the wake of the plantations, 'C'ait ar ghabhadar Gaoidhil?' ('Where have the Gaels gone?'), which mentions the new generation's indifference to his family's historic profession. 


@@@@@


doc= 20535


O Dalaigh family (per. c.1100-c.1620), poets, apparently originated as local chieftains of Corcu Roide (roughly the barony of Corkaree, Westmeath). Five eminent 'ollamhain' ('master poets') of the surname are recorded during the twelfth century, the first of whom, Cu Chonnacht Ua Dalaig, described in the annals of Tigernach as 'the best poet in Ireland' died in 1139 as an old man in religious retirement at the ecclesiastical settlement of Clonard. Mael Isa Ua Dalaig (died 1185), whom the annals of Loch Ce call the 'master-poet of Ireland and Scotland, and high chieftain of Corcu Roide', also died in old age at Clonard. Two others, Ragnall (died 1161), and Gilla na Trinoiti (died 1165), are described as master poets for the kingdom of Desmond, or south Munster, indicating that they were court poets to the Mac Carthaig kings there. The family acquired in the course of this century an extraordinarily high reputation, being among the earliest practitioners of the newly regulated art of 'dan direach' ('strict composition'), though no extant texts attributed to its members predate the early thirteenth century. 
A number of fresh and elegant compositions ascribed to Muireadhach O Dalaigh (fl. 1213) of Lissadill, Sligo, date from this period. The two best-known (Bergin, nos. 20, 22) are: first, his address to the young Richard de Burgh (died 1243), 'Cred agaibh aoidhigh a gcein?' ('Whence comes it that ye have guests from afar?') in which he styles himself O Dalaigh Midhe, and petitions the Anglo-Norman lord for refuge from the anger of Domhnall O Domhnaill, king of Tir Conaill ('r'. 1208-41), whose servant he has killed in a quarrel; and, second, his lament for his dead wife, Maol Mheadha -- 'M'anam do sgar riomsa araoir' ('My soul parted from me last night'), mourning her as his first love, who during twenty years of marriage had borne him eleven children. The account of his life in the annals is a semi-legendary composition of a later century. It relates that he went to Scotland after his exile by O Domhnaill, and he has been claimed as the ancestor of the distinguished Scottish poetic family of MacMhuireadhaigh. Fifteenth-century Irish genealogies (Royal Irish Academy, MS 1233, fol. 36'r'- 'v') assert that Muireadhach of Lissadill was brother to the celebrated Donnchadh Mor O Dalaigh (d. 1244), 'a master of poetry who never has been excelled and never will be', according to the annals of Connacht, where it is also stated that he was buried in the Cistercian monastery of Boyle; another version of his obit says that he kept a guest house, or hostel for travellers, a charity commonly offered by Irish scholars at the top of their profession. Such was his reputation as a religious poet that many folk hymns and ballads of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries have been fathered on him, but a group of poems preserved in the fourteenth-century 'Book of Ui Mhaine' (McKenna, 'Dan De') are probably genuine compositions of Donnchadh Mor. They are long and austere, and do not translate well, but the Irish text corruscates with redundance of rhyme, since like all true bardic poetry it was intended for public recitation. In 'Gabham deachmhaidh ar ndana' Donnchadh Mor pledges to address a tithe of all his professional eulogies to God, and ends with a prayer that those learning or reciting his poem may receive heaven as their reward. Very few of his secular poems survive, the most striking being his lament for the death of his son Aonghus, 'Ar iasacht fhuaras Aonghus' ('I obtained Aonghus on loan'; MacCionaith, 'Dioghluim Dana', no. 69). Another possible example is a eulogy for the three sons of Mac Giollamhuire (a chief in north Down): 'Cuaine rioghna rug Eadaoin' ('Eadaoin bore a queen's litter [of whelps]'; Book of the Dean of Lismore, p. 75; NL Ire., MS 992, fol. 37), which ends with an envoi to Aodh, son of Aodh O Neill, who may be the king Aodh Meith O Neill (d. 1230). 
Some poems from late thirteenth- and early fourteenth-century Connacht are ascribed to Mac Cearbhaill Bhuidhe ('Son of Yellow-Haired Cearbhall'), perhaps for a time the title of the head of a particular line in the O Dalaigh family. Cearbhall Buidhe O Dalaigh himself died in 1245. His son Tadhg, court poet to Aodh son of Feidhlim O Conchobhair, king of Connacht, died in 1274, the same year as his patron. Another Mac Cearbhaill Bhuidhe, court poet to Aodh, son of Eoghan O Conchobhair, king of Connacht ('r'. 1296-1309), composed one, perhaps both, of two poems in honour of the king's palace (MacCionaith, no. 119; Quiggin, 333-52), the first variously ascribed to Cuchonnacht son of Cearbhall Buidhe, Aonghus son of Cearbhall Buidhe, or Aonghus son of Tadhg son of Cearbhall Buidhe, and the second attributed to Aonghus Ruadh O Dalaigh, or Aonghus son of Cearbhall Ruadh (Red-Haired Cearbhall) O Dalaigh. The other Mac Cearbhaill Bhuidhe poems are also of a high quality, but most remain unpublished. Genealogies indicate that the line of O Dalaigh Breifneach, who composed poems for the O Raighilligh chieftains in the late medieval and early modern period, descended from this section of the family. 
In the mid-fourteenth century the main line of O Dalaigh Midhe (O Dalaigh of Meath) divided, when its head, Aonghus Ruadh O Dalaigh (d. 1350), son of Donnchadh son of Aonghus son of Donnchadh Mor, quarrelled with a local chief in co. Westmeath, Ruaidhri O Maolmhuaidh (died 1383). In a poem to the latter, 'Ceangal do shioth riom a Ruaidhri' (McKenna, 'Irish bardic poems', 317-25), Aonghus Ruadh threatened that if the quarrel were not resolved, he would reside with the more prominent O Briain chieftains of Thomond, in modern co. Clare. The existence in 1415 of a line of O Dalaigh of Corcumroe, Clare, headed by Fearghal (died 1420), son of Tadhg son of Aonghus Ruadh, suggests that this threat was fulfilled. 
However, from the fourteenth century onwards the poetic gifts of the Meath, Breifne, and Corcumroe lines of the family were outshone by the Munster branches of O Dalaigh Fionn (O Dalaigh the Fair) and O Dalaigh Cairbreach (O Dalaigh of Carbery, barony, in west Cork). This trend began with the career of Gofraidh O Dalaigh Fionn (d. 1387), styled by the annals of Ulster 'Ollam Erenn re dan' ('chief master of Ireland in the art of poetry'). Educated by the Mac Craith poets of Thomond, he soon outdid his teachers, much to their disgust, as the poem 'Mairg chaitheas dlus re dalta' ('Woe to him who favours a pupil'; MacCionaith, no. 104) suggests. Gofraidh's earliest patron was Conchobhar O Briain (died 1328), but he also addressed chiefs of Tir Conaill and Ui Mhaine, besides Mac Carthaigh Mor, Mac Carthaigh Cairbreach, and their sub-chieftains, and was court poet to the first, second, and third earls of Desmond. His association with the third earl, Gerald the Rhymer 
(Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, died 1398)
, began during the latter's childhood and may have influenced the earl's subsequent development as an amateur poet in the Irish language. In some famous verses to the child Gerald and his father Maurice, the first earl, Gofraidh states: 'In the foreigners' poems we promise that the Irish shall be driven from Ireland, in the Irishmen's poems we promise that the foreigners shall be routed across the sea' (MacCionaith, no. 67). Religious poems and verse tracts on the composition of poetry are also attributed to him. 
By the sixteenth century a branch of the O Dalaigh family had settled at Pallis, Wexford. One member was Aonghus son of Doighre O Dalaigh ('fl'. 1598), poet to the Gabhal Raghnallach, or clan Ranelagh O'Byrnes. From this branch also came the semi-legendary lover of the seventeenth century, Cearbhall na mBan (Cearbhall of the Women). However most prominent at this time was the Munsterman Aonghus O Dalaigh Fionn (d. 1601x9), son of Amhlaoibh O Dalaigh Fionn and author of a lament for Domhnall Mac Carthaigh, earl of Clancare (died 1596): 'Soraidh led cheile a Chaisil' ('Farewell to thy Husband, O Cashel!'; 'Book of O'Conor Don', Royal Irish Academy, MS 2, fol. 363a), and one for the latter's son Tadhg, baron of Valencia (died 1587/8): 'A theachtaire thig o'n bhFrainnc' ('Messenger who comes from France'; Royal Irish Academy, MS 490, p. 151). After the earl's death O Dalaigh Fionn appears to have concentrated on religious compositions, becoming nicknamed Aonghus na Diadhachta (Aonghus of the Divinity). He ran a poetic school at his residence in Duhallow, under the patronage of the local chief, Domhnall O Caoimh, who died in the same year as his eminent protege. A contemporary, Aonghus Ruadh, or Aonghus na nAor (Aonghus of the Satires) O Dalaigh (died 1617) lived on the peninsula of Muntervary in West Carbery, and composed a libellous poem, 'The tribes of Ireland'. From the same period, Lochlainn ('fl'. 1596-1620) son of Tadhg Og O Dalaigh, probably of the O Dalaigh Breifneach branch, is a transitional figure, who composed genre poetry as well as eulogies for patrons, including a lament for the collapse of Gaelic society in the wake of the plantations, 'C'ait ar ghabhadar Gaoidhil?' ('Where have the Gaels gone?'), which mentions the new generation's indifference to his family's historic profession. 


@@@@@


doc= 20536


Odell, Thomas (1691-1749), playwright, was the son of a substantial Buckinghamshire landowner. About the age of twenty-three he went to London, where through the interest of Lord Wharton he secured a pension from the government. But the death of Wharton in 1715 'and some other accidents' left his fortunes 'somewhat impaired' (Mottley, 270) and Odell was thrown back on his own resources. 
Odell turned to the theatre for a profession, and on 19 January 1721 his first play, 'The Chimera: a Farce', was performed at the Theatre Royal, Lincoln's Inn Fields, and ran for three nights. He was later to write other dramatic pieces, but his major venture was the building of a new theatre in Goodman's Fields. There were only three theatres in London at this time, and so the building of a fourth represented a significant expansion, occasioned by an increase in the popularity of the stage resulting from the success in 1728 of John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera' and Sir John Vanbrugh's 'The Provok'd Husband'. The new theatre opened in 1729, the first production being George Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer' on 31 October. This speculation proved a success; the new company achieved an impressive 185 performances in this first season, mostly of contemporary comedy, and Odell 'got not less than one hundred pounds a week by this undertaking' (Baker, xxxiv). 
But opposition to the new playhouse had started before its opening, with application to the justices 'to prohibit the theatre' (Avery, xxi). Soon after the opening Arthur Bedford, a lifelong opponent of the stage, preached a sermon at St Botolph, Aldgate, against the newly erected playhouse, warning that the 'apprentices and journeymen of a leading part of the city would be led into dissipation' ('Thespian Dictionary'). As a result on 28 April 1730 a petition was sent to the king from 'the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen of the City [of] London addressing his Majesty to suppress it' (Mottley, 270). Odell was forced to close the theatre temporarily, but he reopened it on 16 September 1730. The second season saw less opposition, but Odell sold the theatre in 1732 to Henry Giffard, an actor in his company who had arrived from Ireland in 1730, the final performance under Odell being on 23 May. The impending sale was a subject of rumour long before this date; a playbill for 'A Bold Stroke for a Wife' dated 4 June 1731 has the following footnote: 'NB The article in the 'Daily Advertiser' of Wednesday last (June 2) which mentions Mr Odell's intending to decline concerning himself any longer with the management of Goodmans Fields playhouse, is a false and scandalous libel, for which the printer &c of the paper will be prosecuted with the utmost severity by me. Tho. Odell. (Genest, 'Eng. stage', 3.320)' The truth seems to be that Odell did not have the acumen and determination to succeed as a theatre manager. Giffard, on the other hand, did, and under his management the theatre prospered, and was soon replaced: 'Mr Odell, from not understanding the management of a company (as indeed how should any one, that is not, in some way, brought up in that knowledge?) soon left it to Giffard that did; who in the year 1733 caused to be built an intire, new, beautiful convenient Theatre. (Chetwood, 169)' The new theatre was in Ayliffe Street, and it was in this new theatre that Garrick was to give the first performance of his London career in 1741. 
In 1738 Odell began a new career. William Chetwynd was sworn in as licenser of the stage in February, and Odell was appointed deputy 'that he [Chetwynd] might not be too much fatigued with reading half a dozen plays in the course of a twelvemonth' (Genest, 'Eng. stage', 3.522). Odell was to hold this position for the rest of his life. Odell was the author of a number of other dramatic works: 'The Smugglers: a Farce' (1729), 'The Prodigal, or, Recruits for the Queen of Hungary' (1744), 'The Patron: a Ballad-Opera' (1729), as well as several poetical pieces. 
At the end of his life Odell was living in somewhat impecunious conditions, and at his death was engaged on an account of his experiences and acquaintances. He had not made a great success in the theatre as either a manager or an author: 'It does not seem that he possessed the ambition peculiar to author-managers, having produced no piece at his own theatre' ('Thespian Dictionary'). But he was remembered as 'a great observator of everything curious in the conversation of his acquaintance; and his own conversation was a living chronicle of the remarkable intrigues, adventures, sayings, stories, writings etc of many of the Quality, Poets and other Authors, Players, Booksellers... (Oldys, 161)' Odell died of 'gout in his stomach' (ibid.) on 24 May 1749, at his house in Chapel Street, Westminster, and was buried at the Chapel Street churchyard. He was married, but nothing is known of his wife. 


