@@@@@


doc= 20537


Ua Diummusaig, Diarmait (d. 1193), king of Ui Failge, was son of Cu Broga Ua Diummusaig of Clann Mael Ugra, slain in 1162 at Killeigh, Offaly, by Mael Sechlainn mac Congailig Ua Conchobair, king of Ui Failge. The surname Ua Diummusaig derived from Diummasach, an eleventh-century dynast of Clann Mael Ugra which, in turn, derived its name from the mid-ninth-century Mael Ugrai. The Clann Mael Ugra claimed descent from Rus Failge, the eponymous ancestor of the Ui Failge, and were therefore considered to be a branch of the Ui Failge, the overkingship of which generally was monopolized by the Ui Conchobair Failge. The lands of the Clann Mael Ugra were situated along either side of the River Barrow in Laois and Offaly. Diarmait probably succeeded to the kingship of Clann Mael Ugra in 1162 and subsequently gained control also of the overkingship of Ui Failge, possibly because of dynastic rivalry among the Ui Conchobair Failge following the death of Mael Sechlainn Ua Conchobair at the hands of the Clann Mael Ugra in 1164. 
In 1173 Diarmait Ua Diummusaig, who occurs as king of Ui Failge in the so-called 'Song of Dermot and the Earl', mounted an attack on an Anglo-Norman raiding party in Ui Failge led by Richard fitz Gilbert, earl of Pembroke and lord of Striguil, known as Strongbow. As the Anglo-Normans passed through a narrow defile, their rearguard was attacked and, among others, Strongbow's son-in-law, Robert de Quincy, was killed. Ua Diummusaig is styled 'rex Offalie' ('king of Ui Failge') in a charter which he issued to a Benedictine (later Cistercian) community between 1177 and 1181, which granted the early Irish ecclesiastical site of Monasterevin (or Mainister Eimhin), reputedly founded by St Eimin in the sixth century and also known as Rosglas, in Kildare. The charter states that the grant was made with the assent of Muirchertach Ua Conchobair, suggesting that he may have been Diarmait's successor designate in the kingship of Ui Failge. Diarmait Ua Diummusaig died in 1193. His son, Mael Sechlainn, was killed in 1216 by the Ui Mael Muaid in Fir Chell along with followers of Meiler fitz Henry. 


@@@@@


doc= 20538


O'Devany, Conor (c.1535-1612), Roman Catholic bishop of Down and Connor, was born about 1535, inferred from the general agreement that he was nearly eighty at the time of his death. The names of his father and mother have not been preserved, but their social position can be established. They were the 'erenagh' family of the parish of Raphoe in co. Donegal, the 'erenagh' being a layman who farmed church lands by hereditary right. Inquisitions taken in 1609 in preparation for the plantation of Ulster found the lands of 'Tollohedeveny' to be church lands. These were Tulach O Dhuibheanaigh (O'Devany's Hill), today shortened to Tully, and it may be presumed that Conor was born there. Before he was twenty years old O'Devany entered the Observant Franciscan friary in the town of Donegal, the Observants being a particularly effective force in a society based on kin groups, a kind of society that sometimes did not fit well into the framework of the territorial parish. Though nothing is known in detail of his personal ministry, his training in the Observant friary of Donegal would have given it a dedicated character. 
The papal excommunication of Elizabeth I in 1570 quickly polarized the religious situation in Ireland. O'Devany followed many other Irish clerics to Rome, where he was nominated bishop of Down and Connor on 27 April 1582. With two other Irish bishops he was consecrated on 13 May in the church of Santa Maria dell'Anima. He then returned to his diocese, situated in Gaelic Ulster in the extreme north-east of Ireland. The only detail of his episcopate preserved concerns a synod attended by him and six other bishops in 1587. It had been called to promulgate the decrees of the Council of Trent in the northern ecclesiastical province of Armagh. The grip of the government was tightening only slowly in Gaelic Ulster, but pressure was stepped up because of the threat from the Spanish Armada. Bishop O'Devany was captured. He escaped, but was recaptured, and was imprisoned in Dublin Castle. In a petition for his release in November 1590 he said he had been imprisoned by Lord Deputy Perrot, and therefore before 30 June 1588, when Perrot's successor was sworn in. O'Devany's petition was granted almost immediately. He gave a carefully worded undertaking admitting that he had committed 'divers faults worthy of condign punishment' in 'matters of religion', but promised to be of good behaviour in this respect for the future. But when he returned to his diocese in Ulster he found growing resentment at government pressure. In 1593 a number of bishops joined in an appeal for help to Philip II of Spain. It is not known if Conor O'Devany was one of them, or even how many they were. 
In 1594 resentment became revolt. Under the cautious leadership of Hugh O'Neill the war lasted for nine years. The leading family in O'Devany's diocese was a collateral O'Neill branch, which took part in the war, but with some reluctance because of having to take orders from Hugh O'Neill and his family. Against this background there is a small piece of direct evidence to suggest that Bishop O'Devany was not deeply involved in war or politics. It is a report to Rome on Irish ecclesiastical affairs, unsigned and undated, but drawn up about 1600 by Peter Lombard, Hugh O'Neill's agent in Rome. He dismissed Conor O'Devany as 'a good man indeed, but too guileless ['simplicior'] to be of any great assistance' (Archivio Segreto Vaticano, fondo Borghese, III, 124C, fol. 78). 
O'Neill was forced to surrender on 30 March 1603. In 1607 most of the Gaelic chiefs of Ulster left Ireland ('the flight of the earls'), and this resulted in the confiscation and plantation of their lands. To secure a parliamentary majority for the crown, new boroughs were then freely created in the planted areas, and intimidatory pressure on the Old English was stepped up. By this time Conor O'Devany was again in prison. Events in his native Ulster had steadily deprived him of protectors, and he was in fact a fugitive when he was captured in the early summer of 1611 and lodged in Dublin Castle. As part of the preparation for parliament the privy council in London suggested to Sir Arthur Chichester in a letter dated 20 August 1611 that it would be well if 'some titular bishops could be punished in an exemplary manner' provided it could be made clear that they were not being punished for their religious activities ('CSP Ire.', '1611-14', 96). This implied a trial for treason. There were only two Roman Catholic bishops in Ireland, and O'Devany, a native of Gaelic Ulster, was actually in captivity. He was indicted for treason by a grand jury in January 1612, together with Patrick O'Loughran, one of a number of priests in prison, picked out because he had been personal chaplain to Hugh O'Neill. 
They stood trial at the court of king's bench in Dublin on 28 January 1612. No official account of the trial has survived, but there are many accounts from Roman Catholic sources, some deriving directly from eyewitnesses. They agree substantially with one another, and with the known format of trials for treason at the time. In such trials the government took every precaution to secure a favourable verdict. O'Devany pleaded that he was on trial because he was a bishop; that he had confined himself to his ecclesiastical functions during the war; and that in any case there had been a general amnesty. But he and O'Loughran were found guilty and sentenced to be executed as traitors on 1 February. 
Again, there are many accounts of the executions, including one from a protestant, Barnaby Rich. The prisoners were drawn on hurdles from the castle to the place of execution, a little hillock about a mile distant on the opposite bank of the Liffey. They were accompanied by large and growing crowds, which must have numbered at least several thousand by the time the gallows was reached. There was no doubt of the sentiments of these crowds, and from time to time they became threatening. When the bishop and the priest had been executed with all the bloody ritual of traitors' deaths there was an unstoppable scramble for relics of those already regarded as martyrs for their religion. O'Devany's head was apparently recovered. The next day the dismembered corpses were buried on the spot. The following night they were exhumed and buried in a city churchyard. Which one it was remained a secret. 
The government plan to intimidate the Old English Roman Catholics by executing a bishop went badly wrong. On 6 February, Chichester wrote to Cecil lamenting that the bishop and priest 'being lately executed here for treason merely, are notwithstanding... thought martyrs and adored for saints' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/232/8). As a later authority put it succinctly, 'O'Devany's death was an event of unexpected importance in the development of the counter-reformation in Ireland' (Clarke, 209). It stiffened resolve among the Old English electorate. Conor O'Devany and Patrick O'Loughran continued to be venerated as martyrs and on 27 September 1992 they were formally declared blessed by Pope John Paul II. 
O'Devany was the compiler of an 'index martyrialis', which he sent to the Jesuit superior Christopher Holywood shortly before his execution. The 'index' included the names and dates of death of all the bishops and priests who had been martyred since 1585. Though it has not survived, the names were included by David Rothe in his 'Analecta'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20539


Odger, George (1813-1877), shoemaker and trade unionist, was born in Roborough, south Devon, the son of John Odger, a Cornish miner. After attending the village school, he became a shoemaker at an early age, tramping about the country before settling in London, where he became active in the Ladies' West End Shoemakers' Society. A first-class craftsman, he was the only significant labour leader of his generation to practise his trade throughout his life: his death certificate described him as 'Ladies Boot Maker and Public Orator' (d. cert., 4 March 1877). Odger, who rose to prominence in delegate meetings of London trades to support building workers in the 1859 strike and lock-out, helped to initiate the London Trades Council, succeeding George Howell as secretary in 1862 and serving in that capacity until 1872. 
With the London Trades Council as his organizational base, Odger, who never held office in his trade union, promoted the cause of parliamentary suffrage through the Manhood Suffrage and Vote by Ballot Association, of which he became the chairman in 1862. Odger was instrumental in persuading the labour newspaper 'The Bee-Hive' to reverse its pro-Confederate position in the American Civil War and spoke at a meeting held at St James's Hall on 26 March 1863 in support of the Unionist cause. He was also involved in the popular welcome to Garibaldi and in meetings to express sympathy with the Polish revolt in 1863. His fraternal address to French workers in December 1863, following a French deputation over the Polish question, was a precursor of the International Working Men's Association, established in September 1864; Odger became president and subsequently chairman of its council. His influence within the First International, like that of other British workers, proved transitory, and he resigned in June 1871 in protest against the promulgation of Karl Marx's socialist interpretation of the Paris Commune. 
An opponent of George Potter's management of 'The Bee-Hive', Odger transformed the 'Workman's Advocate' (later 'Commonwealth') into the organ of the International and of the Reform League. Serving as editor of 'Commonwealth' in 1866-7, he voiced support for manhood suffrage, land redistribution, reduction of hours of work, and legal protection of trade unions. He was employed as a paid lecturer for the Reform League in 1866 and an election organizer in 1868, canvassing on behalf of the Liberal Party in Devon and Cornwall. In 1867 Odger became a member of the Conference of Amalgamated Trades formed by the junta of amalgamated union leaders to articulate the case for legalization, and was a member of the parliamentary committee of the Trades Union Congress in 1871 and in 1873-4. 
On five occasions Odger contested parliamentary seats, but his candidacy was invariably blocked by the official Liberals. In Chelsea (1868) he was obliged to withdraw when an arbitration committee decided in favour of another Liberal candidate. In Stafford (1869), despite local support, he withdrew after coming third in a test ballot, and in Bristol (1870) he retired rather than split the Liberal vote. In Southwark (1870) Odger went to the poll, losing to the Conservative by only 304 votes after Sir Sidney Waterlow declined to withdraw. Four years later Odger, opposed again by both Liberals and Conservatives, came third in the Southwark contest. 
During the early 1870s Odger flirted with republicanism and endorsed the Land and Labour League's advocacy of land nationalism. More radical than contemporaries like George Howell and Robert Applegarth, he was never a socialist or a revolutionary, believing that working-class advance could be achieved only by legitimate political and industrial means. A brilliant orator, effective in parliamentary deputations, he was a popular leader but lacked the capacity for sustained administrative tasks. 
Odger died from congestion of the lungs on 4 March 1877, survived by his wife, two sons, and a daughter. His funeral on 10 March followed a procession of London workers to Brompton cemetery, where eulogies were delivered by Professor E. S. Beesly and Henry Fawcett MP. 


@@@@@


doc= 20540


Odingsells, Gabriel (1690?-1734), playwright, was probably born in the parish of St Dionis Backchurch, London, the third child of Gabriel Odingsells ('bap'. 1653) and Mary Love (1660?-1690). He was admitted to Pembroke College, Oxford, matriculating on 23 April 1707, but left without taking a degree. He took residence in London, with the aim of making a living as a dramatic writer. His first piece, 'The Bath Unmask'd', was first performed at Lincoln's Inn Fields on 27 February 1725 and ran for a week. The play, which has characters with such names as Sir Captious Whiffle and Pander, was described as 'an indifferent comedy -- he meant by the title to imply that he had described the humours of Bath' (Genest, 'Eng. stage', 3.168). 
At the end of the same year, on 8 December, a second dramatic piece by Odingsells, 'The Capricious Lovers', was first performed at Lincoln's Inn Fields. It contains Mock-Youth, a colonel who is 'twice frightened by the ghost of a lawyer who had forged a will in his favour'. Genest comments: 'this is a poor comedy by Odingsells, there is however a considerable degree of humour in the character of Mrs Mince-Mode, who (as the author expresses it) grows sick at the sight of a man, and refines upon the significancy of phrases till she resolves common conversation into obscenity. (Genest, 'Eng. stage', 3.178)' Odingsells's final work, 'The Bays' Opera', was produced at Drury Lane for three nights from 30 March 1730. It concerns the threat to Tragedo, the lawful heir to the empire of wit, by a usurper, one Cantato. The work is prefaced by an essay 'concerning that way of writing' (Mottley, 271). Genest's verdict was that it was 'very dull -- the design is much better than the execution' (Genest, 'Eng. stage', 3.258). 
Odingsells became mentally unstable, and took his own life by hanging on 10 February 1734 at his house in Thatched Court, Westminster. A publication appeared posthumously in 1742: 'Monumental inscriptions, or, A curious collection of near five hundred of the most remarkable epitaphs... collected by the late ingenious Gabriel Odinsells' ['sic']. 


@@@@@


doc= 20541


Oda (d. 958), archbishop of Canterbury, was the son of a Dane who arrived in England in the army that invaded in 865, led, according to one version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', by Ubbe and Ivarr. Oda's father had apparently settled in East Anglia, where his son later held lands. 
Oda's family produced a number of prominent churchmen in this period. His nephew Oswald was later archbishop of York, and the latter's kinsmen, Oscytel, archbishop of York between 958 or 959 and 971, and Thurcytel, abbot of Bedford (and perhaps of Crowland), may also have been kinsmen of Oda. In his 'Vita sancti Oswaldi' (written probably between 997 and 1002), Byrhtferth of Ramsey relates that, despite his father's paganism and discouragement, Oda attended church services and joined the household of a pious Anglo-Saxon aristocrat, AEthelhelm, where he was educated by a 'religious man' (Raine, 1.404). He remained with AEthelhelm and was ordained priest, accompanying him on a pilgrimage to Rome, during which Oda miraculously healed his patron's illness. Byrhtferth's statement that, on his return, Oda was appointed bishop of Wilton by 'the king', AEthelhelm's brother, is muddled: no chronologically plausible English king is known to have had a brother of that name. Byrhtferth's account is probably to be preferred to that of the early twelfth-century 'Gesta pontificum' of William of Malmesbury (died 1142), largely followed in some manuscripts of John of Worcester's 'Chronicle', in which Oda fought under Edward the Elder, joined the clergy, became bishop of Wilton, and then archbishop of Canterbury at AEthelstan's instigation. In reality, Oda doubtless did owe his appointment as bishop of Ramsbury (not Wilton) to King AEthelstan ('r'. 924-39), but it was AEthelstan's brother King Edmund ('r'. 939-46) who subsequently promoted him to the archbishopric of Canterbury in 941, one of a number of ecclesiastics who exerted great influence in Edmund's reign. 
Oda first appears in contemporary sources in 928, witnessing royal charters as bishop of Ramsbury. His attestations show that he continued to attend royal councils for the next thirty years. Little is known of his career under AEthelstan. Writing at the end of the tenth century, Richer of Rheims reports that Oda acted as a diplomat for the king in the negotiations with Hugh the Great, duke of the Franks, aimed at restoring AEthelstan's nephew, Louis IV d'Outremer, to the West Frankish throne in 936, but this statement lacks contemporary authority. It is equally uncertain whether Oda accompanied AEthelstan on the 'Brunanburh' campaign, though Eadmer, in his life of Oda ('Vita sancti Odonis', composed between 1093 and 1125), relates that he miraculously repaired the king's sword at that battle. In 940, in concert with Wulfstan, archbishop of York, he acted as peacemaker between Edmund and Olaf Guthfrithson at Leicester. 
As archbishop under King Edmund, Oda maintained his close alliance with royal authority: in his pastoral letter to his bishops, for instance, he urged them to obey the royal will. He is probably the Archbishop Otto who is recorded in the life of Catroe escorting that saint to a channel port at King Edmund's behest. Oda's collaboration with Edmund produced a burst of legislation; curiously, indeed, all Oda's legislative activity took place in Edmund's reign. This material -- Edmund's first law code ('1 Edmund'), Oda's pastoral letter, and his so-called 'chapters' or 'constitutions' -- can be dated no more closely than to the period between his elevation to Canterbury in 941 and Edmund's death in May 946. Edmund's first law code was promulgated at an Easter synod held at London and deals entirely with religious matters, requiring the payment of church taxation, including the tithe, and imposing celibacy on the clergy. These interests are shared by the document christened 'Constitutiones Odonis' in the seventeenth century, but perhaps more appropriately to be termed his 'Chapters', which makes considerable, though selective, use of the decrees of the papal legates of 786, and also draws on the 'Collectio canonum Hibernensis'. It omits such eighth-century concerns as the banning of pagan ritual, consisting as much of moral exhortation as of legislation, with sections on the duties of kings, bishops, priests, and monks. It encourages almsgiving and, like 1 Edmund, forbids the violation of nuns and enforces payment of the tithe. Oda's address to his suffragans survives only in fragments recorded by William of Malmesbury in his 'Gesta pontificum'. In addition to urging obedience to the king, it issues, in florid Latin, a reminder to the bishops of their pastoral responsibilities. During his archiepiscopate the East Anglian see was reorganized, with the creation of a new bishopric at North Elmham. The profession of faith of its first incumbent, Eadulf, is the only one to have survived from Oda's time (indeed, from the entire tenth century), perhaps indicating that Oda had a particular reason for recording and preserving it. His personal involvement would reflect his pastoral interests, as well as, perhaps, his family roots in the Danelaw. 
Little can be said of Oda's activity in the reign of Eadred ('r'. 946-55) except that he very probably crowned the king and, as his charter attestations show, continued to attend the royal court. He was, however, a beneficiary of Eadred's will, by which he acquired 200 mancuses of gold, and was to hold 400 pounds of silver at Christ Church for the relief of the peoples of Kent, Surrey, Sussex, and Berkshire in times of emergency. The accession of Eadwig ('r'. 955-9) saw a palace revolution in which a number of Eadred's preferred advisers fell from favour. The earliest life of Dunstan, written 'c'.1000 by an author known only as B, relates that Oda urged that Eadwig be induced to return to his coronation feast after he had left it to consort with a noblewoman and her daughter. This episode presumably reflects tensions which became apparent in 957 or 958 when Oda separated the king from his wife, AElfgifu, on grounds of consanguinity. Byrhtferth's claim that Oda rode to the king's mistress's estate, seized her, and forced her expulsion from the country is unlikely, not least since AElfgifu was certainly Eadwig's wife and not just his mistress. It is possible that in separating the king from his wife in 958 Oda was prompted by his support for the claims of Eadwig's younger brother Edgar, who, for reasons which are unclear, became king of the English north of the Thames in 957. The attestations of Eadwig's charters show a hiatus in Oda's attendance at court in 957 that may have been caused by his conflict with the king. Alternatively, given that he died in the following year, he may simply have been ill. Certainly, his absence did not prevent Eadwig from granting Oda 40 hides of land at Ely in 957. 
Oda was one of a group of monasticizing bishops, including Cenwald of Worcester and AElfheah of Winchester, whose attitudes and activities presaged widespread ecclesiastical reform in the next generation. He himself is reported by Byrhtferth to have taken the cowl at the monastery of St Benoit-sur-Loire at Fleury, where St Benedict's relics were preserved, though it is not known at what point in his career this occurred. It was to Fleury that he sent his nephew Oswald, whose earlier education he had undertaken, to learn what was believed to be the superior monastic practice of that house. While Oda thus set Oswald on the path to becoming one of the triumvirate of leading reformers, his role in the careers of the other two, Dunstan and AEthelwold, is less clear. One of Dunstan's early eleventh-century biographers, Adelard, relates that Dunstan was consecrated bishop of Worcester by Oda who inadvertently called him 'archbishop of Canterbury', thereby predicting the saint's future promotion. Oda's presence here, however, may simply be an assumption, or a convenient insertion, on Adelard's part. 
One characteristic of reforming monasticism on the continent was its devotion to the cult of saints. As with AEthelwold and Oswald, there is evidence for Oda's interest in saints, and especially in their relics. When the minster church at Ripon, founded in the 660s by St Wilfrid, was burnt down during Eadred's northern campaign (usually dated 948), Oda had the saint's relics seized and brought to Canterbury, along with Ripon's copy of Stephen of Ripon's life of Wilfrid. He enshrined the relics in a splendid new reliquary at Christ Church, and in honour of this translation commissioned Frithegod, a member of his 'familia', to write a verse version of the saint's life, the 'Breviloquium vitae Wilfridi'. Its prose preface, which, though in Oda's name, was probably drafted by Frithegod, defends what amounted to a relic theft by accusing the Northumbrian clergy of neglecting the saint's remains. According to Eadmer, Oda also acquired for Canterbury relics of the Frankish saint Ouen, whom a later source attests was the subject of another life by Frithegod. 
Oda's association with Fleury, evident also from an acrostic poem addressed to Dunstan by Abbo of Fleury, was not his only continental connection. He is also listed as bishop of Ramsbury in the confraternity book of the alpine monastery of St Gallen, and as archbishop of Canterbury in that of nearby Pfafers. Both entries may have been the fruits of trips to Rome, in the case of Pfafers perhaps to collect his pallium. It is possible, on the other hand, that his appearance in the St Gallen confraternity book is linked with that of Bishop Cenwald of Worcester, who visited the monastery in 929. However, journeys to the continent by English prelates were not unusual, and Oda may have been abroad at other times and on other business. For similar reasons, it is difficult to attach his sojourns at Fleury, either for his profession as a monk or afterwards, to events like the possible diplomatic trip of 936. 
At Canterbury, Oda had Christ Church renovated, reroofing the cathedral and raising its walls by 20 feet. Although two charters, one purporting to restore many estates to the cathedral, the other granting land at Twickenham, are transparent forgeries, more reliable evidence shows that Oda was able to enlarge Canterbury's landed estate. A genuine charter of Eadred of 949 (its authority has sometimes been mistakenly challenged), which may even be in the hand of Dunstan himself, granted Reculver Minster to the cathedral. A charter fabricated in the mid-tenth century, which purported to be a seventh-century grant of land in Sussex to Wilfrid, may well be connected with the reception of that saint's cult at Canterbury; at any rate, it seems to have succeeded in gaining for the cathedral a large tract of land on the south coast. A charter recording the terms of a lease of Christ Church's lands at Ickham, Kent, to the Kentish thegn AEthelweard is witnessed by the archbishop and his community, giving valuable evidence for the latter's composition at the time. The Canterbury clergy were clearly differentiated from monks by being ranked in the various clerical grades. They may also have worn better clothing and retained some private, though inalienable, property during their lifetimes. Nevertheless, it is likely that Oda encouraged members of the community to follow his example and take monastic vows. 
Oda died on 2 June 958 and was buried in Christ Church, immediately to the south of the principal altar on the chord of the east apse, probably the first archbishop of Canterbury to be interred within the cathedral. In his life of Dunstan, Osbern (died 1094) says that Oda's monument was 'in the shape of a pyramid' (Stubbs, 109). This can be interpreted as meaning either a triangular-sectioned stone coffin lid, echoing some Roman sarcophagi, or a tall, slender, tapering pillar, like the shaft of a stone cross. During the twelfth-century rebuildings of the cathedral, the relics of Oda and Wilfrid were temporarily put in the former resting-places of Dunstan and AElfheah, before both were installed in the corona, or 'chancel', of the Trinity Chapel, Oda's shrine standing on the south side. Eadmer reports that Oda had acquired the epithet 'the Good' during his lifetime, and that it was still current in his own day; he also states that Dunstan, after he became archbishop in 959, was in the habit of genuflecting as he passed Oda's tomb. Lack of contemporary testimony for the cult suggests, however, that Dunstan failed to capitalize on Oda's reputation for holiness. The first evidence for Oda's cult appears in Byrhtferth's life of Oswald, which contains a lengthy account of Oda's life and recounts four miracles. Eadmer wrote the first free-standing life of Oda, drawing on the reports in B's life of Dunstan and Byrhtferth's life of Oswald, slightly embellishing them and adding only two new episodes about the saint's life, probably derived from Canterbury tradition. Although Byrhtferth reports the hostility to Oda of his successor AElfsige -- which is why, he says, the latter died in the Alps in 959 on his way to collect his pallium -- this may simply reflect the author's antipathy to AElfsige, who was never identified with the reformist tendency in the English church. Oda's feast day is given on 2 June in the early thirteenth-century calendar of Christ Church, Canterbury; some later calendars give 29 May or 4 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 20542


Odda, earl (d. 1056), magnate, is said to have been a kinsman of Edward the Confessor. It has been suggested that he was the son of AElfhere of Mercia (d. 983); a more likely ancestor is AEthelweard (d. 998?), chronicler, ealdorman of the western shires, and a descendant of King AEthelred I of the West Saxons, since Odda was earl of the same region in 1051-2 and was, moreover, a benefactor of Pershore Abbey, whose refoundation is attributed to AEthelweard by William of Malmesbury. He may be the Odda 'minister' who attests charters late in the reign of AEthelred the Unready (the earliest is 'AS chart.', S 931, dated 1013) and throughout the reigns of Cnut (died 1035) and Harthacnut (died 1042); he is certainly the Odda who attests charters of Edward the Confessor, as 'minister' or 'nobilis', between 1042 and 1050, often in conjunction with Beorhtric, son of AElfgar, lord of Tewkesbury, Gloucestershire (and another possible descendant of Ealdorman AEthelweard) and Ordgar, patron of Tavistock Abbey, Devon, another kinsman of the king. In the 1030s and 1040s Odda, sometimes with his brother AElfric, attests charters of Lyfing, bishop of Worcester, and AElfwold, bishop of Sherborne (S 1393-4, 1396-7, 1406, 1474). 
Odda's estates included the manor of Deerhurst, Gloucestershire, assessed at 119 hides in 'Domesday Book', where stood an early minster church, of which he was patron. He also held Longdon, Worcestershire, assessed at 30 hides. Land at Mathon, Herefordshire, assessed at 5 hides, was held by two of his thegns, AElfweard of Longdon and Merewine; in 1051-2 the former attested, in his lord's company, a charter of Ealdred, bishop of Worcester, as one of 'the leading thegns in Worcestershire' ('AS chart.', S 1409). Any land of Odda's brother AElfric is now untraceable, but their sister Edith held 9 hides at Upleadon, Herefordshire. Although his full estate cannot be reconstructed, Odda was clearly one of the most extensive landholders among King Edward's thegns. 
When Earl Godwine was banished in 1051, Odda was given the western shires, part of Godwine's former earldom. In 1052 he and Earl Ralph were appointed to command the fleet at Sandwich 'in order that they might keep watch for Earl Godwine' ('ASC', s.a. 1052, texts C, D), but they were unable to prevent his successful return. On Godwine's reinstatement, Odda lost the western shires, but received another earldom in compensation. Presumably this was Worcestershire, for he attests charters of Ealdred, bishop of Worcester, as earl ('dux') in the early 1050s ('AS chart.', S 1407-9). John of Worcester (who gives Odda's alternative name of AEthelwine) describes him in fulsome terms as 'the lover of churches, succourer of the poor, defender of widows and orphans, helper of the oppressed, guardian of virgins' (John of Worcester, 'Chron'., 2.580-81), an elaboration of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle's' eulogy: 'he was a good man and pure and very noble' ('ASC', s.a. 1056, text D). Odda was remembered as the restorer of Pershore Abbey, which had experienced hard times since its refoundation in the reign of King Edgar. Its lands had been seized (allegedly) by AElfhere of Mercia and in 1002 all its records were lost in a disastrous fire; the only surviving early charter is a grant of AEthelred II, giving Mathon to Leofwine, earl of Worcestershire, in 1014 ('AS chart.', S 932); presumably Odda restored it to Pershore. The abbey was functioning by the 1020s, for Brihtheah, bishop of Worcester (1033-8), had previously been abbot of Pershore. 
Odda's brother AElfric died at Deerhurst on 22 December 1053, and in his memory Odda built the church now known as 'Odda's Chapel', consecrated in honour of the Holy Trinity by Ealdred, bishop of Worcester, on 12 April 1056. On 31 August 1056 Odda died and was buried, with his brother, at Pershore, having earlier received the monastic habit from Ealdred. He left no heirs and his lands passed to his kinsman the king, who gave Odda's secular estate at Deerhurst to the abbey of St Denis in Paris, leaving the minster church of St Mary with only 50 of the original 119 hides. Pershore suffered even worse spoliation, for two-thirds of its 300 hides were abstracted and bestowed upon the king's own foundation at Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 20543


Odo, earl of Kent (d. 1097), bishop of Bayeux and magnate, was the son of Herluin de Conteville (died 'c'.1066), a Norman magnate of vicomte status who held lands around Grestain to the south of the Seine estuary, and of Herleva ('fl'. 'c'.1010- 'c'.1055), the former concubine of Robert (II), duke of Normandy (died 1035). He was thus the half-brother of William the Conqueror. 
Herluin and Herleva are known to have produced one further son, Robert (d. 1095), who was appointed count of Mortain in the late 1050s, and two daughters, Adelaide, who married in succession Enguerrand, count of Ponthieu, Lambert of Lens, and Odo, count of Champagne, and Muriel, who married the Norman magnate Eudo, vicomte of the Cotentin. Two other half-brothers, Ralph and John, sons of Herluin's second marriage, are known, both relatively minor figures who held some lands in Normandy. In all probability there was also at least one other sister, or half-sister, who married the southern Norman magnate William de La Ferte-Mace, but whose name is unknown. Odo had one son, John of Bayeux, who was one of Henry I's chaplains; his mother's name has not been recorded. The date of Odo's birth is uncertain because the earliest sources, Orderic Vitalis and William of Malmesbury, both writing in the twelfth century, disagree as to whether Herleva was married to Herluin before or after Duke Robert's death. It is also unclear which of Odo and Robert, count of Mortain, was the senior; Robert's succession to Herluin's lands may well indicate that he was the elder. On balance, a birth date in the early 1030s fits the evidence best. Odo was certainly well below thirty, the canonically required age for promotion to a bishopric, when he became bishop of Bayeux at a date between his predecessor's death, some time after attending the Council of Rheims in October 1049, and 23 April 1050. Little is known about his education; William of Poitiers implies that he was educated in the ducal household. 
Odo's appointment to Bayeux on the say-so of his half-brother William was a typical promotion for a close male kinsman of a Norman duke. Politically it was an aspect of William's consolidation of his rule in western Normandy after his victory at the battle of Val-es-Dunes in 1047. Although Odo's importance in Normandy before 1066 is indicated by his prominence among the attestations to ducal charters, this period of his life is a relatively obscure one. It is primarily his status in England and Normandy after the conquest and his accomplishments at Bayeux on the basis of foundations laid before 1066 which show how active and important he must already have become. 
Odo was prominent in the crucial discussions which preceded the invasion of England. According to an early twelfth-century ship list, he supplied one hundred ships to the invasion fleet. His role in the battle of Hastings is known mainly from the Bayeux tapestry, of which Odo was beyond any reasonable doubt the patron and on which his importance has probably been inflated. He and Count Robert are portrayed in council with William immediately before the battle, with Odo speaking animatedly to an attentive duke, as if laying out the battle plan. During the battle he appears in a quasi-military role, arrayed in a haubergon (but without the full protection afforded by a hauberk), carrying a mace-like instrument and rallying troops at a strategically significant moment in the battle. This portrayal is not necessarily in conflict with William of Poitiers's statement that Odo was not personally responsible for the shedding of blood at Hastings, but it does suggest that his opinion that Odo and Geoffrey, bishop of Coutances, were there to help with their prayers was less than the truth. 
Along with William fitz Osbern, Odo acted as William I's deputy in England after the newly crowned king had returned to Normandy in February 1067. He was created earl of Kent soon after 1066, and his initial responsibilities involved him in supervising the defence and subjugation of the south-eastern part of the kingdom. The months until William's return to England in December were principally occupied in building castles, overcoming English revolts, and, specifically, moving towards Dover when the castle there was attacked by William's former ally, Eustace, count of Boulogne. The treatment of Odo's conduct during this period in the main literary sources raises immediately the problem of interpreting his role in the history of the Norman conquest of England. The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', in key respects echoed by Orderic Vitalis (who wrote in the 1120s), tells of oppression and illegality. William of Poitiers (whose panegyric of William the Conqueror was completed before 1077), in contrast, praises Odo's activities and remarks that the English will in due course come to appreciate him. The perspectives from which each author approached his subject are of course crucial. The dichotomy is fundamental to interpreting Odo's career in England (see below). 
The period between 1066 and his arrest and imprisonment by William in late 1082 or early 1083 is the apogee of Odo's career. A range of literary sources concur that he ruled England when William was in Normandy. 'Domesday Book' shows that he had become the wealthiest English landholder after the king, with estates scattered throughout twenty-two counties in the south and east of the kingdom. His chief residences appear to have been at Dover, Rochester, Deddington in Oxfordshire, and Snettisham in Norfolk. His charter attestations show that his itinerary was that of a cross-channel magnate, present at such great events as Queen Mathilda's coronation at Whitsun 1068 and the settlement of the primacy dispute at Windsor at Whitsun 1072; and that he was usually at the great crown-wearings and assemblies which were a feature of the Conqueror's rule on both sides of the channel, as well as at ecclesiastical councils of the Norman church. He was one of the royal generals in eastern England during the 1075 revolt of the three earls; and in the autumn of 1080 he led an army which devastated Northumbria to avenge the murder in the previous year of Walcher, bishop of Durham. In 1074 the king gave the large estate of Le Plessis-Grimoult to Odo's cathedral; and on 14 July 1077, Odo's new cathedral church was consecrated in the presence of the king and many Norman notables. Odo is addressed in his capacity of earl in most of the surviving royal writs concerned with Kent; and he exchanged and granted lands to the major churches of the shire, notably the abbey of St Augustine's, Canterbury. 
The nature of Odo's role in England between 1066 and 1082/3 has posed problems for historians. Although clearly identified in contemporary sources as having been regent when the king was in Normandy, Odo was himself often in Normandy with William. Also, there were others, notably Archbishop Lanfranc, who clearly acted in England as William's deputy. Lanfranc in particular appears as the first addressee in numerous royal writs in a way which Odo does not and was manifestly playing the central co-ordinating role during the 1075 revolt. The most plausible interpretation of the evidence of the literary sources is that Odo alone could act with the equivalent of royal authority when William was not in England; this interpretation is seemingly confirmed by 'Domesday Book's' insistence that only Odo's seal had the same status as the king's and by its frequent references to, and acceptance of, property disputes settled on Odo's authority. There would probably have been periods of time, most notably from late 1077 to early 1080 when William was dealing with the warfare provoked by his eldest son, Robert Curthose, when Odo was 'de jure' presiding over the settlement of conquered England. 
The way in which Odo exercised his responsibilities attracted strong criticism; Orderic Vitalis, for example, places him in the category of the 'tyranni', rulers who disregard equity and law. Surviving accounts of land pleas convey an ambivalent impression. A Rochester text shows him going to considerable lengths to restore an estate to the church and to demonstrate that English witnesses had perjured themselves because of threats made by a Norman sheriff. The Evesham chronicle describes his role in an inquiry into the abbey's lands held at Four-Shire Stone, Warwickshire, as that of a ravening wolf; it should, however, be noted that even in this case some of the lands which Odo appropriated to himself were not the abbey's, but had been granted to Abbot AEthelwig (died 1078) on a temporary basis. These charges of unfairness and oppression need to be set in the context of other evidence for Odo's conduct. 'Domesday Book' certainly shows that Odo and his tenants in some places acted aggressively to expand their lands. In 1072 he and his tenants in Kent were involved in the great land plea held at Penenden Heath near Maidstone, at which they were adjudged to have illegally taken over a considerable number of estates belonging to the archbishop and monks of Christ Church, Canterbury. Even though much of the litigation had its origins in pre-1066 tenurial disputes, and taking into account that all the surviving testimony was written by Odo's opponents, the protracted disputes which followed the Penenden plea undoubtedly reinforced a general impression of acquisitiveness and overweening power. The overall charge of oppression cannot in the end be gainsaid. But there is plenty of evidence to show that Odo's rule in England was neither entirely arbitrary nor entirely self-seeking. And there is also no doubt that after the Norman conquest Odo was given responsibility for a situation of great tenurial and political complexity. 
While there is good evidence to indicate that the new cathedral church at Bayeux had been begun by Odo's predecessor, the architecture of the building's surviving eleventh-century parts suggests that most of the construction took place in Odo's time. Two Bayeux charters dating from 1092 and 1093 provide the earliest extensive evidence of the personnel of the cathedral chapter, mentioning nine chapter dignitaries and thirty canons. As a measure of the extent of the chapter's evolution, these figures need to be set against the twelve dignitaries and forty-nine canons of the fully-fledged thirteenth-century Bayeux chapter. It was once thought that Odo formally instituted at Bayeux the 'four-square' chapter typical of several English medieval cathedrals; that idea must now be abandoned in favour of an evolutionary and conceptually derivative view of the chapter's development. It remains certain that English developments were influenced through the activities of Odo's proteges. Odo also founded the abbey of St Vigor outside Bayeux at an unknown date before 1082, intending it to be the burial church for himself and future bishops of Bayeux; he was able to attract the distinguished scholar Robert de Tombelaine to be its first abbot. A considerable body of charter evidence shows Odo making grants of limited exemption from episcopal authority to abbeys within his diocese, accumulating property for his church and protecting his clergy. Despite his many absences, Odo was undoubtedly a successful and committed bishop of Bayeux. Comparison with the parallel contemporary developments in other Norman bishoprics demonstrates, however, that he operated on a much grander and more lavish scale than his colleagues; sculpture surviving from the cathedral, for example, indicates a monumentality, ambition, and stylistic range of reference of a quite remarkable kind. 
The most famous product of Odo's artistic and intellectual patronage is the unique Bayeux tapestry. Almost certainly produced in England, this complex and brilliant embroidery is the most spectacular illustration of a wide-ranging patronage whose ramifications were felt not only throughout Normandy and England, but in many regions of France north of the Loire. Odo's patronage supported scholars for study at Liege and elsewhere, nurtured poets writing at Bayeux and throughout northern France, and assisted the development of Bayeux as an intellectual centre. Nine of Odo's proteges obtained bishoprics in either England or Normandy and four became abbots. Although their personal qualities varied, and some, such as Samson, bishop of Worcester (died 1112), or the notorious Ranulf Flambard (died 1128), were certainly excessively worldly, the likes of Thomas (I), archbishop of York (died 1100), William de Rots, abbot of Fecamp (died 1107), and William of St Calais, bishop of Durham (died 1096), were churchmen of either high personal and moral character or exceptional administrative competence. Odo's patronage also extended to include some of the most significant poets of the time, such as Marbod of Rennes and Hildebert de Lavardin, and controversial theologians, such as the grammarian Roscelin of Compiegne. The intellectual tone of Odo's Bayeux, to judge principally from the works of the poet Serlo of Bayeux, tended to the conservative, praising the virtues of the secular clergy and critical of fashionable Benedictine monasticism and many of the ideas being advanced by the Gregorian reformers. 
Either late in the year 1082, or early in 1083, Odo was seized by the king and, after a trial, was imprisoned. Although the earliest source for this event, the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', places it in 1082, the statement by Orderic Vitalis that Odo was in prison for four years would probably place the arrest in early 1083; Odo's attestation of a charter at Downton, Wiltshire, in the autumn of 1082 and William's return to Normandy by Easter 1083 provide the chronological limits. The chronicle offers no explanation of the arrest. While the next earliest source, Guibert of Nogent, writing 'c'.1108, suggests that Odo was planning to seize the English kingdom after William's death, the opinion that Odo was preparing an expedition to Rome to become pope after Gregory VII ('r'. 1073-85), which appears with different embellishments in Orderic, William of Malmesbury's 'Gesta regum', and the so-called Hyde chronicle, is generally preferred. This story has no echoes in papal sources. Orderic's dramatic account of the trial stresses that Odo was diverting warriors from England for an expedition overseas and that William was disturbed by his oppressive and arrogant rule in England; he also suggests that William himself had to seize Odo because the magnates assembled at court feared him so much. Odo remained in prison at Rouen until released by the dying king in September 1087; Orderic suggests that only the supplications of the magnates present, led by Count Robert, weakened William's resolve to keep Odo in prison for ever. 
After attending the Conqueror's funeral at Caen in September 1087, Odo crossed to England and regained his lands and his earldom. He attended the Christmas court of the new king of England, William Rufus, but by April 1088 at the latest he was in arms at the head of an extensive coalition of many of the most powerful magnates of the conquest generation, which was seeking to overthrow the Conqueror's death-bed division of Normandy and England between Robert Curthose and William Rufus in Robert's favour. While superficially imposing, the conspiracy failed because Rufus and his allies were able to defeat their opponents before they could unite their forces, and because Robert Curthose failed to land in England. Odo himself was besieged in his brother Count Robert's castle at Pevensey and then at Rochester. After Rochester's capitulation, Odo was exiled from England for ever. Back in Normandy, he participated in Robert Curthose's campaigns in Maine and southern Normandy in late 1088 and was with Robert when he sought assistance from the French king in 1089. He also took personal responsibility for the imprisonment in 1088 of the youngest of the Conqueror's sons, the future Henry I, whose activities in western Normandy threatened to destabilize the duchy. He continued as far as possible to intrigue against William Rufus. Orderic portrays Odo as Robert Curthose's chief counsellor during these years, but comments that the wayward duke did not always follow his advice. 
Odo also set about regaining estates lost to his cathedral during his imprisonment and restoring the monastic community of St Vigor, which had been plundered by the Conqueror and had disbanded. His intellectual and clerical patronage also revived. It is clear, however, that Odo was unable to restore fully his church's possessions or to do much to prevent the disintegration of Robert's rule in Normandy. In 1095 he was among the Norman bishops who attended the Council of Clermont at which Pope Urban II preached the first crusade. In the months that followed he made arrangements for the re-established monastery of St Vigor to become a priory of the strict abbey of St Benigne of Dijon, before departing for the crusade with Duke Robert's army. The army wintered with their fellow Normans in southern Italy and around Christmas Odo crossed to Sicily to visit the Norman ruler of the island, Roger the Great Count. He died on 6 January 1097 and was buried in the cathedral at Palermo. His last illness, of which nothing is known, must have been a short one. 
Orderic Vitalis's verdict on Odo that, although excessively worldly, he was none the less a curious mixture of virtues and vices, and that he did a lot of good, remains a just one. He was regarded at Bayeux as a good bishop and his activities in England, while undoubtedly at times oppressive and tyrannical, have sometimes been too severely censured because overmuch attention has been given to the testimony of those who suffered at his hands. He was undeniably the most colourful and flamboyant of the Norman conquerors of England, a forceful character whose energy contributed mightily to the success of the conquest. On the other hand his restlessness and turbulence led to quarrels with the Conqueror, Archbishop Lanfranc, and William Rufus and must have contributed significantly to destabilizing Norman rule in England and Normandy. A prince-bishop on a grand scale, his generosity and patronage shaped the careers of many laymen and clergy who played significant roles in the Norman achievement and in the society of the eleventh-century medieval West. The Bayeux tapestry survives as brilliant testimony to the many strands of a remarkable career. 


@@@@@


doc= 20544


Canterbury, Odo of (d. 1200), theologian and abbot of Battle, was probably a native of Kent. All that is known of his immediate family is that his brother Adam and a close relative (perhaps an uncle) named Ralph were Cistercian monks at Igny; another kinsman, John, was chaplain of Harrietsham in Kent. 
The first notices of Odo occur when he was already a Benedictine monk at Christ Church Priory, Canterbury. They are by John of Salisbury, who was in the service of three successive archbishops of Canterbury from soon after 1147 until 1176. In his 'Entheticus maior', probably composed 'c'.1155, John writes warmly of certain Canterbury monks, among them Odo, who 'is an avid reader of books, yet most of all loves those which speak of Christ' (trans. van Laarhoven, 1675-6); and in the 'Entheticus in Policraticum', finished before September 1159, he tells his book to go to Canterbury and 'If you are able, convey my best wishes to Odo' (pp. 191-2). Late in 1164 or soon after John, now in exile with his master Thomas Becket, wrote to a Master Odo in England, evidently no mean biblical scholar. By this date the epithet 'master' frequently implied time spent in the schools, and if John's addressee was Odo of Canterbury, it could mean that he had had formal scholastic training, probably at Paris. 
By now (and since 1163 at least) Odo was sub-prior of Christ Church. He had made a good start in his vocation as a monk; but for the next seven years his career and reputation were to suffer as he struggled to find a middle way through the dispute between Henry II and Archbishop Thomas Becket. In 1163 the archbishop sent him to Rome to protest on his behalf against the claim of the archbishop of York to the right to carry his cross in the southern province. In 1166, however, the convent was ordered by the royal justices to appeal against Becket; in 1167 Odo wrote to Richard of Ilchester, archdeacon of Poitiers and a royal official, explaining the difficulty of his position and pleading for help. In the meantime he and Prior Wibert were recipients of a letter from John of Salisbury, chiding them for withholding financial support for the legal expenses of the exiled archbishop. 
Odo was himself chosen as prior soon after 16 May 1168, but without the archbishop's assent. Becket wished to depose him, and late in 1169 Odo felt obliged to withdraw for a time from Christ Church. He now incurred the pope's displeasure, first for allegedly disregarding the papal prohibition of the young king's coronation on 24 May 1170, and later for even aiding and abetting Becket's death. The martyred Becket was said to have foretold Odo's impending removal from Canterbury to a Christ Church monk, who in his prayers complained of the prior's lack of firmness. None the less, like John of Salisbury himself, Odo continued to maintain a moderate stance. On 21 December 1171 he succeeded in having Christ Church freed from the ecclesiastical censure passed on it because of the archbishop's murder within its walls. At this stage he must have had the support of at least a majority of his monks, for in the following year they began a long and fruitless campaign to have Odo elected as Becket's successor. 
Gervase of Canterbury recounts the wearisome and inconclusive series of meetings in England and Normandy, between the king and the monks led by Odo himself, from September 1172 until April 1173. Odo, in a firm but courteous speech, defended their right of 'free election' and their tradition of having a monk as archbishop, blaming the king's unilateral appointment of a secular clerk -- Becket -- for the troubles that had followed. The king did not at this stage reveal his will, but it would not be surprising if the speech displeased him. Eventually the monks were ordered to meet with the bishops of the province. At the meeting, held in May 1173, the monks put forward as their preferred candidates Odo and Richard, prior of Dover. Gilbert Foliot, bishop of London, as the bishops' spokesman, praised Odo, but none the less expressed their preference for Richard. This may have represented the king's real wishes, for Richard of Dover was one of two monks sent to the king with a message from the council. Possibly Odo too understood this, for Richard was formally elected on 3 June, and Odo wrote to the pope on the convent's behalf supporting 'their' choice. 
On 5 September 1174 Christ Church was destroyed by fire. On 1 July 1175 Odo attended a royal council at Woodstock, hoping to obtain, in place of the monastery's burned charters, new ones worded similarly to the exemplary privileges of Battle Abbey (which were in fact forgeries). For this purpose the monks of Battle were summoned to be present. As it happened, their abbey had been without a head for four years, and the monks, impressed by Odo's demeanour, nominated him as their abbot. At first Odo refused the position, but after due persuasion yielded, and was elected on 10 July. Odo arrived at Battle on 4 August, receiving the blessing from Archbishop Richard on Sunday 28 September, at Malling. In the following year Odo was summoned to Westminster by the papal legate, Cardinal Hugo Pierleone, to defend the abbey's right to the patronage of the church of Wye against Geoffrey de Lacy. He appealed in vain for assistance to Gerard Pucelle, afterwards bishop of Lichfield, to Bartholomew, bishop of Exeter, and to John of Salisbury. But at last Waleran, the future bishop of Rochester, pleaded Odo's cause, and, Gerard now supporting him, effected a compromise. 
When Archbishop Richard died in 1184 the monks of Canterbury once more nominated Odo for archbishop, and again the king refused to accept him. The new archbishop was Baldwin of Forde, who was soon involved in a serious quarrel with the monks over his intention to found a collegiate church at Hackington near Canterbury. On 13 January 1187 Odo was appointed by Pope Urban III as one of the commissioners to remonstrate with Baldwin, and on 1 March he was directed to ensure that the archbishop obeyed the papal mandate ordering him to restore to the monks revenues that he had appropriated for the use of his new church. Baldwin's response was equivocal, and the commissioners contented themselves with rescinding a sentence of deposition already pronounced by him against the prior. Once again Odo found himself caught in the crossfire between the pope and the king's representatives, with his attempted moderation judged unsatisfactory by others. 
On 9 May Urban rebuked Odo for his lukewarmness, and sent a fresh mandate. The justiciar Ranulf de Glanville, however, forbade Odo to act, and in July the monks complained to Urban that Odo and his colleagues were prevaricating out of fear, and needed explicit instructions if they were to act with the firmness expected of them. On 3 October the pope sent another mandate to the archbishop, with instructions to the commissioners to ensure its execution. Odo does not figure in the dispute after this date, although in January 1188 the monks made a final appeal to him for assistance. On 3 September of the following year Odo was at Westminster for the coronation of Richard I. In January 1192, when the see of Canterbury was again vacant, the monks turned to him once more for support in the assertion of their right of free election. Odo died on 20 or 21 January 1200. He was buried in Battle Abbey, where John Leland saw his tomb, a slab of black Lydd marble. 
This bare chronicle of events gives little hint of the man's character. In public life he was obviously by temperament a moderate, whether through wisdom or weakness. Despite that he was evidently held in high esteem by John of Salisbury, by the monks of Canterbury and Battle, but not by Henry II or Thomas Becket. In the end he was remembered, and has in modern times been characterized, not for his public role, but as a model monastic leader: prudent, eloquent, learned, and devout. The Battle Abbey chronicler says that, although he was strict in life and conversation, he consorted freely with his monks; only he did not sleep in the dormitory, because he suffered from a disorder of the stomach which he had to doctor privately. He praises Odo for his humility and modesty, and for his diligence in expounding the scriptures, saying that he could preach alike in French, Latin, and English. 
Odo's conservative Benedictine background, his learning, and interest in preaching and biblical exposition are reflected in his surviving writings which, though not widely disseminated, survive in a handful of manuscripts written in or soon after his lifetime, both in England and on the continent. His commentary on 'Kings', probably written at the end of his life, was never completed and is very likely no more than a draft, given the absence of a prologue and its restricted and repetitive vocabulary. None the less it illustrates his profound knowledge of the scriptures, and suggests that he may even have known some Hebrew. But he could clearly write better than this, and the prologue to his sermon collection is a late example of the elegant monastic style of Latinity which owed much to Anselm and Bec. 
These last two works, and an unprinted commentary on the 'Pentateuch', are certainly Odo's; other attributions are uncertain, owing to confusion with writers of the same name, notably Odo of Cheriton, Eudes de Morimond (died 1161), and Eudes de Chateauroux (died 1273). The following works -- excluding some which are certainly not his -- are attributed to Odo of Canterbury: 1 Commentary on the 'Pentateuch', unprinted; copies listed in Sharpe, 402. 'Genesis'- 'Numbers' only are in CUL, MS Dd.7.15 (early 13th century, ascribed to Odo); Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 54 (late 12th century, ascribed to Odo); Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 331, fols. 1-168 (St Albans, 1250-1300, ascribed to Eudes de Morimond); and Oxford, All Souls College, MS 12 (12th-13th century, ascribed to Isidore). Cambridge, Queens' College, MS 8 (late 12th century, with a 14th century ascription to Haimo), also contains 'Deuteronomy', though the attribution is uncertain. Other copies are attested at the monastic houses of Christ Church, Canterbury, Waverley, and Warden. 2 Commentary on 'Kings', ed. C. de Clercq as 'Le commentaire d'Odon de Canterbury sur les livres des Rois', Centre des Recherches Historiques (Ventimiglia, 1980), from the only surviving manuscript, CUL, Gg.4.17 (Christ Church, Canterbury, 13th century); Leland saw another copy at Battle Abbey. 3 'Odo prior de moribus ecclesiae', not known to survive (copy recorded at Christ Church, Canterbury, early 13th century). 4 Letters: to Richard of Ilchester, in 'Patrologia Latina', 190.1003-5; to his brother Adam, then a novice at Igny, in J. Mabillon, 'Vetera Analecta' (1675-85), vol. 1, pp. 349-59; to accompany a copy of Benedict's miracles of St Thomas sent to Adam and Ralph, in Robertson and Sheppard, vol. 2, p. xlix; to Pope Alexander III, in JS, 'Letters', no. 311, pp. 760-67. 5 Sermons: Twenty sermons with a prologue, addressed to Odo's brother Adam (in which the collection is called 'Solacium peregrinorum'), in Bruges, Grand Seminaire, MS 406, fols. 1-123'v'; the prologue ed. A. Pattin, 'Un manuscrit du xiie siecle de l'ancienne abbaye d'Eename retrouve' (Bruges, Grand Seminaire, MS 406), 'Scriptorium', 44 (1990), 79-91. The same sermons, with seven more, from fourteen other manuscripts, ed. C. de Clercq, 'The Latin Sermons of Odo of Canterbury' (Brussels, 1983); Pattin questions the authenticity of the seven sermons edited by de Clercq not in the Bruges manuscript; all twenty-seven are listed in J. B. Schneyer, 'Repertorium der lateinischen Sermones des Mittelalters', 11 vols. (Munster, 1969-90), vol. 4, pp. 392-4. A collection was seen by Leland at Waverley. 6 Odo of Canterbury may be identifiable with the Englishman named Odo who, between 1140 and 1148, probably wrote the anti-Jewish theological 'summa' called 'Ysagoge in theologiam', ed. A. Landgraf, 'Ecrits theologiques de l'ecole d'Abelard', 'Spicilegium Sacrum Lovaniense', 14 (1934), 61-298. On its authorship and characteristics see D. E. Luscombe, 'The authorship of the 'Ysagoge in theologiam'', 'Archives d'Histoire Doctrinale et Litteraire du Moyen Age', 35 (1969), 7-16; and D. E. Luscombe, 'The School of Peter Abelard' (1969), 236-44. 


@@@@@


doc= 20545


Cheriton, Odo of (1180s-1246), author and scholar, was born in Kent in the 1180s, into a wealthy Anglo-Norman family originally settled at Cheriton near Folkestone by a founding Odo, recorded as being kin to the then archbishop of Canterbury. His father, William of Cheriton, grandson of this first Lord Odo, enjoyed the considerable inheritance that his own father (also William) had ensured for the family by his marriage to an heiress of the Fitz Helt barony, and soon moved into the manor of Farningham in west Kent with his wife, Matilda, and their children. William was an active, powerful lord: he spent three years from 1190 with King Richard on the third crusade, and was an important figure after 1200, increasing in wealth as he expanded his estate, and enjoying a long life well into the new century (he died in 1232 or 1233). 
The career of his eldest son, however, was to move in radically different spheres. In 1200 young Odo was a student at the University of Paris; formally referred to from 1210 onwards as 'magister', he seems to have spent the best part of twenty years studying, teaching, and preaching in the French capital, becoming a master in the university's pre-eminent school of theology. There, acquainted with such luminaries as Peter of Capua, Robert de Courson and possibly the great exemplist Caesarius of Heisterbach, Odo was ideally situated, at a time of increasing intellectual ferment, to digest the compendious amount of religious and didactic source material that he would incorporate into his various writings, together with his keen sense of personal observation and experience. He also travelled widely through France and beyond, both as pilgrim and master, the stuff of his sermons often catering for students of theology south of the Loire (quite possibly in Toulouse, in the orthodox wake of the Albigensian crusade), and over the Pyrenees into Spain, where he was clearly a recognized figure. Although attempts have been made to associate him with various religious orders, these are ill-founded: his interest in the Cistercians seems to centre on money owed him by the abbey of Bonport, near Rouen (in his sermons he actually criticizes the order for its avarice and corruption); and while he is far more approving of the Dominicans, it is -- like his French contemporary Guiot de Provins -- as an outsider, welcoming the evangelism of the new preaching friars. 
In 1232-3 Odo of Cheriton returned more permanently to England, to enter at last into his inheritance on the death of his father, William, and was duly seised of the considerable family lands. However, although the master had now become a lord, Odo's scholarly theological work was not completely at an end: his final work of clerical instruction dates from this period, and there is some evidence of later revision of some of his previous sermon material. Indeed, as the new feudal head of his household, Odo appears somewhat to have lacked his father's taste for activity and acquisition. He was exempted from serving with Henry III in Ireland, and records show him as more than willing to make over to others parts of the Cheriton estate. He died before 15 October 1246 and was buried in Rochester Cathedral; his brother Waleran of Cheriton was declared his heir. 
It is perhaps indicative of Master Odo's true vocation that his only extant seal shows his namesake and patron saint Odo of Cluny seated at a writing-desk: certainly it is on his extensive writings that his reputation stands. His earliest works, composed before 1219, are two treatises, one on the Lord's prayer, the other on the passion. By the end of the year 1219 he had completed the first of three extant sets of sermons, the 'Sermones de tempore' (or 'Dominicales'), on the gospel texts for the year. These sixty-six sermons, based on Odo's own preaching and addressed in the main to students of theology, contain the blend of erudition, 'exemplum', and lively personal anecdote that is the Cheriton signature. Dating from 1224 are his 'Sermones de epistolis' (or 'Sermones de sanctis') devoted to the epistles for saints' days, many of which are clearly tailored to a Spanish audience. Two years later he wrote an exposition on the 'Song of Songs' (this 'Super cantica canticorum' surviving in a single Spanish manuscript, proof again of his Peninsular activities). The contents of his third sermon collection, some twenty pieces for feast days ('Sermones de festis'), date from this same period, and show the preacher moving up from Spain into the south of France. It was during his travels that Odo began to gather material for what was to prove his most popular work: a collection of fables (his 'Narrationes' or 'Parabolae', preserved in many manuscripts all over Europe). These improving tales (serving both as individual resources for preachers and as a moral encyclopaedia in its own right), are a highly readable mixture of bestiary, Aesopic fable, and Reynard beast epic, studded with lively English and Anglo-Norman tags and maxims that complement well the regular citations from the 'Vulgate'. Odo's last and most seriously didactic work was composed after 1235: it is a 'Summa de penitencia', a confessional handbook for priests, inspired by the Spanish scholar Ramon de Penaforte's 'Summa' and stressing the triple process of confession, contrition, and absolution. Odo of Cheriton's influence may be found in a number of subsequent 'exempla' collections that make use of his writings: the work of the French preacher Etienne de Bourbon and of the Anglo-Norman Franciscan Nicholas Bozon; the late thirteenth-century English 'Speculum laicorum'; and the fourteenth-century Anglo-German 'Gesta Romanorum'. His fables also exist in later French and Spanish versions. Odo's life and career are notable examples both of the flowering of preaching throughout western Europe following the Fourth Lateran Council of 1215 and the emergence of the mendicant friars, and of the intertwining of the secular and the religious in thirteenth-century English society. 


@@@@@


doc= 20546


O'Doherty, Sir Cahir (1587-1608), chieftain, was born in Aileach Mor on the Inishowen peninsula, co. Donegal, the eldest legitimate son of Sir John (Sean Og) O'Doherty (died 1601), lord of Inishowen. Although Sir John had striven to assure the English authorities of his loyalty, he fled from his territory with his family and possessions in 1600 to the lands of Hugh Roe O'Donnell (Aodh Rua O Domhnaill) and died on 27 January 1601, a traitor in the eyes of the authorities. But in accordance with native Irish law, the inheritance of his title and estates fell to Felim Oge O'Doherty, Cahir's uncle, who was inaugurated by Hugh O'Donnell in order to ensure that Inishowen remained under his control. The exclusion of Cahir from the lordship on account of his youth gave offence to Aodh Buidhe McDavitt and Felim Riabhach MacDavitt (Mac Daibheid), who belonged to a sept of the O'Dohertys, and with whom Cahir had been fostered from childhood. Aodh Buidhe promised to Lord Deputy Mountjoy to submit himself to Queen Elizabeth and renounce allegiance to Hugh O'Neill and O'Donnell if Cahir's right to succession were acknowledged. After some persuasion by the MacDavitts, Cahir was confirmed as successor by the lord deputy and privy council in Ireland to ensure peace and stability in an area of strategic importance. He was removed from O'Donnell's territory, and returned with his family and possessions to Inishowen, where he was taken under the tutelage of Sir Henry Dowcra in Derry, who styled him the O Dochartaigh and educated him as an English gentleman. Dowcra even suggested in a letter written in September 1601 to the privy council that Cahir be taken to England and educated there, but it was not acted upon. 
Cahir O'Doherty became a fine soldier, and was knighted for bravery by Mountjoy at Augher, near Clogher, in co. Tyrone in 1602. In the following year he visited the court of James I in London, where he claimed his father's title and lands, which were in due course restored to him. On his return to Ireland, in 1604 he married Mary (died in or after 1609), daughter of Christopher Preston, fourth Viscount Gormanstown, was made a JP, and became an alderman of the city of Derry. When he came of age in 1605, he was established as lord of Inishowen. He stood out from his fellow clansmen by virtue of his great stature, red hair, and English dress. 
In the summer of 1606 Dowcra retired from the governorship of Derry because of a disagreement with Lord Deputy Chichester and gave it to George Paulet, who was generally unpopular and disliked. The loss of the support of Dowcra curtailed O'Doherty's power. Early in November 1607 O'Doherty went on certain manoeuvres which aroused Paulet's suspicions and he reported to the lord deputy that O'Doherty was preparing a revolt. O'Doherty denied this and signed a document to that effect in the presence of two sureties before the lord deputy in Dublin Castle on 2 December 1607. This document, with his signature, survives. 
In 1608 O'Doherty was appointed to a commission to rule the territory of co. Tyrone, and acted as foreman of the jury that indicted the earls of Tyrone and Tyrconnell, O'Neill and O'Donnell, of treason after their flight from Ireland in 1607 with their families and followers. This led to the confiscation of their lands and became known as the 'flight of the earls'. Although O'Doherty did not follow them in flight, in the hope of something better arising from the new situation, he was ultimately driven into open rebellion. In April 1608 he was charged with treason, stripped of his lordship, and verbally and physically abused by Paulet, 'so that he would rather have suffered death than live to brook such insult and dishonor, or defer or delay to take revenge for it' (O'Donovan, s.a. 1608). He planned to take the fort of Culmore, which he succeeded in capturing through the unwilling assistance of the wife of Captain Harte, constable of the fort, whom he had imprisoned after inviting the couple to dine at his residence at Inishowen. He and Felim Riabhach later marched on Derry, which was sacked and burnt -- an attack in which Paulet was one of the first victims. The garrison was put to the sword, but the unarmed men were spared. Following this O'Doherty attacked Lifford, but was tracked down and killed by a shot in the head from the English forces under Sir Francis Rushe at Kilmacrenan in co. Donegal on 5 July 1608. His body was quartered and his head removed and sent to Dublin, and stuck on a spike above the main gate for public exhibition. Felim Riabhach was later tried for treason at Derry, convicted, and executed. Niall Garbh O'Donnell, who had ambitions of becoming the new earl of Tyrone and who had at least tacitly sided with O'Doherty, was arrested and accused of taking part in the insurrection, and sent to the Tower, where he remained for the rest of his life. O'Doherty's widow was held under arrest in Dublin but was later released and in 1609 given a pension of $40 per annum out of the rents of Inishowen by Chichester. Cahir O'Doherty had an only daughter from his marriage and his younger brothers, John (Eoghan) and Rory (Ruairi), were still in fosterage at the time of his rebellion. Rory joined the 'wild geese' and died in service in Belgium; John married Eliza, daughter of Patrick O'Cahan of Derry, and died in 1638. 
The revolt had lasted only eleven weeks, but its results for Cahir O'Doherty's allies were catastrophic: the MacDavitts were rendered powerless and the entire barony of Inishowen was confiscated and later granted to Chichester in May 1609. The flight of the earls and the suppression of O'Doherty's brief rebellion paved the way for the plantation of Ulster between 1609 and 1613, which had certainly been the chief objective of James I's government in Ireland. Ironically, O'Doherty had at the end sought a place at court in an attempt to exert some influence over the colonial government in Dublin, and an order was received for his restoration to his former lordship on the day that his rebellion broke out. 


@@@@@


doc= 20547


O'Doherty, William James (1835-1868), sculptor, was born in Dublin. Of his parents or early education, nothing is known. From 1848 to 1853 he studied in the Government School of Design attached to the Royal Dublin Society, with the intention of becoming a painter, but, on the advice of Constantine Panormo, at that time one of the assistant masters, he turned his attention to modelling. He won several prizes for this, including a bronze medal in 1853 for 'Night', after Bertel Thorvaldsen, and 'Boy and Bird' -- both shown at the great Industrial Exhibition in Dublin in 1853. On the death of Panormo in 1852, he studied under his successor in the school of design, Joseph R. Kirk, until 1854, when, at the suggestion of the sculptor John Edward Jones, he went to London. 
O'Doherty's first appearance at the Royal Academy was in 1857, when he exhibited, under the name of Dogherty, a plaster model of 'Gondoline', a subject taken from the poems of Henry Kirke White, and which he afterwards executed in marble for the banker R. C. L. Bevan. In 1860 he sent to the Royal Academy the model of the marble statue of 'Erin', executed for the marquess of Downshire; an engraving of it by T. W. Knight appeared in the 'Art Journal' of 1861. Both in 1860 and in 1861, when he sent to the British Institution 'One of the Surrey Volunteers', his works appeared under the name of Doherty; but in 1862 he appears to have reverted to O'Doherty. His subsequent works included 'Alethe', a marble statuette executed for Bevan and exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1862, and some portrait busts exhibited in 1863 and 1864. He went to Rome in 1864 to pursue his studies and to execute a commission for the marquess of Downshire, the subject of which was to be 'the martyr'. O'Doherty never married and his last years are obscure. His early death in February 1868, at La Charite Hospital in Berlin while on a visit to that city, ended a brief career of much promise. 


@@@@@


doc= 20548


O Doirnin, Peadar (d. 1769), poet, may have been born in Cashel, co. Tipperary, although almost nothing is known for certain about his biographical details. Some of his poems suggest, however, that he may have spent some time in that vicinity. What is certain is that he lived the greater part of his life in south Armagh and north Louth, part of an Irish-speaking area which also encompassed parts of counties Meath, Cavan, Monaghan, and Down. The region formed a linguistic unit in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and was a centre of intense literary activity in the Gaelic tradition of manuscript copying and poetic composition. It was here that many of the late new romances, including some in the Ulster cycle, were composed. O Doirnin himself is thought to be 'author' of the last recension of 'Tain bo Cuailgne' compiled in the region in the early eighteenth century. 
O Doirnin's life and work have been the cause of much conjecture and not a little embroidery. In the mid-nineteenth century Nicholas Kearney (Nioclas O Cearnaigh) passed off a number of his own compositions as O Doirnin's work and altered his biography to suit his own ideas and prejudices, rendering the facts of O Doirnin's life difficult, if not impossible, to ascertain (Kearney's 'Memoir' is published in full in S. de Ris, 'Peadar O Doirnin', 1969). Kearney's poems are easily recognized by their style, redolent of the period's romantic nationalism and quite distinct from the voice of the 'Independent man', O Doirnin's only extant poem in English, in which he outlines his philosophy clearly: '
For kings or their guards I care not a straw 

No colour at all shall make me stand 

To Dukes or to Lords or to Ladys at ball 

I never will crawl with a cap in my hand. 
(O Buachalla, 'Peadar O Doirnin', 12)' This attitude is readily discernible in much of his other work in Irish, particularly in 'Gearan Ui Dhoirnin' and 'Mianta Ui Dhoirnin'. Significantly, when most of his fellow poets in the region regarded the Catholic clergy as allies, his is a dissenting voice, satirizing one of them for his avarice in the mixed prose and verse 'crosantacht', 'An Cleireach Ban', thought to be about a certain Father Toirealach O Cuinne of Creggan (An Creagan), co. Armagh. He also satirized Muiris O Gormain, one of the foremost scribes of the area, lampooning O Gormain's poor command of English in an imagined conversation between O Gormain and a young girl he met on the road to Drogheda. O Doirnin did not continually lament for the glories of past days but wished for material ease and comfort in his present circumstances, something for which he would have readily exchanged his learning. He also celebrates the benefits and pleasures of whiskey drinking. 
In his love songs, which form the greater part of his work, and which fall within the conventions of 'amour courtois', O Doirnin was not above satirizing himself, sometimes portraying himself as an ardent, but sexually impotent, and consequently unsuccessful, wooer of women. In others, it is because of his lack of means that he is rejected. The picture that emerges from the work is of a significant talent, a man with a love of sensual pleasure, aware of the constraints placed upon him by the dominant, exclusionary, sectarian, Anglophone culture of the period. O Doirnin died at Nurney (An Urnai), co. Louth, early in April 1769. He was buried near the north-east wall of the churchyard at An Urnai. His mellifluous love song 'Urchnoc Chein Mhic Cainte' was set again to music by Peadar O Dubhda in 1907, and remains popular, particularly in Ulster. For the commemoration of his death in 1969, Sean O Riada set his 'Mna na hEireann' to a new air which has been notably recorded by the English pop singer Kate Bush, among others. 


@@@@@


doc= 20549


O'Donel, James Louis (1737-1811), vicar apostolic of Newfoundland, was born at Knocklofty, co. Tipperary, the son of a local farmer, Michael O'Donel, and his wife, Ann Crosby. He and his older brother Michael began their schooling under a private tutor, followed by classical studies in Limerick. At the age of eighteen he entered the Franciscan order and left Ireland for theological studies in St Isidore's College, Rome, an institution run by the Franciscans of the Irish province. After ordination in Rome, he taught theology and philosophy in Prague at Immaculate Conception College, an Irish Franciscan seminary, for several years. He returned to Waterford in 1767 in order to take up duties as guardian of the Franciscan house there. In 1779 he was elected provincial of the order in Ireland, and remained in office until the end of his term in 1782. 
In 1783 the governor of Newfoundland, John Campbell, permitted the construction of a Roman Catholic chapel in St John's, and a group of local Catholic merchants made application to Bishop William Egan of Waterford for O'Donel's services. Bishop Egan corresponded with Bishop James Talbot, the vicar apostolic of the London district and the official responsible for any Catholic mission work in Newfoundland. Bishop Talbot wrote to Rome, asking that O'Donel be made prefect apostolic of Newfoundland, which would place the territory directly under O'Donel's jurisdiction and make him answerable directly to the Holy See. 
Shortly after O'Donel arrived in St John's on 4 July 1784, he received news that he had been made prefect apostolic. He was the first officially recognized Roman Catholic priest in the area. He subsequently encountered some difficulties in asserting his authority over two priests, first with Patrick Lonergan, a Dominican whose conduct created some tension with the civil authorities, and later with Patrick Power, a Franciscan who worked in Placentia without proper ecclesiastical permission and who attempted to discredit O'Donel. O'Donel excommunicated both Lonergan and Power, although it took some time and much correspondence between St John's, the Irish bishops, and the head of the Roman Congregatio de Propaganda Fide, before Power eventually departed the island. 
O'Donel also faced opposition from the two governors who succeeded Campbell. One of Governor John Elliot's captains was Prince William Henry, later William IV (1830-37), who arrived in Newfoundland in 1786. While stationed there the prince revoked some privileges granted Catholics in Placentia in the summer of 1786 and later publicly insulted O'Donel, throwing an iron file at the priest in a fit of rage. Two years later Captain Edward Pellew, surrogate for Placentia, passed on some defamatory information about O'Donel, given him by Power, to Governor Elliot, who considered restricting the presence of priests on the island. Elliot backed down only after hearing O'Donel out. Governor Mark Milbanke, Elliot's successor, accused O'Donel of encouraging fishermen to remain resident in Newfoundland over the winter, and refused permission to Thomas Anthony Ewer, one of O'Donel's assistants, to construct a chapel at Ferryland. After O'Donel made some protestations to Milbanke, the governor threatened further restrictions. The arrival in 1791 of Chief Justice John Reeves, who was more favourably disposed to a Catholic presence on the island, put an end to the proposed restrictions. 
Despite these tensions and difficulties, O'Donel's mission prospered. On 5 January 1796, at the request of some prominent lay people, O'Donel was made vicar apostolic of Newfoundland, and on 21 September was consecrated at Quebec as titular bishop of Thyatira. In 1801 he published a body of diocesan statutes and divided the diocese into missions, he himself, owing to the shortage of clergy, being obliged to act as a mission priest. He used his influence to check disaffection to the government among the predominately Irish Roman Catholics, advocating obedience and co-operation with the civil authorities during a period shortly after the Irish rising and the French Revolution, when tensions between Irish and English residents on the island would have been high. O'Donel's constant discouragement of violence among the Catholics of the colony helped to prevent wide-scale popular involvement during the planned mutiny of some soldiers in the Royal Newfoundland fencible regiment in 1800. As a token of thanks for his service to the colony, a number of prominent members of the community and Governor Sir Erasmus Gower asked for and secured a British government pension of $50 per annum for Bishop O'Donel. 
O'Donel's missionary exertions wore out his health, and, having suffered a stroke, he wrote to the pope requesting a coadjutor bishop on 15 July 1804. His successor, Patrick Lambert, arrived in St John's in August 1806, and O'Donel resigned on 1 January 1807, remaining on the island until July of that year. He was feted by the prominent members of the St John's community and given a silver urn in appreciation. 
O'Donel spent his last years at Waterford, where he died on 1 April 1811, having suffered serious burns in a house fire a few days before. He was buried in St Mary's Church, Irishtown, Clonmel, in co. Tipperary. 


@@@@@


doc= 20550


O'Donnell, Calvagh, lord of Tyrconnell (d. 1566), chief, was the eldest son of Manus O'Donnell (d. 1563), lord of Tyrconnell, and his first wife, Siobhan (died in or after 1549), daughter of O'Reilly, chief of East Breifne. Calvagh first appears in the historical record in the early 1540s, when he is noted as supporting his father in his military campaigns in north Connaught and Ulster. In 1541 and 1542 Calvagh travelled to Dublin to endorse Manus's agreement with Sir Anthony St Leger, lord deputy, and in 1544 he brought military assistance from Dublin to Tyrconnell. By 1547, however, Calvagh was clearly trying to usurp his father's leadership in Tyrconnell and to prevent his brother Sir Hugh MacManus O'Donnell (died 1592) from seizing control in the lordship. 
Manus inflicted a military defeat on Calvagh and his ally, the O'Cahan, in 1548, and in the following year Sir Edward Bellingham, lord deputy, attempted to arbitrate between father and son. Both were summoned to Dublin, and Calvagh undertook to 'follow his father in all things lawful, and keep the King's peace towards his father and the whole country' ('Calendar of the Carew Manuscripts, 1515-1574', 221). In return, Calvagh was confirmed in possession of Lifford Castle, co. Donegal. Attempts were also made to resolve the conflict between Calvagh and his brother Hugh which seemed to have its origins in territorial control of the area around Lifford in east Tyrconnell. 
Despite the 1549 agreement and another arbitration attempt by St Leger, again lord deputy, in 1552, the power struggle within Tyrconnell continued. In 1555 Calvagh bolstered his position with an agreement with Archibald Campbell, fourth earl of Argyll, through which he acquired the assistance of significant numbers of Scottish mercenary soldiers, or redshanks, and the use of a ramming gun for breaking castle walls, the famous 'gonna cam' or 'crooked gun' ('AFM', 5.1555). Strengthened by this military reinforcement, Calvagh imprisoned his father and seized control in Tyrconnell. Manus never resumed the position of lord. 
Throughout the sixteenth century the O'Donnell lordship was riven with dynastic and family feuding, and Calvagh's conflicts with his father and brother were not unlike those which Manus had had with his own father and brothers in the early decades of the century. The feuding among the O'Donnells undermined the family's control in Tyrconnell and made it possible for Shane O'Neill to extend his ascendancy over the western part of Ulster. O'Neill also fuelled the dynastic struggle among the O'Donnells through his support for Manus's brother. 
In 1557 O'Neill raided Tyrconnell with a large army. Calvagh reportedly sought military advice from his imprisoned father, and through a surprise nocturnal attack on the invader's camp he won a temporary victory over O'Neill's forces at Balleighan on Lough Swilly, co. Donegal. Calvagh's position was also bolstered by the plan of Thomas Radcliffe, third earl of Sussex, the new lord deputy, to form an alliance of Ulster chiefs against O'Neill. Among Sussex's proposals was the creation of Calvagh as earl of Tyrconnell and the granting of tenure of his lands on the English model in order to enhance his status as leader of the anti-O'Neill forces in Ulster. In 1560 Calvagh, with Sussex's approval, strengthened his links with the Campbells through his marriage to Katherine (died 1588), daughter of Hector Mor MacLean of Duart and his wife, and widow of Argyll. In his marriage agreement, which was partly a renewal of the 1555 arrangement, Calvagh gained access to 500 redshanks. In return, he agreed to pay annually to Archibald Campbell, fifth earl of Argyll, $66 13's'. 8died, the collection of which may have, in the long term, eroded his political support in Tyrconnell. Calvagh's daughter by a previous marriage to Seaen O'Neill (died before 1560), Mary, was O'Neill's wife. O'Neill mistreated her as a consequence of his defeat by Calvagh and she died in 1561. Katherine had received an excellent education and was described as 'very sober, wise and no less subtle, being not unlearned in the Latin tongue, speaketh good French, and as is said some little Italian' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/3/84). It is likely that the mother of Conn O'Donnell (died 1583) was Calvagh's first wife, rather than Katherine. Conn was the father of Sir Niall Garbh O'Donnell (1568/9-1626?). 
On 14 May 1561 O'Neill fatally weakened Sussex's Ulster confederacy by seizing Calvagh and his wife and imprisoning them at Tyrone. The couple were taken from the monastery of Kildonnell in co. Donegal. Sir William Fitzwilliam, lord justice, suspected Katherine of complicity in the seizure. However, Calvagh was in no doubt that O'Neill was assisted by his own kinsmen, particularly Hugh. During his imprisonment he claimed that he was subject to degrading treatment. An iron collar was placed around his neck which was fastened by a short chain to bolts on his ankles so that he could neither stretch his legs nor stand up straight. In the meantime, O'Neill was strengthening his control over the leaderless Tyrconnell. He devastated the countryside -- killing, by Calvagh's estimate, almost 4500 people, which must have represented a sizeable percentage of the total population in the lordship. O'Neill also garrisoned several castles and recognized Hugh as lord of Tyrconnell. When Sussex led a military campaign into Tyrone to avenge Calvagh's capture, the latter was moved into the inner recesses of the region to prevent the lord deputy rescuing him. In early 1564 O'Neill agreed to release Calvagh on payment of a ransom and the promise that Lifford Castle would be delivered to him. Katherine was not released at the same time, allegedly because O'Neill hoped to secure a ransom from the MacLeans for her. She was reported to have been chained by day to the arm of a small boy and released only at night when O'Neill was present. She may have subsequently married O'Neill with the support of her family. She had several children with him and was with him when he was killed. 
On Calvagh's release he refused to abide by the terms of his ransom. In response O'Neill imprisoned Conn and threatened to cut his leg off if he did not get Lifford. Calvagh in the meantime travelled to Dublin to ask for military assistance against O'Neill. The Dublin administration under Sir Nicholas Arnold, lord justice, was unwilling to take any action which might provoke O'Neill's hostility and refused a licence to Calvagh to travel to London. In his report to the privy council Sir Thomas Cusack, lord chancellor, suggested that Calvagh had little support in Tyrconnell and downplayed his criticisms of O'Neill. Defying the instructions of the Irish privy council, Calvagh went to London where he submitted his grievances to Elizabeth I. His account of his treatment at the hands of O'Neill and the continuing reports of the latter's military victories in Ulster convinced the queen that O'Neill could not be dealt with through the conciliatory policy advocated by the Irish privy council. She wrote to Arnold that she was not without sympathy for Calvagh's position and ordered him to pay him some maintenance. Nevertheless, Calvagh was not returned immediately to Dublin and remained in London until 1566. 
In 1565 Sir Henry Sidney was appointed lord deputy and formulated a plan to consolidate crown support among the lesser chiefs of Ulster and north Connaught which included the restoration of Calvagh to the lordship of Tyrconnell. Calvagh travelled back to Ireland with Sidney and in September 1566 he accompanied the lord deputy on his two-month journey through Ulster. Sidney formally returned Calvagh to the castles in Tyrconnell which had been seized by O'Neill. On 20 October, at Ballyshannon, co. Donegal, in an indenture with Sidney, Calvagh thanked the queen for his restoration, pledged his loyalty to her, and undertook to assist the lord deputy in his military campaigns against O'Neill. He also agreed to support Elizabeth if she 'should hereafter be pleased to change the usages or institutions of his country, and to reduce it to civil order and obedience to her laws like the English parts of this realm' ('Calendar of the Carew Manuscripts, 1515-1574', 374). Sidney also made separate indentures with Calvagh's brother Hugh and his uncle Hugh Dubh O'Donnell, although the question of the O'Donnell succession was left undecided. In the event, Calvagh had little time to test the strength of his family's loyalty or that of Sidney. On 26 October 1566, as he was riding to Derry to assist the English captain Edward Randolph, he fell dead from his horse, having suffered either a fit or a heart attack. He was buried in Donegal Abbey. Calvagh was praised by Gaelic annalists for his bravery, steadfastness, and kindness. He was succeeded by his brother Hugh. 


@@@@@


doc= 20551


O'Donnell, Daniel (1666-1735), army officer in the French service, was born in Ireland, the son of Terence O'Donnell and Johanna O'Donnell, who both were from co. Donegal and belonged to the family of O'Donnell or O'Domhnaill chiefs in Tyrconnell. He was appointed a captain of foot in James II's army on 7 December 1688 and in 1689 was acting colonel. After the treaty of Limerick in 1691 he entered the French service but could obtain only the rank of captain in the marine regiment of the Irish brigade, commanded by Lord Henry FitzJames, grand prior of England, a natural son of James II, and brother of the duke of Berwick. O'Donnell, whose commission was dated 4 February 1692, served with this regiment, known as the 'regiment de la marina', on the coast of Normandy during the projected invasion of England, which was averted by the French defeat in 1692 at La Hogue, and afterwards in Germany in the campaigns of 1693-5. His regiment was reformed in 1698, and his commission as captain redated 27 April 1698. He served in Germany in 1701, and afterwards in five campaigns in Italy, where he was present at Luzzara, Borgoforte, Nago, Arco, Vercelli, Ivrea, Verrua, Chivasso, and Cassano; he was lieutenant-colonel of the regiment at the siege and battle of Turin. 
Transferred to the Low Countries in 1707, O'Donnell fought against Marlborough at Oudenarde in 1708, succeeded Nicholas FitzGerald as colonel of a regiment on 7 August 1708, and commanded the regiment of O'Donnell of the Irish brigade in the campaigns of 1709-12, including the battle of Malplaquet and the defence of the lines of Arleux, Denain, Douai, Bouchain, and Quesnoy. He then served under Marshal Villars in Germany, at the sieges of Landau and Freiberg, and at the forcing of General Vaubonne's entrenchments, which led to the treaty of Rastadt between Germany and France in March 1714. In accordance with an order of 6 February 1715, the regiment of O'Donnell was reformed, one half being transferred to Colonel Francis Lee's regiment, the other half to that of Major-General Murrough O'Brien, to which O'Donnell was attached as a 'reformed' or supplementary colonel. He became a brigadier-general on 1 February 1719, and retired to St Germain-en-Laye, where he died, without any surviving children, on 7 July 1735. 
A jewelled casket containing a Latin psalter said to have been written by the hand of St Columba belonged to O'Donnell, and was regarded by him, in accordance with its traditional history, as a talisman of victory if carried into battle. It was presented to the Royal Irish Academy in the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 20552


O Domhnaill, Gofraidh (d. 1258), king of Tir Conaill, was one of five recorded sons of Domhnall Mor O Domhnaill (died 1241), king of Tir Conaill (which comprised most of the modern co. Donegal) and overlord of territories in Fermanagh, Monaghan and northern Sligo; he was grandson to Eigneachan O Domhnaill (died 'c'.1208), first of this dynasty to achieve local kingship. A bardic poem by Giolla Brighde Mac Con Midhe names Gofraidh's chief residence as Inis Saimhear (Fish Island) at the mouth of the River Erne. It contains this significant remark, 'Gofraidh would be similar to Domhnall Mor if the foreigners did not hold sway' (Williams, 61). In the thirteenth century a renewed westward expansion by the Anglo-Normans in Ireland saw Maurice Fitzgerald (died 1257) become lord of Sligo, with a speculative grant of the kingdom of Tir Conaill itself to hold in fee from the earl of Ulster. Fitzgerald's first raids northwards came before the death of Domhnall Mor and continued through the reign of Gofraidh's (presumably elder) brother Maoilsheachlainn O Domhnaill, culminating in the latter's defeat and death at the battle of Ballyshannon in 1247. Kingship of Tir Conaill was then awarded by the victorious Fitzgerald to Ruaidhri O Canannain, member of an earlier ruling dynasty of the area, also backed by Brian O Neill, the powerful king of neighbouring Tir Eoghain, whose western borders had been threatened by O Domhnaill expansion. 
Gofraidh O Domhnaill recovered his inheritance by persuading Maurice Fitzgerald to invade Tir Conaill yet again in 1248, banish Ruaidhri O Canannain, and install Gofraidh as his vassal-king. When Ruaidhri O Canannain subsequently re-entered the country with a force from Tir Eoghain, O Domhnaill killed him, and another claimant, Niall O Canannain, was killed by Maurice Fitzgerald in 1250. Once rid of his rivals, Gofraidh O Domhnaill proved anything but submissive. According to the annals of the four masters, supported by the contemporary poem mentioned above, he plundered the Anglo-Norman lordship of Sligo in 1249, raided and defeated Brian O Neill in 1252, and forced submissions from Fermanagh and Breifne (the modern co. Leitrim) in 1256. As a result of O Domhnaill's constant warfare, Mag Eine (that part of modern co. Donegal lying south of the River Erne) was annexed to the kingdom of Tir Conaill, though remaining part of Clogher diocese. In 1257 Maurice Fitzgerald died, and O Domhnaill promptly brought an expedition to raze his castle of Belleek and invade the Anglo-Norman lordship of Sligo, burning the town itself and killing many of the settlers. A pursuing army of colonists was heavily defeated at Credran, near Drumcliff in Sligo, though O Domhnaill himself received a mortal wound there. The four masters, using a literary source, state that Gofraidh was wounded in single combat with Maurice Fitzgerald himself, lingered on his sickbed for another year at Lough Beagh (near Glenveagh Castle, Donegal), and led the troops of Tir Conaill to a last victory against Brian O Neill in 1258, while lying on his bier. After the battle, they say, the bier was carried back to Conwal, where Gofraidh died. A late medieval genealogical source states more plausibly that Credran was fought against the sons of Maurice Fitzgerald, that Gofraidh died in Lough Beagh a year later, and that O Neill invaded as Gofraidh's people were carrying their king on his bier, but was repulsed. 


@@@@@


doc= 20553


O'Donnell, Hugh Balldearg (c.1650-1703/4), army officer, was born in co. Donegal, Ireland, the son of John (Sean) O'Donnell (died 1655), an Irish officer in the Spanish service, and Catherine O'Rourke. His grandfather was Hugh O'Donnell of Ramelton, grandson of Calvagh, who died the head of the O'Donnells in 1566. The chieftaincy passed in Elizabeth's time to a younger branch in the person of Rory O'Donnell, who was granted the earldom of Tyrconnell, and the evidence would appear to suggest that Hugh Albert, the last titular earl, who died childless in 1642, made Hugh Balldearg his testamentary heir, thus restoring the headship of the clan to the elder line. It is suggested that Balldearg inherited the O'Donnell family papers and that although he was not a descendant of the first earl he was descended from the brothers of Sir Niall Garbh O'Donnell. The name Balldearg, which means 'red spot', is derived from a personal peculiarity found in several members of the family. 
Nothing is known of O'Donnell's early life, but by the early 1670s he lived in and owned property in Spain. There he was known as Count O'Donnell and earl of Tyrconnell, though he had no legitimate claim to the titles, and commanded an Irish regiment of horse in the Spanish army with the rank of colonel. In 1689 he was refused leave to go to Ireland, where he wished to serve James II, and in the process recover his Irish title and estates. Instead, he went secretly to Lisbon, where he published a manifesto, and put himself in contact with the French ambassador. 
O'Donnell eventually reached Cork in July 1690, four days after the battle of the Boyne, and visited the fugitive king on board ship at Kinsale harbour. After James recommended him to Richard Talbot, the then earl of Tyrconnell, O'Donnell was given a commission to raise 3000-4000 men. By the magic of his name, and with the help of an old prophecy that Ireland should be saved by an O'Donnell with a red spot, he raised fourteen regiments in the north, and sent a memorandum to the French ambassador to the effect that he could easily raise 30,000 if arms and ammunition were provided. According to the earl of Melfort 'the very friars and some of the bishops had taken arms to follow him' (O'Kelly, 469). But despite granting commissions to members of the leading Old Irish families in Ulster and Connaught the regiments under O'Donnell's command were never completely taken into service. Jealousies between the Old English Catholics and Old Irish were rife, as personified in the dispute between Tyrconnell and O'Donnell which prevented the latter from taking an active part in the 1691 campaign. Moreover, Fumeron, the intendant with the French troops and faithful servant of Louis XIV, looked upon Balldearg as a doubtful ally. 
Disillusioned with the treatment meted out to him and by the losses at Athlone, Aughrim, and Galway, by mid-1691 O'Donnell had proposed to the Williamite General Godert van Ginckell that he would serve in the Williamite army on condition that he would be granted the earldom of Tyrconnell and $2000 for his expenses. These negotiations were later published, much to O'Donnell's distress, in an August edition of the 'London Gazette'. By September, after some further feints, he openly joined the Williamites before Sligo with 1000 men. Although Ginckell remained suspicious of Balldearg, he certainly contributed to the fall of the town. On 7 October the two met once again and terms were arranged, but few of O'Donnell's men followed him. A pension of $500 a year was settled on him for life, but an intention to employ him in Ireland was abandoned in deference to the protestant interest. 
O'Donnell's appearance at Kensington Palace in London in December 1691 created enormous interest and it was reported that 'he is still respected by the Irish, and has the manners and character of a Spaniard, and he will return to Spain if he can' (Mulloy, 2, no. 1751). In 1693, after recovering from a long illness, he left England for the Spanish Netherlands before moving to Piedmont, where he was given command of a regiment of foot. Balldearg and his regiment were in Catalonia by 1695, but saw little military action. With the treaty of Ryswick in 1697 he moved to the Spanish court, was made a major-general in the Spanish army, and was sent to serve in Flanders. His place of death is unknown but it is believed that O'Donnell died in 1703 or 1704. 
Irish writers generally have dealt hardly with O'Donnell's memory, but John O'Donovan wrote in his defence in 1860, and modern writers are more favourable towards him. It is now acknowledged that he was consistent in his loyalties -- to his Roman Catholic faith and to Spain. 


@@@@@


doc= 20554


O'Donnell, Hugh, lord of Tyrconnell (1572-1602), chieftain and rebel, was born on or about 20 October 1572, the eldest son of Sir Hugh O'Donnell, lord of Tyrconnell ('b'. in or before 1535, died 1600), Irish chieftain, and his second wife, Fionnuala, called Inion Dhubh 
(Dark Girl; died 1611?)
, daughter of James MacDonnell of the Isles. His grandfather was Manus O'Donnell, lord of Tyrconnell, and his uncle was Calvagh O'Donnell, lord of Tyrconnell. Among his many siblings were his half-sister Siobhan (died 1591), who in 1574 married Hugh O'Neill, third baron of Dungannon and second earl of Tyrone; his elder sister Nuala, who married Niall Garbh O'Donnell; and his brother Rury O'Donnell, first earl of Tyrconnell. Hugh Roe was fostered in various chiefly households and his foray into O'Rourke country at the age of twelve was an exploit precocious enough to be recorded by the annalist of Loch Ce. 
Tyrconnell was at this time under threat from both increasing governmental pressure and fierce internal rivalry. This rivalry, begun in the 1540s between Calvagh and Hugh, sons of Manus O'Donnell, and maintained by their respective families, allowed the government (which favoured Calvagh and then his son Conn) in 1543 and again in 1566 in effect to partition the lordship. Thereafter the rich lands of Cineal Moain, extending along the west bank of the Foyle and the Finn, with Lifford and Finn castles, were in contention between the two houses. Sir John Perrot, governor of Ireland, suspected Sir Hugh O'Donnell's loyalty and moved to reduce his power. He shired Tyrconnell in 1585, rejected Sir Hugh's claim to lordship over Sligo, and gave four of his castles to Hugh, son of Dean O'Gallagher, reputed to be Calvagh O'Donnell's illegitimate son, who disputed Sir Hugh's right to the lordship of Tyrconnell. In 1587, after Sir Hugh had failed to give sufficient demonstrations of his loyalty, Perrot sent a ship to Tyrconnell, with the design, apparently sanctioned by Elizabeth I, of kidnapping Sir Hugh, his wife, and Hugh Roe. At Rathmullan the 'Mathew' secured Hugh Roe and some companions, who by late September 1587 were in close confinement in Dublin Castle, probably in one of the gate towers. To add to Tyrconnell's woes, at the end of 1588 the new lord deputy Sir William Fitzwilliam appointed Donal, Hugh Roe's half-brother, as sheriff of Tyrconnell. At the same time both the MacSweeneys of Banagh and the O'Boyles were locked in internecine strife. Tyrone, calling Hugh Roe his son-in-law, pleaded with Sir Francis Walsingham and Lord Leicester that only this youth could restore peace to Tyrconnell. The 'match' between Hugh Roe and Tyrone's daughter was still spoken of as late as 1595, but apparently he never married. Sir Hugh brought thirty Spanish armada survivors to Dublin, but Perrot, then on the privy council, blocked Hugh Roe's release. In January 1591 he attempted escape; recaptured, he was put in irons and incarcerated in the Record Tower. In a second attempt, on 5 January 1592, assisted by Tyrone's outlay of largess, he escaped to Wicklow, where eventually Fiach MacHugh O'Byrne and Felim O'Toole came to his rescue. He suffered grievously from exposure in the mountains, his companion in flight Art O'Neill, son of Shane O'Neill, perishing there. The resourceful Turlough Bui O'Hagan, Tyrone's confidential servant, conducted him to the north and, helped on his way by Sir Edward Moore, Tyrone, and Hugh Maguire, he came at last to the safety of Ballyshannon Castle. During his incarceration his indomitable mother arranged the murder of two of his rivals, Hugh O'Gallagher (died 1588) and her stepson, Donal the sheriff. Donal, however, was replaced by Captain Willis who, with his undisciplined soldiery, oppressed all south-west Tyrconnell. 
Hugh Roe was ill for over a year and the surgeon had to amputate his two big toes, but in February 1592 he expelled Willis. At Kilmacrenan on 24 April Sir Hugh stepped down and Hugh Roe was elected and inaugurated O'Donnell. The redoubtable Hugh MacHugh Dubh, the tanist, had the superior claim, but Hugh Roe was not to be denied. Dunlop in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' echoes Fitzwilliam's belief that Hugh Roe's 'party were filled with joy' at the realization of a prophecy of succession by Hugh O'Donnell to his father Hugh, but this lacks verification. He formally, though with little sincerity, submitted to the queen in August at Dundalk, thus securing the capitulation of his domestic enemies, Hugh MacHugh and Niall Garbh. Sir John O'Doherty he imprisoned. Before the end of 1592 he was master of Tyrconnell, to which, according to O Clerigh, he restored tranquillity. His attacks on Turlough Luineach O'Neill at Strabane in 1592 and 1593 were meant to strengthen his ally Tyrone's position in the O'Neill clan. 
These were O'Donnell's first steps in his design of a national struggle, to be supported by Spain, against England. In all Ireland, only Ulster at this time maintained any real independence of the crown. Even within Ulster, Cavan and Monaghan had seen the introduction of English tenure and primogeniture, while the groundwork for this had been laid in Tyrconnell and Fermanagh. It seemed inevitable that the jurisdiction of O'Donnell, Maguire, and even Tyrone would be supplanted by that of crown sheriffs (of whom the odious Willis was typical) and Irish law and custom would yield to crown law. The northern bishops, led by Primate Magauran and Archbishop O'Hely of Tuam, had already sounded out Philip II and in 1592 confederated with the new O'Donnell, his cousin Hugh Maguire of Fermanagh, Brian O'Rourke, and some of the Mayo Burkes to form a Catholic league. O'Donnell was a realist, not a dreamer, and planned to extend the league beyond Ulster and northern Connaught into Leinster and Munster, so as to include Fiach Mac Hugh O'Byrne and the exiled claimants to the Baltinglass, Offaly, and Desmond titles. In April 1593 the two archbishops and O'Donnell put it to Philip that Spanish aid to Ireland would be an effective counter to England's support of the rebel Dutch. Philip, however, was noncommittal. 
Urged on by O'Donnell, Maguire was the first to revolt in 1593. Suffering a reverse at Tulsk (where Primate Magauran was killed), he went on to raid Monaghan and had the aid of O'Donnell and O'Rourke in investing Enniskillen in 1594. By 1595 Tyrone was also openly committed to the league and took a leading role in the Nine Years' War. The declared demands of the confederates were liberty of conscience, withdrawal of sheriffs and garrisons outside Newry and Carrickfergus, and full pardon. O'Donnell, Tyrone, and Maguire maintained a war of attrition against the English while they perfected their military machine, sought alliance from elsewhere in Ireland and especially from Munster, and awaited Spanish aid. They defended Ulster along a line from the River Erne to Lough Neagh, O'Donnell maintaining the defence of the western side. From Tyrconnell there were two passages into Connaught, one over the Erne by Ballyshannon, the other by Enniskillen between the lakes. O'Donnell held Ballyshannon, the 'key of the province' of Ulster ('CSP Ire.', '1596-7', 333-4), and in 1595 Maguire recovered Enniskillen. Ulick Burke killed George Bingham, governor of Sligo, who had sacked the Carmelite monastery at Rathmullan and plundered Tory Island, and delivered Sligo Castle to O'Donnell, who levelled it and other castles in north Connaught. From Enniskillen and Ballyshannon he now controlled north Connaught. From 1595 he and his lightly armed, mobile forces made repeated forays into Connaught, weakening English power there. He set up Tibbot Burke as Mac William and in this same year assisted Tyrone to hold the Blackwater line. 
Protracted negotiations begun in autumn 1595 led to pardons for Tyrone and O'Donnell in 1596. Meanwhile, however, these leaders were entertaining missions from Philip II and offering the crown of Ireland to Archduke Albert. O'Donnell laid in provisions for the expected Spanish expedition, but Padilla's fleet was destroyed by October gales off Viana. In July 1597, while Lord Deputy Burgh marched against Tyrone, Sir Conyers Clifford attacked Ballyshannon. O'Donnell, by continuous sorties with horse and foot, made the governor's position untenable and demonstrated that here was a leader who had advanced far beyond the traditional hit-and-run methods of Irish warfare. Clifford, learning of Burgh's repulse by Tyrone at the Blackwater and of the approach of Irish reinforcements, abandoned the attack. O'Donnell harried him as he crossed the Erne and in a hot pursuit for 15 miles killed many of his men. 
O'Donnell's success in Connaught, was such that at the battle at Yellow Ford on 14 August 1598, when he commanded the left wing, he had 1000 Connaught men among his troops. The Irish here won a famous victory. Then, while Tyrone went on the offensive in Leinster and Munster, in order to keep the way open should the anticipated Spanish army land in the south, O'Donnell with the same purpose led a great army into Connaught, again set up his Mac William, seized Ballymote Castle, raided Clanricarde and even Thomond's county of Clare, and took immense booty. By this time the confederates sought free and open profession of 'the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman religion' (Maxwell, 182-3), confirmation to Tyrone, O'Donnell, and Desmond of all the lands and privileges enjoyed by their predecessors for 200 years past, and that all officers of state (apart from the viceroy) and churchmen should be Irish. But Clifford, urged on by the earl of Essex, made a determined land and sea attack on Sligo. O'Donnell dispatched a force of 400 men to defend the castle from Tibbot na Long's naval attack, another of 200 horse to keep O'Connor Sligo in Collooney Castle, and himself ambushed Clifford at Bellaghboy Pass in the Curlew Hills. On 5 August 1599 the governor's army was repulsed with great loss, Clifford himself being among the dead, a notable victory over an experienced leader in command of veterans. O'Connor Sligo surrendered Collooney Castle to O'Donnell, who had both repulsed attacks on himself and made any assault on Tyrone's defensive line from the Blackwater to Armagh and even to Monaghan much more hazardous. In June 1600 he drove as far south as Loop Head and in Moylurg turned Clanricarde back from another attempt on Sligo. 
The new Spanish king, Philip III, sent envoys and some arms to Tyrconnell in 1599 and again in 1600. But in O'Donnell's absence in Connaught, Sir Henry Docwra landed an army at Lough Foyle in May 1600. O'Donnell at first discounted the threat, but Docwra won over Sir Art O'Neill, Turlough Luineach's son, and, more importantly, Niall Garbh, who meant to displace Hugh as O'Donnell, and it was he who ensured Docwra's success. Over the following year Docwra seized Rathmullan Carmelite friary while Niall Garbh gained Lifford and Donegal Franciscan friary. In fighting against Niall Garbh the valiant Manus, younger brother of O'Donnell, received a mortal wound. 
In October 1601 O'Donnell, informed that the Spanish had landed at last in far-away Kinsale, but with too small a force to take the offensive (both O'Donnell and Tyrone had strongly advised that so small a force, 4000 men, should come at least as far north as Limerick), abandoned his siege of Donegal, and assembled his forces for a demanding winter march to the south. It was a desperate throw, for it left Ballyshannon open to English conquest. He left Ballymote on 2 November and exactly a month later eluded Sir George Carew in his memorable night march of 32 Irish miles over frozen Slieve Felim, 'the greatest march with carriage', acknowledged Carew, 'that hath been heard of' (Silke, 'Red Hugh', 12). By 2 December he had arrived in Bandon, gathering southern reinforcements as he went. A few days later Tyrone joined him. They had transported their armies and carriage by winter over or through fifty swollen rivers and besieged Lord Deputy Mountjoy as he invested Kinsale. 
Stout Spanish resistance and the news of the Irish arrival made Mountjoy give up his intention of an assault in force. Meanwhile General Zubiaur landed at Castlehaven with some reinforcements, gaining also Baltimore and Bantry harbours. The west Munster lords, MacCarthys, O'Driscolls, and O'Sullivan Beare, declared for Spain. Mountjoy drew his investment tighter, but of his 11,500 foot and 900 horse, many died of exposure. The Irish armies numbered perhaps 6000 infantry and 800 horse, while the Spanish commander Aguila claimed only 2500 effective fighters. Tyrone planned, if reinforced by Zubiaur's men, to force a breakthrough to Aguila; Zubiaur, however, sent only 200 Spaniards, although the O'Sullivans brought 1200 Irish. Aguila encouraged the Irish to rendezvous with him for a joint attack. Tyrone, realizing that the Irish, despite his and O'Donnell's notable successes, would be at a disadvantage in attacking the entrenched English, preferred to harry Mountjoy and let disease and famine do their work on the latter's army, but O'Donnell's voice for attack prevailed, and so the Irish moved up to Belgooly. At the sight of them Mountjoy exclaimed, 'This kingdom is lost today' (Archivo General de Simancas, guerra antigua 3144). Early on 24 December, while it was still dark, the Irish set out, Captain Tyrrell with his Meath and Leinster men leading the van, Tyrone the main force, and O'Donnell with his Tyrconnell and Connaught men in the rear. Aguila planned to join them between Thomond's camp and the west fort but things went disastrously wrong as old rivalries re-emerged. 'Their chiefs were at variance, each of them contending that he himself should go foremost' (AFM, 6.2283). The battalions marched out shoulder to shoulder instead of in order. In the dark they lost contact and went astray. Tyrrell did not find the agreed position, and Aguila stayed in the town. At dawn Tyrone, observing this, withdrew. Mountjoy, seeing his opportunity, launched a cavalry charge against Tyrone; it was repulsed, but a second broke his army. Aguila, although he heard musketry fire, refused to lead out his men. Tyrrell came up but was made to retreat. O'Donnell's men, even further off, at sight of the two other battalions being routed ignored his exhortations to turn and fight, and fled. A pursuit of Tyrone accounted for between 500 and 1000 casualties in the main battle. A volley at the end made Don Juan stir but, realizing that it signalled an English victory, he quickly retreated. O'Donnell succeeded, but too late, in rallying his men on a hill 8 miles away. 
O'Donnell, urging Tyrone and his brother Rury, to whom he entrusted his own command, to remain encamped, then sailed from Castlehaven to seek Spanish reinforcements. But Tyrone went home, suffering many more losses on the way, although Rury then brought his army safely to Connaught. O'Donnell was welcomed to Corunna by Governor Caracena and Philip III ordered the immediate dispatch of a relief squadron to be sent to Castlehaven, Baltimore, and Berehaven, to be followed up by a fresh army, 6000 strong. News of Aguila's surrender, however, and the return from Kinsale on 26 and 27 February 1602 of twenty Spanish companies halted the preparations. These returning soldiers blamed O'Donnell for the rout and the king resolved to give him 50,000 ducats and send him back to Ireland. Then, however, opinion against him hardened; permission for him to leave was refused and he remained a virtual prisoner in Corunna. 
At last in August, O'Donnell was allowed to leave Corunna for the court at Valladolid. Reaching Simancas Castle, he took to his bed and after seventeen days' illness died on 30 August 1602. He probably was not poisoned by one James Blake of Galway, as was once thought. According to Donagh Mooney, a soldier turned friar who knew O'Donnell well, he succumbed to grief and the rigours of the Castilian climate. Among those present at his bedside were Florence Conry, his confessor; Matthew Tully, his secretary; and Dr John Nynan. In his will, drawn up shortly before his death, he named Rury heir to all his 'estates, lands, lordships, and vassals' (Silke, 'The last will', 58) and asked that Philip III should apportion any help equally between Tyrone and Rury and hold them and their heirs in equal regard. He was buried in the Franciscan convent of Valladolid. When this was later secularized, his body was disinterred and its present location is unknown. 
Mooney left a pen-portrait characterizing O'Donnell as a prince and leader: 'He was above middle height, strong, handsome, well-built and of pleasing appearance. His voice was musical. In action he was quick and decisive. He loved justice and was stern with evildoers. He was resolute, faithful to his word and steadfast in time of trial. Maintaining a rigorous military discipline, he led by example in battle. To all he was courteous and affable. He was not married. He was gracious, without pretension. (Mooney, 116)' Mooney went on to speak of O'Donnell's zeal for the restoration of the Catholic faith, his anxiety for a worthy clergy, and his contempt for the world. He had often heard him say that if the war ended favourably he would become a Franciscan. However, this description is perhaps not wholly derived from life because Mooney was drawing here from work by Polydore Vergil. 
O'Donnell spent ten years fighting to maintain what he claimed as his by right of inauguration, maintained a firm alliance with Tyrone, carried the war to the rest of Ireland, drew in the Spaniards, and made the conflict one of national, international, and religious significance. Then, with the balance poised, submerged rivalries within the alliance resurfaced, his luck ran out, and the way was open for completion of the English conquest of Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 20555


O'Donnell, John Francis (1837-1874), journalist and poet, was born in Limerick City, the son of a shopkeeper. He was educated by the Christian Brothers. He then learned shorthand, and when he was seventeen joined the 'Munster News', Limerick, as a reporter. At the same time he began to contribute verse to 'The Nation', for which he continued to write prose and poetry until his death. After two years on the 'Munster News', O'Donnell was appointed sub-editor on the 'Tipperary Examiner', published in Clonmel. He also contributed to the 'Kilkenny Journal'. In 1860 he went to London, to work for the 'Universal News', a weekly Roman Catholic and Irish nationalist paper. He also contributed verse to 'Chambers's Journal' and 'All the Year Round'. He was married and had four children, but the name of his wife is not known. 
In 1862 O'Donnell returned to Dublin to join 'The Nation', then edited by A. M. Sullivan; at the same time O'Donnell edited 'Duffy's Hibernian Magazine'. In 1864, however, he returned to London to edit the 'Universal News', and in 1865 became sub-editor of 'The Tablet', where he remained until 1868. 
It is not known whether O'Donnell was a Fenian, but he was one of their ablest propagandists in the press. From 1863 he wrote articles and contributed nationalist poetry to James Stephens's 'Irish People' until it was suppressed in 1865. He also wrote for Richard Pigott's 'The Irishman' and 'The Shamrock' magazine. In all these papers he used the pseudonyms Caviare and Monkton West. In September 1873, through the Irish chancellor Lord O'Hagan, O'Donnell obtained an appointment in the London office of the agent-general of New Zealand. He died, after a brief illness, on 7 May 1874, in London, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. O'Donnell published three collections of prose and poetry in his lifetime, and the Southwark Irish Literary Society published a posthumous edition of his poems in 1891. 


@@@@@


doc= 20556


O'Donnell, Manus, lord of Tyrconnell (d. 1563), chieftain, the eldest of fourteen sons of Sir Hugh O'Donnell, lord of Tyrconnell (died 1537), and his first wife, a daughter of O'Boyle of Boylagh. Manus is known to have had four wives: Siobhan, daughter of O'Reilly, chief of East Breifne (married later to Maguire, lord of Fermanagh), and mother of Calvagh O'Donnell, lord of Tyrconnell; Joan (died 1535), sister of Conn Bacach O'Neill and mother of Sir Hugh, lord of Tyrconnell; Margaret (died 1544), daughter of Angus Macdonald of the Isles, from whom he had separated by 1538; and Eleanor, sister of Gerald Fitzgerald, ninth earl of Kildare, and widow of Donal MacCarthy Reagh of Carbery, whom he married about June 1538. That he was also married to a daughter of Maguire is most improbable. Besides Calvagh and Hugh, Manus had at least six other sons: Niall Garbh, Donough, Rory, Caffar, Manus Og, and another Manus, and seven daughters: Rose, Sheila, Evelyn, Mary, Fionnghuala (wife of Sir Cu Chonnacht Maguire and mother of Sir Hugh, killed in 1600), Grace, and Joan. 
Manus's grandfather (who was chieftain between 1461 and 1503) and father had broken O'Neill supremacy in the north of Ireland, and had established effective control over lower or northern Connaught. The lordship of Tyrconnell (or Tir Conaill; later co. Donegal), controlling the coast from Broadhaven to Lough Foyle, exchanged fish for wine, salt, iron, and munitions. Breton and Spanish traders knew Manus in his day as 'king of fish'. In his father's absence abroad (1510-12) Manus defended Tyrconnell against O'Neill. Father and son then campaigned vigorously in both Connaught and Tir Eoghain (Tyrone), and in 1514 O'Neill formally acknowledged O'Donnell's rights to the tributes of Cineal Moain (the modern barony of Raphoe), Inishowen, and Fermanagh. Conn Bacach, the new O'Neill, renewed the fighting, and Manus built a frontier castle at Lifford in 1527. The castle had its refinements, as the poet Tadhg Dall O Huiginn tells us; and Manus gathered here a number of scholars, who in 1532 completed 'Betha Colaim chille', a life of the great Cenel Conaill saint, Columba. It was a document for the times, a rich fusion of classical hagiography and folklore. Manus himself was a poet, composing syllabic verses, now tender, now satirical, but the claim that he composed the life 'out of his own mouth' may suggest no more than that he had the work read to him as it proceeded, and with his poet's ear gave approval or criticism. 
His brother Hugh Boy was now challenging Manus for the succession, and the divisions within Tyrconnell allowed O'Connor Sligo in 1533 to win back Sligo Castle, held by O'Donnell since 1516. This weakened O'Donnell domination of the west. Sir Hugh, unable to call on the help of these two sons for a foray on Connaught, found it best in 1535 to surrender to the king half the tributes of lower Connaught and half the cocket of Sligo. But his threat to attack O'Neill was sufficient to deter the brothers-in-law Manus and Conn Bacach (whose wife was sister to the ninth earl of Kildare) from going to the aid of Silken Thomas. 
Death took Sir Hugh in 1537, and Manus was inaugurated O'Donnell. He now made attacks on Connaught and in 1538 won back Sligo Castle. The same year he assumed the leadership of the Geraldine league, about June marrying Eleanor Fitzgerald, the guardian of her nephew Gerald. The alliance of Irish and Anglo-Irish lords feared for their autonomy and were urged on by 'the friers and preestes of all the Yrishtree, not oneley of Odownelles country' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 3.141, n. 1), preaching a religious war. The resentment provoked by Henry VIII's reforms that had been one of the factors motivating the earlier Kildare rebellion was now grown greater. Manus sent out pleas to the papacy, the empire, France, and James V, and in 1539 O'Neill and he ravaged the pale and made a symbolic appearance at Tara. Though mauled by Grey in Monaghan on their way home, the allies were back again in the pale in 1540. But Eleanor, now distrustful of Manus, carried Gerald off to France; and in 1541 Manus, splendidly dressed for the occasion, submitted at Cavan to the politic St Leger, accepting Henry's sovereignty and supremacy, at least on paper. His reward for accepting the status of tenant-in-chief under the crown was to receive in absolute ownership the territory of Tyrconnell (certain rights 'vis-a-vis' MacWilliam Burke also being accorded to him). This was the conciliatory policy of 'surrender and regrant'. Grateful for his bringing in O'Neill, the administration in 1543 accepted his overlordship of Inishowen, to the disappointment of O'Neill, now earl of Tyrone. 
Manus had nominally lost his absolute independence. But now, in place of usufruct of certain lands, Tyrconnell was his in absolute ownership, to be transmitted to his son by law of primogeniture. He might also claim the protection of the crown. There now began a period of diplomatic chess between Manus and the government. O'Donnell listened to overtures from France, England's enemy, and in 1545 secured ratification of his rights over Inishowen. But he yielded up the episcopal revenues he had seized on the death in 1543 of the papal bishop of Raphoe, facilitating continuation of the Roman succession with the appointment of Art O'Gallagher as bishop in 1547. The government, on the other hand, favoured Manus's rebellious son Calvagh, to whom Bellingham in 1549 awarded Lifford Castle, with extensive adjoining lands. Manus was allowed Castle Finn, but his brother Conn, as tanist, was also given a large estate. Manus again turned to France, but after the peace between Henri II and Warwick (March 1550) could only write to disclaim practice of treason. He was now elderly and ailing, and Calvagh made him captive in 1555. Hugh had gone over to Shane O'Neill, and would not help. But when Shane attacked Tyrconnell in 1557, Calvagh turned to his father, by whose advice he was able to drive Shane off. Then in 1561 Shane, O'Neill since 1559, kidnapped Calvagh. 
With Tyrconnell leaderless and at a low ebb, Manus died 'in his own fortress of Lifford', say the four masters, on 9 February 1563, and was interred at the Franciscan friary founded by his grandparents in Donegal. The erosion of the independence of the Gaelic lords had begun before his day, and England, with its increase in armed might, was able to take advantage of the weaknesses of the Gaelic system, its competition for power, and its feuding between states. He had, however, done something to adumbrate a national programme for future Irish leaders, which would have religion for a cement and which would seek to exploit an English weakness, susceptibility to attack from the continent through its back door, Ireland. If unable to restrain the rebels within his own family, he had established the rule of Tyrconnell in his own line, and all its remaining lords would be his descendants. And his support of Bishop Art O'Gallagher was of consequence in ensuring that the Reformation would make no progress in his territory during the sixteenth century. He was 'ilcherdach' ('many-skilled'), say the four masters: man of action and diplomat, with a taste for finer things, including literature. An older contemporary of Manus might have said that he possessed 'virtu'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20557


O'Donnell, Lady Mary Stuart (b. 1607?, d. in or after 1639), noblewoman, was the daughter of Rury O'Donnell, first earl of Tyrconnell (1574/5-1608), and his wife, Lady Brigid Fitzgerald ('c'.1589-1682), only daughter of Henry Fitzgerald, twelfth earl of Kildare, and Frances, daughter of Charles Howard, first earl of Nottingham. In September 1607 her father, disappointed with the numerous exclusions to his patent as earl, fled Ireland for the continent with his infant son, Hugh Albert O'Donnell (1606-1642) ['see under 'O'Donnell, Rury], and Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone. At the time of this flight, Tyrconnell's wife was at her family's Maynooth estate waiting to give birth. Although the earl intended Brigid to follow him abroad, she found herself in a disturbing predicament, forsaken by her husband and caught up in the political wake stirred by his actions. Guiding her through this crisis was her mother, the dowager countess of Kildare. She counselled her daughter to dissociate herself from her exiled husband, by denying foreknowledge of his 'unfortunate journey' and repudiating her husband's 'ungrateful behavior' in 'so wicked an enterprise as to rebel against his prince' ('CSP Ire.', '1600-08', 296-7, B. O'Donnell to lord deputy, September 1607; 'Salisbury MSS', 9.482, B. O'Donnell to lord deputy, 1607). 
After her disavowal, Brigid went to England to defend herself, and in London gave birth to Mary, probably in late 1607. Brigid, at an opportune moment, took the infant and pleaded her case before the king. James I was moved by her desperate condition and her 'sweet' and 'well favoured' appearance. He confessed that he could not understand how her husband 'left so fair a face behind' (Nichols, 2.157). The king granted her a pension of $200 from the revenues of her husband's escheated estates and the baby was placed under royal protection. Henceforth, the child was known as Mary Stuart O'Donnell. 
Mary returned while still an infant with her mother to Ireland, where she was raised as a Catholic on the Maynooth estate. In 1619, two years after Brigid remarried, Mary was sent to England to live with her maternal grandmother. (Her stepfather was Nicholas Barnewall, first Viscount Kingsland.) Within a few years, the strong-willed adolescent estranged her benefactors and family with disputes over her annuities, her Irish Catholic associations, and her marital status. She was a desirable heiress and both the Howard family and her grandmother believed that a protestant husband would resolve many of Mary's difficulties. But in 1626 she became involved in a plot that freed two young native Irish hostages from the Tower. Summoned to testify before the royal council, Mary, disguised as a young man, escaped to the continent and made her way to the Spanish Netherlands. In Brussels she met for the first time her brother, Hugh Albert O'Donnell, titular second earl of Tyrconnell. Through his influence she was well received at the infanta's court and was recommended by the Roman Catholic archbishop of Tuam, Florence Conry, and Guido di Bagno, the papal nuncio, to Cardinal Barberini, the papal secretary of state. Before their dispatches were forwarded, Pope Urban VIII sent his blessings: 'You, our daughter, have given to the world proof of... what strength and courage are imparted by the true faith.' Praising her 'heroic' nature and her resistance to the allurements of court, the menaces of the English king, and the 'horrors of an alliance with a Protestant', Urban celebrated her defiance and welcomed her tenderly into the bosom of the Roman church (Urban VIII to M. S. O'Donnell, 13 Feb 1627, Barberini Latini MS 6207, fol. 7'r'- 'v'; MacGeoghan, 545). 
These good feelings were spent when Mary refused to be used as a marital tool to heal the tensions between the O'Donnell and O'Neill factions. Florence Conry secured her a dowry and the support of the infanta for a marriage to John O'Neill, third earl of Tyrone. Anticipating a serious estrangement if she rejected this match, Mary took matters into her own hands. In the spring of 1627 she made a desperate appeal to Lord Conway, the English secretary of state. She explained away her London flight on her 'smallness of means and the fear of losing her reputation'. Mary also suggested she might 'draw her brother into the King's service' with the right royal guarantees (O'Donnell to Conway, 'c'.March 1627, 'CSP Ire.', '1625-32', 108). The futility of her appeal exposed the hopelessness of her position. She was in love with a poor Irish captain, Dudley (Dualtach) O'Gallagher, (died 'c'.1635), and, true to her own legacy, in 1631 the pregnant Mary fled to Italy with her companion. About this time the young couple married, and while living in Genoa, Mary gave birth to a boy. With Rome unwilling to support their 'worthy daughter' the young couple survived on a meagre subsidy from the infanta. As for her brother, Tyrconnell complained that a woman posing as his sister was defaming him and his house. Mary and her husband ultimately found refuge in Austria where Dudley perished in the imperial service about 1635. The widowed Mary made her way back to Rome and was last heard of in 1639. 
Mary Stuart O'Donnell was a shadowy romantic figure whose notoriety was regularly noted in the dispatches and reports of gossipy field agents. Her father, Rury O'Donnell, died in Rome in July 1608 and his brother Caffar died there about a week later. This left Mary's brother Hugh Albert to claim the title of titular earl of Tyrconnell. He commanded an Irish regiment in the Spanish Netherlands with the title of colonel and died in the service of Spain in August 1642. Mary's mother, Brigid, eventually became Viscountess Kingsland from her second marriage, and had five sons and four daughters with her new husband. Widowed in 1663, she lived until 1682, the oldest surviving person associated with the 1607 'flight of the earls'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20558


O'Donnell, Sir Niall Garbh (1568/9-1626?), magnate and soldier, was the eldest son of Conn O'Donnell (died 1583) and his wife, Rose, daughter of Shane (Sean) O'Neill, and grandson of Calvagh O'Donnell, lord of Tyrconnell. Conn, who appears to have been married previously, had eight sons and at least two daughters. In 1567 the then lord deputy, Sir Henry Sidney, had delivered Lifford and Finn fortresses to Conn, and Niall was probably born in Finn Castle. By his marriage to Nuala (Fionnghuala), sister of Red Hugh O'Donnell, Niall had at least two children, Neachtan and Manus (killed at Benburb in 1646), but his wife deserted him in 1600. In 1602 he was reported to be contemplating marriage with the dead Hugh Maguire's sister, the widow of Sir Arthur O'Neill. Whether or not they married, he seems to have had more than the two children. Niall was three years older than Red Hugh, his father's first cousin and his own foster-brother and brother-in-law. But rivalry between their two houses went back to the 1540s, when the English government had in effect partitioned Tyrconnell. The English favoured Calvagh's branch, represented now by Niall. 
Red Hugh having in 1592 established himself as lord of Tyrconnell and taken over Lifford, from which to challenge O'Neill (Turlough Luineach) at Strabane, made both Niall and Hugh mac Hugh Dubh of Ramelton, 'sinnsear sleachta Dalaig' ('the senior O'Donnell'), submit. Niall, although his ambitions were thwarted and he had lost Lifford, served Red Hugh faithfully in the war, up to 1600. O'Donnell sent him to Hugh Maguire's aid in 1592; thereafter he saw much service in Connaught and presumably shared in the victory of the Curlews (the poet who after 1632 wrote his elegy extols his valour shown in Connaught and in Ulster). But on 3 October 1600 he with his three brothers, Hugh Boy, Donal, and Conn Og, went over to the English at Lough Foyle. Sir Henry Docwra, the English commander in north-west Ulster, had offered him and his heirs the lordship of Tyrconnell, and his grant was enrolled on 18 March 1601. The lord deputy, Mountjoy, knighted him. Fearing Red Hugh's wrath, he joined Docwra before his further demands for the traditional O'Donnell overlordship of Inishowen and of Sligo were met. 
The timing of Niall's defection, in wartime and with the English enemy established on the Foyle, leaves him open to the charge of treason. The disgusted Nuala promptly left him; she went into exile in 1607, died in or after 1617, and was buried in Louvain. Niall kept Docwra victualled and gained for him Lifford (8 October 1600), which, it is thought, Red Hugh had put under his charge. The nastier side of his nature was revealed when he and his men in a drunken fury upon an old grudge murdered Neachtan O'Donnell, Niall's own uncle and a man of great authority with O'Donnell. On 24 October Red Hugh's brothers, Rury and Manus, engaged him and his men. Manus was fatally wounded and Niall narrowly escaped death at Rury's hand. He took Donegal Franciscan friary (31 July 1601) as a base for attacking Ballyshannon Castle, which for Mountjoy was the key to bridling O'Donnell as the Blackwater fort bridled Tyrone. However, O'Donnell attacked Niall, who lost his brother Conn Og and 300 men. He retreated to Magherabeg friary but at the end of October Red Hugh, informed of the Spanish landing at Kinsale, broke the siege to go south. Niall won over MacSweeney Banagh, whose keep commanded Killybegs harbour, and while Ballyshannon fell to the English (25 March 1602), he also secured Castlederg. The historian John Lynch blamed Niall for allowing Docwra's soldiers to kill the aged bishop of Derry, Redmond O'Gallagher. In August, Niall provisioned Mountjoy at Augher, with cattle seized in co. Tyrone and in Breifne O'Rourke. He also destroyed Enniskillen and garrisoned the monasteries of Devenish and Lisgoole. 
Docwra, while acknowledging Niall's ambitious and refractory nature, pleaded with Mountjoy to honour his promises to one who had proved indispensable to the success of the Foyle operation. But Mountjoy thought Rury O'Donnell the man to keep Tyrconnell at peace. The outraged Niall seized Rury's cattle and had himself inaugurated O'Donnell (1603). (The four masters, knowing Rury to be tanist, do not acknowledge the inauguration's validity.) He then came to Derry, where he was arrested, but he broke free with the cattle, 7000 head, which Docwra by prompt action recovered. Still Niall accompanied Mountjoy to London, where Tyrconnell was divided. Rury was made earl, with grant of the major part of the county, but with reservation of Ballyshannon (which, Docwra complained, had been won by himself) and 1000 acres adjoining to Sir Henry Folliott. Niall was apportioned the lands along the Finn that he had held in the time of Sir Hugh O'Donnell. English army officers received grants, which included ecclesiastical lands, while the crown reserved to itself the right to build forts. All this left three people much dissatisfied: the earl of Tyrconnell, Niall Garbh, and Docwra. 
By 1604 Niall had so strengthened his hand that the earl was forced to retreat to the pale. At Strabane in 1605 Lord Deputy Chichester gave judgment in the disputes between Tyrconnell and Niall and between the latter and Tyrone (over the lands to the south of Lifford, Cineal Moain or Moentacht): he awarded 43 quarters of land in Glenfin and the Moentacht to Niall, made Tyrconnell recognize his sub-chiefs as freeholders, and reserved Lifford (although it had not been excepted from Tyrconnell's patent) to the crown. Niall continued in dispute with Tyrconnell and in August 1606 deposed that the earl and Cuconnacht Maguire were planning to seize the northern garrisons. Chichester in December bound Tyrconnell and Niall in recognizances to accept his own decisions in their disputes. Sufficient amity prevailed for Niall to serve under Tyrconnell at the siege of Doe Castle in March 1607, Niall being severely wounded. 
By 1608 Chichester was ready to double Niall's grant in Glenfin and Moentacht but now Niall was accused, even by his two brothers, of instigating Sir Cahir O'Doherty's rebellion. Tyrconnell's mother, Inion Dubh, included the brothers with Niall's son Neachtan among the plotters. Niall's complicity was, however, probably limited. Neachtan, a student first of St John's College, Oxford, and then of Trinity College, Dublin, had been taken hostage by Chichester for his father's good behaviour. Then, straight after the revolt, Niall sought a patent for both Tyrconnell and Inishowen, promising to bring in O'Doherty's head. The rebellion over, on 14 June Niall and his brothers were arrested, as was Sir Donal Ballagh O'Kane, all charged with complicity in the insurrection. They were brought to Dublin in the 'Tramontana', the pinnace that had brought Niall to Holyhead with Mountjoy. Marshal Wingfield had given Niall protection and a jury failed to convict him. Despite that, Niall, Neachtan, and O'Kane were sent to the Tower of London. Niall died there, aged fifty-seven, probably in 1626; Neachtan is said to have died in the Tower, although there is no trace of him after 1623. In the plantation his lands were sequestrated, but it appears that a request made by him in 1613 that the rents he claimed be devoted to the support of his surviving sister and the maintenance of his children at school, and a similar request from O'Kane, were honoured by Chichester. Brave if overbearing, Niall had striven by every means to secure Tyrconnell with all its chieftains' ancestral rights and lived to regret joining the English camp. Through his son Manus he was ancestor of the O'Donnells of Newport, co. Mayo, the Leitrim line stemming from his brother Hugh Boy and the Austrian and Spanish lines from his other brother Conn Og. 


@@@@@


doc= 20559


O'Donnell, Rury, styled first earl of Tyrconnell (1574/5-1608), magnate and soldier, was the second son of Sir Hugh O'Donnell ('b'. in or before 1535, died 1600), lord of Tyrconnell, and his second wife, Fionnuala, called Inion Dhubh 
(Dark Girl; died 1611?)
, daughter of James MacDonnell of the Isles and his wife, Agnes Campbell. The sons of Sir Hugh and Fionnuala were, in order of birth, Red Hugh (Hugh Roe) O'Donnell (1572-1602), lord of Tyrconnell, Rury, Manus, and Caffar. Rury was tanist to Red Hugh from at least 1597 and it may be presumed that he was fostered in a friendly household, receiving an education and training appropriate to his status as the son of a chieftain. 
During the campaign, Rury was in action in Connaught and then at Lough Foyle against Sir Henry Docwra and his own cousin and brother-in-law, Niall Garbh O'Donnell. He and Manus fought as cavalrymen, with lance, short sword, and target. Near Derry, Manus was fatally wounded (24 October 1600), while Niall Garbh narrowly escaped death at Rury's hands. The latter and two companion horsemen next dispatched six English foot and a sergeant. The action moved to Lifford, where Rury was wounded. The death of Manus hastened that of his father, which occurred on 27 November. In the spring of 1601 Rury failed to recapture Doe Castle, which Red Hugh, the new O'Donnell, secured in July. The sources give no account of Rury's part in such actions as that against Sir Conyers Clifford, president of Connaught, in the Curlews. He went south to Cork on the great march in 1601, but again the authorities are silent on what part he played at Kinsale. It is not impossible that he played a more prominent part in the war than O Clerigh's 'Life of Hugh Roe' and, deriving from that, the account by the four masters give him credit for. 
After Kinsale, Red Hugh O'Donnell committed his command to Rury, urging him and Hugh O'Neill to remain in the south pending his return. However, they took their separate ways homewards, Rury bringing his forces into the safety of lower Connaught, where O'Donnell on his way to Kinsale had left O'Gallagher in charge of his cattle. Rury made headquarters at Ballymote Castle, apparently awaiting his brother's return with Spanish reinforcements. In any case the way home was closed to him, with Ballyshannon and Donegal in enemy hands. In the summer of 1602 he successfully evaded a pincer attack on him by government armies and in August O'Connor Sligo and he repulsed Lambert at the Curlews. The death of O'Donnell in Simancas (30 August) made it easier for Rury to accept terms from Lord Deputy Mountjoy, to whom he and O'Connor Sligo submitted at Athlone on 14 December. Rury claimed that O'Donnell had kept him in irons for arranging with Governor Clifford to serve Queen Elizabeth. Perhaps: but Clifford was dead, and Red Hugh O'Donnell had shown confidence in Rury after Kinsale, so possibly Rury, with his army intact, was making the best of what was not a bad hand. Niall Garbh, now abandoned by a Mountjoy anxious for peace, seized Rury's herds and had himself proclaimed O'Donnell, but had to yield to Docwra. 
In the 1603 peace arrangements, Rury O'Donnell was, in Christchurch, Dublin, created earl of Tyrconnell, with remainder to Caffar, and knighted by Lord Deputy Carey on 29 September; he was granted a patent for his lands on 10 February 1604. Cucoigcriche O Clerigh celebrated the new era with a praise-poem: 'Rug cabhair air Chonallchaibh'. But Eoghan Ruadh Mac an Bhaird, reflecting a conviction now current that the old order was over, was fearful: 'do mealladh mac Ui Dhomhnoill' ('O'Donnell's son has been beguiled'; O. Bergin, 'Irish Bardic Poetry', 1970, 127). Yet Tyrconnell was now a good match, and the old O'Donnell-Geraldine alliance was renewed when about 1604 he married Lady Brigid Fitzgerald ('c'.1589-1682), only daughter of Henry, twelfth earl of Kildare. Brigid's mother was Frances, daughter of Charles Howard, earl of Nottingham, lord high admiral and one of the Spanish party among the king's councillors. Hugh Albert O'Donnell, born about October 1606 ['see below'], was the only son of this marriage, Mary Stuart O'Donnell being born about a year later. Some authorities give an eldest child, Elizabeth, probably illegitimate, who became first wife of Luke Plunkett, first earl of Fingall. 
Villamediana, Spanish resident in London, suspected Nottingham's hand behind Tyrconnell's visit to him late in 1604. The earls of Tyrone and Tyrconnell had already sounded the ambassador on a possible renewal of the war with Spanish help. Philip III's council of state, which, with the ink on the treaty of London scarcely dry, had no wish to offend England, supported Villamediana's cool response. The conclusion arrived at by some modern writers of a plot between the earls and Spain is untenable. Nor did the payment by Spain in 1607 of a subvention to the earls constitute a conspiracy. 'Feeding another's dog' ('dar pan a perro ajeno') is how Gondomar, who disliked it, termed this commonplace practice (P. Aguado Bleye, 'Manual de historia de Espana', t. 2: 'Reyes Catolicos -- Casa de Austria', 8th edn, Madrid, 1959, 718). 
Tyrconnell's patent made him tenant-in-chief of co. Donegal in as ample a manner as any of his ancestors had enjoyed Tyrconnell, with remainder to Caffar, but excluded from the patent were: overlordship of Inishowen (granted to Sir Cahir O'Doherty) and of co. Sligo; Derry (which received an urban charter in July 1604), with the Foyle fishings; the land, at least 12,900 acres, and castles of the Finn valley (allotted to Niall Garbh); and the castle and town of Ballyshannon, with which also went the Erne fishery and a (conservatively) estimated 1000 acres adjoining. A network of government strongholds controlled the Swilly and the way into co. Tyrone and Connaught. Valuable lands, both demesne and mensal, were wrested from Tyrconnell, and the government commissioners apportioned freeholds throughout the county. In 1605 he was forced to acknowledge (contrary to the chief's ancient rights, lately confirmed) that the three MacSweeneys and O'Boyle held independently of him. Servitors availed of one device or another -- general grants or declaration of both monastic lands and fishings as royal property -- to enrich themselves at Tyrconnell's expense. Thus Sir Henry Folliott, already holding Ballyshannon and its fisheries, acquired extensive further lands and fisheries in Tirhugh. At the other end of Donegal, Sir Ralph Bingley came by the Rathmullan and Kilmacrenan abbey lands, together with Inch Island and the Swilly fishings. Donegal again and co. Tyrone had sheriffs by 1603, and Donegal saw its first assize sittings in that year. Richard Bingley received the grant of the customs of Derry and Ballyshannon ports. Such severe restrictions on his patent made Tyrconnell's appointment as lord lieutenant of the county in 1605 quite hollow. Finally James I's bishop of Derry, Raphoe, and Clogher, George Montgomery, was working to appropriate, again contrary to ancient law, the ownership of all church and monastic lands. 
Ralph Bingley, at the considerable price of $1600, Tyrconnell later asserted, sold him the Kilmacrenan lands, 29,000 acres, with some smaller lots. But Bingley's tenant remained on the Kilmacrenan holding, paying no rent. The recovery of Doe Castle in 1607 was also at the cost of Tyrconnell, as lord lieutenant, while Chichester put Bingley into the fortress, making Tyrconnell grant him a lease. Tyrconnell was now left with just two castles, Donegal and nearby Lough Eske. In April 1607 King Philip made a sum of 8000 ducats available in equal shares to Tyrone and Tyrconnell. But there was no promise of an annuity, and Tyrconnell's share (about $1250 in contemporary terms) would go only in part to cover debts he had incurred when forced to mortgage a considerable portion of his land to Dublin merchants. Chichester himself estimated that his debts left Tyrconnell no better revenue than $300 a year. 
On 4 September 1607 a shipload of about ninety people, including the earls of Tyrconnell and Tyrone and Cuconnacht Maguire, sailed from Rathmullan, on the Swilly, bound for Spain. Tyrconnell and Maguire (apportioned only part of co. Fermanagh) were both disappointed men and planned, it seems clear, to abandon Ireland. Tyrone in vain advised Tyrconnell first to seek royal leave. About mid-May 1607 Maguire left for the Netherlands. There Father Florence Conry informed him that James I would certainly arrest Tyrone should he go to London to press his claim that he held ownership in fee of O'Kane's country, and that Tyrconnell would be taken in Ireland. While these arrests were more possible than probable, Maguire, probably in August, sent urgent warning to the earls and the archdukes were concerned enough to finance his hire of a ship. When he arrived unexpectedly, Tyrconnell and even Tyrone were ready to go, hoping it seems to return with an army (of which Henry O'Neill's regiment would be the backbone) or else of securing through Spanish intercession reversal by James of the Anglicizing and protestantizing policies his Irish ministers now followed in Ulster. Tyrconnell took with him his son Hugh, less than a year old, in his haste leaving his pregnant countess behind in Kildare. His sister, Nuala, who had left her husband, Niall Garbh, when he deserted to the English, and Caffar and his wife, Rose, sailed also. Equinoctial gales drove the ship to land, not in Spain, but at Quilleboeuf, in the mouth of the Seine. 
The 'flight of the earls' caught the Dublin administration unawares. Lord Howth had, at tedious length and without impressing Salisbury or Chichester overmuch, given information of a conspiracy involving Tyrconnell, Maguire, Lord Delvin and others. Later Delvin would report that Tyrconnell had plotted with him to seize Dublin Castle, a confession that would test credulity by implicating Tyrone and Philip as well. The argument that the 'mandates' episode, whereby named individuals were required to attend worship in the established church, had caused certain Old English to consider their loyalty and engage in serious plotting with the northern leaders is implausible. 
In an extended period of leisure at Louvain over the Christmas of 1607, Tyrone and Tyrconnell set down justification for their flight in separate documents. To James they stressed the high-handed actions of his Irish ministers, Tyrone emphasizing fear for his life, Tyrconnell the pressure put upon him to abandon his religion. But, as Bagwell noted, Tyrconnell had temporal grievances that were real: rights and prerogatives unacknowledged; lands and fisheries allotted away; impoverishment; and seizure of his cattle and horses by the garrisons, whose soldiers were guilty of continuous outrages, all without redress. To Philip, on the other hand, they spoke of an Irish Catholic 'league' formed by them and ready for action at Spain's command. They had, they said, negotiated with most of the Catholic nobles and gentry (alternatively it was with the towns) heretofore loyal to Elizabeth but now disillusioned by enforcement of the recusancy laws. These new-found allies would immediately on receiving some aid from Philip join the earls in a fresh uprising. There had been no occasion to inform Philip of this plan (which is very short on specifics) until then. These plots were no more substantial, as Philip and his first minister Lerma could see, than the alleged confederacies of the mid-sixteenth century, which had failed to interest Philip II or his astute ambassador in London, Quadra. Since then the two Hughs, O'Neill and O'Donnell, had won the support of Philip II, engaged as he was after 1580 in a Catholic crusade, and then of the perfervid Philip III. But now the latter and especially Lerma had been brought to recognize that the protestant powers were firmly established. 
Philip then refused the party including Tyrconnell entry into Spain and they had to repair to the hospitality of the papal court. Reaching Rome on 9/19 April 1608, they were met at the Milvian Bridge by Archbishop Lombard of Armagh, who would now advocate peace rather than war with James. By this time Tyrconnell had been attainted, and thereafter his honours were forfeited. The pope showed them every honour, but the O'Donnell brothers very soon became victims of the Italian climate, Tyrconnell dying at the age of thirty-three in Rome, probably on 18/28 July (though his gravestone -- presumably erroneously -- gives a date two days later), and Caffar on 26 August/5 September. They were laid to rest in one grave in San Pietro in Montorio on the Janiculum. The four brothers, all so full of promise, Manus, Red Hugh, Rury, and Caffar, were gone, each cut off in his prime. So abruptly and tragically ended the O'Donnell lordship of Tyrconnell which had lasted for 400 years and which had had behind that another eight centuries of rule by the Cenel Conaill, the dynasty which had also given ten high-kings to Tara. Now Donegal and Ulster would experience change of gravest consequence. 
Tyrconnell's only son, 
In 1626 Philip IV toyed with a project to launch another invasion of Ireland and set up Tyrconnell and John O'Neill, titular earl of Tyrone, as joint leaders of a Catholic republic. Conry, now archbishop, proposed a match between Tyrconnell's sister, Mary Stuart, and Tyrone, something the unconventional Mary did not favour. Finally, Philip decided against expanding the Anglo-Spanish war, cancelled the invasion, and concluded a new treaty with England (1630). 
The O'Donnell-O'Neill jealousy was maintained to the end. But Tyrconnell was at last (1632) given his own infantry regiment and proceeded to recruit fifteen companies of Irish. In that year he married Anne Marguerite de Heynin, a kinswoman of the last duke of Guise. They had no children. In 1638 he was ordered with his regiment to Spain and perished when the French set his ship on fire, apparently in August 1642. Tyrconnell consistently maintained his claims to the title O'Donnell, to lordship over lower Connaught and Sligo, and to the earldom of Tyrconnell. He was said to be a polished courtier and an excellent and brave soldier, but without the ripe judgement of John O'Neill. With him the final curtain falls on the long drama of the O'Donnells as princes of Tyrconnell. 


@@@@@


doc= 20560


O'Donovan, Edmund (1844-1883), journalist, was born at Dublin on 13 September 1844, son of Dr John O'Donovan (1806-1861) and his wife, Mary Anne Broughton, and received his early education at a Jesuit day school, St Francis Xavier's College. Thence he went to the Royal College of Science at St Stephen's Green, Dublin. Subsequently he studied medicine at Trinity College, Dublin, where he gained prizes for chemistry, but never graduated. During his course he held the appointments of clerk to the registrar and assistant librarian. Having also shown great taste for heraldry, he was appointed aide to Sir Bernard Burke, Ulster king of arms, and carried a banner at the installation of the duke of Connaught as knight of St Patrick. According to Justin McCarthy, when a young man O'Donovan was engaged in the Fenian movement, and after its failure turned to journalism, an occupation favoured by middle-class Irishmen. 
In 1866 O'Donovan began his newspaper career by occasionally contributing to the 'Irish Times' and other Dublin papers. Between then and 1870 he made several journeys to France and America, and in the latter continued his medical studies, attending courses at the Bellevue Hospital medical college, New York. After the Franco-Prussian War broke out in 1870, O'Donovan's adventurous spirit led him to join the foreign legion, after Sedan. He took part in the battles round Orleans, and was wounded and made prisoner. Interned at Straubing in Bavaria, he sent to several Dublin and London papers accounts of his experiences. When the Carlist rising took place in 1873 he went to Spain, and many letters from him were published in 'The Times' and 'The Hour'. In the summer of 1876, when Bosnia and Herzegovina rose against the Turks, he went to the scene as 'Daily News' correspondent. In 1877 he went as its correspondent to Asia Minor, where he remained during the Russo-Turkish War (1877-8). 
In 1879 O'Donovan, still in search of adventure, undertook, again as 'Daily News' correspondent, his celebrated journey to Merv in Turkestan -- a daring, difficult, and hazardous feat, with which his name became associated. From the Russian advanced posts on the south-eastern shores of the Caspian Sea he travelled through Khorasan, and eventually, with great difficulty and at considerable risk, accompanied only by two native servants, he reached Merv. He was at first suspected by the Turkomans of being an agent of the Russians, who were then threatening an advance on Merv. For several months he consequently remained in Merv in a sort of honourable captivity, in danger of death any day, and with no prospect of release. 
According to his own account, O'Donovan helped mount artillery, and was made one of the ruling triumvirate. He managed to send into Persia a message, which was thence telegraphed to John Robinson, the manager of the 'Daily News'. In this dispatch O'Donovan explained his position, and appealed to his friend: 'For God's sake get me out of this'. Robinson applied to the Foreign Office and to the Russian ambassador in London, and immediate steps were taken to effect O'Donovan's release. However, by his own efforts, combining courage with diplomacy, he extricated himself from his perilous position. On returning to London 'the man of Merv' was a celebrity, and he read a paper to the Royal Geographical Society. In 1882 he published a book on his adventures, 'The Merv oasis: travels and adventures east of the Caspian during the years 1879, 1880, and 1881' (2 vols.). 
O'Donovan was an eccentric, nomadic 'incurable Bohemian' who likened himself while living in London to 'a Red Indian in patent leather boots' ('Fifty Years of Fleet Street', 178). His London rooms were 'a cross between a laboratory and an arsenal' (O'Shea, 15). He enjoyed playing practical jokes, firing pistol blanks out of his windows, smoking a water pipe, and reciting from Thomas Moore's 'Lalla Rookh'. From the window of his Bloomsbury lodgings he shot the hat off a dozing cabman with his airgun, after which his landlady told him to leave: 'this is not a private mad-house' (ibid., 17). He moved to an Irish hotel in Holborn where his ways were understood. 
In 1883 O'Donovan went to the Sudan as 'Daily News' correspondent, and accompanied the army of William Hicks Pasha, which marched on al- 'Ubayd to suppress the Mahdists in the Sudan. He wrote in a letter that 'to die out here, with a lance-head as big as a shovel through me, will meet my views better than the slow, gradual sinking into the grave' ('Fifty Years of Fleet Street', 178-9). On 3 November 1883 the army was ambushed at Kashgil, near al- 'Ubayd, and on that and the two following days was annihilated. No information was received of O'Donovan's fate, but there can be no doubt that he died with the other Europeans. Probate of his will, however, was not granted until 1891, as there was a lingering hope that he would reappear. A tall, handsome man, 'slender, black, thin-visaged, and straight in the nose' (O'Shea, 8), O'Donovan was kindly, genial, generous, and popular, as restless and adventurous as he was brave. His attainments were broad rather than deep. He was a good linguist, speaking French, German, Spanish, and Jagatai Tartar. He knew something of medicine and botany, and was a fair draughtsman and a good surveyor. He was an intrepid traveller who achieved much, though apparently also a flamboyant poseur in the quasi-Byronic tradition of Victorian exotic adventuring. 


@@@@@


doc= 20561


O'Donovan, John (1806-1861), Gaelic Irish scholar, the third son and seventh child (of nine) of Edmond Donovan and Eleanor Hoberlin, was born in Atateemore townland, Kilcolumb parish, south co. Kilkenny, on 25 July 1806. He was descended from one Edmond O'Donovan of Bawnlahan, in south-west co. Cork, who had settled in Gaulstown, co. Kilkenny, married the daughter of the last chief of a local Norman family, the Gall Burkes, and died in battle in 1643. John O'Donovan's father died in July 1817. In the previous year the family had been forced by a rent increase to move to a farm at Ballyrowragh, near Atateemore. 
John was educated at a local 'hedge school' and, from 1821, at a private school (Hunt's academy) in nearby Waterford. In 1822 he opened an evening school at Redgap, in his home parish. He spent a good deal of time at this period with a much travelled uncle, Patrick O'Donovan, who possessed a wealth of folklore and other learning. In 1823 his eldest brother, Michael, went to Dublin in search of employment and John soon followed him. There he attended a 'Latin school' (perhaps Dr Doyle's classical academy on Ussher's Island) from late 1823 to 1827. After leaving school, he considered entering Maynooth College as a clerical student, but instead he obtained employment as a scribe from the historian and commissioner of the public records, James Hardiman. He copied Peter O'Connell's Irish dictionary and other Irish manuscripts for Hardiman, but his employment may have been part-time, for in 1828 he transcribed an Irish manuscript, under the supervision of the elderly scholar Edward O'Reilly, for a patron, Myles John O'Reilly of the Heath House, Maryborough, and he also worked as a schoolteacher. When, early in 1830, he became seriously ill, he was invited to stay at the Heath House; as he recuperated he read voraciously and did some light scribal work. While there, he learned of the death of Edward O'Reilly, who had served as a topographical expert to the newly established Ordnance Survey of Ireland. O'Donovan, who two years earlier had given some Irish lessons to the superintendent of the survey, Lieutenant Thomas Aiskew Larcom, applied for and obtained the vacant post. He joined the survey as 'Orthographer and Etymologist' on 28 September 1830. Before the end of 1831, O'Donovan made the acquaintance of the scholar and artist George Petrie who would soon be put in charge of the survey's topographical department. That year Petrie had purchased one of the autograph manuscripts of the annals of the four masters, and very soon O'Donovan was working both on it and on a copy of Dubhaltach Mac Fhirbhisigh's great seventeenth-century collection of Irish genealogies. This was to result, more than a decade later, in two of the magnificent editions for which O'Donovan is justly celebrated, his 'Hy-Fiachrach' in 1844 and his monumental 'Annals of the Kingdom of Ireland' in 1848-51. In 1832 Petrie established the 'Dublin Penny Journal' and O'Donovan soon contributed the first of some twenty articles by him which were to appear there over the next eleven months. 
O'Donovan resigned from the Ordnance Survey in January 1833 but returned seven months later with a substantial increase in pay. The precise circumstances of the incident are unclear but, on his return, O'Donovan was soon the leading member of Petrie's new topographical department, on which a total of some twenty people served over the next eight years. Early in 1834 O'Donovan embarked on his arduous but invaluable series of fieldwork tours throughout the length and breadth of Ireland to study tens of thousands of place names on behalf of the Ordnance Survey. Covering the country, often on foot, over the next seven years, O'Donovan -- with the assistance of a few colleagues, notably O'Conor, O'Curry, and O'Keeffe -- sent back to headquarters in Dublin a voluminous and most valuable stream of letters (the celebrated 'Ordnance Survey letters'); these dealt with various aspects not alone of the toponymy, but also of the history and antiquities of twenty-nine of the thirty-two counties on the very eve of the great famine. O'Donovan was also closely involved in the production of the only volume to be published of the ill-fated 'Ordnance Survey Memoir' (1837). Although the topographical department was disbanded rather suddenly by the British government at the end of 1842, O'Donovan was retained by the Ordnance Survey as a part-time adviser on onomastic matters until the time of his death. 
On 18 January 1840 John O'Donovan married in Dublin Mary Anne Broughton, a sister-in-law to his colleague in the survey Eugene O'Curry; soon they had a young family to support. When in 1840 the Revd James Henthorn Todd, assistant librarian in Trinity College, Dublin, established the Irish Archaeological Society (IAS), O'Donovan became the first and most prolific contributor to its publications. (He had already worked part-time for Todd since 1836, cataloguing the Irish manuscripts in press H in Trinity College Library.) Almost every year from 1841 to 1846 saw the appearance of an IAS volume meticulously edited and painstakingly annotated by O'Donovan: in 1841 'The Circuit of Ireland... a Poem Written in 942'; in 1842 'The Banquet of Dun na n-Gedh and the Battle of Magh Rath'; in 1843 'The Tribes and Customs of Hy-Many'; in 1844 'The Genealogies, Tribes and Customs of Hy-Fiachrach'; and in 1846 more than half the material in the 'Miscellany of the Irish Archaeological Society'. Another learned society, the Celtic Society, issued its first publication in 1847, an edition by O'Donovan of the 'Book of rights'. The society's 'Miscellany', dated 1849 but not published until 1851, contained five items running to a total of more than 460 pages, all edited by O'Donovan. His most exemplary work to date was his encyclopaedic 'Hy-Fiachrach' (1844), but this was soon to be dwarfed by his greatest achievement, his remarkable edition -- including text, translation, and notes -- of the annals of the four masters (1848-51; 2nd edn, 1856). Meanwhile, in 1845, he had published the first serviceable 'Grammar of the Irish Language', prepared at the urging of J. H. Todd for the use of the recently established St Columba's College. The only other book of his to appear during his lifetime was 'Annals of Ireland: Three Fragments... by Dubhaltach Mac Firbisigh', published in 1860 by the Irish Archaeological and Celtic Society. The same society issued two further works of his posthumously: 'The Topographical Poems of John O'Dubhagain and Giolla na Naomh O'Huidhrin' (1862) and 'The Martyrology of Donegal' (1864). In addition to these books, O'Donovan published numerous articles, including seven pieces on the 'Origin and meaning of Irish family names' in the 'Irish Penny Journal' (1841), a dozen or so articles on various topics in the 'Journal of the Kilkenny Archaeological Society' (later the 'Journal of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland') between 1850 and 1860, eleven in the 'Ulster Journal of Archaeology' (1857-61), and seven in 'Duffy's Hibernian Magazine' (1860-61). Moreover, he generously assisted other authors, notably Todd, Hardiman, and Reeves, in preparing editions of various texts and contributed detailed footnotes to the second volume of the Revd Matthew Kelly's edition of John Lynch's 'Cambrensis eversus' (1849). Among the works on which he laboured but which were brought to completion by others were: 'Sanas Cormaic: Cormac's Glossary' (from AD 'c'.900), published by Whitley Stokes (Calcutta, 1868); Edward O'Reilly's 'Irish Dictionary, with Supplement by O'Donovan' (1864); and 'The O'Conors of Connaught: an Historical Memoir', edited by Charles Owen O'Conor Don (1891). 
O'Donovan in 1849 was appointed to the chair of Celtic languages in the newly established Queen's College, Belfast, having previously been offered a lectureship in the same subject at Cork College. Having no students in Belfast, he fulfilled his obligations by delivering six public lectures each year. He and his family continued to live in Dublin. His acceptance of a post at Queen's College brought him into disfavour with the Catholic hierarchy, including Archbishop John MacHale of Tuam with whom he had been quite friendly. As a result, it was his brother-in-law Eugene O'Curry rather than he who was appointed in 1853 to the chair of Irish archaeology and history in John Henry Newman's new Catholic University in Dublin. Most of the final decade of O'Donovan's life was occupied with work for the Brehon law commission, which had been established in 1852 to prepare for publication the 'Ancient Laws of Ireland'. However, the difficulties and frustrations encountered by him and his fellow worker O'Curry in relation to the Brehon law commission led to unhappiness and dissension between the two. Then, in early November 1861 O'Donovan caught a severe cold; this developed into rheumatic fever which caused his untimely death, at his home, 36 Upper Buckingham Street, Dublin, on 10 December 1861. His impressive funeral -- attended by such eminent personages as Sir Thomas Larcom, under-secretary for Ireland (O'Donovan's former superior in the Ordnance Survey), the president of Maynooth College, and several Church of Ireland clergymen -- took place from his house on 13 December to the O'Connell Circle in Glasnevin cemetery, where his grave is marked by a stone memorial. The dimensions of the funeral and the location of the grave reflected the widespread recognition of O'Donovan as the greatest Irish scholar of the nineteenth century; already, as early as 1833, George Petrie had declared him 'the most able and judicious Irish scholar and topographer Ireland has produced for the last century' ('The abbey of Inch, county of Down', 'Dublin Penny Journal', 8 June 1833, 396). The passage of a century and a half has done little to dim scholarly admiration for the pioneering and enduring work of the little scholar (5 feet 2 inches in height) from south Kilkenny. 
O'Donovan was survived by his wife, Mary Anne, who died in 1893, and by six of their nine sons, aged from nineteen down to five years. Four of the sons later became involved with the Fenian Brotherhood; the most celebrated of these, Edmund O'Donovan (1844-1883), went on to have a particularly colourful career which included a period in the French Foreign Legion, assignments as a 'war correspondent' (a novel designation) in Spain and Bosnia, a daring journey to the Merv oasis on the borders of Afghanistan in central Asia, and a fatal final assignment to the Sudan in 1883 to cover the revolt of the Mahdi. 


@@@@@


doc= 20562


O Dubhagain, Sean Mor (d. 1372), historian and poet, was the most distinguished in a line of hereditary historians to the O Ceallaigh chiefs of Ui Mhaine, in eastern Galway. According to a tradition preserved in the seventeenth-century 'Registry of Clonmacnoise', the head of the O Dubhagain family held estates from the Ui Mhaine at Ballinruane and Ballydugan, Galway, in return for keeping a true record of all grants made to the church of Clonmacnoise. Sean Mor himself was scribe of an early portion of the 'Book of Ui Mhaine' (or 'Hy Many', in BL, Egerton MS 90, fols. 20-24) and author of a number of historical poems, the most famous of which, 'Triallam timcheall na Fodla', minutely details the ruling families of Ulster, Connacht, and Leinster, naming their hereditary jurisdictions, but totally ignores the Anglo-Norman invasion and subsequent colonization of large portions of the country. The poem is incomplete, as his original intention was to discuss the whole island of Ireland, and this may have been one of O Dubhagain's latest works. Other poems by him deal with the history and genealogy of the O Ceallaigh chiefs, eulogize his contemporary, Muircheartach O Maolmhuaidh, while reciting the genealogies of the Cineal Fiachach of Westmeath, give the succession of the provincial kings of Cashel as far as Domnall Mor Ua Briain (died 1194), and expound a method for establishing the date of movable feasts in the church's year. 
O Dubhagain was apparently practising his profession for some time before 1339, a year which saw the earliest datable works by his pupil, Adhamh O Cianain (died 1373), a Fermanagh historian and prolific scribe. O Cianain's book of prose genealogies, dating 'c'.1344-5, is described in a colophon as having been copied (in whole or in part) 'from the book of his great tutor, that is, Seoan O Dubagan' (Bannerman, 143-5). This evidence for Sean's activity in the first half of the fourteenth century indicates that he was already 'ollamh' ('court poet' or 'historian') of Ui Mhaine when the chieftain William O Ceallaigh issued a general invitation to the bardic classes of all Ireland to attend a Christmas feast at his residence in 1351, perhaps under O Dubhagain's influence, since it was the first time the host to such a gathering had not been a member of the learned classes himself. About 1365 O Dubhagain retired 'from the delights of the world' to spend his declining years at the priory of St John the Baptist (Crutched Friars) at Rindown, Roscommon. On his death in 1372 he was described in the annals as 'ardsheanchaidh na hEireann' ('chief historian of Ireland'). 


@@@@@


doc= 20563


Ua Duinn, Gilla na Naemh (1102/3-1160), historian and poet, was 'fer legind' (literally 'man of learning') the head of a church school, at Inis Clothrann (Inchcleraun, or Quaker Island, in Lough Ree, Longford) around the time when this early Christian foundation of St Diarmait was to be reorganized as St Mary's Augustinian priory. He is a late and well-documented example of an Irish ecclesiastical scholar whose high reputation derived from his vernacular works on secular history. A notable example was his 'Coiced Laigen na lecht rig', a long poem with a contemporary copy in the 'Book of Leinster', listing the Christian kings of Leinster to his own day, the length of their reigns, and the manner of their deaths, and ending with a eulogy of Diarmait Mac Murchada (died 1171). In this and other compositions of his, which include a poem on the 'dindshenchus' or place-name lore of Sliab Fuait (Slieve Gullion in Armagh), the last verse claims authorship for the 'discerning', or 'erudite' Ua Duinn. The seventeenth-century manuscript, CUL, Add. MS 3084, which contains two of his poems, calls him a 'sage in history and bardic poetry'. Recording his death at Inis Clothrann on 17 December 1160, in the fifty-eighth year of his age, the annals imply he was eloquent and pious, and hail him as Ireland's chief author in history and poetry, 'aenollam na nGaedhel', '[the best] bardic teacher, or master-poet, of the Irish people'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20564


O'Farrelly, Feardorcha (d. 1746), Irish-language poet, was born in Mullagh, co. Cavan, Ireland, the son of John O'Farrelly, son of Feidlimidh O'Farrelly. The family were 'erenachs', hereditary stewards of church lands. One member of this family had been abbot of Drumlane, co. Cavan, in 1025, and another, canon of Drumlane in 1484. John O'Farrelly wrote 'Seanchas an da Bhreifne' ('The history of the two Brefnys'), which is said to have been largely burnt by Feardorcha's mother: this incident became the subject of one of his poems. 
O'Farrelly was intended for the priesthood, but was rejected because of some sacrilegious act of another family member in 1641; instead he became a farmer in co. Cavan. He was the friend of many writers and artists who flourished in that district in the early eighteenth century, including Cathair MacCabe and Torlogh O'Carolan the harper. He was often the guest of the Mortimers of Cloghwallybeg and their family, who were the chief landowners in the area. 
O'Farrelly's poems include one in praise of William Peppard of Kingscourt: a copy of it made in 1827 by Peter Galligan is in Cambridge University Library. O'Farrelly's work also includes such poems as 'Beir beannacht uaim sios go baile na ccraobh' ('A blessing from me on Ballynacree'), 'Suibhal me cuig coige na Fodla' ('I walk the five provinces of Ireland'), and 'Bhidh me la deas' ('I was one fine day'). O'Farrelly died, probably in co. Cavan, but certainly in Ireland, in 1746. 


@@@@@


doc= 20565


O'Ferrall, Richard More (1797-1880), politician and colonial governor, probably born in Dublin, was the eldest son of Ambrose O'Ferrall (1752-1835) of Balyna, co. Kildare, and his first wife, Anne, daughter of John Bagot. Unlike his brother John Lewis More, later commissioner of police (died 1881), he declined, as a conscientious Catholic, to enter the protestant university in Dublin. From an early age he joined in the struggle in Ireland for civil and religious liberty as a member of the Catholic Association, and long corresponded with James Warren Doyle, the bishop of Kildare. After the 'Catholic Relief Bill' passed, he became in 1830 member of parliament for co. Kildare, which he represented from 1830 to 1847 and again from 1859 to 1865. He also sat for a short time from April 1851 to July 1852 for co. Longford, in which his family held property. O'Ferrall did not take the repeal pledge, but remained on good terms with Daniel O'Connell. He became associated with the faction of the whig party led by the third Earl Grey and Charles Wood in the 1830s and 1840s. 
In 1835, under the Melbourne administration, O'Ferrall became a lord of the Treasury; in 1839 he became secretary to the Admiralty, and in July 1841 secretary to the Treasury. In March 1846 he warned Lord John Russell not to attempt to return to the style of government of Lord Normanby (1835-9) in Ireland, and urged remedial measures to promote the 'regeneration' of Ireland. He married, on 28 September 1839, the Hon. Matilda (died 1882), second daughter of Thomas Anthony, third Viscount Southwell. They had a son and a daughter. 
On 1 October 1847 O'Ferrall severed his connection with Kildare to assume the governorship of Malta. On 22 November 1847 he was sworn of the Irish privy council. He resigned the governorship of Malta in 1851, on the ground that he declined to serve under Lord John Russell, the prime minister, who in that year carried into law the 'Ecclesiastical Titles Bill', attempting to outlaw creation of a Catholic hierarchy in England. In 1851-2 O'Ferrall voted mostly with the 'Irish brigade'. 
O'Ferrall died at Kingstown, near Dublin, at the age of eighty-three, on 27 October 1880. He had been a magistrate, grand juror, and deputy lieutenant for co. Kildare, and at his death was the oldest member of the Irish privy council. 


@@@@@


doc= 20566


Offa (fl. 709), the son of Sigehere and Osgyth, whose name marks a departure from the use of names beginning with 'S' which otherwise seems to have been rigidly adhered to by male members of the royal house. Offa abdicated and left for Rome in 709 with Cenred who had formerly been king of the Mercians and overlord of Sigeheard and Swaefred. 
It is not known when Sigeheard and Swaefred ceased to rule, and their eighth-century successors are shadowy figures. Attested rulers include: 


@@@@@


doc= 20567


Offa (d. 796), king of the Mercians, rose to power during the brief period of civil war which followed the murder of King AEthelbald in 757. Offa was the son of Thingfrith, the son of Eanwulf; and Eanwulf was first cousin to AEthelbald: both the great Mercian kings of the eighth century were direct descendants of Eowa, brother and perhaps co-ruler of the celebrated seventh-century King Penda. 
Several records in the Worcester archive associate Offa and his grandfather Eanwulf with the kingdom of the Hwicce and in particular with the minster at Bredon in modern Worcestershire, which was supposedly founded by Eanwulf in 716 or 717 ('AS chart.', S 55, 116, 117, 146, 147). As they stand these documents would seem to be forgeries, but collectively they may preserve a valid tradition. It has been suggested that Eanwulf may have had some family connection with the royal dynasty of the Hwicce, perhaps through marriage, though there is no direct evidence. One of the suspect Worcester charters has an intriguing subscription of Offa, who confidently attests as 'noble youth ['puer indolis', perhaps equivalent to atheling] in the province of the Hwicce, not yet having received from God the kingdom of the Mercians' ('AS chart.', S 55). This is evidently retrospective, but does reveal at least a very early tradition that Offa grew up among the Hwicce. Since he went on to reign for almost forty years, he is likely to have been a young man in 757. He was probably named from Offa, king of Angeln, one of the legendary ancestors of the Mercian royal dynasty. His heroic descent is emphasized in a collection of royal genealogies which would appear to have been compiled during his reign (although probably in Northumbria rather than Mercia). 
Offa became ruler in Mercia in 757 after driving out a certain Beornred, who had taken over the kingdom in the aftermath of AEthelbald's death. The ascendancy over southern England which AEthelbald had enjoyed in the last decades of his reign is likely to have been dissipated or at least reduced by the period of civil war in Mercia. But Offa contrived by military prowess and political astuteness to equal and then exceed his predecessor's power and reputation. By the end of his reign he was the dominant ruler in England and a force to be reckoned with on the European stage, treated as a (near) equal by Charlemagne. His ambitions were huge, and he struggled hard to establish a long-lasting dynasty; but the early death of his son and successor brought ultimate, posthumous failure. 
In Offa's hands the old patterns of Anglo-Saxon overlordship began to change. Earlier kings who had dominated southern England, including AEthelbald, seem to have been for the most part content to exercise their authority in an indirect fashion, interfering relatively lightly in the internal affairs of subordinate kingdoms. During the 770s Offa began to operate on a different level, which involved removing (or at least demoting) local kings and absorbing their territories into a Mercian empire. The first to have experienced this new policy were the South Saxons, then ruled by a multiplicity of minor kings. Offa conquered the people of the Hastings area in 771 and the kings of the South Saxons seem rapidly to have capitulated. A charter issued by Offa in 772 was witnessed by four South Saxons, at least three of whom had formerly ruled as kings in Sussex: they are now called 'dux' or ealdorman, which indicates that they had been demoted below royal status ('AS chart.', S 108). From now on their role was to govern Sussex in Offa's name, as his appointees. Something similar seems to have happened in the kingdom of the Hwicce, in the west midlands, long dominated by Mercia. In 757 the Hwicce were ruled by three brothers, members of the established local dynasty. Charters show them operating only with Offa's permission and licence: they are called 'regulus' ('kinglet') or even 'subregulus' ('sub-kinglet'), and by 777 one of them is referred to as 'dux'. After 'c'.780 there is no sign of an independent local dynasty of the Hwicce: the territory is ruled directly by Offa. About the other midland and Middle Anglian tribes whose territories collectively made up the kingdom of Greater Mercia, almost nothing is known; but it seems likely that any other surviving native dynasties were treated by Offa like the Hwiccean rulers. Offa seems to have been set on ambitiously extending the territory which he ruled directly, eschewing reliance on sub-kings with some pretence to royal dignity. 
The kingdoms of Sussex and the Hwicce were relatively small fry, but the wealthy kingdom of Kent was another matter. Offa took advantage of the turmoil which followed the death of King AEthelberht II in 762, and by 764 he was in a position to dispose directly of an estate in Kent, with merely the meek consent of a local ruler ('AS chart.', S 105). The situation seems to have changed in 776, when the Mercians and men of Kent met in battle at Otford in West Kent. The notice of the clash in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' frustratingly fails to mention the outcome. Later medieval historians assumed that Offa had triumphed, and produced circumstantial accounts of his victory; modern historians generally side with the view that this may have been a Mercian defeat, followed by a brief period of Kentish independence under King Ecgberht II. The circumstances leading up to the battle will never be known, but the fact that the clash took place in the west of Kent does suggest that Offa's forces were invading the kingdom, perhaps with the aim of ousting local rulers and imposing direct Mercian rule. This was certainly the ultimate result of Offa's pressure on Kent. The last known charter issued by a Kentish king in his own right is dated 784 ('AS chart.', S 38; the date may not be reliable); after this there is no trace of any local rulers, and Offa was in sole charge by 785. Thereafter Kent was entirely subject to Mercia until it was conquered by Ecgberht of Wessex in the ninth century, apart from a brief period of revolt which broke out on Offa's death. The leader of the revolt was 'King' Eadberht Praen, a former priest who may have been a member of the native dynasty. He is probably the man of the same name who was given protection by Charlemagne, along with other exiles who feared death at Offa's hands. 
It is difficult to make any confident pronouncements about Offa's relations with the other kingdoms of southern England. About the East Saxons there is little information: they still had their own kings in the ninth century, which would seem to show that Offa did not treat their territory as he did Kent, Sussex, and the west midlands (although it is possible that there was a hiatus and a restoration after Offa's death). The one concrete detail about the large and obscure kingdom of East Anglia is that in 794 Offa had the East Anglian king AEthelberht beheaded, apparently while he was attending the Mercian court. Hagiographical sources connected with AEthelberht (who was later venerated as a martyr) lay the blame on Offa's wife, Cynethryth (fl. c.770-798), but it seems likely that Offa had political reasons for ordering the execution. A little light is thrown on East Anglian affairs by the activities of the kingdom's moneyers in the second half of the eighth century: some struck coins for Offa, some for the local kings Beonna, AEthelberht, and Eadwald. At the least this shows that Offa exercised some kind of influence over East Anglia. 
Debate has raged over whether Offa was able to claim any degree of overlordship over the relatively powerful kingdom of Wessex. King Cynewulf ('r'. 757-86) seems to have operated fairly independently, although Offa was able to use his superior military muscle to seize control of disputed territory in the upper Thames valley ('ASC', s.a. 779; 'AS chart.', S 1258). Cynewulf's successor, Beorhtric (or Brihtric), may have been more vulnerable. He married Offa's daughter Eadburh and co-operated with him in the expulsion of Ecgberht, the future West Saxon king, in 789; whether this operation most benefited Beorhtric or Offa it is difficult to say. Some hint of subservience is betrayed in the three surviving charters of Beorhtric, where the royal styles are curiously humble and tentative ('AS chart.', S 267-9); in one instance he is 'king of this province', which contrasts noticeably with the forthright title 'King of the [West] Saxons' usually applied to his predecessors and successors. It seems very likely that Offa dominated his son-in-law. 
In 792 Offa married another daughter, AElfflaed, to the Northumbrian king AEthelred I ['see under 'Oswulf]. AEthelred had had a tempestuous reign (and was to be murdered in 796) and the alliance may have been arranged in order to ensure Offa's support; it seems unlikely that the Mercian would not have made capital from the situation. Northumbria had been politically unstable for decades, and there is a possibility that Offa may have interfered on earlier occasions. Whether he did harbour ambitions to be recognized as the pre-eminent overlord of northern England as well as the south is incapable of proof. Some significance has been seen in the fact that in a small number of Offa's diplomas he is styled 'rex Anglorum', 'king of the English'; in one, from 774, he is even 'rex totius Anglorum patriae', 'king of the whole fatherland of the English' ('AS chart.', S 111). It is a problem that none of the charters with this extravagant style survives in its contemporary state; all of them are later copies, and many of them are suspicious or downright fraudulent. In surviving contemporary documents, Offa is invariably simply 'rex Merciorum', 'king of the Mercians'. So perhaps the identification of Offa as 'rex Anglorum' owes more to his great reputation among later generations than to his own ambitions. Nevertheless, the more impressive royal style does occur in diplomas from several archives, and there is clearly a possibility that it was used by Offa in certain circumstances. It is interesting to note that Offa would seem to have owned a manuscript of Bede's 'Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum'; he may have been inspired by the careers of the Northumbrian kings Eadwine, Oswald, and Oswiu, who had authority over both north and south, to aspire to a more considerable status over all the English kingdoms. 
Offa owes much of his posthumous fame to a single monument: Offa's Dyke, a military earthwork on a huge scale, originally running from the north coast of Wales to the mouth of the Wye. No doubt the dyke was intended to counter insurgent raids from the Welsh, and it may also have played a part in the devastating onslaughts which Offa is known to have inflicted on the Welsh kingdoms in 778 and 784. Its military function is still much debated, and it is possible that its importance lay as much in its symbolic value as a demonstration of Offa's power: perhaps it is no coincidence that one of the remembered achievements of his heroic namesake, Offa of Angeln, was to have established a boundary between his own people and their neighbours. Huge resources of labour and capital must have been needed to complete Offa's Dyke, as well as sophisticated organization. Evidence about eighth-century royal administration is for the most part lacking. Offa's agents must have been able to make use of great quantities of tribute from conquered and subordinate kingdoms, and there is reason to think that the king's revenues were extended by the confiscation of estates previously controlled by ousted kings. In addition, Offa could make use of a system of military obligations set up in Mercia by his predecessor AEthelbald, according to which landowners were supposed to make provision for building and repairing bridges and fortifications, and to participate in military activity or arrange for substitutes to stand in for them. Some manipulation of these obligations may have helped build the dyke. Offa is known to have extended these military conditions to Kent in 792 ('AS chart.', S 134), and probably did the same in other subordinate kingdoms. Controlling resources of this kind would have enabled him to counter the threat of viking raiders, who were already appearing on the coasts at the end of his reign; at the same time they would have reinforced his military presence in subjugated kingdoms. It is unclear whether Offa's rule of the conquered provinces also involved the imposition of other Mercian laws. King Alfred refers to a law code of Offa as one of the sources for his own legal compilation. This has not survived, and modern scholars disagree on its nature; possibly it was merely Offa's endorsement of a body of ecclesiastical legislation, rather than a full secular code. 
Offa also seems to have exercised a level of control over the ports of southern England, which would have been the main conduits of luxury and overseas trade. The great emporium at London had been a Mercian monopoly since the earlier eighth century, and the important trading settlements in Kent fell into his hands in the 780s. His domination over English trade was such that he could use a total embargo on foreign merchants as a political tool. About 790 Alcuin referred in a letter to a dispute between the Frankish king Charlemagne and Offa which had led both kings to prohibit the passage of merchant ships. Possibly this is the same episode referred to in a ninth-century Frankish source, according to which the quarrel arose from failed marriage negotiations. A match was being arranged between Offa's daughter and Charlemagne's son; but Offa complicated matters by demanding a reciprocal match between his son, Ecgfrith ['see below'], and one of Charlemagne's daughters. There would have been serious questions of status involved here: by attempting to make the alliances exactly equal, the Mercian king was probably intent on ensuring that he stood on an equal footing with Charlemagne, and was not left open to pressure by the presence of a hostage daughter in the other's court. In a spectacular tantrum, Charlemagne barred all English merchants from his realm; Offa responded in kind. Relations had been patched up by 796, by which time the two kings were in correspondence on commercial matters. In response to a letter of Offa (which has not survived), Charlemagne wrote with guarantees for the safety and privileges of English merchants and pilgrims in his realm. He promised to make sure that Offa received some mysterious 'black stones' which he had requested, and in return asked that Offa do something about the length of the cloaks being sent from England. The commercial links between the two kingdoms are underlined by an increase in the weight of Offa's penny coinage in the 790s, which brought it into line with coins issued by Charlemagne. 
The last decade of Offa's reign was triumphant. In 787 he manoeuvred to ensure the succession of his son, 
Offa's wife, Queen Cynethryth, enjoyed an exalted status; her husband had coins struck in her name, and she witnessed his land charters on a regular basis from 'c'.770. The marriage probably did not take place much before this date, since their children do not seem to have reached marriageable age until the late 780s and 790s. Ecgfrith is the only known son, but there were at least three daughters: Eadburh, who married Beorhtric of Wessex; AElfflaed, who married AEthelred of Northumbria; and AEthelburh, an abbess who corresponded with Alcuin. The identification of AEthelburh with a namesake who was abbess of Fladbury Minster, in what is now Worcestershire, seems to be incorrect. During his career Offa founded many religious houses and gained control over others through conquest and other means. From Pope Hadrian he acquired a privilege guaranteeing the rights of his wife and offspring over these minsters. Cynethryth became abbess of Cookham when she was widowed, and controlled at least one other minster; AEthelburh was no doubt abbess of another family house. 
Offa died on 29 July 796, and Ecgfrith inherited the kingdom (the first time that a son had succeeded his father in Mercia for many generations). But he was dead before the end of the year and the kingship passed to Cenwulf, a very distant relative; it may be that Offa had made away with all nearer claimants. It was later claimed at St Albans Abbey that plans for Offa's burial there were thwarted by Ecgfrith, and that he was actually laid to rest in a chapel near Bedford on the River Ouse, his body later being lost. The minster at St Albans was reputedly founded and endowed by Offa after he miraculously discovered the remains of the eponymous Romano-British martyr, an episode which naturally provoked considerable interest in the Mercian king's career among later historiographers at the abbey. One of the products generated from this was 'Vita duorum Offarum', probably written by Matthew Paris 'c'.1250, which enthusiastically invents parallels between the life of the Mercian king and that of his heroic namesake. Matthew and other St Albans historians who wrote on Offa, notably Roger of Wendover, may have had access to a tract on Offa which may have included some genuine details about his life and his relations with St Albans; but it is tedious and ultimately unrewarding to attempt to extract any worthwhile information from the essentially legendary material presented in the thirteenth-century sources. Offa's actual burial place is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 20568


Offley, Sir Thomas (c.1505-1582), mayor of London, born at Stafford, was the eldest son of William Offley, a native of Staffordshire who became sheriff of Chester in 1517; his mother's maiden name was Cradock. Sent to London at the age of twelve, Offley studied under William Lily, the first master of St Paul's School, and sang in the choir there. He was apprenticed to Lily's friend John Nichols, a merchant taylor and merchant of the staple at Calais; and in due course Offley married Nichols's daughter and heir, Joan (died 1578). Offley rose through the ranks to become master of the Merchant Taylors' Company in 1547 and a prosperous wool exporter. In 1549 he served as alderman of Portstoken ward and translated to Aldgate on 22 May 1550; in 1553 he was sheriff of London, and in 1556 became lord mayor. 
Taking his oath as mayor on 28 October 1556, Offley went by water to Westminster, accompanied by other community leaders and the bachelors from his company. Queen Mary knighted him at Greenwich on 7 February 1557 along with William Chester, alderman. Clode posits that while some of Offley's fellow guildsmen 'suffered under evil times', Offley 'carried laws into effect'; however, Offley's civic service during the reign of Mary I did not prevent him from being 'an advocate of the new learning' (Clode, 2.144; 1.150). Offley's mayoralty introduced the institution of night-bellmen, but is better remembered for the 'burning fevers' that killed seven aldermen within two months. During Offley's year of tenure Philip II of Spain came to Greenwich to visit his wife, the queen, and the royal couple rode through London. On 23 March 1557 Offley met them at the Tower wharf and escorted them through the city amid great fanfare and pomp. That same year he attended the memorial for the king of Denmark on 28 August as the city's chief mourner. 
Following his varied civic office-holding, Offley was mayor of the staple in 1560, 1564-5, and 1569. He helped draw up a new book of ordinances for the staplers in 1565. He was also a charter member of the Muscovy Company and, by the first years of Elizabeth I's reign, was among the wealthiest men in London. None the less, there is little extant evidence of his business activities. He obtained former chantry property in Wolverhampton by a grant from Philip Bold in 1556, and in 1578 was still bringing '800 tod of wool by water to Chard'. 
Offley lived in Lime Street, then in the parish of St Dionis Backchurch. While an alderman for Lime Street he successfully asserted the ward's rights over the church and grounds of St Augustine on the Wall in a dispute with Aldgate ward. He defended the interests of the Merchant Taylors' Company before a parliamentary committee in a confrontation with the Clothworkers' Company in 1566 over jurisdictional questions. His association with the Merchant Taylors' continued long after his death, as ten members of his family joined the guild between 1551 and 1628, including his sons Thomas, Henry, and Richard. He was godfather to Alderman John White's son Thomas, baptized at St Bartholomew by the Exchange on 3 February 1561. 
Offley's wife, Joan, predeceased him, together with three of their sons, including the first-born, Hugh; only one, Henry ('b'. 'c'.1536), survived Offley. Izaak Walton dedicated his 'Compleat Angler' to Offley's grandson Sir John Offley of Madeley. Offley died in London on 29 August 1582 (Stow says 1580) and was buried at his testamentary instruction in the church of St Andrew Undershaft near the tomb of his wife. He made many magnanimous bequests in his will, dated 5 August 1580; half of his estate, plus $200 deducted from the other half, was given in charity to be administered by his executors. Among his donations were gifts to the poor of St Andrew Undershaft, to the sick in London hospitals, to destitute prisoners incarcerated throughout London, and to impoverished students at Oxford and Cambridge. Despite his munificence, Offley is remembered for the simplicity of his private tastes in a popular rhyme: '
Offley three dishes had of daily rost, 

an egg, an apple, and (the third) a toast. 
('Diary of Henry Machyn', 353)' 



@@@@@


doc= 20569


Offor, George (1787-1864), literary editor and book collector, was born in the liberty of the Tower of London Without on 30 July 1787, the son of George Offor and his wife, Mary. He started in business as a bookseller at 2 Postern Row, Tower Hill, London, from which he retired with a competency. By the advice of his friend J. S. C. S. Frey, he learned Hebrew, and afterwards studied Greek and Latin. His knowledge of sixteenth- and seventeenth-century English literature, especially of theology, became very extensive, and he assembled a very large collection of early printed English 'Bibles', psalters, and testaments. In religion a Baptist, Offor was an enthusiastic admirer of John Bunyan, and gathered together a unique collection of Bunyan's scattered writings and of early editions of 'The Pilgrim's Progress'. An interest in William Tyndale took him to Brussels in search of details of his martyrdom. During the revolution of 1830, while near Vilvoord, Offor was taken prisoner by a detachment of Dutch troops and was briefly detained in the prison built on the ruins of the castle at Vilvoord where Tyndale had been confined. Offor, who was a justice of the peace, was married to Sarah Ann (1806/7-1873) and had at least five daughters and three sons. He died at his home, Grove House, Grove Street, South Hackney, on 4 August 1864, and was buried in Abney Park cemetery. 
Offor's biographical work on Bunyan, which drew on much new material he had found in the State Paper Office, was marred by a cumbrous style and bitter polemical spirit, and has long been superseded. His bibliography of Bunyan, prefixed to a three-volume collected edition of Bunyan's 'Works' (1853), remained useful until replaced by F. M. Harrison's 'Bibliography' (1932). Offor's 1853 edition continued for even longer -- with all its faults -- to be the sole collection of Bunyan's writings. It was from 1976 replaced by the Oxford edition, whose general editor, Roger Sharrock, justly commented on Offor's work as containing 'an amount of painstaking if amateur bibliographical information, and a verbose and often melodramatic evangelical commentary'. His other Bunyan publications included a careful reprint (1848) of the first edition of 'The Pilgrim's Progress' with notes of all subsequent authorial adjustments. 
Offor's library, with nearly 4000 literary items and including more than 500 Bunyan rarities, was destined for sale at Sothebys over eleven days from 27 June 1865 onwards, but much was lost in a fire at the auction rooms on 29 June. About a thousand volumes salvaged from the blaze were sold by Puttick and Simpson the following year. Many of the surviving Bunyan items came into the possession of Sir Leicester Harmsworth (sale, Sothebys, February 1947); the Offor family's portion of the remainder was presented in 1964 by his grandson Richard (1882-1964), sometime librarian of the University of Leeds, to the Elstow Moot Hall, in the village of Bunyan's birth, and is now in the charge of the Bedford Central Library. 
Offor compiled an introductory Hebrew reader (1812) and produced a revised edition of the Hebrew psalter (1820). A reprint of Tyndale's 1526 'New Testament', with an introductory memoir (1836), was more substantial. He edited several other protestant reprints and projected a reprint of Coverdale's 'Bible'. His collections towards a history of the English 'Bible' between 1525 and 1679 are in the British Library (Add. MSS 26670-26674). The British Library also holds many printed volumes bearing Offor's copious annotations. 


@@@@@


doc= 20570


Offord, Andrew (b. c.1305, d. in or before 1358), diplomat, was the younger brother of John Offord (c.1290-1349). The family may have come from Offord in Huntingdonshire. He was educated at Oxford, being styled 'magister' by 1325, and DCL in 1340. His legal acumen was recognized by Bishop Hempnall, who appointed him joint vicar-general, and later chancellor, in the diocese of Worcester. A career clerk, Offord was supported by income from benefices which included, successively, canonries of Salisbury, St Paul's in London, and York. The king granted him the subdeanery of York in 1348, but this was revoked a year later, when he received dispensation to hold the provostship of Wells, together with the archdeaconry of Middlesex, a canonry of Beverley, and the benefice of Over in the Ely diocese. 
With his brother's promotion to be chancellor of England in 1345, Offord became a chancery clerk. In the following year he was appointed a member of the king's council. He had already embarked on a diplomatic career with a commission on 20 May 1343 to treat with the French ambassadors before Pope Clement VI. Abroad for most of June, he returned with a virulent letter from the pope denouncing royal councillors for infringement of ecclesiastical liberties, an allusion to Edward III's attempts to inhibit papal provisions, particularly of aliens, to English benefices. Returning to the curia, with his brother John, he reported in November to the council on the unsuccessful negotiations with France, before being reappointed as an envoy in April 1344. On 1 July 1345 Offord was made a member of the regency council of Lionel of Antwerp, the king's second son, while Edward III was in the Low Countries (3-26 July). During that year he was also engaged on a further mission to the curia in Avignon, and on another to the north, then plagued by Scottish raids. Later that year, and in the spring of 1346, he was in Spain as proctor of Joan of the Tower, for her marriage contract with Pedro, the infante of Castile. He was subsequently in Flanders for consultation with two cardinals sent by the pope to negotiate between the English and French kings, and attended Edward III during his visit to France in 1346-7. 
In March 1348 Offord was one of those appointed to accompany Joan of the Tower on her journey to Castile, while between 23 March and 17 April 1349 he was negotiating with the French at Calais. He was there again in May, but returned to England in time to be present at the death of his brother, the chancellor, at Tottenham Court, on 20 May 1349. The next day he delivered the great seal to the king at Woodstock. Between August 1349 and the early months of 1353 Offord was mainly abroad treating with French and Spanish envoys, with the count of Flanders, and with the duke of Bavaria. On 4 August 1353 he was appointed one of three keepers of the great seal and in the parliaments of 1354-5 was a trier of petitions. Further embassies to France followed, and by 18 November 1358 he had died at Avignon. 


@@@@@


doc= 20571


Offord, John (c.1290-1349), diplomat and administrator, was a brother of Andrew Offord (b. c.1305, d. in or before 1358) and possibly a kinsman of the John Offord who died in 1375. Presumably born in Offord in Huntingdonshire, where in 1332 he was to have custody of lands pending the majority of the heir, he was a bachelor fellow of Merton College, Oxford, in 1313, and fellow in 1315. He had probably vacated his fellowship by 1322 by when he was MA. Subsequently he studied law, perhaps at Cambridge if, as seems likely, he is identifiable as the man recorded in the register of Bishop John Salmon of Norwich. He was BCL by 1327 and DCL by 1331. 
Offord is termed king's clerk in 1328, but between 1332 and 1336 he appears intermittently as dean of the court of arches. In common with other well-qualified lawyers he soon found employment in diplomatic service. Appointed on 5 November 1334 to renew the truce with France, he continued to serve on various missions during 1337-8, and in October 1338, following the breakdown of negotiations, he accompanied Edward III to the Low Countries. From there he was sent to the curia in Avignon, where he was resident proctor for a year from May 1339, and where with William Bateman, dean of Lincoln, and John Thoresby he presented the king's case against Archbishop John Stratford, using arguments anticipating those of the 'libellus famosus' of the following year. He was also entrusted with securing dispensation for the marriage of Hugh Despenser, son of Edward II's favourite, with Elizabeth Montagu -- for the quieting of former quarrels between their families. In 1341 he was engaged in missions both to the French court and to Edward's allies or prospective allies, the dukes of Brabant and Gueldres, the marquess of Juliers, and the count of Hainault, while in 1342 he negotiated with the French ambassadors at Aunteyn near Tournai, and in April to May was appointed principal commissioner for negotiating a truce. He returned to France in June at the request of the papal envoy. 
Between October 1342 and March 1343 Offord was with the king during the latter's indecisive intervention in Brittany and was involved in negotiating the truce of Malestroit (19 January 1343). At the Easter parliament of 1343 the king ordered the annulment of the articles of 1341 against Stratford, and directed Offord to bring the documents into the chamber for destruction. In August he and his brother Andrew were members of an embassy to Avignon. This was to negotiate a final peace with the French envoys, subject to the 'private arbitration' of Pope Clement VI -- who hoped to unite the French and English in a crusade -- and to renew the long-standing request for a dispensation permitting marriage between the prince of Wales and Margaret, daughter of the duke of Brabant. At the beginning of October 1344 Offord's letters incorporating the pope's proposals were discussed at a secret royal council. In the event little was achieved. The claim of Edward III to the French throne doomed the peace negotiations from the start, the pope's reluctance blocked the dispensation, and the continental alliance against France rapidly disintegrated. Offord was the last of the disappointed English envoys to leave. Two years later he was engaged with William Edington and John Stratford in raising loans for Edward's expedition to the continent. 
Although especially respected as a diplomat, Offord also held high office at home, acting as keeper of the privy seal from 4 June 1342 until after 29 September 1344. While with the king in Brittany during 1342-3 he was entrusted with the great seal, which thus for the first time since 1340 returned to clerical hands. He was appointed chancellor on 26 October 1345, an office he held until his death in 1349, and with Edington, the treasurer, he shared responsibility for government during Edward's absence in France in 1346-7. As might be anticipated, a man so constantly engaged in royal business benefited from royal patronage and papal provision. Offord's first benefice was Deepdale rectory in Norfolk, to which he was admitted as a 'clerk' on 21 April 1316. In 1327 he was provided to a canonry of St Paul's with expectation of a prebend, and secured that of Totenhall by exchange in 1330, at which time he was also canon and prebendary of St Chad's, Shrewsbury. He was collated to a canonry of Lincoln with Liddington prebend in 1331, and the king granted him the long-disputed Leighton Buzzard prebend in 1342, though he failed to gain possession. He likewise failed to secure the archdeaconry of Chester in 1330, but was archdeacon of Ely between 1335 and 1344. Royal nomination to the deanery of York in 1343 proved unsuccessful owing to a papal provision, but in the following year he was himself provided to the deanery of Lincoln, notwithstanding his canonries and prebends of York, Lincoln, London, Wells, Salisbury, and Hereford. On the vacancy at Canterbury following John Stratford's death on 23 August 1348, the chapter of Christchurch elected Thomas Bradwardine, but Offord was provided to the see at the king's wish by bulls dated 24 September 1348 -- four days before the election. The temporalities were restored on 14 December 1348 but before he could be consecrated he died, on 20 May 1349 at Tottenham, probably of the plague. The Rochester chronicler William Dene described him as being by then a weak and paralytic man, who had uselessly borrowed a great sum of money only to die and leave his creditors impoverished, and who was buried secretly in his cathedral church. 


@@@@@


doc= 20572


Domhnall O Fithcheallaigh (fl. 1505), was the author of some annals in Gaelic, dedicated to Florence O'Mahony. These 'Irish Annals' were seen in manuscript by Sir James Ware in London in 1626, but are now lost. 


@@@@@


doc= 20573


O Fithcheallaigh, Muiris (d. 1513), theologian and archbishop of Tuam, was a native either of Clonfert, co. Galway, or of Baltimore, co. Cork, and became a conventual Franciscan friar about 1475. He subsequently studied at Oxford. The chapter at Cremona named him regent of studies at the Franciscan school in Milan in 1488. He became regent master of theology at Padua in 1491, and continued to lecture publicly on Scotistic theology there until at least 1505. He took part in the deposition of the minister-general, AEgidius Delphinus, in the first general chapter of the conventuals, held at Rome in 1506. On 26 June in the same year he was provided to the archbishopric of Tuam by Pope Julius II, who consecrated him in Rome. He continued to reside in Italy, and was present at the Fifth Lateran Council in 1512, signing the acts of the first two sessions. At length he departed for Ireland, but died at Galway on 25 May 1513, and was buried at the Franciscan friary there. 
O Fithcheallaigh is chiefly known as the editor of many of the works of Duns Scotus. He edited, with omissions, chapter headings, expansions, and explanatory notes, the following treatises attributed to the Doctor Subtilis: 'De primo principio'; 'Theoremata'; 'Expositio in XII libros Metaphysicorum'; 'Quaestiones in Metaphysicam Aristotelis'; 'Commentarium in libros I et II sententiarum'; 'De formalitatibus'; and 'Collationes'. These were published between 1497 and 1517. Although his additions to Scotus's own words make his editions at times problematic, his explanatory notes are often very helpful, since Scotus himself is frequently unclear. O Fithcheallaigh was not only an editor, but also an expositor, critic, and author. Among his expositions, published between 1497 and 1519, are 'Annotationes in quaestiones metaphysicales Scoti'; 'Expositio in quaestiones metaphysicales Scoti'; and 'Expositio quaestionum Doctoris Subtilis in quinque universalia Porphyrii' (or 'Expositio in quaestiones dialecticas J. Duns Scoti'). He wrote a short treatise entitled 'Enchyridion fidei' (or 'De rerum contingentia et divina predestinatione'), dedicated to Gerald Fitzgerald, eighth earl of Kildare (died 1513), which was published at Venice in 1505. He also produced, while lecturing at Padua, a version in hexameters of the four books of the 'Sentences', called 'Compendium veritatum' (Venice, 1505). Extending himself beyond the works of Scotus, O Fithcheallaigh also edited the 'Expositio in Metaphysicam' of Antonius Andreae, and began an edition of the works of Francois de Meyronnes (finally published in 1520). The 'Distinctiones ordine alphabetico' sometimes attributed to him were the work of a Friar Maurice of the thirteenth century. 
A relative, 


@@@@@


doc= 20574


O'Flaherty, Roderic (1627x30-1716x18), historiographer, was probably born at Moycullen Castle on the western shore of Lough Corrib, co. Galway, the only son among the five children of Aodh mac Ruaidhrigh (died 1631), chief of one of the principal O'Flaherty septs, and Elizabeth Darcy (died 1636), an offspring of one of the 'tribes' of Galway. When his mother died he was made a ward of the crown. Despite a good deal of (frequently confused) speculation on the subject, virtually nothing is known of his early years and education. Given his later friendship with them, however, it seems likely that O'Flaherty had close contact with Archdeacon John Lynch and Dubhaltach Mac Fhirbhisigh before those scholars left Galway as the city succumbed to the Cromwellian onslaught in the early 1650s. 
O'Flaherty married a daughter of Colonel Murchadh na dTuagh O'Flaherty in 1652 and in the following year obtained a decree -- on the grounds of 'innocency' -- from the Athlone and Loughrea commissioners of delinquency of 'a considerable portion' of his hereditary estate, but the heavy contributions levied by the Cromwellian regime virtually nullified this partial reversal of the confiscation of his lands. Although in 1677 he obtained by legal proceedings a further small part of the estate of which he had been dispossessed (a mere 500 acres of poor land), he became increasingly impoverished throughout the remainder of his long life. 
In September 1665 O'Flaherty wrote the learned 'Letter on the chronology of Irish history' to the exiled John Lynch; his place of writing, 'Armorica Galviensi', indicates that he was already residing in Cois Fhairrge -- perhaps at Park, near Spiddal, where he was to end his days. The letter, which was published twenty years later, suggests that he and Lynch had been engaged in a lengthy correspondence on the subject of Irish chronology. The next extant item of his to which a definite date can be assigned was written in 1682; in this, a brief communication to one Robert Downing, he rebuts allegations by Dr Edmund Borlase about the number of protestant settlers said to have been massacred at the outbreak of the Ulster rising of 1641. One of O'Flaherty's most celebrated works is his 'Description of Iar Connacht', written early in 1684 when William Molyneux of Dublin was collecting materials relating to Ireland for a work entitled 'The English atlas' being planned (though not ultimately effected) by the London bookseller Moses Pitt. In the event O'Flaherty's 'Description' did not appear in print until James Hardiman issued an annotated edition in 1846. 
The year 1685 saw the publication of O'Flaherty's 'magnum opus', a substantial book in Latin entitled 'Ogygia, seu, Rerum Hibernicarum chronologia', on which the author had clearly been working since the 1660s at least. Characterized as 'a learned treatise, compiled from manuscript sources... a substantial and significant book... patently the work of a learned man' and 'the first scholarly presentation of Irish history to the English public', the work was dedicated to James, duke of York, who by the time the book appeared had succeeded to the throne as James II. Its publication drew a sharp retort from the Scottish controversialist Sir George Mackenzie and to this O'Flaherty penned a reply (in English); entitled 'Ogygia Vindicated Against the Objections of Sir George Mackenzie', this work did not appear in print until 1775. Another work, entitled 'Ogygia Christiana: annals of the Christian ages to the dissolution of the Irish monarchy', survived in manuscript into the nineteenth century but is now lost. O'Flaherty saw one other work of his in print during his lifetime. This was a Latin poem celebrating the birth in June 1688 of James II's son, later known as the Pretender. 
O'Flaherty's contribution to William Molyneux's abortive project led to a lasting friendship, and a lengthy correspondence, between the two. Shortly after Molyneux's untimely death in 1698, O'Flaherty came into contact with the Welsh antiquary and collector of manuscripts Edward Lhuyd. Some thirty letters written by O'Flaherty to Lhuyd between 1702 and 1708 still survive. Lhuyd, in correspondence with others, alludes to the Irish scholar's impoverished state; already, in 1696-7, he had spent time in Galway gaol, presumably for an undischarged debt. O'Flaherty refers poignantly to his situation as 'a banished man within the bounds of my native soil; a spectator of others enriched by my birth-right'. A celebrated description of him by Samuel Molyneux (son of his old friend William), who visited him in 1709, states that he: 'lives very old, in a miserable condition at Park... his ill-fortune has stripped him of [his old Irish manuscripts] as well as his other goods, so that he has nothing now left but some few pieces of his own writing, and a few old rummish books of history, printed. (A. Smith, 'A journey to Connaught -- April, 1709', 'Miscellany of the Irish Archaeological Society', 1846, 171)' O'Flaherty also left extensive, and often valuable, annotation in several Irish manuscripts which passed through his hands. Among the most notable of these are Dubhaltach Mac Fhirbhisigh's autograph copy of the 'Chronicum Scotorum', and one of the autograph volumes of the annals of the four masters (TCD). 
In his declining years O'Flaherty was embarrassed by the activities of his son-in-law Edward Tyrrell, who gained notoriety as a priest-hunter and was executed in 1713 on a charge of bigamy. A tradition that his son, Michael, 'was a fool' seems at odds with the fact that the latter engaged in a lengthy and ultimately successful lawsuit to recover some of his ancestral lands from Richard Martin, esquire, who had retained them following the proceedings of 1677 in which O'Flaherty had some of his estate restored. The younger O'Flaherty's 'plaint' of February 1717, as part of the lawsuit, refers to himself as being the son and heir of 'Roger Flaherty, late of Parke' -- which seems to suggest that his father was dead by that date. On the other hand, Walter Harris, writing in 1746, declared that O'Flaherty died on 8 April 1718, in his eighty-ninth year. 
Roderic O'Flaherty features prominently in local west Galway folklore down to modern times. While some of the tales relating to him are rather far-fetched, one that was recorded more than a century and a half ago may contain more than a grain of truth. This is to the effect that his son, Michael, buried the venerable scholar under the floor of his own house at Park, as a means of strengthening his hold on the ancestral estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 20575


Oftfor (d. c.699), bishop of Worcester, was a pupil of Abbess Hild of Whitby (died 680), and studied the 'Bible' in her monasteries at Whitby and Hartlepool. 'Being anxious to reach still greater heights', he proceeded to Canterbury to study with the learned Theodore of Tarsus (archbishop from 669 to 690), before going on to Rome, 'which in those days was considered to be an act of great merit' -- as Bede adds, perhaps revealing a later scepticism (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 4.23). Oftfor's name, which means 'the much travelled', was no doubt a nickname alluding to these journeys. On his return to England he went to the kingdom of the Hwicce, which was then ruled by Osric ('fl'. 674-679), and spent a long period preaching there. As Bosel, the first bishop of the Hwicce (whose see was at Worcester), became incapacitated by ill health, Oftfor was consecrated in his place by St Wilfrid, bishop of the Middle Angles from 691 or 692 until 702 or 703, at the command of AEthelred, king of the Mercians, soon after the death of Archbishop Theodore in 690. Oftfor was not the first of Hild's pupils to be appointed to the see, for another one, Tatfrith, had been appointed before Bosel but died before his consecration. This was perhaps about 675, when the Bath foundation charter refers to Osric's establishment of the see (in pursuit of the Synod of Hertford, 672 or 673) yet notably lacks the attestation of a bishop of Worcester. Tatfrith's replacement may have been delayed and Bosel may not have become bishop until 679, the traditional date for the foundation of the see. Perhaps Oftfor had originally come to Osric's kingdom at Theodore's instigation and as a substitute for his confrere Tatfrith; but, if so, there is no clue as to why he was initially passed over in favour of Bosel. 
Charters show that Oftfor was involved in the rapid growth of monasticism in his diocese. For example, in 693 or later he witnessed a grant of land to an Abbess Cuthswith to establish a monastery at 'Peni[n]tanham' (probably Inkberrow); and according to another charter AEthelred of the Mercians granted Fladbury to Oftfor to re-establish monastic life there, 'for the forgiveness of my sins and those of my late wife Osthryth (died 697)' ('AS chart.', S 76). Possibly Fladbury (perhaps 'Flaede's monastery') takes its name from Osthryth's sister AElfflaed (died 'c'.714), who received her education from Hild at Whitby, and could perhaps have moved south with her sister, before returning to Whitby in the 680s. The statement of John Bale (died 1563) that Oftfor wrote homilies (cited in 'DNB') is probably merely an inference from Bede's account of Oftfor as a scholar and preacher. He has left no known literary remains, but he is possibly the link that explains why certain details about Gregory the Great in the Whitby life of that saint recur in the writings of Bishop Werferth of Worcester and of John of Worcester. Moreover, it may well have been Oftfor who brought the fifth-century Italian manuscript of Jerome (Wurzburg, Universitatsbibliothek, MS M.p.th.q.2), which bears the 'ex libris' of the above mentioned Abbess Cuthswith, from Rome to Worcester. Oftfor's 692 obit in John of Worcester's chronicle is not to be preferred to the evidence of the Fladbury charter cited above ('AS chart.', S 76) that Oftfor was still alive in 697. Evesham sources, admittedly unreliable, suggest that his successor Ecgwine was already in place in 699; hence the ''c'.699' obit above. 


@@@@@


doc= 20576


Ogborne, David (d. 1800/01), artist, was married and settled before 1740 at Chelmsford, Essex, where he is described in the parish register as a 'painter' or 'limner'. With his first wife, Ruth, he had four sons and three daughters. His only surviving son, John Ogborne (1755-1837), was an engraver. Ogborne gained a certain reputation by his portraits of local provincial monsters, such as a winged fish caught at Battle Bridge, and a calf with six legs produced at Great Baddow; but he also painted a portrait of Edward Bright, a grocer of Maldon, Essex, who weighed 431/2 stone, and died on 10 November 1750, aged twenty-nine. This portrait was engraved by James MacArdell and published on 1 January 1750. Another of his portraits was of Thomas Wood, the miller of Billericay. 
Ogborne is better known as the painter of 'An exact perspective view of Dunmow, late the priory in the county of Essex, with a representation of the ceremony and procession in that manor, on Thursday the 20 June 1751', engraved by C. Mosley and published in January 1752. It represents the town's flitch of bacon ceremony, and shows in the foreground a portrait, more or less caricatured, of the then vicar of Dunmow. Another well-known Essex print by Ogborne is 'A perspective view of the county town of Chelmsford in Essex, with the judges procession on the day of entrance attended by the high sheriff and his officers', engraved by T. Ryland and published on 2 August 1762. 
Ogborne also wrote some poetry and plays; however, only one play was ever published, locally, 'The Merry Midnight's Mistake, or, Comfortable Conclusion: a New Comedy' (1765). The prologue and epilogue were written by George Saville Carey, and the piece was produced, with indifferent success, by a company of ladies and gentlemen at the Saracen's Head inn, Chelmsford. Ogborne died at Chelmsford, and was buried in the churchyard there on 6 January 1801. 


@@@@@


doc= 20577


Ogborne, Elizabeth (1763/4-1853), antiquary, was, or claimed to be, the daughter of Sir John Eliot, first baronet (1733x6?-1786), of Peebles, from 1778 physician to the prince of Wales; her mother was Jane Jackson, a tea dealer in Tottenham Court Road Terrace, London. She was almost certainly illegitimate, and seems to have lived with her mother until her marriage, on 20 March 1790 at St Pancras, London, to John Ogborne (1755-1837). Ogborne, an artist and engraver, was the fourth and only surviving son of David Ogborne, a painter. The couple had one son, John Fauntleroy (1793-1813), and lived at 58 Great Portland Street, London, where they housed Euphemia Boswell, the eccentric daughter of Johnson's biographer. 
After their son died in 1813, the Ogbornes attempted to assuage their grief by pursuing an interest in the history of Essex, John Ogborne's native county. Elizabeth prepared the first volume of a county history, while her husband contributed engravings to illustrate it. The antiquary Thomas Leman offered much assistance, and contributed a short account of Essex antiquities to the volume; Joseph Strutt is also believed to have helped the Ogbornes. The first volume of 'The History of Essex' was apparently published in 1817 (although the date of 1814 appears on the title-page), and contained descriptions of parishes in the hundreds of Becontree, Waltham, and Ongar, and the liberty of Havering. Beautifully illustrated, and written in a simple and informative style, it later won the approval of the 'Gentleman's Magazine', where it was described as 'creditable to both the artist and the author' ('GM', 220). However, the lack of public response and the straitened means of the Ogbornes (they became pensioners of the National Benevolent Institution in later years) prevented the publication of any further volumes. 
Elizabeth Ogborne died on 22 December 1853 at 58 Great Portland Street. She was described by Edward A. Fitch as a little woman, old-fashioned in her style of dress and 'very precise and particular'. He dwelt on her 'very high and proud spirit' (Fitch, 140), her love of display, and her obvious learning. This last quality was displayed in her papers, which met with a sad fate after her death, when they fell into the hands of her servant, the wife of a marine-store dealer. Many of them had already been used as waste paper before the remainder were purchased by a passing antiquary, E. J. Sage. They contained unpublished material on Rochford and other Essex hundreds, including many extracts from the works of earlier Essex historians and the Harleian and other manuscripts. 


@@@@@


doc= 20578


Ogborne, John (1755-1837), engraver, was born on 22 July 1755, and baptized at Chelmsford, Essex, on 6 August, the fourth of seven children but the only surviving son of David Ogborne (d. 1800/01), an artist, and his first wife, Ruth Howe. He was apprenticed to William Wynne Ryland and was later one of the stipple engravers who worked for him. He may himself have taught his sister Mary Ogborne ('b'. 1764), who was an equally capable stipple-engraver and produced plates after William Redmore Bigg and William Hamilton for John Raphael Smith and John Thane. 
One of John Ogborne's earliest employers was John Thane, for whom he engraved a number of stipples during the 1780s as well as contributing portraits to his 'British autography: a collection of facsimilies of the handwriting of royal and illustrious personages, with their authentic portraits' (1788-93). After Thane's death in 1818 Ogborne engraved a portrait of him by Bigg (1819) which was added to later editions of 'British Autography'. He did similar work for other printsellers, such as Thomas Macklin and James Birchall. Ogborne also worked for Messrs Boydell, engraving a fine plate of 'Mrs Jordan in the Character of the Country Girl' (1788) after Romney, three plates after Richard Westall, and four large plates for the 'Shakspeare Gallery'. Two of his prints reproduced paintings by Josiah Boydell (1794, 1795) and proved, through no fault of Ogborne's, to be two of the worst in the series. The other two, after Robert Smirke (1791, 1801), were much better. 
Ogborne's marriage to Elizabeth Jackson (1763/4-1853) ['see 'Ogborne, Elizabeth] probably took place on 20 March 1790 at St Pancras Church. They resided at her house, 58 Great Portland Street, Westminster, from where Osborne published a few of his own prints, including 'Rural Misfortune' (1793), after Bigg. 
Their son, John Fauntleroy Ogborne (1793-1813), was a student at Middlesex Hospital and had already qualified in surgery and dressing in 1813 when he died in May from blood poisoning contracted during a dissection. After his death Elizabeth began work on her history of Essex, to which Ogborne contributed drawings and engravings. 
In 1828 Ogborne exhibited a picture at the British Institution and in 1837 another at the British Artists in Suffolk Street, but he died in November that year, a pensioner of the National Benevolent Institution, and was buried at Tottenham Court Road burial-ground on 13 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 20579


Ogden, James (1718-1802), poet and author, was born in Manchester, and while his parentage remains to be discovered, it is known that he was one of at least three children and the cousin of the well-known author the Revd Samuel Ogden. His childhood and personal life remain equally obscure, though it can be determined that he fathered at least one son, William Ogden (1753-1822). It seems that the Ogden family had a close connection with the local cotton industry in the Manchester district and thus James found early employment as a fustian shearer, before travelling as a young man to Europe where he visited France and Germany, spent a year in the Netherlands at either The Hague or Leiden, and witnessed the battle of Dettingen on 23 June 1743. 
On his return to England, Ogden soon took up a post as master of a school in connection with the Manchester collegiate church, and it was probably about this time that he secured the patronage of the first Lord Ducie. Ogden was not a physically imposing man, later described by William E. A. Axon as 'rather under the middle height, with spare but sinewy frame, a thin face, ruddy complexion, and large aquiline nose' (Ogden, 'Manchester', xv), but he had a 'cheerful disposition, and natural urbanity, [which] endeared him to a large circle of acquaintance' ('Manchester Gazette'). He maintained well-defined and strong opinions on diverse subjects: he was an advocate of the abolition of the slave trade, held a peculiar dislike for what he called the 'modern game' of cricket (Ogden, 'Archery', 55), and had a passion for archery which saw him distinguished as an officer in a Manchester archery society. 
By 1772 Ogden had returned to his former trade as a fustian shearer, continuing well into the 1790s in this line of employment, but it was his literary pursuits which over the years brought him fame. The 'Manchester Gazette', in an obituary notice, stated that he was 'a person well known in the literary world', and although the 'Manchester Directory' designates him as a poet for the first time in 1797, Ogden's first publications appeared some thirty-five years earlier with 'An Epistle on Poetical Composition' (1762), a poem entitled 'On the Crucifixion and Resurrection' (1762) which was an orthodox comment on Jesus Christ published specifically for release on Good Friday, and 'The British Lion Rous'd, or, Acts of the British Worthies, a Poem in Nine Books' (1762) which was published by subsidy of 600 subscribers and is indicative of the kind of recognition Ogden's literary talents received. As a poet Ogden was more consistently productive than prolific in the years to follow, with his writings presenting fairly standard, albeit poetically elegant, observations on the subjects he discussed. In 1774 he produced 'A Poem, on the Museum, at Alkrington, Belonging to Ashton Lever', followed some years later by 'The Revolution, an Epic Poem' (1790) which presents William III as a hero and is devoted to the third Lord Ducie, nephew of Ogden's former patron; 'Archery: a Poem' (1793), a composite volume praising the sport of archery as well as a concluding piece, in recognition of his subscribers' interests, on agricultural pursuits; and 'Emanuel, or, Paradise Regained: an Epic Poem' (1797). Ogden's two most interesting and important poetical compositions appeared some twelve years apart, the first being 'Poem, Moral, Philosophical and Religious, in which is Considered the Nature of Man' (1788), which was published anonymously. Arguably his finest poem, this work encompasses by way of subject the grand moral scheme of providing all the women of Manchester and its districts with good husbands, this to be achieved by a reform in domestic economy; Ogden also advocates a gradual abolition of the slave trade. His other significant work was also his last: 'Sans Culotte and Jacobine, an Hudibrastic Poem' (1800). This is a staunchly conservative piece of writing which rejects calls for political reform, particularly universal suffrage and annual parliaments, on the grounds that such reforms would promote corruption and bribery in the world of politics. Ogden also argues that political changes would ultimately destroy the industrial spirit of the British nation by diverting the attention of the people away from work towards politics. For these reasons Ogden goes on to oppose the whig calls for Manchester to be represented in parliament. The author further confirms his conservatism in a prefixed song dedicated to the volunteer forces which defended church and state during the 1790s against radical enthusiasts. Ironically the work was published by Ogden's son William who later distinguished himself as an ardent radical reformer. 
Ogden's efforts as a writer of prose were less voluminous, but no less significant, with 'A Description of Manchester', originally published anonymously in 1783 and reprinted in 1887 as 'Manchester a Hundred Years Ago' with an introduction by William E. A. Axon, and 'A concise narrative of all the actions, in which the British forces were engaged, during the present war, on the continent of Europe' (1797). Ogden resided for many years at 27 Wood Street, with his son living in later years at 26 Wood Street, until his death in Manchester, on 13 August 1802, at the age of eighty-four. While it is understood that he was buried in the grounds of the Manchester collegiate church, the location of his grave remains to be discovered. 


@@@@@


doc= 20580


Ogden, Jonathan Robert (1806-1882), composer, son of Robert Ogden (died 1816), merchant, was born at Leeds on 13 June 1806 and was educated there, partly under Joseph Hutton, minister of Mill Hill Unitarian Chapel. He became a Unitarian, though his parents were members of the Church of England. For a short time he was placed in the office of Thomas Bolton, a sometime partner of his father's, at Liverpool, but he had no taste for mercantile life, and showed an early talent for music. When very young he played the cello at a concert, but his instrument was the piano. To forward his musical education, his mother (whose maiden name was Glover) moved to London. Here Ogden became a pupil of Ignaz Moscheles, and later of Augustus Kollman. He studied for a year at Paris under Johann Peter Pixis, and for three years at Munich under Joseph Hartmann Stuntz; in 1827 he visited Vienna. In 1834 he married Thomas Bolton's daughter, Frances, after which he settled in the Lake District at Lakefield, Sawrey, near Hawkshead, where he lived the life of a country gentleman. 
James Martineau, when compiling his 'Hymns for the Christian Church and Home' (1840), invited Ogden to supply tunes of unusual metre. The result was Ogden's 'Holy Songs and Musical Prayers' (1842). A feature of the volume that evoked criticism was the adaptation as hymn tunes of pieces by Beethoven and others. From the seventh and much enlarged edition (1872) the adaptations were omitted. The style of Ogden's original music was not ecclesiastical, nor were his compositions well adapted for ordinary congregational use, but their spirit was rightly indicated in the title of the volume. 
Ogden died at Lakefield on 26 March 1882, and was buried in Hawkshead churchyard. He was survived by his wife and a granddaughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 20581


Ogden, Samuel (1627/8-1697), ejected minister and schoolmaster, was born at Fowleach, Oldham, the son of John Ogden, a yeoman, and attended school for three years at nearby Littleborough. He was admitted at Christ's College, Cambridge, on 4 May 1648, aged twenty, under the supervision of Samuel Ball, fellow of Christ's College from 1644 to 1651. Ogden graduated BA in 1651 and on 6 January the following year married Hester (or Esther) Barnett, sister of Joshua Barnett, curate of Over Darwen, Lancashire, who had been educated under John Ball of Whitmore, Staffordshire, the father of Samuel Ogden's tutor. William Bagshawe, the Apostle of the Peak, who became friends with Ogden after meeting him at a lecture at Saddleworth, praised Hester, 'who being the Daughter of a good old Nonconformist, when in a single State, shone as a Star of the first Magnitude, among Matrons near Ouldam' (Bagshaw, 98). 
Also in 1651 Ogden was instituted as curate of Buxton, a chapelry attached to the church of Bakewell, Derbyshire, at the meagre stipend of $8 per annum. On 17 September 1652 the committee for plundered ministers ordered that tithes of Great and Little Huckley in the parish of Hope, worth $10, 'sequestered from Rowland Eyre, papist and delinquent and the tithe corn and hay of Buxton and Blackwell in the said county, sequestered from the Earl of Newcastle delinquent, impropriator thereof... amounting in the whole to the yearly sum of $32 13 4d' should 'be from henceforth continued and paid unto Mr Samuel Ogden, minister of the said chapel' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.190). This area came within the jurisdiction of the Wirksworth classis. Having presented testimonials as to his fitness for the ministry and having preached before the classis at Brassington on 15 September 1653, Ogden was ordained at Wirksworth on 27 September by Robert Porter, Thomas Shelmerdine, Martin Topham, Edward Pole, John Oldfield, Samuel Moore, and Thomas Miles. The following year he was presented by John Manners, eighth earl of Rutland, to the chapelry of Fairfield, but it appears there was resistance, for it proved necessary for Ogden to travel to London, and to present his claim to the commissioners for approbation, who granted their consent on 23 October 1654. In May 1658 Ogden settled at Mackworth, Derbyshire, acting as vicar and schoolmaster there. 
Ogden was hostile to restoring the 'Book of Common Prayer'. He 'thought the idolising the Common Prayer, and placing all Religion in it, was a provocation to the good spirit of God' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.196). After his ejection in 1662 he continued to make entries in the parish register for some months. His successor was instituted on 9 June 1663, but Ogden continued to teach at Mackworth until in 1666 he was compelled by the 'Five Mile Act' to move his operations first to Yorkshire and then to Markeaton, near Derby. In 1669 'Mr Ogden late of Marton [Markeaton] by Derby' was reported to be preaching at Little Ireton 'every Lord's day at the house of Colonel [Thomas] Saunders' where '200, 300, 400 at a time' were said to congregate (Turner, 1.49). On 8 May 1672 he was licensed as a presbyterian preacher for this house. Throughout this period Ogden seems to have been able to continue teaching, possibly in his own house. Rachel Ogden, one of three daughters known to have survived their father, married Zachary Merrill, who acted for many years as the usher of his school and kept a notebook detailing his methods. Ogden's evident success eventually provoked the master of the free school at Derby to a law suit. When the court of arches found against him in 1685, Ogden was forced to desist from teaching at Marton. From 1686, through the patronage of Sir John Gell and, according to Bagshawe, with the collusion of 'Persons Dignified in the Church', he became master of the free school at Wirksworth (Bagshaw, 98). In 1689 he took the oaths under the 'Toleration Act' at Derby quarter sessions and his house at Wirksworth was certified as a meeting-place. 
Ogden was by no means a narrow, stereotypical puritan. He was knowledgeable about anatomy, medicine, and botany: 'and took delight in algebra, trigonometry, and the several parts of mathematics. He was acquainted with some of the greatest men of the age in that science and taught his scholars... to charm them into a love of those studies... And he was used to observe that very few good mathematicians were lewd and scandalous. He was a great lover of music, both vocal and instrumental. He was also well versed in Natural Philosophy, and very ready in the Cartesian scheme... He took great delight in poetry, and especially in Latin verse, and did so even to his old age. (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.193)' In 1697, as Calamy explains, 'being of a melancholy disposition, and apt to be incumbered with troublesome fears about dying, it pleased God he was on a Lord's day seized with a palsy, as he was in the pulpit' (ibid., 197). He died a few weeks later, on 25 May 1697, and was buried in the church at Wirksworth two days later. Bagshawe, who also observed the melancholy with which 'this Dear Brother was more than touched', remembered his friend as 'a burning as well as shining light', 'one of another (and choicer) Spirit than many in the Ministry are' (Bagshaw, 97). 


@@@@@


doc= 20582


Ogden, Samuel (1716-1778), Church of England clergyman, was born on 28 July 1716 at Manchester, the only son of Thomas Ogden (1690/91-1766), a dyer of Manchester, who died aged seventy-five, leaving a widow, who lived to be eighty-five. He was educated at the Manchester Free Grammar School, then admitted briefly at King's College, Cambridge, as a sizar in March 1733 before entering St John's College in August 1736. From there he graduated BA in 1737, MA in 1741, BD in 1748, and DD in 1753. He was elected a fellow of St John's on 24 March 1740, being the senior fellow from 1758 to 1768. Ogden was 'an excellent classical scholar, a scientific divine, and a proficient in the Oriental languages' ('DNB'). 
Ogden was ordained priest by the bishop of Lincoln in November 1741. He moved to Yorkshire, where he was appointed curate of Coley, Halifax, in 1745, and of Elland two years later. He also acted as master of the Heath grammar school, Halifax, from 1744 until 1753. The Cambridge antiquary William Cole considered him a born schoolmaster and regretted that he left the profession, but Cole's description of the way in which he would return to his old school in Manchester 'and terrify the boys by his strict and severe examination' (Hughes, 1.ii) casts doubt on his pedagogical abilities. 
In 1753 Ogden returned to Cambridge, having been appointed vicar of the round church of the Holy Sepulchre there. It was here that he made his name as a preacher, his congregations consisting chiefly of members of the university. His return to Cambridge was also marked by his taking the degree of DD, performing disputations with John Green, afterwards bishop of Lincoln, as his opponent. Green's patron, the duke of Newcastle (chancellor of the university), was so impressed by Ogden's performance that in 1754 he conferred on him the vicarage of Damerham in Wiltshire -- a post he held until 1766. However, despite Newcastle's favour, Ogden was denied further advancement from him because he proved not to be a ''producable' man; for he was singularly uncouth in his manner, and spoke his mind very freely upon all occasions' (Gunning, 1.237). His university connections nevertheless secured him a number of preferments: in 1764 he was appointed to the Woodwardian professorship of geology and in 1766 he was presented to the college living of Lawford in Essex. The former post he accepted without any knowledge of the field -- a situation he did little to change during his tenure of office, which lasted until his death. Ogden's hopes of becoming master of his college were conclusively dashed at the elections of both 1765 and 1775; he gained a mere three votes on the latter occasion. However, in 1766 he obtained the rectory of Stansfield in Suffolk, a post in the gift of the lord chancellor. 
Though known for his rusticity of manner in most social situations, in the pulpit he was considered 'remarkably striking', commanding 'the attention of all who heard him' (Hallifax, 1.ix-x). Indeed, his rather singular mannerisms appear to have enhanced his abilities as a preacher. For he had 'a sallow complexion, stern expression of countenance, and very vivid black eyes', and a deep and solemn tone of voice that helped to capture the attention of his audience (Whitaker, 388). In their printed form, too, Ogden's sermons were widely admired by his contemporaries, including George III and Bishop Hurd, who urged that they be put into the hands of the young princes. Boswell, who admired their 'subtility of reasoning' ('DNB'), persuaded Dr Johnson to read them and was heartened that Johnson 'praised my favourite preacher, his elegant language, and remarkable acuteness' ('Boswell's Life of Johnson', 5.350). Johnson also considered that 'he fought infidels with their own weapons' (ibid., 5.351). There is nothing exceptional in the theology embodied in the sermons with its familiar eighteenth-century appeal to the authority both of the scriptures and of reason. Ogden urged, for example, the way in which one could come to a knowledge of the Creator even without revelation, through 'the contemplation of the works of nature', and, in the language of physico-theology, argued that: 'Articles of faith are established... upon as good grounds as systems of physics' (Hughes, 1.126-7). He also expressed his distaste for 'enthusiasm' by contending that religion 'is seen to best advantage when adorned with moderation' (ibid., 2.19). 
In appearance Ogden was 'a stout and very athletic man' (Whitaker, 388) and he was evidently a good trencherman, since one of his few remembered remarks is that a goose was a silly bird, being too much for one and not enough for two. For all his personal idiosyncrasies he was generally respected. Gilbert Wakefield, for example, considered him 'a good scholar, a liberal-minded Christian, and an honest man' (Hughes, 1.v). He died following a fit on 23 March 1778 and was buried on the south side of the communion table at the church of the Holy Sepulchre, Cambridge, where a table was raised to his memory. Ogden left his Arabic books to William Craven, master of St John's College, who, through Ogden's influence, had been appointed to the professorship of Arabic. 


@@@@@


doc= 20583


Ogilby, John (1600-1676), publisher and geographer, was born on 17 November 1600 at 'Kellemeane', near Dundee, Forfarshire. Nothing is known either of his parents or of his early education, and even the date of his birth is known only from later statements by John Aubrey and Elias Ashmole. Aubrey noted that Ogilby was from 'a gentleman's family and bred to his grammar' ('Brief Lives', 2.99). It is probable that his father was admitted to the Merchant Taylors' Company in London in 1606. Aubrey tells us that the young Ogilby paid his father's debts with money secured from a lottery managed by the Virginia Company in March 1612, and that about 1619 he was apprenticed to John Draper, a London dancing-master. It is possible to see several phases to Ogilby's varied career: dancing-master, courtier, and theatre owner between about 1620 and 1641; poet and translator from 1649; and, from about 1669, compiler of geographical works and atlases, culminating in his 'Britannia' (1675). 
Ogilby is thought to have danced in Jonson's masque 'The Gypsies Metamorphosed' in 1621, and it may have been then that he injured himself and became lame thereafter. The details of his life in the later 1620s are uncertain, though he may have soldiered. He was admitted freeman of the Merchant Taylors' Company on 6 July 1629. It is known that in Somerset he taught dancing to Ralph Hopton's sisters ('c'.1632-3). He moved to Ireland in the summer of 1633, under the patronage of Viscount Wentworth, later earl of Strafford, to become master of the revels. Ogilby was responsible for the opening in 1637 of Ireland's first theatre, the New Theatre in Dublin's Werburgh Street, and for the development of the theatre's company. This ceased with the Irish rising in 1641. After service to the earl of Ormond, Ogilby returned to England about 1644, first to Bristol, then, about 1645, to Cambridge, and by 1648 to London. He married Christian (Katherine) Hunsdon on 14 March 1650, in St Peter-le-Poer parish: she was the widow of one Thomas Hunsdon, merchant taylor, of Blackfriars, London. William Morgan, the son of her married daughter Elizabeth, was later to become involved with John Ogilby in mapping and publishing projects. 
In 1649 Ogilby published his first translation, of Virgil. It was initially circulated privately to members of the Merchant Taylors' Company, which rewarded him with a gift of $10, in advance of the general edition. This was followed in 1651 by Aesop's 'Fables' and further translations of Virgil in 1654 and 1658. His translations, particularly the 1654 folio, were magnificent productions: his style was direct and he paid great attention to paper quality, clear type, and the illustrations. Later translations -- of Homer's 'Iliad' (1660) and 'Odyssey' (1665), of Aesop's 'Fables' and 'Aesopics' (in 1665 and 1668, respectively), and of Virgil in 1666 -- are splendid examples of seventeenth-century printing and of the patronage networks through which men like Ogilby promoted both themselves and polite learning. This was not, then, just an individual or a particularly British enterprise. Ogilby drew upon the translations of Virgil by the Spanish Jesuit de la Cerda and others, like Nicholas Caussin. In such ways, classical learning, book production, and patronage promoted elite authority and the learned publics of seventeenth-century Europe. Ogilby was involved in the illustration and production of a two-volume edition of the 'Bible', which, like his 'Iliad', he dedicated to Charles II. Ogilby's support from and for royalty is most clearly evident in 'The Entertainment of his Most Excellent Majestie Charles II' (1661), which he both wrote and printed, a commemoration of the new king's coronation. Drawing upon earlier traditions of triumphal royal processions, Ogilby used the capital's streets as a theatrical stage for the promotion of civic virtue, royal authority, and future prosperity. 
From 1661 Ogilby petitioned the king in order to safeguard publication rights and, in particular, to ensure a monopoly on his successful 'Entertainment'. In March that year he was reconfirmed as master of the revels in Ireland, and he probably secured his title of master of the king's imprimeries (king's printer) in the same year. About July 1662 he moved to Ireland again to establish a theatre in Dublin, and he may have met Robert Boyle at this time. By late 1665 or early 1666 he was again settled in London. After the great fire of 1666 (in which he lost much of his own stock) he was appointed one of the city's assistant surveyors, a position that brought him into contact with Robert Hooke and Christopher Wren. He published his 'Embassy to China' in 1669, and it was at this time that he conceived of a series of atlases to cover the whole world, to be funded through lotteries, subscription plans, and advertisements. The first, 'Africa', appeared in 1670. Others followed soon after: 'Atlas Japannensis' (1670), 'America' (1671), 'Atlas Chinensis' (1671), and 'Asia' (1673). These were not the fruits of Ogilby's own work but rather well-produced compilations of extant translations and others' accounts, a common practice at that time. His and others' work in this sense thus both reflected and directed growing public interest in distant places and foreign peoples. 
Ogilby secured the additional title of his majesty's cosmographer early in 1671. It is clear that he again drew upon the support of the king and other patrons in the production and publication of 'Britannia... an illustration of the kingdom of England and dominion of Wales: by a geographical and historical description of the principal roads thereof' (1675), the work for which he became best known. Chiefly a road atlas, it was securely based on contemporary and collaborative research. It was followed by 'Mr Ogilby's tables of his measur'd roads... with other remarks... to which is added, A true account of the markets and fairs, &c. collected in his survey' (1676). In 'Britannia' Ogilby drew out 2519 miles of road in the form of 100 strip maps, a technique that was widely imitated throughout the following century. Measuring distances by waywiser (his 'great wheel'), he made allowance for roads that ascended hills yet had to be depicted in two dimensions on paper, and his surveys helped to standardize the mile at 1760 yards throughout the kingdom. 'Britannia' marked the first major advance in cartography in England since the Tudor period, though it did echo earlier traditions. It was republished in 1698, 1719, and 1720, and on subsequent occasions up to modern times. 
Ogilby died in London on 4 September 1676, and was buried the next day at St Bride's, Fleet Street. His work was continued by William Morgan. Although Ogilby's translations in particular were decried by eighteenth-century critics, his reputation as a translator and printer was high during his lifetime, and 'Britannia' has secured him enduring importance in British cartographic history. 


@@@@@


doc= 20584


Ogilvie, Charles Atmore (1793-1873), Church of England clergyman, son of John Ogilvie of Whitehaven, Cumberland (died 25 April 1839 at Duloe, Cornwall), and his wife, Catharine Curwen of the Isle of Man, was born at Whitehaven on 20 November 1793. He matriculated from Balliol College, Oxford, on 27 November 1811; after taking a first class in 1815, he won the chancellor's prize for the English essay in 1817. He graduated BA in 1815, MA in 1818, and BD and DD in 1842. In 1816 he was elected a fellow of his college, and was ordained. He was tutor from 1819 to 1830, bursar in 1822, and senior dean in 1842. He was appointed a university examiner in 1823 and 1824, and examiner in the classical school in 1825. He greatly assisted Richard Jenkyns, the master of Balliol, in improving the tone and discipline of the college. Ogilvie is reputed to have been the major influence in the introduction of the open scholarship system on which Balliol's later academic reputation rested (Jones, 187). Ogilvie saw himself as 'an attached and zealous member of the Church of England' (ibid., 181). Though at the end of the 1820s he was looked on as a leader of the high-church party in Oxford, he gave little active support to the Oxford Movement. He was a select preacher before the university in 1825, 1832, and 1844, and was Bampton lecturer in 1836, the lectures being published as 'The Divine Glory Manifested' (1836). 
Ogilvie held some clerical preferments while still fellow and tutor of Balliol. He was rector of Wickford, Essex, from 4 January 1822 to 1833; rector of Abbotsley, Huntingdonshire, from 30 August 1822 to 1839; and vicar of Duloe from 20 October 1833 to 1840. The rectory and vicarage of Ross, Herefordshire, conferred on him on 6 December 1839, he held until his death (together, from 1849, with his Oxford canonry). For a time he acted as domestic and examining chaplain to Archbishop William Howley. He resigned his fellowship in 1834, having ceased to teach in 1830. On 18 April 1838 he married Mary Ann Gurnell (died 2 Oct 1875), daughter of Major Armstrong; they had two daughters. 
On the foundation of a chair of pastoral theology in the university, Ogilvie became the first regius professor on 23 April 1842, and as professor he succeeded in 1849 to a canonry at Christ Church. His selection reflected the concern of Peel's government that the post should not go to a whig or to one of the many then embroiled in clerical dispute. He actively supported tory candidates in elections for the university burgess-ship. Through life Ogilvie maintained a close friendship with M. J. Routh, president of Magdalen College, with whom he corresponded on literary subjects from 1847 to 1854. He was also friendly with Joseph Blanco White and was a quite regular correspondent of Hannah More. Ogilvie published little beyond his Bampton lectures: a sermon (1836), two pamphlets on subscription (1845 and 1863), and an essay, 'On the union of classical and mathematical studies', ('Oxford English prize essays', vol. 3, 1836). While lecturing on 15 February 1873 he was seized with paralysis, and he died in his house at Christ Church, Oxford, two days later. He was buried in the Latin chapel in Christ Church Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 20585


Ogilvie, James (1760-1820), scholar, who claimed connection with the Ogilvys, earls of Findlater, was born in Aberdeen, and was educated there. He may be the James Ogilvie who graduated at King's College, Aberdeen, in 1790. He emigrated to the United States, where he ran a school, first in Milton, Virginia, and then in Richmond. He left the impression of being 'a man of singular endowments', gifted with 'the power of rousing the mind from its torpor and lending it wings' ('Southern Literary Messenger', 14). He closed the school in 1809 and retired to a remote Kentucky cabin, where he wrote lectures, rebutting the theories of Godwin, and depending to some extent for his living on financial help from former pupils. He lectured with success throughout Virginia and the Atlantic states and was employed as a lecturer at the South Carolina College in 1815. He returned to Scotland to claim the lapsed earldom of Findlater as a relative of James Ogilvy, the last earl of Findlater and Seafield of the Ogilvy line, who had died at Dresden in 1811. His claim, however, was not entertained. Constitutionally sensitive and excitable, and worn out with narcotics, he was believed to have committed suicide in Aberdeen on 18 September 1820. 
Ogilvie's 'Philosophical Essays' appeared at Philadelphia in 1816. The book is summarily discussed in 'Blackwood's Magazine' (18, 18xx, 198), and it is criticized at length by E. T. Channing in the 'North American Review' (4, 18xx). 


@@@@@


doc= 20586


Ogilvie, John (1578/9-1615), Jesuit, the eldest son of Walter Ogilvie of Drum (and later perhaps of Milton), was born in Strathisla, Banffshire. Brought up a Calvinist, he matriculated in August 1592 at the protestant University of Helmstedt in northern Germany. In 1596, having become a Catholic, he entered the Scots College of Douai, at that time at Louvain. In June 1598 he was sent to the Scottish Benedictine abbey at Regensburg but by the end of the year was a student at the Jesuit college in Olomouc. 
In November 1599, aged twenty, he entered the noviciate of the Jesuit Austrian-Bohemian province at Brno and two years later, on 26 December 1601, made his vows. The next nine years were spent in study and work in various places in the province. After three years of philosophy at Graz he taught for two years or more at Vienna. There followed an additional year of apologetics to prepare him for controversy, then for two years he studied theology at Olomouc, during which time he was in charge of a students' sodality, that is, a devotional confraternity. In August 1610 he was sent by the Jesuit-general to Paris, where he was ordained priest, and went on to Rouen to teach for three years. 
At that time the general wished to resume missionary work in Scotland, though it was a particularly difficult and dangerous time for Catholicism, with John Spottiswood, archbishop of Glasgow, energetically supporting the Erastianism of James VI and I. Ogilvie volunteered and finally in 1613 received orders to go to Scotland. He landed at Leith in November 1613, in the guise of John Watson, horse dealer. We know very little of his movements, except that he went up to the north-east for a time, then returned south to Edinburgh. There followed a mysterious episode. About the end of February 1614 he went to London and was for a time at the royal court. Towards the end of March he travelled to Paris. His superior, James Gordon, was displeased and sent him back with orders not to return without permission, but the general was more sympathetic and commended his zeal. Though the purpose of his journey to France is not known it is most significant that he travelled from London to France and back with a safe conduct. The king surely knew Ogilvie and the plan he had in mind. 
Back in Scotland in June, Ogilvie resumed his work of administering the sacraments to Catholics, reconciling those who had lapsed, and making new converts. He was active in Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Renfrewshire. It was secret and dangerous work, for at any time he could be betrayed, which is what happened. On 4 October 1614 he was captured while walking in a Glasgow street. Two narratives of his imprisonment were printed: the authorities' 'True Relation', their account of his examinations and execution, and his own description of his sufferings and his dealings with various interrogators. The latter, written in Latin, was continued by his Scottish associates and later published as 'Relatio incarcerationis'. Further details were added by the later testimonies of his associates. Despite their very different purpose and slant the accounts agree on the main events. 
On 5 October, the day after his capture, Ogilvie was examined by a group headed by Spottiswood, and their report was sent to the king. Ogilvie refused to answer on oath anything that would incriminate himself or others or would imply acceptance of the king's authority to put questions on spiritual matters. After two months' confinement in Glasgow he was taken to Edinburgh and on 12 December was examined before five lords commissioners appointed by the king. Again he refused to divulge where or with whom he had stayed, and for the same reasons. So, as the king had given leave for him to be tortured, he was kept awake for (according to his own narrative) eight days and nine nights until he was not far from death. How much he divulged in this condition is not clear. After only one day's respite the examination was resumed, then he was taken back to Glasgow by Spottiswood, arriving on Christmas eve. 
Ogilvie's narrative was apparently written during this second period in Glasgow. It is a fresh and lively account though also diffuse and circumstantial, with details of ill treatment as well as of questioning on matters of religion, to which he replied with spirit. Not surprisingly it has many difficulties and ambiguities but clearly the treatment he received was inconsistent, perhaps deliberately so. At times his feet were bound to a massive iron bar, yet with Spottiswood he visited a neighbour's gardens and house. Spottiswood spoke to him in public in friendly fashion, yet increased the rigours of his imprisonment. He was denied pen and paper, yet he was able to write letters and his lengthy narrative. 
On 18 January 1615 he was formally questioned on five points concerning the king's power and the pope's jurisdiction. These were drawn up by the king, and the five men conducting the inquiry were appointed by the king. In fact, apart from the initial investigation immediately after Ogilvie's capture, the legal proceedings did not follow the ordinary course of law but were put in place by the king personally. James had been controverting on these matters with Jesuit theologians and during the examination works by Bellarmine and Suarez lay on the table. The five questions did not concern the king's authority alone but whether the pope's authority was superior. 
To the first two questions Ogilvie answered clearly that the pope could judge the king, had power over him in spiritual matters, and could excommunicate him. The next three questions were whether the pope could depose the king, whether it was lawful to kill the king so deposed, and whether the pope could release subjects from their allegiance to the king. To each of these Ogilvie refused to reply, as the king had no authority to judge such matters. At his first examination, however, Ogilvie had declared that he detested the assassination of kings and had condemned the Gunpowder Plot. 
Ogilvie's final trial was fixed for 28 February. He was told beforehand (and at the trial itself this was stated explicitly) that he was not accused of saying mass or converting anyone to Catholicism or for matters of conscience, but for declining the king's authority. The proceedings were formal, with four judges, assisted by a group of notables headed by Spottiswood, and a jury of fifteen men of some standing. Ogilvie refused to change his previous answers, and was found guilty and condemned to be hanged. Three hours later he was taken to a gallows erected nearby and executed. There are various accounts of incidents on the scaffold which must have given much publicity to the Jesuit's fate. He was buried that day outside the city. 
A number of those who had sheltered Ogilvie were condemned to death but the sentences were commuted to exile. Indeed Ogilvie was the only Catholic in Scotland ever to be judicially sentenced and executed for his religion. Even James Moffat, a Scots Jesuit who was captured one month after Ogilvie, was tried by ordinary process of law and exiled, as was Patrick Anderson only six years later, though they shared Ogilvie's views on papal and royal authority. The strong suspicion remains that there was something personal between Ogilvie and the king. Ogilvie at his final trial declared that he and Father William Crichton, a Scots Jesuit who had consistently supported James's succession to the English throne, had done more for James abroad than any of his accusers. He was surely referring to his mission to France in the spring of 1614. James knew him and knew his purpose. 
Ogilvie's posthumous renown spread quickly on the continent. The 'Relatio incarcerationis' was published in eight places and he featured increasingly in the printed literature of Europe. Initial steps for his beatification were taken by an examination in 1628 at Wurzburg of two of his associates in Glasgow, both of them now monks in the Scots monastery there, and in 1629 at Rome of an Edinburgh associate. Nothing more was done until in the nineteenth century the publication of Scottish historical sources led to his rediscovery and so to the production of Catholic devotional literature featuring him. In December 1929 he was beatified and in October 1976 formally canonized. 


@@@@@


doc= 20587


Ogilvie, John (1732-1813), Church of Scotland minister and poet, was born on either 18 or 28 November 1732 in Aberdeen, and was baptized on 7 December at his father's church, St Nicholas's, in the town. He was the eldest of six children of James Ogilvie (1695-1776), minister, and his wife, Elizabeth Strachan (died 1778). He graduated from Marischal College, Aberdeen, in 1750, and after a period studying, probably in Edinburgh, was licensed as a minister in the Church of Scotland on 16 July 1755. He was ordained to the parish of Lumphanan, south Aberdeenshire, on 15 March 1759, but was translated to the neighbouring parish of Midmar, 15 miles west of Aberdeen, on 27 March 1760. He remained as minister there for fifty-three years and was noted as a kindly, mild-mannered pastor 'with all the simplicity of a child' ('Scots Magazine'). He married, on 22 January 1771, Margaret (Peggy) Reid (1751/2-1804), daughter of Patrick Reid, minister of Clatt, Aberdeenshire; they had eleven children. He had an early literary friendship with James Beattie; David Dalrymple, Lord Hailes, advised on and corrected some of his works. He travelled to London several times, and is unfairly remembered principally as the butt of Samuel Johnson's remark, at a dinner party in 1763, that 'the noblest prospect that a Scotchman ever sees, is the high road that leads him to England' (Boswell, 'Life', 1.425). Ogilvie recorded that, contrary to Boswell's account, he had been a diffident young guest, who only ventured on a gentle defence of some aspects of Scotland in reply to a prolonged disparagement by Johnson who, he discovered, had never yet been there ('Edinburgh Magazine', 355). 
Ogilvie was a prolific and varied writer in poetry and prose. His earliest published poems, including 'The Day of Judgment' (published 1753), were written before the age of seventeen. Other early verse included odes and elegies, but his poems became progressively longer and more ambitious, supported with long erudite prefaces and footnotes. 'Providence' (1764) is a blank verse theodicy, justifying God's plan in the natural order, the lateness of the Christian revelation, and the apparent injustices of human life. Later he turned to epic subjects and style with 'Rona' (1777), a tragedy set on a Hebridean island, 'The Fane of the Druids' (1787-9), a partly mythical early history of Scotland, inspired by druid remains in his parish, and finally 'Britannia, a National Epic Poem' (1801). This massive work, preceded by a dissertation justifying the use of epic machinery of angels and demons, described in over 15,000 lines of blank verse the legendary founding of Britain by a descendant of Aeneas of Troy. It had a distinguished list of subscribers, headed by the prince of Wales, but the 'Monthly Review' feared that 'few persons will be able to accomplish a progress through the whole'. In his eighth decade he was still energetically contributing to 'The Poetical Register', and published anonymously a poem, 'Human Life' (1806): the sections on 'Infancy' and 'Childhood' are attractively and accurately observed. His last published poem was an elegy written in his seventy-ninth year. 
Ogilvie wrote on the theory of aesthetics, most notably in 'Philosophical Observations on the Nature, Character and Various Species of Composition' (1774), which has some originality in its exploration of the psychology of literary composition, and the interaction between the faculties of reason and imagination. He also published sermons, both in a collected volume (1766) and individually, and 'An Inquiry into the Causes of the Infidelity and Scepticism of the Times' (1783), exploring the social psychology of religious disbelief. 
Ogilvie's works, whose sales were small, show great erudition in the ancient classics, but refer surprisingly little to his literary contemporaries. Although he was praised by John Langhorne, William Duff, and Thomas Blacklock, a fair contemporary judgement was that his undoubted talents had been spread on too many and too varied works to make any lasting impact. According to the entry in Joseph Robertson's 'Lives of the Scottish Poets' (1822), Ogilvie was 'an able man, lost', whose 'intellectual wealth and industry were wasted in huge and unhappy speculations' (Robertson, 3.136). He was awarded a DD from Marischal College in 1766, was appointed to the committee for the revision of the translations and paraphrases used in the Church of Scotland in 1775, and in 1789 was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. He died at Aberdeen on 17 November 1813. 


@@@@@


doc= 20588


Ogilvie, John (1797-1867), lexicographer, born on 17 April 1797 in the parish of Marnoch, Banffshire, was the son of William Ogilvie, crofter, and his wife, Ann Leslie, daughter of a farmer in a neighbouring parish. He received some elementary education at home, and attended the parish school for two quarters. Ogilvie then worked as a ploughman until he was twenty-one. In 1818, following an accident, one of his legs had to be amputated above the knee. Afterwards he taught successively in two subscription schools in the Banffshire parishes of Fordyce and Gamrie. At the same time, by intensive study and with the help of a neighbouring schoolmaster, he prepared for university, and in October 1824 entered Marischal College, Aberdeen. Having added to his income by private tuition he graduated MA on 14 April 1828. He remained in Aberdeen as a private tutor until 13 May 1831, when he was appointed mathematical master in Gordon's Hospital, an important educational establishment in the city. On 15 November 1842 Ogilvie married Susan Smart (died 1853), daughter of a farmer near Stonehaven, Kincardineshire. Marischal College conferred on him the honorary degree of LLD on 15 January 1848. He retained his mastership until July 1859. 
To the short-lived 'Aberdeen Magazine' (1831-2) Ogilvie contributed, under the signature Iota, ten spirited and amusing imitations of Horace in the Scottish dialect. In 1836 he worked on Blackie & Son's annotated edition of Thomas Stackhouse's 'History of the Bible'. Messrs Blackie engaged him in 1838 to revise and enlarge Webster's 'English Dictionary', the result being 'The Imperial Dictionary, English, Technical, and Scientific', issued in parts from 1847 onwards, and published complete in 1850, with a supplement in 1855. In 1863 Ogilvie issued an abridgement of the dictionary under the title 'Comprehensive English Dictionary, Explanatory, Pronouncing, and Etymological', with the pronunciation supplied by Richard Cull. In 1865 appeared the 'Students' English Dictionary, Etymological, Pronouncing, and Explanatory', in which etymology and definitions received special attention. Two features of all three dictionaries were their attention to science and technology and their engravings, the 'Imperial' claiming to be the first after Bailey's to use pictorial illustrations. A modern evaluation regards it as 'a hugely competent work, very well-suited to its times, and one which enjoyed much success in subsequent editions. It marks the flowering of the encyclopaedic dictionary in Britain' ('International Encyclopedia of Lexicography'). Ogilvie's last work was a condensation of the 'Students' English Dictionary' for use in schools (1867). An unfinished revision of 'The Imperial Dictionary' was issued in 1882-3 by Charles Annandale. 
In his later years Ogilvie suffered a partial loss of sight, and after his retirement was almost blind. He died of typhoid fever at Aberdeen on 21 November 1867. His wife predeceased him on 20 May 1853, leaving two daughters and a son. 


@@@@@


doc= 20589


Ogilvie, William (1736-1819), classical scholar and advocate of common property in land, was the only son of James Ogilvie, landowner and farmer, of Pittensear, in Moray, and his wife, Marjory Steuart, of Tannachy. His parents died when he was quite young, leaving him in charge of the estate and with the care of his four sisters. It is likely that he attended the nearby Elgin grammar school before entering King's College, Aberdeen, as third bursar of his year, in 1755. Having graduated MA in 1759 he was schoolmaster at Cullen, Banffshire, for a year. He attended Glasgow University for the winter session of 1760-61 and Edinburgh University for the winter session of 1761-2. Through the influence of his relative Lord Deskford (later earl of Seafield) he was appointed an assistant professor of philosophy in King's College, Aberdeen, on 25 November 1761, on the assurance that he would move into the first vacancy of a regent's place that occurred. He began teaching in November 1762, as an all-round professor of philosophy, and became a full regent in 1764; a year earlier he had been elected a member of the Aberdeen Philosophical Society. He was appointed professor of humanity in 1765, by an exchange of offices, and continued in that role until 1817, when failing health necessitated the appointment of an assistant. 
Ogilvie enthralled his students with the outstanding quality of his translations of classical writers, especially Virgil and Horace, although these were never published. His scholarship extended to natural history and the fine arts and he was a keen antiquary, medallist, and numismatist. He collected specimens for a museum of natural history in King's College as well as a group of rare prints, mainly portraits. D. C. Macdonald was strongly convinced that Ogilvie visited the continent at some stage, possibly as travelling tutor and companion to Alexander Gordon, fourth duke of Gordon, but the latter's grand tour coincided with the commencement of Ogilvie's teaching duties and he is known to have taken another tutor. 
In 1781 Ogilvie published anonymously 'An Essay on the Right of Property in Land'. In it he asserted the birthright of every citizen to an equal share of property in land and outlined means by which this could be progressively achieved. He considered land values as having three parts, the original, the improved, and the improvable values; the first and third of these belonged to the community and only the second to the landholder. He argued from experience and wrote in the context of having inherited property, though he had sold the estate of Pittensear to the earl of Fife in 1772, while retaining the mansion house. In 1773 he purchased the property of Oldfold and Stonegavel, just outside Aberdeen, for $1500. With the aid of a $2000 loan from the duke of Gordon extensive improvements to the property were carried out before it was sold, in 1808, for $4000. 
Ogilvie's clarity of thought, freedom from preconceptions, and disinterested motives inevitably brought him into conflict with colleagues in King's College. In 1783 he was perturbed at the sale of college ground that might have been used as a botanic garden. He was conscious of the college's other dubious practices, including the misappropriation of bursary funds, and found himself in a minority in opposing private interest pursued to the detriment of the college. These established party lines not surprisingly held good in 1786, when he revived the issue of union between King's College and Marischal College. Given two universities within a mile of one another the eventual fusion of the colleges seemed only a matter of time. However, in spite of the positive attitude of Marischal College and Ogilvie's wholehearted sponsorship, self-interest prevailed at King's College and the union proposals were rejected. Ogilvie had at least won the argument with his lucid and ironic advocacy, and collected much support from outside the college as well as that of the rector, Sir William Forbes, before the latter was deposed. 
In 1793 Ogilvie received the honorary degree of STD from Columbia College, New York. Pryse Lockhart Gordon, a former student, visited the already gout-crippled Ogilvie in 1800, bearing Greek and Roman coins and fragments from Pompeii. He recalled: 'It was delightful to see how the eyes of the old antiquary sparkled (or rather squinted), when I laid before him these treasures as a 'ricordanza', and the pleasure with which he examined them. I was much surprised to find in our conversation the minute acquaintance which he had of every work of art in Italy, the correctness of his taste and wonderful memory. (Gordon, 24)' While Ogilvie's agrarian views were never likely to find powerful friends in their day, his 'Essay' became a point of reference for subsequent advocates of land reform. His unquestioned benevolence and personal sincerity meant that his radicalism provoked a less hostile reaction than might otherwise have been the case. Having been a lifelong bachelor of reclusive habits, Ogilvie died at Aberdeen on 14 February 1819, recognized as 'one of the most accomplished scholars of the age' ('The Times', 23 Feb 1819), and was buried in the south transept of St Machar's Cathedral, Aberdeen. 


@@@@@


doc= 20590


Ogilvy, Alexander, of Inverquharity (d. 1446), landowner, was the eldest son of John Ogilvy of Inverquharity, son of Sir Walter Ogilvy of Auchterhouse ('fl'. 'c'.1368-1392), hereditary sheriff of Forfar. It was in this part of north-east Scotland that lands, office, and family connections made the Ogilvys influential. Ogilvy's uncle Sir Walter Ogilvy of Lintrathen served James I as master of the king's household and treasurer, and his cousin Marjory, daughter of Alexander Ogilvy of Auchterhouse, sheriff of Forfar, married David Lindsay, third earl of Crawford. Ogilvy's son, another Alexander, served as a hostage for the ransom of James I from 1427 until 1432, when he is described as the son of the sheriff of Forfar. 
On 28 May 1442 Ogilvy was himself present at the sheriff court held at Inverbervie in the sheriffdom of Kincardine, and on 1 August that year he witnessed an agreement between two powerful north-east magnates, Alexander Seton, Lord Gordon, and Robert, Lord Keith, the marischal, at Cluny, in the sheriffdom of Aberdeen. Ogilvy's only recorded appearance as a witness to a royal charter was on 7 September 1444, when he was with the king at Dalkeith, but it is clear from the exchequer accounts for 1445 that he held the offices of bailie of Panmure and keeper of Methven Castle, further evidence of the importance of the extended Ogilvy family as royal agents in the Forfar region. 
In 1445, according to the Auchinleck chronicle, the Ogilvys took part in a raid mounted against the Fife possessions of James Kennedy, bishop of St Andrews, for which Kennedy excommunicated the perpetrators. The chronicler ties this in with a dispute which arose in the following year concerning Ogilvy's designs upon the justiciarship of the abbey of Arbroath, contested between himself and Alexander Lindsay, master of Crawford. The abbey deposed Lindsay in favour of Ogilvy, but the former was unwilling to relinquish his position without a fight. Battle was joined at Arbroath, the Auchinleck chronicle reports, late on Sunday 23 January 1446, and resulted in the death of David, third earl of Crawford, who had tried to mediate. Ogilvy, severely wounded, was said by one chronicle source (probably following a local tradition in Angus) to have been taken to Crawford's castle of Finavon, where Ogilvy's cousin Marjory, distraught at hearing of the death of her husband, smothered him to death. 


@@@@@


doc= 20591


Ogilvy, Sir Alexander, first baronet, Lord Forglen (d. 1727), judge, was the second son of George Ogilvy, second Lord Banff, and his wife, Agnes, only daughter of Alexander Falconer, first Lord Halkerton. In 1685 Ogilvy was accused by Sir Alexander Forbes of Tolquhoun of having taken from Forbes's house a silver mazer, or cup, and sued for its value, but it transpired that Forbes had forgotten that he had earlier taken the mazer to a goldsmith for repair. Forbes was subsequently fined 20,000 merks for this defamation of Ogilvy's character, half as a penalty, which was subsequently remitted, and half as compensation to Ogilvy, which he was obliged to pay. 
Although there is no record of his legal training, Ogilvy was described as an advocate when he was appointed deputy keeper of the signet on 22 February 1699. In the same year he was appointed warden of the Royal Mint. On 4 June 1701 he was created a baronet, and he sat in the Scottish parliament as commissioner for the burgh of Banff in 1702 and in 1703-7. In 1703 he and Lord Belhaven were ordered into custody for having quarrelled and come to blows in the parliament house in the presence of the lord high commissioner. On 30 June, having admitted their offence, they were to be freed, but had to await the king's pleasure; Lord Belhaven was fined $5000 for having struck Ogilvy, the additional order that he should ask pardon on his knees having been dispensed with. Ogilvy was appointed to the council of trade in 1705, and in 1706 was a commissioner for the Union, which he warmly supported in parliament. 
On 23 July 1706 Ogilvy was appointed a lord of session, with the title Lord Forglen, and later that year he was made a privy councillor. With his first wife, Mary ('b'. 1663), eldest daughter of Sir John Allardice of Allardice, Kincardineshire, he had four sons and four daughters. There were no children from his second marriage, to Mary (1656-1748), daughter of David Leslie, first Lord Newark, and widow of Sir Francis Kinloch of Gilmerton. He died on 3 March 1727, and was succeeded in the baronetcy by his grandson Alexander Ogilvie. 


@@@@@


doc= 20592


Ogilvy, David, styled sixth earl of Airlie (1725-1803), Jacobite army officer, was the eldest son of John Ogilvy, styled fifth earl of Airlie (1699-1761), and Margaret (died 1767), eldest daughter and heir of David Ogilvy of Cluny, Aberdeenshire. He was born in Scotland on 16 February 1725, and educated in Perth and afterwards perhaps at King's College, Aberdeen, and at Edinburgh University. A scion of a family whose Stuart loyalism is commemorated in the song 'The Bonnie Hoose o Airlie', he was commissioned as Jacobite lord lieutenant of Angus (Forfarshire) before the beginning of the 1745 rising, and promised his services to Prince Charles Edward at Perth in September. Ogilvy joined the Jacobite army with a battalion of Angus men on 3 October 1745, going off thereafter to raise the excise there. He was accompanied by his wife, the 'strikingly beautiful' Margaret [
On the army's return to Scotland, during which some of his soldiers had been sacrificed in the garrison at Carlisle, Ogilvy's regiment was involved in the ill-fated siege of Stirling. At Falkirk both battalions stood at the centre of the Jacobite second line; Lady Ogilvy herself insisted on being up with the reserve. At the battle of Culloden, ordered back from the right flank into the reserve, they were, at the end of the battle, the only intact regiment who had taken part: even so, in the confusion Ogilvy was reported dead after the battle. Facing about several times as they withdrew in formation, by keeping Lieutenant-General Henry Hawley's cavalry in check the Forfarshires saved much of the right wing of the Jacobite army. Many retreated intact back to Angus, where units of Ogilvy's regiment seem to have caused trouble to the government for some time. After the battle, Ogilvy skulked in his own country before escaping via Bergen, in Norway (where he was briefly confined in May 1746), and Sweden to France, Lady Ogilvy meanwhile being taken prisoner by Cumberland in Inverness. In June she was sent to Edinburgh, but contrived to make her escape in November, joining her husband in France, where she died in 1757. 
Once he arrived in exile, Ogilvy was seen as 'inclined... to make a figure in France', as Lochiel put it (McLynn, 'Jacobites', 129). This he did, gaining command of Ogilvy's regiment in 1748 and eventually rising to lieutenant-general in Louis XV's service. Ogilvy's regiment was mentioned for possible use in subsequent Jacobite attempts: it was the place where 'most of the refugees from the [Jacobite] army... seeking further military service found a haven' (Gibson, 166). In exile, he continued to write to his family under pseudonyms drawn from their locality, such as Eskside, Elyth (or Alyth), and Lintrathen (the original title was Lord Ogilvy of Alith and Lintrathen). Following his father's death in July 1761 he became titular sixth earl of Airlie. Nine years later he married his second wife, Anne (died 1798), daughter of James Stewart of Blairhill, Perthshire; they had no children. 
In 1778 Ogilvy was pardoned by George III and returned to Scotland, where his pardon was confirmed by parliament in 1783. He was the recipient of a French pension, which Napoleon offered to continue on his coming to power: Ogilvy declined. He died at Cortachy on 3 March 1803. He was among 'the most handsome of the Jacobite commanders' (McLynn, 'Jacobite Army', 19) and, as a near contemporary put it, 'a nobleman of the old school, kind and indulgent to his menials and dependents, of the most correct manners, full of courtesy, integrity, and honour' (Douglas, 1.35-6). On the death, without issue, of his son, David Ogilvy, Walter Ogilvy of Clova laid claim to the title of earl of Airlie before the House of Lords, but failed to elicit from them any decision. Walter's son David was, however, continued in the title by act of parliament on 26 May 1826. 


@@@@@


doc= 20593


Ogilvy, George, first Lord Banff (d. 1663), royalist army officer, was the eldest son of Walter Ogilvy of Dunlugas and Banff (died 1627/8) and Helen Urquhart, daughter of Walter Urquhart of Cromarty. Ogilvy married Margaret Irvine, daughter of Alexander Irvine of Drum, in or before 1611, and they had one daughter. After her death he married Janet Sutherland, daughter of William Sutherland of Duffus, and they had at least four children -- one son (George, second Lord Banff) and three daughters. In July 1629 Janet submitted a complaint to the privy council alleging that her husband had treated her and two of their children with cruelty, seeking to starve her to death and leaving her for dead after beating her. After hearing the parties and witness the council absolved Ogilvy. 
Ogilvy was created a baronet on 30 July 1627, having been knighted previously, and played an active role in local affairs. In the turbulent feuding of north-east Scotland he killed his cousin James Ogilvy in 1628, and made assythment (compensation) to the family of his victim. He supported James Crichton of Frendraught in his feud with the Gordons of Rothiemay, but was not prosecuted for his involvement in the killing of William Gordon of Rothiemay in 1630 as he had had a commission to arrest him. He was appointed a JP for Banffshire in 1634, and sheriff in 1636. In the first bishops' war of 1639 Ogilvy took the leading role in persuading local royalists to resist the covenanters. When the marquess of Huntly and other leaders prevaricated or submitted he 'stoutly stood out the king's man' (Spalding, 2.163). He inspired the successful attack, led by him and Sir John Gordon of Haddo, on covenanting forces at the 'trot of Turriff' on 13 May, and entered Aberdeen two days later. However, on 22 May the royalist forces withdrew, and reached an agreement with the covenanters to lay down their arms. On 30 May Ogilvy sailed from Macduff, intending to join Charles I in England, but, after meeting with a ship bringing Lord Aboyne and others north to resume resistance, he landed with them in Aberdeen. However, their position was unsustainable, as the earl of Montrose had marched strong covenanting forces northwards, and again the royalists were forced into submission, but Ogilvy refused to swear to the national covenant and about September joined the king in England. He remained in England during the second bishops' war of 1640, during which the covenanters took their revenge for his conduct in 1639 by destroying his houses and confiscating his revenues. Charles I is said to have provided partial compensation for his losses by a gift in 1642 of 10,000 merks Scots in gold. Ogilvy was with the king on the latter's visit to Edinburgh late in 1641. He remained in Scotland when the king left, but again visited him in England in 1642, being created Lord Banff on 31 August. He took no active part in the royalist risings of Huntly and Montrose in 1644, but his lack of commitment to the covenanting cause none the less brought action against him, including a fine, though by March 1647 he was sufficiently rehabilitated to be appointed a member of the committee of war for Banffshire. 
In 1648 Banff supported the engagement alliance of royalists and moderate covenanters. After taking his seat in parliament (for the first time) on 2 March 1648, he was appointed a colonel and a member of the Banffshire committee of war. He appears to have played no active military role (though his son fought in the engagers' army), but his support for the engagement was sufficient to arouse the wrath of the church. After the defeat of the engagers his case was considered for nearly a year by church courts before his declarations of repentance and of adherence to the solemn league and covenant were accepted by the presbytery of Fordyce in April 1651. After the Cromwellian conquest of Scotland, Banff's royalism (or perhaps rather that of his son, who had fought at the battle of Worcester in September 1651) brought renewed persecution. A fine of $1000 sterling was imposed on him in 1654, though this was soon reduced by two-thirds and he was appointed a JP in 1656. Restoration of monarchy in 1660 brought new troubles, for he was summoned by the privy council for the slaughter of John Gordon. Banff took his seat in parliament again on 18 June 1663, but he died on 11 August. 
Lord Banff's role in stirring the royalists of north-east Scotland into military opposition to the covenanters in 1639 was notable, earning from enemies the judgement that he was 'a rash and profane man' (R. Baillie, 'Letters and Journals', 3 vols., 1841-2, 2.204). He seems to have quickly repented this rashness, for after the destruction of his houses that it brought about he was, as James Gordon commented, 'never more cordiall [whole-hearted] in the King's service' and 'never did engadge any mor' (J. Gordon, 2.263-4), advancing age and financial difficulties doubtless helping to restrain him from action. 


@@@@@


doc= 20594


Ogilvie, Sir George, of Barras, first baronet (fl. 1634-1679), royalist army officer, was descended from the Ogilvies of Balnagarno, Forfarshire, and was the son of William Ogilvie of Lumgair, Kincardineshire, and Katherine, niece of Alexander Strachan of Thornton. In 1634, by a contract dated 31 January, he married Elizabeth (died 1653), daughter of the Hon. Sir John Douglas of Barras, Forfarshire, fourth son of William, earl of Angus, and purchased Barras from his wife's brother. 
Having in early life served in the German wars, Ogilvie was in 1651 appointed by William Keith, sixth Earl Marischal, with the title of lieutenant-governor, to hold the earl's castle of Dunnottar against the forces of Cromwell. Special importance attached to the trust committed to him from the fact that the honours or regalia of Scotland (crown, sceptre, and sword of state) had been placed in the castle, but for the supply of armaments and provisions he was almost wholly dependent on his own exertions. On 31 August 1651 the committee of estates addressed an order to Alexander Lindsay, first earl of Balcarres, authorizing him to receive the regalia from Ogilvie, whom they directed to deliver them up to Balcarres; but Ogilvie declined to do so on the ground that Balcarres was not properly authorized to relieve him of the responsibility, which had been imposed on him by parliament. He, however, declared his readiness to deliver them up if relieved of responsibility, or his readiness to defend his charge to the last if properly supplied with men, provisions, and ammunition. The castle was summoned by Cromwell's troops to surrender on 8 and 22 November, but Ogilvie expressed his determination to hold out. While the castle was closely besieged, the regalia were, at the instance of Margaret Erskine, dowager Countess Marischal, delivered by Lady Ogilvie to Christian Fletcher, the wife of the minister of Kinneff, who concealed them about her person, and, passing the lines of the besiegers without suspicion, took them to the church of Kinneff, where they were placed below the floor. Although Ogilvie had received a warrant from the Earl Marischal (a prisoner of war in London) empowering him to deliver up the castle to Major-General Deane, he maintained a firm attitude until he obtained terms as favourable as it was possible to grant. On 1 February 1652 he sent a letter to the king asking for speedy supplies of ammunition and provisions. These were not granted him, but on 12 April the king sent him a message approving of his fidelity, urging him to hold out until winter, and permitting him either to ship the regalia in a vessel sent to transfer them to Holland, or to retain them should he think the removal would dishearten the garrison. The castle was surrendered on 24 May to Colonel Thomas Morgan, who had received the siege guns needed to reduce the fortress. The conditions were that the garrison should march out with the usual honours, and be permitted to pass to their homes unmolested. The favourable terms were granted in the hope of obtaining possession of the regalia; but as Ogilvie failed to deliver them up, he and Lady Ogilvie were detained prisoners in a room of the castle until 10 January 1653, only obtaining their liberty when all hope of recovering the regalia was dissipated by a false but circumstantial report that they had been carried abroad. Ogilvie was also required to find caution in $2000 sterling. 
The regalia remained in concealment at Kinneff until the Restoration, when they were delivered up by Ogilvie to Charles II. Subsequently forgotten, they were rediscovered by Walter Scott in 1818 and have since been on display at Edinburgh Castle. For his services in connection with their preservation, he was by letters patent on 5 March or 5 July 1662 created a baronet of Nova Scotia, and on 3 March 1666 received a new charter of the lands of Barras, which was ratified by parliament on 22 August 1670 and on 17 August 1679. In 1667 he was named a commissioner of supply for Kincardineshire, and in 1670 a commissioner of excise for the county. There is no record of the date of his death. He was buried at Kinneff, where there is a monument to him and his wife in the rebuilt church; the couple are also commemorated with an inscription at Dunnottar Castle. In 1701 their only son, Sir William Ogilvie, published a pamphlet setting forth the special services of his father as preserver of the regalia, in contrast to those rendered by the Earl Marischal, the title being 'A true account of the preservation of the regalia of Scotland'. The pamphlet, which was reprinted in the 'Somers Tracts', gave rise, at the instance of William Keith, second earl of Kintore, to an action before the privy council, which, on 8 July 1702, passed an act for burning the book at the cross of Edinburgh, and fined Sir William Ogilvie's son David, one of the defenders, $1200 Scots. The baronetcy became extinct with the death ('c'.1840) of Sir William Ogilvie, the eighth baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 20595


Ogilvy, James, fifth Lord Ogilvy of Airlie (1540/41-1606), nobleman, was the eldest son of James Ogilvy, master of Ogilvy ('c'.1520-1547), and his wife, Katherine Campbell (d. 1578), daughter of Sir John Campbell ['see under 'Campbell family, of Cawdor] and Muriel Calder of Cawdor. His father having died at the battle of Pinkie on 10 September 1547, he succeeded his grandfather, James, fourth Lord Ogilvy of Airlie, some time before 13 July 1548. His mother married the ninth earl of Crawford in 1549 and in 1558 he himself married Jean Forbes (1541- 'c'.1610), eldest daughter of William, seventh Lord Forbes, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir William Keith. They had eight sons: James, sixth Lord Ogilvy of Airlie; Sir John of Craig; David of Pitmuies; William, a pensioner of Kirriemuir and Newtyle; Archibald, who probably died young; Patrick of Muirton; Francis of Newgrange; and George of Friock; as well as a daughter, Margaret, who wed first George Keith, fifth Earl Marischal, and then, after his death, Alexander Strachan of Thornton. 
A powerful figure in Forfarshire, Lord Ogilvy joined the lords of congregation at Perth in June 1559 and was one of the Scottish commissioners who brokered the treaty of Berwick on 27 February 1560. The decision taken by Alexander Ogilvy of Deskford and Findlater in 1545 to disinherit his son in favour of his wife's relation Sir John Gordon, third son of the fourth earl of Huntly, caused great division between the Ogilvys and Gordons, which had reached its peak by the time Queen Mary returned to Scotland in August 1561. On 10 September 1562 Gordon of Deskford attacked Lord Ogilvy outside the Aberdeen tolbooth, severely wounding his right arm. Ogilvy joined the crown forces brought north to bring Deskford to heel and when the Gordons opposed these at Corrichie on 28 October they were routed, Deskford being taken prisoner and executed. Ogilvy received a commission with neighbouring lords in September 1563 to remove the MacGregors from their lands. When the earl of Moray and the duke of Chatelherault rebelled in 1565, Ogilvy supported the crown. He attended the dinner given by Lord Bothwell in the Ainslie tavern in April 1567 and signed the bond supporting the earl's marriage to the queen, but subsequently joined the confederacy of nobles who gathered at Stirling in June determined to safeguard the infant prince and separate Mary from Bothwell. He was not present at Carberry on the 15th, however, and cannot have approved of the subsequent forced abdication and imprisonment of the queen. 
When Mary escaped from Lochleven Castle on 2 May 1568 Ogilvy signed the Hamilton bond and rode north to muster forces, but was unable to reach the queen's army before its precipitate defeat at Langside on the 13th. Lord Ogilvy, who was able to carry most of the Ogilvy lairds, including Inverkeilor and Balgro, into the queen's party, assembled with other Marian supporters at Largs at the end of July. Though he signed a bond in April 1569 acknowledging Moray's authority as regent, he wrote to Mary the following month confirming his allegiance. He attended the Perth convention in July, voting against the queen's divorce from Bothwell. In December, Ogilvy and his wife were ordered to desist from oppressing John Stirling of Easter Brakie. The following August, Ogilvy acted in concert with the earl of Crawford and Sir James Balfour of Pittendreich in proclaiming the queen at Brechin and Forfar. However, the earl of Morton's sudden descent on Forfarshire forced him to retreat to Aberdeen and, leaving his wife as commissioner of his estates, he took ship for France in October. He returned to Airlie in 1572, but was shortly after arrested and warded in Linlithgow Palace. In May 1576 he was transferred to Glasgow and in February 1577, through the solicitation of various noblemen, to St Andrews. On his way to Fife he halted in Edinburgh to speak with Morton, who surprisingly expressed his respect for the queen. He was finally released on 14 March 1578, when James VI first asserted his personal authority, and at the Stirling convention was briefly admitted to the privy council; but when Morton recovered control of government Ogilvy retired to Bolshan Castle. He attended the October 1579 parliament which extended the pacification of Perth to many former Marians but unexpectedly forfeited the Hamiltons. 
Morton fell irrevocably from power at the end of 1580 and Ogilvy gave his support to the new government of the duke of Lennox. The kirk had voiced suspicions as to his Catholic leanings, and to dispel these doubts he subscribed the negative confession in January 1581. He joined the privy council in March and sat on the assize which condemned Morton for Darnley's murder in June. The Ruthven raid of August 1582 brought down Lennox and for its duration removed Ogilvy from participation in government. In 1585 he was called before the council to answer for reiving the property of Patrick Wood of Bonnyton. He was also closely associated with the Catholic conspiracies of King James's early reign and was known to shelter Jesuit missionaries in his houses, while his son Sir John of Craig was vigorously pursued by the government for much of his life for his persistent support of the Jesuit missions. Ogilvy nevertheless continued to enjoy royal favour, and in June 1596 was appointed with the bishop of Dunkeld as an ambassador to attend the coronation of Christian IV of Denmark, returning in September with rich rewards. 
Between 1557 and 1560 Lord Ogilvy had purchased the lands of Forter from the abbot of Coupar Angus, displacing the MacKerrows to install his own kinsmen on the lands and building Forter Castle to control the passes. This expansion north into Glenisla brought the Ogilvys into conflict with Campbells settled on the old abbey lands and with the earls of Atholl who disputed the lordship. Ogilvy had acquired a feu of the lands and castle of Farnell from the sixth earl of Argyll and bishop of Brechin in 1574, but failed to meet payment, and when the young seventh earl raised an action to recover the same in July 1590 relations between the families worsened, reaching a bloody conclusion when the master of Ogilvy and his brothers murdered four Campbells in Glenisla on 18 August 1591. The Campbells retaliated days later, bringing down over 3000 men in a brutal raid on Ogilvy lands, killing indiscriminately and forcing Lord Ogilvy and his family to flee Forter Castle. Argyll was ordered to withdraw his clansmen, but the Campbells remained on the hills, to raid Glenisla and Glen Cova again in September. Later in the month Lord Ogilvy and the earl of Crawford captured and summarily executed at Perth two MacGregors who had participated in the raids, infuriating Argyll and Atholl, whose protection the MacGregors claimed. Lord Ogilvy was unsuccessful in seeking redress for the raids before the council, the king choosing to reconcile the affair through arbitration. In February 1599 Ogilvy was summoned with the sixth earl of Atholl to appear before council to resolve their feud, but both men proved reluctant to compear, the master appearing for his father on 19 April, while Atholl sent no representation. 
In the later years of his life Ogilvy, who enjoyed good relations with his nephew Crawford, sought to avoid a resurgence of his family's old feud with the Lindsays, but was unable to restrain his sons. In March 1600 the master and some of his brothers attacked Alexander Lindsay, Lord Spynie, on the road between Kinblethmont and Gardyne, wounding his head and killing Patrick, son of William Rynd of Carse. All parties were required to find caution and Lord Ogilvy was ordered to ward himself in Arbroath. None the less his son David was fatally stabbed by David Lindsay, an illegitimate son of the earl of Crawford, as he made his way to his lodgings in Edinburgh's Canongate on 13 July 1602, while the master continued to pursue his feud with Spynie, blowing off the gate of Kinblethmont Castle to sack it during a night raid on 30 January 1603. Lord Ogilvy died at Farnell Castle in October 1606 and was buried with Catholic rites in the aisle of Kinnell church. 


@@@@@


doc= 20596


Ogilvy, James, first earl of Airlie (1586-1666), nobleman, was the eldest son of James Ogilvy, sixth Lord Ogilvy of Airlie ('c'.1565- 'c'.1617x19), and his first wife, Lady Jean (died 1612), daughter of William Ruthven, first earl of Gowrie. He succeeded his father on the latter's death, after 12 October 1617. He married (contract dated 22 November 1610) Lady Isobel or Isobella (1596-1682), second daughter of Thomas Hamilton, first earl of Haddington. In 1631 he was one of the commissioners appointed to inquire into the burning of Frendraught Castle, as part of a Gordon-Crichton feud. A committed royalist, he was created earl of Airlie and Lord Ogilvy of Alyth and Lintrathen by a royal patent dated at York on 2 April 1639. 
In 1640 Airlie went to England to avoid having to take the covenant, leaving his eldest son, James Ogilvy, Lord Ogilvy, in charge of his estates. The covenanting earl of Argyll marched to Airlie Castle with 5000 men and demanded its surrender. When Lord Ogilvy refused, and prudently departed, Argyll burned both the castle and the other principal Airlie seat at Forter, Forfarshire. A contemporary commented that 'they have not left him in all his lands a cock to crow day' ('CSP dom.', '1640', 53) and the episode later inspired the well-known Scottish ballad 'The Bonnie Hoose o'Airlie'. Returning to Scotland, Airlie sat in the covenanting parliament of 1643, but the following year he and his three sons joined the marquess of Montrose's royalist army. As a result he suffered forfeiture of life, titles, and estates by parliament on 11 February 1645. On 15 August he led the first charge at the battle of Kilsyth and routed the covenanters. He was present at Montrose's subsequent defeat at Philiphaugh (13 September) where James, Lord Ogilvy, was captured; the latter only escaped death when his sister managed to smuggle him out of prison. Airlie's second son, Thomas, had been killed on the royalist side at the battle of Inverlochy (2 February 1645). 
Airlie was exempted from the general pardon of 11 February 1646 and was excommunicated by the Church of Scotland on 27 July 1646. Not until 17 March 1647 was his forfeiture finally rescinded, thanks to the intervention of John, first earl of Middleton, who had been authorized to pacify northern Scotland. His participation was expected in the 'start' in October 1650, a failed attempt to free Charles II from covenanter tutelage by rallying royalist support. Thereafter he appears to have taken no more part in public affairs, living quietly with his wife. By 1664 he was complaining that he could not 'get anywhares abroad [outside] for my age and infirmitie, I being thre scoir and eighteen yeirs' ('Scots peerage', 1.124). He died on 21 February 1666. 


@@@@@


doc= 20597


Ogilvy, James, second earl of Airlie (1611-1704), royalist army officer, was born about Christmas 1611 at Airlie Castle, Forfarshire. He was the eldest of the three sons of James Ogilvy, master of Ogilvy, later seventh Lord Ogilvy of Airlie and first earl of Airlie (1586-1666), and his wife, Lady Isabella (1596-1682), second daughter of Thomas Hamilton, first earl of Haddington. He was tutored by William Robertson, at home from an early age and then from 1626 to 1630 at the University of St Andrews, where (Robertson assured the young nobleman's father) young Ogilvy took delight in the study of geometry. At St Andrews, Ogilvy associated with his friend and cousin, James Graham, earl of Montrose. Ogilvy courted Magdalene, the youngest daughter of David, Lord Carnegie. According to tradition, as Ogilvy was on his way to propose to her he was thrown from his horse while fording a river. Regarding the ducking as an unfavourable omen, he proceeded no further. The core of truth to the story is Magdalene's rejection of Ogilvy and her later marriage to Montrose. Ogilvy shortly afterwards, and while still at St Andrews, married Helen (died 1664), daughter of Sir George Ogilvy, later first Lord Banff: the marriage contract was dated 20-25 March 1629. Together they had at least seven children, two sons and five daughters. Following the coronation of Charles I in Edinburgh in 1633 Ogilvy travelled abroad for two years. In France he attended the school of 'Monsieur Anglo at Paris' where he learned swordsmanship, dancing, and riding; in Italy he met Montrose again. 
Ogilvy was no friend to hardline presbyterianism, and indeed there is evidence of his Catholicism, though later he was clearly a member of the Church of Scotland, albeit of strongly episcopalian sympathies. He was an ardent royalist in the bishops' wars (1638-40) along with his father, who was created earl of Airlie by Charles I for his services in 1639 (henceforward Ogilvy was known as Lord Ogilvy until he succeeded to the earldom). In the autumn of 1639 Ogilvy defended Airlie Castle against Montrose, who had been ordered to take and raze it. Instead, after a token struggle, and as part of Montrose's increasing distancing of himself from the covenanter cause, the castle was surrendered and a small garrison put in, while Ogilvy was permitted to escape. Montrose was sharply challenged by Argyll for this. The July following, Argyll's punitive campaign of fire and sword against the highland royalists brought him to the castle. Taking revenge on Montrose and Ogilvy, Argyll seized Airlie Castle, evicting Ogilvy's heavily pregnant wife and her children, and burnt the place down. Later balladry recorded that he did not 'leave a stan'in' stane in Airly' (Wilson, 1.215). Ogilvy, who had left the castle upon Argyll's approach to warn his mother and raise more troops, was to remind Charles II that: 'The House off Airlie was caste downe and the House of Forthar burned in the year of God 1640, having refused to covenant and joyn in armes with them. Also att tyme my wyff being big with chyld was necessitatt to flie from hir house, and having only two chyldren thay were carried awa prisoners and kepit in Dundee, the eldest of thame nott being much above thrie or foure yeirs off age. (Wilson, 2.21)' With a warrant out for his arrest, Ogilvy fled to England. In October 1641, after returning to Scotland with Montrose, Ogilvy was involved in the 'incident', the conspiracy which had been approved by the king to arrest, and possibly assassinate, Argyll and the marquess of Hamilton. Ogilvy continued a close companion of Montrose, acting as his aide-de-camp. In February 1643 he accompanied Montrose to Charles I's court at Oxford to concert measures for waging war against the covenanters and then accompanied him to north-east Scotland where he sought to co-ordinate support for a rising. Refusing to obey the order of the Scottish parliament to appear before them and give security for keeping the peace, he was declared a rebel and specially exempted from pardon in August 1643. In April 1644 Ogilvy rode with Montrose in his brief invasion of south-west Scotland, and following its failure crossed the border again in disguise to scout out royalist prospects. However, when Montrose went north to begin his string of victories Ogilvy was not with his kinsman: carrying dispatches from Montrose to the king at Oxford, he had been captured by parliamentarian troops near Preston in Lancashire in August. He was handed over to the Scots and taken prisoner to Edinburgh, where he remained a prisoner in the Tolbooth for more than a year. He underwent frequent examination because he refused to accept the authority of the high court of justice to try him and demanded to be tried by his peers and to be tried as a prisoner of war rather than a rebel. He was frequently visited by his mother, sister, and wife, who in August 1645 petitioned for his removal from the then plague-infested town, and obtained an order for his removal to the Bass Rock. 
Before this change of prisons could be effected, however, Montrose inflicted a severe defeat on the covenanters at Kilsyth (15 August 1645), which placed most of Scotland at his disposal, and sent orders to Edinburgh for the release of Lord Ogilvy and other prisoners, which were at once obeyed. Rejoining Montrose, Ogilvy resumed active service, and was present at the battle of Philiphaugh (13 September 1645). There he was captured again when the royalist army was routed. On 16 January 1646 he stood trial for treason at St Andrews and was condemned to death. The day appointed for his decapitation was 20 January. On the evening before, however, his elder sister changed clothes with him in his prison in the castle of St Andrews, and he escaped; $1000 sterling was offered for his capture dead or alive, but the reward was ineffectual. In the following July, as part of the peace terms negotiated with Montrose's followers, Ogilvy secured a pardon from General John Middleton, which the Scottish parliament was obliged to confirm. He also gave satisfaction to the kirk, and was released from excommunication. 
In May 1649 Ogilvy took part in the royalist rising in the north of Sir Thomas Mackenzie of Pluscarden. He was excommunicated again in July. In 1650 he was involved in planning another rising, though he laid down his arms in October when instructed to by Charles II following the failure of his attempted coup against his new covenanter allies. Instead in December he was appointed colonel of a cavalry regiment, a position he was able to take up once he had submitted to the kirk on 9 February 1651. After the defeat of the Scottish forces by George Monck's English army in Scotland, Ogilvy was captured, along with the members of the committees of estates, near Alyth in Forfarshire, on 28 August 1651. He was sent a prisoner from Dundee to Tynemouth Castle, and on to the Tower of London. A year later he was released on condition that he would not leave London without permission; but on a general order he was soon recommitted to the Tower. He remained a prisoner until January 1657, with the exception of three months' leave granted in July 1655 for the purpose of visiting Scotland. In a petition to Cromwell in 1656 he stated that he was seized by a party of horse under General Monck while peaceably residing at his mansion-house in Scotland and protested that he had never taken an active part against the Commonwealth. He was released in 1657 on finding security in $20,000. 
At the Restoration, Ogilvy's attempts to redeem his losses by grants from the king met with little success: a pension of $500 a year was only erratically paid. He succeeded as second earl of Airlie on the death of his father in February 1666. He is frequently mentioned in the parliamentary proceedings of the reigns of Charles II and James VII. He also served actively in defence of the Restoration episcopalian settlement. In the spring of 1665 he commanded a troop of horse under the commander-in-chief in Scotland, Thomas Dalyell, taking part in November in the defeat of the covenanter rising at Rullion Green. In 1667 he was in command of a force stationed at Perth to keep watch against Dutch incursions and to keep in check the presbyterians of Fife. 
Airlie's first wife, Helen Ogilvy, died in early July 1664. His second marriage was to Mary (died 1707), daughter of Sir John Grant of Freuchie and widow of Lewis Gordon, third marquess of Huntly. Their courtship was prolonged initially by the opposition of his mother and Mary's son and then by the difficulties in obtaining the sanction of the Church of Scotland for Airlie to marry a woman who, as a convert to Catholicism, stood excommunicate. Their marriage contract was dated 31 October 1668 but it was only in June 1669 that the banns were publicly read and the marriage performed privately. In 1678 Dalyell was appointed commander of one of three cavalry troops raised for the renewed repression of the covenanters. Airlie spent the following years in these policing duties, stationed at different times in Renfrewshire, Ayr, and Galloway. In June 1679 his troop was in Glasgow to repel the attack of the covenanters fresh from their victory at Drumclog. By 1680 Dalyell was complaining of the absenteeism of his lieutenant (and of half Airlie's troop) and Airlie was superseded in command. The elderly earl successfully protested against this, but refused to serve again under Dalyell. Under James VII, with John Graham of Claverhouse as commander-in-chief in Scotland, Airlie was again offered a command, patrolling the Ayrshire coast with a regiment of dragoons. He was active in the retribution which followed Argyll's abortive rising in 1685, laying claim to the forfeited estate of George Melville, earl of Melville. 
By the summer of 1687 Airlie's loyalty to the crown was being severely tested by the policies of the Catholic James and, forced to choose between his monarch and his episcopal kirk, Airlie resigned his commission. At the revolution of 1688 he declared for William and Mary and in March 1689 he signed the act declaring the legality of the meeting of the estates of parliament. Thereafter his great age, and perhaps his disillusion when a presbyterian church settlement was rapidly imposed, made him withdraw. He was fined $1200 Scots for not attending the meeting of parliament in 1693. In 1698 and 1700 his attendance was excused on account of his age and infirmities and his fines remitted. He died, aged ninety-two, at his lodgings in Banff on 16 February 1704. He was survived by his second wife and was succeeded by his second but eldest surviving son, David (died 1717). 


@@@@@


doc= 20598


Ogilvy, James, fourth earl of Findlater and first earl of Seafield (1663-1730), politician, was born on 11 July 1663, the second son of the five children of James Ogilvy, third earl of Findlater (died 1711), and Lady Anna Seton ('c'.1632-1687), eldest daughter of Hugh Montgomery, seventh earl of Eglinton. He was educated under the guidance of a private tutor, Patrick Innes, and in May 1675 he proceeded to Marischal College, Aberdeen, where he studied for three years. After a brief stay in the Netherlands in 1683, he settled down to his legal studies and was admitted to the bar as an advocate on 16 January 1685. In 1687 he married Anne (1671/2-1708), daughter of Sir William Dunbar. 
Ogilvy's political and parliamentary career began when he was elected to represent the burgh of Cullen, Banffshire, in the 1689 convention of estates, and he also represented Cullen in the parliament of 1689-95. Ogilvy initially played a dubious role in the convention. On 16 March he subscribed the act which stated that the convention was a free and lawful meeting of the estates, but he was also one of the five members who voted against the 'forfaulture' of James VII. George Lockhart of Carnwath in his memoirs observed that Ogilvy was 'much taken notice of by reason of a speech he made against the forfeiting of King James' (''Scotland's Ruine'', 18). Yet Ogilvy appears to have fallen into line with the dominant faction very quickly, and on 5 April he was nominated to the committee of the convention instructed to oversee the election of magistrates for a new town council for Edinburgh, to be held in St Giles's on 10 April. Furthermore, on 13 April he was named as a member of the committee to consider the political condition and state of the councils and magistrates in the burghs of the kingdom as a whole. Ogilvy's speedy rehabilitation with the dominant faction was reflected in his appointment to the three-man committee of 12 April which was ordered to consider a proclamation in which no one would be allowed to speak or write against the government. On 23 April Ogilvy was also appointed as one of the commissioners to treat for a union of the kingdoms with England. He was also politically active in the parliamentary session of 15 April to 22 July 1690. On 27 July he was appointed to a committee to consider overtures given by the viscount of Tarbat in open parliament, and on 1 July he was added to the committees for the act concerning lease making, fines and forfeitures, and prohibiting the import of brandy and rum. Likewise, on 18 July he was appointed to the commission for plantation of kirks. 
In 1693 Ogilvy was knighted and appointed as sheriff of Banffshire as well as solicitor-general of Scotland, a position which, according to Lockhart of Carnwath, was due to the patronage of William, third duke of Hamilton. He took the oath of allegiance and the assurance in parliament on 18 April 1693, and he was a member of the committee for security of the kingdom in the 1695 session of parliament. He supported the parliamentary report into the Glencoe massacre, but, pragmatic as ever, he informed William Carstares, the king's chaplain and close adviser in Scottish affairs, that he had 'acted a moderate part in all this' and he was prepared to be ordered by King William 'as to the method of serving him as is my duty' ('State papers', 258). As solicitor-general he had visited London on more than one occasion and made a favourable impression on the king. In the aftermath of the 1695 parliament Ogilvy was appointed as joint secretary of state with John, earl of Tullibardine, following the dismissal of James Johnston. 
Ogilvy attended the 1696 parliament in the capacity of a lesser officer of state, and Sir John Hamilton took his place as the elected member of parliament for Cullen. On 24 June 1698 he was created Viscount Seafield and Lord Ogilvy of Cullen, and was appointed as the president of the 1698 session of parliament which met on 16 July. Sir James Murray of Philiphaugh noted that Seafield presided 'very extraordinary well, both readily, boldly, and impartially' ('State papers', 383). Seafield managed the session to defend the king's interest, a difficult task given the controversy concerning the Darien crisis. He was one of the 108 members on 26 January 1700 who voted for a parliamentary address to the king concerning Caledonia, as opposed to a formal act. Seafield appears to have been opposed to the Darien scheme from the start, and Lockhart of Carnwath argued that Seafield was 'visibly against the interest of his country, and trimmed and tricked so shamefully in the affair of Darien that he thereby, from being generally well-beloved, drew upon himself the hatred of all who wished well to that glorious undertaking' (''Scotland's Ruine'', 18-19). His hostility to the scheme aroused the anger of the Edinburgh mob, and in June 1700 his Edinburgh lodgings were attacked after news reached the city of Campbell of Finnab's victory over the Spaniards at Darien in a small-scale skirmish. Ogilvy was appointed lord high commissioner to the general assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1700, and on 24 June 1701 he was created earl of Seafield, viscount of Reidhaven, and Lord Ogilvy of Deskford and Cullen. 
Seafield retained the office of secretary of state, and, following the death of King William in 1702, a new warrant for a patent and commission was issued on 12 May by which he was appointed joint secretary, along with James, duke of Queensberry, with an annual pension of $1000 sterling. Seafield therefore retained his political influence after Queen Anne's accession, and in 1702 he was appointed as one of the members of the ill-fated commission to treat for union with England. On 1 November of that year he was appointed lord high chancellor of Scotland and lord high commissioner to the general assembly which met in Edinburgh on 10 March 1703. He was present in the 1703 and 1704 sessions of parliament in the capacity of lord chancellor, and on 8 August 1704 he was appointed as one of the commissioners of supply for Banffshire. Later that year he was ousted from the chancellorship by John, second marquess of Tweeddale, but on 17 October he was appointed as joint secretary of state (with John, earl of Roxburghe) once more, and on 9 March 1705 he was reappointed as lord chancellor, following Tweeddale's dismissal. 
In March 1706 Seafield was appointed to the second commission to treat for a union with England, the commission which negotiated the treaty of union with English commissioners. Seafield played an important role as lord chancellor and adherent of the court faction in managing the treaty through the parliament of Scotland in the final session of its existence. In his speech to the parliament on the opening day of the session on 3 October 1706, Seafield informed the house that: 'it must be of great Advantage to have this whole Island Unite under one Government, and Conjoyned entirely in Interest and Affection, having Equality of all Rights and Privileges, with a free Communication and Intercourse of Trade, which must certainly Establish our Security, Augment our Strength, and Increase our Trade and Riches.' The pragmatic nature of Seafield's character was reflected in his belief that 'We can never Expect a more favourable Juncture for Compleating this Union, than at present, when her Majesty has not only Recommended it, but Declared, That she will Esteem it the greatest Glory of Her Reign, to have it perfected' ('APS', '1702-7', 11.98-9). Lockhart's memoirs indicate that Seafield was fully aware of the role played by the Scottish treasurer, David Boyle, earl of Glasgow, in the distribution of $20,000 sterling for payment of arrears of salary in the winter of 1706, which would later lead to the view that Scottish members of parliament had been bribed. Seafield received $490 sterling of this money. In one of the most famous events in Scottish history, Seafield signed the 'Act of Union' in the capacity of chancellor of Scotland, and, in face of the assembled Scottish parliament, handed it back to the clerk, exclaiming 'now there's ane end of an old song' (''Scotland's Ruine'', 204). 
Seafield was chosen as one of the sixteen peers to represent Scotland in the new parliament of Great Britain, and he was continuously re-elected until 1727. He was sworn of the English privy council in 1707, and was also appointed as lord chief baron of the exchequer in the same year. His services in securing the Union in Scotland were recognized in 1708 with a pension of $3000 sterling per annum. Following the death of his father in 1711, he took the additional title of earl of Findlater. Nevertheless, his disillusionment with the progress of the Union came to the fore in 1713, when he introduced a bill for its repeal. His main grievance focused on the application of the malt tax to Scotland, but he also cited the abolition of the Scottish privy council, the extension of English treason legislation to Scotland, and the bar on Scottish peers' being peers of Great Britain. His motion was defeated by only four votes, a telling indication of the state of the Union at that particular time. In November 1713 he was reappointed lord chancellor, and he became keeper of the great seal of Scotland shortly afterwards. Seafield died on 15 August 1730 at Cullen, where he was buried. He left a historical legacy as one of the key Scotsmen in the securing of the Union of 1707. 


@@@@@


doc= 20599


Ogilvy, James, sixth earl of Findlater and third earl of Seafield (c.1714-1770), agriculturist, was the only son in the family of one son and two daughters of James, fifth earl of Findlater and second earl of Seafield ('c'.1689-1764), and his first wife, Lady Elizabeth Hay, second daughter of Thomas, seventh earl of Kinnoull. Before succeeding his father in 1764 he was known as Lord Deskford, and while travelling abroad he made the acquaintance of Horace Walpole, who, in a letter to General Conway on 23 April 1740, wrote of him, 'There are few young people have so good an understanding', but who also referred to his 'solemn Scotchery' as not a 'little formidable' ('Letters', 1.46). On 9 June 1749 Ogilvy married Lady Mary (1720-1795), second daughter of John Murray, first duke of Atholl. They had two sons, one of whom died in 1763. The other, James, who died in 1811, was the last earl of the Ogilvy line. 
Ogilvy became interested in encouraging industry and agriculture early in his career. In 1752 he opened a large bleachfield in the parish of Deskford, and he started a factory in Cullen for the manufacture of linen and damask. From 1754 to 1761 he was one of the commissioners of customs for Scotland, and in 1765 he was appointed one of the lords of police. He was also a trustee for the improvement of fisheries and manufactures, and for the management of the annexed estates in Scotland. By his example and encouragement he did much to promote advanced methods of agriculture in Banffshire. He introduced turnip husbandry, and granted long leases to his tenants on condition that within a certain period they should enclose their lands and adopt certain improved methods of cropping. To prevent damage to young plantations on his estate, he agreed to give certain of his tenants, on the termination of their leases, every third tree, or its value in money. 
Ogilvy died at Cullen House, Banff, on 3 November 1770. 


@@@@@


doc= 20600


Ogilvy, John (fl. 1587-1601), adventurer, was the son of Gilbert Ogilvy of Pourie (died 1601). His sister, Anne Ogilvy, married on 30 November 1587 Sir Thomas Erskine, a gentleman of the bedchamber of James VI and later earl of Kellie. 
Scattered details about Pourie Ogilvy's life point to a career in espionage from the late 1580s. For example, when Thomas Phelippes, an informant of the earl of Essex in Flanders, encountered Ogilvy in 1595 he advised the earl to question Archibald Douglas, a diplomat of James VI in London, who had 'won' Ogilvy 'to be a spy for Sr. Fr. Walsingham' in Scotland, so that he had sent letters in cipher, for which 'he got a good store of coin from Mr. Secretary' ('Salisbury MSS', 6.512). After Walsingham's death in 1590 Ogilvy occasionally reported to Douglas; in a letter to Douglas written on 8 January 1593, Ogilvy gave special attention to Angus, Huntly, and Erroll (ibid., 4.279). In the revelations of the 'Spanish blanks' in December 1593 -- the blank sheets alleged to incriminate the three earls and others in clandestine negotiations with the king of Spain -- Ogilvy was identified as the original messenger to bring 'the Scotch king's instructions to Spain' (ibid., 4.216), but he escaped arrest by leaving the paper with George Kerr, who was charged with treason. However, Ogilvy's chances for advancement were ended on 30 September 1594, when he was proclaimed 'traitor' and 'trafficking papist' by order of the Scottish privy council. 
Undaunted by this loss of status Ogilvy went to Flanders in June 1595 as a self-appointed deputy of 'the Catholics of Scotland', who, according to Phelippes, told English Catholic exiles that 'the king of Scots is well inclined, and if he may see men in the field he will venture all to be free' ('Salisbury MSS', 6.512-13). Later, he claimed to be 'speaking on behalf of his king' to Esteban de Ibarra, secretary of state and war, in offering certain Scottish fortresses to Spanish control if troops were sent to support King James (Stafford, 150-52). He had also elevated himself to the title of baron, although the standard authorities on the peerage have no evidence for a barony of Pourie. He arrived in Rome in December 1595 to see the papal secretary of state, Cardinal Aldobrandini, and the Spanish ambassador, the duke of Sessa, whom he visited privately at night. He revealed that James was hoping for financial aid 'to protect himself from rebel vassals' as well as support for his claim to the English throne. He said he carried a sealed document declaring James's intention to become a Catholic, and prepared a list of 'Considerations' showing James's benign treatment of Catholics. Aldobrandini gave no commitment and Sessa commented in his long report that Ogilvy seemed 'cunning', while Ibarra had thought him 'full of inventions' (Archivo General de Simancas, estado 967, 30 Jan 1596). Sessa also quoted the critical doubts of John Cecil, an English priest and secret informant for Robert Cecil ('CSP dom.', '1595-7', 144-6), but gave Ogilvy and John Cecil funds to go to Spain. 
Upon arrival at the court in May, John Cecil informed Juan de Idiaquez, secretary of the council of state, that Ogilvy 'claims to come on behalf of his king', and as a baron 'is anxious to be treated with deference' (Archivo General de Simancas, estado 967, 15 May 1596). In a review of his papers, dated 15 June, Ogilvy recalled most of what he had told Sessa earlier in Rome, but on Ibarra's motion the council advised that confirmation of Ogilvy's credentials be secured from James VI and that he remain in Barcelona. 
Meanwhile, an unexpected revelation outside Spain damaged Ogilvy's remaining hopes of returning to the service of King James. Word spread that copies of the letters of Sessa relating Ogilvy's activities had been seized by a French ship and, after they reached the courts of London and Edinburgh, had created a furore. When Bowes, the English ambassador, protested to James about Ogilvy's 'practices in Spain', the king denied 'any participation in them' ('CSP Scot. ser.', 1589-1603, 717-18), so that Ogilvy's claim to 'speak in behalf of his king' appeared more dubious. A detailed list of objections, submitted by John Cecil on 1 December 1595, led to Ogilvy's confinement for over two years, because it confirmed the suspicions of the Spanish council. In the summer of 1598 his brother-in-law, Sir Thomas Erskine, pleaded for his release, but rather than return to Scotland, Ogilvy went to Madrid to petition the council in December 1598 for a 'salary' of 100 escudos (about $25) a month, on his claim of leaving Scotland 'because of his faith' and suffering imprisonment and 'many trials'. The council refused the salary, but 'to get him out of here more quickly' gave him alms (Archivo General de Simancas, estado 2763, 12 Jan 1599). Even then Henry Neville heard in Paris that Ogilvy stayed in Madrid on his so-called 'important business' ('CSP dom.', '1598-1601', 221) before returning to Scotland. Later in 1600, the keeper of Brancepeth Castle related that 'by secret direction of the Privy Council, [he] apprehended a Scottish laird called Ogilby that came from the court above, kept him safe for 40 days and sent up [to London] his letters and papers' ('Salisbury MSS', 10.204). 
In the same year, in a deal similar to the one he had made earlier with Walsingham, Ogilvy sent reports from Scotland to Robert Cecil as 'John Gibsone' and was paid for them ('CSP Scot. ser.', 1589-1603, 791). Even then, when he tried to enter England again in January 1601, he was arrested and placed in the custody of Robert Carey, the warden of the Middle March, until Cecil ordered that he be sent back northward, with the comment: 'of the man I have heard as evil as I have heard of any' ('Salisbury MSS', 11.22). After this Ogilvy tried to make peace with King James, begging that 'your M. will use my poor wife and bairns according to your wonted clemency' and insisting that he 'never had or used' any commission from the king overseas and that he sought only 'justice and pity' (ibid., 11.559). On 4 July 1601 Ogilvy lamented to Cecil that peace with James was 'upon rigorous conditions which he cannot afford' ('CSP Scot. ser.', 1589-1603, 799), but was told not to enter England again, since the queen did not countenance those subjects of James VI 'to whom he declares publicly his offence' ('Salisbury MSS', 11.290). On the death of his father, Ogilvy inherited his lands, but, still under the ban of the privy council, he had to leave for the continent, where his subsequent adventures have yet to be traced. 


@@@@@


doc= 20601


Ogilvy, Sir Patrick, of Boyne, Lord Boyne (d. in or after 1705), judge, was the eldest of three sons and three daughters of Sir Walter Ogilvie ('c'.1621-1666/7), sixth laird of Boyne, Banffshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Patrick Ogilvie of Inchmartin. In 1660 his father settled the barony and thanedom of Boyne on him. Ogilvy's first marriage, to Anna, eldest daughter of James, laird of Grant, produced a son, James ('b'. 1667). James became an active Jacobite who in 1707 fled to France, where he settled. Anna died in April 1667, and about 1679 Ogilvy married Anna, daughter of Douglas of Wittingham and widow of Patrick Barclay of Towie; a son, Archibald, was born in 1680. 
On the death of his father Ogilvy had inherited a large estate, extending from Portsoy to Banff, with its principal seat at Boyne Castle. He developed the harbour of Portsoy, and the nearby marble quarries which produced a stone which was popular in Britain and was also exported. His long study of the law, coupled to influence, marked him out for political advancement and he represented Banff in the Scottish parliament of 1669-74 and thereafter for some twenty-four years, until 1693 when his seat was declared vacant because he had not signed the assurance. On 14 October 1681 he was named a judge of the court of session, with the title Lord Boyne, and at the same time received the honour of knighthood. In addition he undertook military duties, both as a volunteer and in the regular forces, holding commissions in various militia regiments. 
Boyne ran into opposition when in 1684 he was recorded as having purchased a suit of English cloth, which incensed local manufacturers at Newmills who lodged a particular complaint against Andrew Irving, the Edinburgh merchant who had sold him the imported garments. An outspoken Jacobite, Boyne was one of those who in 1681 signed a declaration that it was unlawful to take up arms against the king. In January 1686 he received a pension from James II, for what reason it is not clear, but as he had in 1677 received a royal protection against paying annual rents on his mortgages, he was possibly already falling into financial difficulties and as a good Jacobite was considered worthy of support. 
Boyne's third marriage, in December 1682, was to Lady Anne, youngest daughter of Hugh Montgomerie, seventh earl of Eglinton, and widow of Sir Andrew Ramsay, bt. She seems to have been the cause of a public dispute in March 1686 between Boyne and the younger Campbell of Calder, by which time there was a rift between the couple and Anne was pregnant with a child whose paternity was disputed. Boyne was returning from court when Campbell confronted him in the High Street, Edinburgh, spat in his face, called him a rascal and a villain, and offered to strike him, saying that if Lord Boyne had been carrying a sword he would have run him through. The court of session committed Campbell to prison in the Tolbooth, and laid the matter before the king, who directed that Campbell should ask pardon of the king and the court, and, on his knees, of Lord Boyne, which he did on 14 September, gaining his release. Anne had departed by the time that the child was born in November 1686. It is not known if she was ever reconciled with her husband, nor what became of the child. 
On the accession of Queen Anne, Boyne was sent as an emissary of the Jacobites to propose to her, 'the design of bringing the Pretender to succeed to the crown upon a bargain that she should hold it during her life', and that on his return 'he gave the party full assurance that she had accepted it' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 5.455). He was mentioned in 1705 in the duke of Perth's instructions as one of those who had distinguished themselves by their loyalty to the exiled Stuart cause since the revolution of 1688. The date and circumstances of his death are not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 20602


Ogilvy, Sir Walter, of Lintrathen (c.1380-1438), administrator and landowner, was the second son of Sir Walter Ogilvy of Auchterhouse ('fl'. 'c'.1368-1392). His mother is said to have been Isabella, daughter and heir of Sir Malcolm Ramsay of Auchterhouse. From about 1400 the younger Walter built up his landed patrimony, 'c'.1414 obtaining from Archibald Douglas, fourth earl of Douglas (died 1424), a grant of the barony of Lintrathen, Angus, whence his style. His lands lay in Angus, Kincardineshire, Berwickshire, and Perthshire. He is also occasionally styled of Carcary or of Bolshan, both in Angus. In 1431 he received a licence from James I to erect his tower of Airlie, Angus, in the form of a castle. 
Ogilvy was knighted at the coronation of James I on 21 May 1424, after the latter's return from captivity in England. By November 1424 he was styled king's treasurer, a post introduced by James I. The treasurer and the comptroller, another new office, exercised the financial powers formerly held by the chamberlain, but the division of responsibilities before the 1460s is unclear. In the 1420s, at least, it seems that both the new officials dealt with the finances of the royal household, although eventually the treasurer was concerned in the main with feudal casualties. Until late 1432 Ogilvy was almost always present as a witness when crown charters were granted. From July 1430 he is normally styled master of the king's household, a post he had yielded by August 1432. While Ogilvy seldom thereafter witnessed crown charters, he had not fallen from favour, as in November 1432 he and others had an (apparently unused) English safe conduct for a year to go as Scots ambassadors to the Council of Basel. In March 1436 he accompanied James I's daughter Margaret on her journey to France to marry the dauphin, the future Louis XI. (Also in March 1436 another unimpeachable source has a Sir Walter Ogilvy present at Florence promising Pope Eugenius IV and his cardinals to attempt to persuade James I to repeal legislation against ecclesiastical liberty. Ogilvy of Lintrathen cannot have carried out both missions, but the identity of the other Sir Walter Ogilvy is uncertain.) 
After the murder of James I in 1437 Ogilvy was briefly treasurer again and may have resumed a career at court, but he died in late 1438; he is said to have been buried in Kinnell kirk. In 1427 and 1432 he founded chaplainries in Auchterhouse parish church. He and his first wife, Isabel (died in or before 1405), whose surname was possibly Durward, had two sons. Sir John, the elder, married Margaret, countess of Moray, widow probably of Thomas Dunbar, third earl of Moray, and their eldest son, James, was created Lord Ogilvy of Airlie in 1491. Sir Walter married second Isabel ('fl'. 1405-1440), daughter of Sir John Glen of Inchmartin and Margaret Erskine. They had five sons and two daughters, one of whom, Isabel, married first Patrick Lyon, first Lord Glamis, and second Gilbert, first Lord Kennedy. Sir Walter's widow survived him and married Robert Cunningham of Auchenbowie (died 'c'.1466). 


@@@@@


doc= 20603


O'Glacan, Nial (fl. 1602-1655), physician, was born in co. Donegal, Ireland. He may have gained the rudiments of a professional education -- familiarity with the aphorisms of Hippocrates, and acquaintance with some of Galen's works -- from one or other of the hereditary medical families, probably the MacDuinntsleibhes who served the O'Donnells, continuing his studies in continental schools. He evidently left Ireland at an early age, for he attended the exiled Hugh O'Donnell (died 1602) in Spain. 
Nellanus Glacanus, as he was known abroad, practised in Salamanca in 1621 and in the following year at Valencia. In the late 1620s, with commendable courage, he was treating plague in towns in the neighbourhood of Clermont and Toulouse, wearing the strange garb devised to give protection -- a long red or black leather gown, gauntlets, leather mask with glass-protected openings for the eyes, and a long beak filled with fumigants to cover the nose. O'Glacan was encouraged in his work by the bishop of Cahors, and in 1628, when the epidemic spread to Toulouse, he was appointed physician to its 'xenodochium pestiferorum'. He published 'Tractatus de peste, seu, Bevis, facilis, & experta methodus curandi pestem', a small volume containing 274 pages, printed by Raymond Colomerius, the university printer, in May 1629, and dedicated to Giles de Masuyer, vicomte d'Ambrieres. For many years O'Glacan remained in Toulouse; he was appointed physician to the king, and became professor of medicine in the university. 
For one reason or another O'Glacan removed to Bologna in 1646, and possibly it was at about this time that he visited Rome. In collaboration with the bishop of Ferns and Sir Nicholas Plunkett he edited a series of poems in Latin in praise of the pope, 'Regni Hiberniae ad sanctissimum Innocentium X pont. max. Pyramides encomiasticae' (1648). The preface is by O'Glacan, who mentions as his friends in Italy Francis O'Molloy, the author of 'Lucerna fidelium', Peter Talbot, Gerard O'Fearail, and John O'Fahy. The professor of eloquence at Lucca, Peter von Adrian Brocke, wrote a poem in praise of O'Glacan himself, the opening lines of which are quoted in Cameron's 'History of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland' (p. 7) and by Fleetwood in 'The History of Medicine in Ireland' (p. 49). 
O'Glacan's quarto two-volume 'Cursus medicus', containing thirteen books in three parts (1, 'Physiologica'; 2, 'Pathologica'; and 3, 'Semeiotica'), was published in 1655. An orthodox account of medicine, it is based firmly on Galen's teachings, making no attempt to foster new ideas. Commendatory verses are prefixed, and among those of part two are some by Gregory Fallon, a Connaughtman, who was at Bologna, and by another fellow countryman, the Revd Philip Roche SJ. Fallon says that O'Glacan is in Italy what Fuchsius was in Germany. Part one has two curious prefaces, one 'lectori benevolo', the other 'lectori malevolo'. 
These books are now great rarities, the availability of the 'Cursus' in Great Britain confined to the British Library. Samuel Simms, who possessed a copy of the 'Tractatus de peste', regarded it as the more attractive, and was impressed by the personal observations scattered through the text, indicative of an extensive knowledge of the dreaded disease. O'Glacan provides a detailed account of the malady's clinical features, paying special attention to examination of the pulse and the urine, and indicating those signs which he regarded as indicating a putridity of the humours. He supplies notes of three post-mortem examinations, drawing attention to petechial haemorrhages on the pleural membrane, and to splenomegaly. As in other acute diseases the prognosis is dubious. In the preface O'Glacan speaks of the fame of Ireland for learning in ancient times, and refers to the achievements of the Irish physicians. 
No personal details of the life of Nial O'Glacan have survived. According to Kenneth Dewhurst he died in Bologna 'around the middle of the century' (Dewhurst, xxxiv), but whether he lived to see the publication of the 'Cursus' is not stated. Presuming he saw his book through the press, he must have exceeded the biblical span. 


@@@@@


doc= 20604


Oglander, Sir John (1585-1655), diarist, eldest son of Sir William Oglander (1554-1609) of Nunwell, near Brading, Isle of Wight, and West Dean, Sussex, and his first wife, Ann, daughter of Anthony Dillington of Knighton, Isle of Wight, was born on 12 May 1585 at Nunwell. His family, which was of Norman origin, had been settled there since the conquest. Pride in his ancestry is a notable feature of his 'Advice to his descendants' and the journal, which gives a vivid picture of his life. Having attended Winchester College, he matriculated from Balliol College, Oxford, on 8 July 1603, and spent three years there without taking a degree. In 1604 he also entered the Middle Temple, but he was not called to the bar. On 4 August 1606 he married Frances (1590-1644), fifth daughter of Sir George More (1553-1632) of Loseley, Surrey. In the course of a very happy marriage they had four sons and three daughters. Following the death of his father on 17 March 1609, Oglander succeeded to the family estates, and was placed on the commission of the peace. 
On 22 December 1615 Oglander was knighted by James I at Royston. In 1620 he was appointed deputy governor of Portsmouth, but he sold the office three years later, having discovered that it entailed a heavy outlay on entertainment. He accepted in 1624 the post of deputy governor of the Isle of Wight, a post which, being close to home, did not also demand neglect of his estates. He sat for Yarmouth, Isle of Wight, in the parliaments of 1625, 1626, and 1628-9, and partook of the general concern about the threat to freemen's liberties posed by money-raising expedients emanating from the privy council over those years, although he was personally charmed by the king during the latter's visit to the island in 1628. He grew to dislike London and its temptations, preferring life on the island, with its simple pleasures of riding and playing bowls on the downs. He made concerted attempts to improve his estates, planting scores of trees and fruit bushes, but by the early 1630s had concluded that an energetic farming policy was insufficient by itself to maintain his income at a level appropriate to his social status: a gentleman needed public office or a career as a lawyer to raise and maintain his family. He was commissioner of oyer and terminer for Hampshire in 1635, and sheriff of the same county from 1637 to 1639. During his shrievalty he displayed great zeal and activity in the collection of ship money. 
On the outbreak of the civil war Oglander adhered to the king, and was superseded in the deputy governorship of the Isle of Wight by Colonel Carne. In June 1643 he was arrested and sent to London on suspicion of delinquency, having refused parliament's commission as governor of the island. Detained pending the investigation of the charges against him by the House of Commons, he was discharged after eight weeks, but was sent for again the following September and placed under arrest in January 1644, remaining close prisoner until procuring his release on condition that he remain within the lines of communication. He was discharged on 12 April 1645. A contribution of $500 was levied upon his estate, although he appears to have paid no more than $115 of it. He was among those who waited on Charles I to express their loyalty on 15 November 1647, the day after the king's arrival at Carisbrooke Castle. Those assembled were given to believe that the king had fled Hampton Court out of fear for his life, and he assured them that he looked forward to reaching a settlement with his parliament of England. By this time Oglander's experience of civil war and of what he considered the arbitrary rule of the island by a county committee composed of social upstarts had merely increased his bitterness and resolve. After the meeting he advised the king's servant Colonel William Legge that the only security against an invasion of the island by those 'Levellers' who wished the king dead was to have a boat in readiness to convey him to the mainland. A few days later, the king came to Nunwell. Oglander did not reveal the subject of their discussions, but prayed that 'God [would] send him happily hence... to regain his crown as his predecessor King John did here' ('Royalist's Notebook', 116). As long as the king remained on the island Oglander visited him regularly until the governor, Colonel Robert Hammond, warned him that two of those about the king, Robert Preston, the keeper of the robes, and Captain Anthony Mildmay, were informing against those who resorted to their sovereign -- 'which (being in the fire before) made me forbear, though much against my will' (ibid., 120). However, Oglander was on hand to hear the king's speech of farewell, made at the departure from the island of the parliamentary commissioners for the treaty of Newport on 27 November 1648. 
Oglander continued to keep his journal for a while after the king's death, noting his displeasure at what he considered the foolish marriage of his daughter Bridget in October 1649, and the visit he received from the duke of Gloucester at his coming to the island with his sister, the Princess Elizabeth, in 1650. He was again arrested and taken to London in January 1651 on suspicion of treasonable designs, and was released early in the following February, on again giving security to remain within the lines of communication. He died at Nunwell on 28 November 1655, and was buried in the family vault in Brading church. The recumbent effigy in full armour which he had commissioned makes an intriguing contrast with his pen-portrait of a 'somewhat corpulent, man of middle stature, with a white beard and somewhat big mustachios, riding in black or some sad-coloured clothes... on a handsome middling black stone-horse, his hair grey and his complexion very sanguine' (quoted in Heal and Holmes, 20). His wife, Frances, had died on 12 June 1644 and their much-loved eldest son, George, had died at Caen in Normandy. A diminished estate descended to the second son, William (1611-1670), who represented Newport in the Restoration parliament and was created baronet in 1665. 


@@@@@


doc= 20605


Ogle, Sir Chaloner (1680/81-1750), naval officer, was the son of John Ogle (1649/50-1740), a Newcastle barrister, and Mary Braithwaite (died 1744). He entered the navy on 28 July 1697 as a volunteer per order, or king's letter-boy, on the 'Yarmouth' with Captain Cleveland. He afterwards served in the 'Restoration' and the 'Worcester' before passing his lieutenant's examination on 11 March 1702 aged twenty-one. 
On 29 April 1702 Ogle was promoted third lieutenant of the 'Royal Oak', and on 28 May he became second lieutenant on the 'Anglesea'. In the West Indies he was given command of the captured sloop 'St Antonio', before moving on 21 April 1705 to the 'Deal Castle'. After returning to England in December 1705 Ogle stayed with the 'Deal Castle', in which he was captured off Ostend on 3 July 1706 by three French ships. A court martial on 19 October acquitted Ogle of all blame. On 26 June 1707 he was appointed to command the 'Queenborough', and on 20 May 1708 he was posted to the frigate 'Tartar'; he remained in her for the duration of the War of the Spanish Succession. In 1716 he commanded the 'Plymouth' in the Baltic under Sir John Norris, and in 1717 the 'Worcester' under Sir George Byng. 
On 11 March 1719 he was appointed to the 'Swallow' (60 guns). After convoying the trade to Newfoundland, thence to the Mediterranean, and so home, Ogle was ordered, on 31 January 1721, to the coast of Africa. On the passage he met the 'Weymouth'. Both ships' companies were badly ravaged by sickness. On 20 September, Ogle wrote from Prince's Island that they had buried men and had still 100 sick. At Cape Coast Castle in November he received intelligence of two pirates plundering on the coast. At Ouidah he learned that they had lately captured ten sail, one of which they had burnt, with a full cargo of African slaves on board, the owners of the ship having refused to pay ransom. On 5 February 1722 he found them at anchor under Cape Lopez. One of the ships, a captured French vessel of 32 guns, commanded by a pirate named Skyrm, slipped her cable in chase, mistaking the 'Swallow' for a merchantman. When they had run out of earshot the 'Swallow' tacked towards the pirate, and, after a sharp action, captured her. Ogle then returned to Cape Lopez under a French ensign. The second pirate ship, the 'Royal Fortune', commanded by Bartholomew Roberts, waited for her, eager for the expected prize. The 'Swallow' then hoisted the English flag and engaged the pirate ship. Roberts defended himself with obstinate bravery, but when he was killed his crew surrendered. The total number of prisoners was 262, including 75 African slaves, who were sold. Of the rest, 19 died before the trial at Cape Coast Castle, 77 were acquitted, 52 were hanged, 20 were sentenced to death and then sent to the mines, and the remainder were sent to prison in England. 
Ogle's conduct received much praise, and on his return to England in April 1723 he was knighted. He also received, as a special gift from the crown, the pirates' ships and effects less the payment of $1940 head-money to his officers and men. Despite contrary claims from his officers and crew Ogle appears to have argued successfully that he should be the recipient of the remaining prize money, totalling more than $3000, which he regarded as a personal gift to support his new title. 
On 2 April 1729 Ogle was appointed to the 'Burford', one of the fleet gathered at Spithead under the command of Sir Charles Wager. On 19 May 1731 he took charge of the 'Edinburgh' in the fleet, also under Wager, which went to the Mediterranean. He was sent out to Jamaica as commander-in-chief in June 1732 and did not return to England until August 1735. Ogle was twice married. After the death of his first wife, Henrietta Issacson (1678-1737), he married on 30 October 1737 Jane Isabella (died 1761), about whom further details are unknown; they do not appear to have had any children. 
In June 1739 Ogle was appointed to the 'Augusta'; on his promotion to rear-admiral of the blue (11 July), he hoisted his flag in her and, with strong reinforcements, joined Nicholas Haddock in the Mediterranean. His stay there was short, and by the following summer he was third in command of the fleet under Sir John Norris. On 10 September 1740 Ogle was ordered to escort an expeditionary army of over 8000, under the command of Lord Cathcart, to the West Indies. The objective was to attack the Spanish possessions in the Caribbean, but tension with France caused the ministry to send over thirty warships with Ogle to reinforce Vice-Admiral Edward Vernon's small squadron at Port Royal, Jamaica. Their combined fleet, numbering thirty sail of the line and some 10,000 British and American soldiers, constituted by far the largest force that had ever been assembled in the Caribbean. The attack on Cartagena in March and April was, however, a disastrous failure; other operations attempted against Cuba in the summer proved equally unsuccessful. Tension mounted within the command of the expedition, which showed itself in a violent quarrel between Ogle and Edward Trelawney, governor of Jamaica, after a council of war on 22 July 1742. On 3 September, Ogle was charged before the chief justice of Jamaica with assaulting Trelawney. The jury decided that Ogle had been guilty and there the matter ended, the governor requesting that no judgment should be given. 
On 18 October 1742 Vernon sailed for England, leaving Ogle in command. The fleet was too much reduced to allow any operations against the coasts of the enemy, who themselves had no force at sea; Ogle's work was therefore restricted to protecting the British and scourging the Spanish trade. Only one incident stands out in this period. George Frye, a lieutenant in the marines, was charged and found guilty of disobedience and disrespect in March 1744. The court martial, of which Ogle was president, sentenced him to be cashiered, rendered incapable of holding a commission in the king's service, and imprisoned for fifteen years. The last part of the sentence was afterwards pronounced illegal, and Frye obtained a verdict of false imprisonment against Ogle and several other members of the court martial. Ogle was sentenced to pay $800 damages, which appears eventually to have been paid for him by the crown. 
On 9 August 1743 Ogle was promoted vice-admiral of the blue. He was advanced to vice-admiral of the white on 7 December 1743 and on 19 June 1744 to admiral of the blue. He returned to England in the summer of 1745, and on 11 September was made commander-in-chief in the Thames, Medway, and Nore. In that month Ogle presided at the courts martial which tried sundry lieutenants and captains on a charge of misconduct in the action off Toulon on 11 February 1744. On 15 July 1747 he was promoted admiral of the white and on 1 July 1749 admiral and commander-in-chief, entitled to fly the union flag. He died in London on 11 April 1750 and was buried at Twickenham. 


@@@@@


doc= 20606


Ogle, Sir Charles, second baronet (1775-1858), naval officer, was born on 24 May 1775 at Worthy Park House, Martyr's Worthy, Hampshire. He was the eldest son of Admiral Sir Chaloner Ogle, first baronet (1727-1816), and his wife, Hester, daughter of John Thomas, bishop of Winchester, and was the great-nephew of Sir Chaloner Ogle. He attended Hyde Abbey School, Winchester, and entered the navy in 1787 on board the 'Adventure', with Captain John Nicholson Inglefield. After uneventful service in different ships on the coast of Africa and home stations, he was made lieutenant on the 'Woolwich', in the West Indies, on 15 November 1793. In January 1794 he was moved into the 'Boyne', flagship of Sir John Jervis (later first earl of St Vincent), and in May he was appointed acting captain of the 'Assurance'. On 21 May 1794 he was confirmed as commander of the sloop 'Avenger', from which he was moved to the 'Petrel', and on 11 January 1796, in the Mediterranean, was posted by Jervis to the 'Minerve'. During the following years, despite St Vincent's concern at his lack of steadiness, he commanded the frigates 'Meleager', 'Greyhound', and 'Egyptienne', for the most part in the Mediterranean, coming home in early 1802. On 22 April he married Charlotte Margaret (died 1814), daughter of General Sir Thomas Gage, brother of Admiral Sir William Gage; they had two daughters and a son, Chaloner, who succeeded to the baronetcy. 
In 1805 Ogle commanded the frigate 'Unite', and in 1806 was appointed to the yacht 'Princess Augusta', which he commanded until August 1815, when he took command of the 'Ramillies' in the channel. In November 1815 he commanded the 'Malta' at Plymouth, and in 1816 the 'Rivoli' at Portsmouth. On the death of his father, on 27 August 1816, he succeeded to the baronetcy, and a considerable fortune. This financial security may well explain his limited post-war service. He was promoted rear-admiral on 12 August 1819. On 4 September 1820 he married Letitia (died 1832), daughter of Sir William Burroughs, bt; they had one son, William, who succeeded as fifth baronet. From 1827 to 1830 Ogle was commander-in-chief in North America, and he became vice-admiral on 22 July 1830. He married, on 10 April 1834, Mary Anne Dalton (died February 1842), daughter of George Cary of Tor Abbey, Devon, already twice a widow. They had no children. He became admiral on 23 November 1841, and was commander-in-chief at Portsmouth from 1845 to 1848. He was promoted admiral of the fleet on 8 December 1857. He died at Tunbridge Wells on 16 June 1858 and was buried at Ponteland church, Northumberland. 
Ogle's two commands were well handled and successful; he was a man of some ability and, through his brother-in-law Gage, close to the tory party. He was a solid professional sea officer who made a significant contribution to naval charities, both in financial support and administrative effort. 


@@@@@


doc= 20607


Ogle, Charles Chaloner (1851-1878), journalist, fourth son of John Ogle of St Clare, near Ightham, Sevenoaks, Kent, was born on 16 April 1851, and educated, with other pupils, under his father at St Clare. He matriculated at London University in June 1869, and then devoted himself to the study of architecture, becoming a pupil of Frederick William Roper of 9 Adam Street, Adelphi, London. He was a contributor to 'The Builder', and in 1872 he both obtained a certificate for excellence in architectural construction and was admitted an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects. Soon afterwards he visited Rome, and in August 1875 went for some months to Athens, where he worked in the office of Herr Ziller, the royal architect. While he was thus engaged, 'The Times' accepted his offer to be their special correspondent in the 1878 war between Turkey and Montenegro and the insurgent Balkan provinces, and he accompanied the Turkish force against the Montenegrins. Ogle's reports from Montenegro and Herzegovina, from Greece, from Crete, and from Thessaly were full of picturesque details, with a kindly humour. While residing at Volo, on the Gulf of Thessaly, Ogle learned on 28 March 1878 that an engagement was imminent between the Turkish troops and the insurgents occupying Mount Pelion and the town of Macrynitza. He at once went unarmed to the scene of action. The battle took place and was prolonged to the following day; Ogle, unable to obtain a horse to return to Volo, slept at Katochori on 29 and 30 March. On 1 April his headless body was found lying in a ravine, and was identified by a scar on the wrist and a bloodstained telegram in his pocket book addressed to 'The Times'. The body was taken on board HMS 'Wizard', and conveyed to Piraeus, Athens, where it was accorded a public funeral on 10 April. It was believed that Ogle's murder was an act of revenge ordered by Amouss Aga, the Turkish commander, because Ogle had criticized him for pillaging a village. To disguise the murder, a report was circulated that Ogle was aiding the insurgents. In a parliamentary paper issued on 18 June, Ogle was blamed for imprudence in venturing among the belligerents without necessity, and his death was attributed to a wound received while retreating with the insurgents after the second battle of Macrynitza; the correctness of these statements was strenuously denied by his friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 20608


Ogle, George (bap. 1704, d. 1746), translator, was the second of six children of the attorney-at-law Samuel Ogle of Bowsden (1658-1718), MP for Berwick and commissioner of the revenue for Ireland, and his second wife, Ursula (1678-1725), who inherited Irish estates and other wealth both from her parents (Sir Robert Markham of Sedgebroke, and Mary, daughter of Sir Thomas Widdrington of Sherburn Grange) and from her first husband, Lord Altham Annesley of co. Cork (died 1699). From his father's first marriage to Elizabeth (died 1697), widow of Thomas Dawson of Newcastle, Ogle also had a half-sister. At least two of his brothers pursued military careers, Robert in Ireland and Samuel Ogle in North America. 
Although Ogle's father attended university at Edinburgh, and his son at Dublin, Ogle apparently learned from tutors the classical languages underlying his best-known writings: a dozen Horatian imitations, individually published from 1735 to 1739, that tend more toward jocularity than workaday translation. 'Satire', ii.5, becomes, for example, 'Of Legacy Hunting... Dialogue between Sir Walter Raleigh and Merlin the Prophet' (1737). Another representative poem, dedicated to Ogle's elder brother Samuel while he was governor of Maryland, imitates Horace's 'Epistle', i.11, with jokes about the shortage of culture and taste in Annapolis ('The Eleventh Epistle', 1738). 
Ogle primarily resided and published in London. In 1735 he married Frances (1711-1750), the daughter and coheir of Sir Thomas (sometimes referred to as Frederick) Twysden of East Peckham. As landholder in Ireland, he might be the George Ogle who in 1737 served as MP for Bannow and high sheriff for co. Wexford. His father died in Dublin; and his son, George Ogle (1742-1814), would long serve as MP for Wexford. Besides the son Ogle and his wife had two older daughters, Frances and Catherina-Isabella. 
Nine years before his marriage to the heiress, Ogle had 'addrest to a young lady' 'The Liffy' (1726), based on Ovid. Next he published imitations of Anacreon, Sappho, and other Greek poets in James Sterling's 'Loves of Hero and Leander' (1728), which is dedicated to the 'ingenious young gentleman' Ogle. His publications may have influenced Alexander Pope's adaptations of Horace and Thomas Moore's of Anacreon (P. Dixon, 'Pope, George Ogle, and Horace', 'N&Q', 204, 1959, 396-7; 'Journal of Thomas Moore', ed. W. S. Dowden, 6 vols., 1983-91, 2.768). Besides working independently, Ogle composed an epilogue for Henry Brooke's 'Gustavus Vasa' (1739), which was banned in London but staged in Dublin ('Prologues and Epilogues of the Eighteenth Century', ed. P. Danchin, 6 vols. to date, 1990-, 5.60-61). He collaborated also with Elijah Fenton and Edward Ward, to translate the sixteenth-century Latin 'Basia (Kisses)' of Janus Secundus (1731), and with engraver Claude de Bosc for 'Antiquities Explained' (1737; 2nd edn, 'Gemmae antiquae caelatae', 1741). This tome reproduces fifty carvings, for each of which Ogle quotes passages in Greek and Latin, provides his own and others' translations, and interweaves commentary that often justifies the figures' nudity. His final publication mocks a vain woman grown old and ugly ('GM', 15, 1745, 48). In 1926 Ogle's reputation for mild erotica caused his name to become erroneously but persistently attached to an essay by Bernard Mandeville ('A Modest Defense of Publick Stews, 1724', ed. R. Cook, 1973). 
Ogle pursued mild erotica within his own vernacular tradition as well as in Graeco-Roman art and literature. In 1739 he published 'Gualtherus and Griselda', amalgamating the versions of Boccaccio, Petrarch, and Chaucer. He then assembled 'Canterbury Tales of Chaucer, Modernis'd by Several Hands' (3 vols., 1741). Besides his own 'Clerk's Tale' he supplied a modernization of Edmund Spenser's continuation of the 'Squire's Tale' (as 'Cambuscan', concluded in 1785 by Joseph Sterling), and he adapted the 'General Prologue' by Thomas Betterton (a pseudonym for Alexander Pope). Ogle also modernized links between tales. 
Perhaps Ogle intended to supply modernized links and tales for the rest of Chaucer's work, but he died on 20 October 1746. To his heirs he left homes in the country (Hendon, Middlesex) and in the city (on Audley Street, his parish church being St George's at Hanover Square). He also left lands in Kent, Sussex, and Ireland; many possessions including furniture, plate, jewels, and a coach; and thousands of pounds. Most went to his wife, daughters, and trustees; to young George he bequeathed his books and bookcases. 


@@@@@


doc= 20609


Ogle, George (1742-1814), politician, was born on 14 October 1742, the only son of George Ogle (bap. 1704, d. 1746), litterateur and MP, and Frances Twysden (1711-1750), coheir of Sir Thomas Twysden, fourth baronet, of Roydon Hall, Kent. His father died when he was four, and Ogle was entrusted to the care of a Church of Ireland vicar proximate to the family estate of Bellevue, Enniscorthy. Educated at Kilkenny School, he entered Trinity College, Dublin, in December 1759 but did not graduate. Following in his father's footsteps, Ogle's initial enthusiasm was for literature, and he achieved a measure of fame as a poet and the author of a number of well-known songs, of which 'Banna's Banks' and 'Molly Asthore' are the best known. The latter was written in praise of Mary Moore of Tinrahan, co. Wexford, whose sister Elizabeth (died 'c'.1798) became Ogle's wife. Ogle declined to publish his own creations, though he often visited Lady Miller's poetical assemblies at Bath and contributed to the volume 'Poetical Amusements at a Villa near Bath' published by the lady's admirers in 1775. 
Ogle's parliamentary career commenced with his election 'by his own interest' (Bodkin, 219) to the House of Commons to represent the county of Wexford in 1769. His 'great antipathy' (ibid.) to the then lord lieutenant, Lord Townshend, prompted him to vote with the opposition upon taking his seat. He continued to conduct himself thus during the lord lieutenancy of Earl Harcourt, leading Dublin Castle to conclude that he was a firm and committed member of the parliamentary opposition. Ogle denied this: 'The evil spirit of opposition never possessed me' (Black, 200), he informed the House of Commons in 1777. Rather, he was guided in his political actions by principle; his reputation as 'a respectable sensible man' (Bodkin, 219) and as 'one of the most popular characters of the kingdom' (Falkland, 24) derived first and foremost from the realization that he was 'a very independent man' (Johnston, 'Great Britain and Ireland', 350). Ogle defined his role as that of 'guardian... of... publick liberty', based upon his conclusion that 'the glorious principles of virtue and publick liberty' that made the British constitution uniquely valuable had been 'restored' in 1688 following 'the tyrant reigns of the Tudor and Stuart families' (Black, 385). This combined with his commitment to 'stand forth [as] the Champion of this country' (ibid., 200) to ensure he kept a wary eye on the Irish administration and, following the outbreak of war in the American colonies -- which he forecast 'would end in ruin' (ibid., 428) -- to single out the embargo imposed on Ireland's freedom to trade. He maintained that the embargo was not just contrary to Ireland's commercial interest, it harmed the empire because 'the constitution and the commerce are the two pillars of the empire' (ibid., 385). His determined opposition led him personally to spend $440 on 200 barrels of beef and a further $200 plus on fees and other expenses in testing the effectiveness of the embargo in 1777. This won him public applause that might not otherwise have been forthcoming since he was not in the first rank of House of Commons orators. The bulk of his many contributions during the late 1770s, when he was at his most active, were of the nature of short, pointed, and frequently unvarnished interjections that, given the esteem in which he was held by his fellow MPs, were 'always heard with attention and deference' (Falkland, 25-6). 
Ogle's dissatisfaction with the government of Britain and Ireland during the late 1770s and early 1780s, which stemmed from his reverence for the constitution, ensured that he was an active supporter of the patriots' efforts to win free trade and legislative independence. His willingness to support them in the division lobbies and his membership of the patriot club known as the Monks of St Patrick ['see 'Monks of the Screw] caused many to conclude that he was a mainstream patriot, whereas he was an independent country gentleman of strong whig views first and foremost. This was manifest in 1778 when he spearheaded the opposition to the proposal to dilute the laws against Catholics. The security of 'the constitution... the Protestant interest... landed property... and the church and state in Ireland' (Cavendish diary, 10.2) was endangered, he insisted, by the proposal to allow Catholics to own property on the same terms as protestants. He could not prevent a generous measure of Catholic relief reaching the statute book, but his insistence that Catholics should not be allowed to acquire influence incompatible with the security of a protestant constitution ensured that they were not allowed to purchase land in fee simple. Ogle was not opposed, as he pointed out, to Catholic relief 'per se'. He was prepared, he observed in 1782, when the matter at issue was the freedom to be allowed the Catholic church, 'to give the Papists every indulgence consistent with the safety of the established church' ('Parliamentary Register', 1.200), but he drew a clear and immovable line at changing the constitution in church and state. 
Ogle's determination to maintain the existing protestant constitution inviolate was consistent with his whig political principles. So too was his gravitation towards the Irish administration during the lord lieutenancy of the duke of Portland, a whig. Ogle was drawn to co-operate with the administration by his conclusion that 'simple repeal' represented 'sufficient relinquishment' ('Parliamentary Register', 1.415) of Westminster's disputed claim to possess the authority to make law for Ireland, but he also had financial reasons for doing so. Having engaged in 'prodigal spending' (Bodkin, 219) over two decades as a result of which he 'consumed a very large estate', he was in 'extreme distress' (Johnston, 195) financially by the early 1780s. At the same time his role in discrediting the Reform Convention held in Dublin in 1783 vividly demonstrated his potential to the administration. This paved the way for his admission to the Irish privy council in 1783, and for his appointment in 1784 as registrar of deeds, which was worth $1700 from the mid-1780s. As the register of deeds was a patent office, Ogle was not bound to vote with the Irish administration. None the less, his vote was forthcoming with sufficient regularity to ensure his inclusion on lists of Castle supporters from the mid-1780s. At the same time he demonstrated that he was not lobby fodder by taking an independent stand on parliamentary reform in 1784, the commercial propositions in 1785, and the regency in 1788-9. The issue that most agitated him was the security of what, in 1786, he termed 'the Protestant ascendancy', and while he helped successfully to galvanize resistance to a suggestion to commute the tithes paid to the Church of Ireland at that moment, his die-hard resistance in 1792 and 1793 to Catholic enfranchisement on the grounds that it would 'overturn... the Protestant ascendancy in every town in the kingdom' ('Parliamentary Register', 12.127) failed. As a result, he concluded that a legislative union was in the best interests of Irish protestants. He also promised 'never again [to] set my foot within' (ibid., 13.346) the Irish parliament, and while he returned to oppose Catholic emancipation in 1795 and to condemn parliamentary reform and emancipation respectively as the harbinger of 'a 'republic' and a 'separation' from Great Britain' in 1797 (ibid., 17.334), his appointment as governor of co. Wexford in 1796 did cause him to concentrate his energies on combating insurrection. He did not stand for re-election in 1797, but his growing reputation as neo-conservative champion resulted in his successful nomination to represent Dublin city in a by-election in July 1798. 
In his capacity as MP for Dublin city Ogle articulated the dissatisfaction of neo-conservatives everywhere with Lord Cornwallis's leniency towards the defeated rebels of 1798. He reflected their wishes by voting against the 'Act of Union', though he had previously indicated his support so long as it was 'proposed on Protestant principles' (PRONI, Stanhope (Pitt) papers, T 3401/4/2). Once the Union was enacted, he had little difficulty accepting it and he was re-elected on a strong protestant platform to represent Dublin city in the imperial parliament in 1801. He did not retain his seat in 1802, but his nomination to serve as grand master of the Orange order in 1801 gave him a focus in later life. He died at his family seat, Bellevue, on 10 August 1814, some sixteen years after his wife, and was buried in the churchyard at Ballycarney, co. Wexford. He had no children and his property passed to his nephew George Ogle Moore, MP for Dublin from 1826 to 1830. 


@@@@@


doc= 20610


Ogle, James Adey (1792-1857), physician, was born on 22 October 1792 in Great Russell Street, London, the son of Richard Ogle, a general practitioner, and his wife, Hannah, formerly Adey. In 1808 he was sent to Eton College, of which Dr Joseph Goodall was then provost. He matriculated on 13 April 1810 as a commoner of Trinity College, Oxford, obtained a scholarship in 1812, and graduated BA in 1813 with a first class in mathematics and physics. Adopting his father's profession he commenced his medical studies at William Hunter's school of medicine in Great Windmill Street, London. On the proclamation of peace in 1814 he travelled to the continent, and in the course of that and some succeeding years he visited many of the leading medical schools of France, Italy, and Germany. He also passed (as was then customary) some winter sessions in Edinburgh, studying under professors Gregory, Duncan, Hamilton, Gordon, Home, and Jamieson. Through his Eton and Oxford connections he gained access to the city's intellectual circles. On returning to London he pursued his medical studies there as a pupil at the Middlesex Hospital, and subsequently at St Bartholomew's Hospital, and graduated at Oxford MA and BM in 1816 and 1817 respectively. In the latter year he also obtained a university licence to practise medicine. 
Upon settling in Oxford, Ogle set up in practice. Although this thrived, his possession of independent means allowed him to lead a comparatively leisurely professional life and to indulge his love both of literature and of social activities. In 1819 he married Sarah, younger daughter of Jeston Homfray of Broadwaters, near Kidderminster. She died in 1835, leaving four sons and five daughters, one of whom became the wife of James Bowling Mozley, and another the wife of Manuel John Johnson. The third son, Dr William Ogle, became superintendent of statistics in the registrar-general's office. 
In 1820 Ogle graduated DM and was appointed mathematical tutor of his old college, Trinity. One of his pupils was John Henry Newman, with whom he maintained a close friendship in later life, though he was not himself a Roman Catholic. Ogle was elected FRCP in 1822. In 1824 he became physician to both the Radcliffe Infirmary, where he was unanimously chosen in succession to Robert Bourne, and the Warneford Lunatic Asylum at Oxford. He was appointed Aldrich professor of medicine in the university in 1824, public examiner in mathematics in 1825, and Aldrich clinical professor of medicine in 1830. Ogle's professional duties were very light since he had few pupils. He gave occasional lectures at his home in St Giles. In 1835 he worked with Drs Kidd and Daubeny to improve the teaching of natural sciences and to revise the university statutes regulating medical degrees, which resulted in the introduction of a public examination for the degree of BM. 
Ogle also revived practical instruction at the Radcliffe Infirmary. Between 1837 and 1840 he organized a course of clinical lectures, and by 1840 had a lecture room equipped. Between 1833 and 1840 he had some thirty-seven pupils, but only three were members of the university, and this fragile aspiration for a school of medicine was soon eclipsed. Between 1840 and 1854 there were only fourteen candidates for the BM degree. Ogle wrote nothing on medicine; during the 1854-5 cholera epidemic he compiled notes and statistics on the disease but did not write them up. During the outbreak he opposed the accommodation of cholera patients in the Radcliffe Infirmary, mainly on account of the cost. His only publication, 'A letter to the Reverend the Warden of Wadham College, on the system of education pursued at Oxford; with suggestions for remodelling the examination statutes', appeared in 1841. The pamphlet was noteworthy in containing the first suggestion of a school of natural science at Oxford; this was afterwards established by a statute proposed in 1851 on behalf of the reformers by Sir H. W. Acland. Yet Ogle was hostile to research, asserting in the pamphlet that 'the prosecution of Truth forms no part of our duties' (J. A. Ogle, 'A letter to the Reverend the Warden of Wadham College', 1841, 9). Ogle also anticipated another change, by his proposal that 'candidates for admission to the university should have their attainments tested 'in limine' [at the outset]' by an examination which became known as 'responsions'. 
Ogle was elected FRS in 1826. His professional success was marked by his delivery of the Harveian oration in 1844, and by his appointment as regius professor of medicine at Oxford by Lord John Russell in 1851, in succession to Dr John Kidd. He held the latter post in conjunction with the clinical and Aldrichian professorships and with the Tomline readership in anatomy. Ogle was president of the Provincial Medical Association at its meeting at Oxford in 1852, and was examiner in the new school of natural science in 1854-5. 
Ogle died of apoplexy after an illness of thirty hours, at the vicarage, Old Shoreham, Sussex, the residence of his son-in-law James Bowling Mozley, on 25 September 1857; he was buried on 2 October in St Sepulchre's cemetery at Jericho in Oxford. He left 6000 guineas to his eldest son James, and $3000 to each of his other children. 
Kindly and good-natured, Ogle was 'a man of liberal views and great depth and sincerity of feeling' ('Jackson's Oxford Journal', 56). His house at Oxford was the rendezvous of a wide circle of friends. In appearance Ogle was 'handsome' and 'clean shaven... with an attractive expression' (Gibson, 113). By nature cautious, he was inclined to adhere to the older traditions of his profession, from the active practice of which he withdrew in his later years, though attending old friends and giving gratuitous advice to the poor. Nevertheless, he did not oppose modern developments of scientific study at the infirmary and in the university, which were the subject of keen controversy at the time. 


@@@@@


doc= 20611


Ogle, Sir John (bap. 1569, d. 1640), army officer, was baptized at Pinchbeck, Lincolnshire, on 28 February 1569, the fifth son of Thomas Ogle (died 1574) of Pinchbeck and his wife, Jane (died 1574), daughter of Adelard Welby of Gedney, Lincolnshire. Nothing is known of John Ogle's early life and he seems to have chosen a military career early on. He went to the Netherlands in 1591, where he joined the company of Sir Francis Vere, sergeant-major-general of the English forces aiding the Dutch republic, whose faithful follower he became. Much of what we know of Vere's campaigns comes from his 'Commentaries', but the original seventeenth-century editor included substantial chunks of material specially written by Ogle to flesh out Vere's manuscript. 
In 1598 most of the English army under Vere was transferred into Dutch pay -- becoming mercenaries in modern terms. On 30 June 1600 the English contingent of the Dutch army played a vital role in the great battle of Nieuwpoort. Ogle rescued his general when Vere was unhorsed ('his blood remained on my clothes'), helped to rally the retreating English infantry, and was in the forefront of their counter-attack, which helped to win a famous victory (Vere, 162). The following year Vere and his troops defended Ostend against the celebrated Spanish siege, which lasted until 1604: the city became known as 'the new Troy'. 
By 1601 Ogle was Vere's lieutenant-colonel (a rank he acquired at some point after Nieuwpoort) and invaluable assistant. In early 1602 Ogle and Sir Charles Fairfax acted as hostages in the Spanish camp during 'capitulation' negotiations -- actually aimed at gaining time. When reinforcements arrived and the talks were abandoned both men could well have been executed by the Spanish, as Vere knew from the start: 'What shall I do for my Lieutenant Colonel?' was his refrain and he was ready to pay Ogle's ransom 'five times over' (Vere, 195). But both hostages were released in time to do their part in repulsing a major Spanish assault. Ogle had already lost his left eye to 'a small shot' earlier in the siege ('Salisbury MSS', 11.293); ever after he wore a black eye patch. 
By this time it was obvious that Queen Elizabeth could not last long. The Dutch authorities saw a chance to integrate the English troops fully into the national army. Ambitious English officers intrigued against Sir Francis Vere hoping to win favour with the Dutch, but Ogle took his own steps against them. He personally thrashed the lieutenant of Callisthenes Brooke, who had attracted the general's ire, and incited his men to attack John Ridgeway, who frequently complained about Sir Francis. In the end, however, Vere resigned his command in 1604. He was replaced by his younger brother, Sir Horace, and the older Vere's departure proved a great opportunity for Ogle, who had been knighted on a visit home to England on 10 December 1603. Having distinguished himself in the capture of Sluys in the summer of 1604, he was made full colonel in the Dutch army in 1605. However, he was bitter against his fellow colonel Sir Edward Cecil who had agitated against Sir Francis Vere and there was considerable tension among English officers even after the twelve years' truce began in 1609, suspending the war with Spain. 
In 1610 the first Arminian troubles broke out. It is a measure of the trust placed in Ogle that he was chosen as governor of Utrecht, where there had been a revolt. Sir John was, Horace Vere suggested, to 'administer verry dire' (Trim, 347). Ogle initially thought he could 'assure the loyalty of the citizens without need of a garrison at all' (''s'asseure si bien de la loyaulte des bourgeois... qu'il ne sera pas besoing de garnison en tout''; Rijksarchief Zuid-Holland, Den Haag, Archief van Johan van Oldenbarnevelt 1318), but though he soon wanted more troops, ultimately he was successful in conciliating the townsmen. Moving his family in straight away was a clever gesture of trust, while it must have helped that Ogle had married a Dutchwoman: Elizabeth, daughter of Cornelius de Vries of Dordrecht. They had four sons and eight daughters, one of whom died young, and two of whom, born in Utrecht, were named after the city: Utricia and Trajectina. The states of Utrecht even voted Utricia a life annuity of $20, which indicates Ogle's ability to win them over. 
In this period Ogle led his regiment in Prince Maurice of Nassau's campaign in Cleves-Julich in 1614, but otherwise remained in Utrecht. He kept Sir Thomas (later first baron) Fairfax updated with news from the continent, exchanging gloomy forecasts about future threats from the Habsburgs and indignant protests about a Spanish marriage for Prince Charles. When Fairfax's son William joined the Dutch army his father put him in Ogle's care. Ogle also kept in touch with potential patrons in England. He corresponded with Buckingham, promising to 'do his best' to procure a place in the states army for Buckingham's client Sir John Manwood (Bodl. Oxf., MS Add. D. 110, no. 276): in 1627, eight years later, Ogle's eldest daughter, Livinia, married Manwood, by then chief justice of common pleas. 
Meanwhile Maurice of Nassau, stadholder and captain-general (and the man who had got rid of Francis Vere), had come into direct conflict with the advocate of Holland (and unofficial chief minister of the republic), Johan van Oldenbarnevelt, partly over Arminianism, which he had come loosely to support. In 1618 matters came to a head: Oldenbarnevelt was arrested (to be executed the following year). Ogle chose chaplains who were strongly orthodox Calvinists, but Oldenbarnevelt was his patron, so the Englishman must have felt torn. In the end he did not support Oldenbarnevelt in a proposed strike against Maurice -- but neither did he act decisively against his benefactor. Consequently he was replaced in Utrecht by Horace Vere and, in 1619 or early 1620, went home. Ogle seems never to have returned to the Netherlands, but he did maintain a correspondence with his circle of Dutch friends, including important figures such as Constantijn Huygens. (The correspondence of his eldest son, Sir John Ogle the younger, with Huygens, preserved in Leiden University Library, is probably a continuation of his father's.) 
Fortunately Ogle's good contacts in Jacobean England served him well. His time in the Netherlands had been profitable and he invested in the Virginia Company. He appears in both the second (May 1609) and third (March 1612) charters as one of the company's promoters and in 1623 was elected to its council. In the latter year he was appointed to a commission to inspect all England's coastal fortifications, from Land's End to the Thames estuary. Expert in siege warfare, he was well qualified, of course, but the links with Buckingham must have helped, and in the following year he was made a member of a new council of war, charged with considering whether England could intervene in the Thirty Years' War. It involved working with Sir Edward Cecil (now Viscount Wimbledon); unsurprisingly Ogle preferred to concentrate on his work as inspector of fortifications. In 1625, however, this caused him to be in Plymouth when troops were gathering for an expedition to Cadiz -- commanded by Wimbledon! Ogle was obliged to take on responsibility for the ill-disciplined and inadequately supplied conscripts, a task he undertook reluctantly. 
There were domestic matters to consider. In May 1622 Ogle obtained a grant of denization to his wife and children; but a draft bill of 1626 to naturalize all twelve never became law. His eldest brother, Sir Richard, hopelessly in debt, died insolvent in the Fleet prison in 1627. John bought from Richard their father's manor of Pinchbeck, and though he seems to have lived mostly in London, he also purchased other lands in Lincolnshire and maintained an interest in his home county and in Yorkshire. He personally invested $1100 in a venture promoted by the great Dutch fen-drainer Cornelius Vermuyden to drain Hatfield Chase in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire. Like so many plans of this type, it was opposed by those whose livelihood depended on their common rights in the fen, who in 1634 appealed for the venturers (including Ogle) to be imprisoned. 
The financial problems caused by the project were probably the impetus for Ogle's return to the military sphere and that same year he obtained a captaincy in the Irish army from Lord Deputy Wentworth. His purpose was avowedly 'rather to mend his fortunes than to require his attendance' ('DNB') but the 'thorough' Wentworth was unimpressed. By 1638 Sir John was owed $1464 11's'. in back pay for himself and his company and had to solicit the king's letters for 'the speedy payment' of the arrears ('CSP dom.', '1637-8', 427). 
Sir John Ogle died in 1640. He was buried in Westminster Abbey on 17 March, and on 15 July his will of 6 December 1628 was proved. In it he left $500 each to his younger sons, and $50 apiece to his five unmarried daughters (Livinia had married in 1627), leaving additionally to Elizabeth and Utricia, the two eldest, lands in Lincolnshire. His wife, Elizabeth, was appointed sole executrix, but with the aid of five overseers -- three English and two Dutch. In death, as in life, Ogle was a nexus between England and the Netherlands. 
If he never achieved the success or status of fellow soldiers like Horace Vere and Edward Cecil, John Ogle certainly had a varied career and interesting life, and showed a breadth of interests common to English military men of his time. By turns professional soldier, duellist, administrator, colonizer, patron of godly ministers, engineer, country squire, and speculator, Ogle was, if not a Renaissance man, very much a gentleman of his time. 


@@@@@


doc= 20612


Ogle, John (c.1652/3-c.1692), wit and gambler, was born the youngest son of a gentleman at Ashburton in Devon, although one early nineteenth-century chapbook states Northampton. He was educated at Exeter, where he was trained in the arts of gentlemanly comportment, and he excelled at those equestrian displays of chivalry known to contemporaries as 'riding the great horse'. His father died when he was young, and he inherited nearly $200 per annum upon coming of age, although he quickly dissipated his estate. Immediately afterwards he made his way to London, and gained quick recognition in elite circles through surviving two duels with well-known gentlemen. Ogle's ability to manage quarrels with other gentlemen 'with discretion as well as courage' soon became public knowledge in London society (Lucas, 184). He gained thereby instant access to the court of Charles II as a noted 'man of spirit', and was soon known as Jack Ogle or Mad Ogle. His sister also found her way into court society, perhaps as maid of honour to the duchess of York, but most notably as the duke of York's mistress. Her influence helped Ogle obtain a saddle in the 1st troop of Horse Guards under the colonelcy of the duke of Monmouth, and later a position in the life guard of James II. 
His extravagancies kept Ogle constantly short of funds to maintain his horse and equipage, but his pranks and humour kept him in favour. He lived in Waterman's Lane, Whitefriars, the area of back alleys notorious to contemporaries as Alsatia. He apparently lost through his wagers on cock-fighting the sums he won at the gaming tables of London's beau monde, and eventually Ogle took to drinking excessive quantities of alcoholic spirits, which is said to have hastened his death at the age of thirty-nine, about 1692. 
Ogle was buried in the churchyard of Henley upon Thames in Oxfordshire, but his name long retained currency as a symbol of eccentric profligacy and was often paired with that of John Wilmot, earl of Rochester. The memory of Ogle thus played a part in the eighteenth-century imagination of the reign of Charles II as an age of merry libertinism. Richard Steele reports on tavern talk in Queen Anne's reign in which 'the greatest wit of our company next myself, frequented in his youth the ordinaries about Charing Cross, and pretends to have been intimate with Jack Ogle... If any modern wit be mentioned, or any town frolic spoken of, he shakes his head at the dulness of the present age, and tells a story of Jack Ogle.('The Tatler', no. 132, 11 Feb 1710; Bond, 2.267)' Cheap print jest books such as the 'Frolicks of Lord Mohun' and the 'Fancies of King Charles and his Concubines' were associated with Ogle's name and his biography was included in Theophilus Lucas's 'Memoirs of... Famous Gamesters', as well as Granger's 'Biographical History' and the 'Eccentric Magazine'. His portrait was painted and subsequently engraved and collected by connoisseurs of English portraiture. 


@@@@@


doc= 20613


Ogle, Owen, second Baron Ogle (c.1440-1486), landowner, was probably born in Northumberland, the eldest surviving son of Robert (VI)Ogle, first Baron Ogle (c.1406-1469), and his wife, Isabel (died 1478), daughter of Sir Alexander Kirkby of Kirkby Ireleth, Lancashire. His elder brother, Sir Robert (VII) Ogle, was apparently dead by 20 October 1465, when Owen was associated with his father in making a grant of land at Great Tossan. By 26 May 1467 he had married Eleanor, daughter of Sir William Hilton, who brought him lands in Cumberland. Owen Ogle was said to be aged thirty at his father's death late in 1469, but whereas the first Lord Ogle had been prominent in the establishment of the Yorkist regime in Northumberland, his successor played little part in either local or national affairs. A chancery error continued to include Robert, Lord Ogle, in commissions of the peace for Northumberland between 1471 and 1485; it is unlikely that Owen served in this capacity as his father's heir. On 14 February 1473 Owen Ogle was granted a general pardon for offences committed before 30 September 1471, and all debts and accounts due to the king before 29 September 1469. The latter portion of the pardon was probably issued in respect of sums owed by his father. Between 1471 and 1474, as Ewyn, Lord Ogle, he was one of a number of lay and ecclesiastical notables who set their seals to a certificate concerning the Delaval inheritance, but elsewhere he was still being styled esquire in 1480, though in his first summons to parliament -- issued as late as 15 November 1482 -- he is named as Owen Ogle of Ogle, knight. 
Although a disability of some kind cannot be ruled out, the likeliest cause of Owen Ogle's inactivity is poverty. Not until 1484 was he licensed to enter the possessions of his father and mother. The latter died in 1478, having made a will bequeathing her Lancashire inheritance to her daughter Isabella, and to the latter's husband and children, and making no mention of her son at all. The fact that the lands disposed of in 1484 were specifically said to have been those of both his parents may indicate that they had been covered by a joint settlement of some sort; that the licence was accompanied by a pardon, 'upon al contemptes etc don upon the same' ('Harleian MS 433', 1.190), suggests that Lord Ogle had chafed at being kept out of his inheritance, and may even have taken possession of it in the course of a dispute. None the less, in 1485 he conveyed Ogle Castle to feoffees, with the result that it does not appear among the Northumberland estates listed in his inquisition post mortem. These, eighteen manors or fractions of manors, were valued at only $111 13's'. per annum, and even allowing for undervaluation and for the absence of Ogle (valued at $20 in 1492), they represent an exceptionally low income for a baron. The fact that Owen Ogle had apparently been knighted by 1482, and was summoned to parliament in that year, may have resulted from involvement in the Anglo-Scottish hostilities that broke out in 1480. The English commander was Richard, duke of Gloucester, and in 1485 Ogle was one of the northern barons and gentry said by 'The Ballad of Bosworth Field' to have fought for Richard, now Richard III, at Bosworth. If he did indeed fight against the future Henry VII, Ogle cannot be shown to have suffered in consequence, and in any case he died soon afterwards, on 1 September 1486. He was succeeded by his son Ralph Ogle. A heraldic visitation also names a second son, Robert (VIII), and a daughter, Joan, who married Robert Clavering. Owen's widow, Eleanor, who was still alive in 1515, remarried twice; her later husbands were George Percy and Henry Raynfforth. 


@@@@@


doc= 20614


Ogle, Robert (II) (c.1305-1362), soldier, was head of a Northumberland family that had held Ogle in the barony of Whalton since the mid-twelfth century. Because for seven generations the eldest son was named Robert there are difficulties attributing exploits to the correct individual. Robert Ogle or his father, Robert (I) ('b'. 'c'.1280), acted as messenger for stocking Mitford Castle in August 1318. Similarly one or other was pardoned in 1329 by Edward III for acts committed in the late rebellion (of Henry, earl of Lancaster). Robert the son married first Isabel Fernielaw, after whose death he married in 1331 Joan Heppale, whose father settled on them half the manor of Hepple and other land in mid-Coquetdale. In 1335 he was a commissioner of array both in Northumberland and in the regalian liberty of Hexhamshire, where he was bailiff. This was revoked in May in respect of Newcastle, where the community had agreed with the king to serve at sea against the Scots. Meanwhile Robert was amassing land throughout the county. In May 1341 Edward III granted him as 'king's yeoman' licence to crenellate his house at Ogle, with free warren in all his demesnes. The same year he was one of the commissioners to assess and levy the ninth in Northumberland. Whether he was responsible for an assault on the army of David II, king of Scots, that was laying siege to Newcastle in November 1341, has been doubted. In May 1344 he was commissioned to array the men of Northumberland against the Scots, renewed in April 1345. 
It may have been this Robert Ogle, or more likely his son with Isabel Fernielaw, Robert (III), who participated in the defence of Cumberland in 1345 with the bishop of Carlisle and Sir Thomas Lucy, and served as seneschal of Annandale for William de Bohun, earl of Northampton and constable of Lochmaben. It was the elder Robert who was thanked by Edward III for his part in the battle of Nevilles Cross on 17 October 1346 and commissioned to bring down to the Tower of London Scottish prisoners captured there. These included the earl of Fife, Henry Rameseye, and Thomas Boyd, whom he was reputed to have captured personally. Conjointly with Robert Bertram, father-in-law to his son, he was also to deliver John Douglas, brother to the earl. (There is a tradition that after the battle the captive King David was taken to Ogle's castle at Ogle by John Coupland, who then refused to surrender his prisoner until favourable financial terms were offered.) On 10 December 1346 Robert Ogle senior was ordered to attend a council at Westminster to consider business concerning the state of England and war in Scotland. 
In 1355 he was in charge of Berwick, under Lord Greystoke, where his son, Robert (III), was killed in the attack whereby the Scots captured the town but not the castle. Robert (III) had married Elena, the heir of Robert Bertram of Bothal, when his father settled half the manor of Hurworth-on-Tees on him and his wife. Robert (II) died on 16 June 1362, and his widow was given dower in Thursby in Cumberland. She and her second husband, John Phillipot, secured custody of the heir, Robert (IV), grandson of Robert (II). This Robert married the youngest coheir of Sir Alan Heton of Chillingham, and was a conservator of the truce between England and Scotland in 1386; his chantry chapel and tomb in Hexham Priory still survive. He settled on his second son, John, the Bertram barony of Bothal, being his grandmother's inheritance. This was disputed by the elder brother, Robert (V), who, after their father's death in 1409, laid siege to Bothal Castle with 200 armed men and archers and captured it. John petitioned in parliament for restitution and recovered possession. The barony remained in his family until a failure of male heirs in the 1470s, when it reverted to the senior line. 


@@@@@


doc= 20615


Ogle, Robert (VI), first Baron Ogle (c.1406-1469), soldier and administrator, was the son of Sir Robert (V) Ogle of Ogle ('c'.1380-1436) and Matilda ('b'. 'c'.1380, died after 1451), daughter of Sir Thomas Grey of Heaton. Through this match he was nephew of the Sir Thomas Grey who married Alice Neville and was executed at Southampton for his part in the plot to murder Henry V, and first cousin to Thomas Grey, who married Isabel, daughter of Richard, earl of Cambridge. His father had been constable of Norham Castle, Northumberland, and sheriff of Norhamshire, 1403-36, a member of parliament for Northumberland in 1416, 1419-20, 1421, and 1425, and sheriff of Northumberland in 1416. He was also constable of Wark Castle in 1419, and warden of Roxburgh Castle in 1424. He died in August 1436. Robert Ogle married Isabel (died 1478), daughter and heir of Sir Alexander Kirkby of Kirkby Ireleth in Lancashire, and had three sons, Robert, Thomas, and Owen Ogle, and a daughter, Isabel. 
Ogle was appointed with his father as a commissioner of truce in 1434, and in 1435 was styled as captain of Berwick, when he was captured in a skirmish by the Scots. He was ransomed for 750 marks and promised indemnification from a Scottish ship seized at Newcastle, but this proved to have been already sold, and he was still trying to get compensation in 1442. He succeeded his father as constable of Norham and sheriff of Norhamshire, and was on numerous commissions for conserving truces with Scotland and arraying the forces of Northumberland against the Scots. He served as sheriff of Northumberland in 1437-8, and was also a member of parliament in 1435 and 1442. In 1438 he was appointed captain of Roxburgh Castle and given charge of the east march of Scotland until a warden was appointed. He occurs in 1452 as bailiff and lieutenant of Tyndale. Three years later he supported the Yorkists when they took up arms, and brought 600 men from the marches to the first battle of St Albans, probably in the train of Richard Neville, earl of Warwick, being a retainer of his father, the earl of Salisbury, at a fee of $20. He was one of the commissioners appointed by the victors to raise money for the defence of Calais. Shortly after Towton (28 March 1461) he and Sir John Conyers were reported to be besieging Henry VI at Carham. 
For his services, being the principal Northumbrian gentleman to support the Yorkist cause, Edward IV on 26 July 1461 summoned Ogle to his first parliament as Baron Ogle, and invested him (8 August) with the offices of steward and constable of the castles of Alnwick, Warkworth, and Prudhoe, and with other lordships forfeited by the earl of Northumberland. He was also appointed warden-general of the east marches, an office previously held by the earl. In October 1462 Ogle distinguished himself in the dash upon Holy Island, which resulted in the capture of all the French leaders who had come over with Margaret of Anjou, except de Breze, and during the operations against the Northumbrian strongholds in the winter Ogle assisted John Neville, Lord Montagu, in the siege of Bamburgh, which surrendered on Christmas eve. Betrayed to the Lancastrians again in the following year, the castle was finally reduced in June 1464, and entrusted to Ogle as constable for life. Just a year later he was commissioned with Montagu, now earl of Northumberland, and others, to negotiate for peace with Scotland, and for a marriage between James III and an English subject. In compensation for the loss of custody of the Percy estates with their transfer to Montagu, he received in April 1465 a grant in fee tail of the lordship of Redesdale and castle of Harbottle in central Northumberland, forfeited by Sir William Tailboys of Kyme in Lincolnshire, who was executed after the battle of Hexham in 1464. To these were added other forfeited lands in Northumberland. Lord Ogle's consistent loyalty to the Nevilles and the house of York may be explained by the fact that William Bertram, the cousin whose inheritance of Bothal Ogle's father had disputed, had been retained since 1440 by Henry Percy, second earl of Northumberland. Ogle died on 1 November 1469. 


@@@@@


doc= 20616


Oglethorpe, James Edward (1696-1785), army officer and founder of the colony of Georgia, was born in London on 22 December 1696, the third and youngest surviving son of Sir Theophilus Oglethorpe (1650-1702), politician and army officer, and his wife, Eleanor, 'nee' Wall (1662-1732), and was baptized the following day at St Martin-in-the-Fields. The strong Jacobite sympathies of his parents, but especially of his mother, would cast a shadow over his career well into his middle age. 
In 1707, following a long-established family tradition of military service, James Edward, or 'Jemmy' as he was known at home, enlisted in Queen Anne's 1st regiment of foot guards and in 1713 was commissioned as a lieutenant. The following year he matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Oxford. In 1715, possibly on his own initiative or perhaps acting on the advice of his mother, who did not wish her son to be jeopardized by her overt support for the Pretender, Oglethorpe resigned his army commission and left England for France. Upon his arrival in Paris he enrolled as a student in the academy of Lompres. One of his fellow students, James Francis Edward Keith, like Oglethorpe from a family with staunch Jacobite connections, became a lifelong friend and ally. War between the Austrian empire and the Turks offered Oglethorpe and Keith an opportunity to experience active military service, and in 1716 they enlisted as volunteers in the imperial army commanded by Prince Eugene of Savoy. By the time Belgrade surrendered in 1717 Oglethorpe, who had distinguished himself at the battle of Petrovaradin (1716) and the siege of Timisora (1716), had been promoted by Prince Eugene to the rank of lieutenant-colonel. In 1718 he saw further action in Sicily. He could have remained in the imperial army but in 1719 chose instead to return to England. 
Oglethorpe's hopes of a commission in the British army were quickly dashed. Neither Prince Eugene's strong recommendation nor Oglethorpe's distinguished military record could compensate for the taint of Jacobitism that attached to his family's name. In June 1719, with his military career seemingly at an end, he returned briefly to Corpus Christi College. Little is known about his time there, and he left without taking his degree. 
In 1722 Oglethorpe's life took a new and unanticipated turn when he returned from Europe to manage the affairs of his expatriate brother Theophilus Oglethorpe ('bap'. 1684, died 'c'.1737). Like his father and brother Lewis before him, Theophilus had sat as the MP for Haslemere in Surrey. The Oglethorpe family assumed that James, in his turn, would occupy the seat, and such was their influence in the constituency that he was returned with a minimum of opposition. He held the seat until 1754. 
The first few years of Oglethorpe's parliamentary career were largely unexceptional, but in 1728 an event occurred which quickly catapulted him into a position of national prominence. Robert Castell, a good friend of Oglethorpe's, fell into debt and was incarcerated in the notorious Fleet prison. Because he was so penurious that he could not afford to bribe the guards into giving him better living conditions, he contracted smallpox and died. Castell's death, and the unmitigated squalor of the Fleet and the other gaols in which debtors were imprisoned, horrified Oglethorpe and spurred him to action. In 1729 he persuaded the House of Commons to appoint a committee, to be chaired by him, which would prepare a detailed report on the conditions in English prisons. 
Oglethorpe quickly developed a close understanding, and an excellent working relationship, with one of his colleagues on the gaols committee, Sir John Perceval, later first earl of Egmont. By 1730 Oglethorpe had formulated a far more ambitious scheme than that of prison reform. Perceval, who proved to be most receptive to his plan, was one of the first people to whom Oglethorpe revealed his proposal to establish a new American colony. 
In some ways Oglethorpe's proposal was very traditional. Ever since the sixteenth century, a central strand in elite English thinking about colonization had been that colonies offered England the opportunity to rid itself of the unemployed and the unemployable -- those who were both a drain on, and a potential social and moral threat to, society as a whole. The abundant resources of the New World would provide such people with every opportunity to improve themselves materially and, through their work, with the prospect of moral and social redemption. This was the essence of the plan Oglethorpe mooted to Perceval in 1730, a plan he believed would receive the enthusiastic backing of politicians and churchmen, as well as those merchants and manufacturers who stood to benefit from the commercial opportunities presented by a new colony. 
In 1730 Oglethorpe had not finalized the exact location of his proposed colony, but, as his plan began to take shape, he realized the practical advantages of selecting a site in the region to the south of the Savannah River. Spain, with its heavily fortified presence in northern Florida, presented a serious threat to South Carolina's burgeoning rice economy. Oglethorpe reasoned that South Carolina's, and thereby England's, interests could be served by establishing a military buffer in these disputed borderlands. The House of Commons, he anticipated, would willingly support a colony which not only served this purpose but would also do so comparatively cheaply. The settlers of this new colony would function as soldier-farmers. They would be South Carolina's first line of defence. Between 1730 and 1732 Oglethorpe, ably assisted by Perceval, embarked on an ambitious campaign to promote his scheme. Oglethorpe was responsible for the earliest literary contribution to that campaign, an unpublished piece entitled 'Some accounts of the design of the trustees for establishing colonys in America'. This detailed analysis of the rationale for the founding of a new colony, and the precise form it would take, seems to have been written between late 1730 and the spring of 1731. Benjamin Martyn, later appointed to serve as the Georgia trustees' secretary, drew heavily on Oglethorpe's work for his 'Some Account of the Designs of the Trustees for Establishing the Colony of Georgia in America' (1732) and 'Reasons for Establishing the Colony of Georgia in America' (1733). As part of the continuing effort to secure support for Georgia, Oglethorpe wrote 'A New and Accurate Account of the Provinces of South-Carolina and Georgia', which was published in London in 1733. By June 1732 Oglethorpe and Perceval were ready to implement their plan. They, together with some of the parliamentarians, churchmen, and merchants subsequently known as the trustees, who were actively prepared to support their scheme, successfully petitioned the crown for a charter which authorized them to found their colony in the region between the Savannah and Altamaha rivers ['see 'Trustees for establishing the colony of Georgia in America]. In October 1732 Oglethorpe accompanied the first embarkation of settlers to Georgia, and for the next decade he played a decisive and highly controversial role in virtually every aspect of life in the colony. The paternalistic, if not authoritarian, attitude he displayed towards the early settlers, and his refusal to brook any criticism, produced mixed results. On the one hand his firmness, combined with his seemingly unflagging energy, was instrumental in securing the colony's survival during the initial years of settlement. At the same time his often inappropriate choice of men to serve as local officials, and his uncritical loyalty to them, stirred up a great deal of discontent. 
By the mid-1730s the trustees, and Oglethorpe in particular, were being blamed by a growing number of colonists, and their allies in South Carolina, for a policy which they believed was stunting Georgia's economic development and thereby thwarting their own economic aspirations: the prohibition of black slavery. Oglethorpe and his colleagues on the Georgia board had not begun their venture with a view to excluding slavery, but Oglethorpe soon became convinced that their intentions for the colony were incompatible with chattel slavery. His uncompromising opposition to slavery was based more on pragmatism than it was on ideological objections to that institution. 
Having seen South Carolina's slave system at first hand Oglethorpe was quickly persuaded that slavery would jeopardize Georgia's role as a military buffer. Enslaved Africans, he surmised, would not hesitate to do all in their power to assist the Spaniards if by that means they could secure their own liberation. Georgia, moreover, had not been founded with a view to replicating, and thereby competing with, South Carolina's rice economy. The subtropical commodities, the silk and the wine, which the trustees insisted would form the backbone of Georgia's economy, were not seen as necessitating the employment of enslaved workers. Finally, Oglethorpe was utterly convinced that the use of slaves would have a highly detrimental effect on the manners and morality of Georgia's white inhabitants. For all of these reasons he urged the other trustees to press for parliamentary legislation outlawing slavery in Georgia. In 1735 the House of Commons enacted the law sought by the Georgia board. 
During the late 1730s the prohibition of slavery generated an increasingly bitter debate. The pro-slavery group of Georgia settlers and their South Carolinian backers managed to secure potentially powerful support in the House of Commons. While Oglethorpe remained in Georgia, effectively ensuring the continuation of the ban, Perceval marshalled the trustees' defences in London. Oglethorpe's victory over the Spaniards at the battle of Bloody Marsh (1742), together with his return to England in the following year, marked the beginning of the end of the prohibition. By 1747 the trustees had all but conceded defeat in their campaign to exclude slavery from Georgia, and three years later they reluctantly agreed to ask parliament to repeal the legislation of 1735. 
Oglethorpe may have made errors in his political judgements and in his civil administration of Georgia, but his military contribution was of the very highest order and significance. It was he who was mainly responsible for ensuring that Georgia successfully filled its designated military function. The trustees had always known that Spain would not take kindly to this English intrusion into the southern borderlands, and in 1736 a Spanish invasion seemed imminent. Oglethorpe cleverly bluffed the Spaniards into overestimating his firepower and, for the time being, postponed an assault which might have dislodged the English. Oglethorpe had bought the time he needed to build up Georgia's defences, and he returned to England to try to impress upon the House of Commons the urgency of providing troops to serve under his command in America. Parliament proved unwilling to supply regular soldiers, but authorized Oglethorpe to raise a volunteer regiment. In September 1738 he and his force of 600 men landed in Georgia. The war that Oglethorpe anticipated did not come for another year. 
In the autumn of 1739 Britain declared war on Spain, and Oglethorpe was ordered to do all he could to harry the Spanish forces based in the Florida port of St Augustine. In May 1740 he hatched what proved to be an overly ambitious plan to take St Augustine. Within a month he was forced to concede defeat. The lack of wholehearted support from South Carolina, sickness in his army, and desertions left him with no realistic alternative but to withdraw the remnants of his forces back to the comparative safety of Georgia. 
Two years later Oglethorpe found himself on the defensive when the Spaniards launched an all-out attack on Georgia. In what was to be a defining point in Anglo-Spanish relations in the southern borderlands, he repelled the Spanish forces at the battle of Bloody Marsh. His stunning victory meant that for the foreseeable future Georgia, and thereby South Carolina, were secure against the possibility of Spanish invasion. In 1743, in acknowledgement of his military achievements in America, Oglethorpe was formally accorded the rank of brigadier-general. He returned to England in 1743 to try to persuade the Pelham ministry to continue funding Georgia. He had left the colony with every intention of returning, but events conspired to ensure that he would spend the rest of his life in Europe. 
On 15 September 1745, at the age of nearly forty-nine, and after a comparatively short courtship, Oglethorpe married the 31-year-old Elizabeth Wright (died 1787), the only surviving daughter and wealthy heiress of Sir Nathan Wright. Whatever her other attractions, Elizabeth's wealth replenished Oglethorpe's much depleted purse. The newly-weds settled at Elizabeth's family home, Cranham Hall in Essex, where they lived more than comfortably on the $1500 per annum she brought to the marriage. The couple had no children. If marriage detained Oglethorpe in England, then so did the Jacobite rebellion of 1745, an event which once more raised questions about the political loyalties of the Oglethorpe family. Oglethorpe, at the head of the troops he had raised for the defence of Georgia, was ordered to join General Wade at Hull. He and his regiment were afterwards transferred to the command of the duke of Cumberland, then in hot pursuit of the retreating Jacobite forces. 
In December 1745 the duke of Cumberland alleged that Oglethorpe had been tardy in his harassment of the rebels and, without any firm evidence to support his charges, implied that this was because of his sympathy for the Jacobite cause. Oglethorpe, who at no point in his life had expressed any overt support for the Stuarts, was court-martialled. Although he was acquitted, his military career in both England and America had been effectively ended. After 1745 he ceased to play an active role in Georgia affairs. For the next nine years he remained MP for Haslemere, but lost his seat in 1754. In 1755 he sought to reactivate his Georgia regiment for service in America, but his application to the ministry was turned down. 
Oglethorpe's keen desire to resume his military career, which may have reflected the boredom of his life as a country gentleman and the loss of his parliamentary seat, was satisfied, but in continental Europe rather than in America. He ended his military career as he had begun it: serving alongside his friend James Keith. By 1755 Keith had attained the rank of field marshal in Frederick the Great's army. Oglethorpe was with Keith when he died at the battle of Hochkirk (1758). 
By now in his mid-sixties, Oglethorpe returned to England in 1760 and lived there for the remainder of his long life. He seems to have divided his time between Cranham and London. While he no longer took any active role in public life, he did become something of a celebrity in London society. His long and varied career, and his apparently jaunty personality, secured for him a wide circle of friends and associates, including Samuel Johnson, James Boswell, and Hannah More. Oglethorpe had been one of the 'warmest patrons' of Johnson's 'London' (1738), and at one point Johnson intimated that he wished to write a biography of Oglethorpe, but the volume never materialized. Both Boswell and Johnson appear to have thought highly of a man who was said to have an 'uncommon vivacity' and 'variety of knowledge' which made his conversation both stimulating and sometimes 'desultory' (Boswell, 92, 756). Oglethorpe, who had enjoyed excellent health throughout his life, died of natural causes at Cranham on 1 July 1785, and was buried in the parish church there. 


@@@@@


doc= 20617


Oglethorpe, Owen (1502/3-1559), bishop of Carlisle, was the third son of George Oglethorpe of Newton Kyme, near Tadcaster, Yorkshire. In 1551 he was said to be forty-eight. Educated at Magdalen College, Oxford, Oglethorpe for most of his life was connected to the college and involved with academic and ecclesiastical politics. Already a fellow in 1524, he graduated BA in 1525 and MA in 1529, when he became a lecturer in logic. Lecturer in moral philosophy in 1534, he proceeded BTh and DTh in February and July 1536 respectively. In the same February began his long presidency of his college. In 1531 he was master of disputations, and in 1533-4 both keeper of the Winton Chest and junior proctor. In 1542 he became canon and prebendary of King Henry VIII College, holding the post until its dissolution in 1545, and still being in receipt of the pension at Pole's investigation in 1556. Vice-chancellor elect in 1551, his university career was now under a cloud because of his religious conservatism, and he was compelled to resign his presidency in September 1552, resuming it under Mary in October 1553, and finally vacating it in April 1555 to become registrar of the Order of the Garter in May 1555. 
Oglethorpe's tenure of benefices followed a pattern familiar to such senior ecclesiastics. Priested in June 1531, a month later he was presented to the college living of Sele, Sussex, which he vacated by September 1536, and in 1534 to Bolton Percy, Yorkshire. He became a canon of Lincoln, with the prebend of Lafford, in 1536, only vacating on his elevation to Carlisle in 1556. He obtained the rectory of Newington, Oxfordshire, in 1537, which he vacated by 1557, and that of East Bridgford, Nottinghamshire, in 1538, in which year he had a dispensation to hold a second benefice. Canon and prebendary of St George's, Windsor (1540-4), he was canon also of Ripon and prebendary first of Nunwick (1541-4) and thereafter of Monkton. At the same period he gained other Yorkshire benefices: his native Newton Kyme in February 1541, and Romaldkirk in October 1541, obtaining in 1557 a dispensation to hold the latter 'in commendam' with his bishopric. His rectory of St Olave's, Southwark (October 1544), was however vacated on his elevation to Carlisle. Not surprisingly 1544 saw dispensations, citing him as king's chaplain, to hold a third and fourth benefice. He hoped for the archdeaconry of the East Riding on the death of Thomas Magnus in 1550, but college politics prevented his obtaining it. Finally he became dean of St George's, Windsor, in February 1554, which he vacated by November 1556, and bishop of Carlisle, to which he was consecrated on 15 August 1556. 
Oglethorpe's career was beset by religious change. Under Henry VIII he suffered the loss of a canonry during the uncertainties over Cardinal College, although he had been one of the seventeen commissioners of 1540 to answer the 'Seventeen Questions' on the sacraments. His doctrinal position being well known, his conservatism was apt to cause him problems during Edward's reign. Tentative contacts with reformers did not save him from dissension in his college, where a radical minority sought to obtain a more sympathetic president. In November 1548 the president and fellows of Magdalen wrote to Somerset, defending themselves against the accusations of some reforming fellows that Oglethorpe had dissuaded them from accomplishing redress of religion, just as he had done at King Henry VIII College. Oglethorpe protested that he was protecting the college as he was bound by oath and statute to do, against changes for which he had no dispensation. He promised obedience to the protector, knowing that he would order nothing that was ungodly, and assured Somerset that the order of communion, not high mass, was in use at Magdalen, and that he had not expelled any dissentient fellow or scholar. This rather spineless conservatism seems characteristic of the man, and won him no friends. By September 1550 others were deliberately undermining him, suggesting then that someone of 'sincerer piety' ('CSP dom.', '1547-53') should be chosen for ecclesiastical preferment, and in 1551 that Oglethorpe was in desperate need of the fellows' support if he were not to lose his presidency, and that he would forgo a major benefice (the archdeaconry) for the sake of the college. The writer thought his motivation not love but lucre, and believed the college to be split two to one in Oglethorpe's favour. 
By 1552 Oglethorpe had given up the struggle: Cecil's notebook records him as content to surrender his house to the king's visitation in July, and in August an indenture of the terms on which he handed over to his successor preceded his departure. In the circumstances it is surprising to find Oglethorpe in correspondence with Bullinger, and mentioned in reformers' correspondence. A fulsome introductory letter of 1548 was followed by a reference in a letter of 1550 to Rudolph Gwalter to 'your friend Oglethorpe' (Robinson, 'Original Letters') being in prison for superstition, and about to lose his presidency. In the same year he is joined with Peter Martyr in affectionate salutations to Bullinger, and in 1552 there is word of Dr Oglethorpe, vice-chancellor, anxiously expecting a letter from Bullinger. Foxe likewise records Oglethorpe in 1552 as having recanted his former ignorance at the preaching of Peter Martyr. His next mention of Oglethorpe, however, is as a disputant with the Oxford martyrs, dwelling in detail on the largely grammatical argument with Cranmer over whether the body of Christ was figuratively or literally present in the bread. Oglethorpe's promotions by Mary, in the light of such expressed theological views, are not surprising. 
In July 1556 a licence was granted to the dean and chapter of Carlisle to elect a successor to Robert Aldridge; in October a grant of the temporalities was made to Owen Oglethorpe, dean of St George's, Windsor. But it was not until January 1558 that he was in full possession, as a result of papal provision to the see. The Marian gift of the advowson and collation to the four prebendal stalls in his cathedral, and, on 14 November 1558, of various Cumberland advowsons, not all within his diocese, should have put him in a position to act as a Catholic reforming bishop of Carlisle. The queen's death ended that hope, and Oglethorpe's episcopacy was effectively over before it ever truly began. In the absence of diocesan records for the period, only fragments remain to illustrate his work. Correspondence over a will shows him in the temporizing strain associated with his Oxford career, but at least resident in his diocese. The weak and shuffling reply which the bishop gave when questioned about the sale of plate at St George's, Windsor, seems typical. Likewise his consecration of a chapelry on his way south to Elizabeth's coronation simply shows a diocesan carrying out his regular duties. His pastoral role is unquantifiable. 
The focal point of Oglethorpe's episcopal career was not his diocese, but his celebration of the Christmas eucharist, and participation in the coronation, of Elizabeth I. On Christmas day the queen walked out in displeasure at his elevation of the Host at the mass. The balance of probabilities is against his celebrating the mass at the coronation. That he should have been the officiating bishop at her coronation was largely accidental. With the see of Canterbury vacant, and York and his aged deputy at Durham infirm, Oglethorpe was the only remaining bishop of the northern province. There was perhaps some difficulty in finding any bishop not so closely connected to the previous regime as to be tarnished by it. The coronation robes had to be borrowed from Bonner of London, a great point being made of there being the full regalia, and all done in due order: 'universum apparatum pontificium quo uti solent Episcopi in huiusmodi magnificis illustrissimorum regum inaugurationibus' ('all the pontifical apparel which bishops are accustomed to wear at such occasions, the magnificent coronations of the most illustrious of kings'; 'APC', '1558-70', 42). Elizabeth was conscious of the service done her. When, in 1598, she wanted to flatter another bishop of Carlisle, she told him that she had been determined to appoint a worthy man to the see, for the sake of him who set the crown on her head ('VCH Cumberland', 2.60). 
Though he must have been aware of the confessional commitment of the new queen, Oglethorpe seems to have been content to be obedient. Faced with inevitable deprivation, like other Catholic bishops he behaved with dignity, regularly attending sessions of the Lords in March to April 1559 and voting against the 'Uniformity Bill'. He was assessed for a fine of $250 in May 1559, and deprived of Carlisle in June, losing also his 'commendam' of Romaldkirk, which went to his eventual successor in August. 
Uncertain of his future, and the validity of any plans made in a more favourable regime, Oglethorpe drew up his will on 10 November 1559, principally concerned to secure the foundation of a grammar school and almshouse at Tadcaster, Yorkshire. Several elements are of interest. The introductory formula claims, like any committed protestant, that he trusts to be saved by the merits of his saviour Jesus Christ. Numerous personal bequests, some very generous, are made; his friend Cuthbert Scott, the late bishop of Chester and one of the supervisors of the will, was to have a valuable cup and 'the ringe with thre diamonde on my finger'. Ample provision was made for the establishment and endowment of his school. What he hoped to be called Christ's Hospital, for twelve old people and as many scholars, is described in considerable architectural detail, with $500 allocated for its construction. Lands and tenements to the annual value of $40 were to be purchased for its upkeep, and a generous salary of 20 marks allotted to the schoolmaster. Even the quality of its intended occupants is specified. Numerous Oglethorpes were bound in the sum of $1000 to see the work completed (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/43, fols. 221-3). Tadcaster grammar school survived until 1968, and its successor preserved, at the close of the twentieth century, the proud memory of its founding bishop. A typical medieval prelate, conservative, primarily an academic, Oglethorpe died suddenly on 31 December 1559 after some months of house arrest in London, and was buried on 6 January 1560 at St Dunstan-in-the-West. 


@@@@@


doc= 20618


Oglethorpe, Sir Theophilus (1650-1702), army officer, was born at Oglethorpe Hall, Bramham, Yorkshire, and baptized on 14 September 1650 at Bramham, the son of Sutton Oglethorpe ('b'. 1612) and Frances, widow of Mark Pickering, daughter of John Matthew, and granddaughter of Tobie Matthew, archbishop of York. He came from an ancient Yorkshire family which had occupied the estate of Oglethorpe in the parish of Bramham since before the Norman conquest. His father was a royalist colonel during the first civil war, and governor of Beverston Castle, near Bristol, in 1644. For participation in the second civil war he was arrested in 1651 and fined $20,000, obliging the sale in 1653 of the heavily mortgaged Oglethorpe estate to Henry Fairfax of Bolton Priory. Sutton Oglethorpe married in 1635. He and his wife had two sons; the elder, Sutton (1637-1727), a student at Gray's Inn in 1657 and MA (Oxon), 28 September 1663, became a page to Charles II, master of the royal stud, and in 1684 collector of the customs at Carlisle. 
Theophilus Oglethorpe entered the military profession and trained in the French army from 1668, probably in Sir George Hamilton's English 'gens d'armes'. He was a captain in Sir Henry Jones's regiment of light horse in the French army from 1672 until 1 February 1675, when he transferred into the duke of Monmouth's Royal English regiment, likewise in the service of Louis XIV. He returned to England in 1678 and was commissioned major of the Royal Dragoons on 19 February. On 10 July 1678 he was additionally appointed brigadier and lieutenant of the duke of York's troop of the life guard. Major Oglethorpe, at the head of his troop of the Royal Dragoons, led the van of Monmouth's small army against the Scottish covenanters at Crookham (14 September 1678) and Bothwell Bridge (22 June 1679). His modest exploits were rewarded by elevation, on 31 August, to guidon and major of the duke of York's troop of the life guard; and then to lieutenant and lieutenant-colonel on 1 November 1680, by which time he had relinquished his commission in the Royal Dragoons. In 1680 he married Eleanor Wall (1662-1732), daughter of Richard Wall of Rathkennan, co. Tipperary, a Roman Catholic and head laundress to Charles II, earning $2000 p.a. Eleanor, or Ellen, was a forceful, determined woman who had considerable political acumen, which she was to employ on behalf of the Jacobites. 
Oglethorpe was a rake and a thug. He killed John Richardson in a duel in 1681 (he is known to have accepted at least two other challenges), was involved in the murder of Thomas Thynne by Count Konigsmarck in 1681, and was possibly involved with the Rye House plotters (1683). The best that can be said of his behaviour during the exclusion crisis was that he emerged finally on the winning side. Oglethorpe was returned as MP for Morpeth in 1685, probably on the interest of his friend Edward Howard, second earl of Carlisle, who had served as the cornet in Hamilton's 'gens d'armes'. During Monmouth's rebellion in 1685 Oglethorpe commanded fifty troopers from the Life Guards to scout ahead of the earl of Feversham's royal army. Oglethorpe's men successfully charged the rebels at Keynsham, near Bristol, on 25 June 1685 and forced them to retire towards Phillips-Norton. However, during his night march to attack Feversham on Sedgemoor (4-5 July 1685) Monmouth slipped past Oglethorpe's carelessly positioned patrols. Nevertheless, Oglethorpe's men arrived on the battlefield in time to harass Monmouth's defeated army. Two days later he was promoted to full colonel and knighted for bringing news of the victory to James II. Further advancement, to colonel of the Holland regiment of foot (3rd foot, the Buffs), followed on 23 October. He also became a royal equerry, and in 1688 purchased the estate of Westbroke, near Godalming, Surrey. Promoted to brigadier-general on 11 November 1688, he brought news to James II in Salisbury of the military desertions to William of Orange at Warminster. Resisting blandishments to remain in the army, Oglethorpe was deprived of his commissions on 31 December 1688 and retired to Westbroke to dabble in Jacobite intrigue. First arrested and temporarily detained in 1689, a repetition in 1692 caused him to withdraw to France, where he remained until James II was prevailed upon to dismiss all protestants from St Germain-en-Laye. Disillusioned, he sailed to England and took the oaths to William III in 1698. Politically rehabilitated, he was returned as MP for Haslemere at the general elections in 1698 and February 1701. He died on 10 April 1702 and was buried at St James's, Piccadilly. 
Oglethorpe and Eleanor had five sons and three daughters. Their eldest son, Lewis (1681-1704), succeeded his father as MP for Haslemere and also became a professional soldier. An equerry to Queen Anne, he was appointed aide-de-camp to Marlborough in April 1704 but was shot in the leg during the assault on the Schellenberg and died shortly afterwards. The second son, Theophilus ('bap'. 1684, died 'c'.1737), succeeded his brother as MP for Haslemere and became aide-de-camp to the duke of Ormond before retiring to the Jacobite court at St Germain-en-Laye. James, the third son, was born in 1689, while the fourth, Sutton, died aged seven weeks in 1693. General James Edward Oglethorpe (1696-1785), founder of the colony of Georgia, was the fifth son. The eldest daughter, Anne (1683-1756), lived at St Germain-en-Laye and, allegedly, was the mistress of James III (James Francis Edward Stuart), the Pretender. Eleanor (1684-1775), the second daughter, was an active Jacobite. The third daughter, Louisa Mary, usually Molly ('b'. 1693), married the marquis de Bersompierre in 1733 before moving to the court of Spain. 


@@@@@


doc= 20619


Ua Gormain, Mael Muire (d. 1181?), abbot of Knock, may possibly be equated with the Mael Muire Ua Dunain, abbot of the same Augustinian house, dedicated to St Peter and St Paul, who died in 1181. He is remembered as author of 'Felire hui Gormain' ('The martyrology of Ua Gormain') which survives in Brussels, Bibliotheque Royale, MSS 5100-5104, fols. 124-97, transcribed about 1630 by Michael O'Clery, one of the four masters. Little is known of his life. He was a member of a prominent ecclesiastical family, probably related to the Oengus Ua Gormain, abbot of Bangor, who died in Lismore in 1123, to the Mael Caemgein Ua Gormain, former abbot of Termonfeckin, who died as master of the monastic school of Louth in 1164, and to the Flann Ua Gormain, chief lector of Armagh, who died in 1174 described as 'a learned sage, versed in sacred and profane philosophy, after having spent twenty-one years of study in France and England and twenty other years in directing and governing the schools of Ireland' ('AFM', s.a. 1174). 
The preface to Ua Gormain's martyrology states that it was written after Ruaidri Ua Conchobair became high-king of Ireland (in 1166) but before the death of the archbishop of Armagh, Gilla Meic Liac (in 1174). John Colgan, in his 'Acta sanctorum... Hiberniae' of 1645, added that it was written 'c'.1167. The martyrology does, however, contain a record of the feast days of Archbishop Gilla Meic Liac and of Gilla Mo Chaidbeo, superior of the abbey of St Peter and St Paul at Armagh, both of whom died in March 1174, though these may possibly have been later insertions. 
Ua Gormain explains in the preface his motivation in compiling the martyrology as being to secure a place in heaven for himself and for anyone who sings it, and also because he is unhappy that the earlier and better-known martyrology of Oengus the Culdee ('Felire Oengusso') has included so few of the saints of Ireland and of elsewhere and arranges them frequently under the wrong feast day. His own martyrology, which is in verse and in Irish, consists of 2780 lines in the strict metre known as 'rinnaird mor', and is important because it contains the names and feast days of almost as many Irish saints as non-Irish saints (a total of about 3450 persons, biblical, continental, English, British, and Irish). It is therefore an important record of the early Irish church, and since its object was to bring Irish hagiology and the Irish church calendar into greater harmony with those of the rest of Christendom, it may be regarded as a product of the reforms then taking place in the Irish church. 
The martyrology of Donegal ('Felire na naomh nErennach'), the last and largest of the calendars of Irish saints, places Mael Muire Ua Gormain's own feast day at 3 July, though there is no record of his formal canonization by the apostolic see. 


@@@@@


doc= 20620


O'Grady, Standish, first Viscount Guillamore (1766-1840), judge, was born in Limerick on 20 January 1766, the eldest son of Darby O'Grady (died 1804), high sheriff, of Mount Prospect, Limerick, and his wife, Mary (died 1809), daughter of James Smyth, also of co. Limerick. He matriculated at Trinity College, Dublin, on 8 November 1780, and graduated BA in 1784. He was admitted as a student at Middle Temple, London, on 19 April 1783, and at King's Inns, Dublin, was in 1787 called to the bar, and joined the Munster circuit. He quickly attained a considerable practice. In 1790 he married Katharine Waller (died 1853), with whom he had seven sons and five daughters. On 28 May 1803, after the murder of Lord Kilwarden, O'Grady became attorney-general, and he was one of the prosecuting counsel at the trial of Robert Emmet. In 1805 he was made lord chief baron, in succession to Barry Yelverton, Lord Avonmore. He was considered to be a sound judge by his contemporaries, and David Richard Pigot, chief baron of the Irish exchequer, called him 'the ablest man whose mind I ever saw at work'. He was renowned for his wit and praised for his advocacy and knowledge of procedure. On his retirement from the bench in 1831 he was created Viscount Guillamore of Cahir and Baron O'Grady of Rockbarton, co. Limerick (28 January 1831). A paralytic stroke in the same year affected his speech and the movement of his hands. He then retired from his house in Baggot Street, Dublin, to his seat at Rockbarton, co. Limerick, and over the next nine years his health steadily declined. He died at Rockbarton on 21 April 1840 and was buried at Aney, co. Limerick. 
His eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 20621


Standish O'Grady, second Viscount Guillamore (1792-1848), army officer, was born on 26 December 1792. He was educated at Westminster School and at Trinity College, Dublin, where he matriculated on 4 July 1809. He did not take a degree but entered the army, in March 1811; he became lieutenant in 1812, captain in 1815, major in 1825, lieutenant-colonel in 1829, and colonel in 1842. It was as lieutenant that he served in the 7th hussars at the battle of Waterloo, where his skills as a commander gained him respect. He led his regiment in a charge against the French: the charge was successful, though many losses were suffered, and he was made captain. On 16 October 1828 he married the Hon. Gertrude Jane Paget (1805-1871), the eldest daughter of the Hon. Berkeley Paget. They had several children, including Standish, third viscount (1832-1860); Paget Standish, fourth viscount (1838-1877); Hardress Standish, fifth viscount (1841-1918); and Frederick Standish, sixth viscount (1847-1927). The second viscount died at Rockbarton, co. Limerick, on 22 July 1848 and was buried at Aney, nearby. Some of his letters were published in 'Waterloo Letters' (1891), edited by H. T. Siborne. 


@@@@@


doc= 20622


Ogston, Francis (bap. 1803, d. 1887), expert in forensic medicine, baptized in Aberdeen on 23 July 1803, was the third son of Alexander Ogston, the founder of a large soap factory in Aberdeen, and his wife, Helen Milne. He was educated at the grammar school and at Marischal College, Aberdeen, completing his medical course at Edinburgh University, where he graduated MD in 1824. Subsequently he travelled and studied on the continent. Having settled at Aberdeen, he soon acquired a large practice. In 1827 he began to teach chemistry privately. 
In 1831 Ogston was appointed Aberdeen city police surgeon and began his long association with the city and university of Aberdeen. In 1839 he was appointed the first lecturer on medical jurisprudence at Marischal College. The appointment, coming in the wake of proposed reforms to university syllabuses, echoed the foundation of a regius chair of medical jurisprudence and public health at the University of Glasgow in 1839. The Aberdeen lectureship was elevated to a chair of medical jurisprudence and medical logic in 1857. The chair was endowed by Dr Alexander Henderson of Caskieburn, who stipulated that two-fifths of the course should be devoted to medical logic and that Ogston should be the chair's first incumbent. In an age when medical testimony was often suspect, Henderson's objective was to equip Aberdeen medical graduates with sound principles of reasoning when giving evidence in court. On 17 June 1841 Ogston married Amelia Cadenhead (died 1852), daughter of Alexander Cadenhead, procurator fiscal for Aberdeen. They had at least two sons and a daughter. Ogston's brother-in-law, George Cadenhead, became procurator fiscal on his father's death in 1854 and remained in post until 1886 on his appointment as Aberdeen county procurator fiscal. 
In 1860, when Marischal College was united to King's College to form the University of Aberdeen, under the 'Universities (Scotland) Act' 1858, Ogston's appointment was maintained, and he continued to occupy the chair of medical jurisprudence until his retirement in 1883. Ogston frequently gave evidence in the judiciary courts and the lucidity of his medical reports drew praise even from the formidable Lord Deas. Ogston's lectures, 'Lectures on Medical Jurisprudence', edited by his son Frank, were published in 1878. The lectures drew heavily on continental and English writers but contained clear examples of Scottish procedures and local case histories. An example of Ogston's grim humour is evident in his repetition of Marie Devergie's instructions on exhumation: 1. Never to proceed to the operation fasting, and to be sure first to take a dram. 
In 1862 Aberdeen appointed Ogston as its first medical officer of health under the terms of the 1862 'Aberdeen Police Act'. He remained medical officer of health for Aberdeen until 1881. Ogston continued the established practice of Scottish medical dynasties and employed his two sons Alexander and Frank as assistants in both his university and city appointments. Alexander Ogston went on to become professor of surgery at Aberdeen, and Frank, after failing to succeed his father in 1883, became professor of public health and forensic medicine at Otago University, New Zealand. Thus, in Aberdeen, the offices of police surgeon, professor of forensic medicine, crown witness, medical officer of health, and procurator fiscal were bound together by close familial ties for half a century. 
Ogston was chosen dean of the faculty of medicine in Aberdeen, and was twice representative of the senatus at the university court. In 1883 he retired from the chair of medical jurisprudence. Two years afterwards the university conferred on him the honorary degree of LLD. He died suddenly at his home, 13 Albyn Terrace, Aberdeen, on 25 September 1887. 


@@@@@


doc= 20623


O'Hagan, John (1822-1890), judge, was born on 19 March 1822, at Newry, co. Down, the second son of John Arthur O'Hagan of Newry, and his wife, of whom little is known. After attending the Belfast Seminary he entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 3 July 1837; he graduated BA in 1842 and MA in 1865. He was called to the Irish bar by King's Inns, Dublin, in Trinity term, 1842, and joined the Munster circuit. An active member of the Young Ireland party, he was one of the counsel for Sir Charles Gavan Duffy on his trial for complicity in the rebellion of 1848. He also contributed to 'The Nation', both in prose and verse, his poems under the pseudonyms or initials Sliab Cuillinn, Carolina Wilhelmina Amelia, O., or J. O'H. They are collected in 'The Spirit of the Nation' (1874). On 2 December 1865 O'Hagan married his cousin, the Hon. Frances Mary O'Hagan, daughter of Thomas O'Hagan, lord chancellor of Ireland. 
O'Hagan was appointed commissioner of the board of national education in 1861, took silk on 8 February 1865, and was admitted a bencher of King's Inns in 1878. On 31 May 1881 he was made third serjeant, and under the 'Land Law (Ireland) Act' of 1881 he was appointed judicial commissioner with the rank of justice of the High Court. He resided at 22 Upper Fitzwilliam Street, Dublin, and at Glenaveena, Howth, co. Dublin, where he died on 12 November 1890. He was survived by his wife. 
O'Hagan was considered by his contemporaries to be a competent lawyer and was respected for his integrity and chivalrous courtesy. He was a prolific writer, and his patriotic songs were popular among nationalists of the time. Charles Gavan Duffy referred to him as 'the safest in council, the most moderate in opinion, [and] the most considerate in temper' (Duffy, 'Young Ireland', 1896, 1.133). 


@@@@@


doc= 20624


O'Hagan, Thomas, first Baron O'Hagan (1812-1885), judge, was born in Belfast on 29 May 1812, the only son of Edward O'Hagan, a Catholic trader, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Captain Thomas Bell. His early education was at the Belfast Academical Institution, where he was at the time the only Catholic pupil. A keen interest in public speaking led to his early prominence in the school's debating society. In 1831 he was admitted as a student of the King's Inns, Dublin, and three years later he became a student of Gray's Inn in London, as a pupil of Thomas Chitty. O'Hagan was called to the Irish bar in 1836, the year of his marriage (on 1 February) to Mary, daughter of Charles Hamilton Teeling of Belfast ['see under 'Teeling, Bartholomew]. They were to have one son (who died in infancy) and five daughters. 
O'Hagan's early career at the bar was spent on the north-east circuit, principally as a criminal defence counsel. He combined legal practice with journalism, editing the 'Newry Examiner', a paper which supported Daniel O'Connell, from 1836 until 1840, when O'Hagan moved to Dublin. His association with O'Connell assisted his rise to prominence at the bar. O'Hagan's successful defence of Charles Gavan Duffy (then editor of the 'Belfast Vindicator') in a seditious libel case in 1842 enhanced his reputation as one of the leading barristers of his generation. Promotion in the profession followed. In 1847 O'Hagan became assistant barrister (or county court judge) for co. Longford, and two years later he became a QC. He became assistant barrister for co. Dublin in 1857. O'Hagan was appointed as third serjeant and elected a bencher of King's Inns in 1859. 
O'Hagan's identification with his co-religionists is evident from a number of controversial cases where he appeared as counsel. In 1845 he was junior counsel in an appeal to the visitorial court of appeal of Trinity College, Dublin. The case concerned Denis Caulfied Heron, a Catholic student, who appealed against a decision of the provost and fellows of Trinity College which had refused him admission to a scholarship on the grounds that the scholarships were not tenable by Catholics. At the trial on 7 December 1855 of Father Petcherine, a redemptorist monk of Russian birth, on a charge of profanity for burning a copy of the Authorized Version of the scriptures, O'Hagan's address to the jury secured an acquittal. Outside the courts, O'Hagan helped to organize opposition to the 'Ecclesiastical Titles Bill' and to proposed legislation on convents in 1852. 
In politics O'Hagan was strongly influenced by O'Connell, whom he described in 1875 in a centenary address as 'my great political benefactor, my deliverer and my friend'. However, O'Hagan did not support the repeal of the 'Act of Union'. Instead he was prepared to work within the Union to bring about fair and just laws which he believed would give Catholics greater rights and might lead ultimately to acceptance of English law. As a founder member of the Dublin Statistical Society in 1847, which became the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland in 1855, O'Hagan pioneered the study of statistical and economic science in Ireland. His later belief -- that Ireland's social and economic problems could be remedied through legislation -- was in keeping with the philosophy of the statistical movement. He collaborated with the leading Irish economist and statistician William Neilson Hancock in making law reform a major objective of the statistical movement in Ireland. 
In 1858 O'Hagan was appointed a member of the board of national education for Ireland, for which he was criticized by Cardinal Cullen. Palmerston made him solicitor-general for Ireland in 1861, and a year later he became attorney-general for Ireland, which also brought him into conflict with the traditional and ultra-conservative side of Catholic nationalist opinion. He rejected the view that 'a Catholic Irishman, faithful to his Church and true to his country, is to ostracise himself and decline a position of dignity and power which he may have won by honest effort and fair capacity' (O'Hagan, 324-5). For a short period, from May 1863 to January 1865, he sat as a Liberal MP for Tralee. O'Hagan had little private means and his search for a safe seat at first proved difficult. He had been unsuccessful at Kinsale, largely because he could not provide the necessary financial patronage to secure local support, but at Tralee Daniel O'Connell's son retired to make way for him. His career as an elected politician was short-lived. In January 1865 he was appointed to the bench as a judge of the court of common pleas in succession to Nicholas Ball. According to 'The Times', O'Hagan commanded widespread support as a fair-minded judge. 
On the formation of Gladstone's first ministry in December 1868, O'Hagan became lord chancellor of Ireland, the first Catholic to hold the office since 1688. He was the first person to benefit from an act of parliament passed in 1867 (30 & 31 Vict. c. 75), by which the office of lord chancellor had been opened to all persons without regard to their religious beliefs. On 14 June 1870 O'Hagan was raised to the peerage as Baron O'Hagan of Tullahogue in co. Tyrone and took his seat in the Lords on 21 June 1870. Following the death of his first wife in October 1868, O'Hagan married on 2 August 1871 Alice Mary (died 1921), daughter and coheir of Colonel Charles Towneley (died 1870) of Towneley, Lancashire, a Catholic landowner and Liberal MP for Sligo in 1848 and 1852-3, through whom he acquired 5200 acres in Lancashire and Yorkshire. 
O'Hagan was aware of the semi-political nature of the office of lord chancellor and aware, too, that his position as Irish lord chancellor was a political gesture to secure Irish Catholic support for Gladstone's ministry. O'Hagan was known to have support from the Catholic bishops. F. E. Ball, in the second volume of his 'Judges in Ireland, 1221-1921' (1926), noted that the appointment was 'prompted by O'Hagan's representing more than any other Roman Catholic on the Bench national ideals'. Throughout Gladstone's first ministry O'Hagan played a prominent role, though he had occasion to complain that he was not initially consulted by Gladstone or the then Irish chief secretary, Chichester Fortescue (Lord Carlingford), over the contents of the 1870 'Land Bill'. The reform of the Irish jury system was identified as one of the major areas for legislation. Jury packing and an unfair jury-selection process were identified as shortcomings in the existing jury legislation. In 1871 O'Hagan introduced a 'Jury Bill', subsequently enacted as the 'Juries Act (Ireland)' 1871, which lowered the property qualification for jurors (replacing the freehold qualification) and endeavoured to prevent jury packing by replacing the sheriff's discretion over jury selection with a system of alphabetical selection by rotation. This 1871 act was the first attempt to broaden the jury qualification to allow Catholics to sit on the jury in both civil and criminal cases. O'Hagan also introduced reforms in the law of lunacy and in the system of juvenile justice during the period of Gladstone's first ministry. 
In 1869 O'Hagan had become president of the Dublin Statistical Society. Many of the papers read at the society's meetings, which were strongly influenced by the utilitarian ideas of Bentham and his followers, identified areas of the law that required reform. O'Hagan believed in codification as an overriding philosophy for law reformers. In the case of Ireland he believed that codification would allow easier comparison and perhaps assimilation of the law in England and Ireland. He also had the vision to imagine both England and Ireland linked to a codified system of law throughout Europe. This European perspective is a recurrent theme of O'Hagan's opening address at the Belfast meeting of the Social Science Association in 1867, entitled 'The study of jurisprudence -- Roman, English and Celtic'. 
O'Hagan's decisions in the Irish court of chancery are reported in the 'Irish Reports (Equity)', volumes 4-8. O'Hagan's work as a common-law advocate was not regarded by his fellow judges as the best qualification for work as a chancery judge, and his lasting legacy is not to be found in his contribution to judicial precedent. In his first period of office as lord chancellor he was embroiled in an embarrassing series of public and acrimonious controversies with his colleague in the chancery appeal court, Lord Justice Christian. Christian disliked the 'Land Act' of 1870, which O'Hagan had supported. In a leading case on interpretation of tenant rights under the new act, 'Re the Marquis of Waterford's Estates' (1871), Christian made strong objection to O'Hagan's judgment about the nature of the legal rights of tenants and attacked the act as 'shocking to all our ideas of property law'. In the case of 'Mulholland v. Killen' (1874), Christian was highly critical of O'Hagan's 1871 'Juries Act' and of the class of new jurors enfranchised by the legislation. Christian was also critical of O'Hagan for allegedly not spending sufficient time on his judicial functions. 
O'Hagan responded to Christian's attacks with characteristic dignity, his reputation for tact and good humour and his fair-minded and honest intention remaining intact. This underlines what appears from reading his letters and speeches: O'Hagan's genial nature and general optimistic view of the world. Perhaps naively, this optimism may have left O'Hagan unwilling or unable to come to terms with his disappointments; his jury reforms in the 1870s required constant amendment, his passion for law reform through codification of Irish law remained unfulfilled, and the land legislation of 1870 required fundamental change in the 1880s. 
In February 1874 O'Hagan resigned with the rest of Gladstone's ministry. During the following six years out of office, O'Hagan continued to take an active interest in public life. He supported reform of the Irish education system. He was one of the original members of the intermediate education board established in 1878 and later became its first vice-chairman. On the foundation of the Royal University of Ireland in 1880, O'Hagan was one of the university senators. In 1878 he delivered the Thomas Moore centenary address in Dublin, and in 1880 he made an address to Cardinal Newman at Edgbaston, Birmingham, on behalf of a deputation from the Catholics of Ireland. In 1881 he delivered the presidential address at the opening of the Social Science Congress in Dublin. 
In May 1880, on the return of Gladstone to office, O'Hagan again became lord chancellor of Ireland and strongly supported another land bill in the House of Lords. Ill health forced him to resign in November 1881. O'Hagan was elected an honorary bencher of Gray's Inn in 1883 and he continued to attend the judicial sittings of the House of Lords after his retirement from the lord chancellorship. O'Hagan suffered a stroke on Christmas day 1884 and died on 1 February 1885 at his London home, Hereford House, Park Street. He was buried at Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin, on 6 February. He and his second wife, who survived him, had two sons and two daughters; his elder son, a protestant, who succeeded him as second baron, was killed on active service in the South African War. 
O'Hagan's speeches and papers were published in 'Occasional Papers and Addresses' (1884) and in 'Selected Speeches and Arguments of Lord O'Hagan' (1885), edited by George Teeling. The published collections contain all of O'Hagan's major speeches, including the O'Connell centenary address published (though not delivered) by O'Hagan in Dublin in 1875. The statue of O'Hagan by Thomas Farrell, erected in 1887 in the Four Courts in Dublin, was destroyed along with the rest of the building in 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 20625


Ua hAingliu, Donngus (d. 1095), bishop of Dublin, used the Latin name Donatus when he was consecrated by Lanfranc, archbishop of Canterbury, in the sixteenth year of his pontificate (that is, some time after 29 August 1085), 'at the request and choice of Terdyluacus [Toirdelbach Ua Briain], king of Ireland, and the bishops of Ireland, and the clergy and people of the city of Dublin' (Gilbert, 2.250). He made a profession of obedience: 'I, Donatus, bishop-elect of the church of Dublin in Ireland, promise canonical obedience to you Lanfranc, archbishop of Canterbury, and to your successors' (Richter, no. 42). According to the 'Acta Lanfranci', Donngus had been a monk of Christ Church, Canterbury; he returned to Ireland following his consecration with (not extant) letters of exhortation to the kings and clergy of Ireland. A subsequent letter of Lanfranc's successor, Anselm, reveals that Lanfranc had given Donngus books, vestments, and ornaments for the church of Dublin. 
Donngus died of pestilence on 22 November 1095 and was succeeded by his nephew, 


@@@@@


doc= 20626


Samuel Ua hAingliu (d. 1121), who had been trained as a monk at St Albans and was consecrated by Anselm in the church of Winchester on 27 April 1096, making a profession of obedience to him as 'totius Britanniae primas' ('primate of all Britain'). According to Eadmer, Samuel was elected by the clergy and people of Dublin with the assent of 'Murierdach' (Muirchertach Ua Briain, king of Munster, overlord of Dublin, and claimant to the high-kingship of Ireland), to whom Anselm sent a letter following Samuel's consecration. Later in the same year, Samuel signed the petition of the clergy and people of Waterford to Anselm requesting consecration of Mael Isu Ua hAinmire as bishop of Waterford. About 1101-2, Anselm, in a letter to Samuel transmitted to him via Mael Isu Ua hAinmire, made various complaints about his conduct, including: that objects given by Lanfranc to his uncle, Donngus, on the testimony of the monks of Canterbury, were not a personal gift but for the use of the church of Dublin; that he had expelled certain monks from the church of Dublin, who were willing to return but he had refused to readmit them; and that he should desist from having his cross carried before him on journeys since this was a right reserved to archbishops who had been confirmed with the pall from the pope. Samuel appears to have been claiming archiepiscopal status. He died on 4 July 1121. A sepulchral monument in St Michan's Church, Dublin, which has been suggested as his, is certainly not contemporaneous with his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 20627


O'Halloran, Sir Joseph (1763-1843), army officer in the East India Company, youngest son of the surgeon and antiquary Sylvester O'Halloran (1728-1807) and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Casey (died 1782), was born in co. Limerick on 13 August 1763. He was appointed midshipman on the East India Company's sloop of war 'Swallow' on 22 February 1781, and in July obtained an infantry cadetship; he was made ensign in the Bengal army on 9 May 1782 and lieutenant on 6 January 1785. He married in 1790 Frances (1773-1835), daughter of Colonel Nicholas Bayly MP, of Redhill, Surrey, of the 1st foot guards, brother of the first earl of Uxbridge, and they had a large family. Their second son was Thomas Shuldham O'Halloran (1797-1870). 
On 7 January 1796 O'Halloran became captain, and from June 1796 to October 1802 was adjutant and quartermaster at Midnapore, and was attached to the public works department. On the abolition of his office he rejoined his unit, the 18th Bengal native infantry. In September 1803 he accompanied a force which crossed the Jumna to subjugate Bundelkhand, and on 12 October defeated a force of 15,000 Marathas at Kopsah. His gallantry at the sieges of Bursaar and Jeswarree in January 1804 led to his appointment to supervise the operations of an irregular force of 2000 men, under Sheikh Kurub Ali, in the interior of Bundelkhand. On 15 May he attacked and defeated, after a determined resistance, Raja Ram and 10,000 Bundelas entrenched among the rocks and hills of Mahaba. On 1 July he commanded two brigades of irregulars in another attack on Raja Ram and a force of 16,000 Bundelas and Nagas on the fortified hills of Thana and Purswarree. Subsequently he served at the siege of Saitpur, and in December attacked and stormed several other towns and forts. In January 1805 he captured the forts of Niagacre and Dowra, in Pinwarree. His services were noticed by the Marquess Wellesley. 
On 1 November 1805 O'Halloran was appointed commissary of supplies by Lord Lake. On the breaking up of the army on 1 June 1806 he rejoined his regiment, and on 25 April 1808 attained the rank of major. He commanded the attack on the strongly fortified hill of Rogoulee, in Bundelkhand, on 22 January 1809. Colonel Martindell, who commanded in Bundelkhand, made O'Halloran his military secretary, and his conduct at the head of the 1st battalion 18th native infantry at the siege of the fortress of Ajaigarh was specially noticed. He became lieutenant-colonel on 4 June 1814, served in the campaigns against the Nepalese in 1815 and 1816, in the first campaign covering the district of Tirhut, in the second at the siege of Harriharpur, and afterwards commanded his battalion in Cuttack during the disturbances there. For his services he was made CB. In August 1818 he was sent to join the 1st battalion 20th native infantry in the Straits Settlements, and on arrival there was appointed commandant of the 25th Bengal native infantry. In January 1825 he was appointed brigadier at Barrackpore. Before leaving he received the thanks of the government of the Straits Settlements, and the unusual honour of an eleven-gun embarkation salute. In December 1828 he became brigadier-general, and was appointed to the Saugor division. He became colonel of a regiment on 4 June 1829. With the expiration of his five years' period of staff service, on 23 December 1833, ended his active military career of fifty-three years, during which he had never taken any leave to Europe. 
O'Halloran landed in England in May 1834. In February 1835 he was knighted by William IV, who observed that the distinction was well earned by his long meritorious and gallant services, and by his consecration of his eight sons to the service of his country. O'Halloran became major-general on 10 January 1837. He was made KCB in 1837, and GCB in 1841. He became a member of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland in 1836, an honorary member of the Royal Irish Academy in 1838, and received the freedom of his native city (Limerick) on 25 February 1838. He died at his residence, 42 Connaught Square, Hyde Park, London, on 3 November 1843, from the effects of a street accident in which the neck of his thigh-bone was fractured. He was buried in the catacombs at Kensal Green cemetery, Middlesex, immediately beneath the chapel. A memorial tablet was placed in the wall of the south cloister. 
O'Halloran's sixth son, 
O'Halloran then embarked for South Australia, landed at Glenelg on 11 August 1840, and purchased a property near Adelaide. In August 1841 he was appointed a justice of the peace, in March 1843 a member of the board of audit, in June 1843 private secretary to Governor Grey and clerk of the councils, and in January 1851 auditor-general of South Australia. In 1866 he acted as chairman of a commission into the administration of the Northern Territory. On 22 January 1868 he retired, after serving the colonial government for upwards of twenty-four years. He died at Adelaide, South Australia, on 15 July 1885. He left two daughters and three sons, the eldest of whom, Joseph Sylvester O'Halloran CMG, became secretary to the Royal Colonial Institute in 1884. 


@@@@@


doc= 20628


O'Halloran, Sylvester (1728-1807), surgeon and antiquary, was born on 31 December 1728 at Caherdavin, co. Clare, Ireland, the third son of Michael O'Halloran, a substantial farmer, and Mary McDonnell. He attended a school in Limerick run by the Revd Robert Cashin and was taught Irish by the Jacobite poet Sean Clarach MacDomhnaill, a distant relative. At the age of sixteen or seventeen he went abroad to study surgery, one of the few professions open to Roman Catholics in Ireland at the time. In London he studied the methods of Joseph Hillmer and Chevalier Taylor, both noted eye surgeons. He was in Paris in 1747-8, during which time he attended the lectures of Antoine Ferrein. Tradition has it that he also studied in Leiden. 
In 1749 O'Halloran returned to Limerick and set up practice. He married Mary Casey (died 1782) of Ballycasey, co. Limerick, in 1752 and had five children, of whom Joseph O'Halloran became a major-general with the East India Company. Sylvester O'Halloran was one of the founders of the County Limerick Infirmary which opened in 1761. His first medical work, published in 1750, 'A Treatise on the Glaucoma, or Cataract', showed his familiarity with the French literature of eye surgery, and suggested a modification of the current method of cataract treatment. 'A New Method of Amputation' (1763) and 'A Complete Treatise on Gangrene and Sphacelus' (1765), published immediately after the Seven Years' War, were directed particularly at the surgical problems posed by injuries sustained in battle, the former proposing a more efficient method of leg amputation. In an appendix to the latter work O'Halloran advocated the licensing of surgeons by public examination and the setting up of a teaching and examining body, and this may have played a part in the foundation of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland in 1784, of which he was elected an honorary member (equivalent to a later fellowship) in 1786. Despite this he felt he had been denied proper recognition by his fellow surgeons in Ireland, believing this neglect to be deliberate and due to his religion. 
O'Halloran was unusually outspoken in his condemnation of the penal laws then in force against Roman Catholics and of what he felt was the hostile stereotyping of them as barbarous. All his medical writings adverted to these concerns, including 'A New Treatise on External Injuries of the Head' (1793), in which he explained that the large number of head injuries that were presented to him had much to do with Irish hot temper, but that this national characteristic had been exacerbated by state oppression. By this stage O'Halloran had given up the thought of state preferment for his surgical works, but, naively, still had hopes that Edmund Burke could procure a civil pension for him in recognition of his antiquarian writing, which began as a pastime but came to have more importance for him in the 1770s and 1780s when the Catholic question was a crucial issue of debate in Ireland. 
O'Halloran's first venture into antiquarianism was an article in the 'Dublin Magazine' in January 1763 on the subject of James Macpherson's Ossian poems, in which he endeavoured to show that the poems were based on material that was originally Irish rather than Scottish. Privately he admired the poems and the heroic Gaelic world which Macpherson had presented in them. All of his own antiquarian works were concerned primarily with the military and heroic aspects of early Gaelic society. In 'An Introduction to the Study of the History and Antiquities of Ireland' (1772) he argued that all the most distinctive laws, manners, and customs of Europe had originated among the Irish Celts, including the medieval concepts of knighthood and chivalry which had been spread by them throughout the continent. His 'General History of Ireland' (1778) presented pre-colonial Ireland as a golden age of military valour and scholarly learning which was destroyed by the Anglo-Norman invasion. This was a reprise on a well-established theme in Irish historiography, but what set O'Halloran apart was his propensity for making direct links between the past and the contemporary political situation of the native population, and also the highly romantic colouring of his narrative. This latter was to make him an important influence on later nineteenth-century writers such as Standish O'Grady. 
O'Halloran was made a member of the Royal Irish Academy in 1786 and contributed papers on medical and antiquarian matters to its 'Transactions'. A portrait of him was published in 'Dublin Quarterly Journal of Medical Science', 6 (1848). He died in his home at Merchants' Quay, Limerick, on 11 August 1807 and was buried in the family vault at Kileely cemetery, Limerick. 


@@@@@


doc= 20629


O'Halloran, Thomas Shuldham (1797-1870), army officer and police chief in Australia, was born on 25 October 1797 at Berhampore, India, the second son of Major-General Sir Joseph O'Halloran (1763-1843) and his wife, Frances (1773-1835), the daughter of Colonel Nicholas Bayly and the niece of the first earl of Uxbridge. He followed in the strong military traditions of his family by becoming a cadet at the Royal Military College at Marlow, Buckinghamshire, in 1808. In 1813 he joined the 17th regiment in India as an ensign and took part in the Anglo-Nepal War (1814-16). He became a lieutenant in 1817. 
On 1 August 1821 O'Halloran married Anne ('c'.1801-1823), the daughter of James Goss, of Dawlish, Devon. They had two children before she died two years later, in Calcutta, whence O'Halloran had gone to join the 44th regiment; the following year he was with them at Chittagong as paymaster, quartermaster, and interpreter. He served in the First Anglo-Burmese War, and became a captain in the 99th regiment in April 1827. Subsequently he exchanged into the 56th and then the 6th regiment, and served as an aide-de-camp to his father in Saugor, central India. 
O'Halloran went on to the half-pay list and returned to England in 1834, where on 10 July he married Jane, the eldest daughter of James Waring. They had three sons and one daughter. In 1837 he returned to full pay as a captain in the 97th regiment, and commanded a force sent to quell a riot in Yorkshire. He finally sold his commission the following year and sailed with his family to take up residence on a series of land selections (later O'Halloran Hill) south of Adelaide, South Australia. Soon afterwards, with concern rising as to the lawlessness of the colony, the governor, George Gawler, sought to make use of O'Halloran's experience (particularly that of suppressing disorder in Yorkshire) and appointed him to the board of commissioners of the new South Australian police force. When in 1840 the governor formed a voluntary militia as a further measure to keep the peace, the 'dashing officer' O'Halloran (Ross) was made its major-commandant. 
With the dismissal in May 1840 of the police commissioner, O'Halloran was appointed to the vacant position. In July of that year survivors of a shipwreck near Adelaide were killed by Aborigines, and he was ordered to lead an expedition to capture those responsible. This was, if possible, to be carried out without bloodshed. But, Gawler wrote, 'if in the execution of it, you are really compelled to abandon temperate measures, and to resort to those of extreme force against the whole tribe, you will not be held blamable' (Tolmer, 180). Two Aborigines were hanged and others were shot while escaping from O'Halloran's party. This was the first 'officially sanctioned punitive expedition' against the Aborigines in South Australia (Clyne, 51), setting a precedent for many in the years to come. Much of O'Halloran's time as police commissioner was taken up in organizing expeditions against Aboriginal 'crime', such as the traditional lighting of fires in grassland and the pilfering of animals and minor supplies. As noted by the historian of the South Australian police, regarding how O'Halloran undertook this duty, his 'judgement was heavily influenced by his military background... He might attempt to disguise or temper his martial belligerency in dealing with this frustrating problem, but he could not always hide it' (ibid., 55). 
O'Halloran reorganized the police force along more efficient lines, but in 1843 he was asked, as part of an economy drive by the new governor, George Grey, to add the role of police magistrate to his duties. He resigned. Soon afterwards he was appointed by Grey to the legislative council. In 1846 he 'stalked out' (Whitelock, 70) of the council with a number of others in opposition to the imposition of mineral royalties. In 1857 he was elected to the first council formed after the granting of responsible government, heading the votes in a list of twenty-seven candidates. He resigned in 1863. After a lifetime of duty, carried out in his 'direct, forthright and uncomplicated' way (Ross), O'Halloran died, at his home in O'Halloran Hill, on 16 August 1870. He was buried at Christ Church, O'Halloran Hill. 


@@@@@


doc= 20630


William Littlejohn O'Halloran (1806-1885), army officer, born at Berhampore, India, on 5 May 1806, went to England in 1811. On 11 January 1824 he was commissioned ensign in the 14th foot, which he joined at Meerut. He served with it at the siege and storm of Bharatpur in 1825-6, obtaining his lieutenancy in action. In April 1827 he exchanged into the 38th regiment, and served on the staff of his father at Saugor, central India. He married in December 1831 Eliza Minton, daughter of John Montague Smyth. O'Halloran was employed on recruiting service in Belfast from 1832 to 1834. In 1834 he embarked for Sydney with a detachment of the 50th. From there he sailed for Calcutta, rejoined the 38th at Chinsura in 1835, and accompanied it to England in 1836. He obtained his company by purchase on 29 December 1837, and retired from the army in April 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 20631


O'Hanlon, Redmond (c.1640-1681), outlaw, was born near Poyntzpass, co. Armagh, the son of Laughlin O'Hanlon. This is the account given in a contemporary pamphlet 'The Life and Death of... Redmon O'Hanlon'. Claims that O'Hanlon served in the armies of the confederate Catholics, fled to France in 1653, and there served with distinction in the army of Louis XIV, would make him much older; however these appear only in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries and are not supported by any contemporary record. The same, contemporary, pamphlet's report that O'Hanlon attended an English school, along with Sir Francis Brewster's description of him after his death as 'a scholar and a man of parts' (Carte, 4.617), suggest that his family had some social standing, but no further details are available. 
O'Hanlon, once again according to the account in 'The Life and Death', began his career as a servant of Sir George Acheson of Markethill, co. Armagh. Having been caught trying to sell a stolen horse he fled the area, finding employment as servant to a 'fanatic teacher', who subsequently made him clerk of his congregation. About 1660 O'Hanlon returned to Armagh where he was first a poll tax collector, then a farmer of the hearth tax. Unable to meet his liabilities in the latter position, and having run through the marriage portion brought him by his first wife, who died young, he turned to crime, in alliance with a kinsman, Laughlin O'Hanlon, whose sister he took as his second wife. On 14 December 1674 both men were proclaimed as outlaws, the first reference to O'Hanlon's activities in official records. 
Contemporary and later accounts suggest that O'Hanlon commanded a band of outlaws based in the area of Slieve Gullion, from where they raided the counties of Armagh, Monaghan, and Down, and collected tribute in exchange for their protection. A second proclamation, in 1676, offering a reward for his capture, confirms his continued career as an outlaw. But it is only in 1678-9 that his name begins to appear in official correspondence as a major threat. In October 1678 he was singled out, under the nickname Count O'Hanlon, as the leading tory (bandit) in Ulster ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 4.213). Sir George Rawdon, on 31 May 1679, reported that he was still alive but 'has had many scapes lately very narrowly and was wounded' ('CSP dom.', '1679-80', 161). His notoriety further increased when, on 9 September 1679, men identified as his followers killed Henry St John, owner of an estate near Tandragee and great-nephew of Sir Oliver St John, lord deputy of Ireland, 1616-22. 
London newsheets in the first three months of 1680 report intensive searches for O'Hanlon. Intelligence passed to the government in October of that year alleged that he planned to join sixteen outlaws from Londonderry and co. Tyrone on a raid into co. Longford, wearing grey coats lined with red which they could reverse in order to pass for soldiers. The following month O'Hanlon, through the Annesley family of Castlewellan, made overtures for a surrender on terms. However, these were rejected by the Irish privy council, apparently overruling the lord lieutenant, Ormond. Meanwhile O'Hanlon had come to the notice of proponents of the Popish Plot. Henry Jones, bishop of Meath, Mrs Annesley's father, suggested that he might give evidence regarding plans for a French invasion. Sworn informations from two Irish witnesses later alleged that Shaftesbury and his accomplice William Hetherington had tried to have O'Hanlon and others brought to England to incriminate Ormond and members of the Irish council. Earlier, in 1678-9, there had been obscure intrigues involving another figure in the plot, Edmund Murphy, parish priest of Killevey, co. Armagh, who presented himself in a pamphlet as having opposed O'Hanlon's depredations, although other evidence suggests that he himself had links with local tories. 
On 4 March 1681 Ormond gave William Lucas of Down a commission granting full power to act against O'Hanlon. Lucas made contact with O'Hanlon's foster brother, Art O'Hanlon, who on the afternoon of 25 April shot Redmond O'Hanlon as he slept in a cabin near Eight Mile Bridge, co. Down. An account of the killing published soon after reported that a companion, acting on the dying man's instructions, removed his head to prevent it being captured and exhibited. However, it was subsequently found and placed on a spike over the entrance to Downpatrick gaol. His body was displayed at Newry, co. Down. 
Memories of O'Hanlon's career were preserved in John Cosgrave's 'A Genuine History of the Lives and Actions of the Most Notorious Irish Highwaymen, Tories and Rapparees', first published some time before 1747 and many times reprinted. He was later the subject of a novel by William Carleton (1862), as well as of other works of fiction and popular history. Modern historians remain divided on how far his career, like that of other 'tories' of the Restoration era, should be seen as a rearguard action by the dispossessed Catholic elite against the new order created by the Cromwellian confiscations, or as an example of the banditry endemic on the periphery of early modern states. The O'Hanlons had at one time been an important Gaelic lineage in south Armagh, and the nickname Count O'Hanlon, used in contemporary as well as later references, may indicate that in this case O'Hanlon did in fact assume the persona of a dispossessed aristocrat. 


@@@@@


doc= 20632


O'Hara, Charles, first Baron Tyrawley (d. 1724), army officer, was probably from Leyny, co. Sligo. A henchman and client of the Butlers, dukes of Ormond, O'Hara attended James Butler, later second duke, probably as riding master, during his travels to France in 1675. In 1678 he was a captain in the Duke of York's Foot, but on 15 December 1679, his company having been disbanded, he was commissioned lieutenant of Henry Cornwall's company in Ossory's regiment in the Anglo-Dutch brigade. Having received a captaincy in the 1st foot (Grenadier) guards on 9 April 1686, he disposed of his Dutch commission to John Lister in May and returned to England. He negotiated the revolution of 1688 without personal mishap and, favoured as a former Dutch officer, was promoted lieutenant-colonel of the 1st foot guards on 16 March 1689, simultaneously receiving a brevet as colonel of infantry. Knighted on 27 August 1689, he fought in Flanders under William III and was promoted brigadier-general on 20 December 1695. On 12 November 1696, while in garrison in Ghent, he was appointed colonel of the Royal Fusiliers (7th foot) and subsequently entrusted with conducting many of the demobilizations between 1697 and 1699. 
O'Hara was raised to the rank of major-general on 9 March 1702 and appointed one of the three officers of this rank to accompany the duke of Ormond's expedition to Cadiz in 1703 as part of the War of the Spanish Succession. He exercised a quiet influence over the duke, a reflection of their earlier master-pupil relationship. The advice of this calm, modest, competent soldier was normally sound -- he 'does not want sense' ('Marlborough-Godolphin Correspondence', 3.1520). Lacking independent means and reliant upon military pay and emoluments, he succumbed to temptation after the capture of Puerto Santa Maria and both permitted, and benefited from, widespread looting and pillage. Although O'Hara distinguished himself at the capture of Vigo and the destruction of the Spanish treasure fleet, he and Lieutenant-General Sir Henry Belasyse were arrested and court-martialled on their return to England. On the advice of the duke of Marlborough, the episode was played down, resulting in the acquittal of O'Hara. On 1 January 1704 he was promoted lieutenant-general. Recommended for a senior command in Spain in 1705, it was not until the following year that he assumed the duties of second-in-command to the earl of Galway, although his position was uncertain and disputed by the plethora of general officers attending Galway and the earl of Peterborough. In late July 1706 he commanded a detachment that prevented a French attempt to surprise the allies at Guadalajara. For this and other notable services during the 1706 campaign he was raised to an Irish barony, taking his title from Tyrawley in co. Mayo. At a council of war on 15 January 1707 held in Valencia, he strongly supported Galway and Stanhope in advocating an offensive against Madrid with undivided forces. The three generals put their arguments in writing and sent them to England. At the battle of Almanza (14 April 1707) he commanded the left of the allied army. His initial advance pushed back the French right before being held and repulsed; he then successfully withstood the French counter-attack. Although wounded, he led his forces back to Tortosa. He returned to England in September 1707 and unsuccessfully petitioned for $1000 compensation for his lost equipage. Having taken his seat in the Irish House of Lords on 25 May 1710, he was sworn of the Irish privy council, and resworn by George I in 1714. 
In January 1711 the tories in the House of Lords initiated an investigation into the perceived mismanagement of the campaign of 1707 in Spain in order to cement their new alliance with the earl of Peterborough. Galway and Tyrawley were summoned to account for their actions, concentrating especially on the council of war of 15 January 1707. Both successfully argued that they had been obeying orders from the secretary of state, the earl of Sunderland. When pressed further, Tyrawley said that he had fought with the sword, not the pen. He had not carried ink with him and he had not kept a register and could therefore only recall generalities not details. Indeed, there was nothing in the official papers implicating him in anything other than the decision to launch the offensive against Madrid. A resolution declared that he was one of those responsible for the decision to advance on Madrid and for the conduct of the battle of Almanza. Galway and Tyrawley petitioned for time to produce answers and they were supported by two protests from the whig peers; no further action was taken. 
Having resigned his colonelcy to his son on 15 November 1714, Tyrawley was appointed commander-in-chief in Ireland, remaining in office until 1721. He was sometime governor of Kilmainham Hospital. Before 1682 he had married Frances, daughter of Gervase Rouse of Rous Lench, Worcestershire, who died on 10 November 1733 and was buried in St Mary's, Dublin. They had at least two children, including a son, James O'Hara, second baron, general and diplomatist, and a daughter, Mary, who died in 1759. Tyrawley died in Dublin on 8 or 9 June 1724 and was buried on 11 June in the chancel vault of St Mary's, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 20633


O'Hara, Charles (c.1740-1802), army officer and colonial governor, was the illegitimate son of James O'Hara, Baron Kilmaine and second Baron Tyrawley (1681/2-1773). He attended Westminster School, and was appointed ensign in Colonel Edward Wolfe's regiment, later the 8th foot, on 20 April 1751 and cornet in the 3rd dragoons on 23 December 1752. In January 1756 he became lieutenant and captain in the Coldstream Guards, of which his father was colonel. He served in Germany as aide-de-camp to John Manners, marquess of Granby, after Minden, then, with the brevet rank of lieutenant-colonel, was quartermaster-general in the short 1762 Portuguese campaign under Lord Tyrawley. In July 1766 he was appointed commandant at Goree in the new British territory of Senegambia and of the African corps, a unit largely of army convicts, pardoned on condition of service in Africa. He retained his position in the guards, however, and became captain and lieutenant-colonel in 1769 and brevet colonel in August 1777. 
O'Hara served in the American War of Independence from October 1780, with the guards brigade of detachments from the three regiments. He was critical of the 'Temporising -- moderation & delay' that 'have governed our councils', and he denounced British efforts to defeat the Americans as 'feeble' (September 1778, Hull University Library, Hotham papers, DDHO 4/18). His recommendation was for 'Fire & Sword' to 'Ruin & desolate the remotest corners' of the most rebellious provinces, so that 'every Man Experiences in himself, & dearest connections, the Rude & mercyless hand of war' (ibid.). This was hardly novel; many of his frustrated colleagues were urging the same course. But O'Hara's conviction that a destructive war was the only option was based on a different logic from that of most of the 'fire and sword' school. He was convinced that no dependence could be placed on the loyalists, and was very critical of 'the New Mode adopted of pursuing the War in this Country by Arming American against American' (West Suffolk RO, Grafton papers, Ac 423/189). No American could be trusted, in O'Hara's view, and he recommended a war of desolation not so much to terrorize the rebellious colonists into submission as to weaken the new United States for the foreseeable future (ibid., Ac 423/190). 
O'Hara served in the southern campaigns under Lord Cornwallis. He was wounded at the battle of Guilford court house on 15 March 1781, and was with Cornwallis's army which surrendered at Yorktown, Virginia, on 19 October 1781. O'Hara, as Cornwallis's second in command, had to take the lead in the surrender ceremony, handing his sword to Washington's second in command, Benjamin Lincoln (a scene depicted in John Trumbull's painting of Yorktown). O'Hara remained a prisoner until 9 February 1782, when he was exchanged. He had in the mean time been promoted major-general (October 1781). In April 1782 he was appointed colonel of the 22nd foot, and the following month he took reinforcements from New York to Jamaica. 
After serving as commanding officer at Gibraltar from 1787 to 1789, O'Hara became lieutenant-governor in 1792. In April 1791 he was transferred to the colonelcy of the 74th highlanders, then more lucrative than that of the 22nd. In October 1793 he was promoted lieutenant-general and given command of the British forces operating before Toulon. When the French attacked Fort Mulgrave on 23 November he was wounded and captured, and he remained a prisoner in the Luxembourg, Paris, until August 1795, when he was exchanged. Shortly afterwards he was appointed governor of Gibraltar. He became known as 'Old Cock of the Rock', and was described in his later years by Thomas Hamilton in his military novel 'Cyril Thornton' (1827). O'Hara became a full general in January 1798, and in his last years was 'very rich' ('GM'). 
O'Hara never married, though he was engaged in 1795-6 to Miss Mary Berry (1763-1852), author, whom he had met at Rome in 1784. He had two children each with two mistresses at Gibraltar, and he left his mistresses and children $70,000 in trust in his will. He left his plate and some other property, valued in all at over $7000 (much more than he left his brother) to his black servant, Moyse. 
After a six-month illness and suffering much from complications caused by his old wounds, O'Hara died at Gibraltar on 21 February 1802. 


@@@@@


doc= 20634


O'Hara, James, second Baron Tyrawley and Baron Kilmaine (1681/2-1773), army officer and diplomat, was the only son of Charles O'Hara, first Baron Tyrawley (d. 1724), and his wife, Frances (died 1733), daughter of Gervase Rouse of Rous Lench, Worcestershire. O'Hara was commissioned on 15 March 1703 a lieutenant in his father's regiment, the Royal Fusiliers, and a captain on 24 March 1705. He fought at the siege of Barcelona in 1706 and was wounded at Almanza in 1707, and again at Malplaquet in 1709, when he served as an aide-de-camp to Marlborough. He succeeded to the colonelcy of his father's regiment on 29 January 1713 and then served with the regiment in Minorca until the end of the reign. O'Hara was named an aide-de-camp to George I in 1717 (continuing to hold office under George II until 1743), and in 1718-19 in the Mediterranean. His regiment was stationed in Ireland from 1719 to 1727. 
O'Hara was created Baron Kilmaine in the Irish peerage on 8 February 1722, and took his seat in the Irish House of Lords on 29 August 1723. He succeeded his father on 8 June 1724 and on 25 June was sworn of the Irish privy council. In November 1724 he married Mary ('b'. in or after 1696, died 1769), daughter of William Stewart, second Viscount Mountjoy. They had no children, though Tyrawley's extra-marital relationships produced several offspring. His attempt in 1727 to obtain the duke of Bridgewater's interest in a parliamentary borough, presumably Brackley, ended in a polite rebuff. Debts in Ireland led him to seek a diplomatic posting and on 11 February 1728 he was named envoy-extraordinary to Portugal. His long stay there ensured a close relationship with King Joao V and it was reported that he 'was almost naturalized amongst them, trusted and beloved there' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 22.48). He finally left Lisbon on 18 July 1741 and on his return was reported to have 'brought three wives and fourteen children' back with him (ibid., 18.104). His estates, too, were in better shape, aided by the $800 p.a. he gained after the death of his mother. 
Meanwhile Tyrawley had become successively brigadier-general (1735), major-general (1739), and lieutenant-general (1743), as well as changing his regiment from the Royal Fusiliers to the 7th foot in 1739, the first of a rapid series of changes which finally saw him settle on his eighth regiment, the Coldstream Guards, in 1755. While in Dublin in 1741 he declined an American command, and he spent 1742-3 in England agitating for honours or employment before being appointed ambassador-extraordinary and -plenipotentiary to Russia on 17 December 1743. He left St Petersburg on 8 March 1745, and was available to serve under General George Wade during the forty-five. 
In 1747, after approaching the duke of Newcastle, Tyrawley was named governor of Minorca, and at the end of the year, on 17 December, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. Unfortunately he was, as he put it, 'interdicted' from taking up his colonial post. This was still a grievance for Tyrawley in 1750, and no doubt explains his appointment in March 1752 as minister-plenipotentiary to Portugal, a post which he took up with alacrity in April before returning in July. Tyrawley was still an absentee governor when Minorca was besieged by the French. On 2 June 1756 he embarked from Portsmouth as the new governor of Gibraltar with orders to proceed via Gibraltar to pick up reinforcements with which to relieve Minorca, but it fell before his arrival. 
Tyrawley spent his time at Gibraltar in strengthening the fortifications and complaining about the lack of supplies and his own under-employment. He was eventually allowed to return home on 16 April 1757. He presided over the court martial of Sir John Mordaunt on 14 December 1757. His conduct as governor of Gibraltar was the subject of a parliamentary attack by Lord George Sackville, particularly his expenditure on defensive fortifications. Tyrawley defended himself at the bar of the Commons on 13 April 1758 and virtually browbeat his accusers, so that he escaped censure. Tyrawley was also critical of the decision to make Charles Spencer, third duke of Marlborough, general of foot in 1758, though he received some recompense in 1759 when he was named governor of Portsmouth. Nor was Tyrawley averse to repaying Sackville, being outspoken in his criticism of Sackville's conduct at the battle of Minden in 1759. Tyrawley was named general on 7 March 1761. He was appointed commander-in-chief in Portugal in February 1762, but came home somewhat disenchanted in July 1762 claiming that the Portuguese only wanted British subsidies. He was sworn of the privy council on 17 November 1762, and made field marshal on 10 June 1763. 
Tyrawley was offered the governorship of Minorca in 1766 in exchange for Portsmouth, Sackville remarking that 'his Lordship not being an accommodating genius, refused the change, though for his advantage' ('Stopford-Sackville MSS', 1.110). This confirms Walpole's sketch of Tyrawley: 'he had a great deal of humour and occasional good breeding, but not to the prejudice of his natural temper, which was imperiously blunt, haughty and contemptuous, with an undaunted portion of spirit' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of George II', 3.14). Tyrawley's wife died on 5 February 1769, and Tyrawley himself was clearly ailing when he sent a message to Hester Pitt, countess of Chatham, which referred to his being 'so blind as to be forced to employ another hand to write, so deaf as not to hear half the nonsense said near him, and so simple of understanding, as not to be able to conceal his own' ('Correspondence of William Pitt', 4.208). 
Tyrawley died on 14 July 1773 at Twickenham, aged ninety-one. He was buried on 24 July at the chapel of Chelsea Hospital, where he was governor. His will referred to money owed him by Sir Arthur Gore, bt, for the purchase of lands in co. Mayo and co. Sligo. He left his estate to his two 'natural' daughters, Anne and Jemima, 'both now living with me', and appointed as executors his son Charles O'Hara and James Meyricke of Westminster. At least two other natural sons, Francis and James, predeceased him; another illegitimate daughter, apparently, was the actress George Anne Bellamy (1731?-1788). 


@@@@@


doc= 20635


O'Hara, Kane (1711/12-1782), playwright, was born at Templehouse in Connaught, the son of Kean O'Hara, a squire and member of an ancient Sligo family. Young O'Hara received his early schooling from the Revd William Jackson at Mount Temple and entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 3 March 1728, aged sixteen, receiving his BA in spring 1732 and his MA in summer 1735. O'Hara is listed in university records as a pensioner, that is, a person of moderate income. 
O'Hara's first professional play was 'Midas, an English Burletta', which had its premiere production at the Crow Street Theatre, Dublin, on 22 January 1762. 'Midas' was a clever, chauvinistic response to the success of a touring Italian troupe, the D'Amici family, which had brought a lively production of an Italian burletta to the Smock Alley Theatre on 19 December 1761. The Italian burletta, a slight comic opera already modish on the continent, captivated Dubliners with its simple domestic plot and brisk galante music. 
Lord Mornington, Garrett Colley Wellesley, father of the future duke of Wellington and then professor of music at Trinity College, urged O'Hara to respond to the Italian performers. O'Hara revised his slight mock pastoral 'Midas', which had been privately performed for William Brownlow MP at Lough Neagh, near Lurgan, co. Armagh, in April 1760. The Irish playwright John O'Keeffe recalled that, as a young boy, he was present at O'Hara's house in King Street, Stephen's Green, one morning when the three gentlemen, O'Hara, Lord Mornington, and Brownlow were settling the music for 'Midas' (O'Keeffe, 1.53). O'Hara transformed his play into an eclectic 'Midas', incorporating the deities and the recitative aria musical pattern of Italian 'opera seria' and the comic domestic plot and lively music of the Italian burletta, subtitling his play 'an English burletta'. 'Midas' delighted Dubliners and was brought to London's Covent Garden with only minor revisions. Performed as a mainpiece on 22 February 1764, it was soon revised to a two-act afterpiece and was performed over 200 times by 1800; it was generally believed to be superior to all subsequent English burlettas. O'Hara's creation of the burletta was significant because it bridged the gap musically between the early-century ballad opera and the later, technically sophisticated, comic opera. 
O'Hara's second burletta, 'The Golden Pippin', was initially rejected by the lord chamberlain because of satirical references to members of the royal family, but, after excision of contemporary allusions, it enjoyed substantial popularity at Covent Garden. O'Hara's next two burlettas, 'April Day' (1777, Haymarket), and 'Tom Thumb' (1780, Covent Garden), abandoned the use of mythological figures but preserved the musical style of the burletta. O'Hara's 'The Two Misers: a Musical Farce' (1775, Covent Garden), an adaptation of M. de Falbaire's 'Les deux avares', enjoyed only moderate success. 
A serious amateur musician, in 1757 O'Hara had founded, with Lord Mornington, the Dublin Academy of Music and served as one of its officers, meeting at the Fishamble Street Music Hall on Wednesday evenings to prepare concerts for charitable causes. O'Hara also wrote musical compositions of different types; the National Library of Ireland holds manuscript copies of five of his works: 'Fussalia' (1756), a musical masque; 'Isaac' (1767), an oratorio; 'Cupid's Triumph' (1768), a serenata; 'Orlando' (1772); and 'Tom Thumb the Great' (1774), a puppet show opera (MSS 9248, 9251, 9252, 9258, 9259). 
In 1774 O'Hara established Mr Punch's Patagonian Theatre in a house in Abbey Street, Dublin, where the Irish tenor, Michael Kelly, as a young boy, sang the role of Daphne in 'Midas', 'instructed by the author himself' (Kelly, 19). The proceeds from all performances were given to charity. The Patagonian Theatre moved to Exeter Change, London, in October 1776, where it successfully presented puppet show performances of ballad operas, burlesques, and burlettas for five years. 
O'Hara was a popular figure, respected in Dublin society as a successful playwright, skilful amateur musician, popular composer, and accomplished painter. Tall and lean, with slightly stooped shoulders, he was called by his friends 'St Patrick's Steeple' and was considered 'a very necessary man in every party for amusement' (Molloy, 2, 153). Though he lost his eyesight in 1778, O'Hara retained an avid interest in theatre. John O'Keeffe, who recalled dining with him in 1781, noted his exquisite manners and described him as 'a first-rate wit' (O'Keeffe, 1.53). O'Hara died in Dublin on 17 June 1782. 


@@@@@


doc= 20636


Cinaed ua hArtacain (d. 975), poet, is referred to in the notices of his death as 'chief poet' ('primeices') of the northern half of Ireland (for example, in the annals of Tigernach), or of Ireland as a whole (for example, in the annals of Ulster). A marginal note in the annals of Ulster adds that he belonged to 'the race of Cernach Sotal'; that is, to the southern branch of the Ui Neill dynasty of Sil nAeda Slaine, rulers of the eastern midlands. Support for this statement is perhaps provided by Cinaed himself, who praises Cernach's descendants in his poem on the Hill of Skreen. There are no other known details of his life, except for the year of his death, 975. 
Cinaed's most ambitious poem is 'Fianna batar i nEmain' (edited by W. Stokes), a catalogue of the graves of famous warriors. His other compositions deal with the lore of places in or near Sil nAeda Slaine territory: those whose attributions to him are most generally accepted are 'A chloch thall for elaid uair', on a stone at Monasterboice (Louth; edited by K. Meyer), 'Achall ar aicce Temair', on the Hill of Skreen (Meath), 'An sin, a maig Meic ind Oc', on the Neolithic tumuli of the Boyne valley, 'Deiccid ferta nithaig Neill', on a burial mound near Tara, and 'Etar etan ri dilind', on the Hill of Howth (Dublin) (all edited by E. Gwynn); and 'In chloch fors' tat mo di shail', on the oracular stone of Fal at Tara (edited by R. Macalister). 
'An sin' concludes with praise of one Congalach, presumably the king of Ireland Congalach mac Maele Mithig 
(Congalach Cnogba; died 956)
; it may well be that several of Cinaed's other poems, dealing with sites in the immediate vicinity of Tara, were also composed under Congalach's patronage. This association with Congalach is interesting in both religious and dynastic terms. Twice in his writings Cinaed invokes St Colum Cille (St Columba), at one point calling him the best of the Ui Neill, and there is other evidence of devotion to Columba in his family at this time; Congalach, however, seems to have been at odds with the monastic federation centred at Kells which looked back to Columba as its founder. Congalach was also a member of the northern branch of Sil nAeda Slaine, the perennial and generally successful rivals of the group to which Cinaed appears to have belonged. 
Several manuscripts of 'Achall ar aicce Temair' conclude with a quatrain acknowledging receipt of a horse as payment for the poem from 'Amlaib of populous Dublin', who 'has taken the kingship in Howth'. This is the viking king of Dublin, Olaf Cuaran (Olaf Sihtricson), who was Congalach's ally for several years but subsequently party to the ambush in which the latter lost his life. Cinaed's poem on Howth may likewise have been composed for Olaf; perhaps also 'A chloch thall', since Monasterboice seems at one point to have been in Olaf's hands. 


