@@@@@


doc= 20637


O'Hearn, Francis (1747-1801), Roman Catholic priest and author, was born in Derry in the parish of Modeligo, co. Waterford. He had at least two brothers, Thomas and Timothy, both of whom were ordained priests. He received his early education from an uncle, William Brown, parish priest of Clashmore, and at a very early age was sent to the Irish Pastoral College, Louvain. 
In 1776 O'Hearn was nominated professor of syntax at Holy Trinity College, Louvain, and between 1781 and 1793 he was professor of rhetoric. In 1787 he published 'Compositio rhetoribus'. His unpublished 'Tractatus rhetoricae' is preserved in the Bibliotheque Royale Albert Ier, Brussels. During university vacations he appears to have travelled widely in Europe and mastered a number of languages. His prowess in Flemish was remarkable and he played a role in the cultural and political revival of the language. In 1785 he had been elected dean of the Flemish nation of the university. He was canon of St Peter's, Louvain, and of Bruges Cathedral. In 1791 he was considered by the nuncio in Liege as a candidate for the bishopric of Waterford. In 1793 he became professor of Christian eloquence and in the same year was rector of the Irish Pastoral College in succession to his fellow countryman John Kent. 
When unrest engulfed the Austrian Netherlands during the Brabant Revolution (1789-90) O'Hearn was initially associated with Jean Francois Vonck, leader of the democrats, who were influenced by Enlightenment and French revolutionary thought. He quickly changed his allegiance to the more conservative Henri Van der Noot. He formed part of a Flemish embassy to Berlin. Later he travelled to the German lands. Just before his return to Ireland his nephew Francis O'Hearn was executed in Waterford for his part in the Irish rising of 1798. Bishop Thomas Hussey appointed him parish priest of St Patrick's, Waterford, in 1799. He died in Waterford on 22 October 1801 and was buried in the precincts of the city's Catholic cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 20638


O'Healy, Patrick (d. 1579), Roman Catholic bishop of Mayo and martyr, may have been from Dromahair, co. Leitrim, or have been a member of the friary there. Having already taken his vows as a Franciscan, he arrived in Rome from Ireland in 1562, where he impressed the minister-general of the Observant Franciscans with his piety and intelligence. O'Healy was sent to Spain, where he studied grammar for two years at the friary of St Francis in Molina de Aragon, philosophy for four years in the friary in San Clemente, and theology in the University of Alcala. He became fluent in Catalan and was described as a good preacher. 
About 1574-5, O'Healy became associated with a circle of exiled Irish who were urging Spanish military intervention in Ireland. He arrived in Rome on 16 June 1575, with letters of accreditation from Philip II and began canvassing support for James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, a charismatic adventurer who wanted to lead a papal-sponsored crusade to Ireland. Frequently in contact with the Spanish papal ambassador, O'Healy spoke with Pope Gregory XIII about the persecution suffered by Irish Catholics. During his stay in Rome, he made enough of an impression to be consecrated as bishop of Mayo on 4 July 1576. In late 1576 he left for Madrid to bring the pope's invasion plan before Philip. Preparations gradually came to fruition, and on 18 November 1577 he set sail with Fitzgerald for Ireland as part of a small invasion force. However, severe storms caused them to put to harbour at Corunna in Galicia. There, the Breton captain and his crew refused to honour their contract by proceeding and were imprisoned, but on 5 January 1578 they escaped and made off with the ship. 
Fitzgerald followed the crew to Brittany, while O'Healy journeyed to Paris, where on 7 April he secured a royal warrant for restitution of the stolen goods. At this point, O'Healy appears to have lost interest in Fitzgerald's crusade and did not play any part in the latter's renewed efforts to head an invasion of Ireland. O'Healy remained in Paris for about nine months, living in the Franciscan friary and engaging in academic disputations. In early 1579 he left Paris for Brittany, from where he took ship for Ireland. 
O'Healy and his travelling companion, Conn O'Rourke, a friar and the son of an Irish chieftain, landed at Smerwick, co. Kerry, shortly before Fitzgerald's forces landed at the same harbour on 18 June 1579. O'Healy and O'Rourke hastened to the seat of Gerald fitz James Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond, at Askeaton, co. Limerick, probably to encourage him to rebel. Desmond was absent, but his wife entertained them for three days. The earl's relationship with the government was tense at best and the actions of fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, his cousin, placed him in a very dangerous position. Either on her own initiative or at her husband's behest, the countess of Desmond sent a messenger to the mayor of Limerick informing him of O'Healy's presence. On leaving Askeaton, O'Healy and O'Rourke headed north towards Limerick, probably on their way to Connaught, but the forewarned authorities captured them 'en route'. 
O'Healy and O'Rourke were imprisoned in Limerick and tried under martial law by the lord president of Munster, Sir William Drury. O'Healy was tortured in an unsuccessful attempt to gain details of fitz Maurice Fitzgerald's plans. As part of this process, spikes were driven through his hands, severing his fingers. Drury then offered O'Healy the peaceful possession of his see, if he would renounce his faith, but he refused. Sentenced to death, O'Healy and O'Rourke were hanged about 13 August 1579 outside Kilmallock, co. Limerick. A woodcut of the hanging bodies was made and appears in Richard Verstegan's 'Theatrum crudelitatum haereticorum nostri temporis' (1587). The bodies were left hanging for a week, before John fitz Edmund Fitzgerald of Desmond arranged for their burial on 27 August at Clonmel, co. Tipperary. In 1647 the bodies were transferred to the Franciscan house at Askeaton. O'Healy was the first Catholic bishop to be executed in Ireland since the advent of the Reformation and he quickly became the subject of a number of martyrologies. He was beatified in 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 20639


Hempson, Denis (1694/5?-1807), harpist, was the son of Brian Darragher Hempson, and was born on his father's farm at Craigmore, near Garvagh, co. Londonderry. Hempson lost his sight due to smallpox at the age of three, and at twelve began to learn the harp from Bridget O'Cahan (Brighid Ni Chathain), afterwards receiving instruction from John Garragher, Lochlann Fanning, and Patrick Connor, all Connaughtmen. When eighteen he lodged with the Canning family at Garvagh who, along with Squire Gage and Dr Bacon, bought him a harp. This harp was probably the one described as being made by Cormac Kelly in 1702 at Ballynascreen, co. Londonderry, of white willow, with a back of fir dug out of the bog. Hempson spent many years as an itinerant harper travelling through Ireland and Scotland, being entertained by many Scottish gentlemen. In 1745, during his second trip to Scotland, his popularity was confirmed when he played in front of Prince Charles Edward Stuart, the Young Pretender, at Holyrood. 
Hempson subsequently travelled all over Ireland, playing in Dublin, Cork, and many other towns. Frederick Augustus Hervey, fourth earl of Bristol and bishop of Derry, bought him a house at Magilligan, where he spent the rest of his long life. Lord and Lady Bristol attended the house-warming, and their children danced to Hempson's harp. In 1781, at the reputed age of eighty-six, he married a woman (said to be lame) from Innisowen, and they had one daughter. In 1792 he attended the famous Belfast meeting of traditional harpers, where he met Edward Bunting, who transcribed much of Hempson's music and published a collection including these pieces. Hempson was a staunch traditionalist in terms of both performance technique and repertory, regarding the music of Turlough Carolan (1670-1738) as too modern. He was the only harper at the Belfast meeting to play with the traditional fingernail technique, by then abandoned by most other players. 
The intricacy of Hempson's playing was said to amaze his listeners, and his staccato and legato passages, shakes, turns, and graces were executed with ease and clarity, and he often achieved better results than more modern harpers. He had a keen sense of humour, and often interspersed his playing with humorous anecdotes. He became temperate towards the end of his life and his favourite drink, once beer, became milk and water, and his diet consisted largely of potatoes. On the day before he died, Hempson was said to have sat up in bed and played a few notes on his harp to his carer, the Revd Sir Harvey Bruce. He died at Magilligan in 1807 having, according to popular folklore, reached the age of 112. 
Lady Morgan, in her 'Wild Irish Girl', published a letter written in 1805 from George Sampson, a Londonderry historian and protestant clergyman, which described an interview with Hempson. It is in this letter that most of his biographical information can be found. Hempson won no prizes at the harpers' meetings, nor did Arthur O'Neill mention him in his famous memoirs. Whether this is a result of rivalry, or whether O'Neill merely considered Hempson as a musical anachronism, will probably never be known. 


@@@@@


doc= 20640


O hEanna, Muirgheas (d. 1206), archbishop of Cashel and papal legate for Ireland, was a monk of the Cistercian abbey of Holy Cross, Tipperary. He became archbishop of Cashel before 1186, when, according to Gerald of Wales, he was present at the provincial synod summoned by Archbishop John Cumin to meet in Dublin during Lent; and Gerald attributes to him the famous remark regarding the propensity of the English race for making martyrs. About 1190 O hEanna wrote two letters to Pope Clement III enquiring about points of canon law and it was this pontiff or his successor Celestine III who appointed the archbishop papal legate for Ireland in 1191-2. The annals of Inisfallen reported that the new legate held a great synod in Dublin in 1192 and Dublin ecclesiastical records testify to the presence in Dublin that year of the legate and other prominent Irish churchmen. During this period O hEanna negotiated a settlement between the archbishop of Dublin and the Cistercian monks of St Mary's Abbey. He was in England 'c'.1192-3 when John, lord of Ireland, granted a charter in his favour at Ludgershall, Wiltshire. In 1195 he is mentioned as one of the prelates who brought the body of Hugh de Lacy, first lord of Meath, to the abbey of Bective in Meath for re-interment. 
Although O hEanna's appointment as papal legate lapsed in 1198, he is described as legate by the annals of Inisfallen when in 1201 he acted as peace broker in Munster between the local Irish and William de Burgh. He incurred the displeasure of Pope Innocent III both for his refusal to consecrate a new bishop for Ardfert and for his involvement in the dispute between Archbishop John Cumin of Dublin and King John. O hEanna apparently administered the Dublin spiritualities while Cumin was in exile. These offences resulted in his suspension by Innocent III's new legate in Ireland, Cardinal John of Salerno. It was reported to the pope in 1202 that because of his advanced age O hEanna could not come to seek the pope's absolution in person. It is not known when the suspension was lifted but by 1205 he was functioning again as archbishop. He died in Holy Cross Abbey in 1206 and was buried there. His obit in the annals of Ireland states that he was an able and religious man, the founder of many churches and religious beyond his fellow countrymen. 


@@@@@


doc= 20641


Cormac mac an Ghiolla Choluim O hUiginn (fl. 1590), composed a long elegy on O'Conor-Sligo, Donnchadh (mac Cathail Oig) O Conchobhair. 
Maol Muire (mac Eoghain) O hUiginn's known work is believed to consist of three poems addressed to An Calbhach Ruadh O Domhnaill about the middle of the seventeenth century, which have survived in a 'Poem Book of the O'Donnells' compiled for Aodh O Domhnaill (of co. Mayo) in the early eighteenth century; one poem in the 'Poem Book of the Dillons' compiled for seventeenth-century members of the family of Viscount Dillon of Costello-Gallen, co. Mayo, whose seat was at Lough Glynn, co. Roscommon; a poem in praise of Oilill O hEadhra of Luighne; and one in praise of Uilliam son of Uaithne O Maoil Mhuaidh of Fir Cheall (co. Offaly), of a family well known for their patronage of Irish learning. 
Tomas O hUiginn ('fl'. mid-17th cent.) was probably a native of co. Sligo. He addressed poems to members of the Meig Uidhir of Fir Mhanach and to Oilill O hEadhra. He probably was also the author of 'Feach fein an obair-si, a Aodh' ('See for thyself these doings, O Hugh'), an allegorical poem cast in the form of an address by a woman to her husband, Aodh O Ruairc, seeking his protection from a would-be suitor, Tomas Mac Coisdealbha (Costello). This artistic poem is, however, as James Carney has explained, merely a sustained metaphor to be understood as an appeal to O Ruairc by his 'spouse' (the poet) against a rival patron. 


@@@@@


doc= 20642


Domhnall mac Briain O hUiginn (d. 1502), as recorded in the annals, died in 1502 on his return from pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela. Only one poem ascribed to him survives, 'Misde nach eadmhar Eire' ('So much the worse that Ireland is not jealous'). It relates that 'Drong do Ghaoidhealaibh ghuirt Breagh... do fhas o mhacaibh Mileadh' ('a band of the Gaels from the field of Bregia [Ireland] which is descended from the sons of Mil') settled and prospered in Scotland; hence Ireland's right to be jealous. 



@@@@@


doc= 20643


Domhnall Og mac Aodha O hUiginn (fl. c.1600) enjoyed the patronage of the lord of Luighne, Cian O hEadhra (died 1612), and of his son and successor, Tadhg Buidhe (died 1616). His extant poems to these chieftains have been preserved in a vellum manuscript (the 'Book of O'Hara', National Library of Ireland, Dublin). He addressed a poem to Fiachaidh (mac Aodha) O Broin (betrayed to the English in 1597), describing him as the prophesied one who is destined to rid Ireland of the foreigners. 



@@@@@


doc= 20644


Maol Muire O hUiginn (d. c.1591), a brother of Tadhg Dall, was archbishop of Tuam and a trained poet. From Rome he addressed the poem 'A fhir theid go Fiadh bhFuinidh' ('O man who goes to the western land') as an exile's greeting to Ireland through the person of a fellow countryman returning home. He died in Antwerp about 1591. 



@@@@@


doc= 20645


Mathghamhain O hUiginn (fl. 1584), Tadhg Dall's father, probably composed many poems, but only six are extant: three of these are included in the 'Poem Book of the Dillons' (Royal Irish Academy, MS A.v.2) and one is found in the 'Book of the O'Byrnes'. 



@@@@@


doc= 20646


Tadhg Mor O hUiginn (d. 1315) could have been the son of Giolla Coluim O hUiginn. He was tutor to Maghnus (died 1293), grandson of Ruaidhri O Conchobhair, king of Connaught. Only two of his poetic compositions seem to be extant, the first is his poem on the warlike upbringing of this prince, 'Gach ean mar a adhbha' ('Every bird has its nest'), and follows the general pattern of this theme but introduces a pleasant variation by comparing Maghnus and his steed to famous warriors and steeds recorded in Irish history and literature, such as Cu Chulainn and his Liath Macha, or Tadhg an Eich Gil ('Tadhg of the White Steed') O Conchobhair (died 1030). Like all others of his profession he was clearly well versed in medieval Irish literature. In another remarkable poem, 'sui generis' in Irish bardic verse, 'Slan fat fholcadh / a Fhionnghuala reidh roicheolchar' ('In defiance of your bathing, O gentle music-loving Finola'), Tadhg describes the beauty of Fionnghuala, daughter of the same Maghnus. He employs the conceit that her whole form is in evidence as she washes her hair. This description undoubtedly was inspired by a scene from the Irish otherworld, namely that found in the tale 'Tochmarc Etaine' ('The wooing of Etain'), which describes the unearthly beauty of the fairy maiden 'Etain' (Eadaoin) as she is loosening her hair to wash it. 



@@@@@


doc= 20647


Tadhg Og O hUiginn (d. 1448) was a great-grandson of Tadhg Mor (died 1315). His most renowned composition is an elegy on his elder brother and teacher, Fearghal Ruadh, 'Anocht sgaoilid na scola' ('To-night the schools disperse'), written at the time of the seasonal closing of the schools in early summer. Fearghal Ruadh's death has been a disastrous loss to the profession of poetry: '
Gan mharthain do mhac Aine, 

rug don eigse a hamhaille; 

mar theid clar a taoibh thunna, 

do sgaoil fal na foghluma. 
(That Aine's son lives not has robbed poetry of its gaiety; as a plank falls out of the side of a cask, the wall of learning has collapsed.)' Here, by the bardic device called 'dunadh' ('closure'), the word 'sgaoil' in the final line echoes part of the first line, thus associating the tragedy of the death of Fearghal Ruadh with the empty schools. 
Tadhg Og gained wide recognition throughout the Gaelic world in Ireland and Scotland, as is shown by the large number of his influential patrons. These included O Neill (in Tyrone), O Domhnaill, O Conchobhair Cairbreach (a family later called O'Conor-Sligo), O Ceallaigh of Ui Mhaine (O'Kelly of Hy-Many in co. Galway and co. Roscommon), O Conchobhair Chiarraighe (co. Kerry), O Cearbhaill of Eile (O'Carroll in co. Offaly and Tipperary), Mag Uidhir (in Fermanagh), Mac Domhnaill of Ile (Islay in Scotland), and Mac Diarmada (McDermott of Moylurg in Roscommon). It is impossible, however, to outline the events of Tadhg Og's full life from any internal evidence in his poems, for the business of the bardic poets was not to record their own achievements but rather those of their patrons. In 'Deanaidh comhaonta, a chlann Eibhir' ('Be ye united, O children of Eibhear') the poet, by a type of dramatic figure common in bardic poetry, urges O Cearbhaill to seize the ancient royal seat of Cashel, unite all the men of Munster and their kinsmen, the Luighne of Lower Connaught, and drive the 'Goill' ('foreigners' / English) out of Ireland. 
On the other hand, like many others of his profession, Tadhg Og availed himself of the patronage of the descendants of several of the Anglo-Norman conquerors of Ireland, such as the earl of Ormond (Butler), Mac Uilliam Uachtair (the de Burghs of Clanricarde in east Galway), and Mac Uilliam Iochtair (in co. Mayo). Many other themes employed by the poet are commonplace in bardic verse and only a few of his poems are susceptible of exact dating. One of these is an elegy on Tadhg O Ceallaigh of Ui Mhaine who died in 1410, 'Anois do tuigfidhe Tadhg' ('Now might Tadhg be understood'). Tadhg Og's compositions were held in high esteem, and samples from his poems are frequently cited as illustrations in the grammatical and syntactical tracts employed in the schools. His many religious poems have largely been preserved in an anthology which has survived in the composite volume known as the 'Yellow Book of Lecan'. This anthology has been published by Lambert McKenna under the title 'Dan De'. 
Tadhg Og, 'chief teacher of the poets of Ireland and Scotland' (as he is described in the annals), died in 1448 at Cill Chonnla (Kilconla), Dunmore, co. Galway, and was buried in the monastery of Ath Leathan (Ballylahan), Templemore, Gallen, co. Mayo. 
Maol Seachlainn na nUirsgeal ('of the allegories') O hUiginn ('fl'. 1400x50), was in the possession of lands at Mag Inghine an Scail (unidentified) in Cairbre (Carbury), co. Sligo, and had a turbulent relationship with his lord and patron, Brian (mac Domhnaill) O Conchobhair, lord of Cairbre. He addressed several poems to O Conchobhair and one to Mag Aonghusa (Magennis) of Uibh Eachach (Iveagh, co. Down). 
Pilip Bocht O hUiginn (died 1487), a member of the Franciscan order (hence 'bocht', 'poor'), was one of the chief exponents of Irish religious bardic poetry. His death is recorded in the annals of Ulster at 1487: 'Pilib bocht mac Cuinn Chrosaigh Ui Uiginn dheg in bhliadhainsi, idhon, Brathair Minur de Observancia, nech is mo7 is ferr duanaire diadhachta san aimsir dheigheanaigh' ('Philip the Poor, son of Conn the Pock-marked Ua hUiginn, namely a friar minor of observance, one who was the most copious and the best devotional poet of later times'). 



@@@@@


doc= 20648


Tadhg Dall O hUiginn (1550-1591) is the best known of the bardic poets of the classical modern Irish period, mainly by virtue of the edition and translations of his poems by Eleanor Knott. He was the son of Mathghamhain O hUiginn and his birthplace was probably in Luighne (barony of Leyny). According to a statement in a poem addressed by him to Aodh O Domhnaill (Hugh O'Donnell), 'Molfaid Conallaigh clann Tail' ('The race of Conall will praise the descendants of Tal'), he was fostered in Tir Conaill and it is presumed that he was educated at a bardic school there. 
Among Tadhg Dall's more important poems are: an address to Conn O Domhnaill, 'Togaibh eadrad is Eire' ('Raise the veil from Ireland'), urging him to make Ireland his spouse; 'Iomdha sochar ag siol Neill' ('Many privileges have the descendants of Niall'), addressed to Toirdhealbhach Luineach O Neill ('an gheag abhla d'fhiodh Teamhrach'; 'the apple-branch of the wood of Tara'); 'Nodlaig do chuamar don Chraoibh' ('At Christmas we went to the Creeve') to the same patron, celebrating a Christmas banquet given by O Neill to the poets of Ireland; three poems to Cu Chonnacht Mag Uidhir (Maguire), 'Daoine saora siol gColla' ('Free people are the descendants of Colla'), 'Teallach feile Fir Mhanach' ('Fermanagh is the hearthstone of hospitality'), and 'Mairg fheagas ar Inis Ceithleann' ('Alas for him who looks on Enniskillen'); and 'Pardhas Fodla Fir Mhanach' ('Fermanagh is the paradise of Ireland') in praise of Brian Mag Uidhir. 
Tadhg Dall met with a tragic end: members of a local branch of the Ui Eadhra (the O'Haras) of Luighne, whom he had satirized, attacked him at his home in Cuil re Coill (now the townland of Coolrecuill) and cut his tongue out. The record of the poet's death is cited by Knott as follows: 'In an Exchequer Inquisition taken at Ballymote, Co. Sligo, January 12, 1593, it was testified that Thadeus, alias Teage Dall O Higinn, late of Cowlrecoyll, in the aforesaid county, 'generosus', died at Cowlrecoyll on the last day of March, 1591, and that Thadeus oge mc Teage O Higgen, at the time of his father's death nine years of age, and unmarried, was his legitimate son and nearest heir. (Knott, 1.xv)' This Thadeus, 


@@@@@


doc= 20649


O'Higgins, Ambrosio, marquess of Osorno in the Spanish nobility (c.1721-1801), army officer and colonial administrator in the Spanish service, was born Ambrose Higgins at Ballynary, co. Sligo, one of several children of Charles Higgins and his wife, Margaret, daughter of William O'Higgins and his wife, Winifred. In a pedigree supplied by the obliging Ulster king of arms in 1788 he was certified as being of noble ancestry but this seems incorrect. The details of his early life are obscure. At some stage, possibly in his youth, the family seems to have moved to Summerhill in co. Meath. Though his parents' circumstances appear to have been comparatively humble they were sufficient to pay for his education, which, to judge from his career, must have been to a good standard, especially in mathematics. Possibly he trained as a surveyor or draughtsman. He was reported late in life to have said that he served for a time in the English army but this seems unlikely as his background was Irish and, he claimed, pro-Jacobite. The traditional account that he was educated for the priesthood in Spain seems to be contradicted by his own statement that he went to Spain in 1751 to work in Cadiz for the Irish merchant firm of Butler. On its behalf he undertook a commercial journey to South America in 1756, taking the opportunity to visit his younger brother William, a former clerical student then living in Paraguay with his wife and two children. 
In 1761 Higgins became a naturalized Spanish citizen and was commissioned as an engineer-draughtsman with the rank of lieutenant in the Spanish corps of military engineers. His appointment was assisted by John Garland, a Hispano-Irish engineer officer whom he accompanied to Chile in 1764, when Garland was appointed military governor of Valdivia. While crossing the Andes Higgins conceived the idea of improving the route from Mendoza to Santiago by constructing a chain of brick-built shelters. He directed this work so efficiently that by 1766 an all-year postal service was operating between the Atlantic coast and Chile, whereas previously communications had been impossible in winter. He returned to Spain, and in 1768 wrote a 'Description of the Realm of Chile', a well-informed memorandum with recommendations on a wide range of topics including agriculture, commerce, administration, and relations with the Indian population. 
On his return to Chile Don Ambrosio, as he was known, was promoted steadily, becoming captain of dragoons in 1770, captain of cavalry in 1771, lieutenant-colonel and commander of cavalry in 1773, colonel in 1777, brigadier-general in 1783, commandant-general in 1780, major-general in 1789, and lieutenant-general in 1794. In the 1770s he successfully commanded troops against the Llanos and Pehuenches Indians of Araucania. He founded the fort of San Carlos and displayed considerable valour and leadership skills in a campaign during which he was twice wounded. His fair treatment of the Indians after their defeat ensured the future peace of the region. In 1778 he was appointed delegate-general of the forces in Chile. While 'intendant' of Concepcion he entertained with great courtesy the French circumnavigator Galaup de la Perouse. 
In 1787 Higgins was made governor and captain-general of Chile, and received a triumphant welcome in Santiago. He proved a vigorous and capable administrator, building roads and coastal fortifications, and founding or re-founding towns such as Los Andes, Osorno, and San Ambrosio de Ballenar, which he named after his birthplace. He improved the sanitation and water supply of Santiago and constructed dykes and jetties along the Rio Maipo to preserve the city from flooding. He introduced reforms to taxation and public administration. He abolished the cruel 'encomienda' system, whereby landowners kept Indian labourers in conditions close to slavery, and pushed forward reforms in the church to benefit the poor. His 1793 settlement with the Indians at the congress of La Laja laid the foundation for assimilation between colonists and natives. By about 1788 he had adopted O'Higgins as his name. In 1795 he was created baron of Ballenary and appointed viceroy of Peru, becoming marquess of Osorno in 1796. In Peru he continued to build roads and improved the coastal fortifications at Callao and Pisco, following the outbreak of war with England. Early in his viceroyalty he befriended his fellow countryman John Mackenna (1771-1814), who thus commenced a distinguished career under his auspices. 
O'Higgins never married but a liaison with Maria Isabel Riquelme de la Barrera y Meza (1759-1839), the eighteen-year-old daughter of a respectable Creole family, resulted in the birth in 1778 of a son, Bernardo O'Higgins. Maria Isabel married in 1780 Felix Rodriguez y Riquelme. O'Higgins paid for his son's education in England and left him property in his will but otherwise their relationship was not close. Several of his nephews also served in the Spanish army, of whom Demetrius and Thomas O'Higgins, sons of his brother Thomas, joined him in South America and were beneficiaries under his will. 
Aged about eighty, O'Higgins died suddenly at Lima, after a short illness, on 19 March 1801 and was interred in the church of San Pedro in Lima. Though stern and serious in character he was nicknamed 'the Shrimp' on account of his high complexion. His son, Bernardo O'Higgins, subsequently commanded the patriot army in the Chilean War of Independence, became president of the congress, and is regarded as the emancipator of his country. 


@@@@@


doc= 20650


Ohthere (fl. 871-899), explorer, was a Norwegian chieftain who in the reign of Alfred the Great paid a visit to the royal court in Wessex and supplied some information about Scandinavia. This was included in the late ninth-century Old English translation of Orosius's 'History against the pagans', and provides the only source of knowledge about Ohthere. His account includes descriptions of three voyages and of Ohthere's way of living. 
King Alfred is described as Ohthere's 'lord'. This probably reflects the fact that the king was protector of all visitors and guests at his court, whether their visit was brief or a long one. Ohthere told his hosts that he lived furthest to the north of all Northmen. This must have been in Halogaland somewhere near modern Tromso, Norway. The traditional boundary between the areas of 'bumenn' (permanent settlers) and those of the nomadic Sami people is the Malangen Fjord; viking-age settlements have been excavated on islands just north of Malangen. 
Ohthere supported himself by agriculture. He ploughed a little land with horses and kept cattle, sheep, and pigs, but only a score of each. His chief wealth was in reindeer, of which he had 600, and in the tribute which the Finnas (Sami) paid him. This consisted in skins of beasts, the feathers of birds, whalebone, and ship's ropes made from whale-hide and sealskin. He also hunted walrus; the ivory from their teeth was highly valued, and Ohthere brought some to Alfred. Tribute taken from the Samians was an important part of the economic basis of the chieftains of Halogaland until the high middle ages, when this source of income was taken over by Swedish and Finnish tax collectors. Ohthere reports that he had to compete for it with the Cwenas, a Finnish tribe or group that sometimes raided the Norwegians. 
One of Ohthere's journeys took him round the North Cape and along today's Lapmark, vast areas inhabited only by Finnas, and round the Kola peninsula, home of the Terfinnas (probably another Sami people), into the White Sea. Here he reached the permanently settled areas of the Biarmians, a Finnish people, but did not venture into them for lack of a peace agreement. His main reason for undertaking this journey, apart from exploring the land, was to hunt walruses; a party of six men had been able to kill sixty walruses in two days, he claimed. The scholars at Alfred's court seem to have been particularly interested to learn whether, when Ohthere changed direction, he did so because the land was turning, or because the sea was penetrating the land. This would have helped them to establish whether Ohthere had been travelling along the utmost edge of the world, or was merely entering another inland sea like the Baltic, said to penetrate the land. 
Another part of the account describes the journey from Ohthere's home to the port of 'Sciringesheal' in southern Norway. This has been identified as Kaupang near Larvik, an important market in viking-age Norway. This journey could, under adverse conditions, take as much as a month. Reference is made in the account to the location of Ireland and Britain, though not for any purpose of practical navigation. From Sciringesheal Ohthere continued his journey to Hedeby in the south of Jutland, which was reached in five days. He said that for the three days he had 'Denmark' to port and the open sea to starboard. Then for two days he had Jutland and 'Sillende' (south Jutland) and many islands to starboard; his interviewer commented that the Angles lived in those parts before they came to 'this land' (England). And on the port side he had those islands which belong to 'Denmark'. This distinction between Jutland and 'Sillende' and many islands on one side, and 'Denmark' and the islands belonging to it on the other, is matched in the introductory description of Europe beyond the Danube and the Rhine by a distinction between south Danes in 'Sillende' and Jutland, and north Danes in 'Denmark', Zealand, with adjacent islands and the south-western coastlands of modern Sweden. 


@@@@@


doc= 20651


O'Hurley, Dermot (c.1530-1584), Roman Catholic archbishop of Cashel and martyr, the son of William O'Hurley, gentleman, and his wife, Honora O'Brien, was born near Emly, co. Tipperary. At a later date, following his father's acquisition of the estate, he moved to Lickadoon Castle, co. Limerick. Some time before 1551, destined for a learned profession, he was sent to study at Louvain, where he took his master of arts degree at the College du Lis, and in 1559 he was appointed professor of philosophy there. In all he spent about fifteen years at Louvain, pursuing legal studies with great success, becoming a doctor of civil and canon law and dean of the college of St Ivo. About 1574, on the recommendation of Cardinal Guise, he left to take up a position at Rheims, where he remained for four years. According to Stanihurst, some time before 1577 he wrote a Latin treatise, 'In Aristotelis Physica', which secured his reputation as a 'commendable philosopher'. By 1580 he was in Rome. A Latin poem composed there in his honour in 1581 mentions that he taught law in the city; presumably he did so as a professor at the Sapienza. He was also connected with the Roman Inquisition, probably, it has been suggested, as a legal expert to whom problems were submitted. 
Once in Rome, O'Hurley's career changed forever. Apparently at the request of Cardinal Como he was encouraged to involve himself in the planning of papal policy for Ireland. While serving in this capacity he sometimes acted as an interpreter between Como and the representatives of rebel Irish lords who appeared in Rome seeking aid. He was almost certainly the author of a report written for Como in 1580 outlining the conditions under which Catholics toiled in Ireland and providing a list of Irish clergy on the continent who could be called upon to return home to forward the papal interest. Curiously, the wider and implicitly political importance of this report has been somewhat ignored by Catholic historians. It offered a markedly positive vision of the prospect of the papacy succeeding in securing the allegiance of Ireland's predominantly Catholic population in the face of only a small force of English heretics. In so doing, it and other reports modelled on it helped to persuade the pope, Gregory XIII, to commit men and money to a combined Italian / Spanish landing in the south of Ireland in support of the rebellion of Gerald Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond, an enterprise that was doomed to failure and ended with the slaughter at Smerwick, co. Kerry, of all those involved. Given these circumstances, it is difficult to accept without reservation the opinion of some scholars that O'Hurley may have had nothing to do with Irish Catholic plots against English protestant power. This is no mere quibble, as his eventual beatification at the end of the twentieth century rested on the supposition that he was a purely religious martyr, his career untainted by involvement in political affairs. 
After 1580, the invasion debacle notwithstanding, the papacy continued to pursue an aggressive policy towards English rule in Ireland, and it was towards this end that O'Hurley was promoted to the vacant archbishopric of Cashel in 1581. That he was a layman -- 'scholaris Limericensis' -- was no barrier to his advancement: extant documents in Rome show that he was admitted to the clerical state, given the four minor orders, and advanced to subdiaconate, diaconate, and priesthood within just sixteen days, between 29 July and 13 August 1581, the pope issuing a special papal brief in his favour. O'Hurley received his tonsure and orders from the Marian bishop of St Asaph, Thomas Goldwell, and during the papal consistory of 11 September 1581 he was proposed for Cashel by the archbishop of Sens, a close associate of Pope Gregory who was unofficially supervising Irish ecclesiastical affairs at this time. 
The pope's eagerness to appoint him to Cashel is explained by O'Hurley's family background. The O'Hurleys were a well connected clerical dynasty in Munster. More particularly, Dermot's father had been a servant of the earls of Desmond, acting about 1540 as steward of Glenogra, a Desmond manor, and other sources reveal that William Oge O'Hurley of 'Lyckadowne', Dermot's half-brother, was likewise a Desmond associate at the time of the Desmond revolt. In 1581, with the rebellion still alive, there was no one in Rome better suited to represent the papal cause in Munster. Early the following year the pope entrusted him with a letter to Desmond, in which the earl and his allies were encouraged to continue their resistance to the heretical rule of Elizabeth; the archbishop of Sens, as 'Protector of Ireland', also gave him letters for Desmond. 
O'Hurley left Rome to take possession of his diocese in the summer of 1582, proceeding via Rheims, where he stayed with the rector of the university, William Allen, and where in August he contracted a severe illness. He made a slow recovery, and it was not until August 1583 that he resumed his homeward journey. Having boarded a Drogheda ship at Le Croisic in Brittany, he put ashore on the east coast of Ireland later that month, disembarking at Holmpatrick, a small harbour at Skerries, co. Dublin. The Ireland to which he returned bore no resemblance to the country he had imagined while abroad. Far from being on the brink of overthrowing English rule, it lay covered by a blanket of government repression, the last embers of Catholic rebellion for the moment all but extinguished, with the main rebel, Desmond, holed up in the mountains of Munster in fear of his life. O'Hurley was soon a fugitive too. Shortly before his arrival the government had been forewarned of his coming. It set its spies to work, so that after an abortive journey towards Waterford he was forced to abandon temporarily his plans for reaching Desmond. When next he left Dublin, O'Hurley turned north instead of south in order to evade his pursuers. Even so he was nearly captured in Drogheda, and for refuge he had to turn to those he could not fully trust, the Catholic nobility of the pale who had remained loyal to the English crown throughout the recent unrest. Having stayed with 'some others of good account within the Pale', he made his way to Slane Castle, co. Louth, where, at the behest of Catherine, Lady Slane, he was hidden for a time in a secret chamber in the castle. While there he ventured into Cavan to meet local priests, but when he returned to Slane he had an uncomfortable encounter with another guest, Sir Robert Dillon, the chief justice of the queen's bench, and he was soon on the run again. Suspecting his arrest was imminent he decided to set out for Munster without delay, and he departed Slane in the company of Piers Butler, the bastard son of Desmond's chief tormentor, the queen's general in Munster, Thomas Butler, tenth earl of Ormond. By September he had arrived at Carrick-on-Suir Castle, co. Tipperary, Ormond's home, where through Piers Butler's introduction he had a face-to-face meeting with the earl. 
The protestant overlord of a Catholic territory, Ormond was anxious not to arouse sympathy for O'Hurley by moving against him; moreover, he was probably curious to discover if the archbishop could be convinced to encourage Desmond to surrender. For his own part, O'Hurley hoped to persuade Ormond to spare Desmond's life. With so little common ground between them O'Hurley and Ormond could only agree that the archbishop could have the benefit of the earl's protection so long as he remained within the boundaries of his diocese, where the earl could have him watched. In the ensuing days O'Hurley paid a pilgrimage to Holy Cross Abbey, where he may have held mass: a government captain reported on 15 September that 'pilgrims from all parts' were repairing to the abbey, seemingly aware of the arrival there of the new papal archbishop. By 20 September he was back under Ormond's roof in Carrick, where such was his confidence in the earl's powers of protection that he decided to try to arrive at an arrangement with his ecclesiastical rival Miler Magrath, the Church of Ireland archbishop of Cashel, so that the two might share the same diocese without friction. To further this objective he wrote Magrath a brief letter, signing it Dermitius Hurrileus, his only known autograph letter. As a record of an age of religious conflict it is a curious artefact, full of pleasant platitudes from one foe to another, but it also reveals something of O'Hurley's political sense. Addressing Magrath as 'Most Reverend Lord', he promised to be a good neighbour -- 'I desire to plant and foster friendship and peace' -- and he offered his rival an important concession, being prepared not to dispute Magrath's claim to the title of archbishop: 'For myself I am content with the academic title [Dr O'Hurley] or to be called by my own name' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 55, fol. 546). Behind this apparent moderation, however, lay a more uncompromising message. With Ormond as his protector O'Hurley felt he was beyond the reach of Magrath and the state authorities. He hoped Magrath would appreciate that it might be better to reach a mutually advantageous arrangement rather than become embroiled in a potentially damaging tussle for position. 
The writing of this letter is O'Hurley's last recorded act as a free man. Shortly afterwards Ormond bowed to the request of his kinsman, Lord Slane, who had come down to Carrick to request that O'Hurley be handed over into his custody to be taken to Dublin. The circumstances behind this episode have never been adequately explained. According to a Catholic account of his life composed early in the seventeenth century, O'Hurley acquiesced in his own arrest, hastening to Dublin to appear before the Irish council so that he could defend Slane against allegations of conspiracy and convince the government 'that he himself had come to Ireland with a true ecclesiastical spirit and [only] to preach the faith' ('Analecta of David Rothe', 429-31). If true, it proved a fatal miscalculation. The same source records that Slane had him put in chains, and on reaching Kilkenny, the main overnight stop on the journey to Dublin, he was locked up in the public gaol. Once in the capital he was imprisoned in Dublin Castle. 
For the Dublin government, headed by the lords justices, Adam Loftus, archbishop of Dublin, and Sir Henry Wallop, O'Hurley's arrest and incarceration had as many drawbacks as benefits. Ideally they wished to see him transferred to the Tower of London, lest his continued presence in Dublin spark unrest. Their anxiety to wash their hands of him was all the greater as the decision had been taken at Whitehall before December 1583 to put him to torture, in order 'to gain his knowledge of all foreign practices against her majesty's state' (O'Reilly, 70-73). On 10 December they tried to effect his removal to London by claiming -- untruthfully -- that there were no instruments of torture in Dublin. After further prevarication, and acting on the advice of Secretary Walsingham, in March 1584 they issued a commission to Sir Edward Waterhouse and Sir Geoffrey Fenton to proceed against O'Hurley, and he was mercilessly tortured in Dublin Castle dungeon, among other things having his feet toasted against a fire while encased in tin boots. On 7 March they reported the outcome. Despite an offer of pardon should he confess all, he denied any involvement in political intrigue, utterly refusing to reveal the details of his mission or to implicate others. To his abusers his defiance was proof of his guilt, demonstrating 'with what bad mind he came to Ireland instructed from Rome to poison the hearts of the people with disobedience' (Brady, 'State Papers', 74-6). 
The following day the lords justices again became agitated about O'Hurley's presence in their care on discovering that on the eve of his torture he had written a letter to Ormond, his 'patron and favourer', and another since, to a kinsman living in Dublin. Both letters were seized -- they no longer exist -- but Loftus and Wallop were concerned that he may have succeeded in smuggling others out, especially to Ormond, whom they feared greatly because of his influence with the queen. Accordingly they determined to do away with O'Hurley as quickly as possible, and Walsingham's approval was sought to have him executed by martial law, thus avoiding the thorny problem of putting his case before a Dublin jury. Although favouring this course of action, Walsingham could not readily accede to their request without first seeking the queen's opinion, for by this time the use of martial law in Ireland was under review, a matter of mounting controversy. Elizabeth I for her part gave a typically evasive response, in April sending instructions through an intermediary that if the desired verdict could be secured by ordinary course of law, O'Hurley should be put on trial; only if not should he be executed by martial law. Still the lords justices prevaricated, but eventually, on 20 June 1584, as a new lord deputy was due to arrive to take up office, and before the earl of Ormond landed in Dublin following a visit to court, O'Hurley was hanged under royal warrant. Far from being killed as an example to others, as Loftus and Wallop had once advocated, his execution was carried out quietly, occurring early in the morning at Hoggen's Green, a stretch of open ground outside the city walls. It was entirely counter-productive, generating more sympathy for him in his native country in death than he had ever enjoyed in life. He was at once hailed as a martyr by the citizens of Dublin, who rescued his remains for burial, and among women of the city a cult formed to venerate his memory. On the continent the enemies of Elizabeth I exploited to the full the propaganda potential of his violent death. In 1587 a woodcut illustration of his torture and execution appeared in a book printed in Antwerp, and subsequently more exaggerated accounts of his sufferings were published, so that in time his name became synonymous across Europe with the harsh plight of Ireland's Catholics. 
In the 1970s O'Hurley's case as the principal Irish martyr of the sixteenth century was revived by the Dublin Diocesan Commission on Causes, and his beatification took place in Rome on 27 September 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 20652


O hEodhasa, Eochaidh (c.1560-1612), Gaelic poet, from Ballyhose (Baile i Eodhasa), Fermanagh, was the son of Maoileachlainn Og O hEodhasa, a known poet who was head of his name. According to his own evidence O hEodhasa trained as a poet at schools in the north (Leath Chuinn) and in Munster (Thomond). His father was probably his principal teacher. His training in Munster took place during the chieftainship of Hugh Maguire, as transpires in the poem 'Atam i gcas idir dha chomhairle' (Mac Cionnaith, no. 70) (reliably attributed). This shows him in two minds whether to break off his studies in Thomond to return to Hugh Maguire's household. But his appointment to the Maguires seems to date from the lifetime of Hugh's father Cu Chonnacht, who is addressed in what purports to be the first poem of O hEodhasa's tenure as 'ollamh' (or court poet), 'Anois molfam Mag Uidhir' (Greene). He was to be 'ollamh' to successive Maguire (Mag Uidhir) chieftains. A special relationship with Hugh Maguire was forged prior to his succession to the chieftainship. The poem 'Connradh do cheanglas re hAodh' (Breatnach, 'Covenant') composed during Cu Chonnacht's lifetime, records how O hEodhasa came to undertake to append a quatrain in Hugh's honour to all his compositions, and the praise poem 'Biodh aire ag Ultaibh ar Aodh' (Mac Cionnaith, no. 75) is also earlier than 1589. Among his numerous later poems for Hugh Maguire are the inaugural ode 'Suirgheach sin, a Eire ogh' (O'Grady, 476-8), the poem asserting his rights as office-holder to Maguire, 'Mor an t-ainm ollamh flatha' (ibid., 474-5), and the elegy 'Fada re hurchoid Eire' (ibid., 460). 
English documents show O hEodhasa to have resided at Ballyhose (on Castlehume Lough, Lower Lough Erne, barony of Magheraboy) in the period from 1585 to 1591. A series of pardons was granted to him at this location, the earliest in 1585-6 during the chieftainship of Cu Chonnacht Maguire (died 1589), who is also mentioned ('Fiants of Elizabeth', no. 4810), and thereafter in 1591 as a 'freeholder' (ibid., no. 5602), and again in 1591-2 along with Hugh Maguire and others (ibid., no. 5716). He subsequently moved to lands located at Currin (near Ballinamallard, barony of Tirkennedy, close to the border with Lurg barony), as can be learned from the composition 'T'aire riomsa, a ri o nUidhir' (Bergin, no. 33) addressed to Hugh Maguire in which the poet expresses dissatisfaction with the holding granted to him in virtue of his status as Maguire's 'ollamh'. In 1610-11 he was allotted a plantation grant of 210 acres at Clanawley barony (adjoining Magheraboy to the south), a fact suggesting an accommodation with the new order, which is borne out by a reference in his obituary to the esteem he enjoyed among the English. 
Hugh's successor in the chieftainship, his half-brother Cu Chonnacht Og, also patronized O hEodhasa who addresses him in several formal poems including 'Fada leigthear Eamhain i n-aontomha' (unpublished) which marks his inauguration, and the artistic eulogy 'Do feachadh fulang Ghaoidheal' (unpublished). O hEodhasa's compositions to patrons other than the Maguires comprise approximately half of the surviving total of fifty attributed to him (half of which have been published) and fall into two more or less equal groups, namely those dating from the years before Hugh Maguire's death, and those composed thereafter. The former category includes addresses to such notables as Aodh Ruadh O Domhnaill ('Diol fuatha flaitheas Eireann', O'Grady, 461) and Toirrdhealbhach Luineach O Neill ('An sluagh sidhe so i nEamhain', O Donnchadha). Also eulogized by him in this period were members of the O'Doherty, Mac Sweeney, and O'Rourke families in Ulster, members of the Burke, MacDermot, and O Conor families in Connaught, and, in Leinster, various of the O'Byrnes, whose family 'duanaire' contains five poems by O hEodhasa (Mac Airt). Among noteworthy poems composed in the period after 1600 'Mor theasda dh'obair Oivid' (Breatnach, 'Metamorphosis') celebrates the accession of James I (1603), while, in striking contrast, 'Beag mhaireas do mhacraidh Gaoidheal' (ibid., 471-2) addressed to Mac Mahon of Oriel, apparently after the flight of the earls in 1607, is marked by a deeply felt gloom concerning the Irish cause. 
Eochaidh O hEodhasa was an outstanding eulogist whose gift surpassed that of either of his two most illustrious contemporaries, Fearghal Og Mac an Bhaird and Tadhg Dall O hUiginn. His verse shows consistent compositional perfection, originality of expression and imagery (see for example the dazzlingly ornate address to Maguire's wounded hand, 'Slan fad lot, a lamh Aodha', unpublished), and a conscious versatility in the choice of apologues. Seriousness, grace, and intensity are characteristic qualities present in a number of personal poems such as his address to Hugh Maguire when absent on a campaign in Munster, 'Fuar leam an adhaighse d'Aodh' (Bergin, no. 29) and 'Fada om intinn a hamharc' (O Maolagain), composed for a similarly absent Cu Chonnacht Maguire. A keen awareness of his traditional rights and personal dignity shows in the poem 'Mor an t-ainm ollamh flatha' as also in 'Beir oirbhire uaim go hAodh' (unpublished) which reproves his patron for unwarranted public criticism of a poem. On the other hand good-natured self-deprecatory humour is evident in several informal compositions addressed to unspecified persons, as also in 'Ionmholta malairt bhisigh' (Bergin, no. 30), a poem in loose metre in which the merits of freer verse forms are extolled. 
O hEodhasa died on 9 June 1612, and the record of his death (in Walsh) describes him as 'a notable arch-professor in poetry and learning and in the clear intellect of Irish art, a good hosteller and keeper of a guest house generally, and a renowned man amongst the Irish and the English' (editor's translation). 


@@@@@


doc= 20653


O hEodhasa, Giolla Brighde (c.1570-1614), Franciscan friar and poet, was born in the diocese of Clogher, perhaps in co. Fermanagh (although there is a tradition that he came from near Bundoran, co. Donegal). He was a member of a celebrated hereditary learned family whose best-known member was the poet Eochaidh (died 1612). It is not known how closely Giolla Brighde and Eochaidh were related to one another. Giolla Brighde is first recorded, as an apprentice poet, about the time Aodh Ruadh O Domhnaill (Hugh Roe O'Donnell) was inaugurated as chieftain of Tir Conaill in the middle of 1592, when he composed an ode to the young chief. This work was apparently ignored by its recipient and does not seem to be extant, but shortly afterwards the young poet composed another poem, of eleven quatrains, 'A-tam ionchora re hAodh' ('I can defend myself to Aodh'); this is preserved in the poem book known as 'The Book of O'Donnell's Daughter'. Some time later (but prior to 1600), Giolla Brighde left Ireland for the continent, his leaving his country and friends occasioning two moving poems, 'Slan agaibh a fhir chumtha' ('Fare you well, my friend') and 'Truagh an t-amharc-sa, a Eire!' ('This is a sorrowful sight, O Ireland'). 
O hEodhasa next appears at Douai on 19 September 1605. He had taken a master's degree and was now seeking permission to go to Louvain to pursue his theological studies, rather than to Salamanca or Valladolid, where he had been asked to go. When the Irish Franciscan college of St Anthony was established at Louvain in 1607 he became one of the first members of staff, having entered the Franciscan order in November of that year and taken as his name in religion Bonaventura. He was ordained in April 1609 and lectured in philosophy and later in theology at Louvain. He had been guardian of St Anthony's for up to two years prior to his untimely death there in 1614. 
O hEodhasa is especially celebrated in the history of Irish literature as the author of the first Catholic book in Irish to appear in print. This was 'An teagasg criosdaidhe', a catechism which was first issued from the press of Jacobus Mesius in Antwerp in 1611. A second edition, printed on the Irish press at Louvain (which Bonaventura was instrumental in obtaining some months before his death), was published some time prior to 1619 (most probably in 1614 or 1615). A third edition was issued in Rome in 1707. The work is partly in verse, but mainly in prose. (The date of the first edition is somewhat disputed: some writers mention 1608 as the year in which it first appeared, but this seems unlikely.) The catechism became an exemplar for later works in the same genre. Apparently printed along with, or shortly after, the second (Louvain) edition of 'An teagasg criosdaidhe' was a separate booklet of twenty-nine pages containing three poems by Bonaventura: 'Truagh liomsa, a chompain, do chor' ('I pity your plight, my friend', ninety quatrains, addressed to a close friend 'who fell into heresy'), 'Gabh aithreachas uaim' ('Accept repentance from me'; twenty-one quatrains), and 'Truagh cor chloinne hAdhaimh' ('Pitiable the condition of the children of Adam'; seventeen quatrains, translated from the Latin of St Bernard). Five further poems by O hEodhasa are extant (or possibly six, as in one instance the ascription is uncertain); these include a long catechetical poem which is to be found interspersed through the prose text of 'An teagasg criosdaidhe'. 
A treatise in Latin by O hEodhasa on Irish grammar, 'Rudimenta grammaticae Hibernicae', attempted for the first time to classify Irish nouns by declension, in imitation of the Latin model. This work, which did not appear in print for more than three and a half centuries after the author's death, was mainly intended for fellow Franciscans and other members of the clergy who would have some competence in reading Latin. Bonaventura shows clearly that, apart from his knowledge of Latin (and of some Greek and Hebrew), he was extremely well versed in the teachings of the traditional Irish grammarians. The examples he adduces, including isolated quatrains and sometimes longer passages of Irish classical poetry, are of particular interest. 
O hEodhasa died of smallpox at Louvain on 15 November 1614, and was buried at St Anthony's College. His fellow scholar and Franciscan Aodh Mac Aingil (Hugh MacCawell) states that O hEodhasa had planned, had he not been cut off so prematurely, to write many other works which would be of benefit, both spiritual and temporal, to the nation. The future Roman Catholic archbishop of Armagh thus sums up his confrere's significance: 'There has not been for a long time a man so expert and eminent as Bonaventura in learning, in Gaelic and in piety' (O Cleirigh, 27). 


@@@@@


doc= 20654


O'Kane, Eachmarcach (1720-1790), harpist, was born at Drogheda in 1720. He was of a northern family, and was taught to play the harp by Cornelius Lyons, harper to the earl of Antrim. Described as a very tall, strong, and athletic man, O'Kane's famed spirit of adventure sent him to Rome, where he played for the exiled Charles Edward Stuart, the Young Pretender. After visiting France he went on to Madrid, where a great number of Irish gentlemen living at the court praised him to the king. However, O'Kane achieved notoriety for his drunken and uproarious habits, and lost favour in the Spanish court. From Madrid he apparently walked to Bilbao, carrying his harp on his back. He did not seem to spend much time in Ireland, instead touring around Scotland, where he played mainly in Blair Atholl, Dunkeld, and the lowlands and isles. In 1775 Sir Alexander MacDonald in Skye gave him a silver harp key, long in the family, and originally left by another Irish harper, Ruaidhri Dall O'Cathain, or O'Kane. Boswell, in his 'Tour to the Hebrides', recounts the tale that O'Kane begged to have the harp key on the basis of his being a namesake of its donor, and that the MacDonald family agreed, being unaware of its true value. Arthur O'Neill, in his famous memoirs, describes how O'Kane sold the key and drank the money, leaving the MacDonalds to rue their loss. Of his musical ability, a contemporary (a Mr Dunn) states that 'he was... able (though blind) to play with accuracy and great effect the fine treble and bass parts of many of Corelli's correntos in concert with other music'; this may have taken place at the series of concerts which Castrucci (Corelli's last pupil) organized in Dublin. O'Kane apparently died in 1790. 


@@@@@


doc= 20655


Oke, George Colwell (1821-1874), legal writer, was born on 8 February 1821 at St Columb Major, Cornwall, the son of William Jane Oke (died 1859) of Truro. After education at Truro he started out as a solicitor's accountant, but by 1848 was acting as assistant clerk to the Newmarket bench of justices. In 1855 he became assistant clerk to the lord mayor of London, and in 1864 succeeded to the chief clerkship. Oke's knowledge of criminal law and of its practical application brought him a high reputation. It was impressively demonstrated in several celebrated fraud cases at the Mansion House, including those arising out of the Overend Gurney financial crash of 1866. 
Oke's learning reached a wider audience through a series of practice books on legal subjects of particular importance to magistrates, such as licensing and the game laws. One, 'The Friendly Societies' Manual' (1855), had to be withdrawn as infringing the copyright of another work, but several others, such as 'The Law of Turnpike Roads', proved highly successful. However, it was the complementary 'Oke's Magisterial Synopsis' and 'Oke's Magisterial Formulist', first published in 1848 and 1850 and running into fourteen and twenty editions respectively, which proved the most enduring, with the last edition of the 'Formulist' being published as late as 2000. In 1862 he addressed the Social Science Congress, advocating 'a uniform and comprehensive code of magisterial procedure' and deprecating any extension of stipendary magistrates. 
Oke was twice married: first to Eliza Neile Hawkins (died 1868), and second on 20 April 1870 to Georgina Percy, stepdaughter of G. M. Harvey, of Upper Norwood. He lived in Peckham, first at 7 Devonshire Terrace, and then at Rosedale, St Mary's Road. On 6 January 1874 he was taken ill at work and died at home three days later on 9 January. He was buried on 15 January in Nunhead cemetery. He was survived by his second wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 20656


O Caoimh, Eoghan (1656-1726), poet and scribe, was one of three sons of Caomh O Caoimh. His mother's name is not known, nor is his place of birth. 
Eoghan recorded in Limerick MS O (pp. 268-9) that he married Eilionoir de Nogla in 1681, that they had seven children, that Eilionoir died in 1707, and that his eldest son, Art, had recently, on 18 July 1709, sailed from Cork for France. Art was to train for the priesthood. A later note (p. 302) plaintively records that Art had died thirty days after his arrival. 
Eoghan valued his descent from the once important O Caoimh family of Glenville, a parish 10 miles north-east of Cork, bordering on the diocese of Cloyne. He described his paternal lineage in Cork MS M62 (p. 347); his headstone more succinctly affirms that he was 'of the family of Gleanphriahane' -- Gleann an Phreachain, now Glenville. John O'Daly consequently supposed that Eoghan was born in Glenville, but his lineage shows, and Eoghan specifically asserts, that his descent parted from the direct Glenville line with his great-great-grandfather Art Og O Caoimh. After more than a century of war and upheaval, it seems improbable that Eoghan's immediate family still resided in Glenville. During his productive period as a scribe from 1679 to 1710, Eoghan resided mainly in the east of co. Kerry, near Brosna, close to the co. Limerick border, south of Abbeyfeale: he was evicted from a farmholding there in 1692, and his wife was buried in Brosna. It may have been his native place. 
Eoghan's descent ensured that he was welcome among the elite of the Irish-speaking community in mid-Cork: he received patronage from Eoin Baiste Mac Sleighne, bishop of Cork, Cloyne, and Ross from 1693 until his deportation in 1702; Uilliam Mac Cairteain (1668-1724), from Whitechurch in the same area, was godfather to his son Art; he knew Diarmaid Mac Carthaigh (died 1705) of Blarney, and composed an elegy on his death. His descent also enhanced his eligibility for clerical appointment in the diocese of Cloyne. 
After 1710, Eoghan prepared for entry to the priesthood. He was ordained in 1717, and was later appointed parish priest of Doneraile in the north of co. Cork, in the diocese of Cloyne. 
Of O Caoimh's scribal work, there are extant: ten full manuscripts, four produced in co-operation with Art, and three to which he made small contributions. Their present locations are: Catholic bishop of Limerick's house (O), University College, Cork (C62, C168), Maynooth (C88), National Library of Ireland (G17, G114, G312), National Library of Wales (413D), Royal Irish Academy (23 E 17, 23 E 23, 23 G 2, 23 H 14, 23 I 7, 23 M 25-34, 24 L 6), Stonyhurst College (A II 20, 2), Trinity College, Dublin (H.5.4). They contain genealogies, prose texts, and verse. The writings of Seathrun Ceitinn are well represented: there are six copies of his history 'Forus Feasa ar Eirinn', and the earliest extant copy of his poem 'Om sgeol ar ardmhagh Fail' ('From my tidings of the great land of Fal'). The whole corpus is a valuable source for scholarship. About thirty of Eoghan's own verse compositions are extant in manuscript copies, eleven in autograph. Not all have appeared in print. His popular piece 'Ar treascradh in Eachroim' ('All who fell at Aughrim'), which was prompted by his eviction in 1692, was first printed in 'The Nation' (15 May 1858); O'Grady printed the full text; and O Donnchadha included it in the uncompleted sequence which he published in 'Gadelica'. Subsequently, O Cuiv published his commendation of a friend, and O Murchadha published his ode to the bishop who ordained him. 
Eoghan is a fine example of the scholar-scribes who struggled in adversity to maintain the native Irish tradition of literature and learning. His work was admired by contemporaries and by later scribes. For the latter there was also the fascination of his remarkable life: the relatively early death of his wife, the loss of a cherished son, and his late ordination to become a respected priest in penal times. 
Eoghan O Caoimh died on 5 April 1726 in Doneraile and was buried nearby at Old Court. 


@@@@@


doc= 20657


O'Keeffe, Adelaide (1776-1865), poet and novelist, was born at Eustace Street, Dublin, on 5 November 1776, the only daughter and third child of Irish parents, the dramatist and actor John O'Keeffe (1747-1833) and Mary Heaphy (1757-1813), actress. Her younger brother Gerald died in infancy. Her childhood was traumatic: her parents had a troubled marriage and her mother was often absent. Adelaide was put out to a nurse until she was five. After the marriage ended her mother was denied access to the children by Adelaide's father. In 1781 John O'Keeffe moved to London as an operatic composer and playwright for the Haymarket, Covent Garden, and Drury Lane theatres. Adelaide and her elder brother John Tottenham followed in 1782 to attend school in London but were shortly afterwards sent to France to avoid what were considered by John O'Keeffe to be the unwanted attentions of his wife. While her brother John enjoyed a 'superior and expensive education' in Paris, at Westminster School, and Exeter College, Oxford (O'Keeffe, xviii), Adelaide suffered the 'horror' of convent schooling until 1788 and subsequently assisted her then blind father in his compositions. She cared for her father until he died. 
Adelaide O'Keeffe embarked on her own career in the early 1790s with the composition of a novel, 'Llewellin' (1799), a fictionalization of the life of Piers Gaveston's son as narrated to Chaucer. In 1798 she wrote 'Patriarchal Times, or, The Land of Canaan', a fictional reworking of chapters from 'Genesis', but she was unable to find a publisher for it until 1811. It proved to be critically and commercially successful. But it was her poems published in Ann and Jane Taylor's 'Original Poems for Infant Minds' (1804) which established her reputation and remain, to the detriment of her novels, her best-known work. Following this success, she continued to write verses for children which were witty and cautionary in equal measure, publishing 'Original Poems Calculated to Improve the Mind of Youth' (1808), 'National Characters Exhibited in 40 Geographical Poems' (1808), and 'Poems for Young Children' (1849). She also continued to write novels: 'Zenobia, Queen of Palmyra' (1814), the three-volume epistolary 'Dudley' (1819), and 'The Broken Sword: a Tale' (1854), a story of parental separation. 
After her father gave up the stage in 1798, it seems that O'Keeffe was financially responsible for the household despite her modest income (she later called for authors to be rewarded by annual grants, and wrote to the publishers Harvey and Darton concerning her underpayment for her contributions to 'Original Poems': see 'N&Q', 7th ser., 3.361-2). O'Keeffe lived with her father in London and then moved with him in 1815 to Chichester, where she worked as a governess; in 1830 they moved to Southampton where John O'Keeffe died. Devoted to her father from early childhood, she published a tribute to him in the 'New Monthly Magazine' (1833) and a memoir in 'O'Keeffe's Legacy to his Daughter' (1834). Following his death, she made numerous successful applications for grants of financial assistance from the Royal Literary Fund between 1834 and 1865. Her last known work was 'The Broken Sword, or, A Soldier's Honour', with an introduction by the author dated Southampton, January 1854. She died, unmarried, at Brighton, Sussex, on 4 September 1865. 


@@@@@


doc= 20658


O'Keeffe, John (1747-1833), playwright, was born on 24 June 1747 in Abbey Street, Dublin. Little is known of his parents but the O'Keeffes of Fermoy and his mother's family, the O'Connors of Wexford, had lost their landed property through their devotion to the Stuart cause. 
O'Keeffe was educated at the school of Father Austin, a learned Jesuit. From an early age he studied art under Robert West at the Royal Academy, Dublin, with his brother Daniel (1740-1787), who became a professional artist. His formal education ended when he paid an extended visit to an aunt in London from August 1762. There he earned pocket money by painting and developed his interest in the theatre, seeing Garrick act at Drury Lane. 
O'Keeffe returned to Dublin in 1764 and soon became an actor in the Smock Alley theatre company under Henry Mossop. On 14 January 1767 Mossop staged his afterpiece 'The She Gallant', which had some success in London when revised as 'The Positive Man' (1782). During the next ten years O'Keeffe worked as an actor in Dublin, Cork, and Limerick, with some appearances in Belfast, Derry, Kilkenny, and Waterford. His one-act musical pastoral 'Colin's Welcome' was premiered at Belfast in 1770, and he compiled and adapted the pantomimes 'Harlequin in Waterford' (1767), 'Harlequin in Derry' (1770), and 'The Giant's Causeway' (1770). When in Kilkenny in 1770 O'Keeffe advertised a subscription series of drawings of local views. He enjoyed a reputation for 'gaiety, wit, and cheerfulness' (A. O'Keeffe, xxi), and acted Gratiano to Macklin's Shylock. He played Tony Lumpkin in Dublin performances of Goldsmith's 'She Stoops to Conquer' and wrote the farces 'Tony Lumpkin's Ramble thro' Cork' (1773) and 'Tony Lumpkin in Town' (1774). 
On 1 October 1774 O'Keeffe married Mary Heaphy (1757-1813), whose father, Tottenham Heaphy, managed the Cork and Limerick theatres. Mary was protestant, so there were both Catholic and protestant marriage ceremonies. They had three children: John Tottenham (1775-1804), Adelaide O'Keeffe (1776-1865), and Gerald, who died in infancy. 
For his Cork benefit in 1777 O'Keeffe produced David Garrick's 'A Christmas Tale' with special effects, including 'the Giant in the Fiery Lake 20 feet high' (Clark, 107). That December John and Mary O'Keeffe travelled to London, where he sent a revised version of 'Tony Lumpkin in Town' to George Colman, manager of the Haymarket summer theatre. It received six performances in 1778, and five the following summer. Mary O'Keeffe made some appearances on the London stage and John acted at Portsmouth in summer 1778, but in March 1779 they returned to Ireland. O'Keeffe quickly wrote an afterpiece, 'The Son-in-Law', and sent it to Colman. With music composed and arranged by Samuel Arnold, it was O'Keeffe's first real success, with sixteen performances in summer 1779. The role of the ridiculous castrato, Signor Arionelli, was designed for the bass Charles Bannister, who was known to delight his friends with falsetto imitations of Italian singers. O'Keeffe's ability to write rewarding parts for actors was to play a large part in his success. Colman visited Dublin in winter 1779-80, bought the copyright of 'The Son-in-Law' for $40, and asked for another play. O'Keeffe sent his musical afterpiece 'The Dead Alive' and Colman staged it in June 1781, the month in which O'Keeffe left Ireland for London, never to return. 
In the mid 1770s O'Keeffe had suffered from violent inflammation of his eyelids and tried remedies which made the condition worse. His eyesight steadily deteriorated, his career as an actor was threatened and he grew less extrovert. He and Mary acted at Crow Street, Dublin, in 1780-81, and at this time his wife apparently became involved with the actor George Graham. According to the 'Catalogue of Five Hundred Celebrated Authors', O'Keeffe 'demolished his wife's nose in a fit of jealousy' and departed for London. Mary lived with Graham as his wife for many years and they acted together in the English provinces and Scotland. O'Keeffe arranged for his children to come to England and made himself solely responsible for their upbringing and education. Adelaide wrote that her father was 'never heard to mention the name of his 'wife'' and that after the death of his brother Daniel in 1787 'the reserve of his character became confirmed and habitual' (A. O'Keeffe, xvi, xxi). O'Keeffe's very successful afterpiece 'The Agreeable Surprise', with music by Arnold, was the last work he was able to write without an amanuensis. It was praised by Hazlitt who called O'Keeffe 'our English Moliere' ('Complete Works', 5.319). The 'Public Advertiser' (6 September 1781) reported that the whole audience was 'in one continued Fit of Laughter' and particularly praised the comic actor and singer John Edwin, who played Lingo, the former schoolmaster who courts the ignorant dairymaid Cowslip with the song 'Amo, amas, I love a lass'. 
Thomas Harris, the Covent Garden manager, then commissioned a full-length piece, for which O'Keeffe received 600 guineas, $120 of which he gave to Arnold for the music. 'The Banditti', a forerunner of romantic opera, failed on its first night (28 November 1781), but was an immediate success the following November when revised as 'The Castle of Andalusia'. The strong cast included the contralto Margaret Kennedy in the breeches role of Don Alphonso, Giovanna Sestini in the tailor-made broken English role of Lorenza, and Edwin as Pedrillo. 25 November 1782 saw O'Keeffe's first Covent Garden pantomime, 'Lord Mayor's Day', a splendid spectacle with over 200 supernumeraries in the final procession and with music arranged and composed by William Shield. Meanwhile his 'Harlequin Teague', with music by Arnold, had been performed as the Haymarket summer pantomime, with a solo duet for Charles Bannister as a man with two heads. In summer 1783 O'Keeffe's first five-act comedy for London, 'The Young Quaker', was a success at the Haymarket; it continued to be performed well into the nineteenth century. He also provided lyrics for 'Gretna Green', a farce with 'Italian, French, Irish, Scotch, Welch, and English MUSIC' ('Public Advertiser', 28 Aug 1783). Every year for the rest of the decade O'Keeffe had new works performed at both Covent Garden and the Haymarket, with music composed by Shield and Arnold respectively. 
For the Haymarket O'Keeffe provided the afterpieces 'Peeping Tom of Coventry' (1784), which remained popular for many years, and 'A Beggar on Horseback' (1785). Another successful farce, 'The Prisoner at Large' (1788), was dedicated to John Edwin, whose death in October 1790 was a serious blow to O'Keeffe, as was the mental decline of Colman after a stroke in 1785. The Haymarket management was gradually assumed by George Colman the younger, who was himself a skilful writer of comic afterpieces. O'Keeffe wrote for Harris at Covent Garden until the end of his career, producing two more successful full-length musical works, 'Fontainbleau' (1784) and 'The Highland Reel' (1788). His afterpiece 'The Poor Soldier' (1783), adapted from his unsuccessful 'The Shamrock', was set in the Irish countryside and starred Margaret Kennedy as the soldier Patrick. The music incorporated some 'fine Irish airs of Carolan' (J. O'Keeffe, 'Recollections', 1.70), which O'Keeffe selected and sang to Shield. With forty performances in its first season, it remained popular well into the next century in Britain and the USA. A sequel, 'Love in a Camp, or, Patrick in Prussia', also did well. 'The Farmer' (1787), which O'Keeffe adapted from his rejected play 'The Plague of Riches', was another success and included the song 'A Flaxen-Headed Cow-Boy', with Shield's delightful flute obbligato for the whistling boy, and a patter song for Edwin as the stay-maker Jemmy Jumps. 
O'Keeffe's ability to rewrite failures into successes was remarkable, particularly in view of his near blindness. He provided words for the Covent Garden pantomimes 'Friar Bacon' (1783, altered to 'Harlequin Rambler' after sixteen performances), 'Omai' (1785), 'Aladin' (1788), and 'Merry Sherwood' (1795). In spring 1791 he had two non-musical successes, the afterpiece 'Modern Antiques' and the five-act comedy 'Wild Oats'. The latter, 'calculated throughout to call forth the broad laugh and the tear of sensibility, alternately' (Baker, 3.410), has proved the longest lasting of his stage works. There were some Covent Garden flops, however. 'The Blacksmith of Antwerp' (1785), 'The Man-Milliner' (1787), and 'Tantara-rara' (1788) folded very quickly, while 'The Toy' (1789) and its revision 'The Lie of the Day' (1796) had only limited success. At the Haymarket 'The Siege of Curzola' failed as both a mainpiece and an afterpiece and 'The Basket-Maker' (1790) received only five performances. O'Keeffe turned out pieces to celebrate special occasions, notably 'The Birth-Day' (1783) for the twenty-first birthday of the prince of Wales and 'Britain's Brave Tars!!' for the naval victories of 1797. There were also benefit pieces, 'The Maid's the Mistress' for Sestini (1783), 'The Pharo Table' for William Lewis (1789), 'The Little Hunchback' for John Quick (1789), and 'St George's Day' for Isabella Mattocks (1789). 'The Czar', premiered at Mrs Billington's benefit (1790), was revised as 'The Fugitive' in the following season. 
After the success of 'Wild Oats' O'Keeffe produced nothing for two years. In summer 1791 he took a six-week holiday with his children in West Lulworth on the Dorset coast and he later drew on this for his popular three-act Haymarket comedy, 'The London Hermit, or, Rambles in Dorsetshire' (1793). The tenor Michael Kelly, who had appeared with him in Dublin in the late 1770s when O'Keeffe was 'a fine, sprightly, animated young man', dined with him in 1793 and found him 'broken down, and almost blind; but still full of pleasantry and anecdote' (Kelly, 2.37). His only other new Haymarket offering was the unsuccessful afterpiece 'The Magic Banner' (1796). Covent Garden had been enlarged to seat over 3000 in 1792 and the enormous auditorium and increasingly refined tastes of the audience militated against O'Keeffe. However, the musical mainpiece 'Sprigs of Laurel' (1793) survived for five seasons and its revised version, 'The Rival Soldiers', proved remarkably popular in the USA in the early nineteenth century. The comedies 'The World in a Village' (1793) and 'Life's Vagaries' (1795) and the musical farce 'The Irish Mimic, or, Blunders in Brighton' (1795) did quite well. O'Keeffe's last collaboration with Shield, 'The Lad of the Hills' (1796), had little success, even when revised in two-act form as 'The Wicklow Mountains', and the comedy 'The Doldrum' (1796) received only eight performances. 'Olympus in an Uproar', his reworking of Kane O'Hara's burletta 'The Golden Pippin' with music by William Reeve, had thirteen performances in 1796. 'Le grenadier' (1789) and 'Jenny's Whim' (1794) failed to reach public performance because of censorship problems, and the same fate overtook his only piece for Drury Lane, 'She's Eloped', rehearsed with Mrs Jordan in May 1798. 
O'Keeffe hoped to provide for his future by publishing his four-volume 'Dramatic Works' by subscription in 1798, under the patronage of the prince of Wales. Harris permitted the inclusion of the works for which Covent Garden owned the copyright, but Colman the younger, who had inherited his father's debts with his theatre, withheld five works that he considered too valuable for general release. Financial returns were disappointing and in June 1800 Covent Garden staged a benefit for O'Keeffe, who was led on by William Lewis to give his specially written address to the audience. In 1803 Harris agreed to make O'Keeffe an annual payment in return for his remaining copyrights and unpublished plays. O'Keeffe received a $100 annual Treasury pension in 1808 and, when Harris's annuity ended in 1825, he was granted a royal pension of $100 a year. He had spent lavishly on the education of his son, who took orders and whose death in Jamaica in 1804 was a devastating blow. Adelaide O'Keeffe acted as her father's amanuensis from 1788 and was his companion in his old age. It was to her that he dictated his 'Recollections' (1826), when they were living in Chichester. 
John O'Keeffe's last few years were spent in Bedford Cottage, Southampton, where he died on 4 February 1833. According to his daughter he took pleasure in their country walks and in verse composition to within a few weeks of his death. He was buried on 11 February at All Saints, Southampton. O'Keeffe worked always in popular genres and so has received scant acclaim from literary critics, but he 'gladdened the hearts of his auditors between twenty and thirty years and 'sent them laughing to their beds'' (Baker, 1.551). 


@@@@@


doc= 20659


O'Kelly, Charles (1621-1695), army officer and historian, was the eldest son of John O'Kelly (died 1674), eighth lord of the manor of Screen, co. Galway, and Isma, a daughter of Sir William Hill. He was born at Screen, but educated at St Omer in the Spanish Netherlands. There 'he went thro' the Course of his Studies with Great Reputation, and became well versed in the Knowledge of most of the European Languages, such as Greek, Latin, Italian, Spanish, French, English and Irish' ('General History of Ireland'). He returned to Ireland in 1642 after the outbreak of civil war and served with his father on the royalist side by commanding a troop of horse in Ormond's army. After the triumph of the English parliamentarians he sailed to Spain with 2000 Irish soldiers to serve the exiled Charles II. He later joined the king in France, but was forced to return to Spain following Cromwell's treaty with the French in 1657. He travelled to England at the Restoration in 1660, 'highly esteemed for his Learning, Loyalty and great services both at home and abroad' (ibid.) and his father was able to reclaim the family lands in Galway. O'Kelly succeeded his father as lord of Screen in 1674. He married Margaret O'Kelly ('fl'. 1650), a daughter of Teigue O'Kelly of Gallagh, co. Galway. 
On the outbreak of civil war in 1689 O'Kelly, at the age of sixty-eight, volunteered for service in King James's Irish army. Although he neither raised nor commanded a regiment, he was given the rank of colonel and served in a staff capacity. After being forced to abandon Sligo in August 1689, Patrick Sarsfield pulled his forces back to Roscommon where he left O'Kelly in command while he travelled to Dublin to report. Seeing that the enemy had not pursued Sarsfield from Sligo, O'Kelly took it upon himself to march back to Boyle and establish himself there. At daybreak on 20 September 1689 he was attacked by Thomas Lloyd's Enniskillen troops, who routed his men at what became known as 'the break of the Boyle'. O'Kelly was forced to flee, leaving behind him all his baggage and his portmanteau of private papers. Nevertheless, the Enniskilliners' success was short-lived as in the next month O'Kelly marched back with Sarsfield and helped to command the force that recaptured Sligo. 
In 1690 O'Kelly was appointed high sheriff of co. Roscommon, where it would seem he remained until September 1691. After the battle of Aughrim (12 July 1691) and the surrender of Galway (28 July), the Irish troops in Roscommon and Sligo were isolated from the main army at Limerick. On the road to Sligo he met, by chance, Baldearg O'Donnell, who commanded a private army of Ulster Gaels. O'Donnell had entered into negotiations with the Williamites, and O'Kelly attempted to persuade him to remain faithful to the Jacobite cause. Nevertheless, O'Donnell and his men changed sides and reinforced the Williamite troops in Roscommon, who then marched on Sligo in early September. On their way they forced O'Kelly to surrender a castle outside Boyle. The terms of surrender allowed him to march to Limerick, which he reached before the siege began. On 14 September 1691 O'Kelly warned Sarsfield that Brigadier Robert Clifford, who commanded the Jacobite troops on the co. Clare bank of the Shannon where a Williamite crossing was anticipated, was not to be trusted. He urged him either to send a trusted officer or come himself to command. His advice was not taken and that night the enemy built a pontoon bridge across the river and at dawn established themselves on the Clare bank. Nine days later a ceasefire was agreed, after which Sarsfield wanted him to assist in negotiating the terms of a treaty. Nevertheless, he took no part, perhaps because his uncompromising views were thought unhelpful. 
O'Kelly's family estates were secured by his being included under the terms of the treaty of Limerick (3 October 1691), after which he retired to Screen. In the following year he wrote the curiously entitled 'Macariae excidium, or, The Destruction of Cyprus containing the last war & conquest of that kingdom written originally in Syriak by Philotas Phyloxypres, translated into Latin by Gratianus Ragallus P.R. and now made into English by C:o K: anno domini: 1692'. The work remained obscure until the nineteenth century, when it was published three times. There are early manuscript copies in the British Library and Trinity College, Dublin. All the named participants and places are disguised by classical names: Ireland is referred to as Cyprus, and England as Cilicia. James II, William III, St Ruth, and Tyrconnell are given the names Amasis, Theodore, Phyrrus, and Coridon. Sarsfield is given that of the Spartan general Lysander. 'Macariae excidium' is primarily a political rather than a military account of the war in Ireland of 1689-91. 'The loss of Cyprus cannot be justly imputed to the Cowardice or Infidelity of the Natives, but rather the wrong Politicks of a weak Prince' (O'Kelly, 'Macariae', 6). The work is particularly hostile to Tyrconnell, whom O'Kelly accused of betraying the Irish cause to the English, and although the portrayal of Sarsfield is generally favourable, he did not escape O'Kelly's criticism for administrative incompetence and for negotiating with the enemy. He was highly critical of the treaty of Limerick. It would, he wrote, take someone else to write a history of the treaty as it would require 'Ink mixed with the Writer's Teares; and the Fountain of my weak Eyes hath been drained up already by the too frequent Remembrance of the Slaughter at Acra [Aughrim], and the sad Separation at Paphos [Limerick]' (ibid., 159). 
O'Kelly wrote another account of the war, as well as an account of the war that followed the 1641 rebellion, in his 'Memoires du Colonel Charles O'Kelly de Skryne, sur les guerres d'Irlande de 1641 et suivans, et de 1689 et suivans'. This document was preserved by the O'Kelly-Farrell family in France, but was lost at the time of the French Revolution. He again used the device of disguising the names and, as the key to the names referred to in the 'Memoires' survived, it would appear that the account of the 1689 war contained more detail than is to be found in 'Macariae excidium'. 
O'Kelly died at Screen aged seventy-four. 'He was a person of great abilities, piety, and universal knowledge, and was justly esteemed one of the wisest as well as the most accomplished men of the age' ('General History of Ireland'). His only son, Captain Dennis O'Kelly, served at Aughrim and succeeded to the lands at Screen. He married a daughter of Lord Bellew, but became 'attached to low intrigues and dissipation' (O'Kelly, 'Macariae', xviii). He was predeceased by his three children, and his wife fled to France to get away from him. He died in 1740, leaving his lands to his uncle John O'Kelly. 


@@@@@


doc= 20660


O'Kelly, Dennis (c.1728-1787), racehorse owner, was born in Ireland of 'humble' parents, and had no formal education. After arriving in London about 1748, aged twenty, he became first a chair carrier, and then kept the scores at the billiard table and tennis court. However, he soon met Charlotte Hayes (died 1787), a noted courtesan whom he later married. She financed his gambling speculations, the success of which provided him with capital. His major break occurred when he paid 650 guineas for a part-share in Eclipse, a horse that had never run a race. The purchase paid off, Eclipse rapidly demonstrating that it was the best horse of the day by winning its first race, the Queen's Plate at Winchester, with such style that O'Kelly was able to collect on a famous bet that he had made -- he had wagered that Eclipse would be at least 240 yards ahead of the rest of the field; everyone was amazed at such a feat, and this prompted O'Kelly to pay a further 1100 guineas to become the animal's sole owner. 
O'Kelly's earnings from Eclipse were undermined by three factors: the most valuable races at Newmarket were confined to horses belonging to the Jockey Club, an elite body which refused to admit O'Kelly; Eclipse's reputation meant that it was difficult to arrange matches elsewhere, for few owners would back their horses against him; and Eclipse was 'an indifferent foal getter', thus limiting its value as a stud ('Sporting Magazine', 6, 1795, 119). Despite this, O'Kelly rejected an offer of 11,000 guineas for the horse. O'Kelly's primary goal was fame rather than money, and he much preferred racing his horses to selling them. Much of his behaviour was probably motivated by a resentment of his treatment by aristocrats, particularly his exclusion from membership of clubs patronized by the higher orders. In addition, he alleged that he had been sold 'half-bred' mares with false signatures testifying to their pedigree. These factors go some way towards explaining his regular denunciations of aristocrats as 'black-legs'. 
Betting, on both horses and cards, allied to the profits from his breeding stud, made O'Kelly a very rich man, though one who was regarded as 'a disreputable adventurer' (Black, 150). Money enabled him to gain some admittance to society, notably his purchase of commissions in the Middlesex militia, in which he eventually attained the rank of colonel. He also bought a country house at Clay Hill, Epsom, and subsequently the famous estate of Cannons, near Edgware, formerly the house of the duke of Chandos. 
O'Kelly was described as having 'a bear-like figure, dark and saturnine visage, with the accompaniment of his rough striped coat and old round hat'. Although his looks resembled a ruffian, he was very 'peaceable' and had 'the manners of a gentleman, and the attractive quaintness of the humorist' ('Sporting Magazine' 6, 1795, 98-100). Contradictions permeated his nature. His kindness towards his servants made them 'look at him more as a friend than a master' ('Sporting Magazine', 2, 1793, 335) and he retained jockeys on an annual basis, permitting them to ride for other owners providing they did not ride against him. However, he displayed immense meanness in almost all of his business transactions, and jockeys invariably struggled to be paid. Similarly, although he was a heavy gambler and had no interest in religion, he refused to permit play at his own table. Indeed, he inserted a clause in his will specifically punishing his heir should he gamble. 
O'Kelly died childless at his house in Piccadilly Grove, London, on 28 December 1787 and was interred in a vault at Whitechapel. While he left his widow well provided for, including the bequest of a famous parrot that he had bought for 50 guineas, which was able to whistle the 104th psalm, the bulk of his estate went to his nephew, Andrew Dennis O'Kelly, who had been educated in England and France. Despite his uncle's stipulations Andrew embraced horse-racing, and was so successful as both owner and jockey that he became a member of the Jockey Club. He was regarded with respect both by contemporaries and by posterity -- something Dennis O'Kelly never achieved. 


@@@@@


doc= 20661


O'Kelly, Joseph (1832-1883), geologist, was born in Dublin on 31 October 1832, the second son of Matthias Joseph O'Kelly, and his wife, Margaret Shannon. His father was noted for a love of natural history, especially of conchology, and for his activity in the cause of Catholic emancipation. Joseph O'Kelly entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1848, took his BA in 1852, his diploma in engineering in 1853, and his MA in 1860. 
In 1852 O'Kelly joined the Geological Society of Dublin (after 1864 the Royal Geological Society of Ireland) and he served frequently on its council. He briefly was employed in the valuation office under Richard John Griffith, but on 13 November 1854 he became an assistant geologist with the geological survey of Ireland under Joseph Beete Jukes. He was promoted to senior geologist on 1 April 1863. O'Kelly mapped chiefly in west Cork, in co. Kerry, in the Limerick volcanic beds, and in the southern Irish midlands. His name is on twenty-three sheets of the one-inch geological map of Ireland and he contributed extensively to the accompanying memoirs. While mapping the Slieveardagh coalfield during the winter of 1858-9 atrocious weather and foul accommodation left him with bronchial problems which eventually terminated his field career. In 1863 he was granted six months' sick leave so that he might pass the winter in Malaga. 
In October 1866 O'Kelly permanently quitted the field to become secretary in the survey's Dublin office. There his services were of great value, not only because of his extensive knowledge of Irish geology, but also because his honesty and genial disposition helped to cool tempers within a survey where strong personal animosities existed. 
O'Kelly married, in 1870, Miss Dorothea Smyth; they had a family of five sons and four daughters. He died of acute bronchitis on 13 April 1883 at his home, 72 Eccles Street, Dublin. His contributions to the literature of geology, practically restricted to the memoirs published by the survey, indicate his powers and his thoroughness as a geological observer. He was elected a member of the Royal Irish Academy on 8 January 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 20662


O'Kelly, Patrick (1754-c.1835), poet, was born in Loughrea, co. Galway. O'Kelly gradually built up a local reputation as a poet in Ireland before publishing his first volume, 'Killarney: a Poem', in 1791. Thereafter, his fame rapidly spread and his subsequent volumes were issued by subscription. Admirers, many of whose eulogistic verses found a place in O'Kelly's own volumes, included the future King George IV of England, who, having ordered fifty copies of O'Kelly's second volume, met the poet at Phoenix Park in Dublin, while visiting Ireland. O'Kelly was also later to meet Sir Walter Scott at Limerick in 1825. 
Despite having such famous admirers, O'Kelly could not live by subscription alone, and spent much of his life travelling throughout south-west Ireland selling his books. In July 1808, while visiting Doneraile, co. Cork, O'Kelly's watch and chain were, unfortunately, stolen. The mishap, however, led indirectly to his most popular verse, the 'Doneraile Litany', a string of curses in poetic form on the town and its people. O'Kelly made further poetic capital out of the locale, writing a sequel, 'The Palinode', which revoked all the previous curses, when Lady Doneraile herself, on reading the 'Litany', was inspired to replace his property. A less profitable relationship was that of O'Kelly's fellow poet Michael McCarthy, whose popular 'Lacas delectabilis' (1816) was, according to O'Kelly, plagiarized from a poem he had earlier written. O'Kelly's other works are equally comic in nature, and include a so-called 'ethicographical survey of the Western parts of Ireland'. 
O'Kelly died about 1835, and his clever, but often plagiarizing, works, although frequently anthologized, largely fell into disrepute. At the turn of the twentieth century, for example, the esteemed Irish critic D. J. O'Donoghue, although in admiration of O'Kelly's 'extraordinary character', nevertheless characterized his verse as being, without exception, 'of a very pedestrian order' ('DNB'). O'Kelly should not be confused with another Patrick O'Kelly of his era, who published 'A General History of the Rebellion of 1798' (1842), and translated works by Abbe McGeoghegan and W. D. O'Kelly. 


@@@@@


doc= 20663


Okely, Francis (1719-1794), Moravian minister and translator of mystical writings, was born at Bedford on 27 March 1719, the first child of Francis Okely (died 'c'.1733), wig maker, and Ann (1691-1766), the daughter of John Battison. His mother came from a respectable Northamptonshire family, but his father died in a debtors' prison. His mother subsequently became a milliner and shopkeeper in Bedford. As a young man Okely made a small but significant contribution to the evangelical awakening, but his inner life was troubled, and he soon revealed the lack of consistency characteristic of his middle years. 
Okely's evangelicalism first made itself felt in 1736 when, on leaving Charterhouse School, London, he awoke similar sentiments in his mother. At St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated in 1739, he formed a small religious society. Ann Okely became a central figure around which the Moravian community at Bedford developed, and Okely and his student friends were also to be drawn into the Moravian church. In his own case, his brother John was a crucial influence. This, however, was not before Okely was rebaptized in 1740 at Blunham, near Bedford, and became a Baptist minister. Expelled from the Baptists two years later, Okely is said to have told his followers that he had 'now found the people of God' in the Moravians (Welch, 210). Extended visits to Moravian centres in Germany followed; he was received into the church in 1743 and ordained in January 1747. In the same month he proposed to Elizabeth Collins (1725-1801), and they subsequently married on 3 February 1747 at Herrnhaag, Germany. 
Okely returned to England during 1747 and laboured as a minister mainly at Bedford and Bristol. While he was minister at Dukinfield (1755-6), near Manchester, the poet John Byrom became an influential acquaintance. In May 1755 Elizabeth Okely was ordained deaconess of the Moravian church at Bethelsdorf, Germany. In 1757 an inner crisis caused Okely to 'retreat' to Bedford. 'I cannot preach because I have not faith', he explained to John Wesley a year later, after a brief foray with him to Ireland ('Letters of... John Wesley', 4.34). Two interviews with William Law in 1760, however, led to intensive study of his works and those by Jakob Boehme (1575-1623), the Lutheran theosophist. This marked a new beginning, and Okely retained the greatest respect for these two mystics. 
Two attempts by Okely to find 'useful' employment failed. He was refused Anglican ordination in 1763, which meant that the offer by Lord Dartmouth of the curacy of Olney, Buckinghamshire, was closed, and, later, a post at the countess of Huntingdon's college was also denied him. His conduct in seeking a living in other churches dismayed the tolerant Moravians, but he had run out of options and needed to provide for his family's education. Okely emerged from this crisis in 1767 as an untypical Moravian and he moved to Northampton, where he cared for a small society and assisted in the development of others nearby. Three years later he led ceremonies, endorsed by the presence of Moravian dignitaries and a large crowd, that opened the chapel in the town. 
A fervent advocate of the spiritual way and of unity among Christians, Okely's extempore preaching attracted a select following. William Bull and John Ryland (1753-1825) were among the dissenting ministers in the neighbourhood with whom he established a warm relationship. Okely was a bibliophile and master of German; at Northampton, where he spent the rest of his life, he applied the fruits of his 'long and dear-bought experience' to writing edifying works and making extracts in manuscript from authors he deemed 'truly spiritual' (Okely, 'Memoirs of... Jacob Behmen' [Boehme], 4.vi). His translations from the writings of Boehme and John Englebrecht (1599-1642) of Brunswick are among his most substantial publications. His fondness for mystics extended to Tauler, the fourteenth-century Dominican, whose 'Evangelical Conversion' he translated, and to St John of the Cross (1542-1591), whose life he described as 'amazing light in the Midst of Popish Darkness' (F. Okely to W. Bull, 26 Nov 1782, Bull MS 3097, 65). 
Okely's constant wish to assist others towards finding faith was realized when the young William Carey, later the pioneer of Baptist missions overseas, read his versification from Law's writings in 'Seasonally Alarming and... Exhilarating Truths' (1774). His 'Dawnings of the Everlasting Gospel-Light' (1775), a collection of letters written in the early 1740s, gives a useful insight into what Okely and other young Englishmen then found particularly appealing in Moravian evangelicalism. 
In early May 1794 Okely preached at Bedford for the last time. He was seized with a paralytic stroke and died there on 9 May. He was buried on 15 May at the Moravian burial-ground in Bedford. His widow survived him until her death on 29 December 1801. Of their children, their second son, William (1762-1830), a physician at Northampton, later became a Moravian minister. William's grandson, William Sebastian Okely, was the first Cambridge MA who was not a member of the established church (Venn, 'Alum. Cant.'). 


@@@@@


doc= 20664


Okeover, John (bap. 1595?, d. 1663?), organist and composer, was probably the John Oker baptized at St Michael's, Worcester, on 7 October 1595, son of John Oker (died 1620), a local builder, and his wife, Anne. Treasurer's accounts at Worcester Cathedral for 1611 refer to a John Oker as a senior chorister (a treble), though accounts for immediately following years relegate him to the bottom of the ranks, presumably owing to the breaking of his treble voice. Such a state of affairs would be entirely commensurate with a boy born about 1595, and the Worcester treble may well be synonymous with the St Michael's John Oker. If so, he would have received his musical instruction from Thomas Tomkins, organist and master of the choristers at Worcester from 1597. Recent researches into property records in Gloucester and Wells spanning the period 1627-1660 have raised the distinct possibility that there were two (or even three) related composers named John Okeover, the first of whom would have died at Wells about 1640 (Scrase); if this is true the Gloucester Okeover may have been that composer's son. 
When his father died on 3 January 1620, Okeover -- then aged twenty-five -- did not inherit his business, which was bequeathed jointly to the widow and an elder brother, Samuel, a fact that perhaps suggests that by this date John had moved elsewhere to pursue a career in music. This may be confirmed by a carving of 1616 in the wall of the organ loft at Winchester College, which notes that 'M IO. OKER', or John Oker, was organist, and an entry in the papers of William, second Lord Petre, of Ingatestone Hall, Essex, which describes music books 'all of which were placed in the charge of John Oker June 1616 with a chest of vialls' (Essex RO, MS D/DP.E.2/8). If these refer to the composer, then he had already gained valuable experience prior to taking up the position of vicar-choral and organist at Wells Cathedral (in succession to Richard Browne) on 16 February 1620. 
In 1625 Okeover was made master of the choristers at Wells, thereafter performing occasional duties as receiver, senior, and escheator. His relationship with the dean and chapter later deteriorated owing to differences of opinion regarding the precise application of the 'Book of Common Prayer' in choral services. According to Anthony Wood, Okeover graduated BMus from New College, Oxford, on 5 July 1633. By about this time he appears to have married Elizabeth, daughter of John Beaumont, a member of a well-known family in Wells, who left legacies to his daughter and to Okeover in his will of 5 March 1634. From the mid-1630s he evidently developed links with Gloucester Cathedral, where he became organist and master of the choristers in 1640. 
Following the Restoration, Okeover returned to Wells. The account books there contain no references to him after 1663, in which year he probably died. His surviving compositions include a handful of anthems (of which only one is complete) and nineteen pieces for viols in three and five parts. The geographical spread of the manuscript sources of his compositions suggests that Okeover's reputation was local rather than national, though he was nevertheless a competent practitioner of his craft. 


@@@@@


doc= 20665


Okes, Richard (1797-1888), college head, was the son of Thomas Verney Okes, a surgeon in extensive practice at Cambridge. Of his twenty children, Richard was the nineteenth, and was born at Cambridge on 25 December 1797. Richard Porson, the Greek scholar, was a visitor at the house, and took a kindly interest in young Richard. Educated on the foundation at Eton College, where he was contemporary with William Mackworth Praed, Edward Stanley (later Lord Derby, the premier), E. B. Pusey, and Shelley (who was some years his senior), he proceeded in 1817 to a scholarship at King's College, Cambridge. He was Browne's medallist in 1819 and 1820, graduating BA in 1822, MA in 1825, and DD in 1848. He was a fellow of King's from 1820 to 1826, when he married Mary Elizabeth, daughter of the late Thomas Sibthorpe of Guildford. They had a daughter, Julia Mary Anna. 
Okes had been ordained in 1822 and was appointed assistant master at Eton in 1823, and lower master in 1838. During the years of his mastership, and afterwards at Cambridge, he was a conspicuous figure in the school and college world, and innumerable anecdotes grew up round his marked and vivid personality. Many generations of Etonians carried away a lively recollection of his dry and caustic wit, his shrewd remarks, his slow and deliberate speech, his inimitable Latin quotations, drawn chiefly from familiar sources, such as Horace or the Eton Latin grammar, and his curious punctiliousness about minutiae of school discipline, usages, and phraseology. He was a successful tutor, having at times as many as ninety pupils, and impressed his colleagues, as well as the boys, with a strong sense of his painstaking accuracy. During the latter part of Dr Keate's headmastership he took much interest in the improvement of geographical studies by the introduction of the 'Compendium of Ancient and Modern Geography' (1831) by Aron Arrowsmith the younger, to which he contributed most of the illustrative notes. 
On his election to the provostship of King's College in 1850, one of Okes's first acts (1 May 1851) was to abandon the privilege which entitled members of King's College to take the BA degree without examination. The wisdom of this reform was proved by the success of King's men in the tripos lists. This important innovation, however, marked the limit of his reforming zeal. Although his provostship coincided with the introduction of great changes in the university and his college, Okes was a conservative in principle and feeling and could not always agree with reforms such as the opening of King's to men from schools other than Eton; he nevertheless took part loyally in the introduction and conduct of such changes and presided over the college with much dignity and kindliness for thirty-eight years. The year following his appointment as provost he filled the office of vice-chancellor, but after the expiration of his year of office he could never again be induced to serve. He was the editor of a new series of 'Musae Etonenses' for 1796-1833 (2 vols., 1859-69), which he enriched with sketches of the authors written in Latin, full of felicitous and witty phrases. The heraldic window in the school museum at Eton was his gift in conjunction with Dr E. C. Hawtrey. He was chairman of the Cambridge Waterworks Company from 1858 to 1887, and was a JP for the borough of Cambridge. He died at The Lodge, King's College, Cambridge, on 25 November 1888, and was buried in King's College chapel. His wife predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 20666


Okey, John (bap. 1606, d. 1662), parliamentarian soldier and regicide, was the sixth child and second son of William Okey of St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, and his wife, Margaret Wetherley. The Okey family owned property in London and possessed a coat of arms. John was baptized on 24 August 1606 at St Giles-in-the-Fields, and he married Susanna Pearson in the same church on 21 January 1630. By 1640 he was the proprietor of a ships' chandler's business near the Tower of London and, according to the republican writer Edmund Ludlow, was a citizen of London. The Oxford antiquarian Anthony Wood, who suggested he was employed as a humble drayman and stoker before the civil war, almost certainly underestimated his social origins. After the death of his first wife Okey married in 1658 Mary (1629-1697), the widow of John Blackwell. Okey possessed a radical religious outlook, and worshipped as both a Baptist and a Congregationalist. 
At the start of the civil war Okey enlisted in the earl of Essex's parliamentarian army and served first as a quartermaster and then as a captain of horse. He was later a major in Hesilrige's regiment and in April 1643 he took part in the defence of Lichfield. On the formation of the New Model Army in 1645 he was appointed colonel of a regiment of dragoons formerly commanded by John Lilburne. Later that year he fought at the battle of Naseby, where he saved the day for John Butler's cavalry regiment, which was in danger of being routed by Prince Rupert's cavalry. In a communication written after the battle he declared that the parliamentarians 'should magnifie the name of our God that did remember a poore handfull of dispised men, whom they had thought to have swallowed up before them' (Tibbutt, 11). Later in 1645 he fought at Burroughbridge and Bath in Somerset and at the siege of Bristol, where he was captured by the royalist garrison but released after the city's surrender. He was later present at the siege of Exeter. 
During the upsurge of political activism in the New Model Army following its victory in the first civil war, Okey's regiment was not one of the conspicuous centres of radicalism. While it did elect agitators in June 1647 it declined to appoint 'new agents' a few months later and in December a number of the troops presented a loyal address to the commander of the army, Thomas Fairfax. During the second civil war in 1648 Okey and his regiment served in south Wales and took part in the battle of St Fagans and the siege of Pembroke Castle. At the end of that year he entered London with Thomas Fairfax. Okey was named one of the commissioners for Charles I's trial; subsequently he attended most of the court's sittings and signed the king's death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. He was one of the army officers charged with overseeing the arrangements for the subsequent execution. 
In the spring of 1649 Okey and his regiment were among the soldiers loyal to the high command who pursued the mutinying Leveller troops through the Thames valley before defeating them at Burford in Oxfordshire. Okey was subsequently awarded an honorary MA degree by Oxford University for his part in their suppression. The same year he attempted to remove from his regiment one of his captains, Francis Freeman, whom he believed upheld Ranter beliefs and whom he accused of singing bawdy songs. Freeman's men backed their captain and the matter was eventually brought before Cromwell, who prevailed upon Freeman to resign his commission. Freeman subsequently outlined his version of events in the pamphlet 'Light Vanquishing Darkness'. 
Okey travelled to Scotland in 1650 and remained in service there under first Cromwell and later Monck until the end of 1651. In August 1651 he arrested several Scottish commissioners who were raising forces near Glasgow and he subsequently took part in the siege of Stirling, the storming of Dundee, and the occupation of Aberdeen. He returned to England in late 1651 or early 1652 and in February 1652 presented a petition to parliament calling for a number of religious reforms, including measures to propagate the gospel and reform the parochial ministry. The following August he was one of the officers who presented to the Rump Parliament the army petition which called upon it to proceed quickly with a range of constitutional and legal reforms. When Cromwell forcibly expelled the Rump in April 1653 Okey's regiment subscribed to the army 'Remonstrance' supporting the action, but Okey himself was critical of the methods used by the lord general and from that point on he became increasingly suspicious of him. At the end of 1653 he firmly opposed the 'Instrument of government' which established the protectorate, and throughout the remainder of the 1650s he displayed a consistent republican outlook, resisting all efforts to impose a more conservative, monarchical constitution upon the country. 
Okey returned to Scotland in the spring of 1654 and subsequently accompanied Monck on his sweep through the highlands the following summer. In September 1654 he was returned to the first protectorate parliament as MP for Linlithgow, Queens Ferry, Perth, Culross, and Stirling. He refused, however, to take the engagement to the 'Instrument of government' which was imposed upon the members by Cromwell a few days after the opening of parliament, and as a consequence was prevented from sitting. He began instead to attend secret meetings of those opposed to the instrument, and in October 1654 he helped to draw up 'The Humble Petition of Several Colonels of the Army', a document which was highly critical of Cromwell and the protectorate and called for the summoning of a free parliament. For this breach of army discipline he was arrested in November 1654, tried by court martial, and condemned to death. His sentence, however, was commuted by Cromwell, and he was instead cashiered from the army. 
Okey retired to Bedfordshire, where he had acquired substantial crown property during the early 1650s, including the honour of Ampthill, the manor of Millbrook, Brogborough Park and Lodge, and lands at Leighton Buzzard. He also owned a share of Newmarket House, Cambridgeshire. The combined value of the properties was about $8000. As the Long Parliament had settled upon him lands in Scotland worth $300 per annum, he was by now a wealthy man. He also owned a residence known as Barbers Barn at Hackney in Middlesex, as well as the lease of a number of tenements in Old Street, London, belonging to St Bartholomew's Hospital, of which he was a governor. He lived both at Hackney and at Brogborough Round House in Bedfordshire during the 1650s, and was active as a JP in both Bedfordshire and Middlesex, and as an ejector of scandalous ministers in the former county. He was also probably involved in the establishment of John Bunyan's Baptist church in Bedford in 1653. 
In July 1656 Okey was summoned before the council and questioned about his attendance at secret meetings in London called by the government's Fifth Monarchist and republican opponents. He was released with a warning and the following month was decisively defeated in the poll in Somerset for the second protectorate parliament. In early 1657 he strongly opposed parliament's plan to make Cromwell king and signed 'The Humble and Serious Testimony of Many Hundreds of Godly People in the County of Bedford', a petition against the move organized by the Bedfordshire gathered churches. During 1657 he attended a number of the republican meetings convened by John Wildman at The Nonsuch inn in Bow Street, London, and in April of that year was again arrested and held for several days after the government discovered that Thomas Venner and his Fifth Monarchist followers were planning an armed insurrection. 
Following the death of Oliver Cromwell in 1658 Okey was elected to Richard Cromwell's parliament for Bedfordshire. After Richard Cromwell's resignation and the fall of the protectorate, the republican members of the returned Rump reappointed him to the command of a regiment. At the end of 1659 he supported the Rump in its quarrel with Lambert and Fleetwood, but his new regiment refused to follow him against them and he was subsequently dismissed from his post by the council of army officers. He remained opposed to the army leadership and in early December was involved in a failed attempt to seize control of the Tower of London, after which he took refuge with the fleet. When the Rump was recalled for a second time later that month, Okey once more recovered his commission and on 26 December he was appointed one of the seven parliamentarian commissioners responsible for the running of the army. The following day he attempted forcibly to prevent the readmission of the secluded members to parliament, an action for which he and several other officers were subsequently charged with assault. In February 1660 Monck again dismissed him from the army, handing his regiment over to Colonel Rossiter. The following month a scurrilous ballad, 'Colonel Okie's Lamentation, or, A Rumper Cashiered', was published and circulated in London. Fearing that Monck intended to bring about the return of the Stuarts, Okey settled his differences with Lambert and joined him in his attempted 'coup d'etat'. He was with Lambert when he was captured at Daventry but managed to escape himself. 
At the Restoration Okey fled to Germany with Sir John Barkstead. In 1661, however, he travelled to the Netherlands where, along with Barkstead and Miles Corbet, he was arrested by the English ambassador, Sir George Downing, and sent back to England. Downing's action was widely regarded as treacherous, as he was a former associate of Okey and had acted as a chaplain to his dragoons. Following a brief trial Okey was executed on 19 April 1662. Three of his letters from prison and his scaffold speech and prayers were published that year in 'The Speeches, Discourses and Prayers of Colonel John Barkstead, Colonel John Okey and Mr Miles Corbet'. He died professing his belief in the rightness of his actions and his commitment to Congregationalism, and declared that he was confident that 'that cause which we first took up the sword for, which was for righteousness and for justice and for the advancement of a godly magistracy and a godly ministry (however some men turned [it] about for their own ends), shall yet revive again. ('Speeches, Discourses and Prayers')' On the grounds that Okey had shown remorse for his involvement in the death of Charles I, and had advised those attending his own execution to submit peaceably to the Stuarts, Charles II initially agreed that Okey's mutilated corpse could be returned to his widow, Mary, for burial. The funeral was to have taken place at St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney, but when the government learned that a large crowd was expected to attend, it changed its mind and Okey was interred instead within the Tower of London. 


@@@@@


doc= 20667


Okey, Samuel (b. 1741?, d. in or after 1780), mezzotint engraver and printseller, was the son of Samuel Okey ('fl'. 1721-1756), printseller, and his wife, probably called Mary Atterbury. He may have been the Samuel Okey baptized at St Stephen, Coleman Street, London, on 17 April 1741. Samuel Okey senior appraised the court of orphans inventory of Thomas Bowles in 1721 and in the years about 1750 published a number of prints from his shop at the back of St Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. In competitions held by the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce Samuel Okey junior won an 8 guinea prize for a mezzotint head in 1765 and a 5 guinea prize in 1767. He exhibited mezzotints with the Society of Artists in 1767 and 1768 and published a portrait of the actor William Powell in 1770. In that year he also engraved and published 'Sweets of Liberty' after John Collett. F. G. Stephens described this large mezzotint as a satire on Wilkesite opposition to supposed court tyranny, but the verses clearly celebrate Wilkes and liberty, and the publication suggests that Okey's sympathies lay with the radicals. It was sold from the address of Charles Reak in Butchers' Row, Temple Bar. Soon after, Okey and Reak both emigrated to Newport, Rhode Island, where they set up shop as stationers and printsellers on the Parade and published a number of prints, the earliest of which is dated October 1773. Okey's portrait of Samuel Adams (1775), leader of the radical party at Boston, was engraved with verses that imply strongly that the publishers were not loyalists. By 1780 both had vanished without trace. 


@@@@@


doc= 20668


Okham, John (d. 1327/8), administrator, is of unknown origins. He is first recorded in 1296, as a clerk in the king's wardrobe, where much of his career was to be spent, and of which by June 1308 he had been promoted to be cofferer. He held that office until July 1309, and again from February 1311 to September 1314. Okham appears to have aroused considerable distrust, for the second set of ordinances of 1311 demanded that he be dismissed. However, the demand was ignored by Edward II; Okham attended the king when he withdrew to Yorkshire at the end of that year, and apparently accompanied him to France in 1313. Only in 1314, after Edward's position had been weakened by defeat at Bannockburn, was Okham obliged to leave the royal household. But once the king began to recover lost ground Okham returned to office; on 18 June 1317 he was appointed a baron of the exchequer, and was subsequently exempted by name from attempts to reduce the number of barons. He was paid as a baron until Easter 1320. He was not disgraced, for having been summoned to parliaments as a royal councillor in 1318 and 1320 he was summoned again in the same capacity in 1321 and 1322. 
In January 1324 Okham was called upon to account for wardrobe receipts from the beginning of the reign, a move in the current programme of exchequer reform, and not a sign of animosity towards him -- in 1325 he was given custody of the deanship of St Martin's-le-Grand, London, where he was already a canon. There is no evidence that he became a priest, however, although he had been ordained acolyte in 1309. By then he had been presented by the king to West Horsley church, Hampshire, to which he added Broad Chalk, Wiltshire, in 1312 and Nether Wallop, Hampshire, in 1314. His wealth, whether derived from office or from his livings, enabled him to make some substantial loans, suggesting that the mistrust felt for him by the ordainers may have been due to suspicions of corruption, as well as of undue influence with the king. 
Following the deposition of Edward II the new regime made further efforts to scrutinize earlier wardrobe receipts, which in 1327 led to Okham's being ordered to attend in the exchequer and answer for money that had passed through his hands. He was to die in debt to the king, but no evidence appears to have been found that he had been guilty of embezzlement. Okham was probably still alive on 20 July 1327, but had died by 27 October 1328, leaving goods and chattels valued at $114 18's'. They may have included the book (a work on the art of 'dictamen', or epistolary composition) that in 1311 he lent to a colleague in the wardrobe, specifying that it was to be returned within a week and paid for with a goose; if held for longer, interest was to be payable not in money but in geese, at the rate of one per week. 


@@@@@


doc= 20669


Oking, Robert (d. in or before 1559), Church of England clergyman, is first recorded in 1521 as vicar of Hardwick, Cambridgeshire. He studied at Jesus College, Cambridge, where he proceeded BCL in 1524-5. He seems to have transferred to Trinity Hall, since a letter of 1538 refers to him as of the 'bringing up' of Stephen Gardiner, who became master there in 1525. In the latter year he became rector of St Nicholas, Feltwell, Norfolk. Commissary of the university in 1529, he became DCL in 1534. In the latter year he was appointed commissary to John Capon (or Salcot), bishop of Bangor. Almost at once he was caught up in a power struggle between William Glyn of Glynllifon and Sir Richard Bulkeley, which in 1535 resulted in his being accused by the diocesan registrar of authorizing the sale of indulgences. Bulkeley wrote to Thomas Cromwell on Oking's behalf, saying that he had heard nothing but good of him, and that he 'spoke as much at all times in the annulling of the bishop of Rome's authority as any man I know in these parts' (Williams, 66). This testimony notwithstanding, Oking remained a marked man, and at Christmas 1536, according to Bulkeley, he was in danger of being murdered in Bangor Cathedral as he held his consistory there. 
In May and June 1539 Oking attended Cromwell's vicegerential synod which debated what would become the 'Act of Six Articles'. He himself at first supported the evangelical opposition, but eventually voted with the conservative majority. Shortly afterwards Bishop Salcot, who had tried unavailingly to obtain preferment for Oking in 1538, took his commissary with him when he was translated to Salisbury in July. In July 1543 he took part in the trial at Windsor of the composer John Marbeck and other suspected heretics. By 16 January 1544 he had been presented to the prebend of Ratfyn, on 20 July 1546 he was installed as archdeacon of Salisbury, and on 23 August 1547 he was admitted a canon residentiary. In the latter year's convocation Oking was among those appointed to draw up a statute regulating the payment of tithes in cities and towns; he was also in the minority that opposed the legalization of clerical marriage. When Thomas Hancock preached against superstition in St Thomas's, Salisbury, Oking and Edmund Steward, chancellor of Winchester, walked out of the church and were reproved by the preacher. 
In spite of his conservatism on marriage and other issues, Oking himself married when it became lawful for him to do so. Consequently he was deprived of his Salisbury benefices in 1554, resigning his house in the cathedral close on 26 May. But his wife may have died, or he may have separated from her, for on 11 October 1556 Oking was presented to the prebend of Highleigh in Chichester Cathedral, a living that carried with it the mastership of the grammar school. He also became rector of Fishbourne. He had probably died by 5 May 1559, when a new rector was presented, and certainly by 23 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 20670


Olaf Guthfrithson (d. 941), king of Dublin and of Northumbria, was the son of Guthfrith (d. 934) ['see under 'Sihtric Caech], a grandson of Ivarr. Ragnall Guthfrithson was his brother. From his father, who died as king of Dublin, having also been briefly king of Northumbria, Olaf had inherited interests in both Ireland and Britain; the latter would lead to his defeat at the battle of 'Brunanburh' (937) by the English king AEthelstan. Olaf first appears in the Irish chronicles in 933, when he sailed a fleet into Strangford Lough and plundered Armagh on 10 November. He then joined with the king of Ulaid, Matudan mac Aeda, to raid as far as Sliab Beagh and Muchnoe (Monaghan). There the allies were confronted by Muirchertach mac Neill, and in the ensuing battle Olaf was defeated with the loss of several hundreds of men. Upon the death of his father, Guthfrith, in 934 Olaf assumed the kingship of the men of Dublin. The following year he attacked his northern neighbours Sil nAeda Slaine, during which he destroyed their fortress at Lagore (Meath) and plundered the cave of Knowth. Olaf then turned his attention westwards and began his campaigns to bring the midlands under his control. The army of Dublin raided the important monastery of Clonmacnoise in 936, and Olaf quartered his troops there for two nights. In revenge the high-king Donnchad mac Flainn burned Dublin. The next year, 937, on 1 August, Olaf attacked Lough Ree, which had been a base for the vikings of Limerick since 931. Olaf ensured its demise when he destroyed the boats after capturing the rival captain and his troops. 
Olaf's Irish campaigns were interrupted when he led his troops to Britain. His personal sense of grievance against the English king AEthelstan, who had expelled his father from Northumbria, in addition to his desire to take the province himself, led him to fight AEthelstan at the battle of 'Brunanburh'. Olaf was joined in that battle by the Scots and by the Britons of Strathclyde. This unexpected alliance had been promoted by the Celts themselves, and a Welsh poem 'Armes Prydein' ('Prophecy of Britain') is a call to arms for an alliance of the Welsh, vikings, and Gaels against AEthelstan. The ensuing battle is best known through the Old English poem preserved in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' and through semi-legendary accounts such as that in 'Egils saga'; it was a murderous and hotly contested fight, but in the end Olaf and his allies were defeated. Olaf fled back to Dublin 'in ships with nailed sides' as noted in the Old English poem. His defeat at 'Brunanburh' gave courage to his Irish foes, and in 938 territory controlled by Dublin, as far as the River Greece, was attacked by the high-king Donnchad mac Flainn and Muirchertach mac Neill. The vikings who attacked Ailech and briefly held Muirchertach in 939 might have been Olaf and his troops, seeking revenge. Olaf raided the monastery of Kilcullen in 939, and soon afterwards left Dublin. While one chronicle claims that his departure was due to divine intervention, the real reason was an invitation from the men of Northumbria who, after the death of AEthelstan, invited Olaf to return to Britain as their king. He had little time to enjoy this prize for in 941, after raiding St Baldred's Church at Tyninghame, he died. Little can be said of his personal life. In later medieval records his wife is called Alfgith, daughter of Orm, but he is also said to have been the son-in-law of the Scottish king Constantine II, his ally at 'Brunanburh'. His children might have included the Maccus, son of Olaf, who killed the Norwegian prince and king of Northumbria Erik Bloodaxe in 954, and the Guthfrith, son of Olaf, who died in 961. 


@@@@@


doc= 20671


Olaf Sihtricson (c.926-981), king of Dublin and of Northumbria, was the son of Sihtric Caech (d. 927) and, although her name and origin is uncertain, one record claims that his mother was named Orgiue (perhaps Eadgifu) and that she was the daughter of the Anglo-Saxon king Edward the Elder. Olaf's career at the height of the viking age would be, for a time, triumphant before ending ultimately in failure, but his legend grew after his death, reaching an apogee as the model for Havelok the Dane. His father, Sihtric, had ruled as king of Northumbria since 921, after a reign as king of Dublin; in January 926, the West Saxon king AEthelstan gave to him his sister in marriage. After Sihtric's sudden death in 927, and the annexation of Northumbria by AEthelstan, it is assumed that Olaf, who may have been born at York, was removed from Britain to Ireland. 
In 941 Olaf was accepted as king by the Northumbrians, and he led a raid on Tamworth in 943, where he was victorious. Edmund, the Anglo-Saxon king who had ceded Northumbria to Olaf's predecessor, did not allow this challenge to go unanswered. He besieged Olaf, together with Archbishop Wulfstan of York, in Leicester; the pair were able to avoid capture when they fled the town under the cover of darkness. A desire to forestall attacks from the south, and to have his kingship recognized, may have played some small part in Olaf's decision to convert to Christianity in that same year; his sponsor was Edmund. This period of cordial relations did not long endure, and in the following year Edmund invaded Northumbria. Olaf and another noble named Ragnall Guthfrithson were driven from the province. Olaf then retired to Ireland, and was made king of Dublin, in the place of a Blacair Guthfrithson. He promptly allied with a claimant to the Irish high-kingship named Congalach mac Mael Mithig of the Ui Neill dynasty of Sil nAeda Slaine. In 945 they attacked an invading army that belonged to Congalach's rival, another Ui Neill prince named Ruaidri ua Canannain of Cenel Conaill, in the territory of Conailli (Louth); Olaf and Congalach were victorious. During the temporary lull in the hostilities in 946, and without regard for his newly declared beliefs, Olaf raided churches in Meath and Westmeath as well as along the River Shannon, culminating with the sack of the great monastery of Clonmacnoise. This period of leisure came to an end in 947, when Ruaidri ua Canannain personally led an army against Congalach and Olaf, in revenge for the defeat of his army two years earlier. In a battle fought at Slane, Congalach and Olaf were routed, with an immense slaughter of the men of Dublin. The defeat may have encouraged Olaf's rivals, for in 948 the Blacair whom he had forced to abdicate Dublin three years earlier was in control of Dublin. Blacair attacked Congalach, but was defeated with 1600 men killed or captured. 
Events now turned in Olaf's favour. During his absence from Northumbria a member of the Norse royal house, Erik Bloodaxe, had established himself in Northumbria in opposition to the West Saxons; Erik was forced to abdicate, temporarily as it transpired, and in 949 Olaf was invited to return by the Northumbrians. This second reign was no less fraught than the first, for Olaf had to face two invasions from powerful foes. The first, in 949, was led by Mael Coluim I, king of Scots, as far as the River Tees in what was a great victory for the Scots. The second invasion was in 951 and the attacking force was a coalition of the Scots, Anglo-Saxons, and Britons of Strathclyde; this time, however, Olaf was victorious. The real threat came from rivals, and in 952 Erik Bloodaxe returned to Northumbria. Olaf was deposed in favour of Erik, who reigned for two years until he was slain in Westmorland by a Maccus son of Olaf, who could have been a son of Olaf Sihtricson, or of his predecessor, Olaf Guthfrithson, or of another Olaf altogether. 
Olaf returned to Dublin, where he spent the rest of his career. There was a new order in Ireland, for his old foe Ruaidri ua Canannain had been slain in 950, and his ally Congalach was now the undisputed high-king. This alliance, however, was fated for an unhappy end, and by 956 Congalach's success as high-king had begun to alarm Leinster and Dublin. Olaf plotted with the men of Leinster to lure Congalach to a spot known only as 'Tech Guigenn' located somewhere near the River Liffey, where he was slain in the company of his retinue. After this Olaf was determined not to become a subject of the powerful Ui Neill princes, so the next quarter century was devoted largely to conflict with the various branches of that dynasty, and there is also some evidence that suggests the expansion of his lordship into those lands. In 960 a dynast of Clann Cholmain named Carlus son of Conn, a descendant of the early tenth-century high-king Flann Sinna was slain at Dublin. In 967 Olaf and Cerball mac Lorcain, a prince of Leinster, raided Brega, in revenge for which Domnall ua Neill of Cenel nEogain, Congalach's successor in the high-kingship, led an army to Dublin where he unsuccessfully besieged the fortress for several months. Domnall was a special threat to Olaf because he, unlike his contemporaries among the Irish, relied on his fleet in his campaigns. In the face of this threat Olaf resurrected his alliance with Sil nAeda Slaine, this time with Congalach's son Domnall. In 970 Olaf and Domnall attacked the high-king at Kilmona (Westmeath), where the allies won a celebrated victory. Although Domnall ua Neill escaped with his life, several of his allies did not, including the kings of Ulaid and Airgialla, together with several other lesser princes. Olaf also had an ally in Murchad mac Finn, king of Leinster, whose daughter Gormflaith he married; in 970 they plundered Kells, and defeated the southern Ui Neill at Ardmulchan, Meath. 
Olaf was not without concerns. In 964 he had been defeated by the men of Osraige at Innistiogue (Kilkenny). A new enemy appeared in 975 in the person of Mael Sechnaill II Mor of Clann Cholmain, who was to succeed Domnall ua Neill as high-king in 980, when he attacked Dublin and, although he could not breach the fortress, savaged the town's sacred grove known as Caill Tomair ('Thor's Wood'). A more worrisome attack had come in 962 when 
These relatively minor mishaps made little impression on Olaf, who apparently feared neither human nor divine foes. He already had offended an important element of Irish society -- the church -- with raids on religious houses in the neighbourhood of Dublin, such as attacks on Kildare in 964 and a second in 967, when Abbot Muiredach mac Faelain was slain. After 975 he began to war on two fronts. In 976 a Dublin force captured Augaire mac Tuathal, king of Leinster. The following year Olaf ordered the slaying of Muirchertach, the son of the high-king Domnall ua Neill, and Congalach, the son of his former ally Domnall mac Congalach. Augaire's freedom must have been secured in the meantime, for in 978 he was defeated and slain by Olaf at the battle of Belan (Kildare). Belan was a significant victory for Olaf, for the list of the notable slain includes princes throughout the province, and was matched in 979 with the capture of the provincial king of Leinster, Domnall Cloen, who remained in captivity until the following year. This was a personal vendetta, for Domnall had slain Olaf's father-in-law, Murchad mac Finn, in 972, in circumstances of treachery. 
By 980 Olaf could be considered one of the most powerful princes in Ireland. By the standards of the day he was an old man, well past his half-century, and his sons began to play a more active role. The continuing rise to power of Mael Sechnaill was troubling and the decision was made to take the fight to him, with the Dublin troops to be led by Olaf's son Ragnall. Also in that force were troops from the kingdom of the Isles, and the men of Leinster, whose presence was probably compelled by the holding of their king as hostage at Dublin. Battle was joined at the ceremonial site of Tara; neither side emerged unscathed, but it went the worse for the invaders. Ragnall and the law speaker of Dublin were both slain, alongside a multitude of others, including princes of Leinster. Mael Sechnaill followed the fleeing troops back to the fortress of Dublin. After a siege of three days the stronghold capitulated and agreed to terms. The price was steep. The lands of the southern Ui Neill dynasties were freed from the payment of tribute, all the Irish hostages (including Domnall Cloen) were released in addition to the payment of 2000 head of cattle, jewels, and treasures. In the aftermath of this disaster Olaf abdicated in favour of his son Gluniairn, who was Mael Sechnaill's half-brother, and, seeking comfort in religion, he retired to the monastery of St Columba on Iona, where he died in 981. 
A summary of political events needs to be complemented with recognition of Olaf as a patron of commerce and the arts. Dublin thrived during his reign, and was becoming one of the main trading towns of north-western Europe. Olaf's sobriquet 'cuaran' ('shoe') refers to the production of footwear at Dublin, evidence for which survives in the shoe pieces uncovered during excavations at Wood Quay. Olaf is also the first viking leader in Ireland for whom there is an indication of a court culture. He was a patron of the Icelandic poet Thorgils Grouse-poet and the Irish poet Cinaed ua hArtacain, who composed verses on the legendary history of the Hill of Skreen. His love of poetry and song may have inspired the legend of Olaf as a poet. William of Malmesbury claims that Olaf was present at the battle of 'Brunanburh' (fought in 937), when he disguised himself as an itinerant poet, or skald, in order to spy out the battle order of the English. Unfortunately for a good story, there is little indication that Olaf was even present at that battle. 
Equally important was the fame and longevity of Olaf's dynasty. Although his family lost control of Dublin during the eleventh century, they ruled in the kingdom of the Isles for several centuries; in the seventeenth century the merchants of Dublin claimed to be his descendants. The names of two of Olaf's wives have survived. One was Dunlaith, the daughter of the famous Ui Neill prince, Muirchertach of the Leather Cloaks; their son was the Gluniairn who succeeded his father and reigned until his murder in 989. The other known wife of Olaf was Gormflaith, daughter of Murchad mac Finn, the provincial king of Leinster; their son was Sihtric (Sigtryggr Olafsson), who succeeded his half-brother Gluniairn and died in 1042. Other sons of Olaf included: Ragnall, who was slain at the battle of Tara in 980; Harald, who was slain at the battle of Glenn Mama in 999; Dubgall, who was slain at the battle of Clontarf in 1014; and possibly another son named Sihtric who is claimed to have raided Kells in 970. Olaf also had three daughters whose names have been preserved: Radnailt, who was the mother of Muirchertach ua Congalaich of Sil nAeda Slaine; Mael Muire, who was the wife of Mael Sechnaill II Mor and died in 1021; and Gytha, who married first an Anglo-Saxon noble and then, after being widowed, married the Norwegian king Olaf Tryggvason. 


@@@@@


doc= 20672


Olaf (1173/4-1237), king of Man and the Isles, was the son of Godred Olafsson ['see under 'Godred Crovan], king of Man and the Isles (died 1187) and Fingola, daughter of Mac Lochlainn and granddaughter of Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn, 'king of Ireland' (d. 1166). He was also known as Olaf the Black and Olaf Godredsson. Godred died on 10 November 1187, leaving three sons, Ragnvald, Olaf, and Ivar. Since Ragnvald had been born out of wedlock, Godred had instructed that his legitimate son Olaf should succeed. But Olaf was only about thirteen years old, and rather than accept a minor as king the Manxmen summoned Ragnvald to the throne in 1188. Olaf was given the island of Lewis for his maintenance, but he became dissatisfied with this poor island and journeyed to Man to seek augmentation of his portion. Ragnvald, however, had Olaf arrested, and then had him imprisoned by William the Lion, king of Scots. There he remained for seven years, until just before his death in 1214 William ordered the release of all his prisoners. Olaf then returned briefly to Man, before setting out on pilgrimage to the shrine of Santiago de Compostela in Spain. On his return he was reconciled to Ragnvald, who married Olaf to Lauon, his own wife's sister. He granted Olaf possession of Lewis as before, and Olaf resumed residence there. 
Olaf cannot have been any more content than previously, and probably looked to Norway for support. At an unspecified date Ragnvald, bishop of the Isles since 1217, summoned a clerical assembly and annulled the marriage of Olaf and Lauon as being within prohibited degrees of relationship. Afterwards Olaf married Christina, daughter of Farquhar Mactaggart, earl of Ross ['see under 'Ross family]. King Ragnvald's wife is said to have taken offence, and to have sent a letter under her husband's seal to her son Godred in Skye, instructing him to arrest and kill Olaf. In 1223 Godred collected an army and attacked Lewis, but Olaf escaped and fled to his father-in-law, the earl of Ross. Olaf and the earl swore alliance and set out to take revenge. Learning that Godred and a few followers were on 'St Columba's Isle', apparently near Skye, they surrounded and attacked them. Godred was taken, blinded, and castrated, allegedly without Olaf's consent. 
Ragnvald had long been feeling the pressure of Olaf's opposition. In 1218-19 he was mending fences with Henry III of England, travelling to England to do homage and to make amends for excesses of his men in England and Ireland. Then in November 1220, Henry III ordered his justiciar of Ireland to assist Ragnvald in the defence of his kingdom. At this time the chieftains of the Hebrides were revolting against Norwegian rule, and in the spring of 1224 it was rumoured at the Scottish court that Norwegian intervention was imminent. But Olaf remained loyal to Norway and his successes that summer removed the necessity for such intervention. He took hostages from all the chieftains and, arriving at Ronaldsway with thirty-two ships, confronted Ragnvald once more. Upon negotiations it was agreed that Ragnvald should retain Man, the title of king, and a part of the Isles, while Olaf should have the remainder. 
Ragnvald now turned for help to Alan, lord of Galloway, the constable of Scotland. In 1225 Ragnvald and Alan mounted an expedition to Skye and Lewis to recover what had been ceded to Olaf. However the Manxmen refused to fight against either Olaf or the people of the Isles, and the expedition returned without achieving anything. Some time afterwards Ragnvald extorted 100 marks from his subjects on pretext of visiting the English king. But with this money he visited Alan of Galloway and contracted a marriage alliance between his daughter and Alan's illegitimate son Thomas. Almost certainly Thomas was intended to succeed as king of Man. The Manxmen revolted against this prospect, and summoned Olaf from the Isles to become king. Thus in 1226 Olaf finally recovered his inheritance and reigned in peace for two years. 
Forced to recognize the weakness of Ragnvald's position, Henry III attempted to broker a peace in 1228. Olaf wrote to Henry, giving details of his case against Ragnvald and requesting Henry to use his influence with the king of Scots to put a stop to raids by Alan of Galloway. In April a safe conduct was granted Olaf to go to England to make peace with Ragnvald. But that same year, while Olaf was on expedition to the Isles, Ragnvald, supported by Alan of Galloway and his brother, Thomas, earl of Atholl, devastated the south of Man. Alan returned to Galloway, but he left officials on the island to collect tribute. On his return, Olaf put these officials to flight; but during the winter Ragnvald mounted a further attack. He destroyed Olaf's fleet anchored off St Patrick's Isle, toured the island, and stayed at Ronaldsway for about forty days. During that time he collected support from the south of the island while Olaf mustered his forces in the northern part. On 14 February 1229 the two sides clashed at Tynwald and Ragnvald was killed. 
But Alan of Galloway still threatened Man. In the spring of 1230 Olaf arrived at the court of King Haakon IV Haakonsson of Norway to seek help, just as the Norwegians were preparing to launch an expedition to pacify the Hebrides. The fleet was intended to install Ospak Asmundsson -- notwithstanding his Scandinavian name a descendant of Somerled of Argyll (died 1164) -- as client king of the Hebrides. Godred Don, a son of King Ragnvald, was one of Ospak's lieutenants. Despite this Olaf agreed to accompany them. They set off, first to Orkney, where they collected reinforcements, and then to Skye, Islay Sound, and Bute. There Ospak was fatally wounded while capturing Rothesay Castle from the Scots. On the approach of Alan's fleet of 200 ships the Norwegians withdrew. Ospak died, and Olaf, taking command of the Norwegian fleet, brought it to Man. There Olaf agreed to partition the kingdom with Godred Don, Olaf retaining Man, while Godred Don received the Hebrides. The following spring the Norwegians departed, having restored their influence in the region. Godred Don was killed while travelling to Lewis and Olaf once more resumed control over the whole kingdom. 
In the summer of 1235 Olaf journeyed to the English court to confer with Henry III. The fruit of this negotiation was revival of an arrangement which had already existed between Ragnvald and the English. In return for homage and for the service of guarding at his own cost the Irish Sea coasts of England and Ireland, Olaf was to receive an annual fee from Ireland of 40 marks, 100 crannocks of wheat, and five tuns of wine. But Olaf remained primarily the client of Norway, and when in 1236 he was commanded to attend the Norwegian court, the English king granted him protection for his possessions. It was a prolonged visit, for in April 1237 he had not yet returned. 
Olaf died on 21 May 1237 on St Patrick's Isle and was buried in St Mary's Abbey, Rushen. He was succeeded in his kingdom by his three sons in turn, Harald (1237-48), Ragnvald (1249), and Magnus (1254-65). 


@@@@@


doc= 20673


Old, John (d. 1557), translator and religious controversialist, was possibly a son of John Olde of Sheriffhales in Shropshire. His early biography is shrouded in obscurity: the date and place of his birth are unknown and little information concerning his formal education has survived. That he was a graduate is undoubted: his contemporaries, and later the historian John Strype, describe Old as a doctor of theology, though none of them gives any indication as to which university he attended. 
The earliest known event of Old's life shows him already closely associated with persons who favoured reform of the English church in a protestant direction. In 1543 he was living in Staffordshire, and between July and December of that year granted shelter to the protestant reformers Thomas Becon and Robert Wisdom after their recantations in London on 8 July. Old had known Becon for a long time, and the two men obviously shared the same religious outlook. Becon describes Old as a man 'ancient in true godliness and Christian life', and implies that Old, like Wisdom and himself, was a member of a persecuted community analogous to the early church saints: 'He was to us, as Jason was to Paul and Silas' (Becon, 422). It seems probable that Old, whom Strype calls 'a teacher of youth as well as a teacher of the gospel', ran a school at this time, and with the help of Becon tutored the sons of the local gentry (Strype, 'Ecclesiastical Memorials', 2/1.47). About 1545, 'impelled by urgent' but undisclosed causes, he left Staffordshire and travelled with Becon into Warwickshire, settling at Coventry (Becon, 424). Once again he invited Becon to share his home, an arrangement that must have brought him into contact with the circle of protestants that Becon is known to have met in the county. This group included Old's friend of many years Hugh Latimer, who had originally converted him from Roman Catholicism to the protestant faith. Latimer stayed regularly at Baxterly Hall, the Warwickshire house of John Glover, where he was visited by Becon and almost certainly by John Old. John Glover's brother Robert was one of the attendants of Lord Ferrers of Chartley, and may possibly have recommended Old to his employer. Certainly by 1546 Old was chaplain to Lord Ferrers, in which capacity on 10 July he was examined at Westminster by the privy council on suspicion of sacramentarianism. After an abject recantation he professed himself 'unfeynedly to receyve the kinges majestes doctrine' and after promising good behaviour he was released ('APC', '1542-7', 479). 
Old's fortunes improved after the establishment of a protestant regime on the accession of Edward VI. In early May 1547 a royal visitation of the church was ordered, and Old was appointed registrar to the team of commissioners who were to visit the dioceses of Peterborough, Lincoln, Oxford, and Coventry and Lichfield. Alongside his duties as registrar he was one of the visitation's preachers, evangelizing on behalf of those protestant reforms that the visitation had been designed to promote. During the same year he took part in the translation of the first volume of the 'Paraphrases' of Erasmus upon the 'New Testament' (published on 31 January 1548) which by order of royal injunctions of 31 July 1547 were to be placed in every parish church in England. Old subsequently accepted a commission from his friend the printer Edward Whitchurch to translate Erasmus's 'Paraphrases' upon seven of St Paul's 'New Testament' epistles. This arduous task, which constituted almost all of a second volume, was completed by mid-1549 and published on 19 August 1549. While executing this commission Old probably lived and worked in Whitchurch's printing shop at Fleet Street in London. On 22 March 1549 he was presented to the vicarage of Cubbington in Warwickshire by the crown. His appointment was due to a recommendation made on his behalf by Hugh Latimer to the duchess of Somerset. In his preface to the second volume of the 'Paraphrases', Old admits his debt, both to his 'singular friend' Hugh Latimer, and to the duchess, to whom he dedicated the work on 15 July 1549. Further ecclesiastical preferments soon followed: on 19 August 1551 Old was granted the prebend of Dernford in Lichfield Cathedral, and on 4 October 1552 he was made a prebendary of the cathedral church at Hereford. 
The accession of the Roman Catholic Queen Mary in 1553 removed the need for caution from those who had always resented Old's appointments and his religion. Clergy who had conformed under the previous regime became openly hostile, threatening him with a prosecution for heresy. At Cubbington the 'malicious force and rage of some unthankful people' (Old, sig. E7'r'), presumably unappreciative Catholic parishioners, contributed to Old's decision to quit his vicarage and ultimately to leave England. He fled abroad probably shortly before 19 November 1554, when he was deprived of his prebend at Lichfield and his living at Cubbington. He later admitted that his departure had been made 'somewhat before extreme trouble came' (ibid., E7'v'), and imputed his precipitancy to doubts about his own constancy in the face of persecution. 
Old probably settled for a time at Emden in East Friesland, and became a citizen there on 6 May 1556. Between 1555 and 1557 he devoted his energies to the propaganda campaign waged by the exile community in Emden against the Catholic regime in England. To this end Old used his considerable skills as an author and a translator to produce works of protestant polemic which were printed in Emden and secretly distributed back in England. 'The Acquital or Purgation of the most Catholyke Prince Edward the VI', Old's first original work, was published at Emden on 7 November 1555. It was followed five months later by his 'A Confession of the Moost Auncient... Catholike Olde Belefe' of April 1556. The aim of both these tracts was to strengthen the commitment of the English to Edward VI's protestant religious settlement, and to prevent their apostasy to Roman Catholicism. The same purpose was served by his translation of Rudolph Gualter's sermons upon Antichrist, a violently anti-papal work that was published the same year. Old also edited for publication at Emden documents written by his persecuted co-religionists in England. The speed with which these works were published after their composition suggests that Old was still in contact with protestants in England who must have smuggled the manuscripts out to him. These included Nicholas Ridley's account of his prison 'conferences' with Hugh Latimer, and possibly Thomas Cranmer's letters to Queen Mary and Drs Martin and Scory; both these works were published in 1556. 
Old left Emden and finally settled at Frankfurt am Main in Germany with his wife (her name is unknown). His name appears on the city tax lists for 15 January 1557, which record that he had no property. As a member of the English stranger church in Frankfurt during 1557 he became involved in the dispute concerning church government between the minister, Robert Horne, and the greater part of his congregation. Old sided with the majority, and in April 1557 signed the reformed scheme of discipline, whereupon Horne and his deacon, Richard Chambers, left Frankfurt, taking the church alms with them. By 10 June Old was living with his wife in the house of Edward Oldsworth, another member of the English congregation in the city, while on 30 June he was one of those to whom Chambers addressed a letter justifying his 'administration of the church funds' (Garrett, 241). Old died at Frankfurt on 15 September 1557. 


@@@@@


doc= 20674


Oldcastle, John, Baron Cobham (d. 1417), soldier, heretic, and rebel, came from a Herefordshire family that emerged in the fourteenth century. 
Oldcastle's great-grandfather Peter is the earliest recorded member of his family, and his grandfather, another John, represented the shire in parliament in 1368 and 1372. His father, Richard, was more obscure, but cannot have been insignificant, for he was the first of the family to be knighted, probably, although only conjecturally, after service in the French wars. It is not known when he died, but possibly it was when Oldcastle was still young. During his youth Oldcastle's most prominent relative was his uncle Thomas, the sheriff of Herefordshire in 1386 and 1391. He was a trusted royal servant, for in 1393 the king ordered him to act against anyone interfering with the trial of the Welsh Lollard layman Walter Brut. Thomas also served Bishop John Trefnant of Hereford (died 1404), and in 1394 was involved in arbitration concerning the bishop's right to the chase of Malvern. He was alive in 1397, but died early in the fifteenth century, when his widow, Alice, married a former knight of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster. Thomas's will was strongly orthodox, endowing masses for his soul and those of members of his family. John Oldcastle's date of birth is unknown; unreliable estimates of it range from around 1360 to 1378. The earliest record of him was in 1397, when he received letters of protection to go to Ireland with the earl of March. As he was then described as 'esquire', a birth date in the mid-1370s seems probable. In Easter term 1400 he appeared as plaintiff in a suit in the court of common pleas concerning the advowson of the parish church of Almeley, the village that was the centre of his family's power. The plea was adjourned, but no record of a settlement survives. He had been knighted by the autumn of the same year, when he served with Henry IV's army in Scotland. 
Although it cannot be proved, Oldcastle may have been attracted to heresy when still young, as the area in which he grew up had seen manifestations of religious radicalism during these years. Sir John Clanvow (died 1391), the author of the pious tract 'The Two Ways' (in which he identified himself with the despised Lollards), had estates at Hergest, Herefordshire, and Michaelchurch-on-Arrow, Radnorshire, both within a few miles of Almeley, and Walter Brut's more limited lands lay close to Hereford. Even more significant is that when Bishop Trefnant attempted to cite the fugitive Lollard evangelist William Swinderby before his court, two parish rectors to whom the citation was directed were those of Almeley and Whitney-on-Wye, which lay between Almeley and Michaelchurch. Swinderby had allegedly preached at Whitney on 1 August 1390 and Oldcastle, then perhaps in his mid-teens, may have been influenced by him. Possibly Clanvow, who was still alive in 1390, may have protected Swinderby, before his own departure for the East on a crusade during which he died. There is considerable evidence of heretical activity in the Welsh marches -- the Lollard priest Richard Wyche came from the diocese of Hereford, William Thorp is associated with Shrewsbury (the place of origin of Sir Roger Acton, who was executed after Oldcastle's rising), and Richard Colfox is described as 'of Cheshire' in a pardon granted after the same rebellion. Connections existed between the Clanvow family and Oldcastle, which may have drawn him into association with the survivors of the Lollard knights whom the chroniclers identified in Richard II's time. In 1404 Oldcastle was named (with Colfox) as an executor of Sir Lewis Clifford, and two overseers of the will were Sir Thomas Clanvow (Sir John's heir and probably his nephew) and Sir John Cheyne (died 1414), another knight with known Lollard sympathies. (Although Clifford was originally a Devonian, he secured the castle of Ewyas Harold in Herefordshire from the family of his second wife, Eleanor de la Warr. Cheyne was probably the youngest of the Lollard knights identified, belatedly, by the St Albans chronicler Thomas Walsingham.) Oldcastle, therefore, was already associated with religious radicalism by 1404, although as yet not necessarily very actively. 
Glyn Dwr's rising brought Oldcastle into prominence as a military leader on several occasions. In September 1403 he was appointed to receive into the king's grace any rebels who surrendered in various south Wales lordships, and in 1404 he and John ap Harry, another prominent local man, who, despite his evident Welsh origin, served three times as parliamentary knight of the shire, were described as captains of the castle of Hay. They remained close associates throughout the Welsh wars, and as custodians of certain Mortimer lands, in the king's hands because of the earl of March's minority. In 1404 he was also commissioned to investigate reports of the provision of food from the shire to the Welsh rebels, and in 1405 he and other royal servants conducted similar investigations in both Herefordshire and Gloucestershire. He also gave non-military service, as knight of the shire in the first parliament of 1404, receiving payment of his expenses for seventy-five days, as a collector of the subsidy in 1404, as a Herefordshire commissioner of the peace in 1404, 1405, and 1406, and as sheriff in 1406-7. During his year as sheriff, however, he was not always present in the shire for he received a pardon for the escape of a prisoner from his custody, on the grounds that he was absent as keeper of Carmarthen Castle. In September 1407 he was at the surrender of Aberystwyth to the royal forces, and was clearly recognized as a man of some importance, as his name was mentioned among the knights present by the St Albans chronicler. His services attracted rewards, including the grant of a wardship in Wales in November 1408. 
Some time before June 1408 Oldcastle's second marriage transformed him from a Herefordshire knight with predominantly local interests into one of the greater men of the realm. With his first wife, Katherine ferch Richard ab Ieuan, he had three daughters and two sons, John, who died in 1420, and Henry, who eventually recovered the family estates and played an active part in the shire community from the late 1420s until his death about 1460. (Some writers have suggested that these were half-brothers, but they probably were children of the same marriage.) His second wife, Joan (died 1434), was of higher social standing, the granddaughter and sole heir of John Cobham, third Baron Cobham, who had died in January 1408. She had already been widowed three times, and had one surviving daughter, with her second husband, Sir Reginald Braybrooke. How far she herself was responsible for choosing Oldcastle as her fourth husband is unknown, but although widows could often be independent in their choice of later partners, it is unlikely that she would have chosen Oldcastle if he had not been a rising man, who could assist in managing her extensive estates, and who would be acceptable to the society within which she moved. Possibly Richard, Lord Grey of Codnor (died 1419), whose estates bordered on the Cobham lands in Kent, and under whom Oldcastle had served in Ireland, Scotland, and Wales, might have provided a link between her and her new partner. The Cobham properties were widespread, in Norfolk, Wiltshire, Northamptonshire, Kent -- where Cooling Castle was a major stronghold -- and London. One of Oldcastle's actions as Lord Cobham, which reflects his marital influence, came in February 1410, when he reached an agreement to marry his stepdaughter to Thomas Broke, the son of a Somerset knight of the same name. Although Broke and his father were never accused of heresy, their wills are couched in similar tones to those of some Lollard suspects. Possibly similar religious sensibilities led Oldcastle and the elder Broke to become associates. 
His marriage extended Oldcastle's area of service to Kent; in both 1409 and 1411 he was appointed to commissions 'de walliis et fossatis' on the Thames. He was also summoned individually to every parliament from 1410 until he was accused of heresy in 1413, probably 'iure uxoris', although he may have been called as a trusted royal servant who had effective control over substantial estates. Certainly in the writs of summons he is described merely as 'John Oldcastle, chivaler' rather than as Lord Cobham. (It is perhaps significant that after his death, his wife's fifth husband was not similarly summoned.) In October 1409 he participated in a tournament at Lille, with two other Englishmen against three Frenchmen. This reflects his new social status, and the recognition of his military capacity is further demonstrated by his being part of the small force that was sent to France in 1411 under the leadership of the earls of Warwick and Arundel to aid the duke of Burgundy. His involvement in this expedition may have been at the wish of the prince of Wales, then dominant in the council, under whom Oldcastle had served in the Welsh wars. 
By this time, however, Oldcastle's interest in heresy is documented for the first time since 1404. Possibly as a member of the upper house he may have promoted various anti-clerical measures in the parliament of 1410 and thereby drawn hostile attention to himself. Certainly, in that April, Archbishop Thomas Arundel (died 1414) instituted inquiries into the suspect preaching of a chaplain called John, who was living in Oldcastle's house and had been preaching heresy in various Kentish churches, including Cooling. The archbishop laid the churches under interdict and cited the chaplain for trial, although he went into hiding. The interdict was relaxed out of respect for Lady Cobham, possibly on account of her daughter's marriage to Thomas Broke. The interdict may have been simply a warning shot, but it may not have been coincidental that the anti-clerical measures were dropped. But although Oldcastle may have shown more caution publicly, he continued to favour Lollardy, and may even have been recognized as a leader of the sect (if it can be so called). Possibly his baronial rank gave him additional standing, even ahead of his acquaintance Sir John Cheyne, the last Lollard knight of the older generation. 
This prominence was reflected in two letters written to Bohemia on 8 September 1410, one by the Lollard priest Richard Wyche to Jan Hus, the other by Oldcastle to one of Hus's lay patrons, Woksa of Waldstein. Although Oldcastle's letter was dated from Cooling and Wyche's from London, the dating makes it clear that they were accomplices. The length of their acquaintanceship is unknown, for although Wyche himself came from the diocese of Hereford, no evidence survives of earlier contact with Oldcastle. This letter was not isolated; Oldcastle remained in touch with the Bohemians, indeed in 1411 writing to King Wenceslas himself, mentioning that he had been in touch with Hus. Although the English ecclesiastical authorities must by now have suspected him of unorthodoxy, he avoided heresy proceedings until after Henry V's accession. Even after these had already begun, a royal warrant of 20 July 1413 to him for the payment of 400 marks, in settlement of a debt, suggests that he could have hoped to benefit from royal patronage from Henry, who, according to the St Albans chronicler, was personally friendly to him. 
Probably the new king's undoubted orthodoxy gave Archbishop Arundel the confidence to act against heresy. When convocation met in March 1413, shortly before Henry IV's death, action was taken against a chaplain, John Lay, who claimed to have celebrated mass in Oldcastle's presence. During the summer evidence was accumulated against Oldcastle, and the seizure of various heretical tracts belonging to him enabled the archbishop to challenge him on his beliefs, and to do so in front of the king. He was the first influential layman to be publicly accused of heresy, although the church authorities almost certainly knew that various knights, often with court connections, had extended patronage to Lollard clergy, whose views they presumably accepted. Possibly Arundel had been watching Oldcastle, whom he might have suspected, justifiably, of being the most prominent heretical layman in the country, and was hoping, by attacking him, to deal a serious blow to all religious dissent. Oldcastle's social prominence, and his friendship with the king, compelled Arundel to move carefully. The proceedings were protracted, and marked by both royal intervention and a futile attempt by Oldcastle to avoid facing the court by returning to Cooling Castle and barricading himself in there. After he was brought to trial, the archbishop proceeded cautiously, trying to elicit a clear statement of his beliefs (something that Oldcastle for a long time tried to avoid giving). But when Oldcastle was challenged on the question of papal authority, he broke out into a tirade against the church, denouncing the pope as the head of Antichrist, the prelates as his members, and friars as his tail. Arundel, in the end, had no option but to condemn him, although one need not distrust the official record that suggests he was more concerned with trying to bring Oldcastle back to the fold of the church than with condemning him. Equally clearly, he was faced with a man whose sincerity in his beliefs was unquestioned, and who, in the last resort, would not avoid the issues. After the trial, an account of it, based on the archbishop's register, was circulated to the country because the events are recorded in both the St Albans chronicle and the 'Fasciculi zizaniorum'. By publicizing Oldcastle's beliefs the archbishop was clearly determined to make an example of him, presumably hoping that this might remove the Lollard threat to the church. 
After the heresy trials of Henry IV's reign, condemned offenders were sent to early execution, but Oldcastle's social standing and his relationship with the king gave him another chance. He was reprieved, and sent to the Tower of London for forty days, to be given an opportunity to recant. But he was not securely held, and escaped on 19 October, with the assistance of some London allies. His precise movements are unknown, but he established contacts with various Lollard communities, and attempted to mount an armed revolt with the aim of taking the king captive. It was an ill-considered enterprise, nor is it clear what he might have done if he had succeeded in seizing Henry and his brothers. The revolt was more a desperate attempt at revenge than a calculated plan to overthrow the existing order in church and state. It did reveal, however, that Oldcastle as leader commanded substantial loyalty, as well as something of the extent of heretical activity throughout the realm, for although there were only a few hundred active rebels (far from the 20,000 suggested by royal propaganda and reproduced by the St Albans chronicler), their geographical origins were widespread, extending from Bristol in the west through the midlands to Essex. 
The authorities, however, penetrated the plot before it came to fruition; indeed, rewards were given on 5 January to two men for disclosing it to the king. When the rebels converged on London on the night of 9-10 January, they walked into a trap and were rounded up. Over forty were executed, and seven were also burnt. Oldcastle himself escaped from the rendezvous at St Giles's Fields, just outside London, but thereafter was a man on the run. Hardly surprisingly, he was excluded from the general pardon to the rebels on 28 March, along with ten of his closest supporters, but later he might still have come to terms with the king, who issued a general pardon in December. A further pardon to him is recorded a year later, in December 1415. His failure to emerge from hiding to claim this probably reflects his religious convictions; however willing the king might have been to forgive his treason, Henry could not guarantee immunity from renewed ecclesiastical measures against heresy, and Oldcastle presumably felt that it was safer to lie low. As late as January 1417 the proclamation of a reward for taking him affirmed that he was refusing to sue for pardon, but was persevering in his nefarious intention of destroying the church and the king. His lands were forfeited and remained in royal hands for many years. A further effect of his rebellion was to blacken the whole reputation of Lollardy by associating it with treason. 
Oldcastle was not captured until 1417, but his movements in these years are virtually unknown, as he was constantly on the move, trying to keep ahead of his pursuers. Various sources, both chronicle and documentary, mention alleged sightings of him, but few are reliable. Probably his main hiding places were in the midlands and the Welsh marches, and the most likely genuine traces of him are those that led to action against individuals alleged to have sheltered him, such as John Prest, vicar of Chesterton in Warwickshire, later pardoned for entertaining him on 5 August 1415, and a chaplain of Piddington in north Oxfordshire, executed for sheltering him in October 1416. He was reported at different times to have been at Malvern, or between Shrewsbury and Oswestry, but although his name is associated with various outbreaks of heretical activity, his presence cannot be proved. Equally unverifiable, although not impossible, are accusations of conspiracy with the pseudo-Richard II and the Scots, and with the earl of Cambridge, and there may be more substance in alleged contacts with the Welsh rebels. He certainly had contacts in Wales; his secretary, Thomas Payn, came from Glamorgan. 
Only in 1417 did the authorities obtain a clear lead. In July Oldcastle was in Northamptonshire, later going west to his own lands in Hereford, where he lay low from August to mid-October. He then went north, where he met Gruffudd ab Owain, a son of Owain Glyn Dwr. He was eventually taken, after a struggle, on the lands of Edward Charlton, Lord Powys (died 1421), by Ieuan and Gruffudd, two sons of Sir Gruffudd Vaughan, in November. The news of his capture reached Westminster by 1 December, and he was brought there, where parliament was in session. When charged with treason before it on 14 December Oldcastle retorted by preaching the mercy of God and saying that he should be left to it. Attempts to silence him may have brought forth a retort that his true king, Richard II, was alive in Scotland, although this is reported only by Walsingham and not in the official record. Walsingham also suggests that he claimed that he would rise on the third day, but this story is otherwise unattested. He was already a condemned heretic and outlaw, so there was nothing to prevent his immediate execution and burning, and the sentence was carried out the same day. 
Oldcastle's support was limited, and the suppression of his revolt easy. Various possible supporters had been rounded up after the failure at St Giles's Fields and there may have been further arrests during later Lollard scares. Oldcastle's wife, Lady Cobham, was also imprisoned and was only released from the Tower on 17 December, three days after her husband's death. Her treatment suggests, however, that she herself was not suspected of treason or heresy, for her son-in-law, Sir Thomas Broke, and a Kentish esquire, Richard Cliderow, who had married a daughter of Oldcastle, were granted some of her property in London to hold to her use as early as October 1414. Broke himself was in custody for a time, but clearly was not regarded as a rebel, although his own religious predilections may have been sympathetic to an evangelical style of piety. Nor were Oldcastle's sons apparently suspected of involvement in their father's treason; the elder, John, was granted lands inherited from his maternal grandmother in June 1417, before his father's capture and death. 
Oldcastle's posthumous history also merits comment. Contemporary political verses denounced him, and although he was regarded as a manly knight he was also seen as a man who would overturn the temporal as well as the spiritual order. (Writers suggested that a knight should concern himself with war rather than with matters of religion.) He was not particularly remembered by the Lollards immediately after his death; the only early description of him as a martyr was by William Emayn of Bristol in 1429. But his fame survived (though how is not known), for references to him reappear in early Reformation propaganda; in 1531 'A Boke of Thorpe or of John Oldcastelle' was condemned by Bishop John Stokesley of London (died 1539). This recorded the sufferings of famous Lollards, and was clearly intended to inspire their followers. In the 1540s John Bale produced an improved version of the narrative of Oldcastle's trial, describing him as a 'valyaunt captayne'. Indeed, Bale attempted to set up Oldcastle in place of Becket as a hero for emulation in the new world of the Reformation. He also provided the material on which John Foxe drew for his 'Acts and Monuments', the so-called book of martyrs, the master-work of English protestant historiography in which Sir John features significantly. The contrary hostile tradition, depicting Oldcastle as a malign companion of Henry V's youth, culminated in his being presented in that role in William Shakespeare's two 'Henry IV' plays (1597). The perceived insult to a previous holder of his title led to protests by the tenth Baron Cobham, which in turn caused Oldcastle's name to be replaced by that of Falstaff (itself adapted from that of the fifteenth-century soldier Sir John Fastolf). Protestant opinion must also have favoured the change, which in '2 Henry IV' resulted in the epilogue's being extended to include a formal disclaimer, 'for Oldcastle died a martyr, and this is not the man'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20675


Oldcorne, Edward (1561-1606), Jesuit, was born in York, son of John Oldcorne, a bricklayer, and his wife, Elizabeth. He abandoned medical studies and went to the continent to study for the Roman Catholic priesthood. He arrived at the English College, then situated in Rheims, on 12 August 1581. On 23 February 1582 he was sent to the English College in Rome and was ordained priest in the Lateran on 23 August 1587. On 15 August 1588 he and John Gerard entered the Society of Jesus. Dispatched almost immediately for England, they arrived in Rheims on 21 September and departed for England via Eu on the 26th. Surveillance at English ports increased because of the Armada so the two paused at Eu to decide on their next move. They left Eu in late October or early November and landed in East Anglia in late November. Oldcorne set off immediately for London to establish contact with Henry Garnet, superior of the English Jesuits. 
In early spring 1589 Oldcorne accompanied Garnet on a missionary tour of the midlands and remained in Warwickshire upon Garnet's return to London. By spring of either 1589 or 1590 (the sources are unclear), he was residing at Hindlip House near Worcester, seat of the ancient Catholic family of Habington. There he remained, labouring zealously as a missioner, making many converts, and placing many clergy with recusant families. One of the most important was the reconciliation of Dorothy Habington, according to Thomas Lister SJ, 'a very obstinate and perverse heretic' who did all she could 'to keep, or rather to drive away Catholic priests from the house' because she blamed them for her brother Edward's destruction in the Babington plot. With her assistance Hindlip House became 'the most famous house in England for entertainment of priests'. Oldcorne was a popular preacher and Lister testified that he had 'seen oftentimes more people come from his sermons than from the service of the Protestant minister on Sundays from the parish church' (Foley, 4.214-15). Of his activity John Gerard said: 'he founded and governed nearly all the domestic churches in those parts' (ibid., 4.212). 
Humphrey Littleton, imprisoned on a charge of harbouring some of the conspirators after the discovery of the Gunpowder Plot, sought to save his own life by informing the privy council that Oldcorne was at Hindlip and that Garnet most likely would also be found there. The search began on 20 January 1606: Nicholas Owen and Ralph Ashley were discovered on the 23rd, and Garnet and Oldcorne on the 27th. Oldcorne was incarcerated first in the Gatehouse and later in the Tower, where he was tortured. He persistently denied all knowledge of the plot. Sent from the Tower to Worcester on 21 March, he was arraigned at the Lenten assizes on three charges: that he had invited Garnet, a denounced traitor, to hide at Hindlip; that he had asked the assistance of fellow Jesuit Robert Jones in Herefordshire in concealing two conspirators, consequently making himself an accomplice; and that he had considered the plot a good action. Oldcorne was found guilty of high treason, and on 7 April 1606 he was drawn on a hurdle to Red Hill, near Worcester, and there hanged, disembowelled, and quartered. His body was destroyed. Littleton, who suffered at the same time, publicly asked pardon of God for having wrongfully accused Oldcorne of the conspiracy. Oldcorne was beatified on 15 December 1929. 


@@@@@


doc= 20676


Oldenburg, Henry (c.1619-1677), scientific correspondent and secretary of the Royal Society, was born in the free city of Bremen, Germany, one of two children of Heinrich Oldenburg (died 1634), a teacher at the Bremen 'Paedegogium' and later a professor at Dorpat University. His ancestors, originally from Munster, had been Calvinist teachers since the mid-sixteenth century. Oldenburg's grandfather, also Heinrich, had repaired the buildings of the vicaria of St Liborius at the protestant cathedral, in return for which he, his son, and his grandson inherited an annual income of 100 reichsthaler, which was paid only fitfully and precariously. 
Oldenburg began his education at the 'Paedegogium' where his father taught, and transferred in May 1633 to the 'Gymnasium illustre' for a thorough grounding in religion, classical languages, the liberal arts, and theology; he received the degree of master of theology on 2 November 1639 for a thesis on relations between church and state. In May 1641 he left Bremen for the Netherlands with letters of introduction to various scholars. (He was perhaps influenced by the fact that his sister was about to marry Heinrich Koch, a relation of Johannes Koch, or Coccejus, professor of theology at Leiden.) Oldenburg settled briefly in Utrecht, which possessed a lively university where Cartesianism was taught. However, he found Utrecht expensive and began in August to look for employment 'instructing either the son of a nobleman or the son of some honest merchant' ('Correspondence', 1.3-6). For the next twelve years he travelled on the continent and in England as tutor to a succession of young men, mostly English, with both royalist and parliamentary connections, as indicated by surviving drafts of letters in his commonplace book. His aim was not only to earn his living but to learn about relations between church and state and to see the world. In all of this he was clearly very successful, becoming fluent in the languages of the countries he visited. He met many Englishmen living abroad, notably John Durie and John Pell, with both of whom he later had connections. 
In the later spring of 1653 Oldenburg visited Bremen, probably to try to secure the title to his vicaria. The city was suffering from the effects of the First Anglo-Dutch War, which put at risk its all-important merchant fleet, and the senate was about to appoint an envoy to England to negotiate recognition of Bremen's neutrality. Oldenburg secured the post on 30 June 1653. He arrived in England in late July and began negotiations promptly, though inconclusively, as he told the Bremen senate; in any case the war ceased in the next spring. Soon afterwards the senate asked him to beg Cromwell to intercede between the Swedes and the city: Oldenburg found Cromwell favourably disposed and a strong letter was written to Sweden, but with little result. However, the mission proved very profitable to Oldenburg himself, not in money but in a growing acquaintance with English politicians and scholars, particularly with Milton, who admitted him into his personal circle, which included Lady Katherine Ranelagh and her young brother Robert Boyle. All seem to have found Oldenburg an attractive man, and Milton wrote approvingly that he had 'learnt to speak our language more accurately and fluently than any other foreigner I have ever known' ('Correspondence', 1.34). During most of 1654 and 1655 Oldenburg lived in Kent with the Honywood family, to one of whom he had acted as tutor; he kept in touch with many former charges while looking for another post. This search ended with his appointment in 1656 to supervise Richard Jones (1641-1712), son of Viscount and Lady Ranelagh, first at Oxford and then abroad. 
In resuming his career as tutor Oldenburg sacrificed his independence but cemented his relations with Robert Boyle, his lifelong patron; developed a keen interest in natural philosophy; and learned how to elicit information from new acquaintances and how to maintain a scientific correspondence. When he went to Oxford with Jones for some reason he 'entred ['sic'] as a Student', as Anthony Wood put it ('Athenae Oxoniensis', 1721, 2.114), under the designation of 'nobilis Saxo' -- a curious act of self-aggrandizement, for though he could fairly call himself a Saxon he was never a noble. He supervised his pupil while at the same time educating himself in natural philosophy by frequenting on terms of equality the circle centred around John Wilkins, whom he had already met in London. This circle included Boyle, John Wallis, Seth Ward, Dr Jonathan Goddard, Thomas Willis, Christopher Wren, Richard Lower, and Robert Hooke, who was then assistant to, successively, Willis and Boyle -- all men who, as Oldenburg told a Dutch friend, 'are followers of nature itself and truth' ('Correspondence', 1.89-92). He quickly absorbed their spirit and appreciated their activities, and was able to understand their achievements. Boyle admitted Oldenburg to his confidence, allowing him to copy out some drafts of essays that were not to be published for some years. 
In May 1657 Oldenburg and Jones left for what became a three-year sojourn on the continent. They settled in Saumur, which they chose for its protestantism and its educational establishments. Thence Oldenburg wrote to Milton about theological controversies, to Boyle about chemistry and the natural philosophers he met, and to Hartlib about practical matters. The next spring he and Jones undertook a five-month tour of Germany: they visited courts and universities, meeting physicians, alchemists, mechanicians, the nobility, and minor royalty with equal interest and aplomb, Oldenburg having obviously mastered the art of extracting information from all whom he met. They were welcomed everywhere and Oldenburg reported carefully to Boyle and Hartlib what they would wish to learn about natural philosophy and mechanics. They spent the winter in the south of France, again meeting natural philosophers in academies and universities and being welcomed warmly. 
In 1659 Oldenburg and Jones travelled via La Rochelle to Paris; they arrived in March and stayed for over a year. Here life duplicated that of the previous winter. Oldenburg saw that his pupil received instruction in the polite arts and in varied intellectual activities. Academies had proliferated in Paris in the early seventeenth century and Oldenburg soon sought out those devoted to natural philosophy, especially the famous Montmor Academy, in whose animated discussions and scientific debates he participated fully. His descriptions sent to Boyle and his friends in the south of France are vivid accounts of the intellectual life of Paris at this time. During this period he matured as a virtuoso and mastered the art of scientific communication. He frequented libraries and reported on their contents, beginning the familiarity with publications that was later to enable him to act as a book agent. 
In May 1660 Oldenburg and Jones were summoned home, and arrived in time for Charles II's triumphant entry into London. Although both religion and acquaintances had inclined Oldenburg to parliamentarian government, like most of his friends (except Milton) he fully accepted the Restoration government. But he now had no settled employment and it is not obvious how he lived. Presumably he worked for Boyle, who was always his patron and for whom he was soon acting as translator. On 28 November 1660 the organizational meeting of what was to become the Royal Society of London was held, and Oldenburg's name was on the list of potential members. He was soon formally elected, and he played an active role ['see 'Founder members of the Royal Society]. 
In the summer of 1661 Oldenburg took a month's continental trip. He went briefly to Bremen and then to Holland, where he visited friends in Amsterdam and Leiden; in the latter city he saw relatives and met and conversed with Spinoza, after which he went to The Hague to renew acquaintance with Christiaan Huygens, whom he had already met in London. An important result was a well-known correspondence with Spinoza, with whom Oldenburg discussed theology and natural philosophy, in the latter field with the assistance of Boyle whose approach to the subject he adopted and fully supported. (The correspondence was first published in Spinoza's 'Opera posthuma', 1677.) Oldenburg continued to act as purveyor of news to Boyle, as he was to do throughout his life. He became 'publisher' (acting as intermediary between author and printer) of many of Boyle's books, as signed prefaces show, and translator of many into Latin for the continental market. Boyle paid him at agreed rates, which was a source of income for his lifetime. 
In July 1662 the Royal Society came officially into existence and acquired a formal structure with the granting of a royal charter. Oldenburg was named as a member of council and one of the two secretaries, and the structure was reinforced the next spring with the grant of a second charter. The charters specifically gave permission for the society (through the secretaries) to correspond freely at home and abroad, while newly enacted statutes specified that a secretary must attend all meetings, take minutes, attend to correspondence, and maintain the society's 'books' (its records). Oldenburg was to be the only active secretary: immensely hard-working and a brilliant correspondent, he was soon to symbolize the much admired Royal Society in the eyes of learned foreigners. Because he was so conscientious the bulk of his correspondence survives, showing its range and scope (both large) and revealing much about the state of natural philosophy of the time in England. Like Pepys, Oldenburg was a skilful administrator, holding the society together and helping to make it work: going to meetings whose content he helped to organize and supply; conferring regularly with his working colleagues, often in coffee houses, between meetings; proposing foreign fellows; and directing the amanuensis who acted as his copying clerk. All this was without pay, and he began to think of making money by purveying news, a plan that was brought into being a few years later. 
On 22 October 1663 Oldenburg married Dorothy West ('c'.1623-1665), 'aged about 40 and a mayden of her owne Disposing' as the marriage licence states, declaring himself to be 'aged about 43 yeares'. Nothing is known about the bride except that her trustees were two baronets and she possessed a dowry of $400. The couple set up house in Pall Mall, very near Lady Ranelagh (but not in the lodgings that Oldenburg had used previously). They soon acquired a family in the shape of John Durie's daughter, Dora Katherina (1654-1677), officially a ward of the London church of Austin Friars. As the child possessed property, presumably Oldenburg's income then increased. His wife died at the beginning of February 1665 and thereupon he very properly requested the elders of the church to make other arrangements for Dora Katherina Durie, and this seems to have been done. Although he then received the remainder of his wife's dowry it soon vanished in necessary expenses. 
Oldenburg now decided to bring his plans for a news sheet to fruition. In the spring of 1665 he instituted his 'Philosophical Transactions', which was intended to incorporate news derived partly from his correspondence and partly from the activities of the Royal Society, with, soon, reviews of scientific books. It is the oldest continuous scientific journal: though the 'Journal des Scavans' preceded it by a few weeks, this was primarily a book-reviewing journal, and not predominantly devoted to natural philosophy. The 'Philosophical Transactions', as his private venture, brought Oldenburg fame but never much income (seldom as much as $40 a year). So great was the demand abroad that four volumes by different translators appeared in Latin (1666-9), a partial French edition was made for the use of the Academie Royale des Sciences, and an Italian edition was published in 1729. Publication was disrupted by the outbreak of plague in London -- the court and much of the society dispersed, while Oldenburg stayed in the city, dealing with public and private business, his only precaution being to smoke a pipe of tobacco every evening. 
In 1666, when life returned to normal in London as the plague diminished, the Royal Society's meetings resumed and Oldenburg's life also went on as before. He had now acquired financial support from Sir Joseph Williamson of the state paper office, who, with the outbreak of the Second Anglo-Dutch War (February 1665), was anxious to acquire knowledge of French and Dutch public opinion and, as a loyal fellow of the Royal Society, to assist its hard-working secretary. The arrangement was that Oldenburg should have a postal address, Mr or Monsr Grubendol, which ensured that all letters so addressed went direct to Williamson's office; Williamson then paid the postage and had the unopened letters delivered by hand to Oldenburg. The latter copied out any political or military news and gossip and sent this to Williamson. 
Besides saving the cost of postage, this work, together with the translation of intercepted letters in Germanic languages, earned Oldenburg some unspecified but useful income. It was, however, the cause of personal misfortune: on 20 June 1667, a fortnight after the public disaster of a Dutch raid on the Medway and Chatham, Oldenburg was closely imprisoned in the Tower of London by order of Lord Arlington, secretary of state and thus Williamson's superior. He was accused of 'dangerous desseins and practices' ('Correspondence', 3.448) or, as Pepys noted in his diary (24 June 1667), of 'writing news to a Virtuoso in France'. He repeatedly expressed his innocence and insisted that it was patriotism alone that led him to regret that the war had gone so badly from 'oversights and omissions some where' ('Correspondence', 3.448). Arlington was much blamed for the failure of his intelligence service to forewarn the English navy of Dutch plans, and, perhaps genuinely ignorant of the arrangements with Williamson, seems to have used Oldenburg as a scapegoat, not releasing him until 26 August 1667. 
Bravely Oldenburg returned to his usual duties, finding that almost all his acquaintances and correspondents responded as usual, the sole exception being his neighbour Dr Thomas Sydenham. His correspondence soon even increased in volume, diversity, and importance; he was described in 1668 by Glanvill as 'render[ing] himself a great Benefactor of Mankind by his affectionate care, and indefatigable diligence and endeavours in maintaining Philosophical Intelligence, and promoting Philosophy' (Glanvill, 103). For the last ten years of his life Oldenburg's unremitting correspondence kept him fully occupied, except for the need to earn a decent income. Unfortunately the 'Philosophical Transactions' never sold as well as he had hoped; he had to give away many copies, and the printers were exigent. In 1668 he began a campaign to secure a salary from the Royal Society in view of his many duties, and appealed to Boyle and others. That year the society voted him a gift only of $50, but the next year relented and voted an annual salary of $40. 
Oldenburg continued to supply news to Williamson and to publish and translate for Boyle, particularly in 1670 and 1671. He also began publishing for others, notably the Italian comparative anatomist and microscopist Malpighi, from whose letters he compiled books. He translated and published works by Francois Bernier and A. Piganius (1671), and attached Steno's 'Prodromus' to Boyle's 'Essays of Effluviums' (1673). He continued to hope for patronage and in 1676 Williamson secured him a place as licensor of books on history; sadly he proved too conscientious for the post and resigned it after three months, partly because of complaints against him, more because of the work involved. 
The increased need for income arose from Oldenburg's second marriage, at the age of about fifty, to Dora Katherina Durie, in August 1668. According to the marriage licence she was aged sixteen, but her father's friend John Pell declared she was only fourteen years and three months. In any case, she married with her father's consent. By the marriage Oldenburg secured the income of his wife's property, two farms (Battens and Wansunt) near Dartford Heath, Bexley, Kent, said to bring in $60 a year, where family holidays were to be spent regularly. Children followed -- Sophia ('b'. 1672) and Rupert (1675-1724). 
A portrait by Jan van Cleef in the Royal Society, dated 1668 and said since at least 1804 to be of Oldenburg, shows a vigorous man with dark and wavy hair to his shoulders and a small moustache, in dark clothes and bands (he must have been in minor orders), with the habitual frown of a conscientious and short-sighted man. Brought up in the Calvinist faith and deeply pious, with a devout personal religion and a keen interest in millenarianism, he was no bigot; he publicly conformed to the 'Test Act' of 1673, which demanded a firm Anglicanism, as he did again in 1677 in order to apply for naturalization (which was granted on 6 April). 
During all the upheavals of his private life, Oldenburg continued to work for the good of the Royal Society and of natural philosophy. By now he had perfected his techniques: he had learned how to encourage talent (as his support and promotion of such men as Malpighi, Flamsteed, Leeuwenhoek, Leibniz, De Graaf, Martin Lister, and others show). Equally significant was his ability to persuade men reluctant to publish to permit him to insert their papers in his 'Philosophical Transactions' and to continue to do so even when this provoked controversy. The most important example is undoubtedly that of Newton. From 1671 to 1677 he painstakingly coaxed the at first little-known Lucasian professor to submit his papers on optics to the Royal Society, then to permit their publication in his journal, and finally to respond to criticisms by those who could not accept his conclusions or repeat his experiments. It was a triumph of diplomatic skill of the greatest benefit to the world of natural philosophy. Just as important was Oldenburg's treatment of those few examples of his mathematical skill that Newton reluctantly released to him, culminating in the energetic exchanges with Leibniz in 1676-7. This involved Oldenburg in the tedious and difficult copying out of many pages of complex mathematical text, which indicates incidentally that he could follow advanced mathematics and perhaps even understand it. 
From 1668 Oldenburg was Huygens's principal correspondent in England, giving him news of the Royal Society's affairs (Huygens had been a fellow since 1663), serving as an intermediary on mathematical subjects between him and Sluse of Liege, as on optical subjects between him and Newton. Oldenburg and Huygens had become good friends, so much so that in 1675 the latter offered any possible English patent for his newly invented spring-regulated watch either to the society or to Oldenburg. Brouncker, as president, resigned the potential advantages to Oldenburg, who promptly drafted a petition for a patent (which was never granted). Hooke, who claimed that he had long since invented the application of springs to regulate watches (but had never made one) was furious, and with his usual fertile ingenuity designed such a watch for which he now claimed a patent, insisting that Oldenburg had 'betrayed' him by telling Huygens of it -- which was not the case (and Hooke's idea had appeared in print in any case). Twelve years of friendly association of two colleagues were forgotten and Hooke denounced Oldenburg bitterly, becoming more vindictive after the Royal Society's council supported his rival; he was to pursue his enmity even after Oldenburg's death. It was a bitter and troublesome episode. Historians have often accepted Hooke's view that Oldenburg was at fault, but it is difficult to see why -- most of his colleagues and correspondents found him open, friendly, accommodating, tactful, and fair. 
Oldenburg seems to have been generally healthy, with no more episodes of illness than normal. According to Hooke's diary he was seriously ill on 3 September 1677 'with ague'; two days later he was dead, 'being striken speechless and senseless'. His death probably occurred at home in Pall Mall, London, though he was buried at St Mary the Virgin, Bexley, on 7 September. His young widow died on 17 September and was buried the next day in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 20677


Oldfield, Anne (1683-1730), actress, was the daughter of Anne Oldfield and her husband, whose name may have been James; she was born perhaps in Pall Mall. Her grandfather had made a good living at the George tavern on Pall Mall, and left several properties to her father. According to the anonymous 'Authentick Memoirs', her father mortgaged these to buy a post in the Horse Guards, but he died young, leaving Anne and her mother in the care of her uncle George, a hosier in St James's Street. George 'put her to School, where she soon took her Learning with admirable Proficiency' ('Authentick Memoirs', 7). Anne and her mother then sheltered with her aunt Mrs Voss, at the Mitre tavern, St James. It was here, according to Egerton's biography of Oldfield, collected from several hands, that Anne was discovered by George Farquhar. The story runs that 'he heard Miss Nanny reading a Play behind the Bar, with so proper Emphasis, and such agreeable Turns suitable to each character, that he swore the Girl was cut out for the Stage' ('BDA'), and on Farquhar's recommendation John Rich took her into the Drury Lane company in 1699 at 15's'. a week. She does not appear to have been given many roles during her first season: only Candiope in Dryden's 'Secret Love' and Sylvia in John Oldmixon's 'The Grove'. Cibber charts her slow rise through the company from: 'the Year 1699, Mrs. 'Oldfield' was first taken into the House, where she remain'd about a Twelve month almost a Mute and unheeded, 'till Sir 'John Vanbrugh', who first recommended her, gave her the Part of 'Alinda' in the 'Pilgrim' revis'd.' However, 'The Pilgrim' (by John Fletcher, revised by Vanbrugh) was performed on 6 July 1700 for Mrs Oldfield's sole benefit, which implies she was considered more highly than Cibber's account of her coming 'but slowly forward 'till the Year 1703' would suggest. In the 1700 season Oldfield performed two prologues, including one to the first play from Susannah Centlivre, 'The Perjured Husband'. This was the beginning of a long collaboration between the two women. Oldfield also played Lucilia in Catharine Trotter's 'Love at a Loss' and the prim, virtuous Ann of Brittanie in Trotter's 'The Unhappy Penitent'. The following season she developed new roles, including Lady Sharlot, the shy younger sister in Richard Steele's 'The Funeral', Cimene in Bevil Higgins's 'The Generous Conqueror', and witty, bantering Jacinta in Vanbrugh's 'The False Friend', for which she also delivered the epilogue. Accounts for the period imply she was earning around $70 for the season, less than Elizabeth Barry and Anne Bracegirdle at the other house, but considerably more than Mary Porter and Mrs Willis. The selection of roles and her salary suggest that Oldfield established herself more rapidly within the company than Cibber remembers. 
About 1703 Oldfield began a long-term liaison with Arthur Mainwaring (1668-1712), MP for Preston and an auditor for the imprests. He was a friend of Owen Swiny at the Haymarket, and was to support Anne's career and write several epilogues for her. 1703 was also the year that there was further opportunity for Oldfield to become a leading player. Susanna Verbruggen's illness and eventual death in childbirth meant Oldfield took on some of her roles, including Leonora in John Crowne's 'Sir Courtly Nice'. Cibber gives a self-mocking account of rehearsals where: 'she could scarce prevail with me to rehearse with her the Scenes she was chiefly concern'd in with Sir 'Courtly', which I then acted. However, we ran them over with a mutual Inadvertancy of one another. I seem'd careless... she mutter'd out her Words in a sort of mifty manner at my low Opinion of her. ('BDA')' However, Cibber had to revise his opinion when he saw her perform, and she even inspired him to complete his 'The Careless Husband', which he had put to one side with the loss of Mrs Verbruggen. Anne's improved position in the company is suggested by the verbal contract she negotiated with John Rich in March 1704, which was to run for five years at 50's'. a week. Under this arrangement she took on many new parts; in 1703 these had included Victoria in Steele's 'The Lying Lover' and Queen Mary in 'The Albion Queens', by John Banks. The following season Oldfield guaranteed the success of Cibber's 'The Careless Husband' with her portrayal of Lady Betty Modish, a character written for her and partially drawn, Cibber confessed, from 'sentiments... originally her own, or only dress'd with a little more care that when they negligently fell from her lively Humour' (ibid.). She also brought her comic talent to Biddy Tipkin in Steele's 'The Tender Husband' and Mariana in Peter Motteux's 'Farewell Folly'. By 1705-6 Oldfield was often performing opposite Robert Wilks in such leading parts as Lady Reveller in Centlivre's 'The Basset Table', Arabella in Thomas Baker's 'Hampstead Heath', and Silvia in Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer'. When the companies reorganized in 1706 and Oldfield moved to Swiny's management at the Haymarket, she was receiving 13's'. 4died 'every day a Play shall be acted by the Company' (Lafler, 37). This move allowed Oldfield to take up many new roles, such as Elvira in Dryden's 'The Spanish Fryar', Florimel in his 'Marriage a la mode', Mrs Sullen in Farquhar's 'The Stratagem', Imoinda in Southerne's 'Oroonoko', Lady Lurewell in Farquhar's 'The Constant Couple', and Narcissa in Cibber's 'Love's Last Shift'. However, the combination of companies also brought her into conflict with Anne Bracegirdle, who had been playing these kinds of part at the other house. Egerton tells a story of a contest between the two in the title role of Betterton's 'The Amorous Widow', in which the town judged Oldfield the winner. Whether this contest actually took place or not, when Oldfield's benefit was set for 25 February 1707, before that of Mrs Bracegirdle, the latter left the stage in disgust. 
Anne Oldfield moved regularly during the next few seasons, each time bettering her terms of employment. In January 1708 a united company for spoken drama was established at Drury Lane, and the Queen's Theatre, Haymarket, was reserved for music. Oldfield moved with the company and tried to enforce an agreement for a salary of 4 guineas per week 'and a Benefit-Play every year paying, only, out the Receipt Fourty-Pounds' (TNA: PRO, LC 7/3 fol. 104). Rich attempted to slice more than the stipulated $40 house charge, pointing out that no actress was receiving more than 50's'. per week, and it is not clear how the dispute was settled. However, in April 1709 Oldfield returned to the Haymarket and entered an agreement with Swiny for thirteen years at an annual salary of $200 and a February benefit, as well as being free each summer. Zachary Baggs, Rich's treasurer, published the company accounts to rebuff accusations of underpaying actors, and alleged that Mrs Oldfield had been better off at Drury Lane, estimating her annual income at $252 6's'. 7died Finally, in 1711 Oldfield moved back to Drury Lane as a managing partner and sharer with the triumvirate of actor-managers Cibber, Wilks, and Thomas Doggett. However, Doggett objected to a female sharer, and instead she was offered an assured $200 each year and a charge-free benefit. This rose to 300 guineas a year, and her benefit, according to Cibber's estimate, brought her twice that. This made Oldfield one of the highest paid performers in the company, although the figures are provided by Cibber in his memoirs, and might be suspected of being glossed. 
Anne Oldfield was to remain at Drury Lane for the remainder of her career, where she continued to expand her range of comic heroines and ladies of quality, such as Violante in Centlivre's 'The Wonder', as well as adding many more serious roles to her repertoire, among them Andromache in Ambrose Philips's 'The Distrest Mother', Arpasia in Nicholas Rowe's 'Tamerlane', Cleopatra in Dryden's 'All for Love', Indamora in his 'Aureng-Zebe', and the title roles in Rowe's 'Jane Shore' and 'Lady Jane Gray'. She appears to have been a confirmed whig, as was her partner, Mainwaring, although after his death her loyalty was questioned. Mainwaring died in November 1712, leaving her and their son, Arthur, the majority of his estate, with only $1000 for his sister. The tory 'Examiner' railed against this ''Whig-Honesty'' to 'a 'Celebrated Actress', who is too much admired upon the Stage to have any Enquiry made into her Conduct behind the Curtain' (Lafler, 106). But the whig 'Flying-Post' came to her defence, vowing, 'I do not believe she is gone off [the whig cause]; so far from it, that I am credibly informed she has refused great Sums, because she insists upon her Lover's voting on our Side' (Egerton, 35). Oldfield's whiggish credentials were to be firmly established through her performance of the self-sacrificing Marcia in Joseph Addison's hit of 1713, 'Cato'. The play gathered cross-party support for its nationalist sentiment, and often Oldfield and Booth would have to pause in their performances to allow the applause to die down. Fairly soon after Mainwaring's demise Anne began an affair with Charles Churchill ('c'.1678-1745), a nephew (though illegitimate) of the first duke of Marlborough, and moved in his circle as if she were his wife. By him she had another son, Charles, who married Lady Catherine Walpole, the statesman's illegitimate daughter. Although Oldfield never left the stage, these alliances clearly left her financially secure, as her sale of $1500 of South Sea stock in 1723 indicates. 
One of Oldfield's greatest triumphs in the later years was her playing of Lady Townly in Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Husband' in January 1728. Cibber, who had completed the play, was delighted at her performance, made her a gift of 50 guineas, and raved about her acting in the preface to the printed work. He had considerably revised his first impression of her and now found her: 'of a lively Aspect and a Command in her Mien, that like the principal Figure in the Finest Paintings, first seizes, and longest delights the Eye of the Spectator. Her Voice was Sweet, strong, piercing, and melodious: her Pronunciation voluble, distinct, and musical; and her Emphasis always placed where the Spirit of the Sense, in her Periods, only demanded it.' Her benefit, which was the first in the 1729 season, apparently made her $500, and she was given by 'several Persons of Quality, &c. five, ten and twenty Guineas each'. This was on top of her salary of 12 guineas a week. Mrs Oldfield was so renowned by 1729 that, on Richard Steele's death, a paper quipped that she 'hath obtained a reversionary grant of the Patent of Master of the Theatre-Royal in Drury-lane, granted by his Majesty King George the 1st' (Lafler, 157). Her final stage appearance was as Lady Brute in Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Wife' on 28 April 1730. During her final illness she was loyally nursed by Margaret Saunders, whose acting career she had sponsored. Oldfield died at her home, 59 Grosvenor Street, London, on 23 October 1730, and her body was carried to Westminster Abbey, where she was buried on 27 October. Her will revealed the same financial acumen that had characterized all her affairs. She left the Grosvenor Street house she had had built to Charles Churchill and ordered her holdings converted into cash. Arthur Mainwaring was to have the interest on $5000, and the capital sum when he was thirty. Oldfield left her mother 10 guineas and a $60 annuity, Margaret Saunders had a $10 annuity, and her aunt Jane Gourlaw the same. The remainder of the estate was divided, with one-third going to Charles Churchill and two-thirds to Arthur. Her share in the patent at Drury Lane passed back to Cibber, Wilks, and Booth. The sale of her effects, which were all 'in the most elegant and Fashionable manner', including books in French and English, lasted five days. Her popularity is confirmed by the two biographies which were rushed out within the year, the short, anonymous 'Authentick Memoirs', and Edmund Curll's longer biography written under the pseudonym William Egerton. The memoirs were printed with engravings taken from the many portraits painted of her, most significantly those by Godfrey Kneller and J. Richardson. 


@@@@@


doc= 20678


Oldfield, Henry George (fl. c.1785-1805), antiquary and topographical artist, was the son of John Oldfield (died 1788), bricklayer and parish clerk of Wingham, Kent; nothing more is known of his background or early life. He was practising as an architect from premises in Scotland Yard, London, in the 1780s, and became architect to Princess Amelia (1710-1786), daughter of George II, who lived at Gunnersbury Park and was ranger of Richmond Park; no documents survive of the work that he carried out for her. His only known work is the rebuilding of the parish church of St Mary in Chatham, Kent, following a fire in 1786. A special vestry committee appointed him to survey the church in February of that year, and in July accepted his estimate of $7000 for the reconstruction, which was completed in 1788. 
Oldfield exhibited architectural designs at the Royal Academy, London, in 1787 and 1788 and at the Society of Artists in 1790. He had a keen interest in antiquities and topography and wrote a guide to St Giles's, Camberwell, about 1785. He was co-author, with Richard Randall Dyson ('b'. 1770), of 'The History and Antiquities of the Parish of Tottenham High Cross', which was published in 1790. Among the subscribers was the antiquary Richard Gough, who subscribed for five copies. A second edition was published in 1792; Oldfield's name was omitted from the title-page, which has led to the incorrect assumption that he had died by this date. In 1791 he wrote 'Anecdotes of Archery, Ancient and Modern', which he dedicated to the first marchioness of Salisbury. In January 1793 he was known to be living at Finchley Common, Middlesex, having left Scotland Yard about 1790. 
In the 1790s and early 1800s Oldfield made a living by selling his coloured topographical sketches of Hertfordshire. 1500 or more of these, bound in nine volumes, are in Hertfordshire Record Office (Herts. ALS); fewer than ten are dated, and only one bears his signature. He sold his drawings for 4's'. each plus expenses, but his sketch of the nave ceiling of St Albans Abbey cost 6 guineas at auction, or 5 guineas by private sale. His sketches of churches are accompanied by descriptions copied from Sir Henry Chauncy's 'The Historical Antiquities of Hertfordshire' (1700). The coloured sketches of buildings generally are simple but those of monuments, achievements, and coats of arms are of superior draughtsmanship and colouring. Oldfield's sketches initially were attributed by J. E. Cussans to John Pridmore (1760-1836), village schoolmaster at Tewin, Hertfordshire, for Pridmore had made copies for Earl Cowper. H. C. Andrews successfully demonstrated that the drawings were by Oldfield and that their original owner was John Meyrick (1753-1805), of Parsons Green, Fulham, who had commissioned Oldfield to record Hertfordshire's antiquities. Meyrick wrote to Oldfield a few months before his own death, on 7 January 1805; Oldfield's drawings were bought by Baron Dimsdale of Essendon, at the auction of Meyrick's library on 21 April 1806. 
Oldfield appears to have depended also on the patronage of Richard Gough and Thomas Baskerfield. In a letter to Gough of 2 May 1799 he wrote that he had been arrested for debt and imprisoned in Hertford gaol for the last two months. As he 'was wholly out of employ' he offered to make copies of his drawings for Gough; some of his drawings are in the Gough collection in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, and in Baskerfield's grangerized copies of Chauncy's and Nathanael Salmon's histories of Hertfordshire in the British Library. Nothing is known of what became of Oldfield after he completed his Hertfordshire drawings, or of when and where he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 20679


Oldfield, John (1626/7-1682), clergyman and ejected minister, was born near Chesterfield, Derbyshire. He was educated at the grammar school at Dronfield, Derbyshire, and though of no university, was justly reputed an able scholar. In 1647 he obtained the vicarage of Crich, Derbyshire, but left two years later, with the approval of the assembly of divines, to become rector of Carsington in the same county. He regularly attended the Wirksworth classis from December 1651 until its last recorded session in November 1658, serving as moderator fifteen times. Leading Derbyshire presbyterians, such as Robert Porter, Thomas Shelmerdine, and the Hieron brothers, John and Samuel, highly esteemed Oldfield, and invited him to preach before them on several occasions, including the first ordination held by the classis in January 1652. They approved his sermon of July 1655 as 'seasonable and orthodox', and, in January 1656, appointed him to deliver a lecture against Socinian errors (Cox, 'Minute Book', 186). Oldfield married Porter's sister, Ann; their eldest son was born on 1 November 1654, their youngest about 1673. Despite Calamy's claim that Oldfield won the affection of a peculiarly 'ticklish and capricious' flock, the fact that he had to request the assistance of lay elders from outside Carsington suggests his own parishioners were either unwilling or unfit to serve in that capacity (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.172). Nevertheless, he declined a more lucrative offer of the perpetual curacy of Tamworth to remain with his people. Oldfield's nonconformity cost him his living in 1662. Following his ejection he settled at Alfreton, Derbyshire, where, though occasionally attending public worship, he preached in conventicles. In 1672 he took out a licence to preach in the house of John Spateman at Road Nook, as well as in his own house and at Derby. 
Between 1663 and 1671 Oldfield published three works. His 'Stumbling at the Sufferings of the Godly', printed in 'England's Remembrancer' (1663), a collection of farewell sermons by ejected ministers, reveals his sense of having been abandoned at the Restoration. He expected the profane multitude to hail the ejections as well-deserved retribution, above all for the presbyterians' obnoxious attempts to restrict access to the sacrament. But it stung to hear even the godly whisper about their pastor as 'an ignorant, scrupulous, or obstinate fool'. Though it looked indeed as if God had 'spit in our faces', Oldfield reminded his hearers (and himself) that Christians were called to a life of suffering; besides, he added with more gusto, providence would eventually vindicate the godly ministers (Oldfield, 'Stumbling', 245, 241). He also defended his reluctance to submit to reordination and his refusal to accept ceremonies he deemed not only unedifying, but positively forbidden in scripture. A particularly full account of Oldfield's objections to conformity survives because, in addition to this sermon, Calamy printed lengthy extracts from his private deliberations drawn up in the agonizing months prior to August 1662. 
As befitted one who 'knew well the inside of Religion', Oldfield's two later books grappled with the problem of formalism, or the tendency to rest in outward performances, devoid of grace (Porter, 51). In 1666 he published 'The First, Last, or the Formal Hypocrite Further from Salvation... than the Prophane Sinner'. In his treatise on prayer, 'The Generation of Seekers' (1671), he positioned himself in the tradition of Jacobean puritanism, recalling the practical works of John Brinsley the elder, Robert Bolton, and Daniel Dyke. He hoped his exposition of the Lord's prayer would 'help to improve that which... is turned at this day into a piece of formality, by so frequent repetition in public' (Oldfield, 'Generation', epistle). 
Oldfield died in Alfreton on 5 June 1682, aged fifty-five, and was buried in Alfreton church, where there is a brass plate to his memory. With his wife, Ann Porter, he had four sons who became clergymen. The eldest son, John ('b'. 1654), received presbyterian ordination in September 1681, but afterwards conformed. The others adhered to their father's principles: the presbyterian minister and nonconformist tutor Joshua Oldfield (1656-1729); Nathaniel (died 1696), who was minister at Maid Lane, Southwark; and Samuel, who was pastor at Woolwich, Kent, and from 1719 at Ramsbury, Wiltshire. 
Oldfield's reflections as he faced his crisis in the summer of 1662 were to echo into the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. They were drawn on in the 1770s by the unitarian Theophilus Lindsey when he found that his beliefs meant that he could no longer in conscience retain his Anglican living, and Lindsey's writings are quoted by Elizabeth Gaskell in 'North and South'. Facing the same hard choice between conscience and retaining one's living, the Revd Hale takes inspiration from the 'soliloquy' of John Oldfield, 'a clergyman in a country parish, like myself... His trials are over, he fought the good fight': 'When thou canst no longer continue in thy work without dishonour to God, discredit to religion, foregoing thy integrity, wounding conscience, spoiling thy peace, and hazarding the loss of thy salvation; in a word, when the conditions upon which thou must continue (if thou wilt continue) in thy employments are sinful, and unwarranted by the word of God, thou mayest, yea, thou must believe that God will turn thy very silence, suspension, deprivation, and laying aside, to His glory, and the advancement of the Gospel's interest. (E. Gaskell, 'North and South', 1855, chap. 4)' 



@@@@@


doc= 20680


Oldfield, John (1789-1863), army officer, only son of John Nicholls Oldfield, lieutenant in the Royal Marines, who served with distinction on the staff of the army and with the 63rd regiment in the Anglo-American War, and of Elizabeth, only daughter of Lieutenant Hammond RN, was born at Portsmouth on 29 May 1789. He was descended from Sir Anthony Oldfield, created a baronet in 1660, and he claimed to be the fifth baronet, but the proof was incomplete. A re-creation was deemed to be necessary, the cost of which Oldfield declined to incur, and the matter was dropped. His father retired from the service about the date of Oldfield's birth, and purchased a small estate at Westbourne, Sussex, dying in 1793. 
In 1799 Oldfield's uncle, Major Thomas Oldfield, Royal Marines, was killed at Acre. His distinguished conduct led to offers from Lord St Vincent, Lord Nelson, and Sir Sidney Smith to provide for John Oldfield in the navy, while Earl Spencer offered a commission in the Royal Marines, and the Marquess Cornwallis a nomination for the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich. The latter was accepted. When Oldfield was old enough to go to Woolwich, he was only 4 feet 6 inches high, and a dispensing order had to be obtained from the master-general of the ordnance to allow his admission to the Royal Military Academy, the minimum standard being then 4 feet 9 inches. The junior cadets at that time went first to Great Marlow, Buckinghamshire, where he joined, on 23 August 1803, and was afterwards transferred to Woolwich. When George III inspected the cadets on 29 May 1805, Oldfield was one of the senior cadets. The king was struck with his diminutive stature, asked his name and age, and spoke warmly to the young man of his uncle's services at Acre. 
Oldfield joined the trigonometrical survey at Bodmin in Cornwall in September 1805, and was commissioned as second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 2 April 1806, stationed initially in Portsmouth. He was promoted lieutenant on 1 July. The following summer he was sent to Halifax, Nova Scotia, and after two years' service in North America he returned to England, being stationed in September 1809 at Dorchester. He was promoted second captain on 1 May 1811. 
From Dorchester, Oldfield went to Fort George in Scotland, and remained there until he embarked for the Netherlands in 1814. He landed at Hellevoetsluis on 28 March, and entered Antwerp with Sir Thomas Graham on 5 May. He was promoted captain on 26 January 1815. He was at Brussels on 7 April 1815, when news was received of Napoleon's escape from Elba, and at once he sent his family back to England. Oldfield was sent to Ypres to construct new defence works, and was entrusted with the inundation of the surrounding area, a difficult and unpopular operation. He shortly after joined the army of the duke of Wellington as brigade major of the Royal Engineers. He made a sketch plan of the field of Waterloo for the use of the duke, and took part in the battle of Waterloo and the subsequent occupation of Paris. In April 1819, in consequence of a reduction in the corps of Royal Engineers, he was placed on half pay, and passed his time chiefly at Westbourne. 
In October 1823 Oldfield was sent on a special commission to the West Indies. He returned in 1824, and was quartered for some years in Ireland. On 23 July 1830 he was promoted brevet major. In September he was appointed commanding royal engineer (CRE) in Newfoundland. On 19 November 1831 he was promoted lieutenant-colonel, and in October 1835 returned to England to be appointed to the command of the Royal Engineers at Jersey. His services were belatedly recognized in 1836 when he was appointed KH. In March 1839 he was sent to Canada as CRE and colonel on the staff; he was there during the French Canadian uprising and rendered valuable service. On 9 November 1841 he was promoted colonel in the army and appointed aide-de-camp to the queen. He returned from Canada in the spring of 1843, and was appointed CRE in the western district. He was promoted regimental colonel on 9 November 1846 and was appointed to command the Royal Engineers in Ireland in 1848. On 20 June 1854 he was promoted major-general and went to live at Westbourne, becoming lieutenant-general on 10 May 1859. He was made a colonel-commandant of the corps of Royal Engineers on 25 October 1859, and was promoted general on 3 April 1862. 
Oldfield was married three times. First, on 12 March 1810, at Dorchester, he married Mary, daughter of Christopher Arden of Dorchester, Dorset; they had seven children, and Mary died at Le Mans, France, on 6 July 1820. On 8 July 1822, at Cheltenham, he married Alicia, daughter of the Revd T. Hume, rector of Arden; they had eight children and Alicia died at Plymouth on 5 February 1840. On 12 March 1849, at Plymouth, he married Cordelia Anne, daughter of the Revd D. Yonge; she survived him. Oldfield died at his home, Oldfield Lawn, Westbourne, Sussex, on 2 August 1863, and was buried at Westbourne. 
Oldfield's eldest son, John Rawdon, was a colonel in the Bengal Engineers; Anthony, a captain in the Royal Artillery, was killed at Sevastopol; Rudolphus, a captain, RN, and aide-de-camp to the queen, died on 6 February 1877; Richard became colonel-commandant, Royal Artillery (1900), and a general officer. 


@@@@@


doc= 20681


Oldfield, Joshua (1656-1729), Presbyterian minister, was born at Carsington, Derbyshire, on 2 December 1656, the second son of John Oldfield (1626/7-1682) and his wife, Ann, daughter of William Porter, a musician of Nottingham. His father was the rector of Carsington until he was ejected from the living in 1662, after which he continued to preach at presbyterian conventicles. Joshua received his early education from his father, and the family lived in the area of Alfreton, Derbyshire. In the 1670s he studied at Magdalene College, Cambridge, which he entered as a sizar in February 1674, and also at Lincoln College, Oxford, and Christ's College, Cambridge. He did not take a degree, however, as he refused to subscribe to the articles of the church. Oldfield followed his father into the ministry as a presbyterian, for which he prepared at John Shuttlewood's academy at Sulby, Northamptonshire. He became private chaplain to Sir John Gell at Hopton Hall, Derbyshire, and later tutor to the son of Paul Foley who subsequently became speaker of the House of Commons. It was during this period that he received tempting offers to conform but always turned them down. 
In the 1680s Oldfield was for a short time chaplain to Lady Susan Lort in Pembrokeshire, and gained experience in the ministry in both Dublin and at Fetter Lane, London. He became the first minister of a presbyterian congregation at Tooting, Surrey, in 1686 and was ordained at Mansfield, Nottinghamshire, on 18 March 1687. Early in 1691 he became minister of the congregation at Oxford, where he renewed his friendship with Edmund Calamy, whom he had met at Tooting. Calamy says of Oldfield at Oxford that 'he was in his prime... With him I daily conversed... [and] fell into the utmost freedom with him, and have reason to be thankful for it' (Calamy, 'Life', 1.224). He adds that Oldfield took great pains with his work although he had little encouragement. He was shy and not free in conversations with university students and his small congregation, but his profile increased in the city following the part he played in a public discussion on infant baptism. 
In 1694 Oldfield became copastor with William Tong of the presbyterian meeting at Coventry. There he quickly formed an academy for training students for the ministry with the assistance of Tong. This brought him into wider prominence, with the result that in October 1697 he was arraigned before the ecclesiastical court for teaching young men without a licence from the bishop. He resisted the action which was then moved to Lichfield, where the cause was listed as teaching with no licence, not subscribing to the whole 'Book of Common Prayer' and all the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', and contrary to the 77th canon. Oldfield demanded a hearing in the public courts before the king's bench in London, where in due course the action was dropped, 'Not without intimation from his Majesty (upon his having the state of the case laid before him) that he was not pleased with such Prosecutions' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 1.553). 
Oldfield left Coventry in 1699 to succeed Thomas Kentish as minister at Globe Alley meeting, Maid Lane, Southwark, a post previously held by his brother Nathaniel (his other brothers John and Samuel were also ministers). He took his academy with him, and carried it forward first in Southwark and later at Hoxton Square, London. The teaching he provided at Hoxton in association with William Lorimer, John Spademan, and later Jean Cappel was recognized as among the best available to dissenters at the time. 'He allowed his pupils the greatest freedom of access and conversation, and yet kept up a just authority and esteem among them' (Harris, 40). 
It was in the early years of the eighteenth century that Oldfield became more widely known, and established contacts with both John Locke and Isaac Newton: 'He was naturally very thoughtful and of great penetration. Sometimes he forgot to eat and was unaffected by noise around him. He was not always so happy in expression, and conveying his sense to others... He was a man of staid passion, and great meekness and calmness of temper... He was of no party, but that of God against the Devil and of all serious Christians; and had great charity and moderation to those who differed from him. (Harris, 39)' Oldfield was considered as a minister who avoided extremes in religious controversy, but who was at the same time a strong supporter of civil and religious liberty. The University of Edinburgh recognized his learning and position among the dissenters by awarding him a DD in 1709. 
Oldfield's published output was meagre for a man of his abilities, and consisted mainly of sermons and a work on the Trinity published in 1721. His congregation dwindled until it was revived with the appointment of Obediah Hughes as his copastor from 1721. Oldfield is mainly known for being the chairman of the Salters' Hall debates on subscription to the Westminster confession in 1719, perhaps the defining event for dissenters in the first half of the eighteenth century. His eirenical approach to religious matters meant that he was probably the best man for this difficult task although he could not prevent the split taking place between those who insisted on subscription to a Trinitarian creed and those who took their stand on the sufficiency of scripture. While orthodox in theology he voted for the non-subscribers probably on the basis that the need to affirm religious liberty and freedom was paramount. Some saw him as partly responsible for the split, as a decision he made as chairman of the conference was its immediate cause. 
Oldfield was one of the first trustees of the various foundations made under the will of his close associate Dr Daniel Williams, and in 1723 he was appointed one of the original distributors of government money under the English 'regium donum' to poor ministers and their widows. He may have been the presbyterian minister who married Catherine Massey at Ashbourne, Derbyshire, on 29 July 1707; there is no record of any children. He died at his home in Redcross Street, Southwark, on 8 November 1729 while still the minister at Southwark, and was buried in the same month in Bunhill Fields burial-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 20682


Oldfield, Thomas (1756-1799), marine officer, was born at Stone, Staffordshire, on 21 June 1756, the third son of Humphrey Oldfield (died 'c'.1775), also an officer in the Royal Marines; his mother was Elizabeth, daughter of Major-General Nicholls, of the East India Company. 
Oldfield accompanied his father to America in the autumn of 1774, or in the following spring, and served as a volunteer with the marine battalion at Bunker Hill on 17 June 1775. In this action he was twice wounded, and his wrist permanently injured. Shortly afterwards, his father died and Oldfield accepted a commission in a provincial loyalist corps -- possibly the mounted legion led by Lieutenant-Colonel Banastre Tarleton. In 1776 he took up a commission in the Royal Marines which was intended for his brother, but which had been made out in his name by mistake. He was promoted to first lieutenant on 16 April 1778, but at the siege of Charles Town, South Carolina, in 1780, he served with the 63rd regiment. Noticed for his intelligence and gallantry, he was placed on the staff of the quartermaster-general's department, and as deputy assistant quartermaster-general he was attached to the headquarters of Lord Cornwallis and to Lord Rawdon who both repeatedly testified to his zeal, gallantry, and ability. He was taken prisoner with Lord Cornwallis at the capitulation of Yorktown. 
After the war Oldfield returned to England, and while quartered at Portsmouth, purchased a small place in the parish of Westbourne, which he named Oldfield Lawn. It was presumably at this time that he married, and started a family; details of his wife are not known. 
In 1788 Oldfield went to the West Indies, but returned in very poor health. He was promoted captain in 1793 and returned to the West Indies in the 'Sceptre' (64 guns, Captain Dacres). In 1794 Oldfield commanded the Royal Marines landed from the squadron to co-operate with the army on the island of Santo Domingo. He reputedly distinguished himself on every possible occasion. In storming one of the enemy's works at San Nicolas Mole he was the first to enter it, and with his own hand struck the enemy's colours. He returned to England in the autumn of 1795, again in precarious health. 
In 1796 Oldfield was employed on the recruiting service at Manchester and Warrington. The following year he embarked on board the 'Theseus' (74 guns), and sailed to join the squadron under the orders of the earl of St Vincent off Cadiz. Upon the 'Theseus''s reaching her destination she became the flagship of Rear-Admiral Horatio Nelson, then serving under St Vincent. Oldfield was wounded on the night of 5 July 1797 during the bombardment of the Spanish fleet in Cadiz, while in a boat with Nelson. His wound could not have been too serious, however, for he quickly recovered and on the night of 24 July was able to lead the marines in Nelson's brave but disastrous attack on Santa Cruz, Tenerife. In attempting to land, his boat was swamped, but he swam ashore, and on landing injured himself. Oldfield looked back on these events as the hardest actions he had fought. 
In 1798 the 'Theseus' was detached to join Nelson, who had shifted his flag to the 'Vanguard' and gone in pursuit of the French squadron up the Mediterranean. Oldfield related in a private letter how, after the disappointment of not finding the French fleet at Alexandria, the 'Zealous' made the signal at midday on 1 August that it was in Abu Qir Bay. At 3.30 p.m. the French fleet was plainly seen, and an hour later Nelson ordered the 'Theseus' to go ahead of him. Oldfield in the 'Theseus' was alongside the 'Guerrier' at a quarter to seven and having poured in a broadside which carried away the latter's main and mizen masts, she passed on to the 'Spartiole' and anchored abreast of her, Nelson anchoring on the other side ten minutes later. After the action, Oldfield (the senior Royal Marines officer in Nelson's fleet) was sent with his marines to the 'Tonnant', to guard upwards of 600 prisoners. 
Oldfield was promoted major on 7 October 1798, and the 'Theseus' spent some time at Gibraltar and Lisbon repairing damage sustained in the battle of the Nile. Then, with Oldfield on board, she was sent to join the blockade of the French army in Alexandria, and arrived there on 2 February 1799. On 8 March she sailed for Acre under Sir Sidney Smith's orders to organize the defences of that town against Bonaparte's advancing army, arriving on 12 March and being joined by Smith himself in the 'Tigre' three days later. For two months British seamen and marines from the two ships, along with the Turkish defenders, were besieged in the town by 15,000 French troops. But Oldfield did not live to see the siege lifted on 20 May. At daybreak on 7 April a party of the defenders with Oldfield leading the centre of three columns sallied out from the walls to attack and destroy a mine which was being dug by the French to weaken their defences. Oldfield's column advanced to the entrance of the mine and according to General Berthier, chief of staff of the French army in Egypt, attacked like heroes. Oldfield was one of the first to be cut down. Both sides tried to recover his body, a French grenadier succeeding, reputedly by hooking a halberd into Oldfield's side and dragging him off, only to discover that he was still alive. Oldfield died shortly afterwards, and was buried with full military honours by the French, in recognition of his bravery. A tablet to his memory was later erected in the garrison chapel, Portsmouth. Sir Sidney Smith praised Oldfield's courage in his official dispatch; and Napoleon, on his way to exile on St Helena, is said to have spoken of Oldfield's gallantry to the marine officers on board the 'Northumberland'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20683


Oldfield, Thomas Hinton Burley (1755-1822), political reformer and historian, was born in Derbyshire. The identity of his parents remains undiscovered and very few details of his personal life are known, except that he fathered several children, two of whom became merchants in Baltimore. Having earned a living practising law, Oldfield is referred to in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' as 'an attorney of great celebrity' ('GM', 566), although his name is unknown to the law list. As a lawyer, Oldfield was actively engaged in politics as an election agent for candidates, a duty which encompassed the important responsibility of organizing and managing local campaigns. From 1777 Oldfield maintained a close association with various groups for parliamentary reform, including the Society for Constitutional Information, earning a reputation as a zealous pioneer of parliamentary reform. His connection with these societies ensured his familiarity with many reformers of the day, but it was, according to his obituary, his 'cheerful temper' ('Monthly Magazine', 178) which particularly endeared him to friends like Sir George Saville, John Jebb, Christopher Wyvill, Granville Sharp, Major John Cartwright, and John Horne Tooke. 
As an author Oldfield found another vent for his political beliefs, and was quite productive and influential in this pursuit despite the somewhat disparaging reference to him, by one contemporary, as 'an obscure writer on the Boroughs' (Mathias, 30). His first book chronicled 'An Entire and Complete History, Political and Personal, of the Boroughs of Great Britain' (3 vols., 1792), and was followed by a 'History of the Original Constitution of Parliaments' (1797). Oldfield continued to expound the ideas of electoral reform through such historical treatises as a 'History of the House of Commons' (4 vols., 1812), 'The Representative History of Great Britain and Ireland' (6 vols., 1816), and 'A Key to the House of Commons' (1820). Oldfield did not publish any further works before his death on 25 July 1822 at the age of sixty-seven. The cause of death and place of burial remain unknown, and the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and 'Monthly Magazine' present conflicting accounts of the place where Oldfield passed away, with the former suggesting he died in Exeter on his way to the Cornwall assize and the latter stating that he expired at his apartments in Skinner Street, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 20684


Oldhall, Sir William (d. 1460), soldier and speaker of the House of Commons, was the son of Sir Edmund Oldhall (died 1417) of Narford, Bodney, East Dereham, and Little Fransham, Norfolk, and either his first wife, Mary, daughter and coheir of Henry English of Wood Ditton, Cambridgeshire, or his second, Alice, daughter of Geoffrey Fransham of Norfolk. As an esquire he indented on 1 May 1415 to serve with three archers under Thomas Beaufort, earl of Dorset (died 1426), but his actual presence on the Agincourt campaign is not proven. In the following year he served as a mounted man-at-arms at Harfleur under Beaufort, and was present at the siege of Rouen in 1418-19. Oldhall had to resist efforts to deprive him of part of his inheritance when his father died intestate in 1417, but achieved this through a petition to parliament in 1421. 
Oldhall served in France with Beaufort in 1421 and 1423, and was present at the battle of Cravant, where he was knighted. He was probably also present at the battle of Verneuil in the following year. By Michaelmas 1424 he had been appointed seneschal of Normandy (although he seems to have held the office only for one year), and participated in campaigns into Anjou and Maine (1424-8). He held a series of captaincies in Lower Normandy: Essay (September 1424 to about August 1429); Fresnay (December 1429 to September 1430); Alencon (March 1430 to early in 1431). He also served on an embassy to Burgundy in August 1426. Present at a great council in England in the late spring of 1434, he crossed again to France as captain of Essay and 'bailli' of Alencon, posts he held from 9 September 1434 to 30 March 1438. By December 1436 he was member of the royal council in Normandy, and was lieutenant of Bayeux in 1438-9. 
When the duke of York began his second term as lieutenant-general in France in March 1441, Oldhall, as well as holding a number of further captaincies in Normandy (Regneville from 1442 to at least August 1444; Coutances from October 1441 to December 1443, when he was replaced by Sir Thibault Gorges; and briefly Pont-l'Eveque, Lisieux, and Orbec in 1445), became one of the duke's closest advisers; by 1445 he was his chamberlain as well as overseer of his lands in Normandy, helping to maintain York's interests in the duchy after the latter returned to England. But he became increasingly involved with York's English interests, and may have crossed with the duke to Ireland in July 1449. He sat as MP for Hertfordshire in the parliament of November 1450, and was elected speaker, clear proof of support for the duke in the Commons, but when York's fortunes began to wane Oldhall found himself vulnerable, and in November 1451 he was forced to take sanctuary in St Martin's-le-Grand, London, accused of stealing the duke of Somerset's goods. There he remained, twice indicted of treason in 1452, outlawed in March 1453 for not appearing for trial, and attainted by parliament on 22 June 1453. When York became protector in 1454 Oldhall obtained a writ of error, but the reversal of his attainder and his liberty were only achieved in July 1455, following York's victory at St Albans. His connection with York persisted. He was with the duke at Ludford Bridge on 12 October 1459, was attainted again in December 1459, and may then have gone to Ireland with York; both were back in London in October 1460, when Oldhall's attainder was again reversed. 
Oldhall had married, probably by 1423, Margaret, daughter of William, Lord Willoughby of Eresby (died 1410) and widow of Sir Thomas Skipwith (died 1418). They had a daughter, Mary, who married Walter Gorges, son of Sir Thibault Gorges of Wraxall, Somerset. Margaret was still alive in 1450, but probably died within the next four years. John Paston failed to secure Oldhall's marriage to his sister Elizabeth. Oldhall had been granted several estates in France, in addition to the English lands inherited from his father. His wife brought him lands in the West Riding of Yorkshire and Lincolnshire which had been the property of her first husband, although some were held only until his stepson came of age, and he himself purchased estates in south-east Hertfordshire, including the manor of Hunsdon, which he bought from York in 1447 and where he built a fine house. He had further grants made to him by the duke of York of lands in Ireland, Hertfordshire, Kent, and Buckinghamshire. Oldhall died in London between 17 and 20 November 1460 and was buried in the church of St Michael Paternoster Royal. 


@@@@@


doc= 20685


Oldham, Hugh (c.1450-1519), bishop of Exeter, was a younger son of Roger and Margery Oldham, apparently minor gentry with property at Ancoats in Salford, Lancashire. His brother Bernard (died 1515) also became a cleric, rising, by his brother's gift, to be archdeacon of Cornwall and treasurer of Exeter Cathedral. Hugh Oldham is first mentioned as a 'clerk, of Durham' in 1475, which suggests that he was born about 1450 and brought up or given early employment in the household of Laurence Booth, bishop of Durham (died 1480), whose own family came from Barton, near Eccles, which was close to Ancoats. By 1488 he was rector of Lanivet, Cornwall, and servant to William Smith (died 1514), keeper of the hanaper in the royal chancery. He also attended university, although it is not clear when. In 1493, on a claim of having studied arts for four years and canon and civil law for four, at Oxford in each case, he was granted a grace to enter in law at Cambridge, evidently as a bachelor of civil (and perhaps canon) law, not as a doctor. There is no contemporary evidence to support Thomas Fuller's assertion of 1662 that he was a member of Queens' College, Cambridge. 
By 1492 Oldham had entered the service of Lady Margaret Beaufort, countess of Richmond and Derby (died 1509) -- a relationship that seems to have begun in his maturity, rather than through his being educated by her as used to be supposed. He was receiver of her west country estates in that year and rose to be chancellor of her household by 1503, a position he resigned on becoming a bishop. Another of his patrons was his old employer William Smith, now bishop of Lichfield, who in 1496 made Oldham master of the hospital of St John, Lichfield, which Smith had recently reformed to include a free grammar school and almshouse; the post did not require residence. During the 1490s Oldham gained a large amount of church preferment, including cathedral canonries at Exeter, Lichfield, Lincoln, St Paul's, Salisbury, and York, several parochial benefices, the deanery of Wimborne, Dorset in 1499, and the archdeaconry of Exeter about 1502. By 24 January 1503 he was important enough to be included in the group of leading clergy and laity who laid the foundation stone of Henry VII's chapel in Westminster Abbey. On 27 November 1504 he was provided by the pope to be bishop of Exeter and was consecrated on 12 January 1505. Later tradition at Exeter attributed this promotion to Lady Margaret's influence. 
Oldham's episcopal register, though informative, is only a selective record of his activities, but he seems to have been a conscientious bishop. He anticipated the Reformation by annexing the decayed hospitals of Clyst Gabriel and Warland, Devon, to the vicars-choral of Exeter Cathedral to provide common meals in their college (1508-9). He issued statutes for the cathedral in 1511, regulating a wide variety of matters, and joined with Sir John Speke, a local knight, in adding two new chapels to the east end of the building. His closure of Warland Hospital in 1509 involved a successful struggle with the Trinitarian friars of Hounslow, Middlesex, who claimed the place as their house, but his attempts to exert authority over the Benedictine abbey of Tavistock, Devon, were frustrated in 1517 when the abbey gained papal exemption from episcopal jurisdiction. The Exeter historian John Hooker, who collected memories of Oldham in the later sixteenth century, wrote that 'albeit he was not very much learned, yet [he was] a great favourer and a friend both to learning and to learned men' (Exeter City Archives, bk 51, fol. 337'r'). This is supported by evidence of an examination system for ordination candidates during his reign, and by his choice of university graduates for most of the diocesan officers and cathedral clergy whom he appointed. Like William Smith and Richard Fox (died 1528), bishop of Durham and Winchester, with whom he had close relationships, he developed a strong interest in promoting education. At Exeter he ordered the adolescent clerks of the cathedral choir to attend the city high school, while at Manchester, near his place of origin, he played a major role in establishing the free grammar school, a project which had begun in 1508. Oldham gave money and property to the school, and its statutes (1515, revised in 1525), which adopted practices from the school foundations of William Smith at Banbury, Oxfordshire, and John Colet at St Paul's, London, probably reflect his influence. 
Oldham also patronized higher education. According to Hooker, he thought of assisting Exeter College, Oxford, and William Smith's new college of Brasenose there, but was rebuffed in both cases -- an assertion untrue in the case of Brasenose, where Oldham's coat of arms formerly appeared in a library window. His chief university benefaction, however, was directed to Richard Fox's Oxford foundation, Corpus Christi College. Oldham gave $4000 and land in Chelsea towards the project, was officially recognized as a benefactor, and was commemorated in daily prayers. Fox's first known scheme for this college, dated 1513, envisaged a foundation for monks and secular scholars, but in 1517, when the first statutes were issued, the monks were omitted. The Exeter tradition collected by Hooker attributed this change to Oldham, who allegedly counselled Fox that 'monks were but a sort of bussing [buzzing] flies, and whose state could not long endure' (Vowell, fol. h2), or, as another version of the story put it, 'What, my lord, shall we build houses and provide livelihoods for a company of bussing monks, whose end and fall we ourselves may live to see?' ('Holinshed's Chronicles', 3.617). The anecdote probably takes some of its colour from post-Reformation hindsight. 
Hooker summarized Oldham as 'a man having more zeal than knowledge and more devotion than learning; somewhat rough in speeches but friendly in doings' (Vowell, fol. h2). The bishop made his will on 16 December 1518. He died on 25 June 1519, and was buried in the chapel he had built in Exeter Cathedral and dedicated to St Saviour. His tomb includes a painted effigy and there is a portrait of him at Corpus Christi College. 


@@@@@


doc= 20686


Oldham, John (bap. 1592, d. 1636), trader and colonist in America, was baptized at All Saints', Derby, Derbyshire, on 14 July 1592, the son of William Oldham. Nothing else is known of his early life until he sailed to Plymouth, New England, in 1623 on the 'Anne', with his wife (the widow of one Bridges), his stepson William Bridges, and at least seven other associates. Although his sister Lucretia married, at Plymouth, Jonathan Brewster, son of the separatist leader William Brewster, Oldham was one of the early Plymouth residents who were not associated with the Leiden congregation, and had no interest in promoting the religious activities of that group. Instead, he allied himself in 1624 with the newly arrived John Lyford, a Church of England clergyman and not a separatist. Oldham, Lyford, and others were soon banished from Plymouth, settled briefly at Nantasket, and then dispersed. By 1628 Oldham had redeemed himself sufficiently in the eyes of the Plymouth authorities that he was assigned the job of escorting back to England in 1628 the troublemaker Thomas Morton of Merrymount. While in England in 1629 Oldham approached the Council for New England and obtained a grant of land in Massachusetts Bay, which conflicted with the grant made by the king to the Massachusetts Bay Company. This led, not surprisingly, to disputes between Oldham and the Massachusetts Bay Company. The company got the better of the argument but Oldham did end up with a grant of 500 acres of land within the boundaries of the town of Watertown. He settled there in 1630 and embarked on a career of coastal trading. 
By 1636 Oldham had made useful contacts with the Narragansetts, and had received a grant from their leader, Canonicus, of Prudence Island in Narragansett Bay. In July that year he was trading in the area of Block Island and Fisher's Island with 'two English boys, and two Indians of Narragansett' (Bradford, 166) when another coastal trader discovered Oldham's boat, containing his mutilated body. This incident was but one of the many episodes of conflict between the Narragansetts and the Pequots which led up to the Pequot War of 1637. 
At the time of Oldham's death he was still considered a member of the Watertown congregation, but had apparently moved his residence, or at least the base of his trading activities, to Hartford, for his will was proved there, and showed $504 9's'. 3died in debts, against $136 66's'. 21died ['sic'] in assets. In 1644 his stepson William Bridges unsuccessfully petitioned the Massachusetts Bay general court for a grant of land in consideration of Oldham's services to the colony. 


@@@@@


doc= 20687


Oldham, John (1653-1683), poet, was born on 9 August 1653 at Shipton Moyne, Gloucestershire, where his grandfather, also John (1594-1657), was rector. The poet's father, another John (1629-1716), was rector of the adjoining parish of Long Newnton, Wiltshire, from which he was ejected in 1662, but he survived on the proceeds of a small estate and a school. He took charge of his son's early education before sending him to Tetbury grammar school for two years, and thence to Oxford, where Oldham matriculated at St Edmund Hall on 17 June 1670. In 1674 his BA was granted subject to the performance of certain public exercises, but Oldham did not complete these, and returned home without a degree, probably to teach in his father's school for a year or two. 
Thereafter, while Oldham developed his poetic skills, he earned his living as a schoolmaster and private tutor, first as usher at Whitgift School, Croydon (1676-9), then in the household of Sir Edward Thurland at Reigate. At one or more points in his life he seems to have made a bid for independence, and 'An allusion to Martial' ('c'.1681) recounts that the author is living in a garret at the far end of Clerkenwell -- though this need not be autobiographical. But (as several of his poems make clear) poetry did not pay, and he soon took another tutorship, this time in the family of Sir William Hickes, of Low Leyton, Essex. Here he studied medicine with the distinguished physician Dr Robert Lower. In June 1682 William Pierrepont, fourth earl of Kingston, became his patron. 
Oldham's early poems were addressed to friends and neighbours, with some love poems and Pindaric imitations of Cowley, notably a long ode in memory of his close friend Charles Morwent (1675), and another on the death of the Croydon worthy Harman Atwood (1677). In 1677 he published a Pindaric poem on the marriage of Prince William of Orange and Princess Mary, which was his first work to appear in print. Cowley would remain a principal influence, and the Pindaric ode a favourite form. But at some point Oldham grew acquainted with the poetry and reputation of the earl of Rochester, and then with the earl himself. His first poem to achieve renown was 'Aude aliquid. Ode' (written in 1676 at Croydon), which circulated in manuscript and appeared in a pirated printed edition in 1679 under the misleading title 'A Satyr Against Vertue'. This was imagined to be Rochester's speech on smashing the phallic glass sundials in the king's privy garden in 1675, and its satirical impersonation of Rochester's libertine stance drew an appreciative visit from the earl and his entourage. The 'Dithyrambique on Drinking: Suppos'd to be Spoken by Rochester at the Guinny-Club' and 'Sardanapalus', an erotic heroic extravaganza too obscene for publication, completed a trio of poems satirically mimicking libertine attitudes with such bravura that some readers failed to see their ironic purpose. 'Upon the Author of the Play call'd 'Sodom'' (the pornographic drama often attributed to Rochester, and certainly from his circle) is itself characterized by obscenity, and it too remained in manuscript until it was printed in the unauthorized 'Poems on Several Occasions by the Right Honourable the E. of R -- ' (1680). Sir William Soame criticized Oldham's penchant for obscenity in manuscript verses addressed 'To the author of 'Sardanapalus', upon that and his other writings', urging him to refine his verse through the study of Horace and Boileau -- which in due course Oldham did. 
Oldham's first substantial volume was 'Satyrs upon the Jesuits' (written in 1679, published anonymously in 1680, dated 1681). Prompted by the Popish Plot, and informed by extensive reading, these anti-Catholic satires attacked the Jesuits' equivocation, murderous plotting, and gulling of the populace. The first of them, 'Garnet's Ghost', appeared as a pirated publication in 1679, and its evident popularity may have prompted Oldham to complete the set of four satires and to add a prologue. They are robust, vigorous work, rough in versification, coarse in vocabulary, and unsparing in their vilification of Catholic beliefs. They demonstrate Oldham's mastery of the couplet form, and his continuing interest in heroic satirical modes. To many readers these have been the poems by which Oldham has been known, but they are unedifying, and better work would follow. The volume was rounded out by 'Aude aliquid. Ode', 'A Satyr upon a Woman, who by her Falshood and Scorn was the Death of my Friend', and a translation of 'The Passion of Byblis' from Ovid's 'Metamorphoses', the latter prompted by the appearance in 1680 of John Dryden's 'Ovid's Epistles'. Of these, 'Byblis' still deserves attention (and was admired at the time) for its portrayal of the psychology of sexual desire, and shows more variety of tone and a subtler handling of verse than the rest of the collection. 
As if to demonstrate that he was more than a purveyor of rough satire and near pornography, Oldham's next volume, 'Some New Pieces' (1681), also anonymous, featured a range of translations from the classics. Here Oldham found his true metier, developing the art of 'imitation' or the free transposition of Latin originals into contemporary English dress. The collection starts with a version of Horace's 'Ars poetica' which breathes Oldham's characteristic devotion to poetry as a vocation, followed by his 'Serm.', i.9 ('the bore'), in which the scene is transferred to London and Oldham shows his genius for catching conversational idiom in verse. Imitations of Horace's 'Odes', i.31 and ii.14, have a more meditative tone. Among the finest of Oldham's poems is 'A letter from the country to a friend in town, giving an account of the author's inclinations to poetry' (written in 1678), which expresses his passionate commitment to the life of a poet despite its lack of financial rewards, and includes a remarkable passage imagining the emergence of poetry from the author's unconscious into his conscious mind: '
When at first search I traverse o're my mind, 

Nought but a dark and empty Void I find: 

Some little hints at length, like sparks, break thence, 

And glimm'ring Thoughts just dawning into sence: 

Confus'd a while the mixt Idea's lie, 

With nought of mark to be discover'd by, 

Like colours undistinguisht in the night, 

Till the dusk images, mov'd to the light, 

Teach the discerning Faculty to chuse, 

Which it had best adopt, and which refuse. 
(ll. 168-77)' Besides a Pindaric 'Praise of Homer', and a pair of religious poems, the volume also includes a beautiful, mellifluous elegy for Rochester (praised by Ezra Pound in his 'ABC of Reading', 1934, for its cantabile qualities) in the form of a translation of Moschus's pastoral lament for Bion. This fine collection demonstrated Oldham's range of voices, and staked a claim for him as a leading figure among those poets such as Dryden and Roscommon who were fashioning a distinctively English form of classicism. 

'Poems and Translations' (1683) continued the trend established by 'Some New Pieces', and indicated that Oldham had been studying the recent satires of Nicolas Boileau-Despreaux. An unfinished manuscript translation of 'Le lutrin' written in 1678 shows that he had been experimenting with Boileau in his attempts to catch the right tone for heroic or mock heroic satire, and this new volume included versions of Boileau's 'Satires' 5 and 8. It was Boileau's transposition of Juvenal's 'Satire 3' from Rome to Paris that inspired Oldham to his own vigorous imitation of the same original, a vivid evocation of the hazards of life in Restoration London, rendered with a fair imitation of Juvenal's overheated indignation. Other classical translations broaden the collection in style and subject: verses from Anacreon, Catullus, Horace, Martial, Petronius. Two other satires attest to Oldham's fiercely proud independence. 'A Satyr: the Person of Spenser is Brought in, Dissuading the Author from the Study of Poetry' denounces the contemporary neglect of poets and poetry. 'A Satyr addressed to a friend that is about to leave the university and come abroad in the world' includes sharp passages on the humiliations of life as a chaplain or tutor in great houses, and concludes with an eloquent version of the fable of the wolf and the dog. The wolf envies the dog's comfortable condition, until he notices the scar of the collar round his neck, and proudly embraces freedom with poverty rather than luxury with servitude. 
Oldham died of smallpox in the earl of Kingston's house at Holme Pierrepont, Nottinghamshire, where he was buried in the local church on 7 December 1683, aged only thirty. A fine memorial was erected over his grave in the style of Grinling Gibbons. After his death, a volume of 'Remains' (1684, 2nd edn 1687) collected up some minor pieces, but is chiefly remarkable for the commemorative poems with which it begins, headed by Dryden's 'To the Memory of Mr Oldham', and continuing with tributes by Thomas D'Urfey, Thomas Flatman, and Nahum Tate among others. Dryden sees him as a kindred spirit: '
Farewell, too little and too lately known, 

Whom I began to think and call my own: 

For sure our Souls were near ally'd; and thine 

Cast in the same poetic mould with mine. 
(ll. 1-4)' It is possible that the 'Satyrs upon the Jesuits' helped stimulate Dryden to write 'Absalom and Achitophel', and that Oldham's classical imitations of the early 1680s encouraged Dryden to embark on the succession of magnificent translations which appeared from 1685 onwards. To Dryden, Oldham's verse was rough, but that was appropriate for satire, for '
Wit will shine 

Through the harsh cadence of a rugged line. 

A noble Error, and but seldom made, 

When Poets are by too much force betray'd. 
(ll. 15-18)' Oldham's four volumes were gathered together with a new title-page to constitute his 'Works' (1684) and frequently reprinted into the early eighteenth century. Pope read him carefully, but thought him 'too much like Billingsgate' (Spence, 1.202), and he was not included among Johnson's poets. A corrupt and bowdlerized selection appeared in 1854. With renewed interest in Restoration satire and in the history of the classical imitation, his reputation grew somewhat in the twentieth century, thanks largely to the scholarly and critical labours of Harold F. Brooks, which culminated in his edition of 1987. This adds a number of poems printed from manuscript, including material from Oldham's rough drafts and fair copies which are preserved in the Bodleian Library (MS Rawlinson poet. 123). 
Though uneven, and in places scatological and obscene, Oldham's work has passion and power; his range is wider than is commonly supposed, he shows great versatility in his handling of the couplet, and adopts an attractive variety of conversational voices. Liberty and poetry are his most cherished themes. Dryden thought of him as the great classical poet whom England never had -- the heir who died before his time, the lost hero of Augustan England. It is in these terms that Dryden takes leave of Oldham, in moving lines which conclude what is perhaps the finest elegy in the language: '
Once more, hail and farewel; farewel thou young, 

But ah too short, 'Marcellus' of our Tongue; 

Thy Brows with Ivy, and with Laurels bound; 

But Fate and gloomy Night encompass thee around. 
(ll. 22-25)' 



@@@@@


doc= 20688


Oldham, John (1779-1840), artist and mechanical inventor, was born in Dublin. He served an apprenticeship to an engraver at a calico printing works in Dublin but subsequently pursued a career as an artist. While based at Newry he also developed his interest in mechanics. He invented a machine for individually numbering banknotes to prevent forgery and, in 1812, laid his plans before the Bank of Ireland. In 1814 he was appointed as full-time artist to the bank, and signed over his rights to the invention. His son Thomas Oldham ['see below'] became his apprentice and assistant in 1816, succeeding to his father's position in 1836. Between 1836 and 1840, in the service of the Bank of England, John Oldham made further improvements to the machinery for printing and numbering banknotes, which effected considerable savings in manpower. The machinery continued in use until 1852-3, when a system of surface printing was adopted. 
Oldham took a keen interest in marine propulsion, obtaining in 1817 a patent for propelling ships by means of paddles worked by steam engine, an attempt to imitate the normal motion of a paddle. In 1820 he patented an improvement, the paddles being revolved about a shaft placed across the ship and feathered by an adaptation of the gearing used in the original patent. Though very imperfect, the contrivance was used in the 'Aaron Manby', the first seagoing iron ship to be constructed. A further development of the idea resulted in the construction of a feathering paddle-wheel, patented in 1827. His combined system of warming and ventilating buildings, by circulating preheated, filtered, and purified air through the space to be heated, was introduced into both the Bank of Ireland and the Bank of England. 
Enjoying a large salary, with the right of a reversion of a portion to his son, Oldham was celebrated for his convivial powers. He died, of an internal haemorrhage, at his house in Montague Street, Russell Square, London, on 14 February 1840. 




@@@@@


doc= 20689


Oldham, Nathaniel (fl. 1728-c.1747), virtuoso, was the son of a dissenting minister. Early in life he went to India, where he served in the army. He returned to England on inheriting a fortune estimated at $100,000 from a near relation. From 1728 to 1735 he lived at Ealing House, Middlesex, the former residence of Sir James Montague (1666-1723), baron of the exchequer. He also had a house at Witton, near Hounslow, Essex, and a third in Southampton Row, Bloomsbury, Middlesex. Oldham was a close friend of Sir Hans Sloane, Dr Richard Mead, and other celebrated collectors. He too began to collect natural and artificial curiosities, although apparently with little taste or discernment. Among his acquisitions was a 'choice collection of butterflies'. He spent a great deal of time at Don Saltero's Coffee House at Chelsea in the company of Sloane and others, comparing shells, insects, and plants. Oldham, who collected paintings, was a good friend of the artist Joseph Highmore, from whom he commissioned a full-length portrait of himself, dressed in a green velvet hunting-coat. The painting, dating from about 1740 and untraced, was engraved by J. Faber. Highmore also painted for him a celebrated informal group portrait, 'Mr Oldham and his Guests' (Tate collection), based upon a real-life incident when Oldham had returned home late for supper at his home in Ealing to find his friends already well wined and dined. He was also a devotee of horse-racing. His lavish spending, notably on his collections, eventually forced him to take refuge from his creditors within the sanctuary of the court of St James's. There he frequented the refreshment room on Duck Island, in St James's Park, attired in an eccentric costume and regaling friends with performances on a variety of musical instruments. Compelled to sell his collection, he put a sign over the door, 'Oldham's last shift'. At the same time he was arrested by a creditor and sent to the king's bench prison, where he is supposed to have died. He was probably still alive when the 'Entire collection of prints, books of prints and drawings of Nathaniel Oldham Esq., of Southampton Row, Bloomsbury' was sold at Cox's auction room on 25-8 February 1747. Oldham was godfather to Nathaniel Smith, the printseller, whose son J. T. Smith was the author of 'Nollekens and his Times' (1828) and keeper at the British Museum. Smith contributed an account of Oldham to James Caulfield's 'Portraits, Memoirs, &c., of Remarkable Persons' (2 vols., 1794-5; 4 vols., 1819-20). 


@@@@@


doc= 20690


Thomas Oldham (1801-1851), the eldest of John Oldham's seventeen children, succeeded to his father's position as artist to the Bank of Ireland, where he became involved with the engineering aspects of the machinery employed to print banknotes. He was elected associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers in March 1841. In 1842 he read a paper to the institution 'On the introduction of letterpress printing for numbering and dating the notes of the Bank of England', and the following year one entitled 'A description of the automatic balance at the Bank of England invented by W. Cotton', for which he received a Telford medal. He died at Brussels on 7 November 1851. 


@@@@@


doc= 20691


Oldham, Thomas (1816-1878), geologist, was born on 4 May 1816 at Dublin, the eldest son of Thomas Oldham, a broker with the Grand Canal Company, and his wife, Margaret Boyd. He was educated at a private school in Dublin and when he was fifteen entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he received his BA in 1836. Following graduation he went to Edinburgh in order to study civil engineering. While there he attended a number of classes at the university, including those on geology given by Robert Jameson. He also worked on civil engineering projects in the city. 
On Oldham's return to Ireland in March 1838 he was appointed principal geological assistant to the geological department of the Ordnance Survey of Ireland under Joseph Portlock (1794-1864) and undertook extensive field mapping in the counties of Londonderry and Tyrone. In 1840 he made the important discovery of trace fossils in the Cambrian rocks of the Bray group, co. Wicklow, forms which, in 1848, Edward Forbes (1815-1854) named 'Oldhamia' in his honour. In June 1843, following the disbandment of Portlock's geological department, Oldham was appointed curator of the museum of the Geological Society of Dublin, a post which he held until January 1845. From 1848 to 1850 he served as president of that society. In November 1844 he became assistant professor of civil engineering in Trinity College under Sir John MacNeill (1793-1880). In April 1845 Oldham was appointed professor of geology in Dublin University, and on 1 July the following year he was made local director for Ireland of the newly formed Geological Survey of Great Britain and Ireland. He also proceeded MA in 1846. Oldham's work in Ireland was much praised by his superiors, but he was a stern critic of any mapping which he considered unsatisfactory, in particular that by Frederick McCoy (1823-1899). 
Oldham married in late 1850 Louisa Matilda, daughter of William Dixon of Liverpool. They had five sons (including the Indian geologist and seismologist Richard Dixon Oldham), and one daughter. On 14 November of that year, following the recommendation of Henry De la Beche (1796-1855), Oldham was appointed to the post of geological surveyor to the East India Company, a position which offered him the substantially increased salary of $1000 per annum. He and his wife arrived in Calcutta in March 1851. Here he immediately styled himself 'superintendent of the geological survey of India', and for the next twenty-five years worked tirelessly to build up the staff of the survey and to improve its scientific competency. A large proportion of India was mapped geologically during this time, enabling the publication of the first official geological map of the sub-continent in 1877. Attention was also directed to economic geology, particularly in mapping the coalfields of Bengal. In 1856, as part of a major reorganization of the survey, Oldham established a new Calcutta headquarters where he built up a fine library and museum. He initiated the modern scientific study of earthquakes in India, and organized a collection of meteorites which by his death had become one of the world's finest. He was also instrumental in the establishment of the Indian Museum in 1866. A keen supporter of geological education in India, he instituted a system of geological apprenticeships for Indians in the survey in 1873. 
Oldham was elected a member of the Royal Irish Academy in 1842, and a fellow of the Geological Society of London in 1843 and of the Royal Society in 1848, receiving the latter's royal medal in 1875. In India he was elected a member of the Asiatic Society of Bengal in 1857 and served as its president four times between 1868 and 1876. A bearded, patriarchal figure in later life, he commanded great respect for his scientific rigour and administrative dynamism, and is justly remembered as the 'architect' of the geological survey of India. Over 120 publications are attributed to Oldham. In Ireland, in addition to official reports, he published some twenty-nine papers mainly in the 'Journal of the Geological Society of Dublin'. As superintendent he inaugurated three important high-quality series of geological survey of India publications -- the 'Records', 'Memoirs', and 'Palaeontologia Indica'. To the former two he made over fifty contributions. The series of annual reports was also begun by him in 1859. Other papers appeared mainly in the 'Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal' and in 'Nature'. 
Following his retirement from the survey owing to ill health, in March 1876 Oldham returned to England and lived at Eldon Place, Rugby. During this time he was appointed an examiner in geology to the University of London, a post which he had also held in respect of the Royal Indian Engineering College, Cooper's Hill. He died at 18 Hillmorton Road, Rugby, after a brief illness, on 17 July 1878; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 20692


Oldisworth, Giles (1619/20-1678), Church of England clergyman, was born at Coln Rogers, Gloucestershire, in 1619 or the first quarter of 1620, a younger son of Robert Oldisworth of that parish and his wife, Merial, daughter of Sir Nicholas Overbury. His mother was the sister of Sir Thomas Overbury, whose notorious murder in the Tower of London in 1613 hung over the family. Giles's elder brother, Nicholas Oldisworth, wrote a manuscript life of Sir Thomas which, he recorded, 'I wrote from dictation, and read over to my old grandfather Sir Nicholas Overbury, on Thursday, 1 Oct. 1637' (BL, Add. MS 15476, fol. 1). 
Oldisworth was educated at Westminster School, and must often have listened to the sermons of the dean of St Paul's, John Donne. Admitted as a pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 17 May 1639, he was elected to a scholarship there on 17 April 1640, and graduated BA in 1643. In 1644 he was deprived of his scholarship on account of his royalist sympathies, and proceeded to Oxford, where, by virtue of a letter written on 29 January 1646 on his behalf by the chancellor of the university, the marquess of Hertford, he was created MA on 20 July 1646. Oldisworth had just been presented by his grandfather Sir Nicholas Overbury to the living of Bourton on the Hill, Gloucestershire, where he succeeded his elder brother as rector. 
Giles Oldisworth was able to retain his living at Bourton throughout the interregnum. He married Margaret Warren, who did not survive him, and they had at least five children. He was the owner of a copy of the 1639 edition of John Donne's 'Poems by J.D. with Elegies on the Author's Death'. His annotations have helped to identify some of the elegists; they show that Oldisworth studied the work with 'scrupulous care' and that he was 'in close touch with well-informed views upon literary and other topics of the day' (Sampson, 83-4). Oldisworth was himself a published author. In 1663 he issued 'The stone rolled away, and life more abundant: an apologie urging self-denyall, new-obedience, faith, and thankfulnesse', prefaced with a laudatory epistle to the king, dated 5 November. This was reissued the following year with a new title, 'The holy royalist, or, The secret discontents of church & kingdom, reduced unto self-denial, moderation and thankfulnes', and with a portrait of the king as frontispiece. In 1673 he made his own contribution to family piety by publishing an edition of Sir Thomas Overbury's poem, 'The Wife', as 'The illustrious wife, viz that excellent poem, Sir Thomas Overburie's wife, illustrated by Giles Oldisworth, nephew to the same Sir T.O.' Oldisworth himself wrote, under the pseudonym of Sketlius, a manuscript poem entitled 'A Westminster Scholar, or, The Patterne of Pietie'. It is a narrative, written in five books, in high-flown language, describing members of the families of Oldisworth and Overbury under fictitious names, with some explanatory notes in the margin. 
On 11 May 1665 Oldisworth preached a sermon at the chapel of the Mercers' Company in London. Before its publication, as 'The Race Set before Us', the following year at Oxford, he had entered the employment of Herbert Croft, bishop of Hereford, signing the dedicatory epistle as 'Your lordship's most obliged servant and devoted chaplain', 'from my study 7 Nov 1665'; a preface to Lady Croft in 'The Father of the Faithfull' suggests that he may have retained that position in 1674. Giles Oldisworth died at Bourton on the Hill on 24 November 1678, and was buried in the chancel of the church on 27 November. By his will, dated the day before his death, Oldisworth divided his property equally among four children, of whom Giles (born in 1650 and by now a citizen of London) and Mary were of age; he appointed his brother William guardian to Thomas ('bap'. 10 April 1659) and Hester. 


@@@@@


doc= 20693


Oldisworth, Michael (b. 1590/91, d. in or after 1659), politician, was baptized on 17 January 1591 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, the second son of Arnold Oldisworth ('b'. 1561) of Bradley in Gloucestershire and Lucy, daughter of Francis Barty of Antwerp. He matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 21 November 1606, aged fifteen, and graduated BA from Magdalen College on 10 June 1611. Elected a fellow of Magdalen in the following year, he proceeded MA on 5 July 1614. A man of some literary ability, he was nominated in 1617 as one of eighty-four key people in Edmund Bolton's proposals for a national academy and was later praised as a most accomplished gentleman by Robert Herrick in 'Hesperides'. Also in 1617 Oldisworth married Susan ('b'. 1599), daughter of Thomas Poyntz and his wife, Jane. 
Oldisworth inherited a lasting interest in politics from his father, who had been MP for Tregony in 1593 and Cirencester in 1640, keeper of the hanaper in chancery, and receiver of fines in king's bench. After leaving university he was appointed secretary to William Herbert, third earl of Pembroke, who was both chancellor of Oxford University and lord chamberlain. Pembroke used his influence to secure Oldisworth's election as MP for Old Sarum in Wiltshire in 1624, 1625, 1626, and 1628. Representing a pocket or nomination borough such as Old Sarum meant that Oldisworth owed no allegiance other than that demanded by his patron. He was one of a number of 'gentleman-servants' in the Commons ('VCH Wiltshire', 5.119), whose status would not normally have secured for them a seat but who now became members of personal factions. 
After the third earl's death in 1630 Oldisworth was eventually appointed, in 1637, as secretary to the fourth earl of Pembroke (brother of the third earl and his successor as lord chamberlain). In 1640 Pembroke succeeded, with the support of the puritan majority on the corporation, in securing the election of Oldisworth for the borough of Salisbury in both the Short and the Long parliaments. Apart from his patron's interests, Oldisworth had no personal connection with Wiltshire, but he generously repaid them for their promotion of his political career. He largely organized the Pembrokes' electoral influence in the county, which the third earl had systematically built up between 1612 and 1630, particularly in Wilton, Downton, and Old Sarum. He managed their patronage and operated as their agent in the Commons, where they had a personal following of about twelve members. In 1639 he supported the fourth earl, who was captain-general of the king's bodyguard, as an officer of the army in the north. Oldisworth also benefited personally from the Herbert influence at court. In 1629 he was granted leases on royal land, including a manor in Kent for which he paid $1200, and in 1639 he was granted income from the western stannaries. 
In politics Oldisworth identified with the parliamentarian party, became a friend of Sir John Eliot, and when civil war broke out in 1642 contributed one horse and $30 for the defence of the country. On 5 July 1644 he was a witness at the trial of William Laud, accusing the archbishop of attempting to deprive the current Lord Pembroke of his right, as lord chamberlain, to appoint royal chaplains. At the time, Oldisworth was attributed with credit for securing Pembroke's allegiance to the parliamentarian cause. According to Anthony Wood, 'Tho' in the grand rebellion he was no colonel, yet he was governor of old Pembroke and Montgomery, led him by the nose (as he pleased) to serve both their turns' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.' 2.356). Contemporary satirists published pamphlets, often with the pretence that they were written by Oldisworth himself, ridiculing Pembroke's vulgar tastes and his total dependence on Oldisworth. In one of these the latter was described as 'Pembrochian Oldisworth that made the Earl, his master's, wise speeches' ('England's Confusion', 1659, 10). 
After the end of the second civil war, Oldisworth became frustrated by parliament's continued negotiations with the king and therefore made few appearances in the Commons during 1648. When, however, matters were brought to a head by the army's intervention and the decision to bring the king to trial, he became an active revolutionary. On 20 December 1648 he registered his dissent to the vote of 5 December that called for further negotiations with the king. His zeal is confirmed by the fact that he was listed, shortly after Pride's Purge, as being one of the radical ultras in the Commons. One of only eight out of twenty-six active Wiltshire MPs who were allowed to remain as members, he served the Rump loyally and, as a pious puritan, became a keen member of its various committees on religious reform, favouring a presbyterian settlement. Although Pembroke died in 1650, his role as Oldisworth's patron had already been taken over by the new government in recognition of his service to the state. In July 1649 Oldisworth was given a lucrative appointment as one of two masters of the prerogative office (renewed by the council of state in 1653); in 1650 he succeeded Pembroke as keeper of Windsor Great Park; and in 1651 he was appointed commissioner to investigate a rising in south Wales. He was still a member of the Rump when it was expelled by Cromwell in April 1653. Although he did not serve in the protectorate parliaments, he resumed his seat for Salisbury when the Rump was restored in May 1659. 
Oldisworth's successful political career had almost entirely been dependent on the patronage of the Herberts and his own opportunism. Although it is estimated that he would still have been classed as a member of the lesser gentry in 1649, with an income of under $500 a year, his later appointments would have secured for him a comfortable standard of living. His exact date of death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 20694


Oldisworth, William (1680-1734), writer and translator, was the son of the Revd William Oldisworth, vicar of Itchen Stoke, Hampshire, and prebendary of Middleton, in Winchester. The family was traditionally royalist, and came from Gloucestershire, where many of Oldisworth's relations had been Anglican clergymen and country squires. Oldisworth matriculated at Hart Hall, Oxford, on 4 April 1698. During his time at university he was associated with the Christ Church wits, and came into contact with the poet Edmund Smith, and with Francis Atterbury, later bishop of Rochester. After leaving Oxford, without having taken his degree, he worked as a clerk for his uncle, a JP in Hampshire, and then moved to London about 1706, where he began his writing career. His first significant publication was his three-volume 'A Dialogue between Timothy and Philatheus' (1709-11), a response to Matthew Tindal's assault on revealed religion in 'The Rights of the Christian Church Asserted' (1706). In the 'Dialogue', Oldisworth linked Tindal with other notorious freethinkers. He continued this engagement in religious controversy with another pamphlet, 'A Vindication of the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Exeter' (1709), in which he defended the high-church Bishop Blackall against attacks by Benjamin Hoadly. 
Oldisworth was reputed to be a fine translator, and in 1712, he, along with William Broome, contributed to John Ozell's five-volume translation of the 'Iliad'. This was followed, in 1712-13, by a parodic version of Horace's odes, in which he translated Richard Bentley's edition of Horace, providing satirical notes on Bentley's lengthy annotations to his edition. However, he is most famous for his role in the continuation of the tory periodical 'The Examiner'. Between 1711 and 1714, he was the main contributor to the publication, which had previously been edited by Jonathan Swift and Delarivier Manley. 'The Examiner' brought him financial stability, and support from prominent tories, including Robert Harley. However, following the death of Queen Anne this involvement ceased, and Oldisworth adopted a more direct form of political action, travelling north in the autumn of 1715 to join the Scottish Jacobites at the battle of Preston. Although contemporary reports claimed that he was killed in action, Oldisworth survived the battle, and may have then gone to seek refuge in Paris along with other Jacobites. His whereabouts for the next five years are unknown, but he appears to have returned to Oxford at some point in the early 1720s, where he took up antiquarian scholarship. He assisted Richard Fiddes in his life of Cardinal Wolsey, and studied various Middle English texts, including 'Piers Plowman'. At this time, between 1723 and 1724, he also seems to have been a contributor to the duke of Wharton's tory paper, the 'True Briton'. His last serious piece of writing was his translation of a sixteenth-century Latin work by Wawrzyniec Goslicki, bishop of Posen, 'The Accomplished Senator' (1733), in which he emphasized the moderation and independence of his own political position, in order to counter his reputation as a political extremist. Although Oldisworth had achieved financial security through his writing, he was rendered destitute in the early 1730s, apparently by the sudden bankruptcy of a relative. He was imprisoned for debt and he died on 15 September 1734 in the king's bench prison, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 20695


Oldmixon, John (1672/3-1742), historian and political pamphleteer, was the son of John Oldmixon, merchant, and Elinor Bawden (died 1689). He belonged to an ancient Somerset family who held the manor of Oldmixon in the parish of Hutton, near Weston-super-Mare. The place and date of his birth are unknown: he described himself as a native of Bridgwater, although there is no entry in the registers of St Mary's Church in that town, where many members of his family can be traced. 
Oldmixon's father, who was described as a gentleman in his will, which was dated 8 June 1675 and proved on 16 April 1679 by his daughters Hannah and Sarah (died 1689), bequeathed to his son 'my best cabinet in the little parlour, wherein my writings are now lodged'. His mother's will, proved on 28 December 1689, was administered by her daughter Hannah ('b'. 1664/5) who had married Richard Legg in 1682, and by John. The older Oldmixon had been involved in bankruptcy proceedings in 1676, probably owing to losses in the Virginia trade, as emerges from a chancery suit later brought by his son. As a result the younger John was forced to mortgage the family estate of Oldmixon in 1696; later he failed to exercise a redemption option and the manor passed into other hands. 
As a boy Oldmixon lived with Humphrey Blake, brother of Bridgwater's best-known native, Admiral Robert Blake. Humphrey was led by religious persecution to emigrate to Carolina, but Oldmixon continued to board in the home of his daughter and son-in-law, John Norman, a schoolmaster. In 1685 the boy witnessed the preliminaries to the battle of Sedgmoor as the duke of Monmouth climbed the church tower to reconnoitre the ground. Soon afterwards Oldmixon went to live with his maternal uncle Sir John Bawden, a prominent West Indies merchant who in 1669 had married Letetia Popham: she was the daughter of Edward Popham, Admiral Blake's principal lieutenant in the navy under the Commonwealth. Bawden, who lived in Stoke Newington, was an alderman of Aldersgate ward and a member of the council for Jamaica. He was knighted on 31 October 1687, as a Presbyterian willing to accept James II's declaration of indulgence. However, he died in the following year, leaving a small legacy to his sister Elinor Oldmixon, who was already in debt to him. John Oldmixon probably entered the family business while living with his uncle, but no details are known. More important was the protestant and whig inheritance he received from the Bawdens, Blakes, Pophams, and more distant kinsfolk such as Thomas, Lord Wharton. In addition he acquired enough specialist knowledge to compile an account of Robert Blake for 'Lives English and Forein' (1704), which would be the principal source for Samuel Johnson's life of Blake (1740), and a fuller 'History and Life of Robert Blake' in 1741. His book 'The British Empire in America' (2 vols., 1708; 2nd edn, considerably augmented, 1741) draws on information from relatives and contacts in the family business, especially with regard to Barbados. 
Oldmixon first appeared in print with poems in the 'Gentleman's Journal' in 1692 and 1693. His collection 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1696) was dedicated to Lord Ashley, later third earl of Shaftesbury: it consists mainly of lyric pieces, and several items were included in vocal miscellanies published by Henry Playford and others. In 1697 Oldmixon produced 'An Idyll on the Peace' to celebrate the settlement at Rijswijk (Ryswick). It was the first of at least eight works of whig panegyric verse on topical themes, addressed to prominent patrons such as the duchess of Marlborough and the duke of Newcastle, which Oldmixon would issue until his poetic career effectively came to an end in 1714. A more original item appeared in 1703 as 'Amores Britannici: Epistles Heroical and Gallant, in English Heroic Verse'. This anticipated the vogue for Ovidian epistles which was to blossom in the following decade, and in fact it is closer to Drayton's 'Englands Heroicall Epistles' in conception and execution than to Ovid. In this period Oldmixon contributed prologues, epilogues, and miscellany verse to volumes by friends such as John Dennis and Charles Gildon. His phase as primarily a creative writer ended with his monthly journal 'The Muses Mercury', which lasted for thirteen issues in 1707-8. Although Samuel Garth and John Dennis were regular contributors, and Rowe, Steele, and Wycherley appeared occasionally, Oldmixon had to cobble together much of the material himself. His greatest coup was to garner a contribution from Addison and to publish an appreciative essay on the old poem 'The Nut Brown Maid', which was to prove a pioneering study in the ballad revival. 
At the same time Oldmixon was active in the theatre, with a short pastoral forming the first act of 'The Novelty' (1697) by Peter Motteux and others, and then a full-length play taken from Tasso, 'Amintas: a Pastoral' (1698). In 1700 he wrote the libretto for an opera by Daniel Purcell, 'The Grove, or, Love's Paradice': songs from this work were published by John Walsh. His last contribution to the stage came with a tragedy entitled 'The Governour of Cyprus' (1703). None of these works seems to have enjoyed any great success in the playhouse. However, Oldmixon also kept his name before the public when he intervened in the Collier controversy with 'Reflections on the Stage' (1699), dedicated to the future Lord Halifax. In January 1712 Oldmixon tried to enlist Halifax's support when, he claimed, John Ozell attempted to steal the credit for a translation of Boileau's works, published by Curll, and also dedicated to Halifax. According to Oldmixon, most of the volume had been his own doing. Oldmixon, described as a bachelor, was granted a licence to marry Elizabeth Parry, spinster, the daughter of George Parry, at Knightsbridge Chapel in March 1703. His wife was still apparently living in 1728. There are many casual references to a double family, and suggestions that Oldmixon may have had as many as six children. His known family consists of two sons and two daughters. John became a writer for Bengal in 1716, serving at Dacca for some years, and rose to be a senior merchant in the East India Company; he died in 1735. George worked in East India House, as chief of the department of the auditor of India accompts, and was a friend of the author John Hoole. He also wrote the English libretto for a 'serenata', 'Parnasso in festa', set by Handel in 1734. George died in 1779 aged sixty-six, leaving bequests to his two sisters, of whom the elder was Hannah ('c'.1705-1789). The younger, Eleanora ('b'. 1721), became a singer and married John Marella. Her son John Marella Oldmixon had a play produced, was knighted in 1782, and subsequently emigrated to the United States, where he died 'c'.1816. 
From the time of the change of ministry in 1710 Oldmixon became a full-time polemicist on behalf of the whigs. He had already written the first part of 'The History of Addresses' (2 vols., 1709-11), and a flood of journalism and pamphleteering followed. He helped his friend Arthur Maynwaring to set up 'The Medley', a weekly paper which ran for forty-five issues from 5 October 1710 to 6 August 1711. This period coincided almost exactly with Swift's editorship of 'The Examiner', which provided the main target and subject matter for the paper. Oldmixon served as managing editor, contributed to most issues, and wrote at least twelve issues single-handedly. The entire run was reprinted in May 1712, but the edition proved unsuccessful and Oldmixon was forced to bear the loss. Meanwhile he kept up his attack on Swift in a succession of pamphlets, including items responding to 'The Conduct of the Allies', 'Some Remarks on the Barrier Treaty', and 'A Proposal for Correcting the English Tongue', which is treated as a politically motivated project. An almost equally virulent barrage of pamphlets identified Defoe as a turncoat and lackey of the tory administration. 
In 1716 Oldmixon claimed that since he had been diverted by Maynwaring from the study of history and poetry to politics, he had published more than a hundred tracts in defence of the whig cause through the booksellers Curll and Pemberton. Some twenty of these can be identified with certainty, usually issued under the imprint of the trade publisher James Roberts. These include 'The Secret History of Europe' (4 vols., 1712-15); 'Arcana Gallica' and 'The False Steps of the Ministry' (both 1714); 'Memoirs of North-Britain' (1715); and 'Memoirs of Ireland' (1716). Oldmixon also specialized in lives of the recently deceased, with biographies of Maynwaring, dedicated to Walpole (1715); Wharton, a kinsman by marriage (1715); and Somers (1716). He also compiled 'The Conduct of the Earl of Nottingham' for Curll in 1716, but the earl's relatives got wind of the book when it was printed and caused publication to be suspended. 
Pope somehow heard of this episode and mentioned it in one of his satiric pamphlets concerning Edmund Curll. Oldmixon had committed his first major offence against Pope when he reprinted an epigram entitled 'Two or Three', suppressed by Pope after its first anonymous appearance: this occurred in a miscellany edited by Oldmixon, 'Poems and Translations', which was published by Curll in April 1714. The pamphleteer compounded his offence when he helped the scandalous bookseller to issue 'Court Poems' in March 1716, as the volume contained unauthorized printings of work by Pope's friends and attributed one item to Pope himself. A month later Oldmixon was responsible for a satire in verse called 'The Catholick Poet', which retailed familiar accusations regarding Pope's Jacobitism and his lack of Greek scholarship. Thereafter Oldmixon remained on Pope's list, with the result that he earned a niche in 'Peri Bathous' and in successive recensions of 'The Dunciad', with a damaging note appended to the text of this poem. Oldmixon responded with hostile comments in the 'Flying Post' in 1728, as well as a number of barbed references in his critical works, the most prominent of which were 'An Essay on Criticism' (1728) and 'The Arts of Logick and Rhetorick' (1728). The latter, dedicated to George Bubb Dodington, is chiefly based on 'La maniere de bien penser dans les ouvrages d'esprit' (1687) by the Jesuit priest Dominique Bouhours. 
Oldmixon must have expected that his life would flow more smoothly after the Hanoverian accession, but the opposite proved true. He was in trouble with the authorities again in April 1716, when he assisted in the publication of an unofficial account of the trial of the Jacobite Lord Wintoun, which resulted in punishment for Curll and Pemberton at the bar of the House of Lords. Efforts to gain the post of consul at Madeira for Richard Miles, who was probably the son of his half-sister Elizabeth, proved unavailing, despite petitions to the customs commissioners and an imploring letter to Addison when the latter became secretary of state. 
On 11 June 1716 Oldmixon finally obtained his only, belated reward for his loyalty, when he was appointed customs collector for the port of Bridgwater. His tenure lasted twenty years, but it was soon dogged by reverses. According to his 'Memoirs of the Press' (published posthumously in 1742), he found the post unprofitable from the start, and in later years he claimed that his salary of $100 was often in arrears. The strongly tory corporation harried him, and in 1718 he was compelled to appear before the mayor along with his friend Dr John Allen ('c'.1660-1741) to explain riots in the street, while the parish clerk and sexton laid information that he was among those who had attended Presbyterian and Anabaptist conventicles. Oldmixon attempted to gain official favour by reporting on suspicious activities in the neighbourhood, as was no doubt expected of him by the ministry. In 1719 he sent long reports of a mysterious Swede who arrived in the estuary of the Axe near Uphill, and was examined as a possible agent implicated in the invasion mounted that year by the duke of Ormond with Spanish support. Two years later he sent news of the 'insolence and disloyalty' of Jacobites on the birthday of the Pretender, James Stuart (TNA: PRO, SP 35/27/23). 
Meanwhile Oldmixon attempted to maintain his literary career. In 1714 he had contributed a version of 'Dejanira to Hercules' to a new edition of 'Ovid's Epistles', originally published by Jacob Tonson with Dryden's collaboration in 1680. Now Oldmixon sought to interest Tonson in new work, including translations of the 'Amores', 'De tristibus', and the 'Fasti' which ran to thousands of lines, along with extensive compilations on the history of Somerset and other counties, which occupied hundreds of sheets. None of this was published. Oldmixon complained to the Tonsons about difficulties and poor payment in relation to the index which he had compiled for Humphrey Prideaux's 'Old and New Testament Connected' and volume 2 of Laurence Echard's 'History of England', both published in 1718. In December of that year Oldmixon wrote pathetically to Jacob Tonson sen., saying that he was 'banished in a corner of the country, surrounded with Jacobites, vilified, insulted and not having a minute's ease'. He asked Tonson to make representations to the duke of Newcastle 'that I may succeed Mr Rowe in the laureate's place which I was to have had before, had it not been for him as Sir Samuel Garth knows' (BL, Add. MS 28275, fol. 46). The application was unsuccessful, as Laurence Eusden was very shortly appointed poet laureate. Oldmixon continued to hound the Tonsons with complaints about the treatment he received, his monetary troubles, and personal isolation in Somerset -- his wife was living in London all the while. 
In 1724 Oldmixon became involved with James Brydges, duke of Chandos, who was pursuing land and business interests in Bridgwater. The main area of development lay in Castle Street, and Oldmixon rented one of the largest buildings in the street as the customs house. He also acted as agent for the duke's varied projects, and was invited to become a nominal partner in a glasshouse which Chandos had set up. The business connection survived, although under increasing strain, until 1731, by which time the duke had grown impatient with Oldmixon's financial management and had refused to pay sums which were the responsibility of the customs commissioners. 
During the 1720s Oldmixon shifted his principal concern as a writer to historiography. He had in fact taken a leading share with John Hughes in the compilation of 'A Complete History of England' (1706), a cento of older sources supplemented by a section on recent history by White Kennet. He now began a series of strongly whig narratives which focused chiefly on the seventeenth century and singled out Clarendon's 'History of the Rebellion' for particular reprobation, with Echard a secondary target. The prime documents are 'The Critical History of England' (2 vols., 1724-6); 'A Review of Dr Zachary Grey's Defence of our Ancient and Modern Historians' (1725); and 'Clarendon and Whitlock Compar'd' (1727). It was in 1729 that controversy really flared, with the appearance of Oldmixon's massive 'History of England, during the Reigns of the Royal House of Stuart'. In this he expanded earlier hints and accused Clarendon's editors -- Francis Atterbury, Henry Aldrich, and George Smalridge -- of falsifying the text of the 'History'. He printed an anonymous letter, written by George Duckett, which supported this contention, on the basis of statements made to Duckett by Edmund Smith in 1710. An extensive debate was set off by these charges, with contributions by Atterbury himself and others, as well as three further interventions by Oldmixon himself. The 'History of the Stuarts' also provoked the elderly tory Lord Lansdowne into vindicating his ancestors General Monk and Sir Richard Grenville. This in turn prompted a pamphlet in response from Oldmixon. A decisive rebuttal of all the charges against the editors was made by John Burton in 'The Genuineness of Lord Clarendon's 'History of the Rebellion'' (1744). Later scholarship has confirmed Burton's position. 
Oldmixon was now in his sixties and suffering poor health, but he still kept up a frenzied pace. His gigantic history of England was completed with two long folios devoted respectively to the reigns of William and Mary, Anne, and George I (1735), and to the Tudors (1739). There were new editions of several of his works, including the long popular work of political soothsaying, 'Nixon's Cheshire Prophecy' ('c'.1715), which celebrated the Hanoverian accession, and reached its 'fifteenth' edition by Curll in 1744 -- it was still being published into the nineteenth century. Meanwhile Oldmixon had been forced to relinquish his customs post in 1736, and soon afterwards lost a royal bounty paid at the instance of Queen Caroline until her death in 1737. He was saddled with a large debt to the crown, incurred as he claimed by his deputy, and petitioned the Treasury for relief in 1740. More efficacious was a personal letter of appeal to the duke of Newcastle in the following year, which resulted in a grant of $50 from the royal bounty. He told the duke that he had been dragged 'to a place I cannot mention in the midst of all the infirmities of old age, sickness, lameness and almost blindness', a poor reward for his services for 'that good cause I have all my life long laboured to serve in the worst of times' (BL, Add. MS 32697, fol. 308). 
After many years of ill health, Oldmixon died at his home in Great Pulteney Street, London, on 9 July 1742, with his age listed in the press as sixty-nine. He was buried three days later at St Mary's, Ealing, near an unidentified son and daughter. Later that month there appeared Oldmixon's most vivid and arresting book, his posthumous 'Memoirs of the Press', which sets out in detail the calamities of authorship as he had experienced them. It is a record of ingratitude and disregard suffered at the hands of those such as Walpole whom Oldmixon had expected to reward him for his services to the whig cause. 


@@@@@


doc= 20696


Oldys, Valentine (1620-1685), poet, was born in Oxford, the son of Valentine Oldis, a London merchant. He went to school in Newport, Shropshire, and was admitted pensioner at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, on 19 September 1650. 
Oldys published 'A Poem on the Restoration of King Charles' in 1660, and was a patron of literature and men of letters. He is among the contributors of commendatory verses to Henry Bold's 'Poems Lyrique, Macaronique, Heroique, &c.' (1664) and one of the poems in the volume is addressed to him. He also contributed to Alexander Brome's 'Songs, and other Poems' (1664). John Phillips dedicated to Oldys his 'Macaronides, or, Virgil Travesty' (1673). 
Oldys was made MD of Cambridge 'per literas regias' on 6 October 1671, and honorary member of the College of Physicians on 30 September 1680. He died in 1685, and was buried near his father in St Helen, Bishopsgate, by St Mary Axe. 


@@@@@


doc= 20697


William Oldys (1590/91-1645), matriculated aged nineteen at New College, Oxford, in 1610, graduated BA in 1614 and MA in 1618, and was a proctor of the university in 1623. He was vicar of Adderbury in Oxfordshire from 1627 and was created DD on 16 January 1643. A staunch supporter of Charles I during the civil war, Oldys went into hiding in Banbury, but was betrayed while conducting his wife, Margaret 


@@@@@


doc= 20698


Oldys, William (1636-1708), civil lawyer and advocate of the Admiralty, was born in Adderbury, Oxfordshire, on 19 October 1636. He was one of eleven surviving children of William Oldys (1590/91-1645) ['see under 'Oldys, William (1696-1761)], vicar of Adderbury, who was killed in a skirmish with parliamentary soldiers, and Margaret (died 1705), daughter of Ambrose Sacheverall. At the age of twelve he entered Winchester College. He then studied civil law at New College, Oxford (BCL, 1661; DCL, 1667), where he was a fellow from 1655 to 1671. In 1670 Oldys was admitted an advocate of Doctors' Commons, the society of civil lawyers who practised in the ecclesiastical and Admiralty courts. He was made chancellor of the diocese of Lincoln in 1683 and held that office until his death. In 1685 he stood unsuccessfully for parliament for Oxford, for what Wood says was the third time (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 2.54). Oldys was named advocate of the Admiralty by the royal warrant of James II in July 1686. Within two months, however, he was one of the counsel for Bishop Compton, who had been brought before the ecclesiastical commission for refusing the king's orders to suppress anti-Catholic preaching. At about this time Oldys contributed the life of Pompey to a new translation of Plutarch's 'Lives' ('Plutarch's 'Lives', Translated from the Greek by Several Hands', 4, 1685). On 5 October 1687 he was admitted as king's advocate in the court of chivalry upon its re-establishment. In this role Oldys, 'one of the leading heraldic lawyers of his day' (Squibb, 184), made explicit the principles governing the right to bear arms, by birth and by grant. 
Oldys maintained his place at the Admiralty after the revolution of 1688. In November 1692, however, he refused to prosecute as pirates the Irish captains and officers of vessels who were acting under letters of marque issued by King James from his court in France. In September 1693 Oldys was called before the council to defend his position. He explained that, under the law of nations, even deposed monarchs, when fighting to regain their thrones, had the authority to grant commissions to privateers. It was a dangerous response, since the ruling explanation of the revolution was that James had not been deposed but had 'abdicated'. Sir John Trenchard, the northern secretary, denounced such reasons as 'amount[ing] to high treason' and demanded to know 'what do you think of the abdication?' Oldys replied that he accepted it 'since it was voted', but that the defendants might reasonably have believed otherwise. Not surprisingly, this failed to satisfy and he was removed from his position and replaced with Fisher Littleton, who, at the same meeting, assured the council that the men in question were 'not enemies but rogues' ('State trials', 12.1270-75). The defendants were tried and several hanged. Oldys's arguments were attacked the next year in a pamphlet by Matthew Tindal, titled 'An Essay Concerning the Law of Nations, and the Rights of Soveraigns' (1694). 
Oldys continued to practise law and in 1696 found himself representing two privateers (these commissioned by the king of France) who were being prosecuted for treason. His career prospered and by the time of his death in 1708 he had a successful practice and had accumulated a considerable estate. This included a library of more than 1000 volumes that was promptly acquired by Doctors' Commons. 'As a scholar, he was respectable; as a civilian, he was learned; as a pleader, eloquent and judicious' (Coote, 95). 
The specifics of Oldys's domestic life are less than clear. Some material suggests he married Theodosia Lovett, the widow of Robert Lovett of Liscombe, Buckinghamshire, and daughter of Sir John Halsey of Great Gaddesden, Hertfordshire, some time after 1686 and that she survived his death. She is not, however, mentioned in his will, executed in 1701. The principal beneficiary of that will was the testator's 'loving cozen', Ann Oldys (1671-1711), the daughter of Oldys's first cousin, and also his mistress (Yeowell, v-vi). Besides some token bequests to his mother and siblings, Ann Oldys inherited all of the estate, including two houses in Kensington said to be already in her possession. Oldys fathered his only child, William Oldys (1696-1761), the well-known antiquary and bibliographer, in that relationship. He inherited Oldys's property from his mother in 1711. 


@@@@@


doc= 20699


Oldys, William (1696-1761), herald and antiquary, was born on 14 July 1696, probably in London, the son of the civil lawyer William Oldys (1636-1708) and his mistress, his cousin Ann Oldys (1671-1711). 
Oldys's grandfather, also 
('nee' Sacheverall, died 1705)
, and his third son, William, on the road to Winchester. Pursued by parliamentary forces, his horse refused to pass his own house at Adderbury and he was shot and killed by one of the soldiers on 12 September 1645. A long inscription from the monument in Adderbury church was published in 1785 in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (volume 55, pp. 106-7). His son William was married to Theodosia Lovett, and kept his cousin Ann as his mistress. Ann was maintained 'very privately, and probably very meanly', Oldys sending her leftover food from taverns on the excuse that it was for his cat (Noble, 419). He died in 1708, and whereas his library was bought by Doctors' Commons, he left two houses in Kensington and the residue of his estate to his 'loving cozen Mrs. Ann Oldys'; she died in 1711, leaving her property to 'her loving friend' Benjamin Jackman, 'for the benefit of her son William Oldys', the future herald, who always claimed Dr Oldys for his father. She further left 'the tuition and guardianship of her son... during his minority' to Jackman (Yeowell, vi). 
Although the young William Oldys was left money for his education, nothing is known of it. He lost money in the South Sea Bubble of 1720, and involved himself in protracted litigation. In 1722-3 he collaborated with Pierre des Maizeaux on a biography of Richard Carew, for a new edition of his 'Survey of Cornwall', but his literary studies were otherwise concentrated upon an interleaved, annotated copy of Langbaine's 'Account of the Early Dramatic Poets' (1691). In 1724 Oldys left his London lodgings, in the house of a Mr Burridge, and went to Yorkshire, where he lived, principally at the seat of the first earl of Malton, until 1730. In 1725 he visited the museum of the recently deceased Ralph Thoresby in Leeds. In 1729 he wrote 'An essay on epistolary writings, with respect to the grand collection of Thomas, earl of Strafford', dedicating it to the earl of Malton (it is now in the Beinecke Library, c476). He was unable to prevent the destruction of the manuscript collections of the antiquary Richard Gascoigne by Thomas Wentworth, Baron Malton, in 1728. He was, however, compiling collections of his own, such as the 200 volumes he bought from the library of the earl of Stamford, the earl of Clarendon's collections of historical and political manuscripts, other state papers, and 'a very large collection of English heads in sculpture' (Yeowell, xii). 
Oldys is credited with 'A Collection of Epigrams' (1727). Between 1728 and 1731 he wrote some twenty papers for Henry Baker's 'Universal Spectator'. On his return to London in 1730 he found his books had been dispersed, including the annotated Langbaine, which had been bought by Thomas Coxeter, who would not return it. On Coxeter's death his books were bought by Thomas Osborne, and they were sold again in 1748; Oldys's notes and Coxeter's additions were heavily used by Theophilus Cibber and Robert Shiels in 'Lives of the Poets' (5 vols., 1753). About 1730 Oldys compiled a manuscript case (now in the British Library) for a projected edition of 'The Negotiations of Sir Thomas Roe', one volume of which eventually appeared in 1740. About 1731 Oldys became friendly with Edward Harley, the second earl of Oxford, who visited him in Gray's Inn in London and paid $40 for his collections. Oldys used Harley's library for his 'Dissertation upon Pamphlets' of 1731 (reprinted with another contribution in Morgan's 'Phoenix Britannicus' of 1732) and other bibliographical work. He contributed songs such as 'Busy, Curious, Thirsty Fly!' (later translated into Latin by Samuel Johnson) to 'The Scarborough Miscellany' between 1732 and 1734, while working on his first major publication, an edition of Sir Walter Ralegh's 'History of the World' (2 vols., 1736). This was prefaced by a colossal 'Life of the author, newly compil'd, from materials more ample and authentick than have yet been publish'd'. A surviving letter to Sir Hans Sloane, dated 29 September 1735, indicates that Oldys was using the baronet's collection for research alongside Harley's. Gibbon was so impressed by Oldys's work that he abandoned his own plans to write a biography of Ralegh. 
Grose records that the booksellers were sufficiently impressed by the success of the Ralegh volume to offer to pay Oldys for the use of his name in selling a different work, and that Oldys indignantly refused the offer, despite his insecure financial position. He was generous in assisting editors and booksellers with information, furnishing the importunate Edmund Curll with some notes on Nell Gwyn for a 'History of the Stage' (1741), and giving biographical notices on scarce authors to Elizabeth Cooper (for 'The Muses Library', 1737) and Thomas Haywood (for 'The British Muse', 3 vols., 1738, which had a dedication to Lady Mary Wortley Montagu written by Oldys). Mrs Cooper, whose anthology was dedicated to the Honourable Society for the Encouragement of Learning and contained passages of Langland, Lydgate, and Hoccleve, as well as later writers, also borrowed many of Oldys's rare books for a proposed continuation, which failed to appear. In 1737 Oldys began publishing his own researches in 'The British Librarian', a miscellaneous bibliographical compilation of rare books and manuscripts. It was published in six monthly numbers, from January to June 1737, and was thereafter issued as a composite volume with an index of subjects in 1738. It was designed to bring to light 'curious' publications and to offer a bibliographical record for early books: three William Caxton items, from the collection of Peter Thompson, are described, together with works by St Gildas, Thomas More, Richard Hakluyt, Thomas Elyot, William Prynne, Elias Ashmole, and Robert Plot. Each number contained at least one manuscript item. Oldys had used the libraries of the duke of Montagu, John Anstis, Thomas Ames, and some of his neighbours in Gray's Inn -- Nathaniel Booth and Charles Grimes. The book was prefaced by an optimistic statement of editorial intention, but in the postscript (from Gray's Inn, dated 18 February [1738]) Oldys cites the 'vast and unseen Mass of Reading' needed to produce the comparatively 'small Quantity of Writing' (W. Oldys, 'The British Librarian', 1738, 375) as a reason for discontinuing the project for the time being. A surviving diary for the period from 1737 to 1738 contains little personal information but records conversations with scholars such as Joseph Ames, Thomas Birch, John Strype, Hans Sloane, George Vertue, and John Christopher Pepusch. Oldys records sales, visits to scientific exhibitions, curious events, and scraps of information, with reminders to himself to check particular sources. He makes many complaints about poor treatment by patrons, collectors, and scholars, and expresses his displeasure at the way his prefatory essay to Hayward's 'British Muse', containing a history of anthologies, had been hastily abridged. 
Oldys's diary ends with the arrival of some money from Harley. On reading 'The British Librarian', Harley promised Oldys more remunerative employment and dissuaded him from applying to Sir Robert Walpole, about whose ancestors Oldys had collected some deeds. In 1738 Oldys, having detached himself from all other patronage, became Harley's literary secretary (and drinking companion), a position which allowed him free use of the library and an introduction to Oxford's circle, which included Alexander Pope. Pope told him Thomas Betterton's story that Sir William Davenant was the natural son of Shakespeare, and Oldys claims to have given Pope (via Oxford) some hints on Shakespeare. His duties for the earl prevented him from completing several biographical contributions to Birch's 'General Dictionary, Historical and Critical' (1734-1741), a deprivation of income he later resented. For Harley he attended auctions and sales and transcribed manuscripts for the collection, and had received some $150 by 1739. He also organized Harley's vast collection of manuscript letters for binding, with abstracts and tables of contents. For these services he was paid a further $200 a year until Harley's death in June 1741, a return which he seems to have regarded as inadequate, while acknowledging that he lived on exceptionally good terms with him: 'For the profit of about 500'l'. I devoted the best part of ten years' service to, and in his lordship's library; impoverished my own stores to enrich the same; disabled myself in my studies, and the advantages they might have produced from the publick; deserted the pursuits which might have obtained me a permanent accommodation; and procured the prejudice and misconceit of his lordship's surviving relations. (Yeowell, xx)' Oldys's 'British Librarian' had been published by Thomas Osborne, and it was Osborne who bought for $13,000 Harley's collection of printed books, intending to dispose of them through an elaborate bibliographical catalogue to be edited by Samuel Johnson and Oldys. The first two volumes of 'Catalogus Bibliothecae Harleianae' appeared on 12 March 1743, after some six months' work; the third and fourth volumes were published on 4 January 1744. The contributions of Johnson and Oldys are difficult to distinguish. Meanwhile, Osborne proposed (in terms provided by Johnson) a weekly subscription serial known as 'The Harleian Miscellany', which reprinted some of the scarcer tracts from the collection and which commenced in March 1744 with Oldys as its supervisory editor. It eventually ran to eight volumes (1744-6). Alongside the 'Miscellany' Oldys edited 'A Copious and Exact Catalogue of Pamphlets in the Harleian Library', which appeared piecemeal but eventually constituted a quarto volume of 168 pages, offering bibliographical descriptions of almost 550 items. Like many of Oldys's publications, this was valued highly by collectors and scholars, and several annotated copies exist. 
Oldys provided a life of Thomas Moufet for a new edition of his 'Health's Improvement', published in 1745 by Osborne, but thereafter terminated their connection. He wrote the 'Historical essay' which prefaces the edition of Michael Drayton's 'Works' of 1748, and between 1747 and 1760 wrote some twenty-two articles for the first edition of the 'Biographia Britannica', including lives of Edward Alleyn, Drayton, Sir George Etherege, and George Farquhar. His substantial accounts of Caxton, based on extensive examination of his output as a printer, of Sir John Fastolf (enlarged from an earlier contribution to the 'General Dictionary'), and of Richard Hakluyt, were regarded as especially illuminating. Some authorities credit him with the co-editorship, with Joseph Towers, of the project as a whole. Oldys's manuscript notes on other figures (notably Arabella Stuart, John Barclay, Mary Beale, and Samuel Butler) were later bought by Thomas Cadell, one of the publishers of the second edition of 'Biographia Britannica', and heavily mined (with acknowledgement) by the editor, Andrew Kippis. 
Despite his labours Oldys was unable to pay his rent in Gray's Inn and was confined to the Fleet prison. Surviving letters to Thomas Birch, dated 22 July 1751 and 23 August 1751, acknowledge helpful sums of money from Birch himself and from 'the Hon. Mr. Yorke' through the agency of Mr Southwell, brother of the second Lord Southwell. His 'loitering, lingering, useless condition' (Yeowell, xxxiii) was ended when his debts were paid by his friends. One account states that Oldys wrote to the duke of Norfolk (Edward Howard, a friend of Harley's), who received the letter at dinner, read it out, and dispatched a messenger to give Oldys money and pay off his debts. Another version relates that the debts were paid by Southwell. The duke of Norfolk was certainly responsible for obtaining for Oldys the post of Norroy king-at-arms, to which he was appointed by patent on 5 May 1755, having previously, on 15 April, been created Norfolk herald-extraordinary at the College of Arms by the earl of Effingham in order to qualify for the office of Norroy. Oldys appointed Edward Orme of Chester as his deputy, and took up residence in the west wing of the College of Arms. There was apparently some resentment among the heralds at Oldys's rapid promotion to a provincial kingship, and malicious rumours were spread to the effect that Oldys was a Roman Catholic. 
Two anecdotes indicate something of Oldys's duties during this period. In one story he tells how, having observed another herald correct himself during the reading of a proclamation and thus appear clumsy, when his own turn came 'he read on through thick and thin, never stopping a moment to correct his errors, and thereby excited the applause of the people', despite making more mistakes than his predecessor (Taylor, 1.26). In the other, which apparently first appeared in the colourful sketch of Oldys in the 'Olio' (1796) of the Richmond herald, Captain Francis Grose, Oldys is said to have been 'rarely sober in the afternoon, and never after supper' and to have been so drunk at the funeral of Princess Caroline that the crown, which he was holding on a cushion, nearly fell off (Noble, 420). Noble disputes this story on the grounds that at a royal funeral the crown should have been borne by Clarenceux, not Norroy, and Clarenceux is identified as the bearer in 'The London Journal' of 5 January 1758 and in 'Reed's Weekly Journal' of 7 January. Norroy had been the officer responsible at the funeral of Queen Caroline in 1737, however. Aside from official duties Oldys continued to collect and study books and manuscripts, furnishing a large upstairs room as a library. At one stage he reckoned his collection of historical and political pamphlets amounted to 5000 items. He wrote out scraps of information on slips of paper, classifying and sorting them into parchment bags for each biographical subject. Among these was Shakespeare, whose biography he had agreed to write for Walker, a bookseller, for 20 guineas (later reclaimed from his friend Taylor); his materials were used by Isaac Reed. He also made notes on Sir John Suckling, Aphra Behn (whose biography he had written in the 'General Dictionary'), Edmund Spenser, John Milton, and John Dryden, including a memorandum to 'search the old papers in one of my large deal boxes for Mr. Dryden's letter of thanks to my father, for some communications relating to Plutarch' (Yeowell, 32). He visited archives and libraries throughout the capital, making notes on the provenance, prices, and fate of notable collections. 
In 1753 Oldys had published 'Observations on the Cure of William Taylor, the Blind Boy of Igtham, in Kent', in collaboration with John Taylor, an oculist in London's Hatton Garden, who performed the cure. Taylor became Oldys's chief friend, and Oldys frequently passed evenings at Taylor's house. Oldys is said to have preferred the quiet of the fireside in the kitchen to more formal social gatherings, and Taylor's son records that he was so particular in his habits that he could not smoke his pipe with ease until his chair was fixed close to a particular crack in the floor. Oldys would not meet Taylor's father, Chevalier Taylor, until the latter sought him out, and spoke to him in Latin, whereupon the two men talked for several hours in that language. Grose relates, however, that Oldys had imbibed a taste for the company to be found in the Fleet prison, formed a 'Dragon Club', and used to drink with his companions 'the Rulers' (because they lived within the rules of the prison) at The Bell in the Old Bailey, near the College of Arms, employing a watchman to get him home before midnight to avoid paying a fine. Grose says that Oldys's favourite drink was porter, washed down with gin. 
Oldys's last biographical work was a life of Charles Cotton, prefixed to Sir John Hawkins's edition of Izaak Walton's 'Compleat Angler' (1760). Oldys is praised by Grose for his 'great good-nature, honour, and integrity, particularly in his character as an historian', in which respect Grose thought him absolutely incorruptible (Noble, 420). He appears to have had a loose connection with the Society of Antiquaries. He did not marry. He died at his rooms in the College of Arms at about 5 a.m. on 15 April 1761 and was buried on 19 April in the parish church of St Benet Paul's Wharf, towards the upper end of the north aisle. His age was given as seventy-two on the coffin, but he was actually not quite sixty-five. He died intestate. Administration of his property was granted to John Taylor, his friend and major creditor; Taylor paid for the funeral and took possession of Oldys's regalia, books, and manuscripts. Taylor was the owner of a painting of Oldys (looking well-fed and well-dressed), later engraved by Balston, with Oldys's own punning motto beneath: '
In word and 'Will I am' a friend to you, 

And one friend 'Old is' worth a hundred new. 

' Oldys's printed books, including many with his habitual copious annotation, were sold with some of the manuscripts (and two other libraries) by Thomas Davies, beginning on 12 April 1762. Oldys had bought a second copy of Langbaine's 'Account of the English Dramatick Poets' (1691) in 1727, and continued to annotate it marginally and interlinearly until he died; this copy was bought by Thomas Birch, who loaned it to Thomas Percy, who copied the notes into a further interleaved copy of Langbaine, from which Joseph Haslewood annotated his own copy. Steevens, Malone, and Reed also made copies of Oldys's notes. Birch eventually left the volume to the British Museum. Other annotated books included copies of 'England's Parnassus', Butler's 'Hudibras', John Philips's 'Life of Milton', William Nicolson's 'English Scotch and Irish Historical Libraries', and Thomas Fuller's 'Worthies of England', which Steevens bought. Among his manuscript collections were: a catalogue of materials relating to the history of London (used by Richard Gough in his 'British Topography' of 1780); a series of remarks on the major institutional and private libraries in London and their catalogues (extending an earlier manuscript by John Bagford, and now in the Hunterian Collection, Glasgow); a catalogue of engraved portraits of national figures; 'Memoirs relating to the family of Oldys' (BL, Add. MS 4240), of which a substantial portion relating to his father was published in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1784 (volume 54); collections of data on English poets; commonplace books; and many observations on aspects of natural history. Taylor retained some manuscripts until Thomas Percy requested the loan of them; many were used by literary scholars and were gradually dispersed or acquired by institutions. While Oldys's own attempts at systematic study and publication petered out because of the magnitude of the tasks, his work was thus harnessed by writers such as Thomas Warton (in his 'History of English Poetry') and Johnson ('Lives of the English Poets') into more literary and comprehensive form. Among more personal manuscript items are: his diary; a collection of poems; and materials for a work called 'The patron, or, A portraiture of patronage and dependency, more especially as they appear in their domestick light and attitudes', which perhaps indicates something of Oldys's feelings regarding his subservient position. 


@@@@@


doc= 20700


O'Leary, Arthur (1729-1802), Roman Catholic priest and religious controversialist, was born at Acres, a townland in the parish of Fanlobbus, near Dunmanway, co. Cork, to a tenant farming couple about whom nothing is known. Having been provided with the rudiments of a classical education at a local 'hedge school' O'Leary was obliged by the prohibition on Catholic education to leave Ireland for France to train for the priesthood. He entered the Capuchin college at St Malo in 1747 and was admitted to orders some time later. One of his first duties was as chaplain to the prisons and hospitals in St Malo during the Seven Years' War, when he ministered to British and Irish prisoners of war. Invited by the duc de Choiseul to encourage the Catholics among their number to transfer their allegiance to France, O'Leary declined because, he later maintained, he 'thought it a crime to engage the king of England's soldiers and sailors in the service of a Catholic monarch against their Protestant sovereign' (Buckley, 18). It was an emblematic moment in O'Leary's life and a pointer to his later advocacy of religious toleration. 
O'Leary returned to Ireland in 1771, having spent twenty-four years in France. Following his return he ministered for a number of years in Cork, where he was an energetic addition to the local Capuchin community. His most notable achievement was the construction of a small place of worship, long known as Father O'Leary's chapel, on a site adjoining Blackamoor Lane friary but he also attracted large congregations on account of his preaching, which was chiefly remarkable for strong moral reasoning, bold figure, and scriptural allusion. In 1775 Patrick Blair, a Scottish physician resident at Cork, published a tract entitled 'Thoughts on Nature and Religion', in which he challenged several key articles of Christianity, including the divinity of Christ; O'Leary responded with a combative defence of the doctrinal foundations of religion, entitled 'A Defence of the Divinity of Christ and the Immortality of the Soul' (1776). Though it was unusual for Catholic priests, especially regulars, to engage in public disputation O'Leary tactfully informed the Church of Ireland ordinary of his intentions prior to entering into print. He also attempted to bring all believers on side by affirming general Christian principles as distinct from specifically Catholic principles, against the negative observations of sceptics, deists, and freethinkers. He was helped by his lucid writing style and a capacity for argument, and his work earned him applause from all quarters. Encouraged by this he turned his attention to the disagreement between Catholics as to whether the oath of allegiance approved by the Irish parliament in 1774 was doctrinally sound. He had no doubts of this and, eager to promote religious toleration, he disregarded the reservations of the archbishop of Dublin, Dr John Carpenter, and produced a pamphlet entitled 'Loyalty Asserted, or, The New Test Oath Vindicated'. For the first time he averred that it was the duty of Irish Catholic subjects not to engage in 'conspiracies and treasonable practices' against their protestant king. He was sharply critical of the Stuarts, whose restoration would, he forecast, result in the 'aggravation of our yoke and new calamities'. More daringly still he claimed that if Christians focused on that on which they were in agreement rather than on their differences, and emphasized charity as opposed to 'religious inflammation' and 'evangelical spleen', it would ensure a welcome diminution in interdenominational dissension (Buckley, 65-9). 
This advocacy of toleration was a radical message, given the depth of religious polarization in Ireland, and it enhanced O'Leary's reputation with Gallican Catholics and liberal protestants who were eager to foster interdenominational concord. However it was not until 1779, when the kingdom was gripped by rumours of a French invasion, that O'Leary achieved national renown, with 'An Address to the Common People of the Roman Catholic Religion', in which he urged Catholics to follow the example of their bishops and clergy and support the crown. A French invasion, O'Leary warned, would worsen the condition of the population and, if it brought about a reopening of the seventeenth-century land settlement, would threaten the 'free exercise of religion' and the diminution of 'the unhappy spirit of persecution' (A. O'Leary, 'Miscellaneous Tracts', 1781, 104). The warm welcome afforded this address stood him in good stead in 1780 in his dispute with John Wesley over the latter's claim that 'an open toleration of the Popish religion is inconsistent with the safety of a free people and a Protestant government'. Wesley justified his contention on the traditional ground that, since it was Catholic doctrine that 'no faith is to be kept with heretics', a protestant government could not safely 'tolerate or encourage Roman Catholics' so long as they adhered to 'their intolerant, persecuting principles' (ibid., 4-7). This restatement of traditional protestant anxieties concerning Roman Catholicism struck at the heart of the principles of toleration that O'Leary championed, and he responded combatively to what he denominated Wesley's 'false assertions'. In a series of letters, first published in the 'Freeman's Journal' in March 1780, he accused Wesley of seeking to 'haunt the living with the images of the dead' (ibid., 77-8) before embarking on a measured but persuasive appeal for Christian toleration. It was an approach that served O'Leary well as it was he rather than Wesley that emerged from the dispute with an enhanced reputation. This gave his case for the repeal of the remainder of the penal laws against Catholics greater authority but, more significantly, it encouraged him to prepare a fuller statement of his views on religious toleration. 
O'Leary's 'Essay on Toleration, or, Plea for Liberty of Conscience' (1780) was one of the most radical and compelling statements in favour of religious and political forbearance published in late eighteenth-century Ireland. Positing the thesis that reason as well as religion enjoined humanity to observe moderation O'Leary described the multiplicity of instances of persecution in history that were responsible for the premature death of 'fifty millions of human beings' as a blight on humanity when 'true religion' worked to mitigate and not to justify abuse. He went on to argue that the practice of 'true religion should be preserved and perpetuated by the same means that established it -- by preaching the Word of God, attended with prudence and discretion, the practice of all Christian virtues, boundless peace and charity' (A. O'Leary, 'Miscellaneous Tracts', 1781, 39). Indeed he cited Montesquieu in support of his contention that 'when many religions have got a footing in the state, they are to be tolerated'. His willingness to criticize the leaders of the Christian churches who failed to conduct themselves according to these principles added weight to his argument, particularly in the Irish context, where his plea for the extension of 'all social benefits to... loyal subjects of every denomination' stood out (ibid., 80). The response to the tract was overwhelmingly positive, although by no means all its admirers embraced its radical implications. The high esteem with which O'Leary was regarded by liberal protestants is vividly illustrated by the decision of the patriot club, the Monks of St Patrick ['see 'Monks of the Screw], to admit him to honorary membership. Catholics were also pleased, as is demonstrated by the willingness of the Irish Catholic Committee to provide $40 in 1781 to defray the cost of publishing a collected edition of O'Leary's writings and of the English Committee to distribute 100 copies gratis. 
There was considerable speculation that O'Leary's allegiance to the Catholic church was less than secure because it was very unusual for Catholic priests to express publicly controversial opinions. His involvement with the campaign to safeguard the regular clergy against the threat of the imposition of new -- or the enforcement of existing legal -- restrictions in the early 1780s gave the lie to this suspicion; he was neither tempted to forsake the Catholic church nor interested in doing so. Indeed he looked with particular optimism to the future as the volunteer corps throughout most of the country admitted Catholics to membership; he became honorary chaplain of the radical Irish brigade, and the Ulster Volunteers pronounced publicly in favour of Catholic relief. His confidence in the volunteers was underlined by his presence at the opening of the grand national convention of volunteer delegates in Dublin in November 1783. However, the refusal of the delegates to promote Catholic enfranchisement, combined with allegations that the radicals who took control of the reform movement in 1784 sought to involve France, compelled him to rethink his attitude. He decided to yield to official blandishments and agreed to report on the activities of the Catholic advocates of parliamentary reform in return for pecuniary reward. 
More than any other event in his life O'Leary's acceptance of government remuneration in 1784 shaped his posthumous reputation and prompted allegations that he was a 'Castle Catholic'. It is indisputable that officials at Dublin Castle identified him as the means by which 'the real designs of the Catholics' (TNA: PRO, HO 100/14, fols. 123-4) could be established and that he apparently agreed to do so in return for an annual payment of $100. His motives are less clear. It is possible that he was drawn by the allure of financial security, since he was dependent on his position as a teacher of rhetoric at the Brunswick Street Academy in Cork, which he took up in 1783. If so it was not a prudent decision, as his failure to produce the required evidence caused officials quickly to lose confidence in him. O'Leary for his part appears to have concluded that what was asked of him was contrary to his commitment to the advancement of toleration. His relationship with Dublin Castle was both less consequential and less personally advantageous than has been suggested. More importantly the strong resistance shown by the Irish administration during the mid-1780s to further relief for Catholics convinced him that his hopes for early implementation of full religious toleration were unfounded. It took the public controversy generated by the Rightboy agrarian movement in Munster in the mid-1780s to disabuse him of the illusion that it was at all attainable. 
Given the success of his inspirational appeal for calm in the face of a threatened French invasion in 1779 it was hardly surprising that O'Leary was invited by friends from co. Cork to make another appeal in 1786 as agrarian unrest gripped the southern half of the country. He responded with two addresses 'to the Common people', published in the 'Cork Hibernian Chronicle' in February 1786, in which he appealed to the Rightboys to obey the law and to desist from violence. However, his observation that the Rightboys' actions were 'founded on poverty', that their mode of proceeding was 'moderate', that the manner in which the tithe was collected was 'oppressive', and that the Church of Ireland clergy were not free of responsibility was incautious (A. O'Leary, 'Mr O'Leary's Defence', 1787, appx). And instead of a repetition of the warm welcome that greeted his 1779 intervention he was plunged into controversy as supporters of the Church of Ireland rushed to defend their church. O'Leary was disturbed by the vehemence of the criticism directed at him, since he had not set out to criticize the Church of Ireland. Moreover his remarks convinced many protestants that the Rightboys were part of a wider Catholic conspiracy to undermine the protestant constitution in church and state, and he was a prime target for the neo-conservative voices that were raised in support of a law and order response. His most passionate critic was Patrick Duigenan, who identified O'Leary -- 'the Fryar 'with the barbarous surname'' -- as the 'instructor of the peasantry in religion and politicks' (Theophilus, 17). This was both offensive and gratuitous but it struck home. Realizing that his hopes for religious toleration as well as his reputation had been severely set back O'Leary prepared a detailed response in which he amply defended himself against the allegations of his accusers. The most striking feature of his defence is his assertion that his critics were intolerant, because it bears witness to his disappointment at the palpable rise in interdenominational antagonism that took place in the mid-1780s. Liberal protestants, well disposed towards tithe reform, were more supportive but this was not enough to ease O'Leary's concerns. Dispirited by the rejection of his vision of a tolerant future he chose to leave Ireland in 1789 for the more congenial atmosphere of England, and he spent the remainder of his life in London. 
O'Leary served as a chaplain to the Spanish embassy on his arrival in London. One of his colleagues was Thomas Hussey, later bishop of Waterford, but their relationship was difficult and was the subject of 'Narrative of the Misunderstanding between the Rev. A. O'Leary and Rev Mr. Hussey' in 1791. O'Leary meanwhile was introduced by Edmund Burke to whig society. His natural bonhomie, abundance of anecdote, and skill as a conversationalist meant that he was a welcome guest even of the prince of Wales for reasons other than his reputation as an apostle of religious toleration. He attended meetings of the English Catholic Committee, although he was less than impressed by their readiness to describe themselves as 'Catholic Dissenters'. His residence in London prompted further speculation in Ireland that he had accepted a pension of $200 per annum from the government 'upon the secret condition that he should for the future withhold his pen, and reside no more in Ireland' (Buckley, 351). Successive biographers have argued that this was not so and, while the absence of a clear documentary trail would bear them out, one cannot entirely discount the fact that he was paid from the secret service list. There were also reports in the Irish press in 1790 that he had embraced protestantism, which he vigorously denied, since he never wavered in his belief that the Catholic church represented 'the right road to eternal life' (ibid., 326). Indeed his recognition that the Catholics of London were poorly served for churches prompted him to convert a large hall on Sutton Street, Soho Square, into a chapel that he named after St Patrick and from which he ministered for the remainder of his life. He was a popular preacher who, even when affirming the doctrines of the Catholic church, declined to criticize others. He was encouraged to take this line as much by his alarm at current events in France as by his continuing belief in the merits of religious toleration. His sympathies with the victims of the French Revolution prompted him to support and to promote the cause of emigre loyalists in Great Britain and to warn against the example of France in his sermons. Persuaded that the revolutionaries were driven by 'irreligion and licentiousness' he was induced by the mistreatment of Pope Pius VI to make a powerful attack, on 8 March 1797, on the 'licentious infidels' whom he held responsible (ibid., 341). This consolidated his reputation in England, which was affirmed further in 1799 when he offered an equally powerful panegyric to Pius VI on his death. 
Understandably O'Leary was no less disturbed by the impact of the French Revolution on Ireland. He maintained that both the Catholic and protestant churches had 'everything to dread from the disciples of the New Philosophy, which has made rapid progress amongst their respective flocks' (Buckley, 375) and he was encouraged by this fact to welcome an Anglo-Irish legislative union when Pitt proposed it in 1799. In 'Address to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of Great Britain', published in June 1800, he pronounced himself 'a friend to the Union' because he believed it would 'close the tumultary scenes which have distracted my ill-fated country for ages, and make the natives, of every religious description, happy' (ibid., 372). His expectation, encouraged by Pitt, was that the early concession of Catholic emancipation would help, and he can only have been encouraged in this conviction by the criticism directed at him by Sir Richard Musgrave in his influential 'Memoirs of Different Rebellions'. Though prompted by this experience to gather materials for a history of his own he was never to write such a work. He made his notes available to Francis Plowden shortly before his death, after a short illness, on 8 January 1802 at 45 Great Portland Street, London. The publication of the funeral oration and the erection of an impressive monument over his grave in St Pancras churchyard, where he was buried on 14 January, provided a final testament to the benign impact of a man who, throughout his life, believed that true religion 'instead of inspiring hatred and rancour, commands us to love' (ibid., 374). 


@@@@@


doc= 20701


O'Leary, Ellen (1831-1889), poet and Irish nationalist, was born on 23 October 1831 at 16 West Main Street, Tipperary, the second child of John O'Leary (died 1848), shopkeeper and landlord, and his second wife, Margaret, 'nee' Ryan. Her elder brother was John O'Leary (1830-1907), and she also had a younger brother, Arthur (1833-1861). Margaret O'Leary died in the mid-1830s and this affected Ellen O'Leary severely. Her father remarried and had a third family, and an aunt, who helped to rear her and her brothers, encouraged nationalist feelings in the children. 
Ellen O'Leary contributed patriotic ballads and songs to the Young Ireland paper, 'The Nation', then to her brother's Fenian paper, the 'Irish People', writing as Eily and Lenel. She also contributed to the 'Irish Monthly', 'The Shamrock', and 'The Irishman'. She was closely involved in the affairs of the Irish Republican Brotherhood of which her brother John was a prominent member; in 1864 she handled Irish Republican Brotherhood funds in her brother's absence and in 1866 she raised $200 on her house property in Tipperary, to help finance James Stephens's escape to France. When John O'Leary was tried for treason-felony in 1865, she sat by the dock and she visited him during his five years in Portland prison. On O'Leary's return to Ireland from exile in Paris in 1885 she came to live with him at 40 Leinster Road, Dublin: brother and sister became the centre of a cultural and nationalist circle which included W. B. Yeats, to whom she had a maternal attitude, Maud Gonne, Rose Kavanagh, Rosa Mulholland, Dora Sigerson, and Katharine Tynan. Yeats recalled her as being, like her brother: 'of Plutarch's people. She told me of her brother's life, of the foundation of the Fenian movement, and of the arrests that followed (I believe that her own sweetheart had somehow fallen among the wreckage), of sentences of death pronounced upon false evidence amid a public panic, and told it all without bitterness. No fanaticism could thrive amid such gentleness. She never found it hard to believe that an opponent had as high a motive as her own, and needed upon her difficult road no spur of hate. (Yeats, 'Autobiographies', 95)' In the early 1880s Ellen O'Leary developed breast cancer. John O'Leary remained unaware of her illness and was abroad when she died at 9 Castle Street, Cork, on 15 October 1889, while on a visit to a nephew. She was buried in Tipperary. O'Leary was devastated, writing to Yeats: 'A horrible calamity has come, and the light of my life has gone out' ('Collected Letters of W. B. Yeats', 1.192). O'Leary later summed up their relationship: 'She was everything to me as I was everything to her' (O'Leary, 2.97). In his 'Boston Pilot' obituary Yeats described her verse as having 'mingled austerity and tenderness... like a rivulet flowing from mountain snows' (Yeats, 'Letters to the New Island', 25). Her 'Lays of Country, Home and Friends', with some verses by Arthur O'Leary appended, was published in 1890 with prefatory material by T. W. Rolleston and Sir Charles Gavan Duffy. Yeats selected four poems by Ellen O'Leary for 'The Poets and the Poetry of the Century' (Miles), emphasizing the traditional nature of her verse and its closeness to popular sentiment, recalling that her songs had been sung in the streets of Tipperary 'by the ballad-singers from their little strips of fluttering paper' (p. 449). Yeats included her 'To God and Ireland True' in his 'A Book of Irish Verse' (1895). Ellen O'Leary is not represented in 'The New Spirit of the Nation' (ed. Martin MacDermott, 1894), presumably because her best political verse was given to the 'Irish People', yet poems such as 'The Felon's Last Wish' compare favourably with verse by Eva (Mary Kelly) or Mary (Ellen Downing). 


@@@@@


doc= 20702


Joseph O'Leary (1792-1857), barrister, was born in Dublin, the eldest son of Jeremiah O'Leary of Cork. He was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1820 and published in Dublin the standard legal works 'Law Tithes in Ireland' (1835), 'Rent Charges in Lieu of Tithes' (1840), and 'Dispositions for Religious and Charitable Uses in Ireland' (1847). He died in 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 20703


O'Leary, Joseph (c.1795-c.1845), songwriter and journalist, was born in Cork. In his youth, possibly after the death of his father, he joined a company of strolling players, but his theatrical experience was short, as the manager was insolvent. About 1818 he started to write for the Cork papers -- notably, 'The Freeholder', a scurrilous sheet which was edited by John Boyle, and lasted until 1842. O'Leary's contributions were considered very powerful; he was likened to Swift by Denny Lane, and it was in its columns that his famous Bacchanalian song 'Whiskey, drink divine', appeared. About 1818 he also wrote for 'The Bagatelle', a short-lived Cork periodical; and for a time he edited the 'Cork Mercantile Reporter'. Between 1825 and 1828 he wrote for 'Bolster's Cork Quarterly', and contributed poems under the pseudonyms 'O'' and 'O'L', and sketches as Denis Murphy, to two London periodicals, the 'Dublin and London Magazine', and 'Captain Rock in London'. In 1825 he contributed to the 'Dublin and London Magazine' an anonymous article, 'Bettheen-a-Vryne'; the song 'Glenfinnishk', which concludes it, appeared in several anthologies of Irish poetry. Richard Ryan, the Irish biographer, who seems to have known him, says that he was, in 1826, preparing a translation of Tibullus. In 1830 O'Leary published a pamphlet 'On the Late Election in Cork', under the signature of 'A Reporter'. There are also some poems by him in Patrick O'Kelly's 'Hippocrene' (1831); and in 1833 a small collection of his poems and sketches appeared at Cork in an anonymous, possibly autobiographical, volume, entitled 'The Tribute'. In 1834 he went to London and joined the staff of the 'Morning Herald' as parliamentary reporter. After this date little about O'Leary's life can be verified. It is said that he was one of the earliest writers for 'Punch'. But despite praise for his 'racy sketches' he seems to have met with little material success in London, and it is conjectured that he drowned himself in the Regent's Canal about 1845. It is also possible that he returned to Cork and died there. 
O'Leary has been confused with the 'Irish whiskey-drinker', John Sheehan, who translated 'Whiskey, drink divine', into Latin. 
Another contemporary 


@@@@@


doc= 20704


Oley, Barnabas (bap. 1602, d. 1686), Church of England clergyman, was born at Kirkthorpe, Yorkshire, and was baptized on 27 December 1602 in the parish church at Wakefield, the son of Francis Oley (died 1643?), clergyman, and his wife, Mary Watterhouse. From 1602 to 1619 his father was vicar of Penistone, in the same county, and in 1607 Oley entered Wakefield grammar school. In 1617 he was admitted to Clare College, Cambridge, probably as Cave's exhibitioner from his school, and he graduated BA in 1621. Having been elected a probationer fellow of the foundation of Lady Clare at the college on 28 November 1623, he proceeded MA in 1625 and was elected a senior fellow in 1627. Among his students was Peter Gunning, later bishop of Ely. 
In 1633 Oley was appointed to the college living of Great Gransden, Huntingdonshire, which he held for the rest of his life, but continuing the duties of his fellowship for several years he continued to live in Cambridge. In 1634-5 he served as taxor, or price regulator, for the university, and in 1635-6 as proctor. The first steps for the rebuilding of Clare College, which was begun on 19 May 1638, although not finished until 1715, were taken under his diligent and careful direction; he was called by Thomas Fuller its 'Master of the fabrick' (T. Fuller, 'The History of the University of Cambridge', 1655, 38). 
In the summer of 1642 Oley was an evidently zealous loyalist, and it was to him, according to standard royalist accounts, that the university entrusted the task of taking its plate to the king to be converted into money for his use. Oley, it was said, brought it safely to Charles's headquarters 'at Nottingham' in August (Varley, 80). He was also said to have lent a considerable sum of money on the communion plate of Clare College, which was of solid gold and very valuable. This he later restored to the college on repayment of part of his loan in 1660; there is a college tradition that its three other very old pieces of plate were also preserved by his care. There are, however, flaws in this version of events: there was no 'university plate' as such; the king was not at this date at Nottingham; Oley was not, as described, 'president' of Clare; only relatively insignificant amounts of plate and money from a handful of colleges are recorded as having reached Charles at Oxford. If Oley acted as an agent then he did so secretly the night before Oliver Cromwell and Valentine Walton successfully blocked a major convoy of plate, and took with him only a fraction of what the royalists received -- perhaps, indeed, plate from Clare. On 8 April 1644 Oley was ejected from his fellowship by the earl of Manchester on the grounds of non-residence in Cambridge and failure to appear before the commission of visitors. He was also plundered of his personal and landed property, and although not sequestered, was forced to leave Great Gransden, where his curate, Nathaniel Jury, deputized for him. 
In the later 1640s Oley led a wandering and impoverished life. In 1643 and 1646 he was in Oxford. During the sieges of Pontefract in 1644 and 1645 he preached to the royalist garrison defending the castle. By 1647 he had been sequestered from the impropriate rectory of Warmfield, Yorkshire, which his father had resigned in 1643. Having helped Sir Marmaduke Langdale to escape in 1648 from prison and a death sentence, the following year Oley had to compound for delinquency in assisting the forces against parliament, and was fined $30. A further $50 was added in 1652, in lieu of which he was required to settle $5 a year on the minister of Warmfield. For some time he had lived at Heath, near Wakefield, but in 1652 and 1653 he stayed 'in the north privately, near the place of Lady Savil's demolished habitation' (J. E. B. Mayor, 'Cambridge in the Seventeenth Century, pt 1: Nicholas Ferrar', 1855, 303-4). 
By the 1650s Oley had both the leisure and the resources to prepare manuscripts for publication. In 1652 he edited 'Herbert's Remains, or, Sundry Pieces of that Sweet Singer of the Temple, Mr George Herbert', containing 'A Priest to the Temple, or, The Country Parson' and 'Jacula prudentum'. Prefixed was an unsigned 'prefatory View of the Life and Vertues of the Author, and Excellencies of this Book', which was written by Oley. The second edition was to appear in 1671 as 'A Priest to the Temple, or, The Country Parson', with a new preface, signed Barnabas Oley. Both prefaces, often polemical in tone, reflect his commitment to a Laudian ideal of the Church of England. The manuscript of 'The Country Parson' was the property of Oley's friend Edmund Duncon: in the 1671 preface Oley corrects Isaac Walton's story that Arthur Woodnoth gave it to him. Walton in turn drew on Oley's prefaces for parts of his own life of Herbert. 
Between 1653 and 1657 Oley edited three volumes of the works of Thomas Jackson, the late president of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. In the prefatory epistles he extolled Jackson's merits and begged for the return of borrowed manuscripts of his works. In the third volume, dedicated to Gilbert Sheldon, Oley explained that 'God, by convincing me of disabilitie, hath taken away all hopes and desires of publishing any work of mine own'. Devoting himself to the works of others, he was probably also the historian who collected, but never published, information on Nicholas Ferrar. 
In 1659 Oley returned to Great Gransden, where Sir John Hewett of Waresley in Huntingdonshire gave him some furniture, and on 9 July 1660 he was restored to his fellowship by order of the same earl of Manchester. Through the 'voluntary mediation' of Gilbert Sheldon, now bishop of London, he was presented on 3 August 1660 to the third prebendal stall of Worcester Cathedral. Now financially secure, he was able to leave his fellowship in 1663 and to be generous. In 1664 he was the leading benefactor of the brick school house at Gransden, which he endowed with $20 a year. He built brick houses for six poor people on his own freehold land, leasing them for one thousand years to the churchwardens for the time being at a peppercorn rent, and he erected a vicarage. To King's College, Cambridge, he gave $100 for putting up canopies and pillars for stalls in the chapel. Having given a pulpit to Gransden church in the first months of his incumbency in 1633, in 1681 he provided wainscot seats for the chancel. 
When Oley's edition of Jackson's works was reissued in 1673, again with a dedication to Sheldon, much was made in the preface of the feebleness of the editor's memory 'by the suddain ingruence of a Lethargy or Apoplexy' ('A Collection of the Works of... T. Jackson'). None the less, in 1678, despite his age, Oley was first choice of the fellows at Clare to replace Theophilus Dillingham as master, although he was not elected because he could not be contacted in time. On 8 November 1679 Oley was collated on the nomination of Bishop Gunning, his old pupil, to the archdeaconry of Ely, but the following year he resigned this preferment because of doubts of his ability to discharge its duties. However, he retained the stall at Worcester until his death, being then 'the senior Prebendary of venerable Memory' (G. Hickes, 'Seventeen Sermons of the Reverend and Learned Dr William Hopkins', 1708, xiii). He established a weekly celebration of the eucharist in the cathedral. 
Oley died at Great Gransden on 20 February 1686, and in accordance with his will was buried there on the night of 22 February. The will, dated between 23 May 1684 and 18 October 1685, was considered noteworthy for its generosity to church causes. One feature was its provision of books for poor parishes: records of borrowing by parishioners exist into the eighteenth century. To the dean and chapter of Worcester Oley gave $200 for buttresses for the choir and the chapel at the east end of the cathedral; to Clare College he left 100 marks ($67) for building a library, and $10 to the descendants of John Westley, the builder of the college. The junior fellows of King's College received $50 for the construction of a walkway for their recreation. A charity was set up in his name, with assets in Warmfield, Kirkthorpe, and Great Gransden, overseen by the fellows of Clare College and still operating with limited resources in the late twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 20705


Oliphant, Francis Wilson (1818-1859), painter and designer of stained glass, was born on 28 September 1818 at Gateshead, co. Durham, and baptized at St Mary's Church there on 15 September 1819, the son of Thomas Oliphant ('c'.1787-1856), a glass cutter, and his wife, Margery. He studied drawing at the Trustees' Academy, Edinburgh, under Sir William Allan and was involved from an early age in the stained-glass industry, which was undergoing rapid expansion. The revival of Gothic style and ornament led him to make a profound study of ecclesiastical art, visiting many of the great northern European cathedrals. He worked first for the firm of Ballantine and Allan, Edinburgh, and then as chief designer for William Wailes, Newcastle, who supplied glass to Augustus Welby Pugin. About 1847 he moved to London and worked as Pugin's second designer, especially upon the painted windows in the new houses of parliament. He also sent in a cartoon to the competition for the decoration of Westminster Hall, which was not successful. During this period Oliphant exhibited several pictures in the Royal Academy, the chief being a large Shakespearian study of the interview between Richard II and John of Gaunt, and a striking picture of the prodigal son, 'Nearing Home'. On 4 May 1852 he married his cousin, Margaret Oliphant Wilson (1828-1897) ['see 'Oliphant, Margaret Oliphant Wilson], who was beginning to be known as a writer. They seem to have had a troubled relationship, and the couple soon became dependent on her earnings. 
By his mid-thirties Oliphant was able to write, 'the number of windows that have been executed from my designs is past counting and are in nearly every county and cathedral in England' (Letter to Major William Blackwood, 26 March 1856, NL Scot., Blackwood MS 4119). But he was not satisfied with the way his designs were carried out. In 1854 he set up a small stained-glass workshop, hoping to create better quality windows, and also to have more time for his painting. This workshop produced the windows in the ante-chapel of King's College, Cambridge, those in the chancel of Aylesbury church, Buckinghamshire, and several in Ely Cathedral. The famous choristers' window at Ely was the joint work of Oliphant and William Dyce RA, the former being responsible for the original design. 
But owing to Oliphant's lack of business sense, the project made heavy losses. In 1857 he developed tuberculosis and was eventually forced to give up work. He left England in January 1859 with his family to seek a warmer climate and died at via Babuino 56 in Rome on 20 October 1859, and was buried in the English cemetery there. He left a daughter and two sons, one born after his death. 
Mrs Oliphant was always reserved about her husband. His friend William Bell Scott thought that he became 'an idle and aimless man' ('Autobiographical Notes of the Life of William Bell Scott', ed. W. Minto, 1892, 1.188). 'He had the ability and the knowledge to imitate the medieval glass of the successive periods of architecture, and yet his ambition was to be a painter of history, which ambition was fatal to him' (ibid.). His only book, 'A Plea for Painted Glass' (1855), shows him to have been an idealist who dreamed of competing with the great artists of the middle ages. He was capable of generous but reckless acts, like presenting a window to Aylesbury church when no one could be found to pay for it. None of his paintings is known to have survived, but his stained glass is excellent. 


@@@@@


doc= 20706


Oliphant, James (1734-1818), Church of Scotland minister, was born in Stirling, the second son of William Oliphant. He entered the University of Glasgow in 1753 and earned an MA three years later. In 1757 Oliphant matriculated at the Associate Burgher Hall, the seceders' divinity school at Glasgow, but he attended only four sessions before leaving the secession movement because of differences with some of the professors at the school. He subsequently joined the Church of Scotland, receiving his licence to preach from the presbytery of Kintyre on 19 May 1760. He was admitted to the Gorbals Chapel of Ease, Glasgow, in 1763, and on 17 May 1764 was ordained to the chapel of ease in Kilmarnock, Ayrshire. Six months later, on 27 November, he married Elizabeth Hay (died 1780). In October 1773 Oliphant was presented to Dumbarton by its town council, acting on the request of the inhabitants, and he was settled there on 23 December. He also served as clerk of the presbytery of Dumbarton from 1783 to 1817. Following the death of his first wife, on 29 March 1780 shortly after giving birth to their seventh child, he married, on 27 April 1784, Janet (died 1805), daughter of Humphrey Colquhoun of Barnhill and Margaret Williamson, with whom he had five more children. 
Although Oliphant was described by J. W. Taylor as 'a sound and racy theologian, and an interesting and highly accomplished preacher', he also provoked considerable opposition, even ridicule. In 'The Ordination' (1786), Robert Burns, who had heard Oliphant preach at Kilmarnock, lampooned him for his booming voice, as well as the opposition to common sense of Oliphant and his Kilmarnock colleague, John Russell: '
Curst Common-sense, that imp o' h-ll, 

Cam' in wi' Maggie Lauder; 

But O[liphant] aft made her yell, 

An' R[ussell] sair misca'd her. 
('Poems and Songs', 2.213, ll. 10-14)' Oliphant's high Calvinism also inspired the hostility of clergymen whose theological views emphasized the role of free will in religious life. In 1773 his Kilmarnock opponents even hired a man to walk the streets of Dumbarton, purporting to sell 'the whole works of the Rev. James Oliphant, presentee to this parish, for the small charge of two pence'. 
Oliphant compiled strict Calvinist catechisms for the use of schools and young communicants, and they attracted the greatest attention during his ministry. His 'Mother's Catechism' (1770) went through more than twenty editions, and his 'Sacramental Catechism' (1772) was also immensely popular. He also wrote the account of the parish of Dumbarton in Sir John Sinclair's 'Statistical Account of Scotland' (1792). 
Oliphant lost his eyesight several years before his death, which occurred on 10 April 1818. 


@@@@@


doc= 20707


Laurence Oliphant, first Lord Oliphant (d. 1500?), was still a boy at the time of his father's death, and was put under the tutelage of Sir David Hay of Yester. In 1450 Laurence went on pilgrimage to Rome in the magnificent entourage of the ninth earl of Douglas; nevertheless, when James II embarked on his violent struggle with the Douglases a few years later, young Oliphant sided with the king and was rewarded with elevation to the peerage some time before 1458. His marriage, about 1463, to Isobel, daughter of William Hay, first earl of Erroll (d. 1462) ['see under 'Hay family], constable of Scotland, perhaps also reflects the king's gratitude. Lord Oliphant continued his service to the crown, holding the office of sheriff of Perthshire. Nevertheless, he was also involved in a number of violent feuds, including one with the earl of Buchan which in 1491 claimed the life of his brother, James. The other side of that coin was the numerous bonds of manrent into which he entered with a number of lairds, including many of his neighbours. 
James III, too, seems to have found Oliphant's services useful, sending him as a commissioner to negotiate the marriage of James Stewart, duke of Rothesay (the future James IV), to Anne de la Pole, niece of Richard III of England, in 1484. Unfortunately, the king's alienation of the earl of Argyll, his former chancellor, ensured that Oliphant, whose son was engaged to marry Argyll's daughter, also fought against James, on behalf of the latter's son, at Sauchieburn in 1488. This decision naturally meant that Laurence continued his involvement in affairs of state under James IV, acting, among other things, as a lord of the articles and as Scottish ambassador on the continent. Lord Oliphant also found time to found a Franciscan friary at Perth, perhaps about 1460. Unfortunately, he was also engaged in a dispute with the burgesses of Perth, which resulted in the destruction of his house at Aberdalgie. His eventful life seems to have come to an end before April 1500. 
The Oliphants provide a striking and illuminating example of the rise and rise of a Norman family. Originally maintaining their political importance and expanding their landed wealth explicitly through loyal service to the crown, the family had reached sufficient rank, socially and politically, to play a prominent role in the wars with England. The habit of loyalty to the Scottish crown, despite a brief adherence to Edward II, brought them very definite favours from Robert I. Coincidentally or otherwise, this permitted the Oliphants to concentrate on building up power at a local level, based on their main estates in Perthshire; their absence from the national scene throughout most of the fourteenth century may well thus reflect not inactivity, but a preference for local affairs of which their later involvement in feuding and bonds of manrent perhaps provides proof. The maintenance of a local power base, together with continuing loyalty to the crown, brought the Oliphants into the peerage under James II. The activities of Laurence, first Lord Oliphant, are perhaps largely typical of that rank of nobility to which the family now belonged. 


@@@@@


doc= 20708


Oliphant, Laurence, third Lord Oliphant (d. 1566), landowner, was the son of Colin, master of Oliphant, and Lady Elizabeth Keith, second daughter of the third Earl Marischal. Colin was killed at Flodden in 1513, and so it was as a minor that Laurence succeeded his grandfather, John, second Lord Oliphant, some time before 18 November 1516. He married Margaret, eldest daughter of Sir James Sandilands of Calder and widow of Robert Bruce of Auchenbowie, before 10 July 1525, and had come of age by 30 March 1526. He and Margaret had three sons and four daughters; the eldest son, Laurence Oliphant, was born in 1529. 
The core of Oliphant's estates lay in Perthshire, with extensive lands in Aberdalgie, Dupplin, and their environs. In 1533 his right to hold the three-quarter lands of Pitcaithly, south of Perth, by feu-ferme from the crown, was challenged by the king's lawyers, and it was not until 1538 that he and his wife were jointly infeft in this property. He also added substantially to his properties by acquiring lands in Caithness from a cousin. Closer to home, he owned property on the east side of the watergate in Perth. There is no record of his having been entered as a burgess there, nor do the burgh records indicate that he took any part in the affairs of the town. Indeed, he remained so aloof from them that he did not accompany the large contingent from Perth and its environs which went to the aid of the earl of Lennox in 1544. 
In 1542 Oliphant had, however, accompanied the Scottish army to Solway Moss, and was there captured by the English. He found the subsequent march to London arduous and was still awaiting a pledge to relieve him from captivity on 19 January 1543. In the meantime, he signed Cassillis's pledge to support King Henry's aims in Scotland and had received a gift of money from the English monarch. Oliphant was back in Edinburgh by early June 1543 and sitting with the council, but in the following March his ransom (set at 800 merks) was still unpaid and his son, acting as his pledge for payment, remained in England. None the less, Oliphant ignored his 'assurance' and did nothing significant to forward King Henry's designs in Scotland. 
Oliphant was engaged in a legal dispute early in 1544 but refused to appear in Perth sheriff court and had the case removed to Edinburgh and the lords of council. A contract for the marriage of his daughter Jean to William Moncrieff of that ilk was arranged in May 1550, but at the height of the Reformation crisis, ten years later, the two lairds were engaged in a quarrel which precluded Oliphant's attendance on the affairs of the lords of the congregation. His absence was a cause of annoyance to his peers, but the English ambassador Thomas Randolph noted that Oliphant's influence was of little significance, and that in any case he was most likely to follow the dictates of the earl of Huntly. Oliphant did not sit in the Reformation Parliament in August 1560, and probably opposed the religious reformation. He died at Old Wick on 29 March 1566. His son was served heir to his father on 2 May 1566, and well before that date had become a prominent member of Queen Mary's party. 


@@@@@


doc= 20709


Oliphant, Laurence, fourth Lord Oliphant (1529-1593), nobleman, was the eldest son of Laurence Oliphant, third Lord Oliphant (d. 1566), and Margaret, daughter of Sir James Sandilands of Calder. He succeeded his father on 2 May 1566 having in March 1551 married Margaret (died 'c'.1594), daughter of George Hay, seventh earl of Erroll. They had six children: Laurence, master of Oliphant, John, William, Elizabeth, whose first husband was William Douglas, tenth earl of Angus, Jean, who married Alexander Bruce of Cultmalindie, and Euphame, wife of James Johnston of Westraw. 
Oliphant was seldom a significant figure in public affairs during his relatively long life. His family had important estates in Caithness, and he was appointed justiciar there on 14 March 1557. Appointed a privy councillor in 1567, he attended infrequently. In the disorders of Mary's reign he initially sided with the queen, supporting her marriage to Bothwell, attending their wedding, and subsequently fighting on Mary's side at Langside on 13 May 1568. For this he was denounced as a rebel by the queen's enemies and put to the horn. Thereafter his allegiance wavered. On 6 January 1569 Mary named him as one of her counsellors, but by April he had moved into the regent Moray's camp, and at the convention held at Perth in July voted with the majority which rejected proceedings to divorce the queen from Bothwell, as a prelude to her marriage to the duke of Norfolk and possible restoration. After Moray's murder on 23 January 1570 Oliphant rejoined the queen's followers, and in April, following a meeting with some of the queen's adherents at Linlithgow, was a signatory to a letter on Mary's behalf to Queen Elizabeth requesting that she 'enter into such conditions with the Queen's Highness in Scotland as may be honourable for all parties' (Calderwood, 2.550). But he does not appear to have been otherwise active on Mary's behalf, and by the end of 1572 was said to be favourable to the king's party. He seems to have supported Morton throughout the latter's regency. In the 1560s Oliphant may have been a sympathizer with Catholicism, but in July 1585 he voted in favour of a league with England in defence of protestantism. In April 1589 he took part in James VI's campaign against the earl of Huntly, and attended a meeting of the privy council for the last time in February 1591. 
Oliphant may not have taken a leading role in Scottish politics, but he undeniably achieved prominence through his involvement in a series of bitter feuds between his own and various other noble houses. In July 1569, for example, there was an attack on him and his servants by the earl of Caithness, highlighting a dispute with the contentious Sinclairs, earls of Caithness, which persisted through his lifetime. But the most spectacular and celebrated episode in which Oliphant was concerned was the one in November 1580, involving the powerful Ruthven family. The two families were near neighbours, both having substantial estates in Perthshire, and on this occasion, a disagreement over the right to certain teinds, a common cause of friction, resulted in the fourth lord's eldest son, the master of Oliphant, and his followers making an attack near Dupplin, a few miles south-west of Perth, on a party of Ruthvens and Stewarts as they returned from the marriage of the earl of Mar. In the violent exchanges which ensued, Alexander Stewart of Schutingleyis was struck by a bullet and killed. The upshot of this fracas was Oliphant's arrest followed by his trial for the murder of Stewart. The trial itself was a curious affair, with allegations at one point of the use of a poisoned bullet, but helped by Morton's backing Oliphant was eventually acquitted. 
Rather surprisingly this verdict did not create a permanent breach with the Ruthvens and shortly afterwards the master of Oliphant was one of the participants in the Ruthven raid, the seizure of James VI in 1582 by the earl of Gowrie and his supporters. In 1584, as a result of his involvement in these events, Oliphant's son was exiled abroad where he met an uncertain fate. According to one account, following his capture by North Sea pirates 'he was hanged upon the mast of the ship' (Calderwood, 4.46), but another source has him incarcerated in Algiers, a prisoner of the Turks. Oliphant himself, still feuding with the Sinclairs, died in Wick, Caithness, on 16 January 1593, and was buried in Wick church. 


@@@@@


doc= 20710


Oliphant, Laurence, of Gask, styled ninth Lord Oliphant (1691-1767), Jacobite army officer, son of James Oliphant (died 1732), laird of Gask, and Janet (died 1729), daughter of the Revd Anthony Murray of Woodend, Perthshire, was born on 29 December 1691 at Williamston, Perthshire. The Gask branch of the Oliphants descended from William Oliphant of Newton, Perthshire, second son of Colin, master of Oliphant, slain at Flodden. Some of their lands were traditionally 'held on the tenure of a yearly gift of White Roses' (Lang, 129); the Gask estate itself came into their hands in 1625. Oliphant married Amelia (or Amelie) Anne Sophia Murray (1698-1774), second daughter of William Nairne, styled second Lord Nairne, in 1719; they had one son, also Laurence, the father of the poet Carolina, who fittingly married back into the Nairnes in time for the restoration of their title in 1824. The Oliphants were a strongly royalist and Jacobite family, and in the rising of 1715 Laurence was commissioned as a lieutenant in Lord Rollo's Perthshire horse, in which capacity he was present at the battle of Sheriffmuir; subsequently he acted as adjutant while James VIII and III (James Francis Edward Stuart, Jacobite claimant to the throne) was at Scone. After the failure of the rising he lay low for a while, but was back at Gask by March 1718 at the latest. The Gasks received a call for support from the Jacobite leadership in Scotland in 1719, but the rising was over too rapidly for anything to transpire. On the death of his father on 18 April 1732, Oliphant succeeded to the Gask estates. His political outlook led to the appointment of the Jacobite poet William Meston to be young Laurence's tutor in 1736. The family continued to display its support for the exiled Stuarts, and in the early 1740s (possibly for Charles Edward Stuart's twenty-first birthday in 1741) Ebenezer Oliphant, Gask's younger brother and an Edinburgh silversmith, gave Prince Charles a 'beautiful rococo canteen of silver-gilt travelling cutlery' (Lenman, 106). In 1745 Gask was asked to subscribe 'for a new edition of Fordun's Scotichronicon' (Oliphant, 102): later, in exile, Gask's antiquarian interests would find solace in the holdings of the Scots College in Paris. 
By 9 August 1745 Gask had heard of the rising, and he and his son took long walks 'along the upper terrace of the old garden' (Anderson, lxxx) to decide which of them would fight. In the end both did, joining the prince at Blair Atholl on 31 August: the next day, Oliphant made his wife factor over his estate, and brought a letter from the prince to Lord George Murray requesting his support. His own tenants were unwilling to follow, and Gask appears to have inhibited them from harvesting their corn, a prohibition gracefully removed by a cut of Prince Charles's sword. In September the Gasks, together with Viscount Strathallan, raised two troops of the Perthshire horse, the first cavalry of the Jacobite army; Strathallan was overall commander, while Gask served as lieutenant-colonel. The horse were present at the battle of Prestonpans, but took no part in the action. While the prince's army was in England, Gask acted as lieutenant-governor of Perth: in this capacity, he held the council house with only nineteen men against an infuriated Hanoverian mob on 30 November. Eventually relief arrived, and Gask remained in post until 6 February, when he reluctantly retreated in the face of overwhelming force. Besides personal bravery, he also displayed guile: after the battle of Falkirk, he accompanied Viscount Strathallan in the guise of a peasant to secure information concerning the extent of the Jacobite victory. At Culloden, after Viscount Strathallan's death, Gask led the horse out of action to final dispersal at Ruthven. He was in hiding thereafter for seven months at Moy, Birkhall, Glenisla, and Strathdee together with his son, who touchingly recalled their experiences many years later. On one occasion, they were close enough to government troops for their servant to hear one soldier say 'That's Oliphant', but Gask's potential attacker was bought off with an opportune gold piece (Graham, 209). 
On the death of Charles, seventh Lord Oliphant, on 19 April 1748, Gask laid claim to the title, which was, however, assumed by William Oliphant. On his death on 3 June 1751, he apparently named Gask his heir, but David Oliphant of Bachilton succeeded instead, and indeed Gask may not have been entitled to the honour in law; however, the peerage was emptily confirmed to him by James VIII and III on 14 July 1760. His estate, under the management of the barons of the exchequer, was purchased by his kinsman Oliphant of Condie in 1753, and Gask took a lively interest in its affairs. In exile, he took the alias John Whytt, and lived in considerable poverty, moving from Versailles to Corbeil in 1755 'in hopes of having everything Cheaper' (Tayler, 212); his grandson apparently died from malnutrition in 1757. None the less, in 1759 he could still gather for a celebration with other Scots and Irish exiles in Paris on 10 June, James's birthday. In 1763 Gask's wife was granted a pension of $111 by George III, and Oliphant 'returned to his ancestral home, apparently with the tacit consent of the government' (Smith, 12), although the attainder remained. He died at Gask on 1 April 1767. His son went on to become one of the last Jacobites: when the larger part of the Scottish Episcopal church finally accepted the inevitable and disowned Jacobitism on Charles's death in 1788, young Laurence sacked his (now juring) episcopal chaplain. With Lord Ogilvie, the Gasks were 'perhaps the last partisans of the alliance between France and Scotland' (Oliphant, 428), ideological episcopalian Jacobites of undiluted vigour and a distinctly Scottish world view. 


@@@@@


doc= 20711


Oliphant, Laurence (1829-1888), diplomatist, traveller, and mystic, the only child of Sir Anthony Oliphant (1793-1859) and his wife, Maria (died 1881), daughter of Colonel Campbell of the 72nd highlanders, was born at Cape Town. Thomas Oliphant, the musician, was his uncle. 
Oliphant's father, who was third son of Ebenezer Oliphant of Condie and Newton, Perthshire, and Mary, daughter of Sir William Stirling of Ardoch, had been called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1821, and practised for a time in London as an equity draftsman, but just before his son's birth he was appointed attorney-general at the Cape. Oliphant's father and mother were both fervent evangelicals. His mother returned to Europe on account of her health, and took her son with her. He was sent to the school of a Mr Parr at Durnford Manor, Salisbury, but spent part of his holidays with his mother at Condie, an ancestral home of the Oliphant family. 
In 1839 Oliphant's father was made chief justice of Ceylon, and was knighted. Lady Oliphant rejoined her husband in Ceylon in 1841, and Oliphant followed in the winter of the same year, in the charge of a private tutor, who continued to teach him in Ceylon; but despite this his education was much interrupted. His father returned on two years' leave about 1846, and spent the time in a continental tour. He was allowed to accompany his parents instead of going to Cambridge, as had been intended. The family spent the winter of 1846-7 in Paris, travelled through Germany and the Tyrol during 1847, and at the end of the year crossed the Alps to Italy, where Oliphant witnessed some of the popular disturbances in the beginning of 1848. He went with his parents to Greece, and then accompanied them back to Ceylon, where he acted as his father's private secretary. 
Oliphant was called to the colonial bar in Ceylon. He said that by the age of twenty-two he had been engaged in twenty-three murder cases. In December 1851 he was invited by Jang Bahadur (the prime minister of Nepal, who was in Ceylon on a return voyage from England) to join a hunting excursion in Nepal and he reached Katmandu before returning to Ceylon. A few months later he went to England with his mother, and at the end of 1851 began to keep terms at Lincoln's Inn. Besides studying law, he took an interest in the work of Lord Shaftesbury and others among the London poor. In the spring of 1852 he published an account of his tour in Nepal, called 'A Journey to Khatmandu'. He resolved to be called to the Scottish as well as the English bar, and began studies at Edinburgh in the summer of 1852, but these were never completed. 
In August 1852 Oliphant set out with Oswald Smith for a visit to St Petersburg, thence to Nizhniy Novgorod, and ultimately to the Crimea, where they entered Sevastopol in disguise and mapped its fortifications. He published an account of part of the journey, 'The Russian Shores of the Black Sea in the Autumn of 1852' (1853). The approach of the Crimean War gave special interest to this book, which soon reached a fourth edition. Lord Raglan applied to him for information, and he was engaged to write for the 'Daily News'. While keenly interested in this he received an offer of an appointment from James Bruce, eighth earl of Elgin, then governor-in-chief of British North America, with whose family Lady Oliphant was intimate. Oliphant acted as secretary to Lord Elgin during the negotiation at Washington of the reciprocity treaty with Canada, whose economy was in ruins as a result of the repeal of the corn laws in 1846. Elgin's success in achieving free trade between Canada and the USA saved what had been a desperate situation. Oliphant afterwards accompanied Elgin to Quebec. He was soon appointed 'superintendent of Indian affairs', and made a journey to Lake Superior and back by the headwaters of the Mississippi and Chicago, described soon afterwards in 'Minnesota and the Far West' (1855). Dancing, travelling, and political business filled up his time agreeably; but on Lord Elgin's retirement at the end of 1854, he declined offers of an appointment under Sir Edmund Head, Elgin's successor. He went back to England (whither his father had now finally returned) and put forward a plan, suggested by his previous journeys, which is described in a pamphlet called 'The Trans-Caucasian Provinces, the Proper Field of Operation for a Christian Army' (1855). While the main allied force was bogged down around Sevastopol, Russian troops were besieging Kars in north-east Turkey; its fall would not only be a severe blow to the Porte, but would renew the Russian threat to Persia, Mesopotamia, and Afghanistan. Oliphant proposed an expedition to relieve Kars through Circassia and the Trans-Caucasian provinces. Privately he asked the foreign secretary, Lord Clarendon, to send him on a personal mission to Schamyl, the Muslim guerrilla leader in the Caucasus, whose aid against the Russians he hoped to secure by the offer of British troops. Clarendon would only go so far as to give Oliphant a recommendation to the British ambassador in Constantinople, Lord Stratford de Redcliffe. Oliphant's father accompanied him to Constantinople, where they found Lord Stratford de Redcliffe about to visit the Crimea; they accompanied him thither and Oliphant had a glimpse of the siege of Sevastopol. He could not obtain an authorization for his scheme, but Stratford allowed him to accompany a member of the embassy on a reconnaissance of the Circassian coast. At Trebizond they fell in with the Turkish commander, Omar Pasha. Oliphant, who got on well with Omar Pasha, joined his force and was present at the battle of the Ingour. The fall of Kars made the expedition fruitless; and after much suffering, and a consequent illness during the retreat, Oliphant returned to England at the end of 1855. 'The Trans-Caucasian Campaign... under Omar Pasha' (1856) describes his experiences. 
Oliphant had been acting as correspondent of 'The Times' during his recent expedition, and in 1856 he was invited by the editor, John Delane, to accompany him on a visit to the United States. He travelled through the southern states to New Orleans, and there was invited to join the filibuster William Walker in his audacious attempt to seize Nicaragua and rule it as a private fief. Oliphant said he accepted for the sake of the book he could write; privately he had been charged by Lord Palmerston to find out what was going on so close to the British protectorate of the Mosquito Coast. However, the expedition fell in with HMS 'Cossack' at the mouth of the St Juan River; and when her captain came on board to inspect the 'emigrants', he recognized Oliphant as a British subject in a place where no British subject ought to be, and removed him. An account of this adventure and of his first trip in Circassia is given in 'Patriots and Filibusters, or, Incidents of Political and Exploratory Travel' (1860). 
In 1857 Oliphant became private secretary to Lord Elgin on his visit to China. He accompanied Elgin to Hong Kong, was present at the bombardment of Canton (Guangzhou), and helped to storm Tientsin (Tianjin). He was employed in several minor missions, and visited Japan with the expedition barely eighteen months after the American Townsend Harris had been accredited as the first foreign diplomat to the shogun's government; he published 'Narrative of Elgin's Mission to China and Japan' in 1859. On his return to England, Oliphant found that his father (with whom he was always on very affectionate terms) had recently died. He was without formal employment for a time, but in 1860 ostensibly amused himself by a visit to Italy, where the drive for unification under the Piedmontese leader, Count Cavour, was entering its last phase. Oliphant was granted an interview with Cavour at the moment when the convention he had agreed with the emperor Napoleon the previous year was about to be made democratically respectable. France had undertaken to help Piedmont drive the Austrians from the Italian peninsula in return for Savoy and Nice. Garibaldi, who was born in Nice, objected to this bargain, and mounted a plot, in which Oliphant became involved, to break up the ballot boxes in Nice on the occasion of the vote for annexation to France. Oliphant gave his view of the value of a plebiscite in a pamphlet called 'Universal Suffrage and Napoleon the Third' (1860), and as before the Foreign Office benefited from his private observations. Garibaldi's expedition to Sicily broke up the Nice scheme. In 1861 Oliphant travelled in Montenegro and elsewhere, and soon afterwards accepted his first official appointment, as first secretary of legation in Japan. He arrived at Yeddo at the end of June 1861. On the evening of 5 July a night attack was made on the embassy. Oliphant rushed out with a hunting-whip, and was attacked by a Japanese with a heavy two-handed sword. A beam, invisible in the darkness, interfered with the blows, but Oliphant was severely wounded, and sent on board ship to recover. He had to return to England after a visit to the island of Tsushima, strategically placed between Russia and Japan, where a Russian naval force was discovered, and persuaded to retreat. 
Oliphant's first invitation on arriving home was to stay with Lord Palmerston at Broadlands. The rest of 1862 was occupied with visits to Corfu (with the prince of Wales, then on his way to Palestine), and afterwards to Herzegovina and the Abruzzi. The Foreign Office chose to announce that 'family considerations' obliged Oliphant to retire from the diplomatic service, thus providing cover for a series of unofficial missions. Early in 1863 he visited Poland to look at the insurrection there, and later in the year made another attempt, but was turned back. He then travelled in Moldavia, and went northwards to report the Prussian-Danish War. He was now disposed to settle down. He had already once or twice canvassed Stirling burghs, and made himself popular with the electors. In 1864 he joined Sir Algernon Borthwick and some other friends in starting a journal called 'The Owl', of which Thomas Onwhyn was the publisher. It was suggested at a dinner party in fun, and was intended to be partly a mystification, supported by an affected knowledge of profound political secrets. Sir Algernon Borthwick undertook to print it, and it caused much amusement to the initiated. Oliphant contributed only to the first ten numbers, retiring when it was taken up more seriously. In the following year he published the hugely popular 'Piccadilly: a fragment of contemporary biography', in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' (republished, with illustrations by R. Doyle, in 1870). 
In 1865 Oliphant was elected as Liberal MP for Stirling burghs. He did little in parliament but annoy his own side. Passionately in favour of reform, in 1867, when his leader, Gladstone, tried to amend Conservative proposals for the extension of the franchise, Oliphant encouraged fellow Liberals to vote for Disraeli's bill. A singular change now took place in his life. His rambling and adventurous career had given him much experience, but had not made up for a desultory education. He loved excitement, was a universal favourite in society, and had had flirtations in every quarter of the globe. He was a clear-headed man of business, was familiar with official life, and was a brilliant journalist. From his earliest years, however, he had also strong religious impressions, and in his letters to his mother speculations upon his own state of mind and the various phenomena of religions of all varieties had alternated with sparkling descriptions of adventure and society. He had been interested successively in many of the books which reflected contemporary movements of thought. He had read Theodore Parker, W. Smith's 'Thorndale', Maurice's writings, and Morell's 'History of Philosophy'. His lack of a secure belief, however, left him at the mercy of any pretender to inspiration. His official and social experience had dispersed many illusions, and his 'Piccadilly', very brightly written, is not a novel proper, but a satire directed against the various hypocrisies and corruptions of society. In it he had come, he said, to think that the world at large was a lunatic asylum ('Piccadilly', 1870, 262). He referred to 'the greatest poet of the age, Thomas Lake Harris', author of 'The Great Republic: a Poem of the Sun', and typified him in a mysterious prophet who meets the hero; Harris was the head of a community in America called the Brotherhood of the New Life. The creed was a mixture of philosophy and science, which identified 'physical sensations' caused by the life of Christ in man, and held that marriage should be a Platonic relationship. Oliphant had also some belief in spiritualism, though he came to regard it as rather diabolical than divine. 
In 1867 Oliphant resigned his seat in parliament, and joined Harris's community at Brocton, or 'Salem-on-Erie', in New York state, where the leader was in the habit of casting out devils and forming magnetic circles among his disciples. Oliphant was renamed Woodbine by Harris and became his spiritual slave. He was set to work on the farm, was ordered to drive teams and 'cadge strawberries on the railway', and, after walking all day, was sent out at night to draw water 'till his fingers were almost frost-bitten'. He made over all his money to the community. Oliphant's mother also joined the community in 1868, and, though living at the same place, was not allowed to hold any confidential communication with her son. After going through this probation the disciples were to regenerate the world, and mother and son are said to have 'found perfect peace and contentment'. In 1870 Oliphant returned to London under Harris's orders, and was supported by a small allowance from Brocton. He resumed his former occupation by becoming correspondent for 'The Times' in the Franco-Prussian War. He was with the French and afterwards with the German armies, but suddenly returned to America, in obedience, it was said, to a sign prescribed by Harris -- namely, a bullet's grazing his hair. He was soon back, however, and was again correspondent for 'The Times' in Paris towards the end of 1871. His mother was permitted to join him, and it was there that he met Alice (1846?-1887), daughter of Henry le Strange of Hunstanton, Norfolk. All who knew her spoke of her singular attractiveness. She was twenty-six, and had been much admired in society, but she shared some of Oliphant's dissatisfaction with the world. She adopted his creed, and they were engaged at the beginning of 1872. However, the consent of Harris was required and he made one condition: that the marriage was not to be consummated. The genuine 'human sentiment' was to be considered as an 'abstract and spiritual passion', a text upon which Oliphant discoursed in letters quoted by his biographer. Alice's family were naturally displeased at the financial arrangements, as the 'whole of her property was placed unreservedly in the hands' of Harris (Oliphant, 115). This was her own decision: Oliphant refused to enter into a marriage contract, insisting that his wife must retain control of her own money and do with it as she saw fit. They were married on 8 June 1872 at St George's, Hanover Square, London. In 1873 Oliphant returned to Brocton by Harris's orders, with his wife and mother, who were there employed in menial offices. Oliphant himself was directed to take part in various commercial enterprises for the benefit, apparently, of the community. He was in New York and Canada, and was occasionally sent to England. In 1874 he joined the Direct United States Cable Company, and was 'coaching a bill through the Dominion Legislature'. He learned the secrets of commercial 'rings', and was kindly treated by Jay Gould, the successful American financier and railway entrepreneur. In 1876 he contributed to 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' the 'Autobiography of a joint-stock company', revealing some mysteries of commercial jugglery. He is said to have shown much financial ability in these transactions. 
Meanwhile Harris had migrated to Santa Rosa, near San Francisco, and taken Oliphant's wife with him. In the beginning of 1878 Oliphant went to San Francisco, to the office of J. D. Walker, a wealthy businessman of San Rafael, whose friendship he had won by an act of kindness. His purpose was to see his wife, but permission was refused, and he returned to Brocton. In the following autumn Alice Oliphant left Santa Rosa, though still under Harris's rule, and supported herself for a time, first at Vallego and then at Benicia, by keeping a school. She was warmly appreciated by the Californians, and Mrs Walker was able to see her occasionally. It seems that about this time Harris had discovered not only that the marriage was not a marriage of 'counterparts', but that Oliphant had a spiritual 'counterpart' in the other world, who inspired him with rhymed communications, and was therefore an obstacle to union with his earthly wife. Oliphant's belief in these communications struck his first biographer, Margaret Oliphant, as the 'only sign of mental aberration' she ever noticed. Meanwhile, Oliphant took up a scheme for colonizing Palestine with Jews, and early in 1879 went to the East to examine the country, and to endeavour to obtain a concession from the Turkish government. An account of his journey was given in 'The Land of Gilead, with Excursions in the Lebanon' (1880). The approach to the Turkish government failed, and the scheme broke down. Oliphant returned to England, and there, in the early winter of 1880, he was rejoined by his wife in answer to an appeal from him: he was depressed and ill. They made a journey to Egypt in the winter, described by him in 'The Land of Khemi: Up and Down the Middle Nile' (1882). An accidental difficulty at Cairo prevented them from formally making over to Harris their right in the land at Brocton. 
In May 1881 Oliphant returned to America to see his mother, who was still at Brocton. He found her both ill and troubled by doubts as to the Harris creed. They went to Santa Rosa, where the sight of a 'valuable ring' of Lady Oliphant's upon the finger of one of Harris's household staggered their faith. In spite of orders from Harris, Oliphant took his mother to a village, where she died, in the presence of her son and their kind friend Mrs Walker. Oliphant himself now became sceptical as to the prophet's inspiration, and, with the help of Mr Walker, recovered his land at Brocton by legal proceedings. Harris and his disciples took a different view of these transactions. Alice Oliphant had received a telegram from Santa Rosa during her husband's absence requesting her sanction to placing him in confinement as mentally unbalanced. This appears to have ended her allegiance to the prophet. 
Oliphant was again in England in January 1882, and prepared the volume called 'Traits and Travesties' (1882), consisting chiefly of reprints from 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine'. He now took up the Palestine colonization scheme again, and travelled with his wife to Constantinople in the summer of 1882, settling for some time at Therapia. At the end of the year they moved to Haifa in the Bay of Acre, in the neighbourhood of various Jewish colonies. He wrote there his story 'Altiora Peto' (1883), in the 'Piccadilly' style, the name being derived from a motto of his branch of the Oliphant family. At Haifa they collected a number of sympathizers, though they did not exactly form a community. Oliphant was now regarded as a 'sort of head of affairs at Brocton', which was no longer in connection with Harris. Visitors from Brocton, as well as local people and Jewish immigrants, gathered around them. They built a small house at Daliyyah, on Mount Carmel, and endeavoured to carry out their ideal of life, giving expositions of their views to various enquirers. A strange book, called 'Sympneumata, or, Evolutionary Forces Now Active in Man', was written by the Oliphants in concert and, as they thought, by a kind of common inspiration. The power they called 'sympneuma' was the faculty of superhuman vision, hearing, strength, and resistance to disease and death given to a very few beings. It was the duty of these beings to impart the sympneuma to their fellows through physical contact, thereby leading to the regeneration of the human race. Men and women would be restored to their happy condition before the fall when male and female had been joined in one being and sexual love was pure. The doctrine was too explicit for many who had previously sympathized; some were alienated in fear of social ostracism, others in disgust; others regarded it as harmless nonsense. Oliphant also wrote 'Masollam' (1886), which finally rejected Harris's claim to prophetic power but was silent as to the reason why Oliphant had submitted to his domination. 
During a trip to the Lake of Tiberias, at the end of 1886, Alice Oliphant caught a fever; she died on 2 January 1887. Oliphant believed that she soon came back to him in spirit, and sent messages through him to her friends. Her presence was thought to be shown by his strange convulsive movements. He returned to England to carry out a tour which they had planned to take together. He was much broken, though he could still often talk with his old brightness. He wrote a series of papers in 'Blackwood's' published in 1887 as 'Episodes in a Life of Adventure, or, Moss from a Rolling Stone', which described his early career with great spirit. He also published at Haifa a description of Palestine, and 'Fashionable Philosophy' (1887), a collection of various stories. In 1887 he returned to Haifa, and wrote a pamphlet called 'The Star in the East', directed towards Muslims. It is said to have made one Arab convert, who was 'not much credit to his leader'. Oliphant returned to England and finished his last book, 'Scientific Religion, or, The Higher Possibilities of Life' (1888). This professed to be the revelation of a new religion based on the power of 'pure' sexual love, and in it he assumed the mantle of a spiritual leader. It helped to bring about him a crowd of spiritualists and people easily swayed by pseudo-philosophical pronouncements. He visited America in 1888, and returned with Rosamond Dale Owen, daughter of Robert Dale Owen, to whom he was married at Malvern on 16 August. A few days later he was seized with illness, the effects of lung cancer, at the house of his old friends, the Walkers, at Surbiton. Thence he was moved to York House, Twickenham, to be the guest of his friend Sir Mountstuart Grant Duff. His case was hopeless from the first, though he was flattered by faith in a miraculous cure. He was cheerful and even witty to the last, and died peacefully on 23 December 1888. 
The charm of Oliphant's alert and versatile intellect and sympathetic character was recognized by a wide circle of friends. It was felt not least by those who most regretted the strange religious developments which led to the waste of his powers and his enslavement to such a prophet as Harris, whose claims extended to the ability to rid his followers of disease. Oliphant was loved for his boyish simplicity and the warmth of heart which appeared through all his illusions. Suggestions of insanity were made, but apparently without definite reasons, and Oliphant was most remarkable for his combination of two apparently inconsistent careers. Until his last years, at any rate, his religious mysticism did not disqualify him for being also a shrewd financier, a charming man of the world, and a brilliant writer. 


@@@@@


doc= 20712


Oliphant, Margaret Oliphant Wilson (1828-1897), novelist and biographer, was born in Wallyford, Midlothian, on 4 April 1828, the only daughter and youngest surviving child of Francis W. Wilson ('c'.1788-1858), a clerk, and his wife, Margaret Oliphant ('c'.1789-1854). During the first ten years of her life the family moved first to Lasswade, near Edinburgh, and then in 1834 to Glasgow, where her father worked at the Royal Bank. In 1838 her father became excise clerk in the custom house at Liverpool. The Wilsons changed house in Everton at least five times before moving to Grosvenor Road in Birkenhead in 1850. Her reclusive father remained a shadowy figure. Her mother, who educated her daughter at home, was the driving force in the family; she kept abreast of the serious periodicals of the day and counted David Macbeth Moir, contributor to 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' under the pseudonym Delta, among her friends. Her mother's repertory of tales of Fife and the Oliphant ancestry fostered a lasting pride in Margaret's Scottish heritage and in the name to which she eventually became doubly entitled. Middle-class accomplishments such as music and art played no part in this regime. The family was, however, politically, religiously, and socially committed; her mother and elder brother, Frank Wilson ('c'.1816-1875), were fervent radicals, and as a teenager Margaret collected signatories for an anti-cornlaw petition. Her parents had joined the breakaway Free Church of Scotland after the Disruption of 1843 and had imbibed the views of its leader, Dr Thomas Chalmers, on the need to practise philanthropy at the local and individual level. Her father was treasurer for the Scottish church's charitable relief work in the fluctuating trade conditions of Liverpool in the late 1840s, and Margaret's early fiction preached the importance of a Christocentric charitable philosophy; it also made use of the seafaring tales of Fife and of the Liverpool docks, and of the lives of the newly arrived workers in the terraced streets of a large city. 
Margaret Oliphant's first novel, 'Christian Melville', was subsequently published in 1856 without her permission by her middle brother, Willie Wilson ('c'.1819-1885). It had been written, when she was seventeen, to provide herself with 'some amusement and occupation' ('Autobiography', 1990, 24) during her mother's serious illness and the heartache of a broken engagement. The home-instilled puritan work ethic and view of the woman's role as an uncomplainingly sacrificial moral exemplar produced in Margaret a lifelong ambivalence about her professional life as a writer. She was permitted to write 'at the corner of the family-table' where the activity could be seen as the equivalent of her mother's sewing, making no claim to the exceptional demand of time and space justified by 'genius'. Pride and pleasure in the work could only be justified in the face of constant reminders that women had more obvious domestic obligations to fulfil. 
Margaret Oliphant's first published novel, 'Passages in the Life of Margaret Maitland' (1849), attracted the attention of both Charles Dickens and Charlotte Bronte, but jubilation was overshadowed by anxiety over her brother Willie, who had succumbed to his besetting sins of drink and debt while training for the Presbyterian ministry in London. Margaret was sent to watch over his final three months in London, where they shared lodgings with their Oliphant cousins, Frank and Tom. The miseries suffered by women required to shed a moral influence on male relatives over whom they had no other authority was to become a regular motif in her fiction. 
Early in 1851 Frank Oliphant, Margaret's cousin, proposed to her and was refused. In the spring her mother decided to launch her daughter on literary Edinburgh. Mobilizing such connections as Delta and her husband's second cousins Daniel Wilson (1816-1892) and George Wilson (1818-1859), she secured Margaret a coveted introduction to the prestigious publishing firm of Blackwoods. By the autumn of 1851 Margaret had decided to accept Frank. Possibly the alternative of living with her alcoholic brother, Willie, who had been precipitately removed from his first post as minister of Etal in Northumberland before the church took disciplinary action, tipped the balance. On 4 May 1852 she married Francis Wilson (Frank) Oliphant (1818-1859), a painter and stained-glass window artist; their honeymoon was spent in Germany. In August her parents, accompanied by Willie, retired to London to be near her. Willie was paid 10 per cent of her profits for making fair copies of her manuscripts. He was to write five novels of his own but also managed to have four of his sister's attributed to his name -- 'John Drayton' (1851), 'The Melvilles' (1852), 'Ailieford' (1853), and 'Christian Melville' (1856). 
Margaret's marriage felt the competing strains of her mother's need for her, her husband's consequent resentment, and the demands of two baby daughters, Maggie and Marjorie, who were born on 21 May 1853 and 22 May 1854 respectively. Motherhood had become her absorbing passion. Her adored mother's death on 17 September 1854, and the subsequent departure of Willie and her father, was swiftly overshadowed by the death of Marjorie on 8 February 1855, and that of a day-old son in November of that year. A fourth child, Cyril Francis, known as Tids (or Tiddy), was born on 16 November 1856. In the period between the birth of her daughters she traded upon the success of her first serialized novel, 'Katie Stewart' (July to November 1852), to obtain regular employment as a reviewer from its publisher, 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', and effect her escape from 'the Scylla and Charybdis of the novel craft' formed by those commercially exploitative publishers, Bentley and Colburn. In her own self-deprecating terminology she became the 'general utility woman' (Oliphant, 'William Blackwood and his Sons', 2.349, 475) at Blackwoods, in some months contributing as much as one-third of their periodical. She adopted a male persona and the common reader's perspective; only politics, science, and philosophy remained outside her range. 
Margaret's writing had become an important addition to the family's income. Her husband, the son of Thomas Oliphant, a glass cutter, frequented the minor artistic and literary circles of London and had an idealistic view of his artistic calling. He set up a workshop to execute his window designs and finance his ambition as a painter of the large historical and biblical pictures then in vogue, but in mid-1857 his tubercular condition first appeared. He disbanded the business and in January 1859 the family set out for the curative climate of Italy. When Margaret finally discovered that Frank had not told her his specialist's grim prognosis she was 'angry and wounded beyond measure' ('Autobiography', 1990, 65). Pregnant and buoyed up by laudanum, she nursed him until his death on 20 October. She had to await the birth of her last child, Francis Romano (Cecco), in Rome on 12 December, before travelling home in February 1860 with an insurance policy of $200 on her husband's life, her furniture in store, and $1000 in debt. The only worthwhile legacy of the sojourn in Rome was the friendship of a bohemian couple, Robert and Geraldine Macpherson, to whom, in the early 1860s, she entrusted her alcoholic brother Willie. She contributed to his support for a further twenty-five years. 
Margaret moved restlessly between friends and relations while John Blackwood, her banker-publisher, found her translation work on Comte Charles de Montalembert's 'Les moines d'Occident'. In her despair at the refusal of Blackwoods to publish several of the articles which she submitted at this period, she began a story, in the spring of 1861, which was to inaugurate the provincial saga that made her famous: 'The Chronicles of Carlingford'. These were published in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' as follows: 'The Executor' (May 1861), 'The Rector' and 'The Doctor's Family' (September 1861-January 1862), 'Salem Chapel' (February 1862-January 1863), 'The Perpetual Curate' (June 1863-September 1864), 'Miss Marjoribanks' (February 1865-May 1866). ('Phoebe Junior: a Last Chronicle of Carlingford' was published separately in 1876.) Research for a biography of Edward Irving (1862), commissioned by his family, introduced her to what was to become her favourite genre: she wrote lives of the Comte de Montalembert (1872), Richard Brinsley Sheridan (1883), John Tulloch (1888), Laurence Oliphant (1891) -- a distant relative -- Thomas Chalmers (1893), and Queen Victoria (1890). Research trips also created new friendships, notably with Thomas Carlyle and his wife; John Tulloch, principal of St Andrews, and his family; and Robert Herbert Story, minister of the lochside parish of Rosneath, Dunbartonshire, who probably proposed to her around this time. 
Margaret Oliphant settled in Ealing in October 1861, but it was with Mrs Tulloch that she led a large contingent of mothers and children to Rome in November 1863. Here, on 27 January 1864, after four days' fever, Maggie, her only surviving daughter, died. Although she commissioned a memorial window in the church at Rosneath, she avoided all mention of her daughter's name and never revisited Rome. For nineteen months she tried an expatriate peripatetic life, but her sons' need for regular schooling, and perhaps the need to live closer to the source material of her domestic novels, if she were to achieve the goal, that John Blackwood assured her was within her grasp, of joining the first rank of novelists ('Autobiography and Letters', 198), led her to return to England in September 1865. Blackwood's payment of $1500 for 'The Perpetual Curate' (1864), the largest sum she was ever paid for a novel, allowed her to choose Windsor as a base from which to send her sons as day boys to Eton College. Her habit of starting work as others went to bed enabled her to be available as a welcoming mother or gracious hostess over the tea or dinner table. 
A settled, solvent household attracted dependants: a distant cousin, Annie Louisa Walker, soon became Margaret Oliphant's secretary-housekeeper at 6 Clarence Crescent, in Windsor. In 1868, just as Margaret was granted a civil-list pension of $100, her brother Frank was bankrupted; she took in his two older children, while enabling the two youngest, Margaret 
(or Madge; 1863-1897)
and Janet Mary 
(Denny; 1865-1954)
, to join their parents abroad. In mid-1870 Frank, now widowed and psychologically incapable of work, and his younger daughters looked to his sister for a home. She provided her nephew, Frank Wilson, with an education at Eton and training for an engineering career in India. After their father's death in 1875, Madge and Denny soon became 'the unquestioned daughters of the house', receiving schooling in Germany and artistic training, as an engraver and portrait painter respectively, at their aunt's expense. 
Margaret perceived 1870, the year in which she became sole breadwinner for two families, as a watershed in her career. Since her brother Willie had negotiated her first contract with Henry Colburn, she had, unusually for a woman of this period, conducted her own business. Dependent always on advances against the next book, but seemingly blessed with astounding literary fecundity, she had not adopted an economic lifestyle; women travelling companions were reputedly shocked by her habit of ordering revivifying champagne and meat for dinner and, despite proclaiming herself 'a fat, little commonplace woman, rather tongue-tied' ('Autobiography', 1990), portraits of her reveal her love of fine clothes. Now, however, she needed a regular income. She blamed a male-dominated publishing world for her failure to secure an editorship of a periodical such as those achieved by Dickens, Anthony Trollope, or Thackeray; but her loyalty to the Blackwoods, for whom editorships were a matter of family succession, her determination only to consider the top periodicals, and the tartness of speech, of which even her closest friends such as Annie Thackeray accused her, may also have stood in her way. Blackwoods did make her editor of their 'Foreign Classic' series. She financed holidays by obtaining sizable advances from Macmillans for a sporadic but infinitely extendible series of books which purveyed cultural history through biographical sketches: 'The Makers of Florence' (1876) was followed by books on Venice (1887), Edinburgh (1890), Jerusalem (1891), and Rome (1896). Finding tenants for their house, or paying members to swell their travelling party, and managing the complex postal arrangements for receiving and dispatching material also fell to her lot. 
In 1878, having obtained advances from both Blackwoods and Macmillans, Margaret bought 8-9 Clarence Crescent, Windsor, which she had rented since 1872, for $1600. In the late 1870s she could still command $750 for a three-decker novel, but in the next decade her expenses always exceeded her income and she found herself forced to work incessantly, always in fear of flooding her own market, and without the time necessary for driving harder bargains with publishers. In the 1880s she claimed, 'my anxieties were sometimes almost more than I could bear' ('Autobiography', 1990, 151). Her son Cyril, who had already displayed propensities to drink and debt as an Oxford undergraduate, showed little enthusiasm for work as a barrister. After a spell as private secretary to the governor of Ceylon in 1884 (which proved threatening to his health), he returned to England to become a dependant of his mother, who tried, with little success, to interest him in literary work. Cecco, her younger son, was sent abroad to acquire German after a disappointing degree at Oxford, and in July 1889 he acquired a part-time post in the library at Windsor Castle. He was cited by his mother as her co-author for 'The Victorian Age of Literature' (1892), but his health and temperament prevented his finding permanent employment. 
During her despair over her sons' indolence Margaret experienced one important source of comfort: the occasional gift of 'a great quiet and calm' that she identified with 'the peace that passeth all understanding' ('Autobiography', 1990, 53). This spiritual consolation fed itself into her tales of the supernatural, which undoubtedly responded to a contemporary vogue for such literary antidotes to the age's perceived materialism but also provided her with a genre in which to explore deep-seated preoccupations with family relationships and gender construction. She felt that these tales were 'given' to her and took unusual pains with them. She was particularly proud of 'A Beleaguered City' (1879), an experiment in multiple narrative. Robert Louis Stevenson confessed that he had been moved to tears by this tale of a French city taken over by the spirits of the dead. 'The Wizard's Son' (1884) was her only novel in this vein. Her popular 'Little Pilgrim' series of tales, designed to console the bereaved, respond to a Victorian obsession with eschatology (21,000 copies of the first of the series had been printed within five years), but some of her tales of the afterlife, such as her dystopia, 'The Land of Darkness' (1888), still hold interest because of her conviction that such a thin veil separates the earthly life from the continuum beyond. Her religious position could best be described as dogmatic Christian unorthodoxy; her sympathies were with those passionate 'outsiders' -- Montalembert, Irving, or Laurence Oliphant -- who seemed, like her, to combine worldly shrewdness with a naive enthusiasm for the supernatural. Friendship with the eminent Scottish churchmen Tulloch and Story won her back to the established church but reinforced her sceptical attitude to clerical spiritual authority. The eclecticism of Anglicanism made it an appropriate haven, and Margaret's political radicalism had also disappeared: in 1886 she and Queen Victoria discussed their mutual detestation of Gladstone. 
In 1889 medical expenses mounted: Cecco was repeatedly sent abroad for his health and Cyril had a seizure in a railway station in Paris. Both sons and Madge accompanied Margaret on the Easter 1890 research expedition for her book on Jerusalem. On 8 November Cyril died, after only four days' illness: there could be no consolation from a life well spent. As the century waned Margaret's only wish was to survive long enough to provide secure futures for Cecco and her nieces. Madge married William Harris Valentine, a Dundee jute manufacturer, in July 1893. Margaret returned from the birth of their daughter and her namesake to find Cecco suffering from 'exhaustion after inflammation of the throat and tongue'. He died on 1 October 1894, and within hours his mother was recording the event in her autobiography. By the end of her life she had worn a hole in her forefinger which would not heal. 
In April 1896, accompanied by Denny (who had changed her surname to Oliphant by deed poll) and their almost permanent guest, John Tulloch's daughter, Fanny, Margaret moved to The Hermitage, Wimbledon Common. The invitation by Blackwoods to write 'Annals of a Publishing House' yielded $500 p.a. Despite her sense of being 'on the ebb-tide' (Oliphant, 'The Ways of Life'), the last three years witnessed a novel, 'Old Mr Tredgold'; a tale of the unseen, 'The Library Window'; and the opening chapters of 'The Makers of Rome', which were entirely characteristic of her finest work. In April 1897, commissioned by a new publisher, J. M. Dent, she undertook a research trip to Siena but recognized that she was suffering from more than her chronic rheumatism. She died at The Hermitage on 25 June 1897 from cancer of the colon and exhaustion, and was buried on the 29th alongside her sons in the cemetery at Eton. On 16 July 1908 her friend and admirer, the writer J. M. Barrie, who had edited 'A Widow's Tale and other Stories' (1898), unveiled a memorial tablet in St Giles's Church, Edinburgh. Windsor's tributary plaque at 8-9 Clarence Crescent was unveiled on 25 June 1997, the centenary of her death. 
Assessing her own achievement, this bereft mother remarked 'I shall not leave anything behind me that will live' ('Autobiography', 1990, 136). Her death amid the swiftly changing literary preoccupations of the end of the century made Margaret Oliphant a convenient symbol for the outdated female romancers of domestic fiction who had too often been prepared to sacrifice artistic integrity to financial need. Furthermore the reshaping of her autobiography by her literary executors contrived to transform this passionate, witty, wryly self-aware, and immensely energetic author into a model of quietly suffering Victorian femininity. The herculean fictional output of some ninety-eight novels and fifty or more short stories undoubtedly shows her ability to gauge changing fashion: the novels span social concern, Scottish tales, the Gothic, the sensational, the historical, provincial sagas, and quieter psychological studies. They equally reveal her as creator as much as creation of her literary milieu: the voracious reading involved in her twenty-five works of non-fiction and over three hundred periodical articles fuelled the disconcerting questions repeatedly raised in her fiction as to the age's accepted ideologies of marriage, family, religion, and gender. In her obituary Henry James asserted that 'no woman had ever, for half a century, had her personal 'say' so publicly'; contemporary writers flinched at the whiplash cracks of epigrammatic wit sometimes woven into her reviews. It seems likely that Anthony Trollope's Lady Carbury in 'The Way we Live now' (1875) and James's Mrs Stormer in 'Greville Fane' (1892) were vitriolic responses to the power her voice carried. Despite her well-known asperity about male failings, her distinctive voice, which encompassed both irony and pathos within its deceptively 'artless' cadences, appealed as much to male as female readers: Tennyson, Gladstone, and Darwin all praised her work. Feminist criticism has been slow to recognize her virtues, largely because her thoroughly feminist analysis often resulted in anti-feminist conclusions. 


@@@@@


doc= 20713


Oliphant, Thomas (1799-1873), music editor and cataloguer, was born on 25 December 1799 at Condie, Perthshire, in the house of his father, Ebenezer Oliphant. His mother, Mary, was the third daughter of Sir William Stirling, bt, of Ardoch, Perthshire. After being educated at Winchester College and by private tutors, he became for a short time a member of the London stock exchange, but soon relinquished commerce to devote himself to literature and music. In 1830 he was admitted to the Madrigal Society and remained an active member until his death, becoming honorary secretary in 1832, vice-president in 1871, and president in 1872. He adapted English words to a considerable number of Italian madrigals (in some cases writing his own verses, in others by merely translating the original texts) for the use of the society's members; his work amounted to some fifty English and Italian works in popular editions as well as several compilations. 
In 1834 Oliphant took part in the chorus, as a bass, in the great Handel festival held in Westminster Abbey, and in the same year published, under the pseudonym Solomon Sackbut, 'Comments of a Chorus Singer at the Royal Musical Festival in Westminster Abbey'. He also published 'A Brief Account of the Madrigal Society' (1835), 'A Short Account of Madrigals' (1836), and 'La musa madrigalesca' (1837), a volume containing the words of nearly 400 'madrigals, ballets, roundelays &c. chiefly of the Elizabethan age'. In 1837 he composed the words and music of a madrigal, 'Stay one moment, gentle sires', which he produced as the work of an unknown seventeenth-century composer, Blasio Tomasi. It was performed as such at the anniversary festival of the Madrigal Society. He wrote English versions of Beethoven's 'Fidelio' and 'The Mount of Olives', and the words for numerous songs by John Hatton and other composers. 
Oliphant was employed from November 1841 to July 1850 as a temporary assistant cataloguing the music in the British Museum. There was initial criticism of his appointment, but during his time there he cleared the backlog of uncatalogued music and also laid the foundations for the collection's expansion. He completed a catalogue of the manuscript music in 1842 and then, with the support of Antonio Panizzi, the keeper of printed books, began the process of providing a comprehensive catalogue of printed music. He resigned in 1850 following the rejection by the trustees of his memorandum for the development of music in the collections. 
Oliphant occasionally lectured in public on musical subjects, and was requested by the directors of the Philharmonic Society to translate portions of Wagner's opera 'Lohengrin', which were performed by the society's orchestra and chorus, the composer conducting, at the Hanover Square Rooms in March 1855. Oliphant died, unmarried, on 9 March 1873, at his home, 35 Great Marlborough Street, London, and the following month his valuable private music library, which included many first and early editions of madrigals, was auctioned by Puttick and Simpson. 


@@@@@


doc= 20714


Sir William Oliphant (d. 1313?). Unfortunately, his activities are easily confused with those of his cousin, also William Oliphant of Dupplin and Aberdalgie ['see below']. Both were captured at the battle of Dunbar in 1296: Sir William was sent to Devizes and his cousin, still an esquire, to Rochester. They received their freedom in the following year, on condition that they served Edward I on his campaign against France. As a result of this service, Sir William's lands were restored to him on 12 September 1297. On his return to Scotland, however, he rejoined the fight against Edward; following the success of the Scots in taking Stirling Castle at the beginning of 1300, he was appointed its constable by the Scottish guardian, Sir John Soulis (died before 1310). However, four years later most Scots had submitted to Edward I; only Stirling Castle and a few notables, including Sir William Wallace and Sir Simon Fraser, held out for King John. Oliphant tried to postpone the imminent siege by requesting that he be able to approach Soules for fresh orders; given that the former guardian was now in France, Edward rather naturally refused. A combined English-Scottish army besieged the castle for ninety days, whereafter Sir William and the rest of the garrison, which included his cousin, now also Sir William, were led off again to captivity in England. 
Oliphant was finally released in May 1308 on Edward II's orders and returned to Scotland in the latter's service to serve, from 1311 at least, as commander of Perth. Given the confusing references of subsequent years, it seems likely that his cousin also went north in Edward's service. On the night of 7-8 January 1313, believing that the Scottish siege had been lifted, the garrison of Perth let its guard down and the town was duly captured by a force, led by King Robert himself, which scaled the walls. Despite the claims of later chroniclers, the garrison was most likely allowed to go free; however, Sir William seems to have died without known heirs soon afterwards, and subsequent references relate to 


@@@@@


doc= 20715


Oliphant, Sir William, Lord Newton (1550-1628), judge, was the second son of Thomas Oliphant of Freeland, Perthshire. He himself married Katherine Blair and they had at least six children: James, who became an advocate; William; John (a future advocate-depute); Helen; Jean; and Elizabeth. There may also have been another daughter, Margaret. After Katherine's death he married Marjory Graham. 
Prior to his admission as an advocate in October 1577, Oliphant had studied in France, and before that probably at St Andrews. He made his first appearance before the privy council on 23 October 1577. Five years later he was appointed a justice-depute, on 14 October 1582, and later he acted as depute for Sir Thomas Hamilton, king's advocate. Oliphant was one of several justices-depute from this generation who proceeded to the bench. Having acted with colleagues as an advocate for Laurence, fourth Lord Oliphant, in February 1593 he was granted the ward and marriage of the latter's grandson and heir by James VI. 
According to David Calderwood, in 1599 Oliphant gave advice to members of the kirk in Edinburgh in a dispute with the king over whether a visiting troupe of English actors should be permitted to perform comedies in the burgh. In the following year his 363 appearances before the court of session made him the second busiest advocate appearing before that court. His predominance led to his appointment in 1604 to a commission to discuss proposals for union with England, as one 'best affected and fittest for that eirand' (Burton and Masson, 1604-7, 457). In December 1605 he was selected by Aberdeen burgh council to choose other advocates to join him in acting on their behalf, while on 14 May 1606 he was admitted burgess and guild brother of Edinburgh. He had acted as one of Edinburgh's assessors from at least October 1593 and he also acted as advocate for the burgh. 
When in January 1606 six ministers were summoned to appear before the privy council charged with convening a general assembly without royal licence, Oliphant was one of the advocates appointed to defend them. However, he and Thomas Craig advised the ministers that they had no defence and declined to appear for them, leaving the much less experienced Thomas Hope and Thomas Gray to represent them. In August 1607 Oliphant was appointed a commissioner for reforming the teaching of grammar in schools, and in 1608 he was named in the testament of William, tenth earl of Douglas, as tutor to the earl's daughter, Frances. 
In December 1610 Oliphant was involved in overseeing the making of desks and seats for advocates in Edinburgh's tolbooth, where the court of session normally sat. In January 1611 he was appointed an ordinary lord of session in succession to Sir David Lindsay of Edzell, whereupon the privy council wrote to the king remarking on the popularity of his elevation to the bench. He took the style Lord Newton. On 19 June 1612 he was nominated king's advocate in succession to Thomas Hamilton, who had been appointed clerk register, which in turn led on 9 July to Oliphant's admission to the privy council and his being knighted by the chancellor. Parliament ratified the appointment in October and granted Oliphant a pension of $1000 Scots for life, as the king had recommended to the council in a letter of 8 April 1611. Oliphant first appeared as king's advocate in a criminal cause on 11 July 1612. Later that year he was appointed to a commission of privy councillors charged with deciding controversies between justices of the peace in the burghs and those in 'landwart'. 
Oliphant was heavily involved in public affairs during the latter half of James VI's reign. He regularly attended privy council meetings, and acted as a commissioner for the trials of the Jesuits Robert Philip (August 1613), John Ogilvie (February 1615), and James Moffat (June 1615). In December 1615 he was appointed a member of the reconstructed court of high commission, and in May 1616 he became one of the committee to report on the treatise 'God and the King', a defence of the oath of allegiance, which James had resolved should be circulated and taught in Scotland as it had been in England and Ireland. On 17 December 1616 Oliphant was elected a member of the financial committee of the council known as the commissioners for the king's rents. However, in February 1626 he was compelled to relinquish his place on the bench, following a proclamation by Charles I which prohibited the holding of ordinary seats in the court of session by officers of state and nobles. On 29 May the same year, Thomas Hope was appointed king's advocate to act in conjunction with Oliphant; they operated conjointly until the latter's death, on 13 April 1628. Oliphant was buried in Greyfriars churchyard, Edinburgh. No record of his testament survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 20716


Eilmer (b. c.985, d. after 1066), pioneer of man-powered flight, was probably born in the 980s, dying not long after 1066. He was a monk of Malmesbury and all that is known of him is told by his fellow-monk William of Malmesbury, writing 'c'.1125 in his 'De gestis regum Anglorum'. There is no reason to doubt the substantial accuracy of the story, probably derived directly from Eilmer, whom Malmesbury could just have known as a very old man. When Halley's comet appeared in 1066, 'portending (as they say) a change in governments', Eilmer, by then advanced in years, crouched in terror and declared 'You've come, have you?... You've come, you source of tears to many mothers. It is long since I saw you; but as I see you now you are much more terrible, for I see you brandishing the downfall of my country' (Malmesbury, chap. 225). Malmesbury tells us that in his youth Eilmer had believed the fable of Daedalus and, seeking to imitate him, fixed wings to his hands and feet. Casting off from the top of a tower, he caught a breeze and flew for 'a stade and more'. Conscious of his own temerity, and buffeted by the wind, he fell, crippling his legs and remaining thereafter an invalid. He himself attributed his fall to his forgetting to fit a tail. 
Eilmer seems to have spent nearly all of his long life as a monk, and was and is distinguished only by his attempt at unpowered flight. This probably took place at some time between 1000 and 1010, assuming that he was about five years old when he saw Halley's comet for the first time in 989. Nor was it wholly unsuccessful. The distance travelled, 'a stade or more', corresponds to about 600 feet, or 200 metres, assuming that Malmesbury had in mind the Roman 'stadium' of 606 feet 9 inches. It is true that the use of flexible wings requires a tail to act as a rudder, and that its absence undoubtedly contributed to Eilmer's crash landing. Curiously, a similar attempt had been made a century earlier, within western Europe but in a quite different cultural context. The fourteenth-century writer al-Makkari tells of the late ninth-century Cordovan Abu'l-Qasim Abbas ibn Firnas who tried to fly, using similar methods to Eilmer's with similar results. He hurt his back badly, for 'not knowing that birds when they alight come down upon their tails, he forgot to provide himself with one' (al-Makkari, 1.148). Perhaps Eilmer got the idea for his attempt from news of the earlier one. 
This particular story of Malmesbury's had a long and independent afterlife: it was quoted by medieval chroniclers and encyclopaedists, and by early modern proponents of man-powered flight. Lynn White has noted the testimonia of Helinand of Froidmont, Alberic of Trois-Fontaines, Vincent of Beauvais, Roger Bacon, Ranulf Higden (who first misnamed the aviator 'Oliver') and the English translators of his work, Henry Knighton, John Nauclerus of Tubingen ('c'.1500), John Wilkins (1648), John Milton (1670), and John Wise (1850). Malmesbury referred to Eilmer as a good scholar for his times, which suggests that he may have been a writer, and there is a slender possibility that works ascribed to him survived until the sixteenth century. John Bale credited him with three works which are certainly of a sort that one might associate with a serious imitator of Daedalus, but are no longer known to exist. 


@@@@@


doc= 20717


Oliver (d. 1218/19), soldier, was the illegitimate son of King John and of Hawise, almost certainly the sister of Eve de Tracy and Fulk Fitzwarine. He was probably born before John came to the throne. Very little is known of him until he is found fighting on the royalist side during the civil war of 1215-17. In June 1216 he was one of those besieged in the bishop of Winchester's castle of Wolvesey, situated in Winchester itself, by Prince Louis of France and English rebels. His most important action occurred during the critical siege of Dover. Louis, who had unsuccessfully attempted to take the castle in 1216, sailed from Calais on 22 April 1217 with the intention of landing at Dover itself. But just as his ships drew near a force led by Oliver and William of Kensham (Willikin of the Weald) descended upon the small force left by Louis in 1216, killing some, burning their huts, and gaining control of the cliff tops. This rendered any landing by the French extremely hazardous and obliged Louis to make instead for Sandwich. Dover remained in royal hands. 
For his services Oliver was well rewarded, first by his father and then by the regency council of Henry III, chiefly in the form of properties confiscated from rebels. John's confidence in his son is shown by the grant made to him of the castle and honour of Tonge, Kent, in November 1215, which was confirmed in June 1217. Following the end of the civil war Oliver sailed with other English crusaders to join the forces of the fifth crusade assembled in Egypt. They landed at Damietta in August or September 1218, and it was there, later that year, or early in 1219, that Oliver died. It appears that his remains were brought back to England, since William Camden recorded their burial place in Westminster Abbey. Oliver does not appear to have married. 


@@@@@


doc= 20718


Oliver, Andrew (1706-1774), public servant and merchant in America, was born in Boston, Massachusetts, on 28 March 1706, the son of Daniel Oliver (1663-1732), merchant, and Elizabeth Belcher (1677-1735). Oliver was born into one of the elite colonial Boston families. After graduating from Harvard (AB 1724, MA 1727), Oliver entered his father's successful merchant firm, and was soon joined by his younger brother Peter. Andrew Oliver married Mary Fitch (1706-1732) on 20 June 1728, receiving a substantial tract of land outside Boston as part of her dowry. She died four years later, leaving Oliver with their one surviving son, also named Andrew. On 19 December 1734 he remarried; his second wife was Mary Sanford (1712-1773), also from an elite Boston family, with whom he had fourteen children. He believed strongly that one of the principal duties of his station was to serve his country and community in a public capacity. He assumed his first post in 1737, as Boston's town auditor. This proved to be the beginning of a long and active career. Other positions for Boston included overseer of the poor, tax collector, justice of the peace, and town meeting moderator. He was equally active in the Congregationalist church. A lifetime member of the Old South Church in Boston, he was treasurer and later secretary of the Congregationalist missionary arm, the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in New England and Adjacent Parts. After 1743 he was increasingly active in Massachusetts politics, serving first as a representative in the colony's house of representatives (1743-6) and then as the province's executive secretary (1756-71). The Oliver family was firmly interconnected with the Hutchinsons, another Boston elite family. Thomas Hutchinson, governor of Massachusetts in 1771-4, was the brother-in-law of Oliver's wife. His nephew was married to Hutchinson's daughter, and his own son was married to another of Hutchinson's daughters. 
Together, the Hutchinson-Oliver faction dominated late colonial Massachusetts politics. Thomas Hutchinson, appointed lieutenant-governor in 1758, helped to secure Andrew Oliver's position as secretary, and when Hutchinson became governor in 1771, he saw to it that Oliver was appointed lieutenant-governor and that Peter Oliver was made chief justice of the colony. The Hutchinson-Oliver faction suffered substantially during Boston's road to revolution, with Andrew enduring the most. In 1765 he was appointed, without his knowledge, to the position of stamp distributor for the ill-fated 'Stamp Act' of 1765, which was a direct taxation by the British crown on its American subjects and is traditionally marked by historians as the opening of the Anglo-American rift. When riots broke out in Boston in response to the act, Oliver was the prime target. He was hanged in effigy on 14 August from Deacon Eliot's tree. That evening the protesters dismantled what was rumoured to be the new stamp office and burned Oliver's effigy in a bonfire, using his fence for kindling. Afterwards the more brazen members of the protesters descended on Oliver's house, vandalizing it and the garden. Oliver escaped unharmed, but publicly resigned his position as stamp distributor the following day. In 1773 Oliver and Hutchinson suffered a public humiliation when several of their letters, which expressed support for a number of parliament's unpopular colonial acts, were sent to the speaker of the Massachusetts house of representatives by Benjamin Franklin. The letters were first distributed privately and then given to the press. The popular outrage undermined any remaining authority of the Hutchinson-Oliver faction. Andrew died from a stroke on 3 March 1774, which his family and friends blamed on the stress of the recent events. His funeral on 8 March was hounded by an abusive crowd, which shouted insults at the procession. His brother Peter did not attend for fear of his own safety. Thomas Hutchinson departed for London three months later, having been replaced by a military governor. 


@@@@@


doc= 20719


Oliver, Archer James (bap. 1774, d. 1842), portrait painter, was baptized on 3 October 1774 at St Mary, Whitechapel, London, the son of John Oliver and his wife, Anna Maria. On 13 August 1790 he was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools, aged sixteen. Between 1791 and 1842 he was a regular contributor to both the Royal Academy and the British Institution, exhibiting 210 works at the former and 62 at the latter. In his early years Oliver worked chiefly as a portrait painter. He built a large, fashionable practice and occupied a studio in New Bond Street. His portraits at this time include 'George Children' (1806; NPG), and in 1807 he was elected an associate of the Royal Academy. In later life his practice declined owing to ill health. From 1830 onwards he exhibited mostly still lifes or historical groups. In 1835 he was appointed curator of the painting school of the Royal Academy, and it was to the academy that he again turned for financial support in his last years. Oliver died, possibly in Bond Street, London, on 16 March 1842. 


@@@@@


doc= 20720


Emma Sophia Oliver (1819-1885), landscape painter, was born in London on 15 August 1819, the daughter of William Eburne (died 'c'.1831), a coach builder, and his wife, Mary, of Rathbone Place, London. Emma Oliver was elected a member of the New Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1849, and exhibited landscapes in watercolours and oils at the Royal Academy, British Institution, Society of British Artists, and at various provincial galleries. 


@@@@@


doc= 20721


Oliver, George (1781-1861), Roman Catholic priest and historian, was born at Newington, Surrey, on 9 February 1781, the son of James and Anne Oliver. He was educated at Sedgley Park in Staffordshire from 1789 and at Stonyhurst College from 1796 to 1802. He remained at Stonyhurst for a further five years teaching humanities. In May 1806 he was ordained priest at Durham. He did not become a Jesuit but maintained a close and cordial relationship with the order, and in 1807 was appointed by Marmaduke Stone, president of Stonyhurst, to take charge of the chapel and mission at Exeter, St Nicholas's Priory, which was formerly served by the Jesuits. As a young man he had shown interest in, and appreciation of, antiquities and had come to the notice of John Milner, vicar apostolic of the western district. At Exeter, where he was to stay for the fifty-four remaining years of his life, he found abundant scope for his antiquarian interests, as T. N. Brushfield's bibliography of his published works shows. His missionary duties, which included visiting two prisons and a hospital, left him time for research and also for public charitable activities. His services during a cholera epidemic were long remembered. 
Oliver's main works became standard authorities. His first important work, published at Exeter (as were most of his works) in 1820, was 'Historic Collections Relating to the Monasteries in Devon', and in the following year appeared 'The History of Exeter', of which there was a second edition in 1861; an index to this was printed in 1884. In 1828 he published 'Ecclesiastical Antiquities of Devon, being Observations on many Churches in Devonshire', which originally appeared in the 'Exeter and Plymouth Gazette' with a letter on the preservation and restoration of churches. The 'Ecclesiastical Antiquities' was written in conjunction with the Revd John Pike Jones of North Bovey who, however, contributed only the introduction and the description of twelve churches. Between 1839 and 1842 there was published at Exeter Oliver's three-volume 'Ecclesiastical Antiquities of Devon, being Observations on Several Churches in Devonshire with some Memoranda for the History of Cornwall'. Although professedly a second edition of the former work, it possesses claims to be considered an entirely new one. The introduction to the first edition was the only contribution by Jones to be retained in the second. In 1838 he published 'Collections illustrating the biography of the Scotch, English and Irish members of the Society of Jesus'. A second, limited edition was published in London in 1845. These notices appeared originally in the 'London and Dublin Weekly Orthodox Journal' (vols. 2-4, 1836-7). The 'Description of the Guildhall, Exeter', written in conjunction with Pitman Jones, was published in 1845 and a second edition followed in 1853. In 1845 he published, again in conjunction with Pitman Jones, 'A View of Devonshire in MDCXXX, with a Pedigree of some of its Gentry by Thomas Westcote'. In 1846 there appeared 'Monasticon diocesis Exoniensis', with a supplement, and an 'Additional supplement... with a map of the diocese, deaneries, and sites of religious houses' was published in 1854; 'without these additions, the edition of Dugdale's 'Monasticon' by [Caley] Ellis and Bandinel must be considered incomplete' ('DNB'). 'Collections illustrating the history of the Catholic religion in the counties of Cornwall, Devon, Dorset, Somerset, Wilts, and Gloucester' was published in London in 1857. Oliver presented the copyright to his friend F. C. Husenbeth, together with very copious additions and several corrections for a second edition. In 1861, the year of his death, there was published his 'Lives of the Bishops of Exeter and a History of the Cathedral'. 
Among Oliver's minor works were a translation of Father John Gerard's Latin autobiography, various articles on the Clifford family and Ugbrooke Park, and a historical novel 'Merrye Englaunde, or, The Goldene Daies of Good Queene Besse' (1841). He had the principal share in preparing for publication the 'Liber pontificalis' of Edmund Lacy, bishop of Exeter (1847). He wrote over a period of nine years many letters on ecclesiastical and parochial antiquities, family history, and biography, communicated under the signature of Curiosus to local newspapers, principally the 'Exeter Flying Post'. He also contributed to the English Catholic periodicals of his time articles on Catholic biography, history, and antiquities. 
'Few names,' declared the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in an obituary notice, 'will remain more pleasingly connected with the past history of Exeter than that of George Oliver.' It described his publications as 'monuments of painstaking research and practical ability', and Brushfield wrote of 'our great ecclesiastical antiquary' (p. 286). Early in the twentieth century the view was expressed that some of his conclusions were no longer accepted, but that 'his researches considering the limited sources of knowledge available to him showed both industry and judgement' (Ward, 244). Oliver himself wrote, 'I have spared no time or labor ['sic'] to arrive at the Truth. But still it is but a beginning, a groundwork for something much better. The only title I can claim is that of Gleaner' (letter to Richard Norris, January 1857). Contemporaries and near contemporaries commended his scholarship and indefatigable research; later writers might qualify this view while still acknowledging the value of the immense amount of work that he accomplished. 
In recognition of his skill as a researcher Oliver was elected an honorary member of the Historical Society of Boston on 30 March 1843, and on 15 September 1844 he was (without his knowledge, as he said) created DD by Pope Gregory XVI. In 1852 he was appointed provost of the newly erected chapter of the diocese of Plymouth. He became a trustee of the General Charities of Exeter in 1837 and was elected chairman for the year in 1842. 
Oliver retired from active duty in 1851 but continued to live at St Nicholas's Priory, where he died on 23 March 1861. He was buried on 2 April near the high altar in the chapel in which he had served so long. A lithograph, presumably taken towards the end of his life, shows a somewhat sharp-featured face with the eyes of an enthusiast. 


@@@@@


doc= 20722


Oliver, George (1782-1867), antiquary and writer on freemasonry, was born on 5 November 1782 at Papplewick, Nottinghamshire, the eldest son of Samuel Oliver (1756-1847), schoolmaster and, after 1842, rector of Lambley, Nottinghamshire. His mother was Elizabeth, daughter of George Whitehead of Blyth Spital in the same county. He had eight siblings. The family claimed descent from an ancient Scottish family, some members of which moved to England in the reign of James I and later settled at Clipstone Park, Nottinghamshire. Oliver attended his father's school in Lutterworth, Leicestershire, and perhaps another in Nottingham. In 1803 he became usher of the grammar school at Caistor, Lincolnshire. In 1805 he married Mary Ann (1785/6-1856), daughter of Thomas Beverley. They had three sons and two daughters. 
From 1809 to 1826 Oliver was headmaster of King Edward's Grammar School at Great Grimsby and, after being ordained deacon in 1812 and priest in 1813, he was curate of Grimsby from 1815 to 1831. In addition he had the living of Clee, but never lived there. As a young man, probably in 1802, he became a freemason, joining the Peterborough lodge of which his father was member and chaplain. In Grimsby he started a new lodge, of which he was master for ten years. In 1831, having lost the curacy at Grimsby, he became rector of Scopwick, Lincolnshire, which he held until his death. He was happy there and energetically rebuilt the vicarage, restored the church, and started a school. In 1814 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a 'ten year man', but never took a degree there, though he was awarded a Lambeth DD in 1835. From 1834 to 1846 he was perpetual curate of St Peter's collegiate church, Wolverhampton. He intended to divide his time between Wolverhampton and Scopwick, but after bitter disputes with his churchwardens in Wolverhampton, particularly over church rates, he left the church in the care of a curate after 1841. He was also domestic chaplain to Lord Kensington and, in 1846, was made rector of South Hykeham, Lincolnshire. 
From early life Oliver was a prolific author; he wrote mainly on topographical subjects and freemasonry, but also published some religious works. His most important topographical work was his 'History and Antiquities of the Town and Minster of Beverley' (1829), which incorporated material collected earlier by the publisher Matthew Turner. It was, however, remaindered in 1839 after the publication of a rival history, George Poulson's 'Beverlac' (1829 or 1830), which was thought to be superior. Oliver produced other works on the monuments and histories of the places in which he lived and worked, namely Grimsby (1825, 1829), Wolverhampton (1836), and Sleaford and Lincoln (1837, 1846). 
Oliver also published more than thirty works on freemasonry, of which he considered 'The Symbol of Glory' (1850) his best; it was as a freemason that he achieved greatest prominence. He regarded masonry as a universal moral code instituted by God at the creation, and his life's work, or 'grand design', was to prove that masonry was necessarily Christian, or rather protestant. This was a concern that he had inherited from his father and on which he expounded in contorted books and regular contributions to the 'Freemasons' Quarterly Review', which attracted wide notice and earned him the name the Sage of Masonry. In 1833 he became deputy provincial grand master of Lincolnshire. He was dismissed from this post in 1842 after public support for Robert Crucefix, editor of the 'Review', who had come into conflict with the masonic hierarchy over support for a new charity. It is likely, however, that Oliver's dismissal reflected the opposition of the duke of Sussex, the grand master, who, in an effort to unify the movement, was working to make masonic rites less Christian. Oliver attracted considerable sympathy in the row that ensued, and in 1846 supporters elected him honorary member of the grand lodge of Massachusetts, with the rank of past deputy grand master. Oliver and Crucefix subsequently organized the ancient and accepted rite of freemasons as a Christian body. 
In 1854, as his health began to fail, Oliver left his parishes in the hands of curates and retired to Lincoln, where he died on 3 March 1867. He was buried on 7 March with masonic rites in the cemetery attached to the church of St Swithin, Lincoln. 


@@@@@


doc= 20723


Oliver, Isaac (c.1565-1617), miniature painter, was apparently the only child of Pierre Olivier, goldsmith of Rouen in Normandy, and his wife, Epiphane. Olivier was among a group of Huguenot refugees from Paris and Rouen, many of them goldsmiths, who were admitted to Geneva on 15 October 1557. Many English protestants had fled to the continent for safety during the reign of the Roman Catholic Queen Mary I (daughter of Henry VIII); one group arrived in Geneva somewhat earlier than the Frenchmen, and in June 1557 were admitted to the English congregation there. Among them was Nicholas Hilliard, then about ten years old, who would soon have met and learned from the French artists. The English exiles returned home in 1559, soon after the accession of the protestant Elizabeth I, and at some unknown date Pierre Olivier returned to Rouen. It was presumably there that he met and married Epiphane (about whom nothing is known), and Isaac was born there. In the eighteenth century George Vertue and Horace Walpole tried, but failed, to establish Oliver's date of birth, and it remains unknown. 
The earliest information about the Oliviers' presence in London appears in aliens' returns, which were made at irregular intervals. Two (of 1571) say that they had arrived about three years earlier. Oliver is entered as 'chylde', perhaps indicating a very young one, so that 'c'.1565 seems to be a reasonable suggested date of birth. Since he always remained firmly within the large community of immigrant artists in London details of his early life are elusive and have been sketched mainly from incomplete manuscript sources and by way of informed guesswork. From 'c'.1568 the Oliviers lodged with a pewterer called Harrison in Fleet Lane, just to the east of the Fleet River, close to its confluence with the Thames, and to Blackfriars, where Isaac was to spend much of his professional life. Pierre no doubt soon sought out Hilliard, whom he had known as a boy in Geneva and who, in 1568, was nearing the end of his apprenticeship. Olivier would have noted the quality of his work, as both limner and goldsmith, and probably then discussed the possibility of instruction for Isaac when he was old enough. They could converse in French, which Hilliard had learned during his continental exile. 
The wills, dated 1570 and 1588, of two members of a Netherlandish family from Breda called Matheeusen or Matheeus (soon Anglicized to Mathewe) contain references to the Olivier family. Jacob (James) Matheeusen, painter, settled in Holborn and became a parishioner of St Sepulchre without Newgate. This area was always popular with immigrants; being outside the city wall it escaped the jurisdiction of the authorities and it provided more space for those who needed studios and workshops. On 12 June 1562 Matheeusen became a denizen, and by 1564 he was living in Seacoal Lane. He would have been buried at St Sepulchre's and his only son, Pieter, baptized there. Dates are unknown since the early registers were lost in the great fire of 1666. Pieter was very young when his father died. He had hoped to become an artist but in 1588, when he was apparently lodging in the city parish of St Helen, Bishopsgate, he became seriously ill. He made his will on 17 October and was buried at St Helen's on 6 November. He was a youth of means, having inherited property in Breda from his father, and he left sums ranging from $3 to $10 to many Dutch relatives and friends who had looked after him; his cousin Adrian Van Son, painter to James VI of Scotland, was to have three 'pictures', probably miniatures, of Pieter's late parents and himself (his two sisters had predeceased him). There were also bequests of $3 each to 'Isac Olivier' and his mother, Epiphane (Pierre is not mentioned and had presumably died); his 'bookes of Artes and that which concerneth the same arte' were left to 'my twoe fellowes Isac Olivyer and Rouland Lacq'. The will seems to imply that the three young men were still being instructed by Hilliard in the autumn of 1588. 'Rouland Lacq' (Rowland Lockey) certainly was; he had started an eight-year apprenticeship under Hilliard on 29 September 1581 and would probably have become free some time in 1589. By sore mischance the Goldsmiths' court minute book covering 1579 to 1592, which might have answered some questions, was lost in a fire -- not that of 1666, which badly damaged the company's hall, but a much smaller one in 1681, when repair work was going on. The fragments of information now assembled establish that the three young 'fellows' had been very near neighbours from boyhood. Pieter was born in Seacoal Lane 'c'.1569 (Seacoal Lane ran down to Fleet Lane, where the Oliviers lodged from 'c'.1568) and Rowland was born 'c'.1567 at the south end of Fleet Lane, the only part of it within his family parish of St Bride, Fleet Street, for which registers do not survive so far back. 
Hilliard and his celebrated pupil Isaac Oliver probably began their professional careers at the age of about twenty-two. Oliver's first known portrait miniature is of a twenty-year-old middle-class woman, and is of unusual three-quarters length; it looks experimental and is dated 1587. In 1588 Oliver emerged as an assured and accomplished artist, with miniatures 'A Youth Aged 19' (priv. coll.), 'A Man of 71' (AM Oxf.), and of a fifty-nine-year-old Dutchman, now known to be Colonel Diederik Sonoy (Royal Collection, the Netherlands). Oliver was always responsive to Netherlandish, French, and Italian influences and it has sometimes been suggested that he had returned to the continent during his youth and that the Sonoy miniature was done there. However, there is compelling evidence that Sonoy sat for him in London. Sonoy was a prominent protestant and anglophile, and in 1588 he was permitted to take refuge in England from the Spanish Netherlands. A letter from Sir William Russell, governor of Flushing, commending him to the queen's principal secretary, Sir Francis Walsingham, is endorsed '17 October 1588... by Colonel Sonoy', meaning that he delivered it himself (state papers, SP 84/27/122'v', Netherlands). Hilliard had spent two years and more in Geneva as a boy and two years in France in the 1570s but there is as yet no hard evidence either way about Oliver. Unlike Hilliard he did not practise as a jeweller, goldsmith, or engraver; he did do a number of drawings but he could have learnt techniques and styles from members of the immigrant community in London. 
Oliver continued to do small oval portrait miniatures from time to time during his career but he employed the techniques learnt from Hilliard in very different ways. Hilliard favoured daylight for his sitter and was against shadowing the face; if necessary, he used a deeper tone of the same basic flesh colour -- 'limning is but a shadowing of the same colour your ground is of', as he writes in his 'Treatise Concerning the Arte of Limning' (1981, p. 7). Oliver chose a restricted source of light, casting deep shadows, for which he used darker pigments. In 1590 he did a fine limning 'Unknown Man, Aged 27' (V&A); similar in handling, and probably of about the same date, is a self-portrait in the Royal Collection, showing the artist at three-quarters length, bearded and wearing a tall hat. Limnings of girls aged four and five (V&A), dated 1590, display Oliver's marked talent, rare at the time, for depicting young children as sentient humans rather than as wooden dolls. During the decade his renown steadily increased and with it the status of the patrons he could attract. His talent and comparative youth appealed to the avant-garde. Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, who had succeeded Lord Leicester as the queen's favourite, sought out the younger man in 1596 on his return from the expedition to Cadiz. He had grown a beard during his absence; a fine limning by Oliver resulted (Royal Collection) and was much copied. A miniature of an unidentified Sir Arundel Talbot (V&A) provides evidence that Oliver visited Italy in the same year; on the reverse he inscribed: '13. Magio. 1596./In Venetia./Fecit m. Isacq Oliuiero/Francese' with his monogram (resembling the Greek phi). Larger miniatures include one often called 'Unknown Melancholy Young Man' (Royal Collection), at one time wrongly identified as of Sir Philip Sidney, and a striking work, dated 1598, 'The Three Brothers Browne' (priv. coll.), portraying the grandsons of the first Viscount Montague, dressed identically in black and with arms entwined. 
Oliver benefited at this period from an absence of competition; Queen Elizabeth had never liked the second great seal of the realm, designed by Hilliard, which came into use in 1586, and in 1591 she required him to try again. This caused Hilliard much trouble and expense -- ultimately to no avail -- and on 2 June 1599 he told Sir Robert Cecil that only one instalment of a $40 annuity, promised in 1591, had been paid: 'throughe missing of so many sutes [commissions] as I have had Wthin this 8. yeres', he wrote, he was now in 'great extremes' (Cecil MSS, Hatfield House, Hertfordshire, 70/76). A striking unfinished and undated limning of the queen (V&A) was probably intended for the guidance of foreign engravers; it is an uncompromising portrayal of an ageing woman and is confidently attributed to Isaac Oliver. Hilliard's monopoly status as the sovereign's limner was reaffirmed by warrant dated 17 August 1599, probably thanks to pressure from Cecil; it is very difficult to believe that Elizabeth would actually have granted a sitting to anyone else. It has been suggested that the unfinished limning of her was a copy done from a Hilliard. 
Isaac Oliver married three times. His first wife, known only as Elizabeth, was buried, aged twenty-eight, at St Peter, Cornhill (near the French church in Threadneedle Street), on 6 September 1599. It was common practice for a man to marry soon after completing an apprenticeship or other training and Oliver may well have married towards the end of 1588, when Elizabeth would have been seventeen or eighteen, at that time a popular age for brides. Thus their son Peter Oliver could have been born in 1589. If Elizabeth was French, as is probable, the marriage would have been at the French church, for which no registers survive before 1600, and Peter would have been baptized there (as was Isaac's eldest son by his third marriage, also to a young bride of seventeen). 
On 9 February 1602, at the Dutch church, Austin Friars, Oliver married, second, Sara Gheeraerts ('bap'. 1575, died 1605), thereby involving himself with the intricate network of leading families of portrait painters from the Netherlands: specifically, Gheeraerts from Bruges and de Critz from Antwerp. Sara had been baptized at the Dutch church on 12 May 1575 and was a daughter of the portrait painter Marcus Gheeraerts I, who had arrived in London from Bruges in 1567-8; on 9 September 1571, at the same church, Gheeraerts had married, as his second wife, Susanna de Critz, elder sister of John de Critz, who became serjeant-painter at court in 1605. Sara Oliver was half-sister to Marcus Gheeraerts II, the most fashionable portrait painter in England from 'c'.1590; he was a son -- born in Bruges -- of Marcus Gheeraerts I and his first wife. To add to the complexities Isaac Oliver became briefly a brother-in-law of the sculptor Maximilian Colt, from Arras in northern France; Colt married Sara Oliver's younger sister Susanna Gheeraerts in 1604 and was appointed master sculptor at court in 1608. 
Nicholas Hilliard retained the monopoly as sovereign's limner on the accession of King James VI of Scotland to the English throne in 1603. His queen, Anne of Denmark -- who was genuinely interested in the visual arts -- soon had her own household at Somerset House in the Strand (renamed Denmark House during her lifetime); on 22 June 1605 she appointed Isaac Oliver her limner, again at $40 a year. Her elder son, Prince Henry, a precocious and gifted youth, began to employ Oliver in 1608, when he was only fourteen, but these moves should not be seen as a rejection of Hilliard; his official appointment was to the monarch, and he and his assistants (including his son Laurence Hilliard) were fully engaged in providing portrait miniatures and gold presentation medals. It has to be remembered, too, that Hilliard reached the then advanced age of sixty about 1607. 
The Olivers had no children and, a month after Isaac's royal appointment, Sara died; she was buried on 27 July 1605 at St Anne Blackfriars. The couple had probably settled in the parish at their marriage. St Anne's still enjoyed certain privileges as a 'precinct' or 'liberty', surviving from the days of its monastic status, and it was much favoured by successful immigrant artists with court connections. It was easy to travel by water from Blackfriars Stairs, upstream to Westminster or downstream to Greenwich Palace. (Van Dyck spent his last years in a house on the riverbank with a garden.) 
In 1606 Isaac Oliver married for the third and last time; his bride, Elizabeth ('bap'. 1589, died 1628x40), was a daughter of Jacques or James Harden or Harding, a court flautist and composer of French origin. The Hardings were parishioners of Holy Trinity Minories near the Tower of London, and also had a country place at the then fashionable riverside village of Isleworth. Eight children of James Harding and his wife, Ann, were baptized at the Minories between 1579 and 1591; most of them were very short-lived. The seventh, Elizabeth, survived to become the wife of Isaac Oliver. (The ninth and last, Anne, future wife of Isaac's eldest son, Peter, was baptized at Isleworth on 11 April 1593; the family had probably moved out of London because of the major outbreak of plague in 1592-4.) All Saints, Isleworth, and its registers were badly damaged in a fire in 1943 but it is just possible to make out that 'Isaac Oliver and Elizabeth Hardinge' were married on 23 (or 29) July 1606. A charmingly informal limning of Elizabeth by her husband (priv. coll.), probably a family possession, portrays her half smiling; she wears a winged cap, a white smock with the collar open and turned down, and a jacket embroidered with flowers. 
It must now have become clear to Oliver that his future lay in England, and at the end of 1606 -- on 6 December -- he secured the right of denization, thirty-eight years after his arrival as a child. Four sons and two daughters of Isaac and Elizabeth were baptized at Blackfriars between 1608 and 1617, and their grandmother Epiphane was buried there on 6 March 1610. Two sons survived: the first, James -- baptized at Blackfriars on 18 December 1608 and on the following 8 January at the French church -- married Alice Thurston on 25 November 1634, and they had at least two sons, William ('b'. 1635) and John ('b'. 1636). Isaac junior, baptized on 11 December 1610, was still living in 1672 in the house at Isleworth of his aunt Anne, Peter's widow, and she made careful provision for him in her will. 
Isaac Oliver did many limnings of Queen Anne of Denmark, including a profile in masque costume (Royal Collection); she was a leading promoter of these lavish court entertainments, in which she and her ladies sometimes took part. The main focus was on the heir to the throne, Prince Henry, who was well on the way to becoming a major patron of the arts at his untimely death in November 1612, aged eighteen. He had his household at St James's Palace, to which Oliver was attached; one of his finest limnings portrays the prince in gilt armour against a background of an encampment (Royal Collection), of which many copies and variants were produced. Roy Strong suggests a link with his appearance as a chivalric champion in the court entertainment 'The Barriers', put on in 1610, the year of Henry's creation as prince of Wales. 'Mr Isacke' attended the prince's funeral on 7 December 1612. 
In general Oliver's works show a remarkable diversity of subjects and styles. He was responsive to the dictates of his patrons; in 1616, the year before his death, he did both a small, austere oval of John Donne (Royal Collection), poet and theologian, in the style of the early 1590s, and a large, highly-coloured full-length of Richard Sackville, third earl of Dorset (V&A), every detail of his extravagant dress painstakingly portrayed. There is no certainty about identities of sitters in two fine and unusually large, 5 inch diameter roundels of exquisitely dressed ladies, and suggested dates have ranged from 1595 to 1613. One (Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge) is of a lady, formerly called 'Lucy Harington, countess of Bedford'; the other is of a lady, formerly called 'Frances Howard, countess of Essex and Somerset' (V&A). Also impossible to date are a number of complex limnings and drawings ranging from an erotic 'Nymphs and Satyrs' (Royal Collection) to religious subjects. The most ambitious limning, 'Entombment', or 'Burial of Christ', was completed by Peter Oliver after his father's death; a carefully finished preliminary drawing in ink and black chalk is in the British Museum. 
Oliver probably died at the end of September 1617, since he was buried at St Anne Blackfriars on 2 October. He bequeathed to Peter Oliver all his finished and unfinished drawings, and his unfinished limnings -- historical scenes and narratives as well as portraits. St Anne Blackfriars and all its contents, including the artist's monument and marble bust, were destroyed in the fire of 1666. 
Elizabeth Oliver married, second, Pierce Morgan, a gentleman of Blackfriars and Isleworth and a freeman of the premier city livery company, the Mercers. He was a wealthy widower with five daughters, and he and Elizabeth had a sixth, called Jane; a seventh, Katherine, was baptized at Blackfriars on 6 April 1628 and buried six days later. Elizabeth predeceased her husband and was presumably buried at Isleworth, a fact obliterated in the fire of 1943. 
A licence was secured on 30 May 1636 for Jane, daughter of Pierce and Elizabeth, to be married to a young nephew of Pierce, and the marriage took place at Twickenham on 1 June. This was evidently a close and affectionate family group, and Pierce Morgan -- who was buried at Blackfriars on 9 April 1640 -- left a will with many references to Olivers. He had built a 'new brick howse' at Isleworth, and he bequeathed to his daughter Jane a 'little dwelling house' there, with grounds, orchards, stable, and coach house; also two pictures at the family home in Blackfriars of her grandfather and grandmother, presumably Isaac Oliver's in-laws, the Hardings. Morgan bequeathed to his 'sonne in law [stepson] Mr Isaack Oliver his Fathers picture in liewe of a silver Cupp he had given him by his godfather or one of his Witnesses... this being his desire' (Edmond, 'Walpole Society', 47.81-3 and pedigree 74). 
A major exhibition, entitled 'Nicholas Hilliard and Isaac Oliver', was mounted at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, in 1947, marking the quatercentenary of Hilliard's probable date of birth; one of its main aims was to establish a clear line of demarcation between the works of the two men, which had become much confused. They were brilliantly gifted but utterly different -- Hilliard English, Oliver determinedly French (although he spent most of his life in England) -- and they were divided in age by almost a generation. Hilliard believed that the portrait miniature was the highest form of art, although he also practised as a goldsmith, engraver, jeweller, and calligrapher; Oliver used limning for a much wider range of subjects and, unlike Hilliard, was a prolific draughtsman. Judging from the self-portraits each had a good conceit of himself. Oliver left no writings so there is nothing to set beside Hilliard's remarkably self-revealing 'Treatise'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20724


Oliver, John (d. 1552), civil lawyer, was sometimes called 'Oliver alias Smith'. His birth date, family, and early education are unknown, but he took the Oxford degrees of BCL on 30 June 1516, BCnL on 23 June 1522, and DCL on 11 October 1522. He probably began his collection of ecclesiastical benefices with the prebend of Norton, Herefordshire, in 1512: some benefices were brief staging posts, but he was vicar of Ross in Herefordshire (1520-49), rector of Pembridge in Herefordshire (1527-51), vicar of Minster in Kent (1528-46), and prebendary of Teynton Regis in Salisbury diocese from 1531 until his death. On 22 April 1533 he was appointed dean of King Henry VIII College in Oxford, but on 20 May 1545 he signed the surrender of the college prior to its refoundation as Christ Church, in return for a pension of $70 per annum. He was sometimes referred to as a clerk or chaplain, but he seems never to have been ordained priest: from 1536 he was given a series of three-year dispensations to hold benefices in plurality without taking holy orders. 
Oliver was a busy civil lawyer: a member of Doctors' Commons from 1522, master in chancery by February 1532, and a judge-delegate in the admiralty court by 1539. He was often employed on official business. He served as one of Wolsey's commissaries (1527-9), as collector of the clerical subsidy for the province of York in 1531, and as one of Henry VIII's proctors in the Aragon divorce suit (1531-3). In 1533-5 he sat with other senior lawyers on an informal committee advising the king and Thomas Cromwell on the break with Rome and the relationship between canon and common law. He seems not to have been used on sensitive business between 1535 and 1540, which suggests that Cromwell may have disapproved of him. In 1540 he was involved in the annulment of the king's marriage to Anne of Cleves, and thereafter was commissioned to deal with a number of lesser marriage disputes; on 21 January 1543 he was elected prolocutor of the lower house of the Canterbury convocation, and in 1543 he took part in various heresy investigations relating to the prebendaries' plot against Archbishop Cranmer. As a master in chancery he was appointed to commissions to determine cases while the chancellor was ill or otherwise occupied in October 1544, February 1547, August 1548, October 1551, and January 1552. 
Oliver seems to have been favoured by Richard, Lord Rich, chancellor from 1547 to 1551, and he sat on a number of major legal commissions: early in 1550 he was one of those who heard Bishop Bonner's appeal against deprivation, on 18 January 1551 he was appointed to a commission against heresy, and on 27 September 1551 he was named on the commission to hear the charges against bishops Day and Heath. On 12 December 1550 he was put on the commission which tried and deprived Bishop Gardiner; he was the most assiduous of the judges, missing only one out of twenty-two sessions and sitting alone on three occasions. On 20 May 1551 Oliver was appointed to serve with the marquess of Northampton on a special embassy to France to conclude an alliance and seek a royal wife for Edward VI; he brought back some gilt standing cups as souvenirs, and in his will bequeathed one of them to Lord Chancellor Goodrich. 
Oliver died in London in 1552; he had made his will on 27 May, and it was proved on 3 July. It was the testament of a prosperous, bachelor lawyer with mildly conservative views. He made bequests to the inmates of all the London prisons and the Bedlam (Bethlem) Hospital, to the widows and orphans of the parishes where he had been incumbent longest, to his poor neighbours in Westminster, to his godchildren, to various servants and tradesmen, and to the politicians and lawyers with whom he had worked: three chancellors, the chief justice of common pleas, a justice of king's bench, and half a dozen civil lawyers. He charged his executors 'in the way of charity, to do for me therein as they would be done for themselves afore Almighty God in that behalf' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/35, fol. 129'v'), which probably means he expected them to seek prayers for his soul. Oliver was a minor agent of the Reformation in England, but it looks as if he did not like it. 


@@@@@


doc= 20725


Oliver, John (1600/01-1661), college head, was possibly born in Kent, although his father may have been the John Oliver (died 'c'.1627) who was rector of Little Laver in Essex from April 1599 to May 1607, for it was to this rectory that Oliver himself was later presented. He matriculated from Merton College, Oxford, on 26 January 1616 aged fifteen, graduated BA from Magdalen in 1619, became a fellow in 1621, proceeded MA in 1622, and became tutor to Edward Hyde, later earl of Clarendon. He was incorporated MA at Cambridge in 1626, and was awarded the Oxford degree of BD in 1631. That year he was instituted to Eastmanstead Chenies, Buckinghamshire, on the presentation of the earl of Bedford, and between 1632 and 1638 he held Broughton Poges, Oxfordshire. 
Oliver remained a fellow of Magdalen until about 1639, and it was probably towards the end of his tenure that 'his eminence in learning, and orthodox principles in religion being conspicuous', he was appointed a domestic chaplain to Archbishop William Laud (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 1.510). Gilbert Burnet stated that Laud sponsored his promotion in the church, and about this time more lucrative benefices came into Oliver's possession. In 1637 he acquired Little Laver, Essex, from 1638 to 1639 he was rector of Monks Eleigh, Suffolk, and in 1639 of Adisham in Kent. Also in 1639 he was awarded his doctorate. Collated on 19 August 1638 and installed on 21 September as canon of the twelfth prebend of Winchester Cathedral, he held the dignity for the next twenty-three years, though for most of that period its income was denied him. On 25 September 1640 Laud wrote from Lambeth to the earl of Pembroke recommending him for a chaplaincy-in-ordinary to the king, vacant through the death of Thomas Jackson. Oliver had 'preached twice to his Majesty with great approbation. I will be answerable for him every way' ('Works', 6.583). Oliver was by this time well acquainted with Michael Oldsworth, secretary to Pembroke in his post of earl chamberlain. Five years later Laud bequeathed a watch to John Oliver. 
On 28 May 1644, following the resignation of Accepted Frewen on 11 May, Oliver, nominated by all the fellows, and with Laud's backing, was admitted to the presidency of Magdalen College, Oxford. The day following, as Charles and his entourage watched from Magdalen tower on the eastern extremity of the city, the army of the earl of Essex moved towards them, drawing up on Bullingdon Green. The attack on Oxford was delayed for over two years, but when it came the fall of the royalists' military headquarters threatened also their control of the university. In May 1647 Oliver was one of the delegates elected by the university convocation which sought to delay on legal and procedural grounds the purge expected in the wake of the parliamentary visitors, but on 14 December 1647 the committee of the two houses declared several university figures, including the vice-chancellor and John Oliver, guilty of a 'high contempt of authority of Parliament'. On 6 January 1648 they declared Oliver's removal from his place as president, and on 17 March, as he had not removed, sent an order demanding obedience on pain of arrest. By this time, however, Oliver had left Oxford, though retaining the keys to the presidential lodgings. On 12 April the earl of Pembroke arrived in the city; the doors of Magdalen were broken down and John Wilkinson, appointee of the visitors, was admitted as president of the college. 
Nothing is certainly known about Oliver's activities during the 1650s, but he may have been the John Oliver who was vicar of St Margaret at Cliffe in Kent from 1655 to 1658. After the Restoration Oliver was readmitted to his prebend of Winchester. On 7 July 1660, through the influence of Edward Hyde, Oliver received the royal patent for the deanery of Worcester, subscribing to the articles before his installation on 12 September 1660. Oliver's chief concern in that year, however, was to reclaim his place as president at Magdalen. He petitioned as early as 18 May 1660, and was readmitted soon after. Named to two commissions of inquiry set up to visit the university, he appears not to have been very active in either. The restoration to their places at Magdalen of all living unmarried fellows and scholars led to tensions between this group and the Independent and presbyterian members who continued in residence. Oliver made it his business to try to keep the peace, and seems to have enjoyed considerable success. But the work seems not to have been to his taste. 'This most learned, meek, and pious person', reports Wood, 'was strangely desirous to leave this world, though few alive had then such temptations to stay in it' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 1.510). Oliver died on 27 October 1661 and was buried in Magdalen College chapel three days later; the funeral sermon was preached by Edmund Diggle. Oliver left money to the poor of several Oxfordshire and Kentish parishes and bequests for maintenance to the cathedrals of Worcester and St Paul's and Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 20726


Oliver, John (1616/17-1701), glass painter and master mason, who was born presumably in London, was supposed to have been related to the miniature painters Isaac and Peter Oliver and to John Oliver, master mason to James I, but there is no known evidence to support this assertion recorded in Redgrave (Redgrave, 'Artists', 301). A panel formerly at Christ Church, Oxford, 'St Peter Delivered from Prison' (lost), inscribed 'J. Oliver, aetat. suae lxxxiv, anno 1700', establishes the year of his birth as 1616 or 1617. 
Glass painting appears to have been Oliver's trade, as a small legacy to the Glaziers' Company in his will suggests, and most of his glass seems to have been heraldic work, a feature typical of post-Restoration England. The extant window at Northill, Bedfordshire ('c'.1664), showing the arms of the Grocers' Company, with royal arms, is on a monumental scale, painted in enamel colours, similar to the works of Henry Gyles. Other recorded works include sundials at the Northill rectory and Lambeth Palace and armorial panels at Petworth, Sussex (lost?). Oliver also held the office of master mason to the crown from 1685/6. He was involved as a surveyor in the rebuilding of the City of London from 1667. He is frequently mentioned in connection with the rebuilding of the City's churches. He seems to have been resident in the parish of St Michael Queenhithe. Most of his architectural works appear to have been carried out for City companies (for example the Mercers' hall and chapel, after 1668) and Christ's Hospital (from 1673), of which he was a governor. 
Oliver was also active as a cartographer and was the author of 'A mapp of the cityes of London & Westminster & burrough of Southwark, with their suburbs as it is now rebuilt since the late dreadfull fire' ('c'.1680). He is recorded to have been in possession of Inigo Jones's papers and drawings ('Brief Lives', 2.10). He died, presumably in London, before 18 November 1701, when his will was proved. In this he made provision for his wife, Susanna, his daughter Grace Shaw, and his son-in-law George Seagood and for his burial in St Paul's Cathedral. He also left a small legacy to the Glaziers' Company, and money for an annual dinner of roast meat for the boys of Christ's Hospital. 


@@@@@


doc= 20727


Oliver, John (1838-1866), Welsh-language poet, the son of John Oliver and his wife, Sarah Thomas, was born on 7 November 1838 at Whitehall, Llanfynydd, a small village in Carmarthenshire, where his parents kept a shop. He spent seven years (1843-50) at the village school and nearly four at a Carmarthen school. Before he was sixteen he was admitted to the Presbyterian college in the same town. Here he made great progress with the regular studies, and read widely, on his own account, in English and German literature. He was soon able to preach with equal facility in Welsh and English. He left college in his twenty-first year, and abandoned an intention of continuing his studies at Glasgow, owing to failing health. 
Subsequently Oliver preached occasionally and devoted himself to Welsh poetry. Most of his Welsh poems were written during his enforced retirement. His most ambitious poem is 'Dafydd, ty wysog yr ar glwydd' ('David, the Prince of the Lord'). Other long poems are 'Prydferthwchanian' ('The Beauties of Nature'), 'Mab y weddw o Nain' ('The Widow of Nain'), and 'Drylliad y 'royal charter'' ('The Wreck of the Royal Charter'), all showing great promise. His shorter poems, however, are his best, particularly 'Myfyrdod', a meditation or soliloquy. Of his English poems, 'Life' and 'When I die' can be singled out for attention but, being his earliest productions, they are inferior to his Welsh poems. 
Oliver died on 24 June 1866 at Mountpleasant, Llanfynydd, of consumption, and his remains were interred in the parish churchyard of Llanfynydd, of which he had sung so sweetly. In 1867 his collected works (Welsh and English) were published under the name Cerddi Cystudd by his brother, the Revd Henry Oliver. 


@@@@@


doc= 20728


Oliver, Martha Cranmer (1834-1880), actress, the daughter of John Oliver, a scene painter, was born at Salisbury, and appeared on the stage there when she was only six years old. Here and at Southampton her performances of children's parts attracted attention. In 1847 she made her London debut under Mary Warner's management at the Marylebone Theatre. Madame Vestris then employed her at the Lyceum from 1849 to 1855. In 1855 she went to Drury Lane, where on 10 October she played Matilda in 'Married for Money' and on 4 September 1856 Celia in 'As You Like It'. Her performance as Helen in Sheridan Knowles's 'The Hunchback' won such praise from the critics that J. B. Buckstone offered her an engagement at the Haymarket, where she was seen in Francis Talfourd's burlesque 'Atalanta' on 14 April 1857. Having accepted an offer from Ada Swanborough, she became the leading actress in comedy and burlesque for several seasons at the Strand Theatre, where her parts included Amy Robsart in 'Ye Queen, ye Earl, and ye Maiden' (December 1858), Pauline in H. J. Byron's burlesque 'The Lady of Lyons' (June 1859), and the Prince in Byron's burlesque 'Cinderella' (December 1860). On E. A. Sothern's first appearance as Lord Dundreary in London, at the Haymarket (16 November 1861), she played Mary Meredith in Tom Taylor's 'Our American Cousin'. In April 1863 she took the title role in Byron's burlesque 'Beautiful Haidee' at the Princess's. 
Pattie Oliver became manager of the New Royalty Theatre on 31 March 1866 and opened with a revival of Taylor's 'The Ticket-of-Leave Man' and Robert Reece's burlesque 'Ulf the Minstrel'. In a clever and successful piece by H. T. Craven, entitled 'Meg's Diversion', which was produced on 17 October, she acted Meg, the author played Jasper Pidgeon, and F. Dewar took the part of Roland. On 29 November 1866 she put on the stage F. C. Burnand's burlesque 'The Latest Edition of Black-Eyed Susan, or, The Little Bill that was Taken Up'. The piece failed to please the critics, but succeeded with audiences, and had an unprecedented run of some 400 performances; on its production at the Royalty on 23 September 1868, it was said that Pattie Oliver had sung 'Pretty See-usan, Don't Say No' no fewer than 1775 times. During the run of this burlesque she produced as a first piece Andrew Halliday's drama 'Daddy Gray' (February 1868), and on 26 November 1868 a serio-comic drama by the same author entitled 'The Loving Cup'. Other burlesques were introduced with less success. 
On 3 March 1870 'Black-Eyed Susan' was revived; the last night of Pattie Oliver's lesseeship was 30 April 1870 when the burlesque was given for the 490th time. After this period she was seldom seen on the stage. She married by licence at the register office, Marylebone, on 26 December 1876, William Charles Phillips, an auctioneer aged thirty-one, the son of the auctioneer William Phillips of Bond Street, London. She was a general favourite with the public, and gave liberal aid to the aged and unfortunate members of her profession. She died at her home, 5 Grove End Road, St John's Wood, London, on 20 December 1880. 


@@@@@


doc= 20729


Oliver, Peter (1589-1647), miniature painter, was the eldest son of the miniaturist Isaac Oliver and his first wife, Elizabeth ('b'. 1570/71), whom he had possibly met and married in the Low Countries about 1588. She died and was buried, aged twenty-eight, on 6 September 1599. The Olivers were Huguenot refugees from Rouen who settled in Blackfriars, a district of London much favoured by immigrant artists and craftsmen because of its traditional freedom from the restrictions on trade maintained by the City livery companies. Through Isaac Oliver's second marriage, in 1602, to Sara Gheeraerts the Olivers became related to the Gheeraerts dynasty of painters and to the close community of Netherlandish artists working in London. Through his third wife, Elizabeth Harding ('b'. 1589, died before 1640), whom Isaac married in 1606 and with whom he had six children, they acquired connections with the Huguenot families of Harding and Lanier, musicians at court, and with the Thames village of Isleworth, Middlesex, in which the Olivers also acquired property. Soon afterwards Peter Oliver also married a Harding, Anne (1593-1672), who was the younger sister of his father's third wife, probably as she reached the age of seventeen, in 1610. Both families continued to live principally in London, Peter Oliver apparently in the north part of the parish of Blackfriars, but they maintained strong connections with Isleworth, where Anne had been born. Ultimately, in his will, Peter would describe himself as a 'gentleman of Isleworth'. 
Peter Oliver was brought up to the art of miniature by his father, and through the early part of his career his work is virtually indistinguishable from that of Isaac, except by signature. This was doubtless deliberate and a way of maintaining the stylistic integrity of the family studio, which was in effect bequeathed to Peter as a going concern, together with all work in progress. Among the latter was an apparently original composition of the 'burial of our Lord and saviour Jesus X, done upon a large table of fine abortive parchment & paisted upon a well seasoned & smooth board, as it is thought of Peartree' (Cordellier), which had been begun by his father and which he finished (and which is now in the Musee d'Angers). 
Peter Oliver also succeeded to his father's place at court, continuing the production of official images of Charles as prince of Wales and as king, and perhaps especially of Princess Elizabeth, wife of the elector palatine and 'winter queen' of Bohemia, together with members of her court. Three versions of a miniature portrait of Elizabeth, current 'c'.1623-6, one of which remains in its original enamel locket, are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. As a member of the royal household Peter Oliver attended the funeral of Anne of Denmark in 1619 and that of the king in 1625, when he was listed by the lord chamberlain, together with Laurence Hilliard, as an officer of the chamber of the new king, Charles I. 
The painting of 'histories' now became an increasingly important aspect of Peter Oliver's work, involving especially miniature copies of paintings in the Royal Collection. According to Edward Norgate: 'Histories in Lymning are strangers to us in England till of late Yeares it pleased a most excellent King to comand the Copieing of some of his owne peeces, of Titian, to be translated into English Lymning, which indeed were admirably performed by his Servant, Mr Peter Oliver. (Norgate, ed. Muller and Murrell, 89)' Seventeenth-century European connoisseurs placed a high value on the accurate copying and, hence, comprehension of famous images; compare for example the series of small oil copies by David Teniers after paintings in the collection of Archduke Leopold Wilhelm commissioned in the 1650s for engraving and publication in one of the earliest published catalogues of great paintings, the 'Theatrum pictorium' (1660; fourteen of these are now in the Courtauld Institute). Peter Oliver was undoubtedly the greatest such copyist working in England. 
Technically Peter Oliver was the first regular professional miniaturist to adopt the practice, apparently pioneered by Balthasar Gerbier, of using pre-prepared gessoed leaves from commercial 'table books' to support his vellum (Murdoch, 10). Stylistically his work in portraiture evolved from the firm stipple of his father's studio towards a broader and softer touch, the effect of which was none the less always firm and clear in the delineation of features. In his miniature copies of history paintings, however, the evolution towards softness was much more extreme, especially when the intention was evidently to emulate the 'sfumato' and 'chiaroscuro' of the great north Italian pictures in the Royal Collection. Examples of these histories, made originally for Charles I and dispersed under the Commonwealth, are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, but the most important group, recovered for the Royal Collection after the Restoration, is at Windsor Castle. The most important of Peter Oliver's royal portraits also remain at Windsor. In the light of the increasingly soft focus of his work in miniature it is perhaps significant that he is authoritatively said by Norgate, a cousin, to have taken up the fashionable medium of pastel, which would have been highly suitable for delicate effects of light and shade. Norgate also recorded that he painted landscapes. However, neither pastels nor landscapes are known to survive. 
Peter Oliver died at Isleworth and was buried on 22 December 1647 beside his father at the church of St Anne Blackfriars 'in the vault with a stone laid over him'. The church, together with the tomb of the Olivers, was destroyed in the great fire of London in 1666. He had no children, and left his estate, including many miniatures by himself and his father, to his widow. She continued to live a solidly respectable life in Isleworth and died soon after her will was made on 27 July 1672. Vertue records the family tale that at the Restoration Charles II visited her, evidently trying to reconstruct what he could of the 'ante bellum' court culture and see what remained of the Oliver inheritance. He chose the miniatures he wanted, offering Anne either $1000 in cash or an annuity of $300 a year. She chose the latter, wrongly, for when she later heard that he had given some of the miniatures to his court ladies she let it be known that she would never have sold them had she known that he would give them to 'whores, bastards and strumpets'. The king stopped the annuity. In her will she directed that the remaining miniatures were to be sold. 
A profile drawing identified as a self-portrait by Peter Oliver and a three-quarters full-face drawing identified as Anne are in the National Portrait Gallery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 20730


Oliver, Richard (bap. 1735, d. 1784), politician, the only surviving son of Rowland Oliver, a puisne judge of the court of common pleas of the Leeward Islands, and the grandson of Richard Oliver, speaker of the house of assembly in Antigua, was baptized in St John's, Antigua, on 7 January 1735. At an early age he was sent to London, where he entered the office of an uncle, Richard Oliver, of Low Leyton, Essex, who was a draper and West India merchant. On 2 February 1758 he married Mary Oliver, the daughter of his uncle; they had no children. He succeeded to his father's estates in Antigua in July 1767. 
Oliver took up his freedom in the Drapers' Company on 29 June 1770, and on 4 July following was elected alderman of Billingsgate ward. He was a radical and a founder member of the Society of Gentleman Supporters of the Bill of Rights, which pressed for reform of government and redress to Wilkite grievances. The radicals controlled the City of London at this time, and when a by-election was called in July 1770 Oliver was elected MP, after the original radical candidate, his brother-in-law Thomas Oliver, had withdrawn from the contest because of ill health. He continued to represent the City until the dissolution of parliament in September 1780, and used his platform in the house to support reforming measures, such as Serjeant Glynn's motion for a committee to inquire into the administration of criminal justice. 
Oliver's most notable appearance in the House of Commons came in March 1771, during the celebrated 'Printers' case' and the subsequent struggle between the City and the Commons. In a deliberate attempt at confrontation, Lord Mayor Crosby and aldermen Wilkes and Oliver arrested a messenger of the Commons. The Commons sought to punish Crosby and Oliver, both MPs, choosing to ignore Wilkes. Due to the illness of Crosby, much of the house's attention was focused on Oliver, who declined to defend himself and defied the Commons, stating that he had acted according to his conscience. An angry Lord North moved for his commitment to the Tower of London, which was carried by a large majority in the house, after midnight in the debate of 25 March 1771. When the parliamentary session closed on 8 May, Oliver and Crosby were released from the Tower and conducted in a triumphal procession to the Mansion House. The City showed its gratitude to Oliver by presenting him with a silver-gilt cup in March 1772, and he was elected a general of the Honourable Artillery Company in August 1773. 
Soon after the 'Printers' case', Oliver split with Wilkes, having already refused to serve as sheriff with him in April 1771. Oliver was elected to that office with Watkin Lewes on 1 July 1772. He joined the faction of radicals led by Home and Townshend, who formed the Constitutional Society in opposition to Wilkes. The friends of Wilkes were so enraged at the election of Townshend as lord mayor in 1772 that they appear to have accused Oliver 'of having taken the vote of the court before their party had arrived' ('Life', ed. Fitzmaurice, 2.289). Oliver, however, continued to speak in opposition to the government and in favour of reform. He supported Sawbridge's motion to shorten the duration of parliaments and opposed the administration's policies towards the American colonies. By September 1778 he had decided to retire from parliament at the next general election, and he declined to stand for the mayoralty. He resigned his gown at a court of aldermen held at the Guildhall on 25 November 1778, and shortly afterwards sailed to Antigua in order to look after his West Indian estates. He died on 16 April 1784, on board the packet-boat 'Sandwich', while returning to England from Antigua. 


@@@@@


doc= 20731


Oliver, Robert Dudley (1766-1850), naval officer, was born on 31 October 1766. He entered the navy in May 1779, on the 'Prince George', flagship of Rear-Admiral Robert Digby, and in her, during the early months of 1780, was shipmate of Prince William, later William IV. Remaining in the 'Prince George', Oliver went to North America in 1781, and later to the West Indies, where he was present in the operations before St Kitts in January 1782 and at the defeat of the French fleet off Dominica on 12 April. After further service in North America and in the channel, Oliver was promoted lieutenant on 21 September 1790, and in 1793 was lieutenant of the 'Active' in the North Sea; in 1794 he was in the 'Artois' with Captain Edmund Nagle, and after the capture of the 'Revolutionnaire' on 21 October he was promoted commander, taking seniority from the date of the action. In 1795 he commanded the sloop 'Hazard' on the coast of Ireland, and on 30 April 1796 was posted to the 'Nonsuch', guardship in the Humber, which he commanded until February 1798, when he was appointed to the 'Nemesis' (28 guns), going out to Quebec with a large convoy. In March 1799 he joined the 'Mermaid' (32 guns), in which he went to the Mediterranean, and after a successful commission brought home Lord Hutchinson from Egypt in July 1802. On the renewal of the war he was appointed in March 1803 to the 'Melpomene' (38 guns), which, during the next two years, was on the coast of France. 
Oliver married, on 19 June 1805, Mary, daughter of Sir Charles Saxton bt, for many years resident commissioner of the navy at Portsmouth. They had five sons and one daughter. The 'Melpomene' joined the fleet off Trafalgar the day after the battle, and helped to tow off the prizes. Oliver was then appointed to the 'Mars' (74 guns), made vacant by the death of Captain Duff; he commanded the ship on the coast of France until September 1806. In May 1810 he commissioned the 'Valiant' (74 guns), in which, in 1813-14, he took part in the operations on the coast of the United States. He resigned the command in July 1814, and had no further service, though promoted rear-admiral on 12 August 1819, vice-admiral on 22 July 1830, and admiral on 23 November 1841. He was an active member of the Bible Society and other religious societies in Dublin. He died at his residence, Barnhill, Dalkey, near Dublin, on 1 September 1850. 


@@@@@


doc= 20732


Oliver, Thomas (d. 1610?), mathematician and physician, was perhaps the Thomas Oliver who entered Christ's College, Cambridge, in November 1569. He may have gained a medical degree since, by 1597, he was working as a physician in Bury St Edmunds. He numbered among his patrons both Lord Petre of Ingatestone and Henry Howard, earl of Northampton. 
Oliver showed his extensive mathematical knowledge in a work on astronomy which he published in 1601. This was entitled 'A New Handling of the Planisphere' and was intended as a means for solving astronomical problems by the use of ruler and compass, thus obviating the need for expensive instruments. The instrument of the title was simply a circular piece of brass with circular scales for degrees, the zodiac, and the hours of the day, and fitted with sights and a plummet. It could be used for various astronomical observations and was obviously designed as an alternative to the astrolabe. The book includes a clear exposition of cosmography but the use of the instrument is rather more convoluted, involving a great many geometrical constructions. In the preface Oliver acknowledged his debt to Christopher Clavius for his writing on the astrolabe. 
Oliver's only other published work was a set of four tracts bound in a single volume and printed in Cambridge. These were written between 1597 and 1603 on a wide range of subjects. The first was a treatise on Aristotelian philosophy, the second addressed various geometrical problems, the third was a medical paper, and the fourth considered the question of squaring the circle. These were dedicated to various academics in both Cambridge and Wurzburg, including Lancelot Browne and William Butler. There are also two manuscript treatises of his in the British Library entitled 'Tabula longitudinum et latitudinum locorum memorabilium in Europa' and 'Mechanica circuli quadratura cum equatione cubi et sphaerae'. 
Oliver remained in Bury St Edmunds until the end of his life. His will was proved in 1610, suggesting that he died in that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 20733


Oliver, Thomas (1731/2-1815), colonial official, was born in Dorchester, Massachusetts, the son of Robert Oliver and Ann, daughter of James Brown of Antigua. His father was living in Antigua in 1738, but had settled at Dorchester before 1747. Thomas was educated at Harvard University, where he graduated in 1753. He probably resided at Dorchester until 1766, when he purchased an estate on Elmwood Avenue, near Mount Auburn, Cambridge, Massachusetts, and erected the mansion which was afterwards the residence of Governor Elbridge Gerry, and later the author and diplomatist James Russell Lowell. A man of fortune, he did not take much part in public affairs until March 1774, when he accepted the office of lieutenant-governor of Massachusetts. In addition he became the president of a council appointed by George III in a manner especially galling to popular feeling. Prior to Oliver's appointment existing councillors had been visited by bands of Middlesex freeholders, and one after another forced to renounce their offices. When royal troops seized the militia's stock of powder, the yeomen of the neighbouring towns marched to Cambridge, some of them bringing arms. Governor-General Thomas Gage prepared to send troops against them. After vainly endeavouring to persuade the yeomen to turn back, Oliver hastened to Boston and prevailed on Gage to refrain from military action. On his return the resignation of his seat on the council board was demanded. He urgently requested delay, inasmuch as he could not renounce that office while lieutenant-governor. A threatening multitude outside his residence on the morning of 2 September forced him to step down and to swear his commitment not to take any further part in the 'present novel and oppressive plan of the government'. He left Cambridge immediately and never returned. He was accompanied by his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Colonel John Vassall, whom he had married in 1760; the couple had several daughters. In 1775 he accompanied the British forces from Boston, and soon afterwards took passage from Halifax to England. He was proscribed in 1778 and his estate confiscated. Oliver died aged eighty-three at Bristol on 29 November 1815. 


@@@@@


doc= 20734


Oliver, Tom (1788-1864), pugilist, was born at Bledlow in Buckinghamshire on 18 July 1788, the son of William Oliver and his wife, Ann. He left his native place as a boy, and entered the service of Mr Baker, a gardener, at Millbank, London. A visit to a prize-fight in 1811 fired his ambition to enter the ring. The same year he fought Kimber, a stonemason, at Tothill Fields and beat him in an hour and forty minutes. He at once became known as the Chelsea Gardener, a title that stuck to him throughout his career until replaced by that of the Commissary. After several minor fights, on 15 May 1813 he beat George Cooper at Moulsey Hurst, Surrey, in seventeen minutes. On 17 May 1814 he met Ned Painter at Shepperton Range, Middlesex, for a purse of $50 given by the Pugilistic Club, to be contended for in a 24 foot ring. In the second round Oliver received a blow that all but disabled him; but, after coming up to time and adopting Tom Cribb's system of milling on the retreat, he won the battle after fifty-one minutes by a lucky blow. He now became the landlord of the Duke's Head, 31 Peter Street, Westminster, a house which 'the fancy' of the Westminster district made their headquarters. On 4 October 1816 he met Jack Carter, the Lancashire Hero, at Gretna Green, for 100 guineas a side. The spectators numbered about thirty thousand, and the marquess of Queensberry and Captain Barclay acted as the umpires. In the thirty-second round, at the end of forty-six minutes, Oliver was taken out of the ring in a state of stupor, and completely unable to see. 
On 10 July 1818 Oliver encountered Bill Neat of Bristol at Gerrards Cross, but the authorities interfered, and the ring was moved to Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire, where Lord Yarmouth, Sir Henry Smith, and other celebrities were present. After one hour had elapsed, and twenty-eight rounds had been fought, Oliver was knocked senseless, and could not come up to time. However, on 28 May 1819 he completely defeated the black fighter Kendrick. He next, on 21 July 1819, encountered Dan Donnelly, the champion of Ireland, at Crawley Hurst, Sussex, for 100 guineas a side. Intense interest was manifested in this affair in both countries, and bets amounting to more than $100,000 were made on the result. Oliver fought with his accustomed bravery, but in the thirty-fourth round he met with his increasingly customary defeat. On 13 January 1820 Oliver defeated Tom Shelton at Sawbridgeworth, Hertfordshire; but in a fight with his former opponent Ned Painter at North Walsham, Norfolk, on 17 July 1820, he lost the battle. He was then matched to fight Tom Spring on 20 February 1821 at Hayes, Middlesex. Spring was too much for him; but he showed great forbearance in the fight, and allowed Oliver much latitude. He also lost to T. Hickman, the gas-lightman, on 12 June 1821, and to Bill Abbott on 6 November 1821. 
Oliver was now appointed to take charge of the ropes and stakes of the prize-ring, and he was a constant attendant at the ringside as commissary. His last fight was with Ben Burn at Hampton, Middlesex, on 28 January 1834, when he won in twenty-five minutes. On 15 July 1846 he was sentenced at the Oxford assizes to three weeks' imprisonment for being present at a fight between Gill and Norley. During his latter years he was a fruiterer and greengrocer at Portman Market and 27 New Church Street, Chelsea. He died in London in June 1864, leaving a son, Frederick Oliver, also a pugilist and a commissary of the ring, who died on 30 January 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 20735


Oliver, William (bap. 1658, d. 1716), physician, born at Launceston, Cornwall, was the son of William Oliver (1627-1681), rector of Launceston, and his wife, Alice Middleton; he was baptized on 31 July 1658. He was entered in the physic line at Leiden University on 17 December 1683 when aged twenty-five, but his medical studies were interrupted by his joining the duke of Monmouth's expedition to England, and serving with the troops as one of their three surgeons. Some years later Oliver told Oldmixon that after Monmouth's defeat he rode off the field with the duke, Lord Grey, and a few others. When they had ridden about 20 miles he proposed to the duke to turn off to the sea coast of Somerset, seize a passage boat at Uphill, and cross to Wales. The advice was not taken and Oliver rode away to Bristol, about 12 miles distant. There he concealed himself with friends, and after the 'bloody assizes' travelled to London with the clerk of Judge Jeffreys, to whom he had been recommended as a tory. He then escaped to the continent and made his way to the Netherlands. In 1685 he was at Konigsberg in Prussia, and he spent one winter in the most northern part of Poland, but his name appears again in the list of the students at Leiden on 17 February 1688. He accompanied William III to England in 1688 as an officer in his army, and was soon rewarded for his services. 
On 30 September 1692 Oliver qualified as a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians at London, and from 27 April 1693 to 1702 he held the post of physician to the Red squadron. He served with the fleet at Cadiz in 1694, and spent two summers in the Mediterranean, during which period he eagerly pursued his inquiries in medicine and natural philosophy. Extracts from two letters written by Oliver when with the fleet were communicated by Walter Moyle to the 'Philosophical Transactions' (17.908-12), and a third letter, written at the same period, was published in the same 'Transactions' (24.1562-4). A letter 'on his late journey into Denmark and Holland', about 1701, also appeared in the 'Philosophical Transactions' (23.1400-10). 
Oliver was elected FRS on 5 January 1704. From 1702 to 1709 he lived in London and Bath, his 'Practical Essay' being dated from 'Red Lion Court in Fleet Street, July 10, 1704', but it is doubtful whether he ever practised at Bath. From 1709 to 1714 he was physician to the hospital at Chatham for sick and wounded seamen, and from 1714 to 1716 he was physician to the Royal Hospital at Greenwich. He died unmarried at Greenwich on 4 April 1716, and was buried there. A monument was erected to his memory in the abbey church at Bath. 
Oliver published in 1704 'A practical essay on fevers, containing remarks on the hot and cold methods of their cure', at page 202 of which began 'a dissertation on the hot waters of Bathe', the first draft of his subsequent work. The essay, through its author's references to Dr John Radcliffe, was attacked in 'A letter to Dr. Oliver, desiring him to reconcile some few of the contradictory assertions in his Essay on Feavers', dated from Tunbridge Wells, 25 July 1704. The treatise on Bath was expanded into 'A practical dissertation on Bath waters; to which is added a relation of a very extraordinary sleeper near Bath' (1707, 1719; 5th edn, 1764). This account of the sleeper, Samuel Chilton, a 25-year-old labourer at Timsbury, is also in the 'Philosophical Transactions' (24.2177-82), and was issued separately in 1707 and 1719. A further communication by Oliver is in the same 'Transactions' (24.1596). Oliver's discourse, 'Christian and politike reasons' why England and Holland should not go to war with each other, with other manuscripts, is in the British Library (Sloane MS 1770), as is a letter from him to James Petiver (Sloane MS 4054). 


@@@@@


doc= 20736


Oliver, William (1695-1764), physician and philanthropist, born at Ludgvan, Cornwall, on 4 August 1695, was baptized on 27 August 1695, and described as the son of John Oliver. The suggestion that he was the illegitimate child of William Oliver (bap. 1658, d. 1716) may be discounted. Oliver's family originally lived at Trevarnoe in Sithney, and later in Ludgvan; the estate of Treneere in Madron, which belonged to him, was sold after his death in 1768. When he decided to erect a monument in Sithney churchyard to the memory of his parents, Alexander Pope wrote the epitaph and drew the design of the pillar ('Quarterly Review', 139, 1875, 367-95). Oliver was admitted a pensioner of Pembroke College, Cambridge, on 17 September 1714, graduated MB in 1720 and MD in 1725, and, to complete his medical training, entered Leiden University on 15 November 1720. On 8 July 1756 Oliver was incorporated at Oxford, and was elected FRS on 22 January 1730. He is, however, most renowned as the inventor of the Bath Oliver biscuit. 
On returning from Leiden, Oliver practised for a time at Plymouth, where he introduced smallpox inoculation. About 1725 he settled in Bath and remained there for the rest of his life, obtaining in a very short time the leading practice of the city. His medical skill is mentioned by Mrs Anne Pitt ('Suffolk Letters', 1824, 2.246-50) and by Mrs Delany ('Autobiography', 2.17; 3.625); and he also attended Ralph Allen in his last illness, receiving a complimentary legacy of $100. However, his popularity was mainly due to his friendship with Ralph Allen, a fellow Cornishman, who introduced him to Pope, William Warburton, and the rest of the guests at his house, Prior Park; and with William Borlase, his 'friend and relation', who, after being his patient in 1730, recommended him to the gentry of the west country. Oliver took great pains to obtain subscriptions for the building of the Water or General Hospital, later the Royal Mineral Water Hospital, at Bath, and in 1737 made an offer of some land for its site, which was at first accepted, but afterwards declined. The following year he was appointed one of the treasurers to the hospital fund, and in July 1739 he became a deputy president. On 1 May 1740 he was appointed physician to the hospital, the same day that Jeremiah Peirce became the surgeon. The regulations for the admission and discharge of English patients were drawn up by Oliver; and in 1756 he compiled a comparable set of rules for patients from Scotland and Ireland. A dominant and even domineering man, Oliver played a major role in the government of the institution until both he and Peirce resigned in 1761; he attended over 600 (more than half) of the meetings of the weekly management committee between 1739 and his death (minute books, Bath General Hospital). 
It has been suggested that Oliver's whig politics made him vulnerable to tory attacks, but the medical conflicts in which he became embroiled were rather a product of professional conservatism and commercial self-interest. In 1743 Oliver was actively involved in the prosecution of Archibald Cleland, one of the surgeons of the hospital, who was dismissed following a charge that he had sexually assaulted female patients. An outsider, Cleland had been engaged in a long and threatening campaign to improve the spa facilities; therefore the allegations offered an excellent pretext for discrediting a competitor. The hospital governors commended Oliver's conduct in the affair. Cleland, on the other hand, was scathing of his anatomical competence (and that of a fellow physician, Alexander Rayner): 'I could not have believed that these two learned doctors... could have been so little versed in these matters, if they had not in their 'Vindication' thus publicly exposed themselves to the censure of every judicious reader' (A. Cleland, 'A Full Vindication of Mr Cleland's Appeal to the Public', 1744, 42). Oliver was at the centre of controversy again in 1757, when he and some other physicians in the city declined to attend any consultations with William Baylies and Charles Lucas, because they had disputed the sulphur content of the waters to which clinical efficacy was traditionally attributed, and criticized the behaviour of the physicians at the hospital. The voluminous correspondence which ensued was published by Lucas in a bid to demonstrate the existence of a physical confederacy in Bath ('Letters of Doctor Lucas and Doctor Oliver Occasioned by a Physical Confederacy Discovered in Bath', 1757). 
Oliver was not a prolific medical writer. In 1723 and 1755 he contributed brief papers to the 'Philosophical Transactions'; in 1751 his 'Practical Essay on the Use and Abuse of Warm Water Bathing in Gouty Cases' appeared; and in 1760 he put together a collection of 'Cases of the Persons Admitted into the Infirmary at Bath under the Care of Doctor Oliver'. Stimulated by the goading of Lucas and Baylies, this last text was republished in 1774 as one of Rice Charleton's 'Three Tracts on Bath Water'. But Oliver had interests besides medicine. Contemporaries recognized him as a 'civilized personality' (Boyce, 87, 243), well connected with the leading figures who frequented Bath, and fascinated by books, painting, and architecture. 
Oliver applied to Dr Borlase for minerals for Pope's grotto, and his name frequently occurs in the letters of Pope and Borlase at Castle Horneck, near Penzance. In the summer of 1743 he wrote to Pope to free himself from all knowledge of John Tillard's attack on Bishop William Warburton, which was dedicated to him without his knowledge ('Works of Alexander Pope', 9.233). Oliver was also a correspondent of Warburton himself, Philip Doddridge, and Stephen Duck; and he wrote to Dr Wood on the subject of two Roman altars discovered at Bath. Oliver's literary works included several poems, but most famous was the anonymously published 'A Faint Sketch of the Life, Character, and Manners of the Late Mr Nash'. It was praised by Oliver Goldsmith as 'written with much good sense and still more good nature', and he embodied it within his 'Life of Richard Nash' (1762). It also appeared in the 'Public Ledger' of 12 March 1761, and in the Revd Richard Warner's 'History of Bath' (1801). 
Legend has it that towards the end of his life Oliver confided the recipe for the Bath Oliver, a savoury biscuit invented for patients, to his coachman Atkins, giving him at the same time $100 in money and ten sacks of the finest wheat flour. The fortunate recipient is said to have opened a shop in Green Street and acquired a large fortune. Although Atkins did not feature in Oliver's will, the story was told to successive generations of the Oliver family. Fortt & Son of Bath, who were manufacturing the biscuit in the 1960s, lost any documents relating to the origins of the recipe when their premises were bombed in 1941. The Bath Oliver is still well known today. Its creator was commemorated in other ways. A plate in the 'Antiquities of Cornwall' (1769), engraved at his expense, was inscribed to him by Borlase; and the later impressions of Mary Chandler's 'Description of Bath' (1736) contained some verses to him (pages 21-3), acknowledging that he had corrected her poem, and that 'ev'n Pope approv'd when you had tun'd my Lyre'. 
However, it is the hospital which stands as the greatest memorial to Oliver's philanthropy. About 1761 he and Peirce were painted together by William Hoare, in the act of examining three candidates for admission: a splendid picture, which still hangs in the hospital. In 1935, moreover, a plaque was unveiled at Oliver's former town house in Queen Square, Bath, marking his association with the institution. 
Oliver purchased in 1746, as a vacation residence, a small farmhouse 2 miles from Box, near Bath, and called it Trevarnoe, after the scene of his childhood and the abode of his fathers. His own son, the third William Oliver, matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 20 January 1749, aged eighteen, and his name appears on the books at Leiden on 21 September 1753. Oliver's eldest daughter married a son of the Revd John Acland, rector of Broadclyst, Devon; his second daughter, Charlotte, married Sir John Pringle on 14 April 1752. 
For many years before his death Oliver was subject to the gout. He died at Bath on 17 March 1764, and was buried in the church of Weston, near that city, where an inscription 'on a white tablet, supported by palm-branches' was erected to his memory. There is also a plain mural tablet to his memory in the abbey church. The statement in 'The Life and Times of Selina, Countess of Huntingdon' (ed. A. C. H. Seymour, 1, 1839, 450-51), that he remained 'a most inveterate infidel till a short time before his death', is probably an exaggeration. He was generally admitted to have been an eminently sensible man, with a compassionate and benevolent nature. 


