@@@@@


doc= 20737


Oliver, William (c.1804-1853), landscape painter, born in Sudbury, Suffolk, the son of William Oliver, is first recorded as an artist in 1829 when he exhibited the first of thirty-six paintings at the Society of British Artists in Suffolk Street, London. In 1834 he was elected a member of the New Society of Painters in Water Colours, and his drawings appeared annually at its exhibitions until 1854. He also exhibited twenty-nine landscapes in oils, mainly views in France and Italy, at the Royal Academy between 1835 and 1853, and fifty-four at the British Institution from 1836. In 1843 he published a folio volume, 'Scenery of the Pyrenees', lithographed by George Barnard, Thomas Shotter Boys, and Carl Hughe, among others. 
On 21 September 1840 Oliver married Emma Eburne ['see below'], whom he had first met when she was fifteen, when he encouraged her to take drawing lessons. They had one son and one daughter. After their marriage they travelled every autumn, painting the landscape scenery of England, Wales, and Germany. Oliver died on 2 November 1853 at Langley Mill House, Halstead, Essex. His oil painting 'Foligno' and a watercolour of the city of Strasbourg are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


In 1855, following the death of William Oliver in 1853, Emma Oliver married John Sedgwick (1812-1882), a solicitor, of Watford, Hertfordshire, but continued to paint under her first husband's name. Many of her later landscapes were painted in Venice, and along the Rhine. She died on 15 March 1885 at the Brewery House, Great Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire. One of her landscapes, 'Vale of Dedham, Essex' (1876), is in the Victoria and Albert Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 20738


Olivers, Thomas (bap. 1725, d. 1799), Methodist preacher and hymn writer, was the son of Thomas Olivers (died 1729) and his wife, Penelope (died 1730). The parish register of Tregynon, Montgomeryshire, shows that he was baptized on 8 September 1725. After his father and his mother died, he was entrusted to the care of a great-uncle, who, however, did not long survive Olivers's parents, but left him a small legacy. The interest was to be employed in the child's upbringing, and the principal paid to him when he came of age. He received 'such learning as was thought necessary' at Forden, Montgomeryshire, but became a wild and reckless young man, much given to cursing and swearing, and who became known as 'the worst boy who had been in those parts for the last twenty or thirty years' (Jackson, 2.49). At the age of eighteen he was apprenticed to a cobbler, but continued in his violent and careless ways, so much so that (following a scandal over his ill-treatment of a girl) he was forced to leave Wales. He went to Shrewsbury, and from there he wandered through the Welsh border counties until he reached Bristol. There he heard George Whitefield preach on the text 'is not this a brand plucked from the fire?' and was converted. He joined the Methodists at Bradford in Wiltshire, and became a conspicuously reformed character, preaching and also repaying those whom he had cheated in previous years. 
In 1753 John Wesley, who later summed up Olivers as having 'good in him' but also as 'a rough stick of wood', chose Olivers to be one of his itinerant preachers. He was sent to Devon, and then to Cornwall; from there he went to Norfolk, where he was attacked by a mob when attempting to preach at Yarmouth, and then to London, Ireland, Leeds, Lancashire, York, Newcastle, and other places in quick succession. He married, probably in 1757 or 1758, a Miss Green, 'noted through all the north of England for her extraordinary piety' (Jackson, 2.80). In 1773 he became for a year Wesley's companion on his preaching tours: the minutes of the Methodist conference recorded that 'Thomas Olivers travels with Mr Wesley'. In 1775 he was appointed supervisor of the Methodist press, a position which he held until 1789, when Wesley removed him for making too many mistakes: 'I cannot, dare not, will not suffer Thomas Olivers to murder the 'Arminian Magazine' any longer. The errata are intolerable and innumerable' (J. Wesley to T. Bradshaw, 15 Aug 1789, 'Letters', 8.160). Despite his errors, the quick-tempered Olivers was a formidable pamphleteer, who engaged in fierce controversies with the Calvinists of his day, such as Augustus Montagu Toplady and Rowland Hill, who attacked Olivers on the grounds that he had once been 'a journeyman shoemaker'. His ferocity in the pamphlet wars of the early Methodist years earned him from Toplady the sobriquet of Wesley's Bully in Chief. 'Mr Wesley', wrote Toplady, 'skulks for shelter under a cobbler's apron'. 
In spite of this expenditure of energy on pamphleteering, Olivers is best known for writing a great hymn of the early Methodist years, 'The God of Abrah'm praise'. He is said to have been inspired to write it by hearing the Hebrew 'Yigdal' sung by Meyer Lyon, cantor at the Great Synagogue in London, about 1770. Olivers asked Lyon to write down the tune and composed the hymn to fit it. He was the author of other strong hymns, such as 'Come, immortal king of glory', and of a poem entitled 'A Descriptive and Plaintive Elegy on the Death of the Late Reverend John Wesley', written on Wesley's death in 1791. He is also thought to be the composer of the hymn tune 'Helmsley' (printed with the name 'Olivers' in a Wesleyan hymnbook of 1765), used for 'Lo, he comes with clouds descending'. His pamphlets were numerous and polemical, although the posthumously published 'A Defence of Methodism' (1818) is a record of a debate held in 1785 ('Have the Methodists done most good or evil?') which shows his skill in reasoned argument. After his dismissal from the 'Arminian Magazine' Olivers spent the remainder of his life in retirement in London, where he died on 7 March 1799, in Hoxton. He was regarded by the early Methodists as one of the foremost disciples of John Wesley, and was buried in Wesley's tomb in the grounds of the New Chapel, City Road, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 20739


Ollier, Charles (1788-1859), publisher, writer, and editor, was born on 4 May 1788 in the parish of St James, Bath, the second among the five or six sons of Charles Ollier (1746/7-1827), a haberdasher and registrar at Bath General Hospital, and Sarah Tuttell (1757/8-1829), a milliner and haberdasher. It is thought that he was descended from a French protestant family which migrated to England at the time of the revocation of the edict of Nantes in 1685. 
At fourteen Ollier moved from Bath to London and became a junior clerk in a banking house, and by 1810 he was employed by Coutts's Bank. In 1812 he was indentured to Philip Drake, a notary public and scrivener, and as late as 1816 he worked for the banks of Alexander Davison and of Coutts. During these early years in London he was drawn to literary, theatrical, and musical circles. In 1810 he wrote his first letter to and theatrical criticism for Leigh Hunt's 'Examiner'. As a good friend of Hunt and, by 1812, of Charles Cowden Clarke, he became acquainted with others in the arts, including the Novellos, Henry Robertson (later treasurer of Covent Garden Theatre), the painter William Havell, and the four or five musical and theatrical brothers Gattie (including Henry and John Thomas Byng). Ollier was an accomplished flautist who played at Novello and Hunt musical evenings and at annual celebrations of Shakespeare's birthday. 
On 13 May 1814, while living at Devonshire Place, Marylebone, London, Ollier married Maria Gattie (1786-1878); they had six children. His second son, Charles (1821-1906), co-founded the booking and opera agency of Lacon and Ollier with George Lacon. His fourth and youngest son, Edmund Ollier (1826-1886), attained some fame as a journalist and historian. 
Between 1817 and 1823 Charles Ollier engaged in business with his younger brother James (1795/6-1851) as a publisher, retail bookseller, stationer, and owner of a circulating library, first at 3 Welbeck Street, Cavendish Square, and then, after May 1818, at Vere Street, Bond Street. The first two publications with an imprint C. and J. Ollier were John Keats's 'Poems' and Percy B. Shelley's 'Proposal for Putting Reform to the Vote throughout the Kingdom', both appearing early in March 1817, and both apparently published by commission on the author's own account (that is, an author would pay the printing and advertising costs). Keats soon became dissatisfied with the Olliers, to whom his brother George wrote a letter of complaint less than eight weeks after publication. In their defence of the poor sales, the Olliers (who had advertised the volume in London and Bath newspapers) responded on 29 April that many who had purchased the volume 'found fault with it' and were offered their money back: one customer actually considered 'Poems' 'no better than a take in'. Most of the remaining copies of 'Poems' were then transferred to Taylor and Hessey, who continued to sell the volume as late as 1824. On the other hand, Shelley continued to publish almost all his works with the Olliers, notwithstanding poor sales and other problems. In December 1817, for example, Charles Ollier wanted to withdraw from publishing Shelley's epic 'Laon and Cythna' when customers complained of the incest and anti-Christian expressions therein. After Shelley reluctantly agreed to remove or alter the offending passages, the epic was republished as 'The Revolt of Islam' in January 1818. Between 1820 and his death in July 1822 Shelley frequently complained that Charles Ollier was ignoring his many requests and commissions (Robinson, 187-8, 190-92, 199-206). 
The fifty titles that the Olliers published in 1817-23 also included Charles Lamb's 'Works', William Hazlitt's 'Characters of Shakespear's Plays', and several volumes by both Leigh Hunt and Bryan Waller Procter (Barry Cornwall). Julius Charles Hare was associated with two of Ollier's periodicals, supplying lists of authors to the 'Literary Pocket-Book' (1819-23), and suggesting to Ollier the idea of the short-lived 'Olliers Literary Miscellany' (1820), in which appeared pieces by Allan Cunningham, Hare, Lamb, Ollier himself, and Thomas Love Peacock (whose 'Four ages of poetry' prompted Shelley to write his 'Defence of poetry', intended for the second number of the 'Miscellany', which never appeared). During these same years Ollier was very active in the Paddington vestry (at meetings also frequented by the publishers John Hunt and John Joseph Stockdale) and was elected overseer of the poor for the parish of Paddington. 
Ollier went bankrupt in the winter of 1822-3 and sold his complete inventory (including bookshelves, fancy stationery, and 288 unsold copies of 'Prometheus Unbound' in quires) on 5-11 March 1823. For some time he continued business as a stationer at his residence in Maida Hill, Paddington, and by the autumn of 1825 he returned to the publishing trade as the chief literary reader and adviser to Henry Colburn in New Burlington Street, then to Colburn and Richard Bentley during their merger of 1829-32, and then to Bentley, who retained Ollier at the annual salary of $300 until the autumn of 1839. During these years his brother James continued as a bookseller in Welbeck Street and occasionally worked for Bentley as a transcriber, translator, and editor, acted as a publisher of 'Le chaperon noir' (1835), and also wrote the prose for 'The Pictorial Album, or, Cabinet of Paintings, for the Year 1837'. James, whose later career is uncertain, died walking across the isthmus of Darien in 1851. 
After leaving Bentley there is evidence that Charles Ollier (or his son Charles) began another ill-fated periodical, 'Ollier's Concert Journal and Weekly Register of Musical Entertainments'. He became a publisher again at Southampton Street, Strand (1846-9), his first published volume being Richard Henry Horne's 'Ballad Romances'. He also published volumes by Charlton Carew, John James Halls, G. P. R. James, Harriet Kearney, Mary Molesworth Kindersley, the Mackinnons (Daniel Henry, Lauchlan Bellingham, and William Alexander), and John Edmund Reade -- certainly less distinguished authors than those from the years 1817-23. To his credit, however, Ollier was one of the first critics in England to celebrate the genius of Walt Whitman; he lectured on the achievements of Henry Fielding; and he delighted in the plays and poetry of Shakespeare, Ben Jonson, Robert Herrick, and Abraham Cowley. 
During his long and varied career Ollier wrote and had published a number of his own works: 'Altham and his Wife: a Domestic Tale' (1818), which Shelley thought was 'most unaffectedly told... in a strain of very pure & powerful English' ('Letters', 117); 'Inesilla, or, The Tempter, a Romance: with other Tales' (1824), which was delayed owing to the death of his first child, Lucy Frances (1816-1820); 'Ferrers: a Romance of the Reign of George the Second' (3 vols., 1842; 2nd edn, 1843), for whose copyright he received $150; the historical and descriptive letterpress for Thomas Boy's 'Original Views of London' (1842) and William Delamotte's 'Original Views of Oxford' (1843); and 'Fallacy of Ghosts, Dreams, and Omens; with Stories of Witchcraft, Life-in-Death, and Monomania' (1848). He also published tales and articles and reviews in a number of periodicals, including 'Ainsworth's Magazine' (1842-5), 'Bentley's Miscellany' (1837, 1841), 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' (1822), Hunt's 'Examiner' (1810), 'Leigh Hunt's Journal' (1850), and 'Naval and Military Gazette' (1854-5). 
Equally significant was Ollier's presence behind the scenes: for example, he was responsible for Colburn publishing Bulwer's 'Pelham', finished the last chapters of William Maginn's 'John Manesty' (1844) after the novelist died, offered himself as a ghost writer to Bulwer, and served as the literary agent for a number of writers, including G. P. R. James. As early as 1829 Ollier was frequently asked by James to make certain that his novels were being properly advertised and reviewed and sent to his friends -- and he would seek Ollier's editorial advice on novels in manuscript. By the late 1840s, Ollier was paid by James to correct the proofs of his novels, advise him on his contracts and accounts with other publishers, and negotiate the sale of his copyrights. After James moved his family to America in 1850, Ollier saw some of James's last works through the press and arranged that his novels published by Harper in New York were published on the same day by T. C. Newby in London -- and he was also commissioned to seek copyrights for James's novels in Germany and France. 
Ollier's second publishing business had failed by January 1849. According to his son Edmund, his father 'was not well adapted to making a trade of the sale of books' (Ollier, 'Literary publisher', 248). Suffering from debts of $300, from his chronic respiratory illnesses (his mother and two of his brothers died of asthma), and from the financial strain of supporting his eldest son, Francis (1820-1872), who was committed to a lunatic asylum for most of his life, Ollier was forced to apply to the Royal Literary Fund for grants of $60 each in 1849, 1854, and 1857. In the second application he wrote that he had 'No salary, annuity or pension. I have no other means than working for publishers' (Royal Literary Fund case files, Charles Ollier, 3 May 1854). According to his obituary in the 'Annual Register for 1859', for 'many of his latter years Mr. Ollier was a kind of 'consulting physician' on the merits of works offered to the London publishers, and was much engaged in putting into a readable form works of value by authors whose experience in the journey-work of literature was crude or non-existent.' Ollier died after a long respiratory illness on 5 June 1859 at his home -- 6 Bute Street, Old Brompton, London -- and he was buried on 11 June at Brompton cemetery, where the remainder of his family was eventually interred. His widow, who also received a Royal Literary Fund grant of $60 in 1859-60, died on 8 January 1878 at 154 Oakley Street, Chelsea, London, the home of her son Edmund. Leigh Hunt, Ollier's dearest friend for fifty years, memorialized him in 'The Spectator' (18 June 1859, 640) as 'a devoted husband and father' and as a modest man whose religious beliefs were 'equally removed from atheistical hopelessness... and every cruelty of superstition'. The 'Morning Chronicle' (10 June 1859) observed that 'Ollier has exercised a considerable influence over the course of literature, although an almost jealous diffidence of himself always kept him in the background'. Ollier was a 'great keeper of things', and many of the autograph letters written to him by the more famous were sold at two Puttick and Simpson sales in 1877 and 1878. No photograph or portrait of Charles Ollier seems to exist. 


@@@@@


doc= 20740


Ollier, Edmund (1826-1886), journalist and historian, was born on 26 November 1826 in Maida Hill, Paddington, Middlesex, the sixth of the six children of Charles Ollier (1788-1859), publisher, writer, and editor, and his wife, Maria Gattie (1786-1878). He was uncertain of his genealogy, remarking in his memoir on his father that the name Ollier 'seems to betoken a French origin... possibly... of Huguenot descent' and that his own ancestors were 'connected for some generations with the north-west and west of England', his father having been born in Bath ([Ollier], 'Literary publisher', 243-4). Because his father had been a publisher (1817-23) of works by Shelley, Keats, Hazlitt, Lamb, and Leigh Hunt, Edmund Ollier had an affection for these romantic writers and in the memoir he wrote for the edition of Lamb's 'Essays of Elia' that he published in 1867 he remarked that he had 'beheld [Charles Lamb] with infantine eyes' and 'sat in the lap of poor Mary Lamb' (Ollier, 'Memoir', 'Essays', vi). As a boy, he also met many of the authors associated with the publishers Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley (for both of whom his father was chief literary adviser from 1825 to 1840), and he listened to the stories of B. R. Haydon and Leigh Hunt. Ollier, a good friend of Hunt until the latter's death in 1859, later joined with others to raise funds for a monument to Hunt in Kensal Green cemetery in London, and in 1869 he edited and wrote a memoir for Hunt's 'A Tale for a Chimney Corner' (1849). His many other correspondents included Richard Henry Horne (Hengist) and Charles and Mary Cowden Clarke. 
Ollier published numerous poems, stories, and articles in such periodicals as 'Ainsworth's Magazine' (1844-6), 'Household Words' (1853-7), and 'All the Year Round' (1860-70), also publishing occasionally in 'The Athenaeum', 'Magazine of Art', 'Mirror of Literature', 'The Spectator', and 'The Sun'. He was sub-editor of 'The Leader' (1855-8), editor of 'The Atlas' (1859-60), and literary editor of the 'London Review' (1864-6). He was an occasional writer in the 'Daily News' from 1853 to 1877. He republished his earlier verses in 'Poems from the Greek Mythology, and Miscellaneous Poems' (1867). 
Ollier made his literary debut in 'Ainsworth's Magazine' in 1844 and was very active in the periodical press until 1877. He was the most prolific historian working for Cassell, Petter, and Galpin, the publishers with whom he began his association by writing a biographical and critical study of Gustave Dore in 1870 and a highly successful 'Cassell's History of the War between France and Germany', in two volumes, issued in weekly and monthly parts in 1871-2 (reserialized in 1873-4 and again in 1883-4). His other works include 'Our British Portrait Painters' (1873), volume 9 (1874) of 'Cassell's Illustrated History of England', 'Cassell's History of the United States' (3 vols., 1874-7), and 'Cassell's Illustrated History of the Russo-Turkish War' (2 vols., 1878-9). His writing of 'Cassell's Illustrated Universal History' (4 vols., 1881-5) meant that he had to decline Leslie Stephen's invitation of 9 December 1882 to become a sub-editor for the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. His last project was 'The Life and Times of Queen Victoria', for which he wrote the first eleven chapters before illness caused him to resign his commission. The work was completed by Robert Wilson in 1887. 
With the exception of a few holiday jaunts, Ollier passed all of his life in London. He did not marry until later in life. On 2 October 1875 he wed Emily Jane Dorrell (1833-1917); they had no children. Although baptized and married in the Anglican church, Ollier (like his father) was 'neither in religion nor in politics... a Conservative'. He 'never strove for party position, for honours or distinctions', but in 1867 he received from King Victor Emmanuel 'the cross of the order of Saint Maurice and Saint Lazarus, in recognition of his literary advocacy of the cause of Italian independence' (Oswald, 309-10). Ollier died on 19 April 1886 at his residence, 154 Oakley Street, Chelsea, London. He was buried on 22 April in Brompton cemetery in the same grave as his father, mother, and brother Francis (1820-1872) -- a grave in which were later interred his unmarried sister Clara Elizabeth (1818-1898) and, in 1917, his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 20741


Olliffe, Sir Joseph Francis (1808-1869), physician, son of Joseph Olliffe, merchant, of Cork, and Elizabeth, daughter of Charles McCarthy of Sunville, co. Limerick, was born at Cork. He was educated in Paris, and there graduated MA at the university in 1829, and MD in 1840. For some time he acted as tutor in the family of the Count de Cresnoi, but in 1840 he began to practise medicine in Paris. He married Laura (died 1898), the second daughter of Sir William Cubitt, in 1841, a marriage which gave him access to a considerable fortune. Olliffe was a fellow of the Anatomical Society of Paris, and at one time served as president of the Paris Medical Society. Louis-Philippe in 1846 appointed him a knight of the Legion d'honneur, and he was promoted to the rank of officer in 1855 by Napoleon III. 
In March 1852 Olliffe became physician to the British embassy, and on 13 June 1853 he was knighted at Buckingham Palace. The Board of Trade nominated him a juror for hygiene, pharmacy, surgery, and medicine in the French international exhibition in April 1855, and in 1861 he was appointed one of the committee for sanitary appliances in the international exhibition of 1862. He became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of London in 1859. 
With his friend and patient the Count de Morny, Olliffe invested in extensive building at Deauville near Trouville, a watering-place which they effectively created. This proved an unremunerative speculation. Olliffe died at his home, 12 Chichester Terrace, Brighton, on 14 March 1869. 


@@@@@


doc= 20742


Ollivant, Alfred (1798-1882), bishop of Llandaff, was born on 16 August 1798 in Manchester, the younger son of William Ollivant and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Stephen Langston of Great Horwood, Buckinghamshire. The family moved to London when the father became a clerk in the Navy Office and lived at 11 Smith Street, Northampton Square. Educated at St Paul's School (1809-16), he was admitted as a sizar to Trinity College, Cambridge, on 11 June 1816 and matriculated at Easter 1817. He was the Craven scholar in 1820, graduated sixth wrangler in 1821, and gained the chancellor's medal for classics. He won the Tyrwhitt Hebrew scholarship in 1822 and was elected to a fellowship at Trinity College. 
In 1827 Ollivant was appointed vice-principal of the newly founded St David's College, Lampeter. While in Cardiganshire he found time to learn Welsh and he preached regularly in that language at Llangeler, of which he was vicar as well as sinecure rector. He returned to Cambridge in 1843 as regius professor of divinity. In 1849 he was nominated to the see of Llandaff, his knowledge of Wales and of the Welsh language being the chief reasons for his elevation. In 1831 he married Alicia Olivia Spencer (1801-1886) of Bramley Grange, Yorkshire. Three sons survived them, one of whom, Joseph Earle, was chancellor of the dioceses of Llandaff and St David's. 
The diocese of Llandaff had long been impoverished and neglected, served by a long line of absentee bishops. The cathedral was a so-called Italian temple, a partial restoration dating from 1736, set in the medieval ruin. In 1849 the ecclesiastical commissioners augmented the bishop's stipend by $3150 to bring it up to the minimum level of $4500 and bought an official residence in Llandaff. Ollivant was therefore able to live in the diocese and attend to its pressing needs. Industrialization had changed the face of the south Wales valleys, and the church in the erstwhile rural diocese had been overtaken by the rapid growth of nonconformity. The Church Extension Society, which he founded in 1850, undertook a massive programme of church and school building; over 170 churches were built or restored. Ollivant also saw the complete restoration of the cathedral, under the direction of a local architect, John Prichard. He was much concerned about the education of the clergy and the needs of the Welsh-speaking areas of the diocese. 
As a young man at Cambridge, Ollivant had been influenced by the famous evangelical Charles Simeon, and he was to retain that influence throughout his life. As a theologian, the former professor was cautious and conservative, fearful of the development of biblical criticism. His 'Charge' of 1857 was devoted to a detailed, if now unconvincing, refutation of the works of Rowland Williams, then vice-principal at Lampeter and an advocate of the still tentative views of the German critics. Ollivant was equally suspicious of the activities of the Anglo-Catholic clergy who began to appear in the diocese after 1870. He inhibited Arthur Stanton, the long-serving curate of St Alban the Martyr, Holborn, from officiating anywhere in the diocese, even though Stanton was a frequent visitor to the home of the powerful Talbot family at Margam. He rebuked the vicar of St Mary's, Cardiff, for wearing a surplice with a large cross on it. It turned out to be a white chasuble borrowed from the parish of Margam. 
In person tall and spare with features said by some to resemble the duke of Wellington, but more refined, Ollivant became increasingly deaf. This hindered him in his work for the panel producing the Revised Version of the 'Bible' in 1870. He finally died on 16 December 1882 at Bishop's Court, Llandaff. He was buried on 21 December in the cathedral grounds, his grave marked by a large Celtic cross in a local red stone. A monument with his effigy was placed in the chancel, near the high altar, as befits one who was the second founder of the cathedral. Apart from a chip off the nose it escaped damage when the cathedral was bombed in 1941. 
Besides a large number of minor publications, his triennial charges from 1851 onwards are still useful sources for the conditions in the diocese, as is his 'Some Account of the Fabric of Llandaff Cathedral' (1857, 1860) for the state of that building. His library, donated to the cathedral, is now housed at St Michael's College, Llandaff, the books amply annotated by his handwritten comments in the margins. 


@@@@@


doc= 20743


Ollyffe, John (1647/8-1717), Church of England clergyman, was born in Arundel, Sussex. He and his brother Thomas were the sons of John Ollyffe (died 1667), during the interregnum vicar of Ringmer and curate of Wivelsfield in Sussex, and an ejected minister at the Restoration. Having studied philosophy and logic at St Catharine's College, Cambridge (which he entered on 16 June 1665), Ollyffe migrated to Queen's College, Oxford, where he matriculated, aged twenty, on 7 February 1668. He proceeded BCL from New Inn Hall in 1672, and was ordained. He served the remainder of his life in two rectories: West Almer, Dorset (1673-93), and Dunton, Buckinghamshire (1693-1717). 
Ollyffe was a reformer who worked through the established church to restore social order and morality. These efforts he directed mainly at his own parishioners: guiding them in practical matters, in 'A Minister's Last Advice to his People' (1694); steering them clear of error, in 'A Brief Defence of Infant-Baptism' (1694); and indoctrinating them, in 'A Practical Exposition of the Church-Catechism' (1710). Ollyffe encouraged local societies in this effort, as in his 'A Sermon Preach'd... before the Society for Reformation of Manners' (1702). Politically outspoken, he preached before local assizes in 1709 and 1715 and published sermons supportive of such whig causes as the allegiance to limited, constitutional monarchy ('England's Call to Thankfulness', 1689), which, to many high-churchmen's dismay, he reiterated at the accession of George I ('An Exhortation to Faithful and True Allegiance', 1715). His concept of order included protestant solidarity against popery, beginning with his oft repeated plan for readmitting moderate dissenters to the church ('An Essay towards a Comprehension', 1701; 3rd edn, 1718). Just as Ollyffe asserted 'I am no Dissenter, but I love and honour Dissenters that are good Men', he equally disdained shallow formalism and bigotry in his own church (Ollyffe, preface). 
Ollyffe earned a reputation as a polemicist with his 'Defence of Ministerial Conformity' (1702-5) in which he challenged the claim of Edmund Calamy, made in his 'Abridgement of Mr Baxter's History of his Life' and expanded upon in debate with Ollyffe and Benjamin Hoadly in 'A Defence of Moderate Non-Conformity' (1703-6), that dissenting principles were still viable. But he managed this temperately, with genuine concern for restoring fellowship. Even Calamy admitted Ollyffe's approach was respectful and moderate, and that they were 'far from differing' in their desire for reformation. 
Ollyffe died at Dunton on 24 June 1717, leaving three sons in the ministry: John (1676-1743), rector of Hedgerley (1699-1743, and author of 'A Sermon... upon Occasion of the Late Day of Thanksgiving for the Union' (170); George ('b'. 1682), vicar of Kemble in Wiltshire (and the only one of Ollyffe's sons' livings not in Buckinghamshire) in 1707 and of Wendover in 1715; and Thomas, vicar of Dunton and Eyworth (1712-42) and rector of Denham (1742-8). 


@@@@@


doc= 20744


Ua Lochlainn, Domnall (1048-1121), king of Cenel nEogain, was the son of Ardgar Mac Lochlainn, who led a major plundering expedition into Connacht in 1062, died as king of Ailech in 1064 at Telach Oc (Tullaghoge in Tyrone), and was buried at Armagh in the mausoleum of the kings. Domnall first married Bebinn (died 1110), daughter of Cennetig Ua Briain (a member of the Ui Briain of Munster, who had briefly been king of Telach Oc, the inauguration site of Cenel nEogain, from 1078 but was killed in battle in 1084). His second wife was Benmide, daughter of Conchobar Ua Mael Shechlainn, king of Mide. From 1083 Domnall Ua Lochlainn was king of Cenel nEogain (or king of Ailech, after the fortress at Greenan in Donegal), and he inaugurated his kingship in that year by undertaking a 'crech rig', or royal prey, in Conaille (modern co. Louth) and distributing stipends to the men of Fernmag. He aimed throughout his career to secure the dominance of his lineage within Cenel nEogain, to assert lordship in the north of Ireland over the kingdom of Ulaid on his eastern frontier and over Cenel Conaill to the west, and to challenge Muirchertach Ua Briain for the high-kingship of Ireland. In order to make such a challenge to the Munster king, he needed not only to achieve a clear hegemony in the north but also to subdue, or ally with, the kings of Connacht and Mide: that is, he needed to rally the whole of Leth Cuinn, the northern half of Ireland, against Munster. He sometimes came close to attaining his ambition, but his power was, in the end, too fragile. 
Domnall Ua Lochlainn early demonstrated the scale of his ambitions by leading an army into Connacht in 1088, securing the submission of Ruaidri Ua Conchobair, king of the province, who then hosted with him to Munster to challenge Muirchertach Ua Briain; Limerick and other fortresses were burnt and the Ua Briain residence at Kincora (in Clare) was razed. Two years later he even secured hostages from Ua Briain himself and from Domnaill Ua Mael Shechlainn, king of Mide, as well as from Ua Conchobair. This was the high point of his reign, the moment at which he seemed to be the new high-king; but he never established himself in that position. In the very next year, 1091, he had to deal with opposition from a neighbouring king: he slew Donnsleibe Ua hEochada, king of Ulaid, in a military encounter at Belach Goirt in Iubair (Gortinure in Londonderry). The site of the engagement shows that the king of the Ulaid was the aggressor. 
After this early success there were several distinct phases to Ua Lochlainn's reign. First, from 1094 to 1103 he was engaged in a war of invasion and counter-invasion, in which Ua Briain held, perhaps increasingly, the upper hand. The Munster-led army invaded the north, while Ua Lochlainn never, in this period, repeated his invasion of Munster of 1090; instead, he was obliged to resort to extreme acts of violence to try to retain control over the Ulaid and Cenel Conaill, blinding Aed Ua Canannain, king of Cenel Conaill, in 1093 and cutting down the tree under which the kings of Ulster were traditionally inaugurated in 1099. That his challenge to Ua Briain survived owed something to the traditional Cenel nEogain alliance with Armagh; in 1097 an invasion by Ua Briain was halted at Fid Conaill in Louth and a truce negotiated by the head of the church of Armagh, Domnall mac Amalgada; another invasion in 1099 ended in a further truce arranged by Domnall; in 1100 he also negotiated a settlement between Ua Lochlainn and the captive king of the Ulaid. 
A major crisis for Ua Lochlainn came in 1103 after Ua Briain had invaded the north in 1101, on which occasion he had avenged Ua Lochlainn's 1090 destruction of Kincora by pillaging Ailech, after which yet another year's truce was arranged by the head of the church of Armagh in 1102. The situation was complicated by the appearance of Magnus, king of Norway, in the Irish Sea and an alliance between Magnus and Ua Briain, also in 1102. The next year the Ulaid revolted against Ua Lochlainn; Ua Briain brought an army north to give them aid, basing himself at Mag Coba (in west Down). After an inconclusive stand-off at Armagh, in August Ua Briain divided his forces, keeping some in Mag Coba, and leading others on a raid into Dal nAraidi (local opponents of the Ulaid); this raid was expensive in casualties, and Ua Lochlainn meanwhile attacked and defeated the detachments left in Mag Coba, compelling Ua Briain to withdraw. Magnus landed in Down, where he was killed in a skirmish, also in August. Ua Briain's grand combination of the forces of Munster, Leinster (including Osraige), together, probably, with Magnus of Norway, had ended in defeat. 
After 1103 there was a phase in which Ua Lochlainn's control of the north was now reasonably secure. Ua Briain, however, still controlled Mide and was thus the leading king in Ireland. In the period 1111-13, however, there were further difficulties with the Ulaid, leading to Ua Lochlainn dividing the province between different rulers; at the same period he appears to have placed his son Niall in the kingship of Cenel Conaill. In 1114 Ua Briain fell ill, and Ua Lochlainn could then pursue his ambitions in the southern half of Ireland, in abeyance since 1088. His control on the north was now much more secure than it had been at the beginning of his reign. Moreover, Ua Lochlainn had also negotiated an alliance with Toirdelbach Ua Conchobair, king of Connacht: Ua Lochlainn's daughter, Mor (died 1122), is named as Ua Conchobair's wife, while another daughter, Derbfhorgaill (died 1151), bore Ua Conchobair three sons, Domnall, Aed, and Cathal. 
Yet, in the final years of his life, after the death of Muirchertach Ua Briain in 1119, Ua Lochlainn's place as chief challenger to the power of Munster was taken by Ua Conchobair. In 1120 Ua Lochlainn mounted an expedition to assist Murchad Ua Mael Shechlainn, king of Mide 'against Connacht' ('Annals of Loch Ce', s.a. 1120). Domnall Ua Lochlainn died aged seventy-three on 9 February 1121 at Derry, where he was buried. He is styled 'high-king of Ireland' in his obituary notice in the annals of Ulster (compiled at Armagh and consequently favourable to Cenel nEogain). His patronage of Armagh is illustrated by the endowment of a shrine for St Patrick's bell, which bears the inscription 'Or[oit] do Domhnall U Lachlaind lasin dernad in clocsa' ('a prayer for Domnall Ua Lochlainn by whom this bell was made'). 
Domnall Ua Lochlainn's second wife, Benmide, was the mother of Niall, killed in 1119, aged twenty-eight, by the Cenel Moen (a branch of Cenel nEogain located around Lifford in Donegal). A son, Muirchertach, was killed 'unjustly', according to the annals of Ulster, in 1114. Domnall's son Conchobar, who directly succeeded him, was slain by the men of Mag nItha in 1136. Another son, Magnus, was slain in 1128 or 1129. 


@@@@@


doc= 20745


Mac Lochlainn, Muirchertach (d. 1166), high-king of Ireland, was the son of Niall, son of Domnall Mac Lochlainn. He was king of the Cenel nEogain (whose land, Tir Eoghain, gave its name to modern Tyrone), and his province-kingdom extended from the plains in the vicinity of the primatial city of Armagh to the Inishowen peninsula in Donegal. The family took its surname from Muirchertach's great-great-grandfather, Lochlainn (died 1023), who was in turn almost certainly the great-great-grandson of Domnall, son of Aed Findliath (died 879), king of Ailech. Muirchertach succeeded to the kingship following the death of his uncle, Conchobar, in 1136. He defeated the petty kings of the northern Cenel nEogain in 1139 and 1142, though in the latter he was severely wounded and was deposed in the following year. In 1145 he recovered the kingship of Cenel nEogain with the aid of the Airgialla and Cenel Conaill. Having secured his position in Tir Eoghain he was victorious in battle against the east Ulster kingdom of Ulaid in 1147. In the following year he replaced the reigning king of Ulaid with a more acceptable kinsman and secured the hostages of Ulaid, Airgialla, and Cenel Conaill at an assembly at Armagh, a gesture of submission that made him the paramount king throughout the north of Ireland. In 1149 he reasserted control over Ulaid and led a cavalry march south to receive the hostages of Breifne and Mide; he then went to Dublin to receive the submission of the Ostmen (its Hiberno-Scandinavian rulers) and the hostages of their overlord, Diarmait Mac Murchada of Leinster. 
This success made Mac Lochlainn a contender for the high-kingship of Ireland, a position then occupied by the ageing Connacht king, Toirrdelbach Ua Conchobair. In 1150 Mac Lochlainn obtained the hostages of Connacht, divided Mide in three, and in the following year launched an invasion of Connacht, again obtaining hostages as a sign of his supremacy. In 1152 he and Ua Conchobair, having made peace, joined forces and again partitioned Mide. However, Muirchertach and Ua Conchobair soon found themselves at war again. In 1153 Mac Lochlainn routed the forces of Connacht led by Toirrdelbach's son, Ruaidri, while in the following year the Connacht fleet scored only a limited success in a major naval encounter off the Inishowen coast, primarily because Muirchertach had assembled a fleet from Galloway, Kintyre, and Man in order to withstand it. Although his forces suffered losses, Muirchertach was now in a sufficiently strong position to parade his armies through Connacht and Breifne, and when he reached Dublin the Ostmen proclaimed him as their king; he then granted them twelve hundred cows as 'tuarastal' or wages, a sign of his overlordship. Implicitly, this deed secured him the high-kingship of Ireland, though his reign is generally dated from the death of Toirrdelbach Ua Conchobair in 1156. 
Mac Lochlainn invaded Osraige in alliance with Diarmait Mac Murchada in 1156. A year later he was in Munster, which he repartitioned, and having laid siege to Limerick was granted its kingship by the Ostmen. It may have been in commemoration of this circuit of Ireland that the propagandist poem known as 'Moirthimchell Eirenn Uile' was composed. His reign did not go unchallenged, however. Ruaidri Ua Conchobair attacked Tir Eoghain in 1157 and 1158, and in the next year he and his allies, Ua Ruairc and Ua Briain, challenged Muirchertach to battle at Ardee, in Louth, but were severely routed. Mac Lochlainn then ravaged Breifne, billeted his troops on Mide for a month, and raided Connacht; and in 1161, having taken the hostages of Breifne, he accepted the formal submission of Ruaidri Ua Conchobair and Diarmait Mac Murchada and was declared by the annals 'king of Ireland without opposition'. 
As king, Mac Lochlainn was a munificent benefactor of the church. The 'Book of Kells' contains a document by which he granted the church of Ardbraccan in Mide freedom from the exactions of secular rulers. Gill Meic Liac, head of the church of Armagh, made a circuit of Tir Eoghain in 1150 and 1162 and received tribute. In the same year Muirchertach gave the abbot of Derry, Flaithbertach Ua Brolchain, a gold ring and other gifts and allowed him too to make a circuit of Tir Eoghain. In 1162 both king and abbot began an extensive building programme in Derry, culminating in 1164 in the erection of a ninety-foot-long church. In this same year, Muirchertach joined with the archbishop of Armagh in opposing the appointment of Flaithbertach to the abbacy of Iona. He was present at the consecration of the Cistercian abbey of Mellifont in 1157, at which he not only granted to the monks cows and gold but lands in the kingdom of Mide. At about the same time he issued a charter to the Cistercian house of Newry, Down, in which he styled himself 'rex totius' 'Hiberniae' ('King of all Ireland') and by which he made a grant of lands in the vicinity to this house too. 
Mac Lochlainn sought something akin to territorial ownership of the lands he conquered. In 1163, Diarmait Ua Mael Sechlainn paid him 100 ounces of gold for the kingship of western Mide. When Muirchertach invaded Ulaid in 1165, not only did he temporarily banish its king, Eochaid Mac Duinn Sleibe, but gave away lands in the latter's kingdom to Donnchad Ua Cerbaill of Airgialla and the church of Saul, in Down. In the following year, however, he treacherously blinded Eochaid, which incident brought about his own downfall. Tir Eoghain was invaded by the forces of Airgialla and Breifne and, in a battle in south Armagh, Muirchertach was slain and was buried in the 'mausoleum of the kings' at Armagh (at which the churchmen of Derry took grave offence). His death greatly weakened the Mac Lochlainn family and ultimately paved the way for the restoration of the Ui Neill to power in Ulster. He was succeeded as high-king of Ireland by Ruaidri Ua Conchobair of Connacht, and, because Muirchertach's demise left exposed his ally, Diarmait Mac Murchada, who was thereupon banished overseas, his death indirectly precipitated the Anglo-Norman invasion of Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 20746


O'Loghlen, Sir Colman Michael, second baronet (1819-1877), judge and politician, eldest son of Sir Michael O'Loghlen, first baronet (1789-1842), master of the rolls in Ireland, and Bidelia, daughter of Daniel Kelly of Dublin, was born on 20 September 1819. He was educated at private schools in England and at University College, London, and graduated BA at London University. He had entered the Middle Temple in 1837, and in 1840 he was called to the Irish bar and went on the Munster circuit. As a junior he took a number of briefs in the state trials at Dublin and Clonmel in 1848, at which a number of Young Irelanders were tried in the wake of their failed insurrection. His performances drew compliments from bench and bar alike, and as one of his clients was to write, 'He resolutely refuses fees. In fact he spends money in our behalf instead of making money by us.' 
O'Loghlen took silk in 1852. From 1856 to 1859 he was chairman of Carlow quarter sessions, and from 1859 to 1861 he held the same position in co. Mayo. In 1863, standing as a Liberal, he was elected MP for County Clare, and he held the seat until his death. In 1865 he was made a third serjeant-at-law for Ireland, and he became second serjeant in the following year. He was appointed judge-advocate-general in Gladstone's ministry and a member of the privy council in December 1868; he held the former office until November 1870. O'Loghlen also introduced and carried the bill of 1867 which enabled Roman Catholics to obtain the position of lord chancellor of Ireland. 
A member of the Stephen's Green Club (Dublin) and the Reform Club (London), O'Loghlen's unassuming manner and good nature made him universally popular. He died suddenly, on 22 July 1877, on board the mailboat while crossing from Holyhead to Kingstown. He was buried in the family vault in co. Clare. He was unmarried, and his brother Bryan succeeded to the title. 


@@@@@


doc= 20747


O'Loghlen, Sir Michael, first baronet (1789-1842), judge, born in Port, co. Clare, in October 1789, was the third son of Colman O'Loghlen (1745-1810), of Port, and his second wife, Susannah, daughter of Michael Finucane MD, of Ennis. He was educated at the Erasmus Smith School, Ennis, and at Trinity College, Dublin, where he was admitted in 1805 and graduated BA in 1809. He entered the Middle Temple, London, in the same year and was called to the Irish bar in Michaelmas term 1811, after which he joined the Munster circuit. On 3 September 1817 he married Bidelia, daughter of Daniel Kelly of Dublin. 
O'Loghlen's first distinction as an advocate was gained in 1815, in a case involving important questions of law in which he was Daniel O'Connell's junior. The case came on for argument in the king's bench the day after the fatal duel between O'Connell and Captain J. N. D'Esterre, and O'Connell was in consequence absent. O'Loghlen asked for a postponement, but, the other side objecting, he argued the case alone, obtained judgment in his favour, and was specially complimented by the court on the ability and learning of his argument. He became a favourite with O'Connell, was constantly employed as his junior, and succeeded to a large part of his practice when O'Connell became absorbed in politics. 
In a sketch by R. L. Sheil, written in 1828, O'Loghlen is described as an excellent lawyer, a master of the practice of the courts, in receipt of an immense income, and a great favourite with the judges because of the brevity, simplicity, and clearness with which his points were put. His custom was on receipt of a fee to take the shilling from each guinea and put it in a box for his wife, and at the end of one term Mrs O'Loghlen is said to have received 1500 shillings. On the passing of the 'Catholic Emancipation Act' (April 1829), the leading Roman Catholic barristers expected to be made king's counsel. The honour was somewhat unfairly deferred until Trinity term 1830, when, at the instance of Lord Francis Leveson-Gower (Lord Egerton), then chief secretary, O'Loghlen, Sheil, and two other Catholics were called within the bar. 
In January 1831 O'Loghlen was appointed third serjeant, and in 1832 he was elected a bencher of King's Inns. In the same year he was made second serjeant, and stood unsuccessfully as the Liberal candidate for the city of Dublin. On 21 October 1834 he was appointed solicitor-general for Ireland in Lord Melbourne's first government. At the general election in January 1835 he was returned for Dungarvan, and on April 29 of that year, on the formation of Lord Melbourne's second government, he was again appointed solicitor-general for Ireland. On 31 August 1835 he was appointed attorney-general. In November 1836 he was appointed a baron of the court of exchequer in Ireland, and in the following January he succeeded Sir William McMahon as master of the rolls. He was the first Catholic law officer and the first Catholic judge in Ireland since the reign of James II. On 16 July 1838, on the coronation of the queen, he was created a baronet. O'Loghlen died in George Street, Hanover Square, London, on 28 September 1842, and was buried at Recan, co. Clare. 
Both at the bar and on the bench O'Loghlen enjoyed a high reputation. O'Connell, writing to Lord Duncannon in October 1834, said: 'Than O'Loghlen, a more amiable man never lived -- a more learned lawyer, a more sensible, discreet, and, at the same time, a more powerful advocate never belonged to the Irish bar. He never made an enemy, he never lost a friend... He possesses in an eminent degree all the best judicial qualities. ('Correspondence', 490)' On the bench O'Loghlen justified O'Connell's forecast of his judicial powers. 'There never was a judge who gave more entire satisfaction to both the suitors and the profession; perhaps never one sitting alone and deciding so many cases of whose decisions there were fewer reversals' ('Irish Equity Reports', 5.130). He was very courteous, carried patience almost to a fault, and was especially kind and considerate to young men appearing before him. Of his family of four sons and four daughters, three sons followed their father to the bar: the eldest son, Sir Colman Michael O'Loghlen (1819-1877), became judge-advocate-general; his third son, Sir Bryan O'Loghlen (1828-1905), had a political career in Australia and was premier of Victoria (1881-3). 


@@@@@


doc= 20748


Cuan ua Lothchain (d. 1024), Gaelic poet, is variously designated Ireland's 'chief poet' ('primeices', in, for example, the annals of Ulster, or 'ardfhili', in the annals of Inisfallen) and 'chief historian' ('primshenchaid', in the annals of Tigernach) in his obituary notices. There are no reliable data concerning his background or career: his family name is twice given as 'ua Leochain', suggesting a connection with the petty kings of Luigne in Meath; but this variant is too isolated to justify preferring it to the standard form. The annals of Clonmacnoise, surviving only in a seventeenth-century English translation, record a tradition that after the lapse of the high-kingship in 1022 Ireland was governed by Cuan together with one Corcan Cleirech, 'like a free state, & not like a monarchy'; whatever the origin of this fantastic doctrine, it can have no historical basis. 
Most of the poems plausibly attributed to Cuan deal with the lore of places in the midlands: 'A choemu criche Cuind chain', on Tailtiu in Meath, 'Ata sund carn ui Chathbath', on Carn Furbaide near Granard, 'Druim Criaich, cete cet cuan', on Drumcree, Westmeath, and 'Sid Nechtain sund forsint shleib', on the River Boyne, have all been edited by E. Gwynn (Gwynn, vols. 3 and 4); 'Temair Breg, baile na fian' and 'Temair, toga na tulach', both on Tara, have been edited by M. Joynt and by E. Gwynn (Gwynn, vol. 1); and a poem on the Shannon, 'Saerainm Sinna saigid dun', may also be his work (Gwynn, vol. 3). Besides the antiquarian topics with which they purport to be primarily concerned, some of these poems deal with the reign of Mael Sechnaill mac Domnaill (high-king of Ireland 980-1002, 1014-22), evidently Cuan's principal patron. 'Druim Criaich' asserts the principle that the high-kingship should never pass from father to son, in justification of Mael Sechnaill's own succession; while 'A choemu' praises him for reviving the royal assembly at Tailtiu in 1007, and calls him 'chosen king of Tara... river Euphrates surging aloft, sole warrior of Europe'. Other poems describe the origin of Mael Sechnaill's dynasty ('Temair Breg', where Tara is called 'a second Rome') and the exemplary rule of his legendary ancestor Cormac mac Airt ('Temair, toga'). In the only surviving non-toponymic composition, 'A fhir iadas in tech' (edited by M. Dillon), the poet asks to be admitted to Tara on the strength of his knowledge of the things which are lucky and unlucky for the king. Cuan seems, however, also to have courted the favour of lesser figures: his poem on Drumcree includes a quatrain praising Lachtna mac Taidc, an otherwise forgotten member of the local dynasty of the Ui Gadra of Luigne. 
The annals of Ulster, closely followed by most of the other annals which speak of his death, state that Cuan was killed in the region of Tethba, Westmeath: 'in the same hour the company which had killed him putrified; that was a poet's miracle'. A more realistic account is provided by the annals of Inisfallen: 'the man who killed him was killed immediately, i.e. the son of Gilla Ultain son of Rodub'. If Cuan's murderer was a nephew of the Fiachra, son of Rodub, who killed the lord of Tethba in 995, this would make him a member of the Muinter Maelshinna: this was in fact a Tethba family, occupying the barony of Kilkenny West in Westmeath; and the name Gilla Ultain occurs elsewhere in its pedigree. The background of the poet's death in 1024 is impossible to recover in detail, but its broader outlines can be surmised: the petty kingdoms of the western midlands were at this time exceptionally violent and chaotic, and there would have been nothing to protect Cuan there after the passing of his great patron and the eclipse of the national monarchy to which he had aspired. 


@@@@@


doc= 20749


O Maoilchonaire, Fearfeasa (fl. 1630-1646), antiquary and poet, was born some time in the late sixteenth century in Cluain Plocain (Cluain Bolcain) or Ballymulconry, in the parish of Kiltrustan, co. Roscommon, the chief place of the Ui Mhaoilchonaire family. He was the son of Lochlann O Maoilchonaire, a member of the younger branch of a family which from antiquity had been hereditary bards and chroniclers to the kings of Connaught. Almost nothing is known of his career beyond his collaboration between 1630 and 1633 with Michael O Cleirigh OFM, Cucoigcriche O Duibhgennain, and Cucoigcriche O Cleirigh on a series of major historical enterprises, including a compilation of the genealogies of the kings and saints of Ireland, an edition of an eleventh-century pseudo-historical account of the successive prehistoric invasions of Ireland known as 'Leabhar gabhala', and, above all, a history of Ireland from the creation up to their own time traditionally known as the annals of the four masters. The last work constitutes the largest single collection of annalistic material relating to Ireland. Because it is largely a copy of older manuscript material no longer extant, it now preserves a unique record of events over considerable spans of time. O Maoilchonaire collaborated with Michael O Cleirigh and the other chroniclers on the first part only of this multi-volume work, covering events to 1333, the transcription of which was completed in 1632 in the Franciscan convent of Drowes or Bundrowes on Donegal Bay, co. Donegal. He states that he checked the old manuscripts of the martyrology of Gorman, of which a transcript had been made by Brother Michael. It is now the only copy remaining of this liturgical calendar. Since O Maoilchonaire was descended from a family of hereditary antiquaries it is very likely that he not only gave his services as scribe and chronicler but also contributed some source material to the enterprise, including a 'Book of Cluain Plocain', referred to in a number of sources. Moreover, his name appears three times after O Cleirigh's in the dedications and prefaces to the works mentioned above, which preceded the compilation of the annals, indicating his importance to the scholarly enterprise, but in third place in the dedicatory preface to the annals. His handwriting has not yet been identified in the original manuscripts. 
When Tuileagna O Maoilchonaire, also a Franciscan author and a kinsman of Fearfeasa O Maoilchonaire, tried over a number of years, between 1638 and 1646, to prevent publication of the works compiled by O Cleirigh and his collaborators, Fearfeasa was the chief respondent, since O Cleirigh was dead. He appeared before a provincial chapter of Irish Franciscans at Multyfarnam in August 1641, where the decision went against Tuileagna. The latter's persistence finally elicited two responses from Fearfeasa in Irish, the first in an open letter entitled 'To the reader -- a reply' (printed in Walsh's edition of the 'Genealogiae', 6.150-53), the second a long reply in verse entitled 'Beag tairthear [do]n tagra mbaoith' ('Foolish debate achieves nothing'; Mhag Craith, no. 39). Both were penned in 1646, and nothing further is heard of Fearfeasa after that date. The annals and other compilations were not published until the nineteenth century, not because of Tuileagna's objections, but because of the extreme poverty of the Louvain community. Notwithstanding his long association with the Franciscan order and this enterprise, Fearfeasa O Maoilchonaire was a layman. His son Peadar was poet to the O Rodaighe family of co. Leitrim, specifically to Tadhg O Rodaighe. About six poems by him are extant. 
The O Maoilchonaire family was one of the most distinguished learned families in Ireland, supplying a long line of important poets, chroniclers, and ecclesiastics. O'Reilly's 'Catalogue of Irish Writers' lists fourteen poets of that name from 1310 onwards. Fearfeasa's kinsman Flaithri O Maoilchonaire (Florence Conry, as he is more usually known), archbishop of Tuam, in 1607 founded St Anthony's College, Louvain, where Michael O Cleirigh and his collaborators sought to publish their work. Muirghes mac Paidin O Maoilchonaire copied the 'Book of Fenagh' from an earlier exemplar for the O Rodaighe family, under whose patronage Fearfeasa's son Peadar later worked. It is written in both prose and verse and purports to be a statement of the dues owing to the high king of Ireland from his sub-kings and of his reciprocal duties to them. The name O Maoilchonaire is of frequent occurrence in the fiants. In particular, a fiant of Elizabeth I in 1585 names a 'Ferfesse O Mulconry of same' (that is of Clonpluckane, or Ballymulconry, co. Roscommon), who must have been a kinsman of Fearfeasa. A poem attributed to 'Ferfesa mac Lochlainn Ui Mhaoilchonaire' written in honour of Calvach Rua O Domhnaill of Connaught and entitled 'Mo chean do chuairt a Chalbhaigh', now preserved in an eighteenth-century manuscript in the National Library of Ireland, is almost certainly Fearfeasa's. Nothing further is known of him beyond these scraps of biography. Because of the appalling events brought on by the rising of 1641 and its aftermath, the earliest copies of the four masters' works survived for many years on the continent and were only brought back to Ireland in the nineteenth century and published. O Maoilchonaire's works are preserved in manuscripts in the libraries of the Royal Irish Academy and Trinity College, Dublin, in the Franciscan library at Killiney, the Bibliotheque Royale, Brussels, and the National Library of Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 20750


O'Mahony, Daniel, Count O'Mahony in the Castilian nobility (d. 1714), army officer in the French and Spanish services, colloquially known as 'le Fameux Mahoni', was the son of John O'Mahony of Coolcorkerane, Killarney, co. Kerry, and Mary Joan Moriarty, the daughter of Thady Moriarty of Castle Drum, Dingle, co. Kerry. His brother Dermod attained the rank of colonel in James II's Irish army, distinguishing himself at the Boyne and at Aughrim before being killed in Italy while serving with the Limerick regiment about 1706. Daniel O'Mahony, having attained the rank of captain in the Royal Irish foot guards during the Williamite wars, went to France in 1692, becoming major in the Limerick and Dillon regiments successively. 
O'Mahony served under Villeroy in northern Italy in late 1701, having command of Dillon's regiment during the absence of its colonel in January 1702, the regiment then being part of the 7000 strong garrison of the heavily fortified city of Cremona. In the early hours of 1 February O'Mahony awoke to find the Austrians under Prince Eugene had gained entrance to Cremona by a sewer and captured Villeroy and many French officers in their beds. Despite Austrian cavalry charging through the dark streets, he managed to rally a detachment of his regiment and held the Po gate. Over the next ten hours, although the surviving garrison was scattered in small bodies, mostly half dressed in the freezing winter weather and with few officers, this position formed the nucleus of an effective resistance to Eugene's occupation of the town. As O'Mahony obtained reinforcements he spread them along the ramparts, and kept up a galling fusillade on the enemy. This diversion gave the comte de Revel time to concentrate and reanimate French troops in the neighbourhood of the Mantua gate, and Eugene, finding himself between two fires, was forced into a precipitate retreat from the city. On account of O'Mahony's crucial service at Cremona, he was selected to carry the dispatch to Paris. Louis XIV accorded him an hour's private conference at Versailles, later relating to De Chamillart that he had never before known a person give such a fair and balanced account, yet display a personality that was both spirited yet agreeable. Saint-Simon confirmed this assessment, describing him as a man of wit and valour. Louis rewarded O'Mahony with the brevet of colonel, a pension of 1000 livres, and a present of 1000 louis d'or. From Versailles he proceeded to St Germain, where the Pretender, James III (James Francis Edward Stuart), knighted him. 
O'Mahony continued to serve in northern Italy under Vendome; he was appointed governor of Brescello upon its surrender on 28 July 1703, and in January 1704 he took part in Vendome's successes at San Sebastian and Castel de Bormida before leaving Italy. Efficient officers were urgently needed in the Spanish service, and Louis XIV had recommended O'Mahony to his nephew Philip V. He was appointed colonel of his own regiment of Irish dragoons (composed largely of deserters from the British expedition to Cadiz), and during the remainder of 1704 and the whole of 1705 served with distinction under Count Tilly. While placed at Murviedro in January 1706 to block the advance of Lord Peterborough's English relief column to Valencia, O'Mahony, being heavily outnumbered, was obliged to surrender, allowing Peterborough to pass. Despite this failure, Philip appointed him marechal-de-camp shortly thereafter. After his promotion he stormed and sacked Enguera, and in June defended Alicante for twenty-eight days against Sir John Leake despite an inadequate garrison, ramparts requiring constant repairs, and a severe wound of his own. Although obliged to surrender on 8 September, his troops marched out with the honours of war, being transported to Cadiz without loss of service. Early in 1707 he resumed his command in Valencia, and captured several towns from the allies. At the battle of Almanza on 25 April 1707 he performed distinguished service in command of a brigade of horse that included his own regiment of Irish dragoons. On 7 July he was again badly wounded at the siege of Denia. However, by December 1707 he was again in command of some 6000 regular troops in Valencia, capturing the important town of Alcoy on 2 January 1708. 
Appointed viceroy of Sicily in March 1709, with 3000 Spanish troops, including his own regiment of Irish dragoons, O'Mahony reached Messina in April. He suppressed several Austrian conspiracies, and his precautionary measures prevented the English fleet from landing any allied force. He returned to Spain in 1710 to command the cavalry of Philip's army, the king promoting him lieutenant-general; he had already, in 1706, been made a Castilian count. He subsequently served in the campaign of Ivaris, and on 20 August 1710 commanded the Spanish cavalry at the battle of Saragossa. Placed upon the extreme right, he opposed the Portuguese horse, which he utterly broke and drove into the Ebro. The Spanish cavalry, however, proved ill-disciplined and despite his best endeavours impetuously charged, riding over the enemy's artillery and far into their rear. In the meantime the main body of Philip's army had been defeated and was in retreat. O'Mahony rejoined it with the utmost difficulty. Although criticized for losing control of his men at Saragossa, he gained distinction at the head of Vendome's cavalry at the battle of Villaviciosa on 10 December 1710, Philip rewarding him by appointing him commander of the military order of St Iago. He led the pursuit into Aragon, capturing the stronghold of Illueca and Lieutenant-General Dom Antonio de Villaroel with a detachment of 660 men. He continued to act in Spain under Vendome until the cessation of hostilities in 1712, when he returned to France, where Louis XIV ennobled him. Before the end of that year O'Mahony, whose first wife, Cecily (Cecilia), daughter of George Weld of the old Catholic family of Lulworth Castle, Dorset, had died about 1708, married Charlotte, widow of Charles O'Brien, fifth Viscount Clare, and a sister of the duchess of Berwick, at St Germain. He did not, however, long survive his second marriage, dying at Ocana in Spain in January 1714. By his first marriage he left two sons, the elder being John Joseph, second Count O'Mahony, whose career included positions as lieutenant-general in the army of the Two Sicilies, inspector-general of cavalry and dragoons, governor of San Elmo, and commander of the order of Saint Januarius. His granddaughter Cecilia, styled Countess Mahony, married in May 1757 Benedetto, Prince Giustiniani. The younger son, Demetrius, became Spain's ambassador to Austria, dying at Vienna in 1776. Neither son left male descendants. 


@@@@@


doc= 20751


O'Mahony, John (1815-1877), Irish nationalist, born at Clonkilla, co. Cork, on 12 January 1815, was the son of Daniel O'Mahony and his wife. The family was one of minor Roman Catholic gentry, reputedly in long-standing conflict with the neighbouring magnates of Mitchelstown Castle, the earls of Kingston. 
O'Mahony was sent early in life to Dr Hamblin's school in Midleton, co. Cork, and entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1833, but never took a degree. He was a good Greek and Latin scholar, and always more or less devoted to linguistic and philological pursuits, especially in connection with the Irish language. In 1857 he published 'The history of Ireland from the earliest times to the English invasion, by Geoffrey Keating, D.D., translated from the original Gaelic, and copiously annotated'. It was at that time the best translation to have been published but was taken from a very imperfect text, and had evidently been executed (as O'Mahony himself confessed) in great haste. O'Mahony contributed to various Irish-American newspapers. His articles were mostly political, and generally somewhat ponderous in style. 
In the 1840s O'Mahony took up residence on a substantial family holding near Carrick-on-Suir, co. Tipperary. This was in the region where William Smith O'Brien and his associates attempted to start an insurrection in July 1848, and O'Mahony was one of the few local men of substance who rallied to them. For several weeks after the debacle at Ballingarry ended Smith O'Brien's venture, O'Mahony and some scores of followers remained under arms on the Tipperary-Kilkenny border near Ahenny. With the authorities offering a reward for his capture, O'Mahony eventually escaped on a schooner from Dungarvan to Newport in Wales and from there to France. For five years from late 1848 he lived in Paris, sharing impoverished lodgings with James Stephens. O'Mahony arrived in New York in January 1854 and quickly became involved in Irish-American revolutionary endeavours. 
The Emmet Monument Association was founded in 1855 by Michael Doheny, O'Mahony, and others, but it failed to effect anything. In late 1857, however, an envoy was sent, from a committee in New York composed of O'Mahony and his friends, to James Stephens in Dublin, with proposals for the foundation of a new secret organization in Ireland, with the object of overthrowing English rule and establishing an Irish republic. Stephens consented, under certain conditions, notably the sending over of definite sums of money at stated times. He founded the Irish Republican Brotherhood in Dublin in March 1858, and early in 1859 on a visit to New York he saw to the formation by his American allies of the Fenian Brotherhood. 'Fenian' is derived from the 'fianna', a legendary band of ancient Irish warriors, and the derivation was O'Mahony's. He is thus the author of the term which came in time to designate revolutionary Irish nationalism on both sides of the Atlantic. From the beginning O'Mahony was 'head centre' of the Fenian Brotherhood. In late 1860 he travelled to Ireland and, after visiting his relations, proceeded to Dublin, where in early 1861 he and Stephens met to review their plans. 
The American Civil War boosted the movement on both sides of the Atlantic, but expansion rendered the Fenian Brotherhood less amenable to O'Mahony's control. He could not resist the momentum that led to the summoning of a congress of the brotherhood at Chicago in November 1863. Here a representative form of government was adopted and, although O'Mahony was elected head centre, his authority was circumscribed. It was further diminished by the intrigues of James Stephens, who made a fund-raising visit in 1864. O'Mahony survived a second congress, at Cincinnati in January 1865, but a third, at Philadelphia in October 1865, saw him overthrown by a majority which put all power in the hands of a 'senate', from which he was excluded. 
In January 1866 O'Mahony was once again head centre but now of a splinter group. The senate wing called for an attack on British power in Canada, a policy denounced by the O'Mahony wing as a diversion. But in April 1866, in an attempt to upstage their opponents, O'Mahony's supporters set out to occupy the small island of Campobello, belonging to New Brunswick but situated close to the coast of Maine. The attempt was prevented by the American navy, and it cost those involved dearly in terms of resources, morale, and prestige. After arriving in America in May 1866, James Stephens took control of the O'Mahony wing, promising an invasion of Ireland by the year's end. When this failed to materialize, morale and prestige were further undermined. The Fenian Brotherhood dragged on in a precarious existence. For several years O'Mahony remained head centre, but neither he nor it thenceforward had any appreciable influence on Irish or Irish-American politics. 
O'Mahony was physically a very powerful and handsome man. Although he took part in no action, O'Mahony was briefly in charge of the 99th regiment of the New York national guard during the civil war and so acquired the title of colonel. Before leaving Ireland in 1848, O'Mahony had made over his property to his sister Mrs Jane Mandeville. For most of his subsequent career he depended precariously on politics and journalism for a living. He never married. A friend found him sick and in great poverty a few days before he died in New York on 7 February 1877. His remains, which were brought back to Ireland, were followed to Glasnevin cemetery on 4 March 1877 by a great concourse of people. 


@@@@@


doc= 20752


O'Malley, George (1780-1843), army officer, was the son of George O'Malley and Elizabeth, 'nee' Clarke. He was a volunteer in the Castlebar yeomanry during the attack on the town by the French on 27 August 1798, and was present when it was attacked a fortnight later by a strong Irish rebel force, which was defeated by the yeomanry and a company of Fraser fencibles. O'Malley was confirmed as a lieutenant in the Castlebar yeomanry by Lord Cornwallis in recognition of his services, and soon after joined the North Mayo militia, from which he brought volunteers to the 13th regiment. He was appointed ensign on 23 February 1800, serving with the 13th at Ferrol and in Egypt, where he was severely wounded in the action of 13 March 1801, and afterwards at Malta and Gibraltar. For his success in recruiting in Ireland he received a company in the new 2nd battalion 89th regiment on 25 April 1805, and served with it until Colonel Henry Augustus Dillon raised the 101st regiment, in which O'Malley was appointed major. In Mayo he assisted in forming the regiment. He served with it in Ireland and Jersey, and was dispatched with 300 men to Saint John, New Brunswick, in 1808, when war with the United States was imminent, and the Americans were reportedly collecting a large force near that place. For his services in command of the garrison, and the exemplary conduct of the troops under his command, he received the freedom of the city on 19 July 1809. As major, he commanded the regiment for four years in Jamaica, obtaining the brevet rank of lieutenant-colonel on 4 June 1813. (The regiment was disbanded as the 100th in 1817.) 
O'Malley's applications for employment in Europe were initially unsuccessful, but on 27 April 1815 he was appointed to the 2nd battalion 44th foot, and commanded it in Picton's division at Quatre Bras and Waterloo. On 18 June the battalion lost very heavily, being reduced to five officers and 200 men. O'Malley was twice wounded and had two horses shot under him, but he remained in command, for which he was made CB. He commanded the battalion in France until it was disbanded in 1816, when he was placed on half pay. He was appointed major 38th regiment on 12 August 1819 and lieutenant-colonel 88th Connaught Rangers on 2 June 1825. He commanded that regiment, which he brought to a fine state of discipline, until promoted major-general on 23 November 1841. He died in London on 16 May 1843, and was buried at Murisk Abbey, co. Mayo, Ireland. A statue was erected to him at Castlebar, co. Mayo. 


@@@@@


doc= 20753


O'Malley, Grainne (fl. 1577-1597), chieftain's wife and pirate, was the daughter of Owen Dubhdara O'Malley, chief, lord of Umhall Uachtarach or Upper Owle in the barony of Murrisk, co. Mayo, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Conchobhar Og Mac Conchobhair O'Malley of Moher, co. Mayo. The Anglicized version of her Gaelic name, Grainne, became the basis for her name in folklore, Granuaile. The O'Malleys were a seafaring family with a reputation for piracy off the north and west coast of Ireland. 
Very little is known of O'Malley's early life. She was probably brought up in the heart of her family's territory in co. Mayo. Her first husband was Donal O'Flaherty, chief, son of Gilldubh O'Flaherty, and lord of a sept of the O'Flahertys, based in Connemara, co. Galway. They had a son, Owen. By the time of the first recorded references to O'Malley in the late 1570s, Donal had died and she was married to Richard an Iarainn Burke (died 1583), chief 'tanaiste' (designated successor) to the MacWilliam Burke, chief of the Burkes of lower Connaught, co. Mayo. They had one son, Theobald (died 1629). Richard an Iarainn's territory lay in the barony of Burrishoole, adjacent to the O'Malley lands in Murrisk. When Sir Henry Sidney, lord deputy, visited Galway in 1577 he recorded meeting O'Malley, whom he described as 'a most famous femynyne sea captain'. She offered him the service of her three galleys and 200 men. According to Sidney, O'Malley 'brought with her her husband, for she was aswell by sea as by land well more than Mrs Mate with him' (LPL, Carew MS 601, fol. 111). Sidney did not avail himself of O'Malley's overtures of assistance and shortly after their encounter she was arrested by Gerald Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond, and spent almost two years in prison in Limerick and Dublin. Her crime was not recorded, but it is likely that her arrest was motivated more by Desmond's desire to demonstrate his loyalty to the government than by any serious threat represented by O'Malley. 
In the spring of 1579 O'Malley was released, and later that year Richard an Iarainn raided the Galway region, partly as a means of dividing crown forces which were concentrated on controlling the outbreak of Desmond's rebellion in Munster and partly to bolster his own military standing among the Burkes. Through O'Malley's intercession he submitted to the president of Connaught, Sir Nicholas Malby, in 1580, and at the end of the year he succeeded to the position of MacWilliam Burke with government support. He was knighted in 1581. There were, however, limits to Burke's and O'Malley's co-operation with the crown authorities, and over the next two years she is recorded helping him to resist further interference by government officials in the Burke lordship. Richard an Iarainn died in 1583. On her husband's death, O'Malley, according to her own account, 'gathered together all her own followers and with 1000 head of cows and mares' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/170, no. 63) went to live in Carraighowley Castle, co. Mayo, on part of her late husband's territory, where she continued to 'maintain herself and her people by sea and land' (ibid., no. 64). She may initially have established friendly relations with the new president of Connaught, Sir Richard Bingham, but she and her sons soon fell out with his regime. Owen was killed by the president's brother George Bingham in 1586 and O'Malley was imprisoned and threatened with death. Theobald was maintained in the president's household for some time as a pledge. 
O'Malley was implicated in the Burke rebellions of 1586 and 1588 by Sir Richard Bingham, who accused her of drawing Scottish mercenary soldiers into co. Mayo. Her actions suggest, however, that she was primarily concerned to protect the interests of her immediate family and particularly those of Theobald. By 1591 Theobald had emerged as the leading Burke and the strongest contender for the position of MacWilliam but despite submitting to the government he was still regarded with suspicion. Her son's arrest precipitated O'Malley's visit to Elizabeth I in the summer of 1593. A remarkable aspect of O'Malley's petitions was that she acted as spokesperson for the men in her family. She asked the queen for the release of her son and of her brother, who had also been arrested by Bingham. She also requested that her two sons and two other male members of the Burke family be given letters patent for their lands. As a widow under English common law, O'Malley also laid claim to dower from the land of the O'Malleys and of the O'Flahertys. In a much quoted passage she explained that a widow under Gaelic law had no right to her husband's land. The royal visit was a success from O'Malley's point of view. Bingham was ordered by Elizabeth to release Theobald and to grant O'Malley maintenance from her husbands' lands. As a demonstration of loyalty, O'Malley claimed that she had 'procured all her sons, cousins and followers of the O'Malleys', with a number of galleys (some newly built on her return from London) to assist the Elizabethan forces in the Mayo area (TNA: PRO, SP 63/177, no. 36). The Irish administration was, none the less, slow to implement the queen's instructions and in 1595 O'Malley made another visit to London, renewing her requests for herself and her male relatives. 
The London administration's endorsement of O'Malley's requests was rooted in the absence of substantial evidence that she had participated in rebellion against the crown despite the strong assertions of Bingham that she, or at least her sons, had done so. Crown support for O'Malley was vindicated during the 1590s when her son and she assisted the government with their galleys. In 1597 Theobald made an agreement with the English administration which granted him the lands of MacWilliam in return for his support for government troops. With the exception of the Bingham era of the late 1580s, the strategy of O'Malley, Richard an Iarainn, and Theobald appears to have been one of negotiated co-operation with the English administration in Ireland. This was successful in the sense that Theobald emerged at the end of the sixteenth century as the greatest landowner in co. Mayo and was created Viscount Mayo in 1627. 
The date of O'Malley's death is not recorded, but it was probably in the first decade of the seventeenth century. She is remarkable as being the only woman from sixteenth-century Gaelic Ireland who is recorded as taking a leadership role within her sept. Despite her notoriety among English officials, however, there are no references to her in Gaelic historical sources, a reflection, perhaps, of her relatively minor status within the politics of the north-west of the late sixteenth century. Apart from her two sons, O'Malley had a daughter, Margaret, although it is not known which husband was the father. In later centuries O'Malley's life became the topic of folklore stories which celebrated her piratical and military achievements. 


@@@@@


doc= 20754


O'Malley, Thaddeus (1796-1877), Roman Catholic priest and political writer, was born at Garryowen, near Limerick. At the age of twenty-three he completed his training for the Roman Catholic priesthood and obtained a post in America. In 1827 he was suspended by his ecclesiastical superior, the Rt Revd John England, bishop of Charleston, for difficulties caused by his independence of spirit. On his return to Ireland, he was attached to the cathedral in Marlborough Street, Dublin, where he officiated as an assistant priest under Archbishop Daniel Murray. 
After the death of the bishop of Kildare and Leighlin, James Warren Doyle (1786-1834), who had been a powerful advocate for the Irish poor, O'Malley took up the demand for a poor law for Ireland in a series of public letters. He also supported a system of national education, but was suspended by Archbishop Murray for sending an intemperate and caustic letter to Archbishop MacHale in defence of Murray's own views on national schools; he was restored to his position as priest after a short time. He then published a further tract in favour of state education entitled 'A Sketch of the State of Popular Education in Holland, Prussia, Belgium, and France' (1840). 
O'Malley was appointed rector of the Catholic University of Malta by the British government, but was rebuked for introducing reforms to student discipline there. When he asserted that protestant laymen did not have the right to interfere in a Catholic ecclesiastical institution, he was dismissed from his post. He returned to Dublin, where in 1845 he started a newspaper called the 'Social Economist', which soon fell into disfavour with the Catholic church because of some articles which challenged the enforced celibacy of clerics and advocated marriage for the priesthood. It was a lively and irreverent periodical, one column being headed 'Sips of Punch'. Differing with Daniel O'Connell on the question of the complete repeal of the 'Act of Union', he urged the establishment of a federal parliament for Ireland. The differences of opinion between the two men were publicly debated, and many came over to O'Malley's point of view, which was further publicized in the new newspaper which he set up, 'The Federalist'. He then turned his attention to an attempt to unite Old and Young Ireland. Old Ireland as represented by O'Connell advocated public pressure, whereas Young Ireland supported armed conflict as the means to liberate Ireland. From about 1850 to 1870, O'Malley retired from controversy, and lived privately in a back lane of Dublin. 
O'Malley returned to public debate in 1870 with the inauguration by Isaac Butt of the home-rule movement, which he supported with enthusiasm, speaking and writing in its defence. He also published the anonymous 'Harmony in Religion', which urged changes in ecclesiastical discipline within the Catholic church and alleged that there was a breach between the head of the Catholic church in England, Cardinal H. E. Manning, and its head in Ireland, Cardinal Paul Cullen. For this O'Malley was strongly rebuked by Cullen. His last publication, 'Home Rule on the Basis of Federalism' (1873), went into a second edition, and was inscribed 'To the Irish Conservative Party'. 
O'Malley was a controversial figure whose taste for polemic made him an exasperating priest to his ecclesiastical superiors, and whose consistent urging for change within the discipline of the priesthood was out of step with prevailing Catholic emphases. But he was also capable of rousing popular opinion to his side, and was entirely orthodox in matters of Catholic doctrine. He died at his lodgings at 1 Henrietta Street, Dublin, on 2 January 1877, leaving possessions worth less than $50, and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 20755


O'Meara, Barry Edward (b. in or after 1770?, d. 1836), surgeon, was born in Ireland, the son of Jeremiah O'Meara, variously described as an army officer and a member of the legal profession, and a Miss Murphy, sister of Edmund Murphy MA of Trinity College, Dublin. Different sources give the year of his birth as 1770, 1778, and 1786. He is said to have been a member of the Irish medical family of whom Dermod Meara was a member. He is also said to have been educated at Trinity College, Dublin, and to have been a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, but there is no record of his affiliation to either institution, and his granddaughter's religion and particularly his ready acceptance into Napoleon's household suggest that he may have been a Roman Catholic, in which case his attendance at Trinity College would have been impossible. It is similarly impossible to substantiate the suggestion that he trained in surgery in London. He joined the 62nd regiment in 1804 as an assistant surgeon and served in Sicily, Egypt, and Calabria, but was cashiered after acting as second in a duel while in Sicily. He joined the navy as an assistant surgeon and served initially on the 'Victorious' off Sicily in 1810. After further service on the 'Espiegle' and the 'Goliath' (58 guns) he chanced to be on the 'Bellerophon' (74 guns) on 7 August 1815 when Napoleon came on board to surrender himself. O'Meara's professional skill and knowledge of Italian commended him to Napoleon, whom he agreed to accompany to the island of St Helena as his personal surgeon, once he had official permission to undertake this duty while remaining officially in naval service. The party arrived at St Helena on board the 'Northumberland' on 15 October 1815. They were housed at Longwood House, on the Deadwood plain, where O'Meara became not only Napoleon's medical adviser but also his confidant. 
Relations between Napoleon's household and the British authorities were initially fairly cordial, though Napoleon's domestic arrangements were uncomfortable and solitary residence on the remote and inhospitable island was hardly the outcome he had had in mind when he surrendered himself. However, with the arrival in April 1816 of Sir Hudson Lowe, who in 1815 had been appointed governor of the island, matters deteriorated markedly. Some see Lowe's restrictions on Napoleon's household as petty and arbitrary; others see them as evidence that he was dutifully if over-assiduously fulfilling his charge of guarding Napoleon. Personal relations between Napoleon and Lowe were always poor and when they collapsed completely O'Meara initially acted as a channel for information between Plantation House and Longwood House. Eventually however relations between O'Meara and Lowe also broke down. Lowe confined O'Meara to Longwood House. At this O'Meara resigned, whereon Lowe ordered him off the island with little notice. He left the island in July 1818 and returned to England. Some have interpreted O'Meara's actions as part of the systematic and deliberate irritation of the authorities by Napoleon's household, while others have interpreted them as the result of a genuine feeling that the British authorities had acted at least shabbily and at worst deceitfully in their treatment of Napoleon. 
Back in England on 28 October 1818 O'Meara wrote to the Admiralty alleging that Napoleon's life was not safe while Lowe remained governor. The Admiralty thereon removed his name from the navy list. O'Meara then set himself to continue his attacks on Lowe in print. These had begun with the anonymous 'Letters from the Cape of Good Hope' (1817) and continued with 'Exposition of some of the transactions that have taken place at St Helena since the appointment of Sir Hudson Lowe as governor' (1819) and 'Napoleon in Exile: a Voice from St Helena' (2 vols., 1822), both works being published over his own name. The latter was generally critical of the way in which Napoleon had been treated after his surrender and in particular portrayed Lowe as spiteful, arbitrary, and vindictive. It was received with scepticism, not least because of inconsistencies between it and earlier accounts by O'Meara. These inconsistencies were detailed by John Wilson Croker in the 'Quarterly Review' for October 1822 (28.219-64) and the book was savagely reviewed by Christopher North in 'Blackwood's Magazine' (14.172) but defended in the 'Edinburgh Review' for June 1822 (37.164-204). The book rapidly went through five editions and was issued in translation in France. Lowe obtained a rule 'nisi' for criminal information against O'Meara in Hilary term 1823, but it was afterwards discharged on technical grounds. Following legal advice that the onus was now on O'Meara to accuse Lowe of perjury if he wanted to challenge the veracity of Lowe's denials, Lowe decided not to proceed further with this action. 
Napoleon had in the meantime died on 5 May 1821 at Longwood, St Helena. He had been in poor health from shortly after his arrival on the island and O'Meara had attempted unsuccessfully to treat him for insomnia, pain in the region of the liver, and swelling of the legs. An autopsy, performed at the house by Napoleon's Italian surgeon Francesco Antommarchi, failed to establish unambiguously the cause of death but cast doubt on the hypothesis that he suffered from liver disease, since that organ, unlike his kidneys, heart, and particularly his stomach, was found to be healthy. Antommarchi secretly removed a piece of the ulcerated lining of the stomach which he later gave to O'Meara. Suggestions that Napoleon was poisoned with arsenic stimulated much writing, including that by O'Meara, about his illness, as did the feeling that his physical and psychological health had been harmed by the circumstances of his exile in a damp, lonely, isolated place. In fact, however, although he was described as 'the confidential medical attendant of the Emperor Napoleon in his last days' ('Gentleman's Magazine', 1836, 219), O'Meara had had no influence on Napoleon's last illness since he left the island nearly three years before he died. 
O'Meara married on 10 February 1823 at her house by special licence Theodosia-Beauchamp (died 1830), daughter of Sir Edward Boughton, sixth baronet, of Lawford, Warwickshire, and his second wife, Anna Maria Beauchamp. Theodosia-Beauchamp was the widow of Captain John Donellan (died 1781) and of Sir Egerton Leigh, bt (died 1818). At the time of the marriage O'Meara was being prosecuted by Lowe. The marriage made his personal circumstances very easy, his new wife enjoying the fortune gained by her first husband by murdering her brother. O'Meara is said to have been twice married, but the details of his other marriage are not known. O'Meara became a follower of Daniel O'Connell. He died at his home on the Edgware Road, London, on 3 June 1836, according to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1836, 219) of erysipelas in the head caught at one of O'Connell's meetings. The sale of his effects on 18 and 19 July attracted considerable attention since it included several relics of Napoleon. The eldest surviving daughter of his son Dennis O'Meara of Tipperary was Kathleen O'Meara, the novelist, biographer, and Roman Catholic writer. 


@@@@@


doc= 20756


O'Meara, Kathleen (1839-1888), writer, was born in Dublin, the eldest daughter of Dennis O'Meara of Tipperary. Shortly after her birth her parents moved to Paris and she did not return to Ireland again. Her mother (died 1887) received a pension under the second empire because she was directly related to Barry Edward O'Meara, Napoleon's physician in his last years. 
O'Meara wrote for a period under the pseudonym of Grace Ramsay. Her English publishers suggested the 'nom de plume' believing, as she noted, that 'the Irish and Catholic ring of my real name would indispose the liberal British public' ('Irish Monthly', 531). She wrote stridently Catholic books and her first published novel was 'A Woman's Trials' (1867), in which the central incident is the conversion of an English girl to Catholicism. 'The Battle of Connemara' (1878), set in Paris and the west of Ireland, features a similar theme. Lady Peggy Blake, an Englishwoman, marries an Irish protestant landlord and settles in Connemara. So inspired is she by her tenants' faith and their acceptance of their lot, that she converts to Catholicism. Other novels include 'Are you my Wife?' (1878), 'The Old House in Picardy' (1887), and 'Narka, a Story of Russian Life' (1888). 
O'Meara also wrote a number of biographies such as 'Life and Times of Thomas Grant, First Bishop of Southwark' (1874), 'Frederick Ozanam, Professor at the Sorbonne, his Life and Works' (1876), 'One of God's Heroines: a Biographical Sketch of Mother Mary Teresa Kelly' (1878), and 'Madame Mohl, her Salon, and her Friends' (1885). Her short stories appeared in the 'Irish Monthly', 'Harper's New Monthly Magazine', the 'Atlantic Monthly', the 'Catholic World', and 'The Tablet'. She appears to have travelled widely in Europe and visited America, and was Paris correspondent for 'The Tablet' for many years. She never married. Kathleen O'Meara died of pneumonia at her home, 15 rue Washington, Paris, on 10 November 1888. Her last work, 'The Venerable John Baptiste Vianney, Cure d'Ars', was published posthumously in 1891. 


@@@@@


doc= 20757


Ommanney, Sir John Acworth (1773-1855), naval officer, eldest son of Rear-Admiral Cornthwaite Ommanney (died 1801), entered the navy in 1786 on board the frigate 'Rose' (Captain Henry Harvey) on the Newfoundland station. He afterwards served from 1788 to 1792 in the Mediterranean, and in July 1792 was appointed to the 'Lion' (Sir Erasmus Gower), which took Lord Macartney to China. On 20 May 1793 Ommanney was promoted lieutenant, and, on returning to England in October 1794, he was appointed to the frigate 'Aquilon', cruising in the channel. In March 1795 he was moved into the 'Queen Charlotte', one of the ships with Lord Bridport in the engagement off Lorient on 23 June. On 6 December 1796 he was promoted commander. During the mutiny at the Nore he commanded gun-brig no. 28 for the defence of the Thames, and in December 1797 was appointed to the brig 'Busy' in the North Sea, with considerable success. In August 1799, in company with the brig 'Speedwell', he stopped a fleet of Swedish merchant ships under the convoy of a frigate. Ommanney had intelligence that some of these ships were laden with contraband of war and were bound for French ports, and, as the frigate refused to allow them to be searched, he sent the whole fleet into the Downs, off the Kent coast, for examination. His tact and determination received the particular approval of the Admiralty. 
In January 1800 Ommanney went to the West Indies, but was obliged by the state of his health to return in July. On 16 October he was advanced to post rank, and during 1801 commanded, in rapid succession, the frigate 'Hussar', the 'Robust', and the 'Barfleur', bearing the flag of Rear-Admiral Collingwood, in the Channel Fleet. Ommanney married, in October 1803, Frances, daughter of Richard Ayling, of Slidham, in Sussex; they had four daughters. From 1804 to 1806 he was flag captain to Sir Erasmus Gower on the Newfoundland station. He did not serve at sea again for nineteen years, a period that can be explained only by his whig politics. In 1825 he was appointed to the 'Albion', which, after some time at Lisbon, joined Sir Edward Codrington in the Mediterranean and had an important part in the battle of Navarino on 20 October 1827. Ommanney received the CB and French, Russian, and Greek decorations for this service. 
On 22 July 1830 Ommanney was promoted rear-admiral; he was knighted on 23 May 1835, and nominated a KCB on 20 July 1838. From 1837 to 1840, with his flag in the 'Donegal', he had command of the Lisbon station, and from September 1840 to October 1841 he commanded at Malta, during the prolonged absence of the commander-in-chief, Sir Robert Stopford. He became a vice-admiral on 23 November 1841, and admiral on 4 May 1849. He was commander-in-chief at Devonport from 1851 to 1854, during the latter part of which time the fitting out of the fleet for the Baltic put severe strain on nerves enfeebled by age. He died at Warblington House, Havant, Hampshire, on 8 July 1855. Lady Ommanney died a few weeks after her husband, on 17 August. Sir Francis Molyneux Ommanney, the navy agent and MP for Barnstaple, who acted as banker and agent for Lord Collingwood, was Ommanney's brother. 
Politically, Ommanney was closely linked to Palmerston, and through him to Lord Minto and Sir Charles Adam, a fact of some significance during his service at Lisbon and in the Syrian crisis of 1840. Palmerston thought highly of his good sense, and valued his political support in Portsmouth. 


@@@@@


doc= 20758


O Maelmuaid, Ailbe (d. 1223), abbot of Baltinglass and bishop of Ferns, had a close association with King John, with whom he probably first came into contact when John, on his visit to Ireland in 1185, issued a confirmation charter to the Cistercian Baltinglass Abbey, where O Maelmuaid was abbot. The surname O Maelmuaid is associated with kings of Fir Cell (in Offaly), on the northern boundary of which was located the Cistercian monastery of Kilbeggan, which lends support to Ailbe's connection with that area. On 22 March 1186, at a provincial synod at Dublin, O Maelmuaid preached a sermon denouncing the incontinence of Welsh and English clergy in Ireland which provoked a response from Gerald of Wales. Shortly thereafter he was made bishop of Ferns (the form 'bishop of Wexford' also occurs), probably with the assent of John, son of Henry II, as lord of Ireland (who, according to Gerald, previously had offered him the see). He was present at the coronation of Richard I on 3 September 1189 and at the council at Pipewell on the 15th. He attended the consecration of St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, on 17 March 1192 and was with John, count of Mortain, at Nottingham on 27 December of that year. 
On 5 November 1203 Pope Innocent III appointed O Maelmuaid, along with the archbishop of Tuam and the bishop of Kilmacduagh, to proclaim the ecclesiastical censure laid on Robert, bishop of Waterford, for despoiling Malachias, bishop of Lismore. On 3 April 1206 he was recommended to the electoral body of the archiepiscopal see of Cashel by King John, as his nominee, and on 6 April received 10 marks as the king's gift. On 2 October 1207 Pope Innocent replied to his queries concerning the ordination of clerics by bishops other than their own. In the same year O Maelmuaid provided testimony to Innocent in support of the canonization of Lorcan Ua Tuathail, archbishop of Dublin. On 19 June 1208, along with Meiler fitz Henry, the justiciar, and Philip of Worcester, he was appointed as King John's representative to the king of Connacht and other kings and magnates of Ireland. On 15 September 1215 he was given royal protection while attending the Fourth Lateran Council at Rome. 
Evidence for O Maelmuaid's long-running dispute with William (I) Marshal, earl of Pembroke and Striguil, over lands of the see of Ferns, first appears on 30 May 1216, when Innocent III, doubtless in response to personal representations made to him by O Maelmuaid at the Lateran Council, instructed the archbishops of Dublin and Tuam, as papal judges delegate, to command William Marshal and others to restore the disputed property; an interdict had been placed on the earl's land in Ireland and the bishop of Ferns, then in England, had been ordered to excommunicate the Marshal and his accomplices. On 5 September 1216 King John gave O Maelmuaid custody of the vacant see of Killaloe until such time as he could be appointed bishop; but he was not promoted, probably because of the death of John a few weeks later. Early in 1218 he brought a case against William Marshal in an ecclesiastical court presided over by the archbishops of Dublin and Tuam; but on 18 April a royal writ was issued prohibiting the case from being heard until such time as Henry III came of age. Further letters on 20 April directed Geoffrey de Marisco, the justiciar, to see that the judges did not hear a plea regarding a lay fee in an ecclesiastical court. The Marshal took advantage of his position as regent to prevent pursuit of the claim on the grounds that the disputed land was a lay fee held of the king, who would warrant it to the Marshal when he came of age. On 25 June 1218 Pope Honorius III, possibly in response to representations from William Marshal, sent letters to O Maelmuaid, to the Marshal, and to Henry, archbishop of Dublin, requesting them to come to some agreement. The Marshal died excommunicate on 14 May 1219, having refused to restore the disputed property to the see of Ferns. According to Matthew Paris, after the Marshal's death O Maelmuaid petitioned the crown for restoration of the lands, but the earl's heir, William (II), and his brothers withheld their consent, whereupon he foretold the extinction of the family in the male line. Ironically, O Maelmuaid had co-operated with the Marshal in the foundation of the Cistercian abbey of Duiske (Graiguenamanagh), dedicating its cemetery in 1204 and witnessing the Marshal's charter to Duiske about 1207. 
O Maelmuaid acted as suffragan in the diocese of Winchester, consecrating a chapel at the Cistercian abbey of Waverley on 6 November 1201 and dedicating five altars there on 10 July 1214. The Benedictine community of the cathedral priory of St Swithun's, Winchester, made him a member of their fraternity. He died in 1223. He may have been the author of an extant Latin life of St Abban. 


@@@@@


doc= 20759


O'Moran, James (1735-1794), army officer in the French service, was born and baptized on 1 May 1735 in the parish of Ross, near Elphin, co. Roscommon, Ireland, allegedly the son of a shoemaker. He was educated at the Irish College at Tournai, Belgium, of which his uncle was rector. On 15 November 1752 he entered the Dillon infantry regiment of the Franco-Irish brigade as a cadet, and was commissioned 'lieutenant en second' on 14 January 1759. He served with distinction in the campaigns of 1760-61 in Germany. Although without wealth or obvious influence he was steadily promoted and received the cross of St Louis in 1778. In 1779 he crossed the Atlantic with his regiment to serve at the capture of Grenada and in D'Estaing's subsequent naval victory over the English. His regiment joined the Americans at the siege of Savannah, during which he suffered a leg wound which troubled him for the rest of his life. After recuperating in France he returned to America in 1780 and participated in an expedition to Jamaica in 1782. He became a member of the Society of the Cincinnati in 1783 and was awarded a pension on his return to France. In 1785 he married Patience Singleton (died 1785), who died within months of their marriage. He later married Eleanor King ('b'. 1760), a native of Scotland; they had two children, Eleanor ('b'. 1788) and William ('b'. 1789). 
Unlike many compatriots, O'Moran accepted the French Revolution and on 25 August 1791 he was appointed colonel of the regiment of Dillon, by then the 87th regiment. He was made 'marechal de camp' on 6 February 1792. He served under Dumouriez in Champagne and Belgium and was promoted general of division on 3 October. His headquarters, which was at Tournai, he governed with prudence and firmness. While there he was a witness at the wedding of Lord Edward Fitzgerald, the Irish radical, to Pamela, the adopted daughter of the duc d'Orleans. After Dumouriez's retreat from Belgium and subsequent treason O'Moran came under suspicion. He was removed from command and arrested in 1793. Arraigned before the revolutionary tribunal in Paris, he strongly maintained his innocence but was guillotined there on 6 March 1794. The night before his trial he wrote of his stainless, unbroken service to France and of his cherished dream of liberating Ireland. The latter ideal was probably rooted in his Irish brigade background, but was refined by his experience of the American and French revolutions. A brave and able soldier, O'Moran was noted for his fine manners, bonhomie, and Catholic faith. His son, William O'Moran, served in Napoleon's Irish legion. 


@@@@@


doc= 20760


Rory Caoch MacConnell O'More (d. 1545), chieftain, was the son of Connell O'More (died 1537), chieftain, of Leix (Laois) and succeeded his father as chieftain of Leix in 1537. Rory Caoch ('the one-eyed' or 'the blind') was captain of Leix. The O'More family was one of the most important of the minor Irish septs, or clans, and among the most implacable opponents of the government's policy of plantation because their lands, along with the O'Connor lands, were the first to be appropriated for this scheme. Rory Caoch's elder brother Kedagh succeeded Connell after much internal fighting. Kedagh died early in 1542 and was succeeded by Rory Caoch. 


@@@@@


doc= 20761


O'More, Rory Oge (c.1540-1578), chieftain and rebel, was the eldest son of Rory Caoch MacConnell O'More ['see below'] and his first wife, Margaret, daughter of Thomas Butler and granddaughter of Piers Butler, eighth earl of Ormond. 
The government's botched attempts to protect the pale against raids by outlying septs after Kildare's rebellion (1534-5) engendered anarchy in the midlands. Sir Anthony St Leger, the lord deputy, opted for a policy of conciliation through the conclusion of a surrender and regrant arrangement with Rory Caoch on 13 May 1542. However, this failed to stabilize the pale because Rory Caoch was deposed and murdered by his younger brother Giollaphadraig in 1545. Following the prosecution of that usurper the government, weary of Irish raids against the pale, decided to plant soldier-settlers in Leix and Offaly (later renamed Queen's county and King's county) to contain the native population. In 1549 the first contingents of these colonists arrived in Leix-Offaly to take up their grants, but it was not until 1556 that the colony was officially established. The O'Mores, now under the leadership of Connell Oge MacConnell (died 1557), refused to acquiesce in the scheme, and began to raid the settlements from hideaways in the impenetrable Gallen woods of western Leix after 1556. As native resistance hardened, Thomas Radcliffe, third earl of Sussex, the lord deputy, resorted increasingly to martial law to maintain order. Connell Oge was hanged in chains from Leighlin Bridge, co. Carlow, in 1557, but resistance continued sporadically until 1564, by which time thirty-five of the leading O'Mores had been killed by the colonists, who quickly earned a reputation for high-handedness among the Irish: 'If it were ones spoken of a... captens mouthe it was a sufficient quarell for the capten to rob, pray and kill the person... and all his tenantes withowt other attoryte or commiscon then the captens owne allegacon' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/1/84). 
Sir Henry Sidney, the lord deputy, described Rory Oge as an 'obscure and base varlet', despite the importance of the O'More sept. Rory Oge was the most vigorous and most notorious leader of the midland septs opposed to the government's expropriation of their lands. His main significance was that he came to typify the incorrigibility of the Gaelic elite in the eyes of the New English. Little is known of his formative years. He was fostered with the O'Byrnes for a time, probably with Hugh MacShane O'Byrne, chief of the Gabhal Raghnaill branch of the O'Byrne clan, given the extent of Rory Oge's attachment to his family. He was close to Hugh MacShane's son Fiach MacHugh O'Byrne (c.1544-1597), and married Margaret (died 1577), daughter of Hugh MacShane O'Byrne and his first wife, Sadhbh, about 1573. Among their children was Owny MacRory O'More (b. in or before 1577, d. 1600). Rory Oge's sept, the MacRorys, was left landless as a result of the reorganization of landholding in Leix in 1564. Rory Oge was forced to enter the service of Sir John Fitzgerald of Desmond, the younger brother of Gerald fitz James Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond, as a swordsman. He returned to Leix by 1570 and began negotiations with the government for a grant of lands, similar to those granted to his cousins Laoighseach and Cathaoir MacKedagh in 1566. 
How Rory Oge emerged as leader of the O'Mores in rebellion against the government less than a year later is somewhat unclear. The decisive factor may have been Sidney's arbitrary execution of Laoighseach and Cathaoir MacKedagh, who were both implicated in the Butler revolt in 1569-70. Sidney subsequently decided to 'bare such a hand upon the whole name of the OMores as I trust the Quenes countye shalbe a quiet countye' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/30/52). Rory Oge survived the 1570 purge only because he was in the service of Francis Cosby, seneschal of Queen's county, and occupant of Stradbally, his paternal inheritance in co. Leix (now Laois). He was suspicious of Sidney's intentions and refused to meet government officials. In February 1571 Sir William Fitzwilliam, Sidney's successor as lord deputy, observed that Rory Oge was gathering men from among the disgruntled midland septs, and appeared about to 'go out' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/31/8). Rory Oge secured election as chief of his sept in April and rebelled in May. 
That Rory Oge rebelled in order to avenge his kin was suggested by a number of sources, and also by his own indictment of the government's policy towards the leading O'Mores: 'farr betters of his name submytted them selves to the late Lord Deputy and sarved him and that they were after taken and executed'. He refused to disperse his men for this reason, claiming he 'hath no other assurance of his lyfe'. Yet the hidden intention of Rory Oge's rebellion, as Thomas Butler, tenth earl of Ormond, and Gerald Fitzgerald, eleventh earl of Kildare, with whom he parleyed in August 1572, surmised, was to put pressure on the government to grant him the barony of 'Gallen... which he sought afore' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/37/37). Rory Oge subsequently submitted and was pardoned after this, while his claim was sent for government arbitration. 
In December 1572, having received no response to his petitions, Rory Oge resumed hostilities in order to hasten consideration of his claim. His use of guerrilla warfare against the settlers proved impossible to contain, especially because he adopted the brutal methods of the midlands planters, using them against the same, which won him much support from the region's dispossessed Gaelic elite. Supported by the O'Connors, O'Byrnes, and O'Kavanaghs, Rory Oge used the densely wooded area of Gallen as a base. In 'smalle companies or grete, as ocascon requireth or as the turn is best sarved, the rebel issueth into the heart of the Queens Countye and thence into every parte of the Pale spoylinge the same at pleasure' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/38/41). Indeed, by February 1573 so effective had Rory Oge's campaign proved that the government was considering methods 'of so manie circumstances, as it cannot be so comitted to writing but it will admit matters disputable', to end his rebellion (TNA: PRO, SP 63/39/27). In another effort to advance his petitions he again submitted (November 1573) but immediately aided the earl of Desmond's escape from Dublin later that month, providing a 400-strong escort for the fugitive through the midlands. 
No resolution had been achieved by 1575, when Sidney, again lord deputy, observed that Rory Oge 'hath that Possession, and Settling Place' in Leix, and 'listeth and wasteth what he will'. Recognizing that the devastated midlands would continue to suffer unless Rory Oge was given a living, Sidney offered him lands, provided he accepted the plantation. Rory Oge submitted in St Canice's Cathedral, Kilkenny, 'repenting (as he said) his former Fawltes, and promisinge hereafter, to lyve in better Sorte (for woorsse than he hath ben he cannot be)'. He was, however, more ambitious than before and Sidney warned him that unless he abandoned his 'aspiringe imagination of tytle to the countrie' he would lose 'lyffe, land and all' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/54/17). Although Rory Oge was pardoned on 4 June 1576, Sidney, disquieted by his continuing claim to authority over Leix, did not settle his demands. 
In March 1577, after ten months of peace, Rory Oge broke the stalemate through a devastating raid, and burnt to the ground the town of Naas, co. Kildare. This sealed his fate. Sidney decided drastic action was required and Cosby received an extensive commission of martial law authorizing him to eradicate 'with fire and sword Rory Oge... and all other traitors and rebels in any place where they may be found' ('Irish Fiants', no. 2997). By August 150 O'Mores had been killed. As his programme and reputation were subjected to unprecedented criticism, Sidney's frustration with Rory Oge, whom he made a paradigm of the opposition he was encountering in Ireland, clearly boiled over. Infuriated by mounting costs and constant resistance, he decided to wage 'as actuall and as cunning warre' upon Rory Oge as possible (Sidney, 1860, 185). A sea change in governmental attitudes to the Irish population occurred, and some New English officials were already articulating the view that normal ethical restraints did not apply when dealing with the native Irish. A rare contemporary Gaelic source states that Rory Oge was subjected to unprecedented attention, relating how his wife, Margaret, was killed on government orders, 'and with her have been killed women, and boys, and humble folk, and people young and old, who, according to all seeming, deserved not to be put to the sword' ('agus mna agus macaim agus mindaoine oga agus arsaidhi do marbhadh maille ria nach ar thuill a marbhadh do fer bharamhla'; Royal Irish Academy, MS 24.14.170). 
As the hunt for Rory Oge intensified, the authorities were confounded by their continued failure to apprehend him: 'for never Wretche, beinge so longe and earnestlye followed, hath continued on Foote so longe'. His frequent narrow escapes from his pursuers were attributed to 'Sorcerie or Enchauntement', as he assumed the guise of bogeyman for the English soldiers and administrators (TNA: PRO, SP 63/61/29). Sir Nicholas Malby, governor of Connaught, described Rory Oge as the only Robin Hood of Ireland, while John Derricke characterized him as a wolf. In 1599 his reputation as a demonic force was confirmed when Sir John Harington, the courtier and author, wrote that he had escaped his pursuers 'by dint of witchery, and had by magic compelled them not to touch him' (Harington, 2.23-4). 
In November 1577 Rory Oge captured two leading figures of the midland garrison, Alexander Cosby and Henry Harington, Sidney's nephew, whom he paraded in chains 'like a slave'. Thereafter the dispute with Sidney assumed an even more personal edge because the lord deputy was outraged by the slight on his family's honour. Even when trapped by Sidney's forces in a cabin, Rory Oge managed to break Harington's arm, to 'cutt off the little finger of one of his handes' and to inflict serious head injuries, before 'miraculously' escaping through the legs of his besiegers. Sidney's forces then proceeded to massacre the cabin's remaining occupants, including Rory Oge's wife and two young sons (Sidney, 1860, 185-6). Rory Oge responded in kind, burning Leighlin and Carlow and beheading those soldiers he could capture. 
In March 1578 the government's frustration was revealed when its forces, including Cosby, massacred some of Rory Oge's supporters at Mullaghmast, co. Kildare. Since the O'Mores had convened there under a protection for parley, the Irish annalists were prompted to claim that 'no uglier deed than that was ever committed in Ireland' ('ni dhearnadh in Eirinn riamh gniomh ba ghranna na sin'; Hennessy, vol. 2, s.a. 1567 ['sic']). By this point the noose around Rory Oge was tightening. Attempting to ease the pressure, on 30 June he tried to entice one of his most dogged pursuers, Barnaby Fitzpatrick, second baron of Upper Ossory, into an ambush. Anticipating treachery, Upper Ossory concealed the kerne (light foot soldiers) he had with him, and, when Rory Oge appeared: 'the Lord of Upperosseries Kerne, gave the chardge upon hym, and at their Reencounter one of theim light upon hym, and thrust hym presentlye thorough the Boddie with his Swoorde, which was no soner donne, but twoe or three more likewise hacked upon hym at once, and gave hym soch mortall Woundes, as downe he fell: and this was the Ende of this rancke Rebell. (Collins, 1.263-5)' Despite attempts by Upper Ossory's men to seize it, Rory Oge's body was carried off by his own followers; however, the head was attained soon after and delivered to Sidney, who had it mounted on Dublin Castle. The annalists recorded of Rory Oge that 'there was not in Ireland a greater destroyer against foreigners than that man: and he was a very great loss' ('agus ni raibh a nEirinn fear millte ar Ghaill ba mho na fear sin agus fa ro mor'; Hennessy, vol. 2, s.a. 1578). 
Rory Oge's death marked the end of O'More efforts to restore the old order of Gaelic lordship, or at least to secure a stake in the plantation. Although his son Owny MacRory O'More managed to raise the O'More banner again in the 1590s, it was only with the support of Hugh O'Neill, second earl of Tyrone. Never again were the O'Mores capable of threatening either the pale or the midlands plantation. On a wider plane Rory Oge's career was critical in the breakdown of the conciliation strategy. Derricke's 'Image of Irelande' (1581) reveals the role Rory Oge played in the changing New English mentality. Rory Oge was characterized as a savage wood kerne addicted by nature to rapine and rebellion and depicted as 'a lively image and pattern of rebellion', rather than as a dispossessed member of the Irish elite fighting for his lands. He was cast as the leader of a 'crooked generation', whose 'ireful hearts' were 'bent to every kind of ill' ('Image of Irelande', 183-8, 199-205). Both contemporary Gaelic commentators and critics of the New English administration identified in the period 1549-78 an increasing breakdown in the rules of war in the midlands. This affected the conduct of New English settlers in their dealings with the disaffected Irish elite. Rory Oge's significance is that he provided the most potent symbol of Irish opposition to the government's reform effort. The government's solution to his vigorous and determined campaign was extermination. Some 725 O'Mores were killed by 1578 and this departure from normal ethical conventions provided the ideological conditions for the wars of extermination in Munster and Ulster which completed the conquest of Ireland at the close of the sixteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 20762


O'More, Rory (b. c.1592, d. in or after 1666), conspirator, was the son of Calvach O'More (died 1618) and Margaret Sherlock or Scurlog. Calvach's father had been recognized by the Tudors as chieftain of Laois, but the territory was subsequently shired as Queen's county, and planted with an English colony. In 1567 Queen Elizabeth granted Calvach, in partial recompense, escheated lands amounting to 1078 acres in the barony of Carbury, in the north-west corner of co. Kildare, and former church lands in the parish of Kilmainham Wood in the north of co. Meath. During the plantation of Ulster (1609-10) James I granted him about 7000 acres, in south-east co. Armagh, originally assigned to Art Mac Baron O'Neill, the father of Owen Roe O'Neill. 
Rory O'More inherited these scattered estates on the death of his father in 1618. According to a family memoir, he sold the Kilmainham Wood estate because of scruples about owning land which originally belonged to the church, and bought, rather than inherited, the Armagh estate with the proceeds. By 1641 he had married a daughter of Sir Patrick Barnewall, of whom little is known. 
In February 1641 O'More approached Conor, Lord Maguire, then attending the parliament in Dublin. He urged that the Anglo-Scottish crisis offered the Irish a chance to regain lost estates by force. He also drew attention to Maguire's own debts and claimed to have secured support for his plan in Leinster and Connaught. The latter claim, while probably untrue, was doubtless given credence by O'More's marital connections to some of the leading families of the pale, including Viscount Gormanstown, the earl of Fingall, and Luke Netterville, the three individuals who would ultimately assume local leadership of the insurgency. When parliament resumed sitting in May, O'More had a second meeting with Maguire and other Ulster conspirators drawn in by the latter. O'More's motives for plotting are not as clear-cut as those of Maguire and Phelim O'Neill, both of whom were deeply in debt. O'More either borrowed heavily or was, in fact, quite wealthy, to judge from the dowries, amounting in aggregate to $4000, that he paid to marry off his daughters. The most likely explanation for his involvement was not immediate financial pressure but that he was 'Piqued by the loss of his ancient patrimony' in co. Laois (Plunkett, fol. 5). That he may have seen himself as the leader of a revived O'More clan is suggested by his recall of the 'several septs that were banished from Leix' to serve him as soldiers ('Examination of Lewis O'Moore', fol. 128). 
Having initiated the plot, O'More played a subordinate role as it was transformed from vague scheming into a purposeful movement based on confident and reasonably effective planning. In September 1641 the conspirators decided on a two-pronged rising, involving the seizure of Dublin Castle on 23 October in concert with an uprising in Ulster. O'More was one of the leaders entrusted with taking the castle. The plot was, however, betrayed by Owen O'Connolly on the night of 22 October. O'More, suspicious of O'Connolly, had changed his lodgings that night: he evaded arrest and was ferried upriver towards Lucan, where he took shelter with his daughter and her husband, Patrick Sarsfield of co. Dublin, the parents of Patrick Sarsfield, the Jacobite leader in the 1689-91 war. 
As the insurgents reached the limits of their territorial gains in Ulster it was to the south that the momentum of the insurgency was maintained. O'More probably played a role in this strategic reorientation. At any rate he was one of the three leaders of an insurgent column that routed government forces at Julianstown on 29 November 1641, and cut off Drogheda from the south. Some 500 government soldiers were killed in this demoralizing reverse which, if not 'very considerable' (Plunkett, fol. 5), hastened the alliance of the pale nobility with the Ulster insurgents. 
While the alliance would probably have been forced on the pale nobility by government hostility, it was certainly facilitated by 'the trust they reposed in Roger Moore, who by his marriage to Sir Patrick Barnwall's daughter, was allied to most of them' ('Irish Confederation', ed. Gilbert, 1.34-5). In early December they met the insurgents at Knockcrofty, where they were asked 'wherefore they came armed into the pale' (ibid., 36). O'More's masterful reply played on the palesmen's grievances, fears, and aspirations: 'We are the sole subjects, who, being much the more numerous and powerful, are made incapable of raising our fortunes by serving our King in any place of honour, profit or trust, in that country wherein we were born'. He reminded them that the English parliament and the Scottish covenanters would not discriminate between Old English and Gaelic Irish Catholics: 'you are marked forth for destruction as well as we'. He concluded with a powerful appeal to the nascent sense of common Irish identity: 'We are of the same religion and the same nation; our interest and our sufferings are the same; the bonds of friendship and alliance are mutual between us; and, from the highest to the lowest, we affect you dearly' (ibid., 36). On this showing O'More has been justifiably called 'the most skilful politician among the Irish leaders' (Perceval-Maxwell, 245). 
The period from December 1641 to March 1642 saw the insurgents besiege Drogheda, while trying to prevent relief from Dublin by encircling the capital with insurgent encampments. Shortly after the Knockcrofty meeting in early December, O'More set about instigating an insurgent military organization in co. Kildare. Here, as elsewhere, the original 'coup d'etat' was in danger of being subsumed within a popular revolt characterized by attacks on British civilians. O'More's directions that 'no man should be wronged in goods or body' ('Deposition of William Pilsworth', TCD, MS 813, fol. 3) were typical of the attempts by the insurgent leadership to rein in their followers. This policy was only moderately successful, as evidenced by his followers' killing three household servants after capturing Castle Carbury. 
O'More was nominated as one of seven colonels raised from co. Kildare, and served with his regiment at Newcastle, west of Dublin, in January 1642. The following month this force was pushed back from Dublin, and he shifted his attention to the north of Dublin and to Drogheda. In early March 1642 O'More met with Viscount Gormanstown, the leader of the pale nobility, to compose an appeal for help to Mountgarret, the insurgent leader in south Leinster, and to adopt a draft national 'model of government' ('Irish Confederation', ed. Gilbert, 1.36-7). The plan for a national government ultimately came to fruition in June 1642 with the creation of the supreme council of the confederate Catholics. However, Mountgarret did not respond to the appeal and, shortly afterwards, Ormond relieved Drogheda. 
During the spring of 1642, with government forces launching attacks deep into Catholic territory, O'More was placed in command of King's county and the adjacent half of Queen's county. On 15 April the insurgents attempted to intercept the royalist governor, Ormond, on his return march from Athy towards Dublin at Kilrush in co. Kildare. In the subsequent battle O'More, commanding one of the three Irish divisions, repulsed the initial cavalry charge. A subsequent charge, however, scattered the entire insurgent army. 
Between July and September 1642 'General Moore' commanded the unsuccessful siege of Birr, King's county ('Irish Confederation', ed. Gilbert, 1.lxxvii-lxxix). In a letter written from Wexford on 20 September 1642 he complained of the 'troublesome charge of generalship cast on me in upper Leinster' (Meehan, 334). He styled himself Ruri de O'Mora and expressed his intention to set up a school of Irish and acquire a printing press in Irish type. Soon afterwards he was relieved of this 'troublesome charge', being among several officers cashiered during the pruning and reorganization of the Leinster army into six field infantry regiments on regular lines. However, on 14 January 1643 O'More assisted Thomas Preston, the newly appointed general of Leinster, in capturing Birr, using recently acquired siege artillery. 
Thereafter, O'More was a marginal figure in the Catholic confederation. In May 1644 he embroiled himself in attempts by Randal Mac Donnell, earl of Antrim, to wrest command of expeditionary forces to attack the Scottish covenanters in Ulster and in Scotland. Antrim had secured the support of many of the cashiered officers. The supreme council, baulking at confronting Antrim, instead arrested O'More and Philip Mac Maolmhuire O'Reilly for inciting the earl. The council described them as 'men of their own disposition turbulent and much taken... with the condition of troublesome times' (cited in Ohlmeyer, 141). 
There is a gap in the record of O'More's activities for the years 1645-7, which, intriguingly, corresponds to the service of the confederate Catholic expeditionary force in Scotland, led by Alasdair Mac Colla Mac Donnell. O'More offered to lead a regiment of 1500 men to Scotland, but his name is not included in the list of officers who embarked. 
By 1648 the confederate Catholics had split into opposing Ormondist and clericalist parties, supporting and opposing, respectively, a royalist alliance. Owen Roe O'Neill opposed the alliance and employed O'More on his 'cabinet council' (Gilbert, 2.21) and as an envoy. In early 1649 O'More fell out of favour with O'Neill after acting as an intermediary with Ormond. According to the rabidly clericalist author of the 'Aphorismical Discovery', O'More, 'a well spoken gentleman... though no martial man' (ibid.), seized the opportunity to curry favour with Ormond by giving unfounded assurances to both parties of the other's willingness to seek an accommodation. 
In August 1650 the Catholic synod of Jamestown repudiated royalist authority and attempted to reassert control over the faltering Irish resistance to the Cromwellian reconquest. O'More was chosen as one of three Leinster representatives on a proposed new Catholic confederation, and also served as a colonel in the reconstituted Leinster army. In June 1651 the army moved to Connaught belatedly to defend the Shannon line. Between November and December 1652 O'More was serving in one of the last royalist outposts, Inishbofin. He escaped to co. Donegal before the final surrender of the island early in 1653. 
O'More was exempted from pardon for life or estate by the 1652 Cromwellian 'Act of Settlement', and, if apprehended, he would certainly have been executed. However, the authorities believed that he had escaped abroad and died. According to a family memoir, he worked in co. Donegal as a herd for a time, under an assumed identity, until his employer caught him reading a book behind a hedge and dismissed him, saying that he needed a herd, not a scholar. From there he moved to south co. Armagh. Corroboration that he lived for some years afterwards comes from the affidavits of two Irishmen in Madrid in September and October 1666, when Daniel O'Neill (husband of O'More's daughter Leonor) was made knight of the military order of Calatrava. The later of the two affidavits stated that the deponent 'receives letters regularly from Leonor's father, Rory O Moore, who is at present living in Ireland' (Walsh, 137). After the Restoration, Rory O'More's eldest son, Charles, recovered most of the Carbury estate through the court of claims. 


@@@@@


doc= 20763


O'Neal, Jeffrey Hamet (fl. 1766-1772), miniature painter, was a native of Ireland. He practised for many years in London and exhibited occasionally with the Incorporated Society of Artists, of which he was a fellow and whose declaration roll he signed in 1766. He is also stated to have painted landscapes, natural history, and 'Japan' pieces, the last for Smith, a printseller in Cheapside. In addition he worked for a porcelain factory at Worcester, where he painted 'incorrect but very charming figure, animal and landscape subjects' (Foskett, 611). In 1772 O'Neal was living in Lawrence Street, Chelsea. 


@@@@@


doc= 20764


O'Neil, Henry Nelson (1817-1880), historical genre painter, was born on 7 January 1817 in St Petersburg, Russia, of British parents. Of his early life nothing is known, except that at the age of six, in 1823, O'Neil went to England with his family. By 1836 he was enrolled at the Royal Academy Schools and there O'Neil met Alfred Elmore, who became a close friend. In the late 1830s they were founding members of the Clique, a sketching club, together with Richard Dadd, Augustus Egg, William Powell Frith, and John Phillip. All were diligent students with differing views on art, who wished to depict modern subjects with a strong emotional element, as a rebellion against the authority of the Royal Academy. They sought to paint better and met every week to draw on a theme, later discussing, comparing, and judging their sketches. O'Neil, in particular, wanted his work to appeal to the viewers' emotions. In 1838 he exhibited his first pictures: at the Royal Academy 'A Student' and at the Society of British Artists in Suffolk Street 'A Jewish Doctor', but his work did not receive much notice until after his return from a trip to Italy with Elmore in 1840. O'Neil exhibited fourteen paintings at the Suffolk Street gallery from 1838 until 1843, and thirty-four pictures at the British Institution from 1839 until 1861. All his major works were shown at the Royal Academy, including more than ninety paintings between 1838 and 1879. 
The two works for which O'Neil is best-known were 'Eastward Ho! August 1857' (exh. RA, 1858; priv. coll.) and 'Home Again, 1858' (exh. RA, 1859; priv. coll.). The subject of 'Eastward Ho!' was the Indian mutiny of August 1857, when the greatest number of British troops departed for India to suppress the mutiny of the Bengal army. When the Royal Academy exhibition opened in May 1858, news of the massacres and reprisals still dominated the news. The picture's appeal to patriotic fervour and its focus on the domestic side of military life ensured that it was an immediate success: the picture drew huge crowds, exceeded only by those looking at W. P. Frith's 'Derby Day'. The success of O'Neil's embarkation painting led to its sequel in the following year, 'Home Again, 1858', where several of the same figures are shown receiving the returning soldiers, a picture that was only slightly less successful in drawing the crowds. Both paintings are examples of the depiction of current events as narratives that are particularly moving because of their implied themes of separation and family loss. Both pictures, like others of O'Neil's paintings, were engraved and widely distributed, and gained great popularity. These two paintings were so much sought after that O'Neil painted several versions in varying sizes, as well as copies of details of some of the main figures. On the basis of their success O'Neil was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1860, although he never became a Royal Academician. His pictorial pageants also include 'The Landing of her Royal Highness the Princess Alexandra at Gravesend, 7th March 1863' (exh. RA, 1864; NPG). 
In the 1860s O'Neil also began to produce portraits, scenes of famous artists, and landscapes. He also played the violin, and wrote on art. O'Neil's published works include 'Modern Art in England and France' (1869) and 'The Age of Stucco: a Satire in Three Cantos' (1871). He also published the lectures on painting he gave at the Royal Academy. The quality of his art declined in later years. He was a member of the Garrick Club and counted among his friends Elmore, Frith, Frederic Leighton, John Everett Millais, and the novelists Charles Reade and Anthony Trollope. O'Neil died at his home -- 7 Victoria Road, Kensington, London -- on 13 March 1880, leaving a widow, Claudia Anne Greatorex. He was buried at Kensal Green. The contents of his studio were sold by Christie, Manson, and Wood on 18 June 1880. Anthony Trollope in an obituary describes him as 'one who was simple, just, and affectionate as a child' ('The Times'). 


@@@@@


doc= 20765


O'Neill, Brian mac Phelim, lord of Clandeboye (d. 1574), landowner, was the son of Phelim O'Neill (Feidhlimidh Bacach O Neill), lord of Clandeboye between 1529 and his death in 1533. Clandeboye was an extensive lordship in south Antrim and north Down. The O'Neills of Clann Aodh Buidhe had come to dominate the region following the disintegration of the earldom of Ulster from the mid-thirteenth century. By the early sixteenth century the English presence in the earldom had been reduced to a small pocket around Carrickfergus, and enclaves in Lecale and southern Ards. However, Brian's grandfather Hugh or Aodh (died 1524) was the last great lord of Clandeboye. Following Hugh's death the lordship was undermined by the succession of a series of short-lived lords, including Brian's father. Internecine struggles for power left Clandeboye effectively divided by 1555 between Phelim's sons Brian and Hugh and their cousin Conn. 
Brian and his brother travelled to Dublin in May 1556 and promised to serve the English crown 'like as by report they have done a long time since' ('Haliday MSS', 2). The English administration in Dublin decided to formalize the division of Clandeboye as a means of making it more amenable to English influence. However, Brian mac Phelim won to his side William Piers, captain of Carrickfergus Castle, and, to his great benefit, his brother Hugh and cousin Conn were detained in the castle while Brian ruled as lord of all Clandeboye. Brian mac Phelim married twice: first, a daughter of Art Magennis, Viscount Iveagh, who died before 1568; and second Anne, daughter of Brian Carragh MacDonnell, captain of Glenconkoyne, who died with her husband. 
In 1565 Piers composed his 'Opinion', advocating the colonization of Ulster east of the River Bann, including Clandeboye. Subsequently, however, he formed a close relationship with Brian mac Phelim O'Neill, based primarily on their common interest in containing the expansion of Scottish power in north Antrim and the ambitions of the O'Neills of Tyrone east of the Bann. O'Neill allowed Piers to exact a levy on part of Clandeboye to supplement the meagre resources allocated to the Carrickfergus garrison by the English crown. In 1570 O'Neill undertook responsibility for victualling the garrison. For his part, Piers helped to bolster O'Neill's authority throughout Clandeboye. He regularly reported Brian's good service and he promoted his suit to have his lordship of Clandeboye formally recognized by Elizabeth, holder of the title to the defunct earldom of Ulster. Brian mac Phelim received a letter of thanks in July 1567 and was subsequently knighted in recognition of his services against the rebellious Sean O'Neill, but the queen would not legitimize his lordship because of plans to colonize eastern Ulster to England's benefit. 
On 16 November 1571 Sir Thomas Smith, the English privy councillor, received a royal grant of an extensive portion of Clandeboye in Ards and lands adjoining it south of Belfast. Forewarned, perhaps by Piers, O'Neill protested his loyalty and service to the English crown. When the planters arrived on 30 August 1572 he drove them off. They subsequently returned to establish a foothold at Newtownards but their leader, Thomas Smith junior, was killed by some Irishmen who boiled his body and fed it to their dogs. Despite two attempts by Sir Thomas Smith to reinforce the colony it fizzled out. 
In August 1573 Walter Devereux, earl of Essex, landed at Carrickfergus. He had received a royal grant of all of the recently created county of Antrim, excepting only Carrickfergus and its immediate environs, with no regard for the rights of Irish landowners like O'Neill of Clandeboye. O'Neill formed an alliance with Turlough Luineach O'Neill, lord of Tyrone, and, together with the Scots in Antrim, succeeded in thwarting Essex's grandiose plantation plans. Essex had mortgaged much of his estate to finance this venture and, as his wealth was dissipated to no effect, he became increasingly frustrated and vicious. He arrested William Piers and sought his execution for allegedly passing on intelligence to Brian O'Neill for use against him. Essex bitterly resented O'Neill for outwitting him, and for dashing his dreams of winning fame and fortune in Ulster. By 13 May 1574 Essex had the Irish lord proclaimed a traitor and put a bounty of $200 on his head. 
O'Neill secured a pardon from the crown on 17 June and left his sons in Dublin as pledges for his good faith. He also agreed to assist Essex in fortifying Belfast. He seems to have been assured, wrongly, that it was possible to effect a reconciliation with Essex. Early in November 1574 O'Neill, accompanied by his wife, his brother Rory Oge, and an entourage of about 200 persons, attended a parley with Essex in Belfast. However, after a banquet, English soldiers massacred O'Neill's entourage. O'Neill, his wife, and brother were taken to Dublin. Between 14 and 24 November they were tried for treason, executed, and quartered, notwithstanding the royal pardon and Essex's own guarantees. 
Essex died in 1576 and Brian's son Sean eventually established a title to Belfast Castle and three-quarters of north Clandeboye, while his uncle Hugh's son Niall held the remaining quarter. Brian mac Phelim's cousin Conn, after many years of detention in Carrickfergus Castle, was established at Castlereagh as chief captain in south Clandeboye. The judicial murder of Brian mac Phelim O'Neill, together with his wife and brother, and the slaughter of his entourage, was long remembered as one of the worst acts of English infamy perpetrated in Ireland. Its significance was magnified by the fact that O'Neill was one of those Irish lords who sought an accommodation with the English crown. His demise suggested that the Irish nobility, however accommodating, were expendable should they dare to resist English ambitions. 


@@@@@


doc= 20766


Charles Henry St John O'Neill, Earl O'Neill (1779-1841), landowner, elder son of the first Viscount O'Neill, was born on 22 January 1779. He was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford, matriculating on 23 November 1795. On his father's death in 1798 he became second Viscount O'Neill. At the time of the passing of the 'Act of Union' in 1800 Lord Cornwallis, in a letter to the duke of Portland (3 June 1800), recommended that O'Neill and Lord Bandon should have precedence in the creation of Irish earls then contemplated. On 7 August 1800 O'Neill accordingly became first Viscount Raymond and first Earl O'Neill of Shane's Castle. His borough of Randalstown was disfranchised. In September 1800 he was elected one of the first Irish representative peers in the Westminster parliament. In 1807 he was appointed joint postmaster-general of Ireland with the earl of Rosse. This was a comparatively new appointment, and in practice the Post Office was run by the secretary, Sir Edward Lees. The postmasters-general appeared rarely in the office, and never together. On 13 February 1809 O'Neill was created a knight of the Order of St Patrick. In 1831 he was appointed lord lieutenant of the county of Antrim. Understandably, perhaps, he did not share his father's political views and could not bring himself to travel through the town of Antrim. He was a strong supporter of the union and became grand master of the Orange order in Ireland until the union of the Irish and English bodies under the duke of Cumberland. He died unmarried at the Bilton Hotel, Sackville Street, Dublin, on 25 March 1841. The earldom then became extinct and the viscountcy devolved on his younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 20767


O'Neill, Conn Bacach, first earl of Tyrone (c.1482-1559), chieftain and magnate, was the youngest son of Conn More O'Neill (died 1493), chieftain, lord of Tyrone, and his wife, Eleanor (died 1497), daughter of Thomas Fitzgerald, seventh earl of Kildare, and his wife, Joan. Rival O'Neill factions had been fighting for decades to exert control over Tyrone, the unwieldy O'Neill lordship which stretched across much of Ulster. Conn More's marriage to Eleanor Fitzgerald in 1480 secured for him a powerful ally in Kildare and prompted the Irish parliament to recognize Conn More and his issue as English subjects. Subsequently the earls of Kildare intervened periodically in O'Neill politics to install candidates more sympathetic to their position. Following the death in 1519 of his elder brother Art Oge O'Neill, Conn Bacach ('the lame'), supported by Gerald Fitzgerald, ninth earl of Kildare (1487-1534), succeeded to the chieftaincy. He subsequently married his cousin Alice, fourth daughter of Gerald Fitzgerald, eighth earl of Kildare, cementing an alliance with the Geraldines. 
Conn's accession, however, had not gone unopposed; the sons of Art Oge O'Neill, led by Niall Conallach (died 1544), allied with the neighbouring O'Donnells, who were receptive to any interest capable of destabilizing the O'Neill lordship, mounted consistent opposition. The replacement of the ninth earl of Kildare as lord lieutenant by Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey, in 1520 prompted Conn to threaten the pale's northern marches. However, the O'Donnell-O'Neill alliance 'behind' Tyrone raised the prospect of a two-front war as Surrey marched northwards. In a letter to Conn, John Kite, archbishop of Armagh, urged that he: 'should cultivate a mind worthy of your abilities and character, and no longer take delight in wild and barbarous manners... It is much better to live in a civilized fashion, than to seek a living by arms and rapine, and to have no thought beyond pleasure and the belly. (Brewer and Bullen, 1515-74, no. 8)' Conn submitted and Henry VIII, eager to win his allegiance inexpensively, sent him gifts and authorized Surrey to grant him a knighthood and to induce him to repair to court. Conn, however, could not offer the lord lieutenant, or the king, his full attention while Sir Hugh O'Donnell threatened, and in summer 1522 he invaded Tyrconnell. 
Rumours of Conn's alliance with Colin Campbell, third earl of Argyll, in summer 1521 caused consternation among English officials. Their fear was misplaced as Scottish aid represented only a part of a greater confederacy formed by Conn to crush O'Donnell the following year. Conn brought to the field an impressive array of preponderantly Gaelic clans from across Ireland in what was a battle to confirm traditional O'Neill hegemony in Ulster. After several initial successes, however, the greatly outnumbered forces of O'Donnell inflicted a sharp defeat on Conn at Cnoc Buidhbh near Strabane, in Tyrone, in mid-August 1522. The confederacy disintegrated; and though fighting between Conn and O'Donnell continued intermittently for the rest of the decade, neither could secure a decisive advantage. With his ambitions in Ulster cooled, Conn concentrated on his alliance with his brother-in-law the newly restored ninth earl of Kildare, attending his installation in 1524: 'and so O'Neill, being in the council house with them, bare the sword before the deputy till they went to Thomas Court and there dined, and after dinner had a goodly banquet' (TCD, MS 543/2, s.a. 1524). He subsequently accompanied Kildare on a hosting against O'Donnell, and in 1526 attended a council held by him in Dublin. This close association with Kildare continued despite Conn's marriage to Sorcha (died 1530), daughter of Hugh Oge O'Neill, chief of the Clandeboye O'Neills; among their children was Shane O'Neill (c.1530-1567). 
During Kildare's absence at court, Conn did his best to obstruct the stop-gap government of Richard Nugent, third Baron Delvin, which had superseded that of Kildare's brother Sir Thomas Fitzgerald of Leixlip. In May 1528 Conn complained to Cardinal Thomas Wolsey that Delvin withheld his traditional blackrent and requested Kildare's return. Sir William Skeffington, however, was appointed lord deputy on 22 June 1530. In an effort to demonstrate his loyalty, Kildare accompanied Skeffington on a campaign against Conn in 1531. The campaign, carried out with the assistance of both the O'Donnells and the rival O'Neill faction, dealt Conn a devastating blow. The following year the weakened O'Neills underwent a second assault that saw their enemies penetrate the heart of Tyrone. The annals of Ulster note:'do impoadur Gaidhil Letha Cuind uile ar O Neill 'munn am sa, achtmadh becc' ('the Gaidhil of all the half of Conn, except a few, turned on O'Neill about that time'; Hennessy and MacCarthy, vol. 3, s.a. 1532). However, Conn's chieftaincy survived the onslaught. Kildare's restoration in 1532 ushered in more peaceful conditions which allowed Conn to re-establish his power base. 
Like many Kildare clients Conn initially supported the rebellion of Thomas Fitzgerald, Baron Offaly, in 1534, but abandoned the Geraldines as the rebellion faltered. In July 1535 he entered into a detailed submission with Skeffington at Drogheda. The terms of submission were renewed the following year, although the new lord deputy, Leonard Grey, Viscount Graney, complained of Conn's refusal to give hostages. Unable to predict the government's future alignment in the wake of the rebellion of Offaly, now tenth earl of Kildare, and weakened by the invasions of 1531-2, Conn doubtless hoped to secure his lands and position through formal submission. He had also been engaged in a 'rapprochement' with certain O'Donnells since 1535. Sir Hugh O'Donnell's son Manus was particularly receptive to Conn's overtures and their friendship grew into a solid alliance. Shortly before 29 November 1538 Conn married Mary (died in or after 1560), daughter of Alexander MacRandal Boy MacDonald. By 1539 Graney's aggressive behaviour prompted Conn and Manus O'Donnell to form a confederacy against the government, the so-called Geraldine league, whose nominal aim was Kildare's restoration. They were encouraged by Conn's receipt of a letter from Paul III in June, which revoked the bull 'Laudabiliter' and styled Conn 'King of Our Realme of Ireland'. Conn and O'Donnell invaded Meath in August, but failed to press their advantage and on their return to Ulster were routed by Graney at Bellahoe, on the border of Meath and co. Monaghan. This rare mustering of Gaelic strength was a worrying development for the government and demanded a change of tack. Graney was replaced by Sir Anthony St Leger, who shortly after his arrival in August 1540 embarked on a markedly more conciliatory initiative to defuse the confederacy. 
St Leger's conciliatory strategy succeeded gradually in detaching Conn's allies from the confederacy. Yet despite O'Donnell's submission in July 1541 and St Leger's diplomatic advances towards him in March and June 1541, Conn remained unmoved. Two campaigns launched into Tyrone that autumn also failed in securing his submission. A devastating third invasion launched in December left the already isolated Conn with little choice but to surrender unconditionally, condescending at last to offer his son as hostage for his loyalty. His submission marked the confederacy's end and exercised a profound effect on powerful chiefs such as Murrough O'Brien, who subsequently consented to terms offered by St Leger. In January 1542 Conn acknowledged Henry VIII's laws and sovereignty, agreeing to renounce the pope and attend parliament. His submission was formalized at Drogheda on 29 May and the following month he attended St Leger's parliament at Trim. The king baulked at offering the earldom of Ulster, for which Conn petitioned, but offered instead the earldom of Tyrone. Conn accepted and, with his expenses borne by St Leger, afterwards repaired to England to submit formally to Henry. 
Following his submission to Henry at Greenwich Palace on 24 September 1542, Conn was created earl of Tyrone for life on 1 October. The title was to revert to his illegitimate son and heir with Alison Kelly, Mathew (died 1558), who was concurrently created baron of Dungannon. The significance of the occasion was not lost on St Leger, who reminded the privy council that: 'yt can not be knowen that ever any Oneile repaired in person before this in to England to any of his noble progenytours, but hitherto usurped to call them selffes Prynces of Ulster' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 3.417). Conn surrendered both his kingdom and his Gaelic title to the crown in exchange for an earldom, incurring the wrath of a Gaelic poet as a result: 'O Neill Oiligh is Eamhna, ri Teamhrach agus Tailtean, tugsad ar iarlacht Uladh rioghacht go humhal aimhghlic' ('O'Neill of Oileach and Eamhain (Macha), the king of Tara and Tailte, has exchanged in foolish submission his kingship for the Ulster earldom'; O Cuiv, 273). The promise of immediate stability and hereditary succession, however, doubtless appealed to Conn, whose tanist, prior to the indenture, was his rival Niall Conallach. With the succession assured and his enemies outmanoeuvred, Tyrone returned to Ireland. 
On 7 May 1543 Tyrone was admitted to the Irish privy council and received a grant of lands in Dublin on 9 July. He subsequently set about reaffirming his traditional suzerainty in Ulster both by bringing pressure to bear upon lesser Ulster chiefs and by rekindling hostilities with O'Donnell. His neighbours, however, had very different expectations from St Leger's negotiations: the former understood their tenurial independence, guaranteed by their respective submissions, as tantamount to exoneration from traditional obligations to Tyrone, while O'Donnell withheld payment for lands in the Inishowen peninsula from which the new earl had withdrawn his claim as part of his submission. Detailed judgement on the rights and status of lesser Ulster chiefs was postponed, but St Leger recognized the potential danger posed by an O'Neill-O'Donnell feud at this juncture and brokered a mutually acceptable compromise, finalized by August 1545. Tyrone enjoyed relative stability in the following years, and in 1544-5 he readily provided ninety kerne for the king's war with France and Scotland. Niall Conallach's death in 1544, moreover, removed any immediate internal threat to Tyrone's leadership. 
The tanist's death, however, threatened a conflict between English and Gaelic succession laws. Dungannon, heir to the earldom, was indeed Tyrone's eldest son, but appears to have been illegitimate or a 'named' son, born to the wife of a Dundalk blacksmith. Tyrone, a much married man, fathered many children. Four identifiable male children, however, were eligible for the chieftaincy under Gaelic law: Turlough, Brian, Conn, and Shane. Conflict was averted owing principally to Tyrone's strong presence and his continued support of Dungannon. But St Leger's recall and the more aggressive policies introduced by Edward VI's regime placed Tyrone's leadership under considerable strain. The deployment of an English garrison at Newry led to disputes between the earl and its captain, Nicholas Bagenal, who proceeded to raid Tyrone with impunity. The English, moreover, began assisting Dungannon against Tyrone in a premature succession dispute. In January 1551 Tyrone repaired to Dublin to seek redress from the Irish privy council, but Andrew Brereton, constable in Lecale, accused him of complicity with the French. He returned home and commenced hostilities against Dungannon and his other sons who had exploited their father's weakness in pursuit of their own interests. In May 1552 the new lord deputy, Sir James Croft, lured Tyrone into the pale, where he was detained. 
During the earl's absence, the earldom of Tyrone descended further into civil war. The earl's younger sons struggled with Dungannon, whom many held responsible for Tyrone's imprisonment, for control of the region. It was, however, his youngest son, Shane, who rose to prominence, emerging as the lordship's defender and Tyrone's likely successor. A desperate attempt to restore the earl was made in December 1552. He was now an old man but nevertheless set about reasserting his authority. He was reconciled with Dungannon and assembled an army to attack the Scots in Clandeboye in 1554. Shane, however, supported the Scots and easily defeated Tyrone and Dungannon. Tyrone was powerless against his enemies, who later imprisoned his wife, son, and grandson in Scotland. Shane was now the dominant force among the O'Neills; his orchestration of Dungannon's assassination in 1558 merely confirmed to the government what had long been apparent in Tyrone. Tyrone himself escaped to the pale, residing with William Walsh, bishop of Meath. He died before 16 July 1559 and was survived by his last wife, Mary. Shane was proclaimed O'Neill under Gaelic law, and subsequently petitioned for recognition as earl of Tyrone. The annals of the four masters note: 'Conn... decc iar ccaitheamh a aoisi agus aimsire gan oilbeaim gan imdhearccadh, agus ro ba doiligh do Chenel Eocchain a eccsidhe munbhadh a sheandataidh agus a sheanordhacht, agus a dhiol doidhre dfaccbhail ina ionadh.i. Seaan' ('Conn... died after having spent his age and time without blemish or reproach. His death would have been a great cause of great grief to the Kinel-Owen but for his great age and infirmity, and that left an heir worthy of him, i.e. John'; 'AFM', s.a. 1559). Conn's successful transition from Gaelic chief to English earl had a profound influence on the Gaelic order's perceptions of Tudor England. However, the government's inability to prevent Shane from undermining his father's authority exposed both the weakness and impermanence of Conn's transition. 


@@@@@


doc= 20768


O'Neill, Daniel (c.1612-1664), royalist army officer and courtier, was the eldest son of Con MacNiall MacBrian Faghartach O'Neill (died 1619), lord of Clandeboye in co. Antrim, and his wife, Eilis, the daughter of Art MacBaron O'Neill, the older, base-born brother of Hugh O'Neill, second earl of Tyrone. Born at the ancestral seat of his father's family at Castlereagh, co. Down, Daniel's life was charted by the political dexterity of his grandfather Niall MacBrian O'Neill and the intemperance of his father. The former owed his position to the crown's favour, which was threatened by the native ascendancy of Tyrone and the upheavals of the Nine Years' War. Playing off the fortunes of the conflict, Niall MacBrian, shortly before his death in February 1601, resecured his estates under the queen. His son Con wasted this recognition by going over to Tyrone's side before the battle of Kinsale. Captured and imprisoned after his 'perfidious revolt' (Chichester to Cecil, 8 Oct 1601, 'CSP Ire.', '1601-3', 110-11), Con escaped the government's wrath, but squandered his reprieve by inciting trouble over a petty disagreement with local authorities. Reconfined, he made a bargain with Hugh Montgomery, afterwards viscount of the Ards, for a royal pardon in return for half of his holdings. Recognizing an opportunity for advancement, James Hamilton, later Viscount Claneboye, persuaded the king to reward his service by including him in the Montgomery settlement. On 5 November 1605 the tripartite grant was passed by letters patent under the great seal of Ireland. Over the next fourteen years, until his death in 1619, Con O'Neill sold, mortgaged, and leased his remaining holdings. His eldest son and heir, Daniel, inherited little of an estate once valued at about $12,000 a year. 
The prospects for Con O'Neill's surviving family were not encouraging. One son, Hugh Buidhe, died as a youngster, while another, Con, pursued a career in the Spanish Netherlands as an officer in the Irish regiment of his uncle Owen Roe O'Neill. A daughter, Catherine, married her cousin Thady O'Hara of Crebilly, co. Antrim, and had five children. It was Daniel O'Neill who carried the burden of restoring what his father had dissipated. The government, recognizing the importance of this native Irish heir, made him a ward of chancery and raised him in England as a protestant. This background and the circumstances of his upbringing produced a striving and resourceful young man. Quick-witted and charming by nature, Daniel was described by Clarendon as 'in subtlety and understanding much superior to the whole nation of the old Irish', a 'great observer and discerner of man's natures and humours, and... very dextrous in compliance where he found it useful' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.513). 
As the recognized head of the Upper Clandeboye O'Neills, much of Daniel O'Neill's status and initial well-being revolved around the fate of his father's forsaken estates. In an inquisition delivered into chancery in June 1624, he and his assigns held only twenty-seven townlands about Castlereagh. By 1635 these lands were conveyed by the king to Viscount Montgomery of the Ards. This decision left O'Neill and his brother with a joint annuity of $160. Without immediate prospects in his homeland, O'Neill entered his majority by serving under Lord Conway in the Low Countries. Here he gained military experience and prominent friends. Until the late 1630s O'Neill divided his time between the English court and the states general -- 'the winter seasons in the one and the summer always in the army of the other; which was as good an education towards advancement in the world as that age knew' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.513). On the continent he became well acquainted with Elizabeth, the titular queen of Bohemia and sister of Charles I, and her husband, the elector palatine. Using these connections, in 1635 he redoubled his efforts to regain parts of his father's former estates. These undertakings coloured his politics and ambitions for the rest of his life. 
O'Neill's petitions were supported by such noteworthies as Archbishop Laud, Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel, Charles Lewis, the new elector palatine, and Lord Conway, all of whom addressed the Irish lord deputy, Thomas Wentworth, on O'Neill's behalf. Arundel recommended him for master of the Irish mint and Laud urged Wentworth 'to help him to a subsistence' and restore to 'this gentleman that [which] is lost without his own fault' (Laud to Wentworth, 16 Jan 1636, 'Works of... Laud', 7.266-7). O'Neill was also armed with addresses from the king. But his suit never had the lord deputy's support. Wentworth's inactivity was personal. He did not appreciate O'Neill's importunity or the persistent pressures from a well-connected supplicant with, his own protestantism notwithstanding, strong Irish Catholic associations. Wentworth saw O'Neill as a desperate suitor seeking leverage from any opportune source. He was especially troubled by his close relationship with his influential cousin Randal MacDonnell, second earl of Antrim. The lord deputy distrusted Antrim, grandson of the late earl of Tyrone, and his ambitions in north-east Ulster and the western isles of Scotland. In particular, Wentworth had misgivings over Antrim's appointment of O'Neill to a royal commission in Scotland. He was wary of arming either man and described O'Neill 'to be in his Heart and affection a Traytor, bred no other, Egg and Bird as they say' (Wentworth to Windebank, 2 March 1639, 'Works of... Laud', 7.297). This estrangement set O'Neill against the lord deputy, which prejudiced him with the king. 
Waiting for his claims to be sorted out, O'Neill returned to the Low Countries in 1637 and participated in the siege of Breda. He distinguished himself and was severely wounded in the primary assault. Following his recovery, he found himself caught up in the campaigns of the erupting bishops' wars with Scotland. He was given command of a troop of horse, 'having had good experience in the most active armies of that time, and courage very notorious' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.513). After the treaty of Berwick he retired to the Netherlands with dispatches for the queen of Bohemia. When hostilities renewed, he went back to command a regiment of horse and distinguished himself with his gallant defence at Newburn (28 August 1640), where he was badly wounded and captured. Reported to be dead, he was taken to Newcastle, where he was well treated by captors he knew from the continent. He was released during the Ripon negotiations. 
Over the next two years O'Neill took advantage of the evolving crisis between the crown and parliament to enhance his options. He conspired for the overthrow of Thomas Wentworth, now the earl of Strafford, and participated in a series of plots representing a variety of royalist interests. Two of these schemes, the army plots (March-May 1641), were linked to deploying the support of the northern English army officers for the king. For his services, the debt-ridden O'Neill got a royal annuity and the promise of an appointment as groom to the royal bedchamber. These intrigues were followed by a shrouded conspiracy involving his brother Con, an agent from his uncle Colonel Owen Roe O'Neill, to northern Irish Catholic malcontents. Con's initial mission, when he met up with Daniel, was to get recruiting licences for soldiers in Strafford's soon to be disbanded Irish army. Hoping to capitalize on Daniel's royalist connections, Con believed he could get the king's desperate assent to put these soldiers under beholden Catholic commanders. In what is sometimes called the 'colonels' plot', Con moved between England and the continent trying to co-ordinate plans through his older and well-connected sibling. In the coded correspondence that ensued, Daniel O'Neill was termed Lewis Lanois. This machination was derailed in mid-June when O'Neill fled to the continent to escape parliament's attempt to arrest him for his role in the original army plots. 
When he was questioned about his complicity, there was initially insufficient evidence to convict O'Neill. It was only after incriminating testimony surfaced that he fled to the continent. In September, hoping for immunity under a negotiated act of oblivion, he returned to England and surrendered to John Pym. O'Neill was sent to the Gatehouse prison in Westminster to await his trial, declining to respond to the initial indictment. But new revelations about the second plot saw the charges changed to high treason. While he was in custody, his health began to suffer and he successfully petitioned in January 1642 for better treatment. He was moved to the Tower and afforded greater personal liberty. On 5 May he escaped by tying sheets and a tablecloth together. He went over the wall and avoided detection by dressing as a woman. Searches were ordered with descriptions of him 'being of sanguine complection, a middle stature, light brown hair, about the age of thirty, and little or no beard, and of late hath been sickly' ('JHL', 5.48). His flight gained considerable notoriety in a provocative tract detailing his breakout. It confirmed him 'a consanguinean to that rebellious family [O'Neills] in Ireland' ('Oneales Escape out of the Tower of London'). This association seemed appropriate after the outbreak in October 1641 of the Irish rising. 
The upheaval in Ireland stoked the deteriorating English political crisis which brought an Irish royalist like Daniel O'Neill to the forefront. From Brussels, where he had fled, he raised arms and ammunition for the anticipated royalist campaigns of the civil war. Back in England he became a major in Colonel Osborne's regiment before taking a commission as a lieutenant-colonel of a regiment of horse under Prince Rupert of the Rhine. He participated in the battles of Edgehill, Chalgrove, and the first Newbury encounter, and was wounded at the failed relief of Reading. Soon after, he learned that his brother Con had been killed in Ireland after quarter had been granted at the skirmish of Clones. But, grief aside, most of O'Neill's attention was given to serving at the royal court in Oxford, where he could have 'access to all those of the best credit in this state of the world' (Trevor to Ormond, 9 Dec 1643, T. Carte, 'A Collection of Original Letters and Papers, Concerning the Affairs of England', 1.26). Through his former services and connections he appeared to be the right person to help the crown deflect parliament's alliance with the covenanting Scots. 
The royalist camp knew that a military diversion in Scotland was necessary to obstruct the new accord. In a scheme similar to that suggested by Antrim during Strafford's deputyship, it was hoped that Scottish royalists supported by Irish soldiers would foil the king's enemies. The plan called for Antrim to raise 10,000 troops in northern Ireland to serve under the earl of Montrose in Scotland. Unfortunately, Antrim lacked credibility and was not on good terms with the marquess of Ormond, the lord lieutenant of Ireland, who had just signed a cessation of arms with the ruling Irish Catholic confederacy. To facilitate these negotiations, Lord Digby proposed his good friend the well-trusted Daniel O'Neill. Getting him appointed, Digby had to overcome the king's wariness about Daniel's role in Strafford's overthrow. He also extracted O'Neill's long-promised appointment to be a groom to the royal bedchamber. Digby advised Charles that this post gave O'Neill stature as an emissary. He then mollified his majesty by suggesting that having an Irishman so near 'to the person of the king' would not be a factor, since O'Neill would be taken up with services elsewhere (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.513-21). 
O'Neill and Antrim arrived on 23 February 1644 at the confederate capital of Kilkenny and addressed the supreme council, urging that their support would help the confederate peace commissioners get favourable terms from the king. From here O'Neill met Ormond in Dublin, before proceeding with Antrim to Ulster. By the end of June, 1600 soldiers were raised and shipped to Scotland for service in Montrose's army. Departing soon after, O'Neill returned to England too late to join his regiment at the battle of Marston Moor. He did participate in the western campaigns against Essex's forces and took part in the second battle of Newbury. But his value was his royalism and his ties to his uncle Owen Roe, the native military leader and protector of the clerical party. 
For most of the next five years O'Neill's primary tasks were to secure aid from the native Irish and bring his uncle over to the king's side. These dealings were frustrating and often futile because he could not offset the suspicions of the papal nuncio Rinuccini and his faction. At stake were religious and landed guarantees that were often neither negotiable nor enforceable. With Owen Roe and Ormond difficult and contrary bargainers, O'Neill's efforts faltered in the kaleidoscopic arena of confederate politics. By 1647 he spoke of quitting his homeland and entering the French service. Digby persuaded him to reconsider, despite their disappointment over Ormond's surrender of Dublin to parliament. Another set-back was the opposition of the clerical party to O'Neill's appointment to be general of the confederacy's Connaught army. With failing prospects, he accompanied Digby to France, where he again was caught up in a variety of enterprises involving the recruitment of Irish soldiers. Not until October 1648 did he return to Ireland with Ormond to resume his royalist representations. 
Daniel O'Neill reopened talks with Owen Roe, but the terms of the treaty did not satisfy Rinuccini and the clergy. When the nuncio left Ireland in February 1649, O'Neill again failed to secure a pact because the intentions and good faith of Ormond's party were still suspect. The treaty's urgency was soon redoubled by the changing military climate of Ireland. Parliamentarian forces had defeated Ormond at Rathmines (2 August 1649), Oliver Cromwell had landed in Dublin (15 August 1649), and truces with Owen Roe proved fruitless. The gravity of these events weighed heavily on O'Neill, who busily tried to revive talks with his terminally ill uncle. On 20 October a peace accord was finally reached between Owen Roe O'Neill and Ormond, and seventeen days later General O'Neill died. 
Following the settlement, O'Neill accompanied his cousin Major-General Hugh Dubh O'Neill and 2200 men south to try to repel Cromwell's forces. Too late to be effective, O'Neill got some satisfaction when the new English king Charles II appointed him to the Irish privy council. But the important selection for O'Neill was the contest over who would succeed Owen Roe as the commander of the northern army. Ormond and his supporters favoured O'Neill's election. Unfortunately, the clerical party led by the bishop of Clogher resisted his candidacy. O'Neill pleaded ill health and proposed Hugh Dubh to lead his uncle's army. He also accused the clergy of looking 'more to their reputations at Rome than their preservation at home' (D. O'Neill to Ormond, 9 Jan 1649-50, Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 26, fol. 332). After a great deal of scheming, Clogher prevailed by suggesting that if elected he would turn the command over to Daniel O'Neill on the inconceivable condition of his conversion to Catholicism. Three months later the bishop-led army was decimated at the battle of Scariffhollis. Having no other recourse, O'Neill got the permission of Henry Ireton to enlist 5000 men for the service of Spain or the states general, and returned to the continent. 
For the next decade Daniel O'Neill's attention was focused on survival. Firmly attached to the fortunes of the exiled court, he risked his life on many occasions for the Stuart cause. He gathered intelligence about conditions in England, reconciled royalist factions, carried dispatches, and acted as a commissariat to Charles and his court. Some of his most important tasks were mediations between the Sealed Knot and Action parties over the ill-fated royalist insurrections in England. But O'Neill and his fellow emigres suffered for their devotion. They were often debt-ridden and sometimes lived from hand to mouth. Looking for maintenance, O'Neill even offered to raise 3000 soldiers for Spain in return for the position of colonel-general of all Irish in the Spanish service. His proposal rejected, he depended on his position as groom to the royal bedchamber and his ties to Lord Heenvliet and his wife, who cared for Charles II's sister, Princess Mary of Orange. He used his influence at the Dutch court to favour friends such as Ormond and Edward Hyde, who once addressed O'Neill as the 'Infallible Subtle' (Hyde to O'Neill, 31 Oct 1653, Bodl. Oxf., MS Clarendon 46, fol. 361). In one instance O'Neill recommended Hyde's daughter Anne to be a lady-in-waiting to the princess, putting her on a course to become a future duchess of York. 
With the restoration of the Stuarts on 29 May 1660, O'Neill's devotion and friendship were well rewarded by an appreciative monarch. He never received a peerage, but he accumulated money-making positions and sinecures to make him one of the richest men in England. He held numerous lucrative land grants in London and Ireland and built Belsize House in Hampstead. Having married in September 1660 Heenvliet's widow, Katherine, 'nee' Wotton (died 1667), who had been created countess of Chesterfield as widow of her first husband, Henry Stanhope, in May of that year, he enjoyed her country home at Boughton Malherbe in Kent. O'Neill continued as groom to the bedchamber, was made captain of the King's horse guards, became a member of parliament for St Ives in 1662, was admitted to Gray's Inn, and sat as an absentee representative in the Irish parliament of 1661. He also was granted extensive mining rights and privileges, held the coveted monopoly of sole manufacturer of gunpowder to the crown, was appointed surveyor of the petty customs and tonnage, and was the accountant for the regulation of ale houses. And for the payment of $21,000 annually he became the postmaster-general of all the king's dominions, with the monopoly of carrying all letters to the colonies with power to make contacts with his continental counterparts. Still in the king's service, he worked as the warden of St James's Palace and park, served as building commissioner in London, and co-ordinated the recovery of the royal family's heirlooms. He did not neglect his friends. He helped to restore Antrim to his Irish estates, assisted Sir Henry Bennet in becoming secretary of state, and looked after the well-being of his niece and nephew and three stepchildren. When O'Neill died in his Whitehall lodgings, on 24 October 1664, the king wrote, 'Poor Oneale died... of an ulcer in his guts; he was an honest man as ever lived; I am sure I have lost a very good servant' (Charles II to the duchess of Orleans, 24 Oct 166[4], Dalrymple, 2.2.27). The diarist Samuel Pepys commented that 'This day the great O'Neale died; I believe, to the content of all the protestants in Ireland' ('The Diary of Samuel Pepys', ed. H. B. Wheatley, vol. 4, 1894, 273-4). O'Neill was buried at Boughton Malherbe parish church. His wife was the major beneficiary of his accumulated wealth. 
O'Neill's inscripted epitaph lauding how he 'added new lustre by his own merit' to his honorable ancestry (Cregan, 5.73) is also appropriate for his life and career. His accomplishments were considerable, given his father's disappointing bequest and the family's situation in post-plantation Ulster. From early on he appreciated how his fortune was tied to royal favour. Even in desperate times he knew there was no alternative to the crown's goodwill. Raised as a protestant, he never made an issue of religion. He tolerated the old faith and used protestantism as a badge of his political correctness. He endured by using his nurtured charm to gain influential friends and manipulate circumstances to his advantage. His personal dexterity was a major factor in his broad appeal. An experienced soldier, he was also the ultimate courtier, an intimate of the royal family, and confidant to policy makers. His activities during the decades of war and exile were remarkable testimonies to his endurance and political acumen. His post-Restoration awards, together with his magnanimity, speak to the quality of his character and the success of his endeavours. All told, he was probably a better royalist than an Irishman. 


@@@@@


doc= 20769


Ua Neill, Flaithbertach (d. 1036), king of Ailech, was a member of the Cenel nEogain branch of the northern Ui Neill, and the son of Muirchertach (died 977), son of Domnall ua Neill (d. 980), high-king of Ireland, and of Cres Cumal, a lady of the Ui Maine of Connacht. He succeeded to the kingship of Ailech following the premature death of his uncle Aed in 1004, and in 1005 and 1007 is found raiding in Lecale, Down, and doing battle against the Ulaid. He may have submitted to the high-king, Brian Boruma, on the latter's northern campaign of 1005, but refused submission on that of the following year (though at some point he married Brian's daughter, Be Binn, who bore him his sons Aed and Domnall). When he ventured south to Conailli Muirthemne in 1006 he was opposed by the former high-king, Mael Sechnaill mac Domnaill of the southern Ui Neill, and lost 200 men; but he raided successfully as far south as Brega in 1009. 
Ua Neill continued to build up his northern power base by blinding and killing an Inishowen lord in 1009, and, having in 1010 made a renewed submission at Armagh to Brian Boruma (who brought Flaithbertach's hostages home to Kincora), he raided westwards in Cenel Conaill in the following year in the company of Brian's son Murchad, and eastwards in Ulaid, where he burnt Duneight. In 1012 he was back in east Ulster plundering Ards, and led two western campaigns against Cenel Conaill. Mael Sechnaill took advantage of his absence on one of these to raid the Cenel nEogain inauguration site at Telach Oc, but offered no opposition to Flaithbertach when he campaigned near Kells, Meath, a year later. 
In 1015, following the death of Brian Boruma, Ua Neill assisted Mael Sechnaill in his campaign to recover the high-kingship, burning Dublin and Ui Chennselaig in the south-east, setting up a new king over Leinster, and plundering neighbouring Osraige. Five years later he helped secure the hostages of Connacht for Mael Sechnaill; but after the latter's death in 1022 he began to interfere again in the late high-king's sphere of influence. In 1025 he took an army south to Brega and to the area ruled by the Hiberno-Norse of Dublin, taking hostages and effectively securing his dominance over them. Although he was repulsed by a member of Mael Sechnaill's dynasty, he returned to Meath a year later and seized from the Hiberno-Norse the crannog site at Inishmot. 
This is the last military engagement at which Flaithbertach Ua Neill's presence is recorded, although the army of Cenel nEogain did raid Ulaid in 1027 and Cenel Conaill in 1028. He must have been very elderly at this stage, a full fifty years after the death of his father, and in the following year went 'on his pilgrimage' to Armagh, thereby abdicating. In spite of his advanced years, in 1030 he became the latest in a succession of recent Irish lords to visit Rome (as a result of which he acquired his nickname, Flaithbertach an Trostain, 'Flaithbertach of the Pilgrim's Staff'), returning safely within a year. His son Domnall had died in 1027 and he was succeeded by another son, Aed, whom he joined in plundering Inishowen in 1031; but Aed too died, in 1033, forcing Flaithbertach out of his retirement, an annalist reporting that 'the north of Ireland submitted to him on account of seniority' (annals of Inisfallen, s.a. 1034). However, he died in 1036 'after a good life and penance' ('AFM', s.a. 1036). The kingship of Cenel nEogain and Ailech passed out of his direct line at this point, and no one of the surname Ua Neill held it again until it was recovered by Flaithbertach's direct descendant, Aed in Macaem Toinlesc, in 1167. 


@@@@@


doc= 20770


Gordon O'Neill (c.1652-1705), army officer, the younger son of Sir Phelim Roe O'Neill and his third wife, Jean, was named for his mother's family, but lived in the shadow of his father's 1641 infamy. The capture and subsequent execution of his father by the Cromwellians came about when he attempted to communicate with his wife, who was caring for the infant Gordon in their confinement at Charlemont Castle. His fate was also affected by the actions of his older half-brother, James Hamilton, baron of Strabane. Hamilton had joined Phelim Roe and the Catholic royalists in 1649 and as a Roman Catholic recusant forfeited his land to the Commonwealth in June 1655. With declining prospects, Gordon O'Neill and his mother made the necessary accommodations. Gordon was raised outside his faith, never learned the Irish language (P. Walsh, 92), and married 'a Protestant lady' ('DNB') from the city of Derry with whom he had at least two children, Catherine and Gordon. Eventually the young O'Neill returned to Catholicism, lived in Derry, and served as a captain of grenadiers in the infantry regiment of William Stewart, Lord Mountjoy. A favoured officer, he was made lord lieutenant of Tyrone and sat for the county in the parliament of 1689. Fighting for the Jacobite Catholic-royalist cause in the Williamite Wars, he led a regiment of foot in many critical campaigns. He participated in the siege and blockade of Derry and was wounded in the thigh. O'Neill and his regiment were reassigned to Drogheda and fought on 12 July 1690 in the battle of the Boyne. Afterwards, he fell back with the Jacobite forces towards the Shannon River and defended the city of Limerick. A year later he was with the French commander St Ruth, near Athlone, when the Dutch General Ginkel soundly defeated the Jacobite forces at the battle of Aughrim. O'Neill and his regiment fought well, but he was severely wounded and was left for dead on the battlefield. Fortunately, he was recognized by Scottish relatives among the Williamite soldiers and was taken to Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 20771


O Neill, Einri (d. 1392), nobleman, was a younger son of Niall Mor O Neill (d. 1397), king or chief of Tir Eoghain, and his wife, Beanmidhe (died 1385), daughter of a Mac Mathghamhna chief. He was nicknamed Einri Aimhreidh (Henry the Turbulent or Henry the Contentious) and was long remembered in Ulster folklore as Harry Avery. Evidence that his sobriquet was not bestowed on him, as the annals of Connacht flatteringly allege, 'per antiphrasim', comes in a letter to his father, Niall Mor, dated 18 July 1375, in which Milo Sweteman, archbishop of Armagh, complained: 'your degenerate sons Henricus and Catholicus [Cu Uladh Ruadh], hunters ordained by the devil, are raping the wives of divers husbands and their handmaidens with them' (register of Milo Sweteman, fol. 27'r'), causing the citizens and tenants of Armagh to threaten emigration. 
Subsequently Einri O Neill is found in western Tir Eoghain, on the borders of Fermanagh and Tir Conaill (the Donegal area). In 1379 he inflicted a defeat on the men of Fermanagh and in 1380 intervened in the succession struggles of Tir Conaill to enable his brother-in-law, Toirdhealbhach an Fhiona O Domhnaill (died 1423), to become king there. He appears to have exercised authority over the area around the modern Newtownstewart, in Tyrone, where his sons and grandsons, known as the Sliocht Einri ('descendants of Henry') or Slughte Henry Avery O'Neill, held sway subsequently and where the ruin called Harry Avery's Castle is traditionally associated with his rule (the implied date being accepted as possible by modern archaeologists). O Neill married a kinswoman, Aiffric (died 1389), the daughter of Aodh O Neill. The year of her death saw the first recorded raid by one of their sons against a vassal of O Domhnaill. 
In contrast to his sons, who turned against both O Domhnaill and Niall Mor, Einri O Neill was a loyal supporter of his father and of his elder brother Niall Og O Neill (d. 1403) ['see under 'O Neill, Niall Mor]. In March 1390 he yielded his second son as a hostage for the release of Niall Og, captured in battle by the Anglo-Irish the previous year. This son, soon ransomed, may be identical with Domhnall Bog O Neill (died 1432), the future king of Tir Eoghain, who, after the death of his brother Briain Mor in 1402, emerged as the leader of Einri O Neill's descendants, and seized the kingship from Eoghan O Neill (d. 1456), son of Niall Og O Neill. Other sons of Einri O Neill are named as Aodh ('fl'. 1412), Niall Ruadh (died 1430/1432), Sean, Ruaidhri, and Einri Og. Einri Aimhreidh O Neill died on 16 May 1392. Described by most annalists as worthy to succeed his brother in the kingship and praised for his extravagant generosity, he was criticized by Aughuistin Magraidhin (died 1405) as 'an unjust, wicked and sinful man' (O hInnse, no. 8, 147). 


@@@@@


doc= 20772


O Neill, Einri (d. 1489), king or lord of Tir Eoghain, was the eldest son of Eoghan O Neill (d. 1456), chief of Tir Eoghain, and of his wife, Caitriona (died 1427), daughter of Ardghal Mac Mathghamhna. Since Eoghan was ransomed in 1422 from O Neill of Clandeboye by his own wife and sons, Einri and his next brother, Aodh of the Fews, were probably born not long after 'c'.1400. In 1431 Einri was briefly captured in a frontier conflict by Neachtain O Domhnaill, brother of the king of Tir Conaill. In 1432 the hostility was renewed as a 'great war' between the chiefs Eoghan O Neill (officially inaugurated in that year) and Neachtain's brother, Niall Garbh O Domhnaill (died 1439). Einri negotiated with O Domhnaill's enemies, the O Conchobhair chieftains of Sligo; then in 1433 he joined his father in invading Ulster east of the Bann, where O Domhnaill had brought his army to ally with Robert Savage and MacQuillin, leaders of the vestigial Anglo-Irish colony there, who, like O Neill and O Domhnaill themselves, were nominal subjects of Richard, duke of York, the absentee earl of Ulster. 
With the aid of a fleet commanded by Mac Domhnaill, the Scottish lord of the Isles, Einri O Neill and his father burnt the port of Ardglass and drove O Domhnaill and MacQuillin into Louth, to seek the ineffective assistance of the chief governor of Ireland, who joined them in an unsuccessful raid on Armagh but could not prevent the submission of O Domhnaill to O Neill before the end of the year. As the Anglo-Irish seem to have anticipated, this consolidation of authority in the north resulted in the invasion of Meath and Louth in 1434 by all the Ulster chiefs, during which campaign O Domhnaill was captured, but Einri O Neill and his brother Aodh distinguished themselves by covering the retreat of their troops after burning Nobber. 
The annals credit the brothers with similar prowess at the camp-assault of the Rosses and the battle of Sliab Truim on Eoghan O Neill's expedition in 1435 against Neachtain O Domhnaill, deputy leader of Tir Conaill, and his own hostile kinsman, Brian Og (a grandson of the Einri O Neill who died in 1392). When Brian Og deserted Neachtain, coming in to parley under the safe conduct of O Neill's court poet, Einri and his brothers violated the poet's guarantee by imprisoning and maiming Brian Og and his two sons, one of whom died in consequence. The poet, having vigorously satirized O Neill's sons, was disinherited and exiled to Connacht for eighteen years, as he later lamented in an apologetic address to Einri, 'Cionnas do roichfinn ri Oiligh?' ('How shall I reach the king of Oileach?'; Killiney, Franciscan House of Studies, MS A25, p. 149). 
Einri O Neill became increasingly prominent. In 1438 he intervened in Fermanagh to negotiate the release of the chief Mag Uidhir, imprisoned by rival kinsmen. Following his father's submission to the Dublin government in the spring of 1441, Einri brought an Anglo-Irish army to the borders of Tir Conaill in 1442 to assist Eoghan in subduing Neachtain O Domhnaill, when he annexed the disputed borderland of Cineal Moain and left a garrison in Neachtain's castle on the River Finn. He dominated Tir Conaill politically thereafter until his appointment of Aodh Ruadh O Domhnaill (died 1505) as chief in 1461. 
The repeated attempts by Einri O Neill and his father to force submission from O Neill of Clandeboye were less successful. In 1444 they ended in the surrender of nineteen hostages, including a son of Einri, to secure a safe retreat. However, Einri's presence at Ardglass in company with the chiefs of the Ulster colonists on 9 December 1448 suggests an alliance with these, verified in 1450 when he aided MacQuillin to attack O Neill of Clandeboye. At Drogheda on 27 August 1449 Einri O Neill, having full powers from his father, family, and subjects, ratified an indenture with the duke of York (as earl of Ulster and also king's lieutenant). He undertook, in exchange for the duke's aid and protection: to return any formerly conquered lands; to render the ancient services, including the 'bonnacht of Ulster' (a former right of the earls of Ulster to billet fixed quotas of mercenary soldiers on each of the Ulster chiefs); to war against the duke's enemies; and to serve him whenever summoned with 500 men-at-arms and 500 foot soldiers. In May 1452 Einri brought about the death of Neachtain O Domhnaill and married his widow, the daughter of MacWilliam Burke, lord of Mayo, although he was already married to Gormlaith (died 1465), mother of his son Einri Og and daughter of Mac Murchadha Caomhanach and of the sister of James Butler, fourth earl of Ormond. That July the dying Ormond brought an army northwards and forced Einri to dismiss O Domhnaill's widow and take back Gormlaith, the earl's niece. 
In 1455 Einri O Neill was inaugurated chief in place of his father, Eoghan, in July and confirmed in office by Archbishop John Mey of Armagh on 4 August; he drew up a concordat with Mey on 14 November following. Styled in 1474 'the king's friend', O Neill brought an Anglo-Irish army on an unsuccessful siege of his own brother Art's castle of Omagh in 1459, and in 1463 received a livery of scarlet and a golden chain from Edward IV, who, as the son of Richard duke of York, was now earl of Ulster. O Neill's expeditions to eastern Ulster in 1469, 1470, and 1476 in support of the White family and MacQuillin against the Savages and O Neill of Clandeboye, and his capture of Omagh after a six-month siege in 1470, mark a high point in his career. In 1480 his son and heir, Conn Mor (who married Eleanor, sister of Gerald Fitzgerald, eighth earl of Kildare), received a grant of English law, the earl joining Conn that year in an unsuccessful siege of the castle at Caledon, stronghold of Einri O Neill's brother, Sean Buidhe. Besides family rivalry, O Neill was threatened by O Domhnaill and O Neill of Clandeboye, who combined in 1481 to capture Conn. After ransoming Conn in 1483, Einri O Neill handed over the precarious chieftaincy to him, and eventually died on 15 June 1489. 


@@@@@


doc= 20773


O'Neill, Henry (1798-1880), artist and antiquary, was born at Clonmel, co. Tipperary, the only child of Henry O'Neill and his wife, the daughter of Samuel Watson, a bookseller. After the early death of his parents, he was brought up by his paternal aunt Sarah O'Neill, a Dublin haberdasher. His artistic talent was recognized and he attended the Dublin Society school from 1815. The society awarded him a silver medal for 'industry and talents' in 1825. From 1835 he exhibited regularly at the Royal Hibernian Academy, of which he became an associate in 1837 but from which he resigned in 1844. 
Despite his assertions to the contrary, it was financial need that drove O'Neill to London in 1847; he fared little better in England and joined the army, but his friends bought him out shortly thereafter. He returned to Dublin, and dedicated his life to travelling around the country to record the antiquities of Ireland. He is best known for two books, 'The most Interesting of the Sculptured Crosses of Ancient Ireland' (1857) and 'The Fine Arts and Civilisation of Ancient Ireland' (1863). Both works collected O'Neill's drawings of the antiquities, while the latter work sought to demonstrate the existence of an advanced civilization in Ireland in prehistoric times, and to refute the conclusions of George Petrie in his 'Ecclesiastical Architecture of Ireland' (1845). O'Neill's argument that the round towers were of pagan origin was soon discredited, and his other arguments did not carry lasting weight. 
O'Neill was a member of Daniel O'Connell's Repeal Association and wrote a pamphlet attacking landlordism, 'Ireland for the Irish' (1868). His portrait of O'Connell and his fellow prisoners in Richmond gaol in 1843 was well received. John Ruskin was said to have paid 50 guineas for a small collection of O'Neill's drawings; his 1874 portrait of John Cornelius O'Callaghan, the historian, hangs in the National Gallery in Dublin. He died at 109 Lower Gardiner Street, Dublin, on 21 December 1880, leaving a widow (his second wife) and four children in straitened circumstances. 


@@@@@


doc= 20774


O Neill, Aodh (d. 1230), king of Tir Eoghain, was the son of Aed an Macaem Toinlesc 
(the 'Lazy-Rumped Lad'; died 1177)
, who is said to have earned his unusual sobriquet by refusing to rise respectfully to greet his rival kinsman, the high-king Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn (died 1166). The accession of Ruaidri O Conchobair (died 1198) to the high-kingship of Ireland in 1166 weakened the Mac Lochlainn family, and Aed an Macaem Toinlesc O Neill shared the kingship of Tir Eoghain with a Mac Lochlainn in 1167-9, enjoyed a brief spell in sole power 'c'.1170-1174, but was deposed before his death, which took place in the same year as the Anglo-Norman invasion of Ulster under John de Courcy. 
Aodh Meith (the epithet means 'the Fat') is first recorded in 1199 leading a fleet of five ships to harry the Larne district of Antrim in retaliation for a raid by Courcy on Derry and Inishowen. His successful wars against Tir Conaill (the Donegal area) and O hEignigh of Fermanagh that year show O Neill leading men from Inishowen and Mag Iotha, or the west bank of the Foyle, traditional homelands of the Mac Lochlainn family. Perhaps it was after this campaign that he married Bean Midhe (died 1215), the daughter of O hEignigh. In 1200-01 O Neill repelled a series of Anglo-Norman raids on southern Tir Eoghain, then joined O hEignigh on an expedition into Connacht, to support Cathal Croibhdhearg O Conchobhair (died 1224) against Cathal Carrach O Conchobhair and William de Burgh (died 1206). The annals say the northern Irish were taken unawares by the presence of Anglo-Normans in Cathal Carrach's army and were withdrawing when they were overtaken and defeated, O hEignigh being killed and O Neill forced to submit and give hostages. On his return home O Neill was briefly deposed in favour of Conchobhar Beag Mac Lochlainn, who was, however, slain the same year when Eigneachan, the first O Domhnaill king of Tir Conaill (died 1208), raided Inishowen. 
After some years' struggle against both Mac Lochlainn and O Domhnaill claims on Derry and Inishowen, O Neill concluded a truce 'c'.1208-9 with Domhnall Mor O Domhnaill (died 1241) which the four masters call 'an alliance against such of the English or Irish as should oppose them'. Meanwhile John de Courcy, deposed from the lordship of Ulster in 1205, sought refuge in Tir Eoghain, drawing down punitive raids in 1207 from his successor, Earl Hugh de Lacy (died 'c'.1243), who failed to exact submission or hostages from O Neill. Aodh Meith also refused hostages when he met King John at the siege of Carrickfergus in 1210, during that monarch's expedition to Ireland to expel the rebellious Lacy. However, after the English king departed, his officials exacted a fine of 293 cows from O Neill and 321 cows as rent for Tir Eoghain, the earldom of Ulster being now in the king's hands. The northern coastline was granted away to King John's Scottish allies, Alan Fitzroland and Thomas of Galloway, who mounted a series of raids and built a castle at Coleraine, while the justiciar, Bishop John de Gray of Norwich, built three castles along O Neill's southern borders at Belleek, Clones, and Newry, all of which Aodh Meith destroyed in 1213-14, with the assistance of the other Ulster chiefs. He burnt the town of Carlingford in 1214 and raided the Anglo-Normans of eastern Ulster the following year. 
The English chancery addressed O Neill as one among many Irish vassal kings in a circular letter of 1221, but he soon defied the Anglo-Irish government again, in support of the dispossessed Hugh de Lacy, destroying the castle of Coleraine in 1222 and blocking William (II) Marshal's attempt to enter Ulster with the royal army in 1224. He made destructive king-making expeditions into Connacht in 1225 and 1226, with only temporary success, though he did exact hostages from Tir Conaill on the same campaign. To the surprise of the annalist, this warlike chief died a natural death in 1230, leaving his son Domhnall (died 'c'.1235), ancestor of the Clann Aodha Buidhe, or Clandeboye O'Neills, to dispute his kingship with Domhnall Mac Lochlainn (died 1241). 


@@@@@


doc= 20775


O'Neill, Hugh, second earl of Tyrone (c.1550-1616), magnate and rebel, was born in the lordship of Tyrone, in the province of Ulster, the second son of Matthew O'Neill (Feardorcha), first baron of Dungannon (died 1558), landowner, and his wife, Siobhan (Joan), daughter of Constantine Maguire. 
Matthew was heir designate, under English law, to the earldom of Tyrone, created in 1542 by Henry VIII for Conn Bacach O'Neill, Gaelic lord of Tyrone. His eldest son, Brian O'Neill (died 1562), was his heir in turn. As a younger son, Hugh O'Neill had but limited prospects, and these were further dimmed when an uncle, Shane O'Neill, forcibly opposed the succession arrangement, contending, among other matters, that Matthew was no O'Neill but the illegitimate son of a blacksmith named Kelly. Shane's opposition led successively to the death of Matthew in 1558 and of Brian O'Neill in 1562. Moreover, following Tyrone's death in 1559, Shane became head of the O'Neills by Gaelic procedures, and forcefully opposed successive government efforts to impose a division of the lordship. The crown, at various points, considered meeting his demands, especially in 1562, when he visited Elizabeth I's court. However, these overtures came to nothing because Shane would not agree to any segmentation of the traditional O'Neill lordship, or to relinquishing authority over the 'uir rithe' ('subsidiary lords'), who customarily paid a head rent to the ruling O'Neill. Thus, as negotiations failed, the crown decided the issue should be settled by force, and in 1567 Shane was killed. This outcome benefited the young Hugh O'Neill, who was recognized as third baron of Dungannon and prospective heir to the earldom. 
It is unclear where Dungannon spent his childhood, but any fosterage with the O'Hagans and O'Quinns would have been brief since each of these septs identified with Shane O'Neill in the internecine struggle. It is probable that Hugh spent some of the time from 1556 to 1559 in the Dublin household of Sir Henry Sidney, which seems to have been followed by a period with the family of Giles Hovendon, an English soldier and settler in the Irish midlands, who leased property at Balgriffen, co. Dublin, assigned in 1542 to Tyrone to meet the costs of educating his heirs in English customs. This sequence is consistent with Sidney's claim of 1583 that he had 'bred' Dungannon in his house 'from a little boy, then very poor of goods and full feebly friended' (Brewer and Bullen, 1575-88, 339) and with the fact that Hovendon's sons were regularly described as foster brothers of Dungannon and remained among his most loyal supporters. Hovendon's tutelage had obviously ended by 1567 when Sidney brought Dungannon, together with the heirs of several Irish noble houses, to court. 
Dungannon was necessary to this delegation, because Sidney sought authority to restructure the province of Ulster following Shane's death. This is probably the occasion that Thomas Gainsford had in mind when he described how Dungannon 'in his younger time trooped in the streets of London, with sufficient equipage and orderly respect' (Gainsford, 14). The crown probably met his expenses and enabled him to sue out his livery as baron of Dungannon. This installation indicates that the government saw a place for his brother Cormac Mac Baron and him in a remodelled Ulster. The primary objective was to expel the Scottish MacDonalds from the lands that they had occupied in the province, and to replace them with trustworthy English, Old English, and Gaelic proprietors. Then, to further assure stability, it was intended that the great O'Neill lordship should be parcelled out between various members of the ruling O'Neill family, the principal 'uir-rithe' whose territories lay on the perimeter of the lordship, and the heads of the principal septs within the lordship on whose support O'Neill power was based. Dungannon stood to benefit from this scheme, although clearly the government did not intend to grant him all his grandfather's estates. 
These various plans for Ulster explain why, after 1568, it made sense for crown officials, including Sir Nicholas Bagenal, marshal of the army, and his son, Henry Bagenal, who were settled at Newry, co. Down, to enable Dungannon to acquire further lands in south Armagh commensurate with his status as baron. Yet Dungannon lacked sufficient support because Sidney, who might have assisted him, was detained in England. When Sidney returned to his post in 1568 his scheme for the reform of Ulster had been compromised both because, in 1567, Turlough Luineach O'Neill succeeded Shane as the ruling O'Neill, and because the queen demurred at the prospective cost. It was not until 1572, after Sidney's departure, having surrendered the governorship to Sir William Fitzwilliam, that a systematic reform scheme for Ulster was launched. What emerged was fundamentally different both in theory and practice from anything previously contemplated, and these alterations involved a correspondingly different role for Dungannon. The theory underpinning the new scheme was the crown's ancient claim to all Ulster between the River Bann and the sea. It was now also asserted that the crown had title to the entire lordship of Tyrone through the attainder of Shane in the Irish parliament of 1569-71. This put paid to Dungannon's hopes of claiming his grandfather's entire estates by hereditary right. Yet he now had the opportunity to extend his landholdings as this revised reform scheme for Ulster unfolded. 
The essence of this scheme was that private individuals would restructure the eastern sector of the province along predetermined lines at their own expense, being compensated with grants of land and office. The two principal adventurers attracted by this opportunity were Sir Thomas Smith, principal secretary, and Walter Devereux, first earl of Essex. Essex hoped to secure control with a fort on the River Blackwater, just east of the customary centre of O'Neill power at Dungannon, and he anticipated that the garrison there would be provisioned by Lord Dungannon himself. The campaigns associated with Smith and Essex were among the bloodiest and most futile undertaken by English planters in early modern Ireland, but they were important to Dungannon because he became indispensable to them and his actions attracted the government's attention. He received favourable mention in dispatches sent by the colonizers to England. Essex placed him in charge of a company of cavalry, and was soon commending him for his forwardness in 'service' as 'the only man of Ulster... meet to be trusted and used' (W. B. Devereux, ed., 'Lives and Letters of the Devereux Earls of Essex... 1540-1642', 2 vols., 1853, 1.40-42). Continued military exertions, including efforts to ensnare, or kill, Turlough Luineach O'Neill, earned Dungannon further commendation at a time when Essex was complaining of English gentlemen who deserted his cause, and of Old English landowners who refused to support it with either men or money. In return for his services he received military support from Essex to extend the lands he already held in Ulster, and was appointed captain of troops in government pay. These men were available to him for both private and official purposes, but he was called upon regularly between 1575 and the early 1590s to further various government missions with them, including providing assistance to Lord Grey in the suppression of the Desmond revolt. 
These various actions helped Dungannon to familiarize himself both with English modes of warfare and with the methods by which impecunious crown captains advanced themselves in Ireland. During these years he also established lasting bonds with several English captains, while, in 1574, the queen advised Essex 'to use all good means to nourish the Baron of Dungannon's and [Calvagh] O'Donnell's good devotion towards us'. This directive was taken by William Cecil, first Baron Burghley, lord treasurer, to mean that Dungannon 'be admitted to be earl of Tyrone according to his right' ('CSP Ire.', '1571-5', 508), although he also directed that this elevation be linked to a division of the previous Tyrone earldom among several claimants to royal favour. Probably Elizabeth and Dungannon both had this intervention in mind when she later described him as 'a creature of our own', and when he admitted to having been 'raised from nothing by her Majesty' (Morgan, 85, 94). 
Despite Dungannon's good reputation in official circles, no specific lands were assigned to him beyond those he had seized with government connivance. However officials tolerated his further aggrandizements provided that they were at the expense either of Turlough Luineach O'Neill, whose power they wished to curb, or the MacShanes (the sons of Shane O'Neill), whose potential they feared. Concurrently, he received several appointments as lieutenant of areas of Ulster bordering the pale which were analogous to the seneschalships held by several army captains occupying Gaelic land beyond the pale's southern marches. If Dungannon's position then resembled that of the many English captains serving in Ireland, he was more adept in advancing his interests because his Ulster origins allowed him to operate within two competing worlds. Thus, besides seizing, with official support, larger parts of the O'Neill lordship, he was able to weaken his O'Neill rivals by inducing the subordinate septs to occupy the lands which he possessed and secured with soldiers under his command. This increased support from within the lordship then permitted Dungannon to aim still higher. Thus on successive occasions in 1579, 1583, and 1585, when Turlough Luineach O'Neill seemed about to die, Dungannon moved to succeed him as O'Neill, and subsequently justified his actions on the grounds that he wished to prevent the title, and the moral authority that it enjoyed, from falling to the crown's enemies. During these, and subsequent, years he also employed marriage as a device to forge, and break, alliances. He first married a daughter (probably called Katherine) of Brian Mac Phelim O'Neill of Clandeboye, a man whom he later alienated by supporting Essex's attempt to seize Clandeboye. This marriage produced several children but, at Dungannon's request in 1574, it was annulled on grounds of consanguinity. This left him free to marry, also in 1574, Siobhan (or Joanna; died 1591), daughter of Sir Hugh O'Donnell and his first wife. She, in turn, was repudiated in 1579, when Dungannon briefly contemplated marriage with a daughter of Turlough Luineach O'Neill, since restored to health, who then seemed agreeable to Dungannon's nomination as his successor. However, this alliance proved short-lived, and Dungannon welcomed back Siobhan.They had two sons, Hugh (1585-1609) and Henry O'Neill (1586?-1617x21). Dungannon formed further strategic alliances within Gaelic Ulster by negotiating marriages for his sisters, and later, as they grew up, for his various daughters and sons, sometimes also taking hostages as sureties. 
Dungannon's bids to claim the O'Neill lordship raised fears in Dublin that their intended agent in Ulster was less malleable than anticipated. However, some senior officials in Dublin and London were convinced by Dungannon's protestations of loyalty. He began his negotiation to secure the title and estate granted in 1542 to Conn O'Neill. His first move was to assume his place as Lord Dungannon in the Irish parliament of 1569-71. His authority was increased further when Arthur Grey, fourteenth Baron Grey of Wilton, lord deputy (1580-82), granted him additional powers of martial law. Dungannon's good standing in official circles earned him commendation. Such praise seemed to presage reward, but not until Sir John Perrot became lord deputy (1584-8) was serious thought given to satisfying Dungannon's ultimate ambition, and then within the context of a plan for an enduring settlement in Ulster. Therefore, while Perrot agreed that Dungannon should be recognized as earl of Tyrone in the Irish parliament of 1585-6, he also had Turlough Luineach O'Neill, whom he knighted, lead the procession when parliament convened. The letters patent confirming Dungannon as earl of Tyrone were issued on 10 May 1587. 
Perrot intended to segment the former O'Neill lordship between separate proprietors holding their land in chief, with each landowner being required to reallocate his property among tenants-in-chief, and to support the appointment of sheriffs as a preliminary to the extension of English common law to all inhabitants. This implied that provincial administration would, as in Munster and Connaught, be supervised by a president maintained, together with supporting troops, by a composition rent imposed upon the lands of the new proprietors. This conflicted with Tyrone's plans. Although he probably saw himself as a loyal subject at this point, he argued persistently that he was entitled to everything held by his grandfather. Disagreement over this point delayed any final settlement, and in 1587 Tyrone was granted an audience at court to ventilate his views. These disclosed that his ambition cut across the intentions of both Perrot and Sir William Fitzwilliam, who dedicated himself to shiring Ulster during his final term as lord deputy (1588-94). Perrot ultimately sought to divide the core O'Neill lordship into two units, with the earl excluded from the western portion granted to Turlough Luineach O'Neill, who was to become either earl of Omagh or earl of Clanoneill. 
Before visiting court in 1587, Tyrone worked assiduously to pre-empt Perrot's plan by seizing lands intended for Turlough Luineach O'Neill and by undermining his authority and credibility as a ruler, usually in association with his O'Donnell allies to the west. Concurrently, he demonstrated his indispensability to the government: he opposed the MacShanes, who sometimes allied with Turlough Luineach O'Neill and frequently imported Scottish mercenaries, and he screened the pale by frequent proclamations of martial law. This fostered an uneasy relationship with the Irish privy council and, still more, with the various English captains and minor officials who hoped to benefit from Perrot's scheme. However Tyrone did succeed in consolidating his position within the O'Neill lordship, principally at the expense of Turlough Luineach O'Neill (now Sir Turlough O'Neill). Tyrone's court visit proved a spectacular success, principally because the Irish privy council was in turmoil, due to antagonism towards Perrot. Accordingly Elizabeth listened to the advice of her kinsman Thomas Butler, tenth earl of Ormond, who supported Tyrone. As a result, Tyrone's grant of land reflected his grandfather's grant in 1542 rather than circumstances following Shane's attainder. 
The English government accepted Tyrone as their leading servant in Ulster, and this grant implied that his lordship would remain outside the authority of any new provincial president or minor official. What he obtained was little short of palatine jurisdiction such as Ormond enjoyed in co. Tipperary, and a further victory followed when an ensuing commission ruled that the country of Rory O'Cahan, principal 'uir-ri' to the ruling O'Neill, was part of Tyrone's inheritance, and that the Fews in Armagh was integral to his lordship. Tyrone reciprocated in 1588 by executing many (perhaps over 500) survivors of the Spanish Armada. He maintained order in his lordship's southern marches and the pale borders; was relentless in pursuing and incarcerating the MacShanes who were still importing Scottish mercenaries into Ulster; and he justified fresh forays against Sir Turlough O'Neill on the grounds that he was conspiring with these enemies of the crown. He systematically increased his authority in Tyrone between 1587 and 1595. 
If Tyrone was gaining ground against his traditional opponents he was incurring the resentment of an increasing number of officials in Ireland, especially in Ulster. Several of them voiced concern at his growing strength. Sir Henry Bagenal took the lead in trying to check and ultimately undermine Tyrone's power by forcing him to defend his position against officials more often than against his dynastic rivals. Bagenal succeeded his father as an Irish privy councillor and marshal of the army in 1590, and aspired to become the first president of Ulster. He was active in shiring the province, and also strove to exploit for his own ends and those of the captains and officials posted there the several commissions concerning Ulster affairs. Having failed to limit Tyrone's power he sought to convince successive lord deputies, senior administrators in England, and, ultimately, the queen, of the earl's treasonable intent. The first charge, endorsed by one of the MacShanes, was that Tyrone had in 1588 assisted, and sought help from, some of the Spaniards shipwrecked off the Ulster coast. He was then accused of importing Scottish mercenaries (which he never denied), and of treasonable correspondence with Philip II and James VI against the queen. Concurrently he was charged with pursuing a private vendetta against Sir Turlough O'Neill and the MacShanes contrary to the public interest. 
When these various charges and insinuations failed, Bagenal sought Tyrone's conviction for treason on the grounds that he had had Hugh Geimleach O'Neill, the most forceful of the MacShanes, executed by martial law, against Fitzwilliam's specific instructions. Consequently, Tyrone was again called before the privy council in 1590, this time to clear his reputation. Burghley, advised by the disgraced Perrot, now believed that the privy council had an opportunity to reverse, or curtail, the grant of 1587. However, his fellow privy councillors remained unconvinced of Tyrone's treason, and some approved of Hugh Geimleach O'Neill's execution, if not of its manner. Therefore, in June 1590, the earl was permitted to return to Ireland, having agreed to divide his lordship into freeholds to facilitate the introduction of English common law. These developments show that traditional alliances were reversed, with officials now supporting Sir Turlough O'Neill, and the surviving MacShanes, against Tyrone. In desperation Tyrone sought a new alliance by marrying Mabel (1570/71-1595), daughter of Sir Nicholas Bagenal of Newry, co. Down, and Carlingford, co. Louth, and his wife, Eleanor, and Sir Henry Bagenal's sister. Then, when this overture was spurned, Tyrone persuaded Mabel to elope with him. The two were married on 3 August 1591 by Thomas Jones, bishop of Meath, in the house of William Warren of Drumcondra, co. Dublin. An outraged Bagenal interpreted this as an affront to family honour: Tyrone had never been properly separated from his first wife, he contended, and he refused to pay his sister's dowry. This intensified the rivalry between the two men. However, just when Bagenal, with Fitzwilliam's apparent support, seemed to have restrained his rival, Tyrone's position was transformed by the unexpected escape of Hugh Roe O'Donnell from confinement in Dublin Castle. 
O'Donnell -- Tyrone's former brother-in-law -- had been held hostage since 1587, and power within the O'Donnell lordship had slipped away to his O'Donnell rivals, who supported Sir Turlough O'Neill. However, following his return to Tyrconnell he quickly recovered control. Thereafter the ageing Turlough O'Neill remained friendless and a pensioner of Tyrone until his death in 1595. By 1592 Tyrone was master within his own lordship and, enjoying the support of the ruling O'Donnell, was, therefore, the most powerful man in Ulster. 
If Tyrone had prevailed over Bagenal he was careful not to provide him with grounds for fresh charges. He complied with the terms agreed with the privy council in 1590, as he interpreted them. While claiming to have consented under duress, he none the less chose freeholders, and recommended his brother Cormac Mac Baron as sheriff of the entire jurisdiction. Officials welcomed these developments, but still demanded that two sheriffs be appointed, one for western Tyrone, to be styled co. Tyrone, where Cormac Mac Baron would serve, the other for co. Armagh. Tyrone's rooted objection to this could have been construed as unreasonable, but communal reaction to sheriffs -- usually rapacious military men -- in recently constituted counties in Ulster and north Connaught, suggests that he would have faced discord within his own lordship had he permitted officials from outside his control. However, while he defended his independence, marauding bands of English soldiers were imposed upon contiguous lordships, including those of his allies O'Donnell and Hugh Maguire, who confronted them. The resulting conflict rendered Tyrone's position more precarious, especially when some subordinates, including kinsmen, joined in what had become a popular cause. His professions of non-involvement were mocked by minor officials, who also alleged that he, with other Ulster lords, conspired with recently appointed Counter-Reformation Irish bishops to secure Spanish military support and to switch allegiance from Elizabeth to Philip. Senior officials were more circumspect, accepting Tyrone's protestations of good faith provided he induced those in arms to sue for pardon. Tyrone performed this service on two occasions -- an especially difficult assignment given the understandable distrust among Ulster lords about meetings with officials -- but received little gratitude. His loyalty was further tested when, in 1593, the lord deputy commanded him to accompany, and provide military assistance to, Bagenal in bringing Maguire to order. Once again Tyrone complied, so confounding the sceptics, was injured in the ensuing conflict, and received no praise, with Bagenal taking all the credit. This, and other snubs from Bagenal and Fitzwilliam, provoked Tyrone to complain that officials were bent on discrediting all Irish noblemen, that bribery was rampant within the political process, and that Bagenal was determined to trap him. These charges won Ormond's sympathy, and raised fears in London that Tyrone was about to join his kinsmen in rebellion. Therefore Bagenal was directed not to interfere in co. Tyrone, a commission was appointed to investigate the earl's grievances, and Fitzwilliam was replaced as lord deputy in 1594 by Sir William Russell. The English garrison at Enniskillen, co. Fermanagh, was attacked and routed by a force led by Maguire and Mac Baron. Undeterred, Tyrone, in August 1594, again demonstrated his loyalty by attending, without invitation, upon Russell in Dublin. 
Obedience was no longer unconditional, however, and in 1595 Tyrone relayed a petition from O'Donnell and neighbouring Ulster lords that their lordships be exempted from recent innovations, including the stationing of garrisons, in return for payment of crown rent. Affronted by this, Elizabeth directed Russell to reclaim and consolidate government outposts in Ulster. Concurrently, the rebels laid siege to English garrisons, including Blackwater Fort within Tyrone's own lordship, forcing the government to send relief. Finally, Bagenal, with 1750 men, was attacked at Clontibret, co. Monaghan, and forced into retreat on his return journey from a relief expedition by a large, well-armed force commanded by Tyrone himself. 
Tyrone was proclaimed a traitor in English and Irish on 24 June 1595 at Dundalk, co. Louth. The issue of his father's questionable ancestry was now revived, this time by officials, but Tyrone gained alternate authority when, in September, he was chosen to succeed Sir Turlough O'Neill as ruling O'Neill. This supported Bagenal's contention that Tyrone had long conspired, along with his Ulster neighbours, with continental powers, and had orchestrated all recent disturbances. The evidence rather suggests that before 1595 Tyrone strove to work with the government, and was earnest in his demands for palatine jurisdiction to counteract a possible communal challenge to his authority mobilized around his brother Cormac Mac Baron. Also, he restrained his more impetuous associates, possibly on the understanding that he could negotiate a similar autonomy for their territories. Having failed in this, he was forced to choose between assisting Bagenal against his own supporters, or leading them against the marshal. He recognized that, without access to the queen, loyal service no longer won him favour and his statement that 'the Knight Marshal was the only man that urged' him to his 'troubles' seems convincing (Meehan, 125). 
Immediately before his break with the government Tyrone, like his associates, worked to strengthen his military capability. He did so by raising and training men from within his lordship, sometimes aided by the English soldiers serving with him, by hiring mercenaries from Scotland, and by purchasing weapons and munitions. His real achievement was in using the English 'butter captains' to train his men in the 'perfect use of firearms' with the result that those who previously were such 'rude soldiers' that 'two or three of them were required to fire one piece' were 'grown ready in managing their pieces and bold to skirmish in boggy and woody places' (Moryson, 12). Consequently, the government was taken by surprise when Tyrone first confronted them. He was cautious because he knew that he could not defeat a large, professional army under an able commander. Therefore, he endorsed the petitions, which O'Donnell, Maguire, and Cormac Mac Baron had previously made to Philip, asking him for a Spanish army of 6000 or 7000 men to pursue what was now described as a war to preserve Catholicism. Meanwhile Tyrone continued to isolate the crown garrisons in Ulster, and, as at Clontibret, occasionally attacked relief expeditions at carefully chosen sites. 
Tyrone proceeded more cautiously than O'Donnell and negotiated with the government while seeking Spanish support. This suggests that he would still have settled for palatine status for himself and his neighbours. Doubtless he felt that Elizabeth could ill afford to confront him because of the war with Spain. He also seemed less enthusiastic than his confederates about proclaiming the Ulster insurrection a religious crusade and was suspicious of continentally educated Catholic bishops bent on recovering church property. He wanted to keep his options open and sought to strengthen his military position, while fighting a defensive war. Consequently, the years 1595-8 were characterized by intermittent war, punctuated by truces and pardons, the spread of insurgency outwards from Ulster in 1596, when help from Spain was expected, and an intensification of government activity in 1597 after an anticipated Spanish force was destroyed by storm off Brittany. By then Thomas Burgh, fifth Baron Burgh, had succeeded Russell as lord deputy, with Sir Conyers Clifford becoming president of Connaught, following Richard Bingham's death. These commanders launched a joint offensive and recovered some Ulster positions, including Blackwater Fort. Seemingly, luck also favoured the government when another Spanish expedition was lost at sea in October 1597. However this was offset by the unexpected death of the government's most accomplished military leaders, Burgh and Sir John Norris. Tyrone's third wife died shortly before 30 December 1595. He married Katherine (died 1618), daughter of Sir Hugh Magennis of Iveagh, co. Down, before 6 June 1597. 
The Irish privy council was initially divided between suing for peace or continuing with the war, but eventually chose the latter: in August 1598 Bagenal received command of 4000 foot and 300 horse sent to relieve the Blackwater garrison, then besieged by Tyrone. On approaching the fort their way was blocked by a confederate army, under Tyrone's command, standing behind prepared ground. In the ensuing battle at Yellow Ford on 14 August the crown forces lost most of their cavalry and munitions while Bagenal and hundreds of his men were killed. Victory transformed both Tyrone's attitude and the character of the conflict. His reticence about religion and his caution were now cast aside for several reasons. First, the government position seemed precarious; second, his victory increased the possibility of tangible assistance from Spain, and many other dissidents in Ireland were now willing to accept his leadership. An indication of his enhanced reputation within Ulster is the appearance of a eulogy in verse, 'Cumam croinic Clainne Neill' ('Let us compose a chronicle on Niall's descendants'), by Dubhtach O Duibhgeannain, which praised Tyrone for his victory. The confederates overran most of Ireland, except for the pale, the walled towns, and fortified positions (which they could never capture without artillery), and parts of some lordships, notably those of Ormond, Thomond, and Clanricarde, whose earls remained loyal. Most spectacularly, the recently established Munster plantation collapsed before the assault of an expeditionary force sent by Tyrone. Concurrently the confederates increased their military capability, meeting the increased cost largely by revenues extracted from territories outside Ulster on which they now encroached. With the Catholic bishops, they also renewed their appeals to Spain, hoping that their victory would convince the new Spanish king, Philip III, that support for them would benefit his wider ambitions. Philip was sympathetic. 
Even without Spanish support, the victory of Yellow Ford prompted a reorientation of English military priorities that was symbolized by the appointment in April 1599 of Elizabeth's favourite Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, as lord lieutenant, with 17,300 troops -- the largest army to leave England during her reign. Before assuming his post Essex won endorsement for his strategy of establishing a chain of fortified positions along the eastern and western entries to Ulster, plus a fort on Loughfoyle which could be provisioned by sea. It was intended to attack the confederates from three sides simultaneously, and to destroy the crops and to kill the civilian population that sustained the Ulster war effort. This was delayed and, on arrival in Dublin, Essex was persuaded by the Irish privy council to relieve those outposts that remained loyal in Leinster and Munster before launching an attack on Ulster. He became embroiled in Leinster and Munster while awaiting the marine support needed to execute his Ulster strategy, instead of confronting the confederates as ordered. When Essex eventually headed for Ulster, in September 1599, this support had not yet arrived and the season for fighting was already past. Thus he had no option but to temporize. This explains the famous parley between Tyrone and Essex at a river ford north of Dundalk. There the unarmed Tyrone, 'putting his horse up to the belly in water, with all humbleness' explained to his former patron's son, 'standing on the other bank', that he sought peace with the queen. What Tyrone demanded, besides the usual immunity from direct government supervision, is unclear: his subsequent assertion that he gave priority to religion was categorically denied by Essex, who testified that 'toleration in religion' was 'mentioned in deed, but never yielded unto by him, nor yet stood upon by the Traitor, to whom the earl had said plainly Hang thee up, thou carest for religion as much as my horse' (Moryson, pt 2, bk 2, 38). 
Essex's enemies at court used his alleged capitulation to Tyrone to destroy him and Elizabeth resolved not to offer Tyrone pardon. Charles Blount, eighth Baron Mountjoy, was appointed lord deputy in February 1600 essentially to complete Essex's military agenda, but with the resources formerly denied to his predecessor. Tyrone was quickly hemmed in and thrown back on the limited resources available to him in Ulster. Recognizing that confrontation was now inevitable, he offered his associates unqualified support, declaring a religious war. He apparently also cultivated a closer relationship with Catholic clerics, while continuing to represent himself as an upholder of English civility. This is suggested by Sir John Harington's encounter, when visiting Tyrone in 1599. Then the earl's two sons, Hugh and Henry, were both 'dressed in English clothes, with velvet jerkins and gold lace... acquainted with the English tongue' and able to recite from an English translation of Ariosto, but tutored by Aodh Mac Aingil, a Counter-Reformation priest and future activist for the cause at St Anthony's College, Louvain (Meehan, 27). 
One of Tyrone's hopes in declaring his religious war was to win support from those people in Ireland who had remained obedient. This prospect faded in 1600 when Sir George Carew, given charge of 3000 men in Munster, succeeded in recovering government authority outside Ulster. Thereafter it was apparent that Tyrone had no hope of fresh adherents unless he could confront and defeat Mountjoy's army, and for that military reinforcements from the continent were essential. Therefore, as prospects of substantial help from Spain increased in 1601, Tyrone avoided conflicts with the crown forces pressing in upon his home territory. The confederacy had to ward against defections, which became ever more frequent, while Tyrone had to guard against assassination attempts prompted by Mountjoy. He maintained discipline and trained his men in the pike warfare that would follow once Spanish assistance arrived. Fynes Moryson acknowledged Tyrone's efforts to meet this challenge but noted with satisfaction that the confederates were not yet ready to confront drilled opponents in the field: they were no sooner exposed to 'some volleys' from field guns than 'their puppets bravery suddenly vanished, and according to their wonted manner, they hid themselves in the woods' (Moryson, pt 2, bk 2, 113). Such inadequacy gave added urgency to the confederate appeals for Spanish support, so as to secure a backbone of seasoned pikemen for the army confronting Mountjoy. 
Strategy dictated that any sizeable Spanish force should disembark south of Ulster because of the need for provisions, and Limerick or Galway seemed best, but the force of 3000 men, under Juan del Aguila, which reached Ireland in September 1601, disappointed the insurgents, first because it was half the expected size and second because it disembarked at Kinsale, co. Cork, far distant from Ulster. There they were immediately besieged by Carew, president of Munster, while Mountjoy rushed to take command of a larger assault force, 7000 strong. The harsh winter of 1601 -- with snow, frost, and swollen rivers -- both helped and hindered the extraordinary feat of leading from Ulster to Kinsale two armies, Hugh O'Donnell's passing through Connaught, Tyrone's via the pale: it enabled them to follow normally impassable routes, thus evading the English forces sent to cut them off. The two armies also merged successfully and approached the Spanish force, now but 2400 strong. Tyrone hoped to avoid battle and to deny food and fodder to the English army, which was suffering more severely from disease and exposure than the Spaniards were. This plan was rejected by the Spaniards, by the Irish clerics accompanying them, and by O'Donnell, who all wanted to join the two forces, despite confusion. As this difficult manoeuvre was proceeding, Tyrone's ill-prepared forces broke ranks when exposed to an English cavalry charge, O'Donnell's army then fled, and the Spaniards had no opportunity to engage. The battle of Kinsale (24 December 1601) shattered whatever prospect Tyrone ever had of dictating terms to the English crown. The confederates were decimated and demoralized, their weapons mostly abandoned, and the Spaniards surrendered to Mountjoy and were permitted to return home. Tyrone was isolated. 
Even in defeat Tyrone remained determined to fight for terms from a government initially fixed on massive confiscation of property and an Ulster plantation. He held out in his Ulster fastnesses even as government troops pillaged his core territories and destroyed the crops that sustained the war effort. Officials were astonished to find that his closest followers would not desert him and speculated that only Tyrone's death, capture, or flight would end what became a war of attrition. Two factors in his favour were the mounting cost to the government and Elizabeth's failing health. Furthermore, if he managed to escape to Spain, Tyrone could complicate the peace overtures under way to end the Spanish war. He remained in arms until Mountjoy and Carew won permission to reach an accommodation. In February 1603 Mountjoy was authorized by Sir Robert Cecil, principal secretary of state, to receive Tyrone to mercy. 
The generosity of the terms ultimately conceded to Tyrone by the so-called treaty of Mellifont (30 March) is explained both by Mountjoy's concern to settle before the earl learned of Elizabeth's death and by his determination to attend James VI and I. Tyrone's doggedness was thus rewarded: in return for abjuring the name and title of O'Neill and promising to sever all contact with Spain, he was assured of his earldom in perpetuity, with the promise of new letters patent on condition that his 'country' pay composition rent to the crown. This agreement seemingly left Tyrone in much the same position as he had enjoyed in 1587, albeit as ruler of a lordship devastated by prolonged warfare. In addition, he was without rivals within his lordship, and further strengthened his position by persuading Mountjoy to have the entire O'Donnell lordship granted to Rury O'Donnell, who became first earl of Tyrconnell. Tyrone and O'Donnell accompanied Mountjoy to meet James in England in 1603, with the intention of having 'one assured in Tyrconnell and another in Tyrone' each 'able utterly to suppress' his local opponents (N. Canny, 'The treaty of Mellifont, 1603', 'Irish Sword', 9, 1970, 380-99). 
This outcome represented a diplomatic victory for Tyrone. Army captains, crown officials, and even the English public were dismayed, while lesser lords in Ulster who had deserted the earl during the war had most reason to feel betrayed. Consequently between 1603 and 1607 Tyrone was preoccupied on one level with consolidating his position within his devastated lordship and on another with defending himself against those who resented his success. This attack was many-faceted, involving co-operation between servitors who held positions or property in Ulster, officials in Dublin, churchmen eager to make the established church a reality in Ulster, and former subordinates of Tyrone who wanted the government to honour its promises to make them independent of a vengeful lord. Collectively these enemies set about identifying concealed land within the two lordships which might be claimed as crown property, especially fishing rights on lakes and rivers and church property. A series of legal challenges and investigations ensued, leading ultimately to the suggestion that title to the disputed properties should be established by an inquisition. This decision produced the apparently reasonable demand that the lordships of Tyrone and Tyrconnell should become shire ground, a task delegated to Sir John Davies, solicitor-general. Davies enjoyed fulsome support from Sir Arthur Chichester, lord deputy, but made little initial progress because the earl of Devonshire (Mountjoy) defended the arrangement on which he had staked his reputation. His influence, however, waned by 1605 and the subsequent struggle between Tyrone and Davies was every bit as personal as that previously fought between Tyrone and Bagenal. Davies held that the patents devised for Tyrone and Tyrconnell were unjust because the earls had been granted outright ownership of their entire lordships irrespective of the rights of the other O'Neills, the lesser lords, and the church. Davies wished to segment the Tyrone and Tyrconnell lordships to reflect the wider claims to property within them, while Tyrone held rigidly to the view that his grandfather in 1542 and he in both 1587 and 1603 had been granted outright ownership of the entire lordship of Tyrone. His position, therefore, was that the only others who had property rights within the lordship were those appointed by him after 1590 and again in 1605 as tenants-in-chief. To counter this Davies encouraged Tyrone's estranged son-in-law, Sir Donnell Ballagh O'Cahan, to bring an action against him before the Dublin courts contending that since, under the Gaelic dispensation, the ruling O'Cahan had been a sovereign lord, a major injustice had been perpetrated by the passing of Tyrone's patent. Davies hoped, if successful, to establish a precedent which would result in the dismemberment of the Tyrone lordship among several claimants, all of whom, including Tyrone himself, would then be ruled by a provincial president. Confronted with this challenge, Tyrone petitioned James for support. The king's agreement to resolve the dispute in person represented a major concession to Tyrone, who commented that if he were dissatisfied with the outcome he would 'choose' to live in England rather than be 'governed by any other than your Majesty and your deputy general of this realm' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/218/71). In this event Tyrone probably intended to play the part of a 'British' courtier at the Jacobean court, leaving his heir, Hugh O'Neill, fourth baron of Dungannon, to handle his Irish affairs. Dungannon would probably be better suited to a rigidly monitored life and, since his father was finalizing a marriage for him with a daughter of Archibald Campbell, seventh earl of Argyll, and his first wife, Anne -- thus linking 'Mac O'Neill with the daughter of McKallym, for so the Scottish Irish call the earl of Argyll' (Meehan, 101) -- would also be better placed to receive royal favour. 
Following James's decision Tyrone and Davies each spent much of 1607 preparing for the anticipated royal hearing, which would have implications for all Ulster lordships. Yet it seemed of little consequence when Tyrconnell and Cuconnaught Maguire openly admitted their inability to manage their lordships, lamenting that economic circumstances would force them to join their fellow countrymen as soldiers in Spanish service. Nobody thought, for a moment, that Tyrone would also leave, because of his age, his dedication to countering Davies's every move, his involvement with his son's prospective marriage, and his seeming resolve to plead his case before the king. Therefore officials were astonished when they learned on 7 September that Tyrone, as well as Tyrconnell and several family members and retainers of both lords, had taken ship three days previously for an unknown destination. Once Spain emerged as their intended landfall, officials asked why Tyrone decided to participate in this dramatic exit, known in Irish historiography as the 'flight of the earls'. Two points were put forward, and are still being debated by historians; first, whether Tyrone, like Tyrconnell, had long contemplated this move or was panicked into joining the expedition only on hearing that the ship commissioned by Maguire had landed at Lough Swilly, and, second, whether Tyrone was resigned to losing everything or had left in the hope of returning with Spanish military support. 
On the first point, the evidence suggests that Tyrone's action was not premeditated: he was at Slane, co. Meath, in the lord deputy's company, and seemingly preparing both for his impending visit to the king and for the marriage of his son when word reached him of the ship's arrival at Lough Swilly. This news would not have surprised him and cannot alone have startled him into abandoning the country. Government officials concluded that Christopher St Lawrence, ninth Baron Howth, then put 'buzzes' in Tyrone's ear convincing him that 'if he went into England he should either be perpetual prisoner in the Tower of London or else lose his head and members'. Tyrone would unquestionably have been alert to this possibility, as on all previous visits to the English court, but in his own version of his meeting at Slane, the fresh information causing him disquiet was that Chichester had persuaded the king, through the procurement of Cecil, the earl of Salisbury, to overlook in favour of himself Tyrone's request to be appointed president of Ulster. This, according to Tyrone, convinced him that the king would similarly dismiss his other petitions and that life in exile would be preferable to 'the misery he saw sustained by others through the oppression of the like government' (Meehan, 126). 
Tyrone's explanation of his departure suggests that he entertained no hopes in September 1607 of Spanish military support. He was an astute politician who accepted, unlike his lay and clerical associates, that the calamity at Kinsale had ended any realistic prospects of further substantial military support from Spain. His flight was an act of desperation, an interpretation that fits the known details of his final actions in Ireland -- the sad farewell to his friends, the desperate effort to gather up his three sons by his fourth wife (ultimately, he was forced to leave one behind), and his seemingly brutal effort to compel his reluctant countess to accompany him. Moreover his subsequent 'articles' addressed to James from the continent (which probably derived from the statement of grievance originally intended for presentation to the king) suggests a belated recognition that he had acted rashly and that his best hope of receiving succour lay in London rather than Madrid. These 'articles' gave priority to religious grievances, and, in correspondence with the Spanish court, Tyrone also emphasized his loss and sufferings for the sake of Catholicism, whose defence had always been his prime concern. This was the only argument to advance once he had placed his trust in Spain, and the only position that his clerical correspondents with the court in Madrid would countenance. Perhaps he became convinced by his own rhetoric, especially as Fearghal Og Mac an Bhaird, in 'Mor do mhill aoibhneas Eirinn' ('Greatly has it destroyed the beauty of Ireland'), sought further to convince him that his failure to return with an invading force meant that the trials of the Nine Years' War had been endured in vain. 
Returning to Ireland was not an option for Tyrone, but exile became especially bitter as Philip's embarrassment with his guests became apparent. The exiles intended to disembark at Corunna and to proceed to Madrid in the hope of an audience with the king. They landed, however, in Normandy and were granted safe passage to Spanish Flanders. There they were welcomed by the Irish military and clerical community, including Tyrone's second son, Henry, a colonel in the Spanish army. Despite the honours and entertainment enumerated by Tadhg O Cianain, the dutiful narrator of the flight, the harsh reality was that those declared rebels by James were neither welcome in Flanders nor in Spain lest their presence compromise the peace. Instead, Tyrone and his companions were dispatched along 'the Spanish road' towards Milan and eventually to Rome where they were assigned a residence by Pope Paul V as pensioners of Philip. The correspondence of Tyrone and his companions concerns the early deaths of some of the exiles, the survivors' supplications for continued support, and their futile pleas to the Spanish government -- oscillating between demands for a fresh invasion of Ireland and requests for intercession with James for restoration of their estates and of Catholicism as the religion of Ulster. Thomas Gainsford witnessed Tyrone's company making its way to Rome and noted that the earl stayed in a 'common inn' while in Milan and became 'the subject of charity and had only a poor supplement from some special cardinals' during his final years in Rome (Gainsford, 1, 6, 14). Tyrone's health deteriorated and he became almost blind. He died of fever on 20 July 1616 in Rome and was buried there after a fairly elaborate funeral ceremony in the Spanish church of San Pietro Montorio. The countess of Tyrone is believed to have died on 15 March 1618 in Rome. 
For Gainsford, Tyrone's 'dejection' provided 'exemplary' proof of his maxim that subjects who were 'seduced' from their 'faithfulness' by the promises of foreign princes would be 'made the tennis ball of fortune' and forced 'to fly to foreign princes for refuge' (Gainsford, 1, 6, 14). He believed that Tyrone had been hoodwinked by survivors of the Spanish Armada into allying with Spain and that all his actions after 1588 were motivated by this fact. Ironically, the Counter-Reformation historian Philip O'Sullivan Beare took this story up but used it for a different purpose. Like Gainsford, he saw Tyrone's life largely in terms of prevarication and deception but regarded him as cleverly disguising his intentions from the government before allying with Spain to strike a blow for Catholicism. O'Sullivan saw him as an exemplar to Irish Catholics and wanted to refute the denigration of Moryson and Gainsford and the work of other Irish Catholic historians, including Lughaidh O Cleirigh, who remained in Ireland and argued that Hugh Roe O'Donnell was the heroic figure, not Tyrone. In the short term O'Sullivan's version of events proved the more appealing and when Giovanni Battista Rinuccini, archbishop of Fermo, the papal nuncio to Ireland, presented Tyrone's sword to his nephew, Owen Roe O'Neill, in 1646 it was regarded as identifying the latter as the possible king of a Catholic Ireland. 
The evidence concerning Tyrone's career hardly accords with the accounts of Gainsford and O'Sullivan, or the succession of writers following in their respective traditions. Tyrone has been employed to support different causes through selective use of the evidence. More careful attention to each phase of his career and to the explanations that he offered to justify his actions reveals a less charismatic or attractive man, who was committed to few causes other than his own survival and the preservation of his family. However, he was caught in something of a bind between the fears and expectations of the government and the hopes of his Gaelic Irish supporters. He was proud of the achievements of his sons, but displayed a utilitarian attitude towards his wives and children and could be brutal to kinsmen. He was loyal to those of his English and Irish adherents who remained loyal to him, but exacted harsh revenge on any he regarded as having betrayed him. He tried to remain loyal to the crown for as long as possible and to his political allies and was amenable to aspects of royal policy in Ulster. He only championed the cause of Spanish intervention and the Counter-Reformation when he recognized that he could not reconcile loyalty to Elizabeth with acceptance of increased circumscription of his power and of his room to manoeuvre. However, he was a pragmatist, who was conscious of his strengths and weaknesses as a military commander and of the limitations of his forces. Moryson, although biased, made what is perhaps the shrewdest observation of Tyrone, when he met him, describing him as a man: 'of mean stature, but of a strong body, able to endure labours, watching, and hard fare, being withall industrious, and active, valiant, affable, and apt to manage great affairs, and of a high, dissembling, subtle and profound wit. So as many deemed him born either for the great good or ill of his country. (Moryson, pt 2, chap. 1.7)' 



@@@@@


doc= 20776


O'Neill, Hugh, styled sixth earl of Tyrone (d. 1660/61), army officer, was born in the Spanish Netherlands the son of Art Oge O'Neill, who was the elder brother of Owen Roe O'Neill and nephew of Hugh O'Neill, the great earl of Tyrone; his mother was Helen (or Evelina) Mac Carthy. He served as a captain in the regiment of Tyrone, in the Spanish service, and had most recently been engaged in fighting Catalan rebels, before coming to Ireland in 1642 to serve in the Ulster army of the confederate Catholics. He was known as Hugh Dubh or Bui because of his black hair and sallow complexion, respectively. 
O'Neill was captured when local British forces routed the Ulster Irish army and creaghts at Clones in 1643. Ormond declined Owen Roe O'Neill's offer of an exchange and Hugh O'Neill remained a prisoner until released through exchange after the battle of Benburb in 1646. The following year he was appointed major-general of the Irish forces in Ulster, and they were partly under his direction during the illness of his uncle, General Owen Roe O'Neill, whose confidence he enjoyed, and by whom he was dispatched with 2000 soldiers to aid the marquess of Ormond against the Cromwellian forces. After Owen O'Neill's death, in November 1649, Hugh was, like his cousin Daniel O'Neill, one of the numerous unsuccessful candidates for the command of the Ulster army. 
In February 1650 Ormond appointed O'Neill governor of Clonmel. He had under his command some 1200 men, of whom all but fifty-two were infantry, and with these forces he pursued an aggressive defence, mounting frequent sallies to cut off isolated parties of the besiegers. On 27 April Cromwell sited his siege batteries, prompting O'Neill to demand urgent relief from Ormond. The relief did not arrive and on 9 May, after opening a breach, Cromwell's soldiers stormed in: 'never was seen so hot a storm of so long continuance and so gallantly defended, neither in England nor in Ireland' (Whitelocke, 41). On pouring through the breach the attackers were canalized by newly erected embankments into a lane covered by two artillery guns. The gunners fired chain shot while other defenders raked the attackers with musket fire and missiles from the surrounding embankments and houses. Constricted and pushed forward by the press of bodies, some 2000 of the storming party were killed over the ensuing four hours before Cromwell finally called off the attack. 
Nevertheless, the garrison could not prolong the struggle, and in the dead of night O'Neill and his followers slipped away in the direction of Waterford, leaving instructions with the mayor to come to terms. On 10 May Cromwell received a deputation, and granted them terms. It was not until he got within the walls that he learned of the escape of the garrison. He kept his word, but sent in pursuit of O'Neill, and, according to Ludlow, killed 200 stragglers. 
O'Neill subsequently commanded in Limerick during the siege by Ireton which lasted from May to October 1651. Again, he conducted an active defence, most notably when he annihilated a landing party which tried to establish a beachhead on King's Island preparatory to a general assault. By October, however, about a fifth of the townspeople and garrison had perished owing to the combined effects of famine and pestilence, and the demoralized citizenry sued for peace. In the articles for the surrender of Limerick, dated in October 1651, the governor, Major-General Hugh O'Neill, was excepted from quarter, and excluded from any benefit, on the ground that he had largely contributed to 'the long and obstinate holding out of the place'. In conformity with them, O'Neill, as governor, on 29 October 1651 surrendered the city to Ireton, and was committed to prison. A council of war on the same day voted that O'Neill and others should be executed. In his defence, O'Neill insisted that he had not been guilty of any base or dishonourable act, having only discharged his duty as a soldier, and appealed to the justice of the lord deputy, Ireton. On 1 November, after reconsideration, the vote for the death of O'Neill was revoked, and it was determined to send him as a prisoner to be dealt with by the authorities of the parliament at London. This course, it would appear, was adopted mainly in consequence of his rights as a subject of the king of Spain (having been born in Flanders) and his numerous influential connections. 
As a prisoner in the Tower of London, where he arrived on 10 January 1652, O'Neill was treated with consideration by the government, and allowed 20's'. a week for his maintenance; he was also granted the privilege of having 'the liberty of the Tower'. In July 1652 Cardenas, the Spanish ambassador at London, applied officially for his discharge from the Tower, on the grounds that he was a subject of the king of Spain, that he had not been guilty of excesses in Ireland, and that his liberation would promote the bringing together of the Irish soldiers then about to be levied for the Spanish service. 
O'Neill was released in 1653 and made his way to Madrid. There, in December, he was tasked with mustering the many thousands of recently landed Irish scattered across Galicia and Cantabria and marching them to Aragon to fight the French. In October 1660 on the death of Hugh O'Neill, titular earl of Tyrone, Hugh Dubh succeeded to the title. In that same month he addressed a letter from Madrid to Charles II and the marquess of Ormond asking that his family be 'restored... to a possibility of deserving well of the crown', though he admitted that, because of ill health, he would not live to enjoy such royal grace (Gilbert, 3.xlvii). His pessimism was justified and he died within the following five months. 
O'Neill is mainly remembered for his defence of Clonmel and Limerick. While he was, doubtless, a competent practitioner of siege warfare, his reputation was inflated by the amateurish siege tactics of Cromwell and Ireton. 


@@@@@


doc= 20777


O'Neill, Hugh (1784-1824), architectural draughtsman, was born in Bloomsbury, London, on 20 April 1784, the son of an architect who designed a portion of Portland Place. Nothing is known of his early training but he won a silver palette from the Society of Artists in 1803, and exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1800 to 1804. From 1813 he taught drawing in Oxford and later worked in Edinburgh, Bath, and Bristol, where he settled in 1821. He was a prolific draughtsman, and made over 500 drawings of Bristol alone. Generally he retained his carefully finished originals and disposed only of copies. Many of his drawings were published; for example, his sketches of the ruins of Christ Church, Oxford, after the fire of 3 March 1809, were engraved by W. Crotch and published in Oxford in 1809. Skelton engraved a number of O'Neill's drawings of Oxford and its surroundings for the second volume of his 'Oxonia antiqua restaurata' (1823) and O'Neill's work also appears in Skelton's 'Antiquities of Bristol' (1820, 1826). Drawings of St Peter's Church and of Balliol, Magdalen, Exeter, and All Souls colleges (engraved by J. Basire and J. S. Storer) were published in the 'Oxford Almanack' for 1809, 1810, 1812, 1813, and 1828. O'Neill also made an interesting collection of fossils, minerals, and other curiosities. 
O'Neill died in poverty, in Princes Street, Bristol, where he was living, on 7 April 1824. He is represented in the collections of the British Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Victoria Art Gallery in Bath, the Whitworth Art Gallery in Manchester, and Reading Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 20778


O'Neill, John, first Viscount O'Neill (1740-1798), politician and landowner, was born on 16 January 1740 at Shane's Castle, co. Antrim, the eldest son of Charles O'Neill (died 1769), MP and landowner, and Catherine Alice (died 1790), third daughter of St John Brodrick MP. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, which he entered on 21 April 1757, and Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on 14 April 1762 and graduated MA on 15 June of the same year. The extent of the O'Neill family influence in co. Antrim was reflected in his appointment as high sheriff of the county in 1772, and subsequently as deputy governor, then as governor (1792-8). He entered the Irish parliament in 1761 as representative for the borough of Randalstown, which the O'Neill family controlled. In 1783 and 1790 he was elected as one of the MPs for the county, but preferred to continue sitting for the borough. On 18 October 1777 he married Henrietta (died 1793), only daughter and heir of Charles Boyle, later styled Lord Dungarvan, and Susanna Hoare. They had two sons, who are noted below, and a daughter, who married George Hartwell on 20 June 1792. 
O'Neill was regarded as a moderate in politics, a great landowner who was a good and considerate landlord, an amiable and much respected man in public and private. He entered with enthusiasm into the volunteer movement which developed after 1778, when Ireland was denuded of troops during the American war, and became colonel of the first regiment raised in Antrim in 1781. In parliament he aligned himself with the whig and 'patriot' interest on popular issues, but without losing the respect of government. He was a warm supporter of the reform of parliament, and, after some initial hesitation, Catholic emancipation. Early in his parliamentary career he temporarily lost the goodwill of the Presbyterians (who predominated in Antrim and eastern Ulster) by introducing in 1774 a 'Vestry Bill' which would have infringed their customary rights, enabling vestries consisting of Church of Ireland members alone to impose taxes for the repair of churches on dissenting residents of the parish, but the bill was defeated. Almost all of O'Neill's tenants were Presbyterians and henceforward he tended to support measures which had the broad approval of the dissenters. 
O'Neill attended the first great volunteer convention in Dungannon on 15 February 1782, as a delegate for co. Antrim, in the historic closing stages of the agitation which helped to bring about the independence of the Irish parliament. He was one of the four delegates appointed by the Irish House of Commons to present a petition to the prince of Wales in 1789 requesting him to assume the regency in Ireland without conditions. O'Neill spoke seldom in the house, but when he did he acquitted himself effectively. He was tall and well-proportioned, his voice well-toned and harmonious, though 'somewhat hurt by a tendency to a lisp' (Johnston-Liik). He was described by a contemporary as addicted to the interests of Ireland and acting as the independent representative of a free people, shunning alike 'the meanness of factious opposition and the servile subserviency of the hireling tribe' (ibid.). Although the borough of Randalstown had been in the control of the O'Neill family 'from time immemorial', he insisted on the inhabitants having the uninfluenced choice of their representatives. He was one of the founders of the Northern Whig Club in 1790, his name appearing alongside those of radicals and United Irishmen such as Archibald Hamilton Rowan, Samuel McTier, and Theobald Wolfe Tone, but O'Neill's loyalty was never in doubt, and this was recognized by his elevation to the rank of Baron O'Neill in 1793 and Viscount O'Neill in 1795. During his viceregal tour of the north of Ireland in 1787 the lord lieutenant, the duke of Rutland, visited him at Shane's Castle, and like other guests expressed admiration for the residence and its magnificent setting on the shore of Lough Neagh. To indulge his wife's enthusiasm for the acting of Sarah Siddons, O'Neill built a private theatre there, and persuaded the celebrated actress to give a performance in it; Siddons wrote of her enchantment on the occasion in her memoirs. 
Although sympathetic to the cause of reform, Lord O'Neill was totally opposed to the United Irishmen, who by the late 1790s were planning insurrection. From 1793 he had been colonel of the Antrim militia, and he was active in helping to raise and train the yeomanry. When the Irish rising broke out on 23 May 1798 the north at first remained quiet, but early in June O'Neill, who was in Dublin, had reports of an imminent rising in Antrim. As governor of the county he summoned a meeting of the magistrates for 7 June in Antrim town, a decision which precipitated the calamity he wished to avert, for Henry Joy McCracken, the leader of the Presbyterian insurgents in the county, planned to attack the town on that day and seize the magistrates as hostages. Hastening towards Antrim, O'Neill passed through Lisburn without stopping, and so failed to receive an urgent warning from General Nugent, the army commander in the north. He arrived in the town to find the battle in progress, and at the moment when Colonel Lumley's dragoons were hastily retreating after their disastrous charge along the main street. Accounts of what followed are conflicting, but it is clear that Lord O'Neill found himself alone on horseback near the market house. He fired his pistols at the advancing rebels and one of them drove a pike into his side, probably without recognizing him. After a sortie from the wall of the Massereene estate by the defenders, he was carried into Lord Massereene's residence. When the rebels abandoned the town, Colonel Durham of the Fife fencibles, learning of Lord O'Neill's injuries, went to see him, and sent for two of the army surgeons to dress his wounds. They told Durham that O'Neill 'could not live, as the pike had pierced his stomach' (Dundas MS). That night the exhausted soldiers slept on the benches of O'Neill's private theatre at Shane's Castle, while he lay dying in the house of his neighbour, scarcely a mile away. Against all expectations, he survived for almost two weeks, conscious and able to communicate with family and friends. His death, on 18 June at Massereene House, co. Antrim, was greatly mourned, not least by the United Irishmen themselves. It was widely believed that his assailant had been one of his own tenants. 




@@@@@


doc= 20779


O'Neill, John (1778-1858), shoemaker and writer, was born in Waterford city, Ireland, on 8 January 1778, the second son of Thomas O'Neill (died 'c'.1810), a poor shoemaker, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' English (1756/7- 'c'.1828). John O'Neill finished his formal schooling at the age of nine and was largely self-educated. He worked as a shoemaker in Ireland, and married Mary Dollard ('c'.1780-1823) in Carrick-on-Suir, co. Tipperary, about 1800. He began to try his hand at writing while working at the boot and shoe trade, and while he dreamed of literary success, after emigrating to London in 1808, he quickly joined the capital's community of shoemakers and successfully tracked down his father, who had deserted the family some thirty years earlier. After the death of his first wife O'Neill married Ann Bass, 'nee' Lester ('c'.1795-1864), the widow of David Bass, on 30 January 1824 in St Anne's Church, Soho. 
O'Neill managed to combine his trade with literary activity and was known in his lifetime primarily as a writer of temperance poetry, especially 'The Drunkard', which he wrote soon after becoming a teetotaller in 1840 (although he had never been an especially heavy drinker). The poem was dedicated to Father Mathew, the foremost teetotaller of his day, and it earned O'Neill the unofficial title of the laureate of the temperance movement; many reformers saw it as a vividly memorable account by a labouring-class author of the ruin brought by drink to a young working man and his family. The edition of 1842 was illustrated by George Cruikshank, who later produced his own series of popular illustrations on the same topic, entitled 'The Bottle'. Robert Cruikshank, brother of the illustrator, produced a portrait of O'Neill which was engraved by Charles Wagstaff to form a frontispiece to 'The Drunkard', later renamed 'The Blessings of Temperance'. 
O'Neill was also the author of 'Fifty years' experience of an Irish shoemaker in London'. This memoir was published eleven years after his death in forty-one weekly instalments (8 May 1869-19 February 1870) in 'St Crispin', a weekly journal for the boot and shoe trade. Its proposed publication in a volume entitled 'Struggling through Life' had been announced in 1856, but it remained unpublished in book form at the end of the twentieth century. The text describes O'Neill's struggle to survive when the shoemaking trade went into decline, telling of how he coped with injury and illness, letting rooms, and attempting to run a business of his own. All such enterprises were failures: O'Neill remained poor all his life. He also depicted family life in slum rooms at numerous addresses (especially around Clare Market and Drury Lane, but also in the Waterloo area), diet, clothing, entertainment in public houses and other places, parish relief, and finding work for his children. The death of his wife after giving birth to their thirteenth child is described, as is his second marriage, and the resultant six more children, as well as his responsibility for two stepchildren. He tells of how he wrote songs (including a popular drinking piece 'Trim the lamp; fill the bowl'), occasional articles and poems, and an English stage version (published, but not performed) of the Spanish novel 'Alva'. Folk-tales remembered from his youth were published in 1854 as 'Handerahan, the Irish Fairyman; and Legends of Carrick', with an introduction by Anna Maria Hall. Such work, in addition to 'The Drunkard', meant that his applications to the Royal Literary Society for loans and grants were generally successful. 
John Bedford Leno, editor of 'St Crispin', singled out the importance of the memoirs when he noted in an editorial: 'To the historian of the future, the Reminiscences will be of immense value. Hitherto history has been too much confined and hence in searching for the records of a nation we find merely the history of its kings' ('St Crispin', 19 Feb 1870, 85-6). O'Neill died at his home, 20 White Horse Yard, Drury Lane, on 3 February 1858 and was buried in the St Pancras cemetery, Finchley, on 7 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 20780


John Bruce Richard O'Neill, third Viscount O'Neill (1780-1855), army officer and politician, who was born on 30 December 1780 at Shane's Castle. After being educated at Eton, he entered the army as an ensign in the Coldstream Guards on 10 October 1799, saw much active service, and attained the rank of major-general on 27 May 1825, lieutenant-general on 28 June 1838, and general on 28 June 1854. He represented the county of Antrim from 19 July 1802 until his succession to the peerage on the death of his brother in 1841. In 1811 he was appointed constable of Dublin Castle. He took little part in politics, though he supported the 'Reform Bill'. In February 1842 he was elected a representative peer of Ireland in the House of Lords at Westminster. Among his honorary appointments was that of vice-admiral of the coast of Ulster. He died unmarried of a complication of gout and influenza at Shane's Castle on 12 February 1855. His title became extinct but the name of O'Neill was assumed by the inheritor of the estates, the Revd William Chichester ['see 'O'Neill, William Chichester, first Baron O'Neill (1813-1883)]. 


@@@@@


doc= 20781


O'Neill, Sir Neil, second baronet (1657/8-1690), army officer, was born late in December 1657 or early in 1658, and was the eldest son of Sir Henry O'Neill ('b'. 1625) of Shane's Castle, co. Antrim, who was created baronet, of Killelagh, on 23 February 1666, and his wife, Eleanor Talbot, sister of Richard Talbot, earl of Tyrconnell. O'Neill married in January 1677 Frances Molyneux (died 1732), eldest daughter of Caryll Molyneux, third Viscount Molyneux of Maryborough, with whom he had four or five daughters. 
When Tyrconnell became lord deputy of Ireland in 1687, O'Neill received from his uncle first a captain's commission taken from Lord Kingston, and then the colonelcy of a regiment of dragoons. He was in France at the time of the revolution in England. In March 1689 he sailed with the French fleet that brought King James to Ireland. He was present at the siege of Londonderry, where on 13 July he was one of the six commissioners chosen to treat with the garrison. The siege was raised before any agreement was reached. He was appointed lord lieutenant of Armagh, a county then under Williamite occupation, and his regiment served under Patrick Sarsfield in the expedition to Sligo in October 1689. At the end of that year O'Neill tried unsuccessfully to muster recruits to go to France in a proposed Irish brigade. 
At the battle of the Boyne (1 July 1690) O'Neill was placed with his dragoons on the extreme left of King James's army to guard the ford at Rosnaree. With his 500 men he 'did wonders' (Gilbert, 100) in preventing the 10,000 commanded by Meinhard, Count Schomberg from crossing for an hour. O'Neill was forced to withdraw by the arrival of the enemy's artillery and during the fighting he was shot in the thigh. The wound proved fatal. He died in Waterford eight days later and was buried in the Franciscan convent there. 
He was succeeded to the baronetcy by his brother Sir Daniel O'Neill, who had been one of the members for Belfast in the Irish parliament of 1689. The title and estates became forfeit by a posthumous act of attainder in 1691. On petitioning the government, Sir Neil's widow was granted a forty-one-year lease on the Killelagh estate in 1700, which she sold the following year. Lady O'Neill died in 1732. 


@@@@@


doc= 20782


O Neill, Eoghan (d. 1456), king or lord of Tir Eoghain, was a younger son of Niall Og O Neill (d. 1403) ['see under 'O Neill, Niall Mor] and his wife, Una (died 1417), the daughter of Domhnall O Neill. He had clearly reached military age by 21 July 1399 when he slew Cathal, son of Ruaidhri Mag Uidhir at a time when Niall Og was forcing submission from all Ulster apart from O Domhnaill, the lord of Tir Conaill. However, by 1403 Niall Og faced rebellion from his nephews, the sons of Einri O Neill (d. 1392). A matter of months after Niall Og's death, his eldest son and heir, Brian Og, died from smallpox and the kingship of Tir Eoghain was seized by Domhnall Bog 
('Donal the Soft' or 'the Generous'; died 1432)
, son of Einri Aimhreidh, who was inaugurated as O Neill in 1404. Eoghan, however, retained influence over Mag Uidhir of Fermanagh, and was married to Caitriona (died 1427), the daughter of Ardghal Mac Mathghamhna (king of the Monaghan area from 1403 to 1411), and mother of his eldest son, Einri O Neill (d. 1489). 
In 1410 Eoghan O Neill's brother-in-law, Brian, captured Domhnall Bog, precipitating civil war in Tir Eoghain. Eoghan himself was imprisoned by the sons of his uncle, Einri Aimhreidh, in 1414 and released only in exchange for the reinstatement of their leader, Domhnall Bog. In 1419-20, however, Eoghan, in alliance with O Domhnaill, Mag Uidhir, and Brian Mac Mathghamhna ignominiously drove Domhnall Bog out of Tir Eoghain to seek refuge with the English settlers of Down. Within a year peace was patched up again. Domhnall Bog retained his title as the Great O Neill (as he was known in the English pale), but became politically insignificant thereafter. During the prolonged struggle both O Domhnaill in the west and the Anglo-Irish government in the east had expanded their influence. 
In 1421 Eoghan O Neill was on his way to meet James Butler, fourth earl of Ormond, at Dundalk when he was captured by O Neill of Clandeboye. When ransomed a year later by his wife and sons, Eoghan allied with Niall Garbh O Domhnaill, the new king of Tir Conaill, to ravage O Neill of Clandeboye, forcing him to submit and join a general federation of Ulster chiefs who invaded northern Connacht in 1422 and the English of Meath and Louth in 1423, defeated the justiciar's army, and imposed 'black-rent' (protection money which subsequently developed into a customary annual payment) on the town of Dundalk. This brought Edmund (V) Mortimer, fifth earl of March and Ulster, to Ireland as lieutenant in the autumn of 1424. The Ulster chiefs came to Trim Castle that Christmas to submit, but Mortimer died suddenly on 18 January 1425 and the visitors were promptly arrested by Sir John Talbot, though subsequently released by the new lieutenant, the earl of Ormond, in exchange for ransom and hostages. In his indenture with Ormond on 23 July 1425, Eoghan O Neill acknowledged himself vassal to the duke of York, Mortimer's heir, and significantly undertook to desert and inform on any treasonable confederation. Once home he allied with Domhnall Bog to recover land lost to O Domhnaill during their contentions. He rebuilt his father's authority over the province, adding the allegiance of O Raighilligh of East Breifne in 1429. In 1430 he once again harried Louth, took black-rent from Dundalk, then received submissions from the Irish chieftains of Longford and Westmeath, Baron Nugent of Delvin (an ally of Ormond), and the Plunkets and Herberts, before making war on the other English in Meath. 
In 1432 Eoghan O Neill at last succeeded Domhnall Bog as the Great O Neill. He then forced O Domhnaill to submit, and in the course of a joint raid into Louth in 1434 the latter was conveniently captured by the English. After submitting to Ormond once more in 1441, O Neill next year used English troops to win a crushing victory against the new O Domhnaill. However, he made war on Louth in 1444, in 1449 just before the duke of York's visit, and again in 1452; and he and his then wife, Evelina Baret, incurred archiepiscopal censure for infringing the property rights of Armagh. In 1455 Archbishop John Mey sanctioned a transfer of the chieftainship from Eoghan to his eldest son, Einri, on grounds of infirmity, though the annals speak of forcible deposition, and the retired chief died the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 20783


O'Neill, Owen Roe (c.1583-1649), army officer, was the son of Art MacBaron O'Neill ('c'.1548-1618), the older 'base-born' brother of Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone. Art MacBaron had at least nine sons and four daughters from three marriages. Owen O'Neill's mother was the second wife, an unidentified daughter of Hugh Conallach O'Reilly, lord of Breifne. The birthplace of Owen Roe -- or Ruadh, the red or ruddy complexioned -- was the scenic lake district in Armagh near his father's 'chief house and holde' at Loughall in the barony of Oneilland. Well educated by continental-trained Franciscans, he was brought up in troubled times and much of his early training involved traditional skirmishing tactics. 'Bred in a nursery of arms since a boy' (Gilbert, 'Contemporary history', 1/1.72), Owen, after the death of six older brothers, served with his uncle, father, and surviving brothers in the campaigns of the Nine Years' War. 
Seeking opportunities that no longer existed in war-ravaged Ulster, O'Neill and his older brothers, Art Oge and Cormack, went to the Spanish Netherlands some time after his uncle's submission to the English crown. They enlisted and received commissions as captains in an Irish regiment led by their cousin, Tyrone's son Henry O'Neill. In this 'vulcanian forge' he and his fellow expatriates learned Spanish military tactics and the politics of survival. In the Spanish army he distinguished himself in the campaigns against the rebellious Dutch states, particularly at the successful siege of Rheinberg. The presence of these young Irish soldiers troubled the English as conditions in post-Elizabethan Ulster deteriorated. When Owen Roe's uncle the earl of Tyrone, together with Rory O'Donnell, the earl of Tyrconnell, succumbed to their failing prospects and fled in September 1607 to the continent, they undermined native Irish resistance and the fortunes of Owen O'Neill's family. 
In the wake of this intemperate exodus, native leadership floundered and confiscation and plantation followed. O'Neill's father lost his estates, a recalcitrant older brother was executed, and many of the native northern Irish exiles were reduced to dependants of Catholic Europe. The only reliable vehicle of native Irish restitution was the Irish regiment. In English eyes it was 'a cloud hanging in the sky prepared to break forth upon the realm upon the first offer of a fit time' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/22/136, 122). The untimely deaths of Tyrone's sons, including the regiment's colonel, thrust Owen Roe O'Neill into a prominent role. During the minority of Tyrone's sole surviving son, John, the Louvain Franciscans under Florence Conry, titular archbishop of Tuam, chose Owen O'Neill to be the sergeant-major and tacit commander of this invaluable regiment. In this wilderness of exile, he and his Franciscan patrons evolved a crusading attitude directed at recovering their homeland and promoting their faith. The basis of their ideology was Tyrone's vision of 'et libertate patriae', grounded in a shared Catholic fatherland binding the fervour of the Counter-Reformation with the ambitions of provincial and traditional native resistance. 
England understood what the Irish regiment meant to a new generation of displaced Irishmen and fomented discord among the fractious native and Anglicized (Old English) Catholic soldiers. O'Neill and the ever-present Franciscans did everything to deflect this animosity. Their efforts kept the regiment together, but they stirred lifelong rivalries between O'Neill and Old English officers like Thomas Preston. Strengthening O'Neill's position in the depleted exiled community was his marriage to Rosa O'Dogherty ('c'.1588-1660). The sister of Sir Cahir O'Dogherty of Inishowen, the leader of a short-lived post-flight Ulster insurrection, Rosa went to the continent with her first husband, Cathbar O'Donnell, the brother of the earl of Tyrconnell. Widowed in September 1609, she married O'Neill about 1613 and had one son, Henry Roe, with him. Many of O'Neill's duties after his marriage revolved around his obligations in the Spanish army. He served as military governor of the city of Rheinberg and Oloonzel, and with the outbreak of the Thirty Years' War he and the regiment were active in the Palatinate campaigns against the Dutch. He distinguished himself at the sieges of Bergen-op-Zoom and Breda. The outbreak of hostilities with England in 1625 refocused his attention on Ireland. Fearing an invasion through her Irish 'back door', England redoubled her efforts to undermine the regiment's unity. O'Neill and the Franciscans responded with invasion schemes that tried to reconcile the splintered Irish community. 
In November 1627 O'Neill and archbishop Conry presented the Spanish king with an elaborate enterprise that became the basis of O'Neill's political philosophy. It called for the liberation of Ireland and its oppressed religion. They proposed the establishment of a unifying 'republic and kingdom' where jurisdiction would be divided among the different provinces. Each jurisdiction would send deputies to the headquarters of the occupying army to vote measures and assessments. In this Catholic commonwealth the interim captain-generals would be advised and counselled by experienced officers and agents without regard to race. The pope and Catholic Europe were expected to recognize and sustain this governing experiment until an integrating Catholic monarch was selected. This extraordinary proposition never passed the drafting stage, but the experience taught O'Neill and his cohorts that the fate of their envisaged Catholic 'patria' depended on their own ingenuity and resourcefulness. 
Spain's peace with England in 1630 and the expansion of hostilities on the continent increased the need and demand for Irish soldiers. One of the five new Irish regiments formed in the 1630s was led by Colonel Owen O'Neill, known in the Spanish territories as Don Eugenio O'Neill. In his quest for recruits, he bolstered his Irish ties and gathered intelligence about conditions in Ireland. The lord deputy of Ireland, Thomas Wentworth, fearful of strengthening the regiments of disenfranchised native Irishmen, obstructed their recruiting efforts. O'Neill never lost his focus despite the new distraction of France's entry into the European war. His actions in the border province of Artois led in June 1640 to his military governorship of Arras. Outnumbered by fifty to one, for two months he held off three French armies. His celebrated defence was the apex of his career in the Spanish service. 
While O'Neill was combating French offensives, sectarian strife in the three Stuart kingdoms drew the Catholic communities of Ireland together. Fearful that Wentworth's disbanded Irish Catholic army, raised to support the king, would be dispersed overseas, a pro-monarchy conspiracy in 1641 unfolded that attracted a desperate and accommodating O'Neill. To his way of thinking a troubled king could resolve the landed and religious grievances of the disenfranchised Irish. Through the efforts of his nephews, Con and Daniel O'Neill, he was drawn into the evolving intrigue and was granted recruiting licences that had been so vigorously denied him in the past. But the plot was stillborn when Charles I believed he had instead found non-Catholic allies in Scotland for his campaign against the parliament of England. 
The collapse of the plot did not deter O'Neill and his fellow northern plotters. They continued their efforts and proclaimed that their rebellion in October 1641 was not against the king, but 'in defense and liberty of ourselves and the Irish natives of this kingdom' (proclamation of 24 Oct 1641, TNA: PRO, SP 63/206/27, 135). The 1641 conspirators rebelled to rescue, or in some cases preserve, their estates and religious rights under the king, or without him, in his name. After planning and supplying the insurrection, O'Neill became intent on leaving the Spanish service and returning to a homeland he had not seen in thirty-five years. Dependent on a new generation of Franciscans, he strove for continual Catholic support and did what he could to elude English surveillance and appease ethnic dissensions. Those wary of his leadership and imagined ambitions were reminded that he was not going to Ireland to command 'but to receive what they [insurgents] may be minded to accord him... as he claims only the right to serve God and enjoy the portion that falls to him of his father's inheritance' (H. Bourke to L. Wadding, 12 April 1642, Franciscan library, Killiney, MS D. IV, 327-9). After taking leave of the Spanish service, he secretly went to Ostend and about 29 June 1642 left for Ireland. With soldiers and supplies on board, his frigate hoisted a green flag with a large Irish harp. After skirting the northern coast of Scotland, he landed on 8 July at Doe Castle in Sheep Haven on the coast of Donegal. 
The news of O'Neill's arrival excited the despairing insurgents and on 29 August at the Ulster provincial assembly at Clones he was proclaimed 'lord general'. His cousin Sir Phelim O'Neill, a major conspirator of 1641 and rival claimant for the leadership of Ulster, reluctantly stepped down as the province's leader. With the issue of authority settled for the moment, Owen O'Neill faced the immediate problems of Ulster's deteriorating condition and the insurrection's disarray. He described the war-ravaged countryside 'like a hell if there could be a hell on earth'. The people were so crude and barbarous 'that many are little better off than the most remote Indians'. He lamented how there was no obedience among the soldiers 'if one can call men soldiers who behave nothing better than criminals'. Suffering also from a lack of military supplies, native resistance was disheartened (Jennings, 507-9). He and his young continental-trained officers, his would-be 'Maccabees', strove to put the northern native forces in order while containing the threat of English and Scottish protestant troops under the command of Robert Monro and Alexander Leslie. Chances for a more enduring effort revolved around the new Irish Catholic confederation meeting in Kilkenny. 
The Kilkenny confederation was a conciliatory vehicle for native and Old English Catholic interests. A rapprochement model was not unfamiliar to the Louvain Franciscans or to O'Neill. In May 1642 an embryonic commonwealth of the desperate native Irish and the legalistic Old English created a government of 'his majesty's Roman Catholic subjects of the kingdom of Ireland' whose motto declared 'pro Deo, rege, et patria Hibernia unanimis' ('United for God, king and the Irish fatherland'). But the problem was whether this consensual experiment could lay the foundation for a Catholic 'patria' in a provincial-minded and religiously fractious society. At the opening sessions of the new general assembly in Kilkenny, O'Neill took the confederate oath of association. Unfortunately he was unprepared for the machinations in Kilkenny. Not a subtle politician, his causes -- the restoration of estates and the acceptance of his Franciscan-inspired faith -- ran counter to the interests of the confederation's dominant Old English constituency. Unlike O'Neill and his supporters, the Old English with their parliamentary traditions viewed the confederation as a temporary expedient for resolving their religious concerns with a struggling protestant king. In no way did they want to jeopardize their leverage and advantages on diffusive natives and their irreconcilable issues. Unwilling to empower a man of O'Neill's stature and ability, the confederate executive, the supreme council, refused to trust a unified military command to the foreign-trained Ulsterman. O'Neill became one of four regional commanders. The Leinster command went to his continental rival, Thomas Preston, whose daughter married O'Neill's Ulster antagonist, Sir Phelim O'Neill. He countered by marrying his son, Henry Roe, into the family of Preston's Leinster competitor, Sir Luke Fitzgerald. 
After the session O'Neill returned to the north and briefed his officers and provincial leaders about the events at Kilkenny. He also worked to establish an effective fighting force and defend his vulnerable province. He adapted his considerable military skills to the skirmishing tactics of his adversaries and began by instilling discipline and an organized command to a rabble fighting-force. This task was made difficult by the constant attacks from the Scottish forces under Monro and the incursions of local protestant forces led by Sir William Stewart and Sir Robert Stewart. Not anxious to expose his inexperienced forces to these threats, O'Neill directed his men to less turbulent southern counties. On 13 June, near the town of Clones in co. Monaghan, his scattered forces stumbled into a fatal ambush. He lost many veteran commanders in this embarrassing setback. Afterwards he vowed never to 'give field upon any man's bidding, other than advantage' (Gilbert, 'Contemporary history', 1/1.49). 
O'Neill redeemed himself a few months later when the supreme council ordered the recovering northern army to relieve the embattled county of Meath. At Portlester Castle, 6 miles west of Trim, he defeated English troops under Lord Moore. Once secured, however, the Old English landowners grew anxious to rid themselves of O'Neill's northern army. His eventual withdrawal back to the desperate confines of Ulster was tied to a cessation of arms between the confederates and the king's lord deputy, James Butler, marquess of Ormond. The youthful head of a leading Old English family, Ormond was a devout royalist and protestant convert. His mission, as he saw it, was to pacify the country and provide Irish support for Charles I. These difficult priorities made Ormond, like O'Neill, a hostage to his ethnicity and religious politics. In the peace negotiations following the cessation, the protestant New English community decried concessions to papist rebels, and Old English and native factions bickered over their landed-religious agendas. Complicating the settlement also was the hard line of the new papal envoy, Pierfrancesco Scarampi. He put his faith in the military leadership of General O'Neill and cautioned confederate Catholics about negotiating away their anticipated leverage. 
However, O'Neill's situation was precarious. Encamped again in war-torn Ulster, he did not benefit from the cessation. The long-suffering protestant settler communities of the north turned away from the cessation and their failing monarch and joined the English parliament and the Scots in the solemn league and covenant. This decision led to renewed conflict and breaches in the weakened cessation. In November 1643 O'Neill brought his grievances to the confederate general assembly. He warned the delegates about diluting their military power and cautioned the assembly that he would move his troops to Leinster if his native north was denied relief. The delegates responded by raising a confederate army to check the actions of General Robert Monro. The Old English majority did not trust this relieving army to O'Neill, and, with Preston pushing for the command, the assembly compromised and gave it to the inexperienced 'pseudo-general' James Touchet, the earl of Castehaven. This appointment doomed the summer expedition of 1644. The earl's timid leadership never overcame the campaign's inadequate strategies or O'Neill's illness and disdain. No battle was ever fought; Monro, after wasting the countryside, retired to co. Antrim. In the months that followed, O'Neill's frustration and discontent moved him to consider returning to the Spanish Netherlands. 
O'Neill never acted on this threat. Instead he was encouraged that the king's weakening position and growing need for Irish soldiers, together with the accession of a more energetic pope, Innocent X, might evoke significant concessions from the king's new representative, the Catholic Edward Somerset, earl of Glamorgan. But neither Glamorgan's accord nor subsequent proposals from Ormond satisfied the newly arrived papal nuncio, Archbishop Rinuccini. Disillusioned by the confederate leadership's tempered objectives, O'Neill saw the nuncio as a source of military succour and supporter for his coveted Irish Catholic commonwealth. Bolstered by Rinuccini's aid, he restructured his army and drilled them on the co-ordination of musket and the short pike. Able to defend Ulster, on 5 June 1646 he lured a protestant army led by Monro to a site near the town of Benburb in co. Armagh. Before he decisively defeated Monro in a pitched battle, he aroused his soldiers by telling them how 'All Christendom knows your quarrel is good -- to fight for your native birthright and the religion of your forefathers' (Gilbert, 'Contemporary history', 1/1.111-13). Uncontested in the field, he never followed up on his victory. Many of his soldiers dispersed with their booty, and without cannon his victorious army was incapable of capturing the north's walled garrison towns. In Waterford, Rinuccini and the assembled clergy, believing the Catholic position was strengthened, looked unfavourably on the new Ormond settlement negotiated with the supreme council. Courted by both sides, O'Neill proclaimed the guarantees of the 'vile treaty' obstructed 'the propagation of the Catholic religion' and 'the restoration of our country's freedom' (O'Ferrall and O'Connell, 2.322, 2.297). 
By the end of August 1646 O'Neill had directed his forces to Kilkenny to support the position of the nuncio and the Catholic clergy. With his backing the council was purged, and a new executive, led by Rinuccini, took control of the confederation. Fissures in this new government erupted over the continuing negotiations with Ormond and the appointment of a confederate commander for an attack on Dublin. Unwilling to alienate the Old English clergy or their vacillating champion, Preston, the command was jointly entrusted to O'Neill and his irresolute rival. Operating under threat of excommunication and lacking sufficient ordnance, the Dublin campaign was troubled from the beginning. The latent distrust between the two generals, Preston's vulnerability to royalist pleadings, and O'Neill's concern for conserving his precious army undermined the enterprise and the momentum of the clerical coup. 
Over the next seven months, while O'Neill secured key garrison towns in the confederate heartland, events at Kilkenny and Dublin worked against native Catholic aspirations. As each side jockeyed for power, fateful decisions undercut O'Neill's position. Ormond turned Dublin and the nearby posts over to the parliament of England in summer 1647, while the newly elected supreme council continued to splinter the confederate military command by relegating O'Neill to Connaught. By removing their undesirable protector, the council put their well-being in the hands of Preston's Leinster army, who were badly defeated at Dungan's Hill, near Trim, on 8 August by the new parliamentarian governor of Dublin, Colonel Michael Jones. The council responded by asking Rinuccini to invite the northern army back to Leinster. 
O'Neill was distressed by these circumstances, but he recognized the alarming vulnerability of the midlands. His troops were less accommodating to these new directives. At their campsite near Kilbeggan monastery, O'Neill told his dissatisfied officers that he had returned to Ireland to serve the king, the nation, and his native province. He reminded them of their duty and declared that their timely relief would 'endear and create a better understanding between you and the rest of your countrymen' (Gilbert, 'Contemporary history', 1/1.158; 3/2.206-7). Despite the defection of some regiments he led his men to Kilkenny, where he protected the capital and southern Leinster from the Irish protestant general Murrough O'Brien, Lord Inchiquin, who had defeated the confederate Munster forces at Knockanoss in November 1647. Some time after Inchiquin's withdrawal the council directed O'Neill to King's county. Restrained by confederate directives, it was only after Jones returned to Dublin that O'Neill was ordered to move out and waste the countryside north of the city. He reluctantly carried out this mission and unsuccessfully endeavoured to engage Jones and his supporters. 
O'Neill's support and service did not deter the supreme council. Wary of his power, the council and its Old English cadre did what it could to discredit the Ulster general and weakened the nuncio and his clerical supporters. As for O'Neill's ill-provisioned and unappreciated troops, they were racked by mutinies and the machinations of recalcitrant leaders like Sir Phelim O'Neill. The situation deteriorated to the point where O'Neill and Rinuccini felt unsafe in the confederate capital, but the fateful breach erupted after the council signed a cessation of arms with Inchiquin on 20 May 1648. They believed that the Munster leader would provide a defender less controversial than O'Neill and hoped that Inchiquin's royalism might rekindle negotiations with Ormond. Put off by their choice of allies, O'Neill supported Rinuccini's condemnation of the cessation with its censure of excommunication. The supreme council responded by rescinding his military command. O'Neill and his officers countered that they had stood by their oath of association for the defence of religion and the king. They accused the 'malignant party' of treachery and 'private advantage even at the cost of the ruin of the kingdom, the violation of their oath and the extinction of the faith' (O'Ferrall and O'Connell, 3.293-5; Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 68, fols. 156-8). Appreciating that the clerical party depended on O'Neill, the council retaliated, and by the end of June Inchiquin, Preston, and all the confederate forces moved against his ill-succoured army. Throughout the summer months he adeptly manoeuvred his forces against adversaries who were bent on his disarray or defeat. When no advantage for battle presented itself, he cautioned his aroused forces and took the position of the Roman consul Fabius the Delayer. Why risk all in one battle, he asked: 'to purchase the sweet fruits of revenge... with the hazard of our whole body, the only one in Ireland for religion, king and kingdom, as long as we hold in a body, though we never give a blow: the enemy will fear us.(O'Ferrall and O'Connell, 3.516-18; Gilbert, 'Contemporary history', 1/1.268)' When he failed at combat, the supreme council and the new general assembly declared O'Neill a traitor, a rebel against the king and the fundamental laws of the land, and a 'manifest opposer of the established government of the Confederation' (proclamation, 30 Sept 1648, Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 22, fol. 177). At this juncture Ormond returned to Ireland with a commission to conclude a peace treaty. Still preferring to settle things with the crown, O'Neill welcomed Ormond. Unfortunately the reliability of royal agents was fading in proportion to the ascendancy of the English parliament. 
O'Neill's position deteriorated rapidly after Ormond and the confederates concluded a treaty on 17 January 1649. It was followed by Charles I's execution and Rinuccini's departure. Ostracized and without dependable benefactors, O'Neill was thrown upon his own devices. Unable to obtain necessary guarantees from Ormond, he unwillingly made desperate accommodations to survive. He opened negotiations with parliamentarian commanders in Ireland and on 8 May signed a cessation of hostilities with George Monck for three months. The benefits of the cessation were short-lived. Monck was secured against O'Neill's attachment to Ormond and O'Neill received much-needed provisions after supporting the parliamentarian garrison at Dundalk. In the end, parliament dissociated itself from Monck's pact and refused openly to deal with O'Neill and his party. Anxious to keep his army in the field, O'Neill also signed a truce with Sir Charles Coote and came to his relief when the Scots besieged Londonderry. Within a few weeks his bargaining position increased when Jones defeated Ormond at Rathmines and Oliver Cromwell landed in Ireland. Despite these desperate conditions, it was almost the middle of October before the parties signed the articles of peace. The accord gave O'Neill most of the secular and religious guarantees he coveted. It also provided him and his followers with the promise of an act of oblivion and assured the native leader land and political considerations in any final peace settlement. Unfortunately the pact was made with a king whose promises no longer had the weight of law. O'Neill was also terminally ill and was carried about on a horse litter. He dispatched his forces to Ormond's service, while he retired to Cloughoughter Castle, about 6 miles west of Cavan. In his last letters to Ormond he asked the lord lieutenant to be patient and not risk his men needlessly. He also requested that Ormond take care of his son, Colonel Henry O'Neill, and see to it that he benefited from 'such conditions, concessions and creations, as his Majesty intended for me' (O'Neill to Ormond, 1 Nov 1649, Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 26, fol. 49). On Tuesday 6 November 1649, he died at Cloughoughter Castle; he was buried in an unmarked grave in the Franciscan priory in Cavan. 
O'Neill's unfolding story was first attempted in an unsigned, sentimental article in the 'Ulster Journal of Archaeology' in 1856. Towards the end of the nineteenth century the availability of J. T. Gilbert's multi-volume editions of contemporary accounts and correspondence provided a published basis for setting O'Neill in a more full and balanced historical framework, and S. R. Gardiner drew upon it in his treatment of O'Neill for the 'Dictionary of National Biography' in 1894. Two years later J. F. Taylor published the first biography of the Ulster leader, a small popular nationalist account concentrating on his career after 1642. In 1914 Diarmid Coffey contrasted O'Neill to Ormond's royalist dealings, while over the next half-century at least four brief biographies appeared, each of them an abridged adaptation of Taylor's work. No new light was shed either by the work produced for the tercentenary of O'Neill's death or by T. S. O'Cahan's romantic 1969 biography. The first complete historical treatment of O'Neill, detailing both his early life and his civil war career, was published by the present writer in 1984. O'Neill's values and motivations were subsequently evaluated by Raymond Gillespie in a brief biographical article, while further specialized studies of aspects of O'Neill's career and opinions were undertaken by Casway. 
In retrospect O'Neill appears a skilled and resourceful military leader who with proper ordnance and support might have made gains commensurate with his abilities. But knowing how to assemble a fighting force and keeping it in the field were fruitless if a general could not affect the maintenance and politics of a campaign. It is also sometimes overlooked that his power rested on his military prowess and not on his hereditary position in the society of the Ulster clans. Never the master of his fate, he remained dependent on myopic and declining powers. Spain, Rome, and the confederate leadership utilized his skills and profited from his service. But these powers never had the capacity or willingness to reorder the protestant landed settlement of Ulster or the resources to restore the privileges of the Irish Catholic church. O'Neill's hope that a liberated Catholic fatherland could ameliorate the ethnic and provincial divisions of Ireland never stood a chance in a realm ruled by a religiously contentious protestant monarch in an age of Calvinist ascendancy. Nor could his efforts and sacrifices move his Old English confederates to tie their threatened well-being to the eclipsed world of native Irish Ulster. 


@@@@@


doc= 20784


O'Neill, Sir Phelim Roe (1603-1653), landowner and insurgent, was the eldest son of Tirlough Oge O'Neill (died 1608), landowner and heir to Sir Henry Oge O'Neill of Kinnard from co. Tyrone, and Catherine, daughter of Tirlough McHenry O'Neill of the Fews. This parentage reflected the intra-sept rivalries that consumed the northern O'Neills. 
Sir Henry Oge O'Neill's marriage to Catherine, daughter of Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, fed the pretensions of the family. Towards the end of the Nine Years' War, Henry Oge, sometimes called 'the queen's O'Neill', deserted Tyrone in the hope of holding his estates directly from the crown. This strategy was shared by Tirlough McHenry O'Neill of the Fews. Drawn together by their shared post-war ambitions, Henry Oge's son married Tirlough McHenry's daughter Catherine. This lineage provided Phelim Roe and his brother with autonomy in the unsettled native north, but Henry Oge paid a high price for his prominence and the schism it provoked. On 20 June 1608 both Henry Oge and his son Tirlough Oge were killed in the king's service during the ill-fated O'Dogherty revolt. The crown, reacting to the troubled condition of Ulster, attempted to reassert control by nurturing the northern Irish who had remained loyal. Towards this end, the lord deputy, Sir Arthur Chichester, violated the laws of succession and turned over parts of Henry Oge's estate to Phelim's uncles and cousins who otherwise threatened to be 'thorns in our feet and pricks in our side' (Chichester to Davies, 31 March 1609, TNA: PRO, SP 63/226/58, 154). In March 1609 an inquisition resolved the inheritance issue by recognizing the five and a half-year-old Phelim Roe as the heir to his grandfather's remaining lands. In 1613 his mother was granted a patent for custody of the newly created manor of Kinnard during Phelim's minority. 
Raised as a royal ward in conformity with the principles of 'piety and civility' ('APC', '1615-16', 346), in 1618 O'Neill and his brother Tirlough Oge enrolled at Lincoln's Inn, London, the former staying there for three years. His return to Ireland coincided with the expiration of his mother's patent and his coming of age. Although he took the oath of supremacy, he lapsed back to his native Catholicism after the 1628 'graces', or religious concessions, modified the oath to one of allegiance. He also petitioned for a new grant for his grandfather's estates. On 6 May 1629 the king's council, anxious to sustain O'Neill's loyalty during England's war with Spain, ordered a new patent for much of Sir Henry's lands, estimated at 4500 acres. That same year O'Neill enhanced his standing in Ulster by marrying the daughter of Arthur Magennis, Viscount Magennis of Iveagh. But he lacked the discretion to conduct himself properly, and 'ran into all the follies and extravagances of youth' (Carte, 1.158). His intemperate lifestyle, 'as free and generous as could be desired' (Hogan, 148), could not keep pace with the inflationary age. Moreover, the purchase of his knighthood, a wartime assessment, and the settlement to the crown of the value of his wardship and marriage were unavoidable expenditures. His only recourse was to heavily mortgage his estates. A 1661 inquisition stated that by 1640 he owed over $12,000 to Dublin and London creditors. 
This not uncommon plight did not detract from O'Neill's regional prominence. A Tyrone-Armagh notable, he served as a local JP, sat in the Irish parliament for Dungannon in 1641, and through his brother's marriage had ties to the MacDonnells of Antrim. It was through the earl of Antrim's influence in 1639 that he gained his knighthood. Like many others in Ireland, O'Neill was alarmed by the uncompromising policies of the lord deputy, Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford, whose regime exposed the vulnerability of Irish tenurial, legal, and religious rights. His assault on traditional sources of Irish power moved O'Neill and others like him to fear that an ascendant English protestant parliament would use Strafford's policies to undermine their place in the post-plantation north. To protect their positions and redress former grievances, O'Neill and other Catholic landholders sought ways to preserve, not overthrow, the colonial system that gave them status and influence. 
Having attempted to use the Irish parliament to work out constitutional safeguards, Irish politicians failed to resolve their grievances and, moved by the success of the insurgents in Scotland, turned to more militant remedies. Initially O'Neill kept his distance from the conspirators, wary of risking his fragile position on the early plots of Lord Maguire and Rory O'More, although his brother informed him of the progress of their machinations. But his rank among the Ulster O'Neills made his support essential for any action in the native north. It was not until the spring of 1641 that he stepped up his role, as witnessed by his contacts with native commanders and kinsmen in the Spanish service. The key factor for the plotters was the fate of Strafford's Irish Catholic army that was raised to support the king against the covenanting Scots. 
With the death of John O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, in 1641, Sir Phelim, identified in the plotters' codes as 'President Rosse' (Gilbert, 'A Contemporary History', 1/2.397), increased his communications with his cousin Colonel Owen Roe O'Neill in the Spanish Netherlands. This urgency came after the disbandment on 25 May 1641 of Strafford's Catholic army. With parliament unwilling to tolerate unemployed Catholic troops in Ireland, the king directed the earl of Antrim to issue licences to designated Catholic recruiter-colonels for the purpose of maintaining the Irish army. In this context, a royalist conspiracy, termed the 'Antrim plot' or 'colonels' plot' evolved. O'Neill was not an immediate participant. Having worked in the Irish parliament to keep the soldiers together, he already had contact with Owen Roe and native officers on the continent. It was natural that he would attach himself to the original O'More and Maguire conspirators who at this point were plotting with the colonels to seize Dublin Castle and overthrow the pro-parliament regime. 
O'Neill was briefed about the conspiracy at his wife's funeral in 1641. With assurances from Owen Roe's agents, he followed his confederates to Dublin to meet spokesmen from the colonels. The colonels, however, 'were fallen from their resolution' (Hickson, 2.349) because of the crown's accommodations with the Scots. Undeterred by the loss of the colonels, 'the fools', as Antrim described the native plotters, 'would not accept our time and manner for ordering the work; but fell upon it without us and sooner and otherwise than we should have done' (Cox, appx, xlix). O'Neill and the original plotters professed that they were acting in the king's best interest and planned an attack on Dublin Castle for 23 October 1641. O'Neill, preferring a contained provincial rising, concentrated his forces in Ulster. On the day preceding the general insurrection he took Charlemont Castle and a host of other fortifications. Always conscious of justifying his actions and broadening his support, he later asserted that the Ulster rising was for the 'liberty of religion and for the recovery of those lands which should appear by the law of the land to be unjustly held from the native Irish' (TCD, MS 839, fol. 3). This justification was anticipated in his Dungannon proclamation of 24 October, which professed that the uprising was not directed against the king and that no harm would come to the Scots Irish. The sole motive, O'Neill said, was the 'defense and liberty of ourselves and the Irish natives of this kingdom' (proclamation, 24 Oct 1641, TNA: PRO, SP 63/260/27, 135). A few weeks later he published a forged royal commission authorizing him to rise up against parliament in support of Irish liberties. None of these validations won over the Scottish settlers, nor did they pacify the outbreak of long-suffering discontent. 
Despite his provincial prominence, O'Neill was neither a trained military commander nor a conciliatory leader. He had envisaged a limited rising, not a rebellion that vented popular grievances. He based his actions on a network of kinship groups and affiliates who failed him when local authority broke down. In the anarchic wake, his misconceived expectations suffered from factional self-interests and the disparagement of his intentions. Branded a traitor with a $1000 reward on his head, he was often held responsible for many of the post-rising excesses. He did try to establish military order in the chaotic north, but with few resources and untrained troops his successes were limited. He took the town of Lurgan and ventured into west Tyrone and seized Strabane Castle, wasting the countryside, before being repulsed by Sir William Stewart and his protestant Lagan forces. O'Neill's greatest effort was the attempted capture of Drogheda in early 1642. The county of Meath made him general of the forces and gave him governing authority during the campaign, but neither these efforts nor his forays against the Scots in counties Down and Antrim were successful. He narrowly escaped capture and later eluded the veteran Scottish commander Robert Monro, who had landed with a Scottish army in the spring of 1642, by burning Armagh and fleeing to Charlemont. By the early summer he had lost possession of Fort Mountjoy, Dungannon, Strabane, and Kinnard and was soundly defeated by the Lagan forces at Glenamaquin, near Raphoe. With his resources and leadership waning, he attended a provincial council meeting at Glaslough. It was here on 18 July that a courier announced that Owen Roe O'Neill had arrived on the coast of Donegal with men and supplies from the continent. 
O'Neill set out with a large contingent to meet and escort Owen Roe O'Neill to Charlemont. They arrived on 13 August to a great celebration. According to an eyewitness, everyone received Owen Roe with bare heads except Sir Phelim. This response portended a leadership struggle between the deposed natives and 'deserving' Irish at a general assembly convened at Clones on 29 August 1642. At this gathering, the delegates, particularly the dispossessed Irish, rallied around and acknowledged Owen Roe as their commander; they conferred upon him the title of lord-general. No reference was made to the earldom of Tyrone, to which Sir Phelim allegedly aspired. Facing up to the north's dire condition and the popular appeal of Owen's generalship, Phelim hesitantly stepped aside and was appeased with the perfunctory title of lord president of Ulster. After the assembly he accompanied Owen Roe to Kilkenny to attend the inauguration of the new Catholic confederation. Representing Ulster on the supreme council, O'Neill, 'puffed by emulation' and caught up by the intrigue at the capital, pursued opportunities to strengthen his deflated position. He not only opposed his kinsman's selection as the chief commander of the confederate forces, he also tried to outmanoeuvre him by marrying, in October 1642, Louise (1623/4- 'c'.1649), the eighteen-year-old daughter of Owen's lifelong military adversary Thomas Preston. The marriage strengthened him with a dowry of muskets, arms, and $3000. The Franciscan Hugh Bourke, writing to Rome, warned that the Irish cause would suffer unless the differences between Sir Phelim and Owen Roe were healed. 
In the years and campaigns that followed, O'Neill busied himself with affairs in Kilkenny and Charlemont. He consolidated his military position and promoted himself as an alternative to his cousin. Lacking siege weaponry, he posed no threat to the north's fortified places, but venturing into Meath with Owen Roe's army he occupied the well-situated castles. During the failed confederate campaign of 1644 against the covenanting armies of Ulster, he remained in Kilkenny and took the confederate government's side against Owen Roe by turning Charlemont over to the campaign's commander, the earl of Castlehaven. His political connivances were eventually constrained in October 1645 by the arrival of a papal nuncio, Giovanni Rinuccini. Concerned about the confederate Catholics' lack of success, particularly in Ulster, Rinuccini focused his attention on the 'irreconcilable enmity' between Owen and Phelim. Owen Roe and his clerical adviser, Ever MacMahon, bishop of Clogher, lost no time accepting the nuncio's mediation. Sir Phelim, not wanting to lose the church's support, followed suit and was granted an all-embracing pardon for his actions. After the reconciliation the northern army received papal succour that allowed them to move against the covenanters. At the battle of Benburb, on 5 June 1646, Sir Phelim's ten-company regiment followed the command of Owen Roe. He and his forces gave a good account of themselves and settled old scores, taking no prisoners. 
O'Neill used the Benburb triumph to accumulate provisions and expand his holdings. He also accompanied Owen Roe to Kilkenny to support a clerical-led coup against the confederate government, who had accepted peace terms considered to include unsatisfactory religious guarantees from the king's lord lieutenant, the marquess of Ormond. Unable to withstand Rinuccini's censure or Owen Roe's power, O'Neill righted himself by serving on a reconstituted supreme council more amenable to clerical aims. Operating under clerical duress, he took over the strategic garrison at Maryborough, as Owen Roe and the coerced Thomas Preston marched against Dublin, held by Ormond. The deposed Old English supporters of the peace with Ormond countered this offensive with divisive appeals to the royalism of Thomas Preston and the ambitions of 'deserving' Irishmen such as O'Neill. 
The failure of the 1647 Dublin campaign, the overthrow of the clerical regime, and the discrediting of Owen Roe O'Neill allowed Sir Phelim O'Neill to make amends with the crown's representatives. He knew his advancement was tied to the royalist cause and was not willing to jeopardize his rank and estates for the desperate politics of dispossessed natives or the hard-line expectations of Tridentine continental clergy. Back in the good graces of the king, he dissembled against Owen Roe and drew away key officers such as Lord Iveagh, Myles O'Reilly, and Alexander MacDonnell. By the summer of 1648 he was in a position to ignore Owen Roe's military directives and resisted his call to arms. In the early autumn he settled his differences with Ormond and was appointed a peace commissioner. He was promised a title and an expansion of his estates and was made governor of Charlemont and commander of a regiment of foot. Hoping to rekindle his primacy under a royal-confederate settlement, he continued to disparage Owen Roe and obstruct the general's negotiations with Ormond and the king. About this time he married Lady Jean (died in or after 1668), daughter of George Gordon, first marquess of Huntly, and widow of Claud Hamilton, first Lord Hamilton, baron of Strabane. Their younger son was named Gordon ['see below']. 
O'Neill's last hope for command occurred after Owen Roe's death (6 November 1649), when the northern leaders assembled at Belturbet in March 1650 to elect a new general of the northern army. However, not only did Sir Phelim lack the respect of Owen Roe's followers, but also a proviso in the articles of peace excluded the candidacy of any officer who had deserted the northern army in 1648. In the end, his old nemesis, Ever MacMahon, bishop of Clogher, was selected bishop-general. A week later, after acts of penance, O'Neill and his compatriots made a formal submission to MacMahon. Unfortunately, the inexperienced bishop-general led the northern army into a disastrous defeat at Scariffhollis on 21 June 1651. O'Neill escaped to co. Tyrone, where he defended Charlemont Castle against the forces of parliament. After surrendering the fortress he fled, leaving his pregnant wife behind for her own safety. He was branded a traitor and criminal, and in August 1652 the Cromwellian regime offered a $300 reward for his apprehension. Six months later O'Neill's hiding place on an island on Lough Roughan in Tyrone was betrayed. He was taken to Dublin, and on 5 March 1653 was put on trial before the high court of justice. Offered a pardon if he admitted the authenticity of the bogus 1641 royal commission, O'Neill refused to implicate the executed Charles I, knowing it might later be held against his wife or heirs. Five days later, in Dublin, on 10 March 1653, he was found guilty and was hanged, drawn, and quartered. His remains were impaled on the gates of Lisnegarvy, Dundalk, Drogheda, and Dublin. 
O'Neill has been made the scapegoat for the 1641 rebellion. The sectarian propaganda of the civil war era portrayed him as a villainous rebel, the man behind the undisciplined fury of the Ulster uprising. He was also stigmatized by the clerical party who rallied around Owen Roe O'Neill. His agenda and survival tactics were hardly ever accepted or respected by them. On the other hand, his aspirations to land and status were better appreciated by royalist and Old English confederate parties as a counterforce against the native and religious militants. In the end, he became a vilified and maligned historical figure, a casualty of his post-plantation ambitions. 
Contemporary accounts of the rebellion and the civil war did little to redeem O'Neill's reputation. His ambitions and intentions suffered further in the depositions taken after the Ulster rising. In many cases, he was blamed for the revolt's excesses and was accused of being a particularly vengeful leader. Historians of the later twentieth century have proved more objective in their treatments, but are still obliged to draw their conclusions from the same critical sources. For O'Neill, the problem will always be one of appreciating his circuitous and unrelenting struggle to secure his position in the unstable kaleidoscope that was colonial Ulster. 


After his recovery O'Neill took advantage of the treaty of Limerick and joined thousands of Irish soldiers who departed for France. He became a colonel of the Irish Charlemont regiment. They were part of the Irish brigade, wearing British uniforms and serving the kings of France. From 1692 to 1697 he fought with distinction in the French service. Following the treaty of Ryswick, the remnant of his regiment was re-formed and reassembled into an infantry regiment under Pierce Butler, styled Viscount Galmoye. O'Neill rose to the rank of brigadier-general, but before his death in France in early 1705, he was negotiating to raise a regiment for the service of Spain. 
O'Neill's daughter Catherine married John Bourke, styled fourth Baron Bourke of Brittas and eighth Baron Bourke of Castle Connell. His son Gordon fought in the Spanish service as a captain in an Irish regiment of dragoons. His older stepbrother Phelim, son of Phelim Roe and Louise Preston, became a Franciscan and returned to Ireland in 1671-2. He was appointed guardian of the convent of Armagh and visitor in Ulster. A controversial figure, he returned to the continent and actively served the church on political missions. 


@@@@@


doc= 20785


O'Neill, Shane (c.1530-1567), chieftain, was the youngest son of Conn Bacach O'Neill, first earl of Tyrone (c.1482-1559), chieftain, and his second wife, Sorcha (died 1530), daughter of Hugh Oge O'Neill, chief of the Clandeboye O'Neills. Upon his mother's death in 1530 Shane was fostered out to the O'Donnellys, the hereditary marshals to the O'Neills. Conn's decision to foster Shane out to a lesser dependent family, rather than to an existing or potential ally, was probably due to the fact that he had at least five much older sons. Yet neither Shane's supernumerary status nor his infancy prevented his abduction in 1531 by Niall Conallach, Conn's principal rival for the O'Neill chieftaincy. Conn survived the leadership challenge and Shane was returned to his foster family, with whom he remained until reaching adulthood. During this time the O'Neill lordship underwent rapid change culminating in the surrender by Conn in 1542 of both his kingdom and his Gaelic title in exchange for the earldom of Tyrone; his eldest son, Mathew O'Neill (died 1557), was concurrently created baron of Dungannon, with right of succession to the earldom. But Shane, still in adolescence, remained a discounted quantity, wholly excluded from both the detailed negotiations preceding the settlement and the formal indenture with the crown. 
Shane led an army against the Clandeboye O'Neills in 1548 and in the course of the action killed the chief's son. The attack was part of Tyrone's effort to exert control over the failing Clandeboye lordship, which was being gradually undermined by the MacDonalds, the so-called 'Scots', who were emigrating from the western isles. The government shared his desire to arrest the advancing MacDonalds and deployed a garrison at Newry, co. Down, against them. But disputes soon arose between the earl and several aggressive English captains who began raiding Tyrone with impunity. The English had, moreover, begun elevating Dungannon at his father's expense in a premature succession dispute. As the region descended into a triangular war between the earl and Dungannon and his brothers, who exploited their father's weakness in pursuit of their own interests, Tyrone came increasingly to rely on Shane, whose victory in Clandeboye had proved his ability and assured his popularity among the O'Neills. Tyrone's arrest and detention in Dublin in May 1551 provided Shane with an opportunity to assert his independence while nominally defending his father's interests. 
Tyrone's removal simplified the situation by uniting Shane and his older brothers against Dungannon, upon whom the blame for their father's imprisonment was squarely placed. It was Shane, however, who rose to prominence, assuming responsibility for Tyrone in his father's absence. Recognizing this, Dungannon and Nicholas Bagenal, marshal of the army, attempted to negotiate or, if possible, capture him in October 1551. Following Dungannon's failure to accomplish this, Shane agreed to talk, revealing that he had been acting on 'instructions receavyd from his father sithens his laste repayre to Dublin' and that 'he shulde submit him sellfe to no man tylle his father returne' (TNA: PRO, SP 61/3/56). Shane, however, accepted a truce and agreed to acknowledge Dungannon's authority. But Dungannon's credibility among the O'Neills was in ruin, and in spring 1552 Shane marched into Dungannon, in Tyrone, unopposed taking $800 worth of treasure which, he claimed, belonged to his father. He subsequently sought support for his actions among other Irish chiefs and even made peaceful overtures towards the MacDonalds. Hearing of this, Sir Thomas Cusack, lord chancellor, travelled to Dungannon to learn of Shane's intentions. He perceived in him 'but pryde, stubbornes, and all bent to do what he coulde to distroy the pore countrey' (TNA: PRO, SP 61/4/43). Upon Cusack's departure Shane exercised his independence by defiantly burning the earl's house. In December the government released the aged Tyrone in the hope that Shane would acknowledge his father's authority and that the O'Neills would assist in expelling the Scots from Ulster. 
Tyrone's restoration, however, failed to achieve either objective because it neglected to address the principal cause of instability in the region: the discrepancy between English and Gaelic laws of succession. Shane's efforts to achieve recognition as 'tanaiste' were misinterpreted as simple recalcitrance and the earl's reconciliation with Dungannon upon his return, coupled with his adherence to the English law of succession by primogeniture, reinforced his youngest son's belief that his only means of redress was by the sword. Thus a dangerous situation developed where two successors existed concurrently, one by Gaelic right, the other by English. Upon his reappointment as deputy in November 1553 Sir Anthony St Leger, the architect of the settlement of 1542, lent tacit recognition to Shane's position by awarding him a generous royal pension. The support of Gerald Fitzgerald, eleventh earl of Kildare, for Shane against a rival O'Neill faction in 1554 clouded the question of legitimacy further while echoing an earlier Geraldine-O'Neill alliance. In the same year Tyrone and Dungannon assembled an army to attack the Scots in Clandeboye and to demonstrate their collective strength, but Shane, who by this time had married James MacDonald's daughter, Katherine, maintained his alliance with the MacDonalds and the attacking army was routed. Shane was now the dominant force among the O'Neills. Yet the government failed either to recognize his Gaelic right to the chieftaincy or to uphold vigorously Dungannon's English claim to the earldom. The new lord deputy, Thomas Radcliffe, Lord Fitzwalter, pardoned Shane in 1556 for his recent confederation with the Scots, but similarly ignored the question of succession. This hesitation created a power vacuum that Shane exploited to his advantage. 
In 1557 Shane assembled a large army and attacked Tyrconnell. He hoped to re-establish traditional O'Neill suzerainty throughout Ulster by compelling the O'Donnells to submit to his authority 'so that there should be but one king in Ulster for the future' ('AFM', s.a. 1557). A victory, moreover, would make his position impossible for the government to ignore. The expedition, however, ended in disaster when Shane's army was defeated at Cnoc Buidhbh, near Strabane in Tyrone, ironically the place where his father met with a similar discomfiture, in pursuit of the same goal in 1522. However, a serious challenge to Shane's leadership failed to materialize: the O'Donnells were wracked by internal dissension and were unable to consolidate their victory, the earl was old and sickly and Dungannon lacked support among the O'Neills. The government of Mary I, moreover, failed to pursue any consistent policy towards O'Neill or Ulster save a resolution to expel the Scots. When in 1557 the third earl of Sussex (Fitzwalter) called upon the O'Neills to aid in a campaign against the Scots, Shane was conveniently absent. In October Sussex twice burned Armagh in search of Shane, but failed on both occasions to engage him. Shane -- having secured another pardon in December -- was sufficiently confident in his position and at last moved against Dungannon, orchestrating his assassination in 1558. Tyrone subsequently escaped to the pale, where he died the following year. Dungannon's young son Brian O'Neill (died 1562) inherited the title second baron of Dungannon, but because of his youth and Shane's strength he did not accede to the earldom to which he was entitled by English law. 
Tyrone died by 16 July 1559 and Shane was elected O'Neill. This Gaelic distinction, however, did not abrogate or supersede the vacant English title and Shane immediately sought recognition as his father's legitimate successor to the earldom. Elizabeth I was keen to avoid conflict and did not have a viable alternative. She proved receptive to his claim and in July authorized Sussex to recognize him as earl. Yet the absence of trust between Shane and Sussex, coupled with the former's refusal to allow English arbiters to settle his disputes with lesser Ulster chiefs, made the subsequent negotiations impossible. In an effort to circumvent Sussex, Shane, through his trusted foster brother Terence Donnelly, dean of Armagh, petitioned the queen for recognition of his position, noting that the 'rude uncyvill and disobedient people' of his lordship 'will fall to cyvilite and here after be faithfull obedyent and trew subjectes' if his requests were granted (TNA: PRO, SP 63/1/79). Sussex, however, vilified Shane, convincing Elizabeth to rescind her offer of the earldom and pursue a more aggressive policy. Within a year any hope of peace was lost as Shane resumed raiding the pale's northern marches and the queen authorized Sussex to 'practise with such other subjects as be neighbours unto him, by reward or otherwise, by whom ye may most probably reform the said Shane, or otherwise by our force to compel him to stand to your order and governance' (Brewer and Bullen, 1.292). In summer 1560 Sussex, now lord lieutenant, made a feeble attempt to form an English-backed alliance of Ulster chiefs to challenge Shane's authority. However, in August Shane, demonstrating his impressive military capabilities, marched through Ulster intimidating Sussex's would-be allies. Elizabeth subsequently authorized his subjugation and the restitution of Dungannon's rights to the barony. 
Sussex, with a reinforced English army, was at last free to wage war openly against Shane. But militarily this presented him with several problems: Shane was master of a sprawling lordship in Ireland's most Gaelic province which had remained consistently militarized for over a decade, he employed thousands of Scottish mercenaries, and was continually surrounded by hundreds of fiercely loyal bodyguards. Sussex was forced to rely on another hastily constructed alliance of Ulster chiefs to maintain a decisive advantage. The most important of these chiefs was Calvagh O'Donnell, who alone was capable of opening up a second front to the north-west of Shane's lordship. In June 1561 Sussex printed a proclamation detailing Shane's offences since 1556 as a public declaration of war. Shane, however, had already struck, capturing O'Donnell and his wife, Katherine 'nee' MacLean (died 1588), dowager countess of Argyll, in late May. This wrong-footed the lord lieutenant, denying him his second front, and allowed Shane to extend his influence into Tyrconnell. Shane established a firmer foothold in Tyrconnell about 1560 when he divorced his wife and married Calvagh and Katherine O'Donnell's daughter, Mary, who, according to the four masters, 'died of horror, loathing, grief and deep anguish, in consequence of the severity of the imprisonment inflicted on her father' in May 1561 ('AFM', s.a. 1561). With O'Donnell as a bargaining tool and the freedom to retreat into the fastness of Tyrconnell, Shane became an elusive enemy for the increasingly frustrated Sussex. 
Sussex staked his political reputation in Ireland on effectively dealing with Shane. In early 1561 he favoured Shane's repair to England to submit to Elizabeth. However, by summer he had become convinced that English rule in Ireland hinged on Shane's subjugation. For Sussex, Shane's imprisonment of O'Donnell -- to whom the government had lately offered an earldom -- and his retention of Katherine O'Donnell as his mistress were merely the latest in a series of outrages which demanded an overwhelming military response. Shane, however, was not without allies and they continued to hold out the more conciliatory option of a visit to court. Through Kildare and the under-treasurer, Sir Henry Sidney, who stood as godfather to Shane's child in 1559, he sought to obtain money and sureties for his safe conduct to England. His repeated efforts to plead his case to the queen in person stemmed from his worsening relationship with Sussex which had, by 1561, degenerated into little more than bitter accusations and counter-accusations. In a letter to Sussex in June Shane wrote: 'You began with a conquest in my land without cause, and so long as ther be any Englysh man in my contre against my wyll, I wyll not send agreement nor message unto you from hence forthe, but wyll send my complaint in another way to the Quenes Majestie to declare unto her Grace howe youe interupted my going. (TNA: PRO, SP 63/4/22 viii)' But Sussex was determined to eliminate Shane before he could secure an audience with Elizabeth, and, in July, he marched into Tyrone. Shane withdrew to Tyrconnell and waited until the advancing army's supplies grew low; and upon their return towards Armagh mounted a successful attack on the rearguard. A failed effort to have Shane assassinated in August and an expensive, but ultimately ineffectual, campaign in September undermined further support for Sussex's coercive policy in Ulster. The queen, her confidence in Sussex's methods shaken, authorized Kildare to treat with Shane in August. Kildare brokered a settlement by October. Yet it was Shane who dictated its terms, receiving $2000 to defray the expenses of a journey to court, a pardon, and a safe conduct signed by five Irish earls. Aware of the dangers of leaving his country, but confident in the guarantees he had painstakingly procured, he consented to go to England. Sussex warned 'yf Shane be overthrowen all is settled, yf Shane settell all is overthrowen' but was defeated and humiliated (TNA: PRO, SP 63/4/37). He followed Shane to court to defend his conduct and salvage his reputation. 
Shane made his formal submission to Elizabeth on 6 January 1562. Unlike his father, who appeared at court in October 1542 in English dress and flanked by English nobility, Shane wore his native costume and was surrounded by a retinue of elaborately adorned galloglass. The scene, given added effect by Shane's Gaelic speech and his prostration before the queen, created a stir at court and was described, some years later, by William Camden: 'Shane O'Neill came out of Ireland that year as promised, surrounded by Galloglass for security, with bare heads, ash-coloured hanging curls, golden saffron undershirts, if not the colour of infected human urine, loose sleeves, short tunics, and shaggy lace: the English nobility followed with as much wonderment as if they had come from China or America. (Camden, 69)' Shane's presence at court, however, went beyond mere ceremony. Accompanied by advisers intimately familiar both with Gaelic and English law and administration, he put forward his case for the earldom. The main point of contention was the settlement of 1542, which Shane held to be invalid on account of Dungannon's illegitimacy. He alleged that his half-brother was not an O'Neill, but rather the son of a Dundalk blacksmith adopted in adolescence by his father. He pressed for renegotiation of the settlement on account of his own legitimacy and his status as the O'Neills' elected leader. Sussex, who arrived in February, however, insisted that the settlement of 1542 was a submission rather than a contract and that the sovereign alone had the authority to revoke its terms. Dungannon, he contended, was Tyrone's accepted heir and he dismissed his illegitimacy as irrelevant to Shane's case. To this Shane replied that his father was merely an 'officer' of his people incapable of being made owner of his country or investing the succession in an illegitimate child. Sussex replied that Gaelic political custom had no standing in English law. 
The argument was familiar; it dated back to 1560, when a number of questions were put to Shane concerning his right to the earldom. His answers and counter-questions, however, exposed more fundamental questions concerning crown rights in Ulster and the legitimacy of Gaelic custom 'vis-a-vis' English custom in Ireland. His argument could be applied to every Gaelic lordship and, if successful, threatened to undo painstakingly negotiated submissions. Shane's case placed the entire policy of surrender and regrant under examination and revealed that many Gaelic and English legal customs were simply irreconcilable. Yet the crown could not ignore the reality of his Gaelic lordship in Ulster, and over the following months continued negotiating towards an acceptable settlement without addressing these irreconcilable differences that lay at the heart of the problem. Elizabeth's decision in March to postpone her judgment on the matter of the earldom until Dungannon was interviewed convinced Shane that the negotiations were futile. Dungannon's murder on 12 April 1562 by his cousin Turlough Luineach O'Neill, amid rumours of a coup in Tyrone, however, delivered the final blow to negotiations as Shane sought immediate licence to return to Ireland. But before his departure Shane hastily agreed to an indenture that acknowledged his 'captaincy' of the O'Neills, but circumscribed his traditional suzerainty in Ulster. 
On another level, the failure of Shane's visit can be attributed to court politics. Sussex was concerned that Shane's intimacy with Kildare would unite Old English and Gaelic Irish in opposition to his government in Ireland. Kildare's successful bid to induce Shane to repair to court, moreover, was a humiliating defeat for Sussex and was perceived by many palesmen as vindication of Kildare's more conciliatory methods for the governance of Ireland. Sir Robert Dudley, Elizabeth's favourite, was alive to Kildare's ascendancy and the opportunities for patronage in Ireland; but his lavish entertainment of the earl and Shane during their stay at court aroused the attention of his rival for the queen's attention, Sir William Cecil, principal secretary. Cecil was determined to frustrate Dudley's efforts to establish an affinity in Ireland and used his own influence with Elizabeth to ensure Sussex's arguments were greeted favourably. Shane, moreover, was an obstacle to Cecil's ongoing negotiations with Archibald Campbell, fifth earl of Argyll. Cecil had, for several years, been urging Argyll to employ his forces to bring pressure to bear on Shane and dislodge the Scots from Ulster, but Shane's capture of Argyll's stepmother, Katherine O'Donnell, in 1561 frustrated Cecil's plans. Ultimately it was Cecil who supported Sussex's arguments, delayed Shane's stay for four months, and convinced the queen to suspend judgment on Shane's right to the earldom. Shane's treatment reveals how far court politics obstructed consistent crown policy under Elizabeth. Dungannon's murder coupled with rumours of Shane's intrigues with Alvaro de la Quadra, the Spanish ambassador in England, however, forced Cecil to discontinue his strategy and expedite Shane's bid to return to Ireland. 
Upon his return to Ireland on 26 May 1562, Shane proceeded directly to Tyrone where he quickly reasserted his authority, having heard that Turlough Luineach had proclaimed himself O'Neill on 23 May. He subsequently rounded on the neighbouring Ulster chiefs who had, in his absence, pledged to resist his authority. This behaviour clearly violated the terms of his indenture, which stated that grievances between Shane and other Ulster chiefs should be subject to English arbitration. But Sussex, who returned as deputy in July, found the indenture's terms impossible to enforce without resorting to full-scale war. Elizabeth -- loath to expend her limited resources on war in Ulster only months after Shane's submission -- vacillated. Shane, meanwhile, tightened his grip on Ulster through raiding the pale, attacking the English garrison at Armagh, and opening a second front against the O'Donnells. In September Sussex called for Shane and the Ulster chiefs to attend him at Dundalk, co. Louth, but Shane, whose distrust of the lord lieutenant had not been diluted, refused. Sussex's continued presence made war a certainty and in spring 1563 he launched a campaign against Shane. However, it was poorly organized and under-funded. Despite Sussex's ostensibly successful efforts to detach Shane's most ardent supporters, the operation collapsed having accomplished nothing. By July Elizabeth, influenced by Dudley and his supporters at court, decided to change tack and pursue an inexpensive conciliatory strategy. 
Cusack and Kildare met Shane at Drumcree, co. Meath, in September and negotiated a treaty. This granted Shane nearly all the demands that he had failed to secure at court and nullified the indenture that he had signed in April, exempted him from attending the queen's governor in Ireland, and acknowledged him 'to have all the pre-eminence, jurisdiction, and dominions which his predecessors had, and particularly over the Lords subject to him' (Brewer and Bullen, 1.239). This last clause gave tacit recognition to the Gaelic tract known as 'Ceart Ui Neill', the customary right of O'Neill over the province of Ulster. The tract obliged the many lesser Ulster chiefs to join O'Neill in a hosting, to provide billets for his troops, and to pay fixed tributes. Cusack and Kildare, however, went too far in their conciliatory efforts, virtually establishing Shane as an independent entity in Ulster. Elizabeth modified the treaty, insisting that Shane attend her governor, provided assurances were given for his safety, and that differences between him and the government be referred to arbitration. None the less this reflected a volte-face in crown policy towards Shane and, in the final draft, acknowledged his right to accede to the earldom following an examination at the next Irish parliament of the letters patent granted in 1542. The treaty confirmed Sussex's eclipse and Shane -- 'ever ready to change his wife to suit his policies' -- added insult to injury by resuming his efforts to wed Sussex's sister as proof of his willingness to embrace English civility (Hogan, 'Shane O'Neill', 168). A favourable settlement with the government concluded, Shane confidently turned his attention to the governance of Ulster. 
In spring 1564 Shane released O'Donnell from captivity on condition that he relinquish his claim to Lifford Castle and the Inishowen peninsula, co. Donegal. O'Donnell agreed, but, once freed, refused to honour his word and fled to Dublin to reveal the enormity of Shane's cruelty and to appeal for assistance. During his absence Shane invaded Tyrconnell and wasted much of the country. The government, however, was not prepared to risk a confrontation with him following Drumcree and ignored O'Donnell's pleas. Shane had, moreover, offered to aid the government in the expulsion of the Scots. His motivation for such a gesture was twofold: first, it demonstrated his loyalty to the crown and would, he hoped, expedite the settlement of the earldom in his favour; second, it would remove the final obstacle to his goal of achieving O'Neill hegemony across Ulster. A letter from the earl of Leicester (Dudley) in late summer urging Shane to do something to merit Elizabeth's favour pushed him into action. Shane, denied the English aid for which he petitioned, marched against the Scots in September, but following an encounter near Coleraine was defeated. The defeat revealed weaknesses in Shane's military machine -- particularly when acting in the offensive in an open confrontation -- and forced him to invade Tyrconnell in October to replenish supplies and boost morale. He was capable of holding the O'Neills and their septs together through his standing and his personality but he was a poor commander. The invasion also saw the occupation of certain castles, raising the ominous prospect of permanent O'Neill settlements in Tyrconnell. 
By spring 1565 Shane had grown impatient with Elizabeth's failure to call the parliament that would ratify the Drumcree treaty and assure his accession to the earldom. The earldom and the right of Dungannon and his sons to the succession hung over Shane's head like the sword of Damocles for over a decade and he was determined to force a resolution of the matter. In April he assembled a large force and marched towards Clandeboye, co. Antrim. With the support of the local chiefs, he cut passes in the woods and surprised the MacDonalds in the Glens and the Route, forcing them back upon their fortress at Red Bay. Shane destroyed the fortress and marched to Ballycastle, where he overwhelmed a newly reinforced Scottish contingent in the valley of Glenshesk, both in co. Antrim, on 2 May. Two powerful chiefs, James and Sorley Boy MacDonald, were captured and Shane proceeded to destroy every vestige of Scottish occupation along the Antrim coast. His victory was complete. He did not withdraw, however, and, in an unprecedented move by a Gaelic chief, began colonizing the Glens, the Route, and Clandeboye with his own people to maintain his influence and dissuade future Scottish encroachment. That summer he unexpectedly attacked the English garrisons at Newry and Dundrum, co. Down, before invading northern Connaught in the autumn to reassert traditional O'Neill suzerainty. Shane's power reached its apogee and his refusal to release his MacDonald captives won him the attention of Mary, queen of Scots, and Argyll, who saw him as a powerful potential ally against Elizabeth. 
Running concurrently with Shane's aggressive military strategy was an effective diplomatic offensive waged with allies to influence the government's political policy towards Ulster. Chief among these allies was Donnelly who, following Drumcree, repeatedly pointed out Shane's conformity and willingness to serve the crown. Shane dispatched him to England to relate the manner of his victory over the Scots and press his claims for the earldom. Together with Robert Fleming, he portrayed Shane as a dutiful subject even as his actions grew bolder late in 1565. Cusack, who tied his reputation and political career to the conciliatory measures embodied in Drumcree, joined Shane's allies in convincing the government of the latter's loyalty. Leicester also contributed to Shane's diplomatic offensive by preserving his reputation at court. It was Shane, however, who maintained the preponderance of correspondence with the government, firmly setting out his demands and proposals to the queen, the privy council, and the Irish privy council. But his diplomatic offensive went beyond England. Rumours of his negotiations with Mary or Argyll abounded towards the close of 1565 and in the previous summer Shane had entertained David Wolfe, the papal nuncio, in Tyrone. Moreover, he hoped to elevate Donnelly to the see of Armagh and denied the bishopric of Down and Connor to the crown's choice, James Mac Caghwell, in May, retaining instead his brother, who held the position through a grant procured from Rome. By 1566 his military aggressions coupled with his wide-ranging diplomatic efforts cost him the support of his allies in Dublin and at court, and convinced the crown to abandon its conciliatory policy in Ulster and to seek his destruction. Reports filtered back to England that he was deeply critical of the queen when drunk. 
Sidney was appointed lord deputy on 13 October 1565 and arrived in Ireland on 20 January 1566. He had been convinced for months of the necessity for Shane's destruction, but was unable to persuade Elizabeth to commit to all-out war. Following Shane's refusal to meet him on several occasions, Sidney wrote to Leicester: 'I believe Lucifer was never puft up with more pryde nor ambytyon than that Onelr [O'Neill] ys... he continually kepyth 600 armed men... about him, he ys able to bring to the field a thousand horsmen and 4,000 footmen; he hath already in Dundrum, as I am credibly advertysed 200 toon of wyne and mutch more he lokyth for; he ys the only strong man of Ireland; hys cuntre was never so rytch nor so inhabited; he armyth and weaponnyth all the peasantes of his cuntre, the first that ever so dyd of an Iryshman; he hath agentys continually in the coor [court] of Scotland and with dyvers potentates of the Irysh Scottes. (TNA: PRO, SP 63/16/29)' The letter found its way to Elizabeth and the privy council, who recognized the need for Shane's extirpation; but an independent observer, Sir Francis Knollys, was dispatched to conduct a review of the state of Ulster before any resources were released. Knollys's report eventually concluded that war was unavoidable and Shane was proclaimed a traitor in August. Shane, meanwhile, exploited the delay by making preparations for war. He tightened his grip over his septs, resumed raids on the pale, and evacuated Dungannon and Benburb, co. Armagh. His diplomatic intrigues, moreover, stretched from Munster to Scotland as he sought support both from Sir John Fitzgerald, the brother of Gerald fitz James Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond, and at Mary's court. He even approached the Scots offering to 'put away' Katherine O'Donnell, whom he married in 1565, and marry James MacDonald's widow. Most remarkably, however, Shane donned the mantle of defender of Catholicism against English heresy and appealed to Charles IX for 5000 French troops. Foreign or domestic aid, however, was not forthcoming and his military capability was no match for Sidney's professional army, which marched north. Sidney's army traversed Tyrone unopposed leaving a garrison at Derry and restoring O'Donnell. In December Shane sued for peace, but his efforts were rejected. 
In spring 1567 Shane marched a large force into Tyrconnell to reassert his authority. The O'Donnells, however, laid aside their differences and, in a concerted effort to repel the invader, attacked his encampment at Farsetmore. Shane's men were forced back upon the swollen River Swilly, which carried hundreds to their deaths. He narrowly escaped, but the battle claimed many of his leading officers. The defeat was disastrous and, sensing his vulnerability, his followers and allies proceeded to abandon him. As Sidney marched north contenders for the chieftaincy and the earldom began to emerge. The Scots, moreover, resumed their settlements in Antrim and pushed west. In desperation Shane considered surrendering unconditionally to the lord deputy, but decided instead to seek reconciliation with the MacDonalds, whose chief, Sorley Boy, remained his captive. Shane travelled to Cushendun, co. Antrim, on 31 May to parley with the MacDonalds. The negotiations -- conducted in an open field far removed from their respective forces -- continued for two days with Shane hoping to secure much needed reinforcements in exchange for Sorley Boy's release. On 2 June the Scots fell upon him, perhaps provoked by his intemperate speech, killing him by cutting his throat before hacking him to pieces along with five advisers accompanying him. The Scots had no shortage of reasons to seek Shane's murder, but it was his weakness and desperation that afforded them such a golden opportunity. Edmund Campion noted: 'Thus the wretched man ended, who might have lived like a Prince, had he not quenched the sparkes of grace that appeared in him, with arrogancy and contempt against his prince' (Campion, 130). The annals of Loch Ce recorded that Shane was 'Lord of the Ultonian province, and royal heir of Erinn without dispute' ('Annals of Loch Ce', s.a. 1567). Shane's body, hastily buried at Glenarm and wrapped in a kerne's shirt, was later exhumed and his head was sent 'pickled in a pipkin' to Sidney, who had it placed on a pole over Dublin Castle ('DNB'). He was attainted, his lands declared forfeit, and the title of O'Neill extinguished in 1569 by act of the very parliament which was, according to the Drumcree treaty, to have formalized his accession to the earldom. He was succeeded by Turlough Luineach and was survived by Katherine O'Donnell and at least ten identifiable sons. His sons were too young in 1567 to challenge Turlough Luineach but within a decade emerged as a political faction among the O'Neills known as the MacShanes. 
Historical interpretations of Shane's career have, until recently, been inextricably linked with the myth surrounding his character: 'Shane the Proud', a quintessentially Gaelic chief whose overweening ambition and pride upset the balance of power in Ulster and plunged the province into unprecedented chaos for fifteen years. His ascendancy, motivated only by pride and maintained through cruelty, was a fluke leaving no tangible legacy save destruction. Accordingly, detailed studies of Shane and the complicated social and political world he inhabited have been deemed unnecessary. This interpretation was advanced during his lifetime primarily by English politicians and continued by near contemporary English historians like Campion and John Hooker. To the Tudor mind Shane's savagery exemplified the depths to which an unrestrained and uncivilized Gaelic chief might sink. Nineteenth-century English historians -- drawing on these contemporary and near contemporary sources -- accepted this interpretation without question. Robert Dunlop concluded: 'judged even by the lax standard of his age, he was a bad man -- a glutton, a drunkard, a coward, a bully, an adulterer, and a murderer' ('DNB'). Irish nationalist historians, keen to revise hostile English histories of Gaelic chiefs, found it difficult to accommodate Shane within their historical tradition. When they scratched the surface of the standing English interpretation, they found instances of Shane's sexual indiscretion, an ambivalent attitude towards his fellow Gael, and his avid pursuit of English civility. Thus the majority of nationalist historians ignored him, accepting the traditional interpretation of his character and career. Only recently have historians begun to offer a reappraisal of his significance in the Tudor period and to dispel the myths surrounding his character. Shane is re-emerging as an innovative and highly organized leader who transformed his lordship into an often effective military machine, the most powerful force Gaelic Ireland had yet witnessed. That he was ambitious cannot be disputed, but little else can be said about him as an individual. It was his ambition, however, that was most crucial. Shane's aggressive ambition, pursued in the periphery of both the English and Gaelic worlds, frustrated the cultural and political advance of an increasingly centralized Tudor state and made his destruction inevitable. 


@@@@@


doc= 20786


O'Neill, Sir Turlough Luineach (c.1530-1595), chieftain, was the son of Niall Connallach O'Neill (died 1544), whose sobriquet reflects the fact that he was fostered among the ruling O'Donnells of Tyrconnell. His mother was, almost certainly, Rose O'Donnell, sister to Manus O'Donnell, lord of Tyrconnell between 1537 and 1555, and wife of Niall Connallach, though a late pedigree from Lord Justice Drury, a hostile source, claimed that Turlough Luineach was a 'bastard'. 
Turlough's grandfather, Art Og O'Neill, held the title O Neill or lord of Tyrone, the greatest lordship in late medieval Ulster, between 1513 and 1519; Turlough Luineach would also rise to be O Neill between 1567 and 1595. Art Og's power base had been on the fertile Lough Neagh basin around Dungannon in east Tyrone. However, to enhance his authority across the Sperrin Mountains, where the Sliocht Airt Ui Neill were dominant, he established his sons in Slewisse in north-western Tyrone. On his death Art Og was succeeded by his half-brother, Conn Bacach O'Neill (1519-1559), as O Neill. Yet one of Art Og's sons, Niall Connallach O'Neill, father of Turlough Luineach, became Conn Bacach's 'tanaiste' (nominated successor). Niall Connallach died in 1544 in unexplained circumstances. 
Turlough Luineach O'Neill's cognomen has been taken as an indication that he was fostered by the Muintir Luinigh, though it seems more likely that it simply reflected his control of that district. Joseph Costello has proposed that Turlough Luineach was actually fostered by the Flemings, a gentry family of English descent on the northern borders of the pale. 
Turlough Luineach's rise to provincial prominence is not well documented. After his father's death he secured possession of his demesne lands in Slewisse. He extended his authority to Strabane, where he built an important castle across the river from Lifford Castle, a major stronghold of O'Donnell, lord of the powerful lordship of Tyrconnell in north-west Ulster. He fostered the development of a small but important town at Strabane. This resource base was too slender, and too marginal geographically, for Turlough Luineach O'Neill to have any realistic prospect of emulating his grandfather Art Og and becoming O Neill. Yet that is precisely the goal that he set himself from an early date. 
Turlough Luineach built up a formidable power base in western Tyrone by developing the economy of his lordship and by forming alliances with the heads of collateral branches of the O'Neills in western Tyrone, most notably with Hugh mac Niall O'Neill, lord of Omagh and head of Sliocht Airt. He also formed an alliance with his uncle, Manus O'Donnell, lord of Tyrconnell, and in the late 1540s joined O'Donnell in attacking Conn Bacach O'Neill, who had become earl of Tyrone through a compact with Henry VIII in 1542. Turlough Luineach's pretensions might have been crushed quickly were it not for the ageing earl's faltering grasp on his lordship and the consequent contest for power that broke out between the earl and his own sons. Turlough Luineach took advantage of the internecine warfare among the ruling O'Neills to assert a claim to the office of 'tanaiste', but he did not have the strength to realize his ambition. In the event, Conn Bacach's youngest legitimate son, Shane (alias Sean) O'Neill, succeeded in taking control of Tyrone from his father, despite the claims of the baron of Dungannon, the earl's nominated successor. Shane appointed Turlough Luineach as his 'tanaiste' in recognition of his influence in western Tyrone. 
While Shane O'Neill dominated Tyrone and most of Ulster from the mid-1550s, there was little scope for Turlough Luineach O'Neill to pursue his ambitions. On 12 April 1562, while Shane was engaged in delicate negotiations with Queen Elizabeth at the English court, Turlough Luineach killed Brian O'Neill, the young baron of Dungannon, whom the crown acknowledged as the heir to the earldom of Tyrone. Shane O'Neill claimed that Turlough Luineach acted rebelliously in killing the baron, though it was suspected that Shane had sanctioned the murder to clear the way for the crown to recognize his own claims to succeed his father as O Neill and as earl of Tyrone. Certainty on this matter is impossible, though Shane's claim may well have been correct: some weeks later, in May 1562, during Shane's continued absence in England, Turlough Luineach had himself proclaimed as O Neill at the traditional inauguration site at Tullyhogue. However, Turlough Luineach O'Neill failed to establish his authority among the leading families of eastern Tyrone, most particularly among the O'Donnellys, who held the hereditary office of marshal of O Neill's army and were completely loyal to Shane O'Neill, whom they had fostered in his childhood. Turlough Luineach briefly supported the English viceroy in Ireland, the earl of Sussex, against Shane but soon came to terms with O Neill. 
Shane O'Neill's decision not to crush Turlough Luineach for his audacity may be seen as an indication that he did not perceive his cousin from north-west Tyrone as a serious rival for power. Over the subsequent years Shane O'Neill's fortunes were in the ascendant in Tyrone and across Ulster generally. Not until Shane's army suffered a catastrophic defeat at the hands of O'Donnell in the battle of Farsetmore on 8 May 1567 did Turlough Luineach dare to rebel again. The killing of Shane O'Neill by the Scots with whom he was negotiating at Cushendun in north Antrim on 2 June 1567 cleared the way for Turlough Luineach O'Neill to become O Neill. 
Turlough Luineach's accession to the lordship was as much a result of the power vacuum left by the death of Shane O'Neill as of his own political strength and skills. Shane had eliminated his own brothers as contestants for the lordship, while his sons were still too young to take their father's place. None the less, Turlough Luineach needed time to consolidate his authority as O Neill. To that end he neutralized the alliance that had brought about the downfall of his predecessor. He contracted a new alliance with O'Donnell, lord of Tyrconnell. He made overtures to the Scots in north Antrim. He gave one of his daughters in marriage to Rory Oge MacQuillan to pacify that Irish lord in north Antrim. The English viceroy, Lord Deputy Sidney, underestimated the new O Neill and was readily reassured by Turlough Luineach's submission on 18 June 1567. Sidney departed from Dublin on 9 October 1567 and remained at the court of Elizabeth for almost a year to devise a new programme of reform for Ireland. Turlough Luineach O'Neill used that time very effectively to establish himself in the demesne lands pertaining to his new office around Dungannon, and to win the confidence of O Neill's household families ('lucht tighe') in eastern Tyrone. 
The new O Neill hoped to secure the English crown's recognition of his authority in Tyrone. However, Elizabeth's ministers envisaged the breakup of O Neill's overlordship. Inevitably, the negotiations between Lord Deputy Sidney and O Neill in September and October 1568 achieved very little. O Neill was obliged to acquiesce in Sidney's establishment of the teenaged Hugh O'Neill, baron of Dungannon and brother of the previous baron whom Turlough Luineach had murdered, in Oneilland, a lordship south of Lough Neagh. In effect, O Neill was forced to accept the Blackwater River as the southern boundary of his lordship. Yet O Neill was determined not to cede any more ground. 
Turlough Luineach entered into negotiations with Scotland's clan Donald South, a junior branch of which had settled in north Antrim, to marry as his second wife Lady Agnes Campbell (d. in or after 1590), widow of James MacDonald, and by February 1569 had contracted to marry her in return for a dowry of more than 1000 Scottish mercenaries. The nuptials were celebrated in August 1569, and it was reported shortly afterwards that O Neill had 3000 Scottish mercenaries in his employ, in addition to thousands of local kerne and galloglass. This military establishment proved to be too large for O Neill to sustain indefinitely, but it succeeded in discouraging English military or colonial adventures west of the River Bann. On 20 January 1571 O Neill and Sidney agreed to a truce whereby the Irish lord was to dismiss his Scottish mercenaries in return for the opportunity to submit his proposals for a political settlement to Queen Elizabeth. However, O Neill's willingness to reach an accommodation with the English crown was not reciprocated. 
The younger Sir Thomas Smith's pilot scheme for private colonization in east Ulster, which got under way on 30 August 1572, was stoutly resisted by Sir Brian mac Phelim O Neill, lord of Clandeboye, with support from O Neill. Smith's death in August 1573 effectively aborted that colonization scheme, but it was succeeded by another of grander scale and ambition devised by Walter Devereux, earl of Essex. O Neill again supported Sir Brian ONeill, and also worked with the MacDonalds in north Antrim to thwart the English colonists. Despite Essex's considerable investment in the project he ultimately failed ignominiously. 
Following Essex's death Sidney was restored as lord deputy on 5 August 1575. He travelled to Ulster to restore some semblance of English order after the turmoil generated by the plantation projects. He met O Neill at Armagh, and the two men concluded a formal treaty in which the crown accepted Turlough Luineach's claims to overlordship to a limited degree, while the Irish lord agreed to dismiss his Scottish mercenaries, with the exception of a bodyguard composed of Campbells, his wife's clan. Sidney committed himself to securing O Neill a peerage from the crown. Subsequently, in May 1578, a patent was passed to make Turlough Luineach O'Neill earl of Clanoneill and baron of Clogher, albeit only for life, which Sidney reckoned would not be for long given O Neill's age, his bullet wound, his poor diet, and his constant over-indulgence in alcohol. However, with Sidney's retirement from office in September 1578 that initiative fell through. O Neill, for his part, was unable to observe his side of the agreement made with Sidney, for he was heavily dependent upon his Scottish mercenaries to maintain his authority across Tyrone and among his 'uirrithe' ('vassal-chiefs'), the subordinate lords outside Tyrone. O Neill also employed his mercenaries to deter English incursions into Ulster, and to exert leverage on the crown to concede formal recognition of his overlordship. 
Sir James Fitzmaurice returned to Ireland in July 1579 proclaiming a papally sponsored crusade for Catholicism. He appealed to O Neill for support, and informed him of Pope Gregory XIII's offer to make him king. However, while in less sober moments O Neill expressed romantic desires for an Ireland free of English interference, he did not commit himself to Fitzmaurice's 'faith and fatherland' ideology. He was conservative in religion, but not imbued with Counter-Reformation zeal despite the promptings of local churchmen such as Raymond O'Gallagher, bishop of Derry (1569-1601). None the less, O Neill maintained contacts with the Catholic rebels, and particularly with Viscount Baltinglass after Fitzmaurice's death in August 1579. He made some promises to assist Baltinglass, and he offered himself as a foster father to James VI, the young king of Scotland, to draw the Scots into the conspiracy. Yet Turlough Luineach, pragmatic as he was, did not employ his considerable military resources to promote the Catholic cause. He waited for the military support that was supposed to arrive from Spain and Scotland, and meanwhile took advantage of the English crown's difficulties with the rebels to extend his own authority in Ulster. In August 1581 he abandoned Baltinglass and made peace with the crown in return for official recognition of his authority over his 'uirrithe'. 
Crown ministers rested their hopes for a settlement in Ulster congruent with English interests on Hugh O'Neill, baron of Dungannon. Hugh O'Neill had assisted Essex's plantation project in Clandeboye, and was well paid for his efforts. Essex's fort and bridge at the Blackwater River remained as a bulwark against O Neill behind which the baron was free to establish a dominant position in the region north of the pale. Hugh O'Neill emerged from Essex's debacle with his personal standing greatly enhanced in both Irish and English eyes. One reflection of his status in Ulster is the fact that he was able to marry Siobhan, a daughter of O'Donnell of Tyrconnell. That alliance gave the baron a provincial profile and had the effect of putting Turlough Luineach under pressure from the west as well as from the south-east. O Neill, however, responded with a master stroke: in 1579 he named Hugh O'Neill as his 'tanaiste' or nominated successor, gave the baron the hand of his daughter in marriage, and had Siobhan sent back to her father. Without his alliance with O'Donnell, though, Hugh O'Neill lost much of his leverage over O Neill, and he soon found himself deposed from the office of 'tanaiste'. Turlough Luineach had taught his young rival a humiliating lesson in 'realpolitik'. 
Lord Deputy Grey promoted Hugh O'Neill with a joint commission alongside Sir Nicholas Bagenal to defend the pale against incursions from Ulster. He subsequently made him a royal lieutenant for south-east Ulster, alongside O Neill for the lordship of Tyrone and Bagenal for Antrim and Down. These commissions enhanced the baron's increasing power in southern Ulster 'vis a vis' O Neill. When, in 1583, Turlough Luineach fell into a coma and was widely presumed to be dead, Hugh O'Neill crossed the Blackwater River with a large force and took possession of O Neill's inauguration site at Tullyhogue. However, after a severe hangover, Turlough Luineach made a full recovery and the baron was obliged to retire back across the Blackwater. Hugh O'Neill may have been Turlough Luineach's most likely successor, but the old lord was still predominant within Tyrone. 
On 1 August 1584 an estimated 2000-3000 Scottish fighters landed in Tyrconnell with the intention of establishing one of the sons of Shane O'Neill, whose mother was a MacLean from Scotland, in control of Tyrone. The O'Donnellys, who had fostered Shane, and O'Cahan, one of O Neill's leading 'uirrithe', defected to the MacShanes (literally the 'sons of Shane'). Turlough Luineach O'Neill was left virtually powerless. His own son, Art O'Neill, forsook him and joined with Hugh O'Neill, his father-in-law, to salvage something of his inheritance. Hugh O'Neill came to an agreement with Turlough Luineach whereby the latter retained the title of O Neill but had his authority restricted to western Tyrone, his original power base. The baron, on the other hand, took control of eastern Tyrone and promised to pay O Neill 1000 marks per annum. Though this arrangement took the form of a seven-year lease which was revocable by O Neill at the end of three years, it left Hugh O'Neill as the predominant figure in Ulster, and O Neill was powerless to compel the baron to abide by the terms agreed. Unfortunately for O Neill, the baron was very antipathetic towards him, perhaps because he had murdered the baron's elder brother in 1562. 
Lord Deputy Perrot sent English soldiers into Ulster to expel the MacLeans. With Perrot's approval, the Irish parliament of 1585, whose opening Turlough Luineach attended, recognized Hugh O'Neill as earl of Tyrone. This was seen as necessary by the crown to prevent the MacShanes taking advantage of any power vacuum which might otherwise have formed in the wake of O Neill's loss of authority. None the less, Perrot was concerned lest the earl of Tyrone should become an over-mighty subject. Consequently he endorsed the division of Tyrone agreed between Turlough Luineach and Hugh O'Neill, and sent 300 English soldiers to prop up O Neill's position in western Tyrone. Turlough Luineach petitioned the crown for the title of earl of Omagh, to hold western Tyrone as a perpetual inheritance, and for his son, Art, to be legitimated and made baron of Strabane. His petition was not granted. The earl of Tyrone persuaded Queen Elizabeth in 1587 that he was entitled to hold all of Tyrone on O Neill's death. None the less, O Neill proved to be more resilient than anyone had anticipated. Strengthened by a renewed alliance with the Scots in north Antrim -- in October 1588 O Neill had one of his daughters marry Sorley Boy MacDonnell at Strabane -- and the employment of English and Scottish mercenaries, Turlough Luineach was able to put the earl of Tyrone under real pressure, even to the extent of defeating him in a significant battle at Carricklea on 1 May 1588. O Neill also nurtured the ambitions of the MacShanes against the earl, despite an agreement to the contrary in October 1589. 
In April 1592 Red Hugh O'Donnell succeeded his father as lord of Tyrconnell. He was a son-in-law of the earl of Tyrone, and was indebted to the earl for his escape from English custody in Dublin Castle earlier in the year. Together the young O'Donnell and the earl of Tyrone waged war on O Neill from east and west. Early in May 1593 Turlough Luineach O'Neill surrendered his rights of lordship in Tyrone in return for an annual pension of $2000. He retained his demesne lands, together with the town of Strabane and the land surrounding it. This agreement was formally ratified by the English administration in Dublin on 28 June 1593. Turlough Luineach retained his title as O Neill. It seems unlikely, though, that the earl of Tyrone abided by this agreement any better than with the last made with Turlough Luineach, for in May 1594 O Neill offered to assure Ulster to the crown against the increasingly rebellious earl. In June 1595 the English ship 'Poppinjay' was sent to Strabane to convey O Neill to Dublin, but the earl of Tyrone received prior warning and razed O Neill's castle at Strabane. Turlough Luineach O'Neill took shelter in a neighbouring ruin until his death in early September 1595. He was buried at Ardstraw in west Tyrone. 
Turlough Luineach O'Neill has been eclipsed in Irish historiography by his more flamboyant predecessor and successor, Shane and Hugh O'Neill. Yet he was a man of very considerable political skill. He became O Neill despite the handicap of the peripheral location of his power base within Tyrone, and held on to the office for twenty-eight turbulent years. Like Shane and Hugh, he harboured thoughts of an Ireland free of English rule, but he was pragmatic enough to accept the reality that he had to reach some form of accommodation with the English crown or risk annihilation. The failure to achieve a durable settlement for Ulster cannot be ascribed to Turlough Luineach; it owed more to his rivals within Ulster, and to the crown. 


@@@@@


doc= 20787


O'Neill, William Chichester, first Baron O'Neill (1813-1883), Church of Ireland clergyman and composer, was born on 4 March 1813 at Culdaff House, co. Donegal, the son of Edward Chichester (died 1840), rector of Kilmore, Armagh, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Young. He was educated at Foyle College, Londonderry, and, from 1829 to 1830, at Shrewsbury School. He graduated from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1836 and was ordained in 1837. On 3 January 1839 he married Henrietta (died 1857), eldest daughter of Robert Torrens, a judge of the common pleas in Ireland. They had three sons and a daughter. In 1848 he was appointed to a prebendal stall in Christ Church, Dublin, which he retained until 1859. 
By the death in 1855 of John Bruce O'Neill, third Viscount O'Neill, he came into possession of the great estates of the O'Neill family, to whom he was related by the marriage of his great-grandfather, and took the surname O'Neill. In 1868 the peerage, originally conferred in 1793, and extinct on the death of the third Viscount O'Neill, was restored, and he became Baron O'Neill of Shane's Castle. His first wife having died in 1857, he married Elizabeth Grace (died 1905), daughter of John Torrens, archdeacon of Dublin, on 8 April 1858. 
O'Neill was a talented performer on the violin and organ, especially the latter instrument; he was also a skilled singer and composer. He frequently officiated as organist in the Dublin cathedrals, and wrote church music, glees, and songs, all remarkable for purity of style and grammatical accuracy, some of which were published. 
A Conservative in politics, O'Neill contributed to the debate on the disestablishment of the Church of Ireland with a sermon published in 1867 in a volume entitled 'The Church in Ireland'. His other publications were principally sermons and addresses, and a response to Herbert Spencer's 'First Principles', which he published as 'A Description of Christianity Criticised' (1883). A further volume of his sermons, with a memoir of his life, appeared in 1885, edited by E. J. Hamilton. He died on 18 April 1883, at Shane's Castle, and was buried at Drumaul, co. Antrim. 


@@@@@


doc= 20788


Onslow, Arthur (1691-1768), speaker of the House of Commons, born at Kensington, London, on 1 October 1691, was the elder son of Foote Onslow (1655-1710), first commissioner of excise, and his wife, Susannah, the daughter and heir of Thomas Anlaby of Etton, in the East Riding of Yorkshire, and the widow of Arnold Colwall of Woodford, Essex. His great-grandfather was the politician Sir Richard Onslow (1601-1664). He was educated at Winchester College and matriculated at Wadham College, Oxford, as a fellow commoner on 12 October 1708, but took no degree. He was called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1713. However, he made little headway in the practice of law. He became a bencher of the Inner Temple in 1728 and served as recorder of Guildford and high steward of Kingston in 1737. 
On 8 October 1720 he married Anne (1703-1763), the daughter of John Bridges of Thames Ditton, Surrey, and the niece and coheir of Henry Bridges of Ember Court in the same parish. They had a son, George Onslow, first earl of Onslow (1731-1814), and a daughter, Anne, who died unmarried on 20 December 1751. Onslow had not been a wealthy man, but his marriage greatly improved his financial circumstances. 
At a by-election in February 1720 Onslow had been returned to the House of Commons as a whig MP for the borough of Guildford, which he continued to represent until the dissolution of parliament in July 1727. Only three references to his speeches during the period he was a private member are known. He took part in the debate in November 1722 on the proposal for raising $100,000 upon the real and personal estates of the Roman Catholics, and 'declared his abhorrence of persecuting anybody on account of their opinions in religion' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 8.52). In April 1725 he strenuously opposed the motion for the reversal of Bolingbroke's attainder, and in March 1726 he supported Richard Hampden's petition on behalf of the latter's great-grandfather, who had opposed Charles I's ship-money levy in 1637. In 1726 he was one of the Commons managers at the trial before the House of Lords of Lord Chancellor Macclesfield, who had been impeached for embezzlement. At the general election in August 1727 he was returned for both Guildford and Surrey. He elected to serve for Surrey, and continued to represent that county until his retirement from the Commons at the dissolution in March 1761. 
At the opening of the new parliament, on 23 January 1728, Onslow was unanimously elected speaker. He was the third member of his family to hold this office, to which he was unanimously re-elected in 1735, 1741, 1747, and 1754. His speakership spanned the entire reign of George II, and by the end of the twentieth century he still held the record for length of service in the office. He was sworn of the privy council at Hampton Court on 25 July 1728, and on 13 May 1729 accepted the post of chancellor and keeper of the great seal to Queen Caroline (who was godmother to his son). 
Onslow was a man of rare integrity in an age of corruption, and he realized that the stability of parliament was being undermined by the sordid political intrigues of the day. He was the first speaker to recognize the crucial importance of distancing the chair from all such discreditable activity and of asserting its independence and authority. It was a task for which he was eminently suited, and his renown rests exclusively on his greatness as a speaker. Onslow set the pattern for the impartiality of the chair, but it would be misleading to suggest that he shed his party associations: the total political detachment of the office was to await a later era. He regularly exercised his right to speak and vote in committee, he was known to attend ministerial meetings, and his close friendship with Sir Robert Walpole undoubtedly assisted the furtherance of his early career. But he did not hesitate to oppose government policy when he felt strongly about an issue, and he spoke out against measures he disliked, such as the 'Regency Bill' of 1751 and the 'Marriage Bill' of 1753. Above all other considerations he saw the speaker's role as to protect the institution of parliament and the constitution established by the revolution of 1688. 
Onslow insisted on the strict observance of the procedure and practice of the house, a discipline which he saw as an indispensable protection against assaults on the integrity of parliament, whether by bullying ministers or intriguing factions. He had a special regard for the rights of independent members, representing the minority, who were beyond the influence of factions. For him, no procedural detail was too trivial to be enforced, and his rulings amounted to a massive codification of contemporary parliamentary practice. Some regarded this insistence on detail as a tiresome obsession, but John Hatsell, who became a clerk-at-the-table during Onslow's tenure of office, confirmed the speaker's view 'that the forms of proceedings, as instituted by our ancestors, operated as a check and controul on the actions of ministers; and that they were, in many instances, a shelter and protection to the minority, against the attempts of power. (Hatsell, 2.230)' His rigid attachment to precedent probably explains his reactionary stand on the question of the reporting of parliamentary debates. In Onslow's day this was held to be a breach of privilege, and on 13 April 1738 he brought the matter to the attention of the house. A debate ensued which led to a resolution condemning the practice. 
Onslow insisted that members show proper respect for the dignity of his office and 'never permitted a member to come in, or go out of the House, whilst he was in the Chair, without calling him, if he observed, that the member did not make his obeysance to the Chair' (Hatsell, 2.232). In his relations with the House of Lords he was ever protective of the privileges of the Commons and swift to protest against attempted encroachments on the part of the peers. To protect his own independence he did not hesitate to sacrifice financial advantage. On 20 April 1734 he was appointed to the lucrative office of treasurer of the navy, but he resigned it eight years later, the day after giving his casting vote on a highly political issue, in order to refute the assertion that he was influenced by personal interest. Thereafter he contented himself with the emoluments attached to the speaker's office, which included the fees from private bills. Onslow introduced important administrative reforms in the House of Commons, and it was due to his influence that in 1742 the house first ordered its journals to be printed. 
In consequence of failing health Onslow resolved to retire from parliamentary life, and on 18 March 1761 the thanks of the House of Commons were unanimously voted to him 'for his constant and unwearied attendance in the chair during the course of above thirty-three years in five successive parliaments'. In returning thanks Onslow was deeply affected, and in a moving speech he expressed all that his life's work had meant to him. A further resolution for an address to the king, that he would be 'graciously pleased to confer some signal mark of his royal favour' upon the retiring speaker, was also unanimously carried. Accordingly the king, by letters patent dated 20 April 1761, granted Onslow an annuity of $3000 for the lives of himself and his son George, a provision which was further secured to him by an act of parliament passed in the following year. This was the first occasion when a pension was granted to a retiring speaker. The freedom of the city was voted to Onslow at a court of common council on 5 May 1761 'as a grateful and lasting testimony of the respectful love and veneration which the citizens of London entertain of his person and distinguished virtue'. He was the first speaker to be so honoured. He was admitted to the freedom on 11 June following, but declined, 'on account of his official position', to accept the gold box of the value of 100 guineas which had also been voted by the court. Shortly after his retirement he was elected a trustee of the British Museum. He died at his home in Great Russell Street, London, on 17 February 1768, aged seventy-six. He was buried at Thames Ditton, but his body and that of his wife, who had died in 1763, were afterwards removed to the burial-place of the Onslow family in Merrow church, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 20789


Onslow, George (1731-1792), politician, the elder son of the four children of Lieutenant-General Richard Onslow ('c'.1697-1760), politician, and his second wife, Pooley, the daughter of Charles Walton of Little Burstead, Essex, was born on 28 April 1731 in Guildford, Surrey. He entered the army as ensign in the 1st foot guards on 27 February 1748, became captain in Guise's regiment, afterwards the 6th foot, on 12 January 1751, and was promoted major in the 57th regiment on 3 August 1757. He returned to his first regiment as captain-lieutenant on 27 March 1759 and was promoted lieutenant-colonel in the 1st foot guards on 7 November of the same year. On 29 July 1752 he married Jane, the daughter of the Revd Thomas Thorpe, of Chillingham, Northumberland. They had four sons and one daughter: Richard ('b'. 1754), Pooley ('b'. 1758), George ('b'. 1764), George Walton (1768-1844), and Arthur (1773-1851). 
On the death of his father in March 1760, Onslow succeeded him as one of the members of parliament for Guildford, and he retired from the army on 10 February 1762. He represented the borough until March 1784 and became known as Colonel Onslow to distinguish him from his first cousin and fellow MP George Onslow (1731-1814), the only son of the speaker of the Commons, Arthur Onslow (1691-1768). At the outset of his parliamentary career Onslow followed his cousin's lead and was one of Rockingham's supporters. In the debate on the 'North Briton' no. 45 case on 19 January 1764 he was conspicuous as 'the single member who said that No. 45 was not a libel', and he voted against the expulsion of Wilkes ('Cavendish's Debates', 1.124-5). The Rockingham administration rewarded him in 1765 by granting him the office of outranger of Windsor Forest for life and an increased salary. He voted for the repeal of the 'Stamp Act' in 1766. Later he changed his views, and became an adherent of first the duke of Grafton and then Lord North. On 8 May 1770 he stoutly defended North's American policy when he opposed Burke's resolutions relating to the recent disorders in North America, and called upon him 'to found the censure upon established truth, not upon vague and general declamation'. 
Onslow took a leading part in initiating the 'Printer's Case' when on 5 February 1771 he moved to have the appropriate regulations read on restricting the printing of debates so as to warn off the newspapers. In one newspaper report of this debate he was offensively described as 'little cocking George', which alluded to his penchant for cock-fighting ('Middlesex Journal', 7 Feb 1771). In the ensuing days he moved for the printers of these reports, John Wheble and Roger Thompson, to be summoned before the Commons for 'misrepresenting the speeches and reflecting on several members of the House' (BL, Egerton MS 224, fols. 181-7). On 12 March he called for six more printers to be summoned before the house for continuing to print debates. This sparked off the Commons' confrontation with the City of London, which cost North's ministry much prestige. Onslow made himself so unpopular that he was hanged in effigy on Tower Hill, on the same gibbet with the speaker. 
Onslow proved to be uncompromising in his support for the war in the American colonies. Even after Burgoyne's surrender at Saratoga he protested strongly against peace, insisting in December 1777 that 'it was better to lose America by arms than by treaty', and asserting that the rebellion had been 'fomented, nourished, and supported by the inflammatory speeches and other means used by the incendiaries in that house' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 19.546-7). He also opposed the petitions for economical reform which were debated in the house in February 1780 and spoke against the 'Contractors' Bill' in March 1781. Above all else, Onslow was an unwavering supporter of North, and he opposed Sir John Rous's motion of want of confidence in North's ministry in March 1782. Having followed North into opposition, he defended him from a personal attack made by Thomas Pitt in February 1783. He continued to support North in the coalition government with Fox, but retired from the Commons at the general election in March 1784. 
Onslow, who was 'a short, round man', was aptly described by Walpole as 'one of those burlesque orators who are favoured in all public assemblies, and to whom one or two happy sallies of impudence secure a constant attention, though their voice and manner are often their only patents, and who, being laughed at for absurdity as frequently as for humour, obtain a license for what they please. (Walpole, 2.286)' He died on 12 November 1792, at Dunsborough House, Ripley, Surrey, from the effects of a carriage accident. He was survived by three of his children: George Walton and Arthur, who both became clergymen, and his daughter, Pooley, who married, first, on 23 January 1788, Rear-Admiral Sir Francis Samuel Drake (died 1789) and secondly, on 13 June 1801, Arthur Onslow (1759-1833), who became MP for Guildford in 1812. 


@@@@@


doc= 20790


Onslow, George, first earl of Onslow (1731-1814), politician, was born on 13 September 1731, and baptized on 20 October 1731 at St Anne's, Soho, London, the only son of Arthur Onslow (1691-1768), speaker of the House of Commons, and his wife, Anne (1703-1763), the daughter of John Bridges of Thames Ditton, Surrey. He was educated at Westminster School (from 1739) and Peterhouse, Cambridge (from 1749). On 26 June 1753 at Thames Ditton he married Henrietta (1731-1809), the eldest daughter of Sir John Shelley (1692-1771), of Michelgrove, Surrey, and his second wife, Margaret Pelham, the youngest daughter of Thomas Pelham, first Baron Pelham. They had four sons and one daughter. 
Onslow was brought into parliament for Rye, a Treasury borough, in April 1754 by the duke of Newcastle, who was his uncle by marriage. He declared that his election cost him 'not a single shilling save my moiety of the entertainment' ('Buckinghamshire MSS', 520). At the general election in April 1761 he was returned for his father's seat of Surrey, which he continued to represent until his accession to the House of Lords. Newcastle had already provided him with the sinecure of outranger of Windsor Forest, worth $400 a year, and in 1761 he was given the office of surveyor of the king's gardens and waters, which he described as 'a very genteel office'. He lost both posts in 1763 during the 'massacre' of Newcastle's followers, and he became an enthusiastic supporter of Pitt and Temple in opposition. He also supported Wilkes, presenting the latter's petition to the Commons in November 1763, and was active in opposition to the 'Regency Bill' in May 1765, when he seconded Rose Fuller's motion for making the queen regent and opposed Morton's motion for reinstating the name of the princess dowager. In June 1765 he urged Temple to accept the Treasury 'for the sake of the country', but a month later he took on the post of a lord of the Treasury on the formation of Lord Rockingham's first administration. He remained in office, however, on Rockingham's split with Chatham in November 1766, and thereby became one of Newcastle's men who placed their loyalty to government above loyalty to the whig party. He was admitted to the privy council on 23 December 1767. 
In spite of his former friendship with Wilkes, on 14 April 1769 Onslow moved that Wilkes's fourth election for Middlesex was null and void, and on the following day he carried a resolution by a majority of fifty-four that Colonel Luttrell 'ought to have been returned' ('Cavendish's Debates', 1.386). On 14 July 1769 he was accused in the 'Public Advertiser' by Horne Tooke of having accepted $1000 to procure a place for a person in America. Onslow denounced the story as 'a gross and infamous lie from beginning to end', brought an action for libel against Tooke, and obtained damages for $400, but judgment was arrested by the court of common pleas in Easter term 1771 on technical grounds. 
Onslow became a prominent defender of the rights and privileges of the House of Commons, and on 25 January 1770 he opposed Dowdeswell's resolution that the house was bound on matters of election 'to judge according to the law of the land and the known and established law and custom of parliament' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 16.790-91). In the same session he introduced a bill taking away all privileges of parliament from the servants of members, which, with the aid of Lord Mansfield in the House of Lords, became law (10 Geo. III, c. 50). When the members of the House of Commons were turned out of the House of Lords on 10 December 1770, Onslow, in retaliation, immediately proposed that the Commons should be 'cleared of strangers, members of the House of Lords, and all', but he voted against Dunning's motion for a committee to inspect the journals of the House of Lords. On 7 February 1771 he opposed Sir George Savile's attempt to bring in a bill for 'more effectually securing the rights' of electors. In the same session he took an active part with his cousin and fellow MP George Onslow (1731-1792) in excluding strangers from the gallery of the House of Commons, and in calling the printers of newspapers to the bar of the house for publishing the debates. In April 1772 he supported a motion for leave to bring in a bill for the relief of protestant dissenters, and strongly advocated the propriety of granting them relief from subscription. On 8 July 1773 he was created DCL of Oxford University. 
As his part in the Middlesex election controversy had made him unpopular with the county electors, Onslow retired from the seat for Surrey in 1774, though he retained his place at the Treasury until 1777. He was created Baron Cranley, in the county of Surrey, on 20 May 1776, and took his seat in the House of Lords on the following day. On 8 October of the same year he succeeded his cousin Richard as fourth Baron Onslow, and on 30 October was sworn in as lord lieutenant of Surrey. He spoke for the first time in the House of Lords on 16 April 1777, when he urged that some provision should be made for the discharge of the king's debts, and 'launched into encomiums of the personal and political virtues of the sovereign' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 19.163-4). On 13 May 1778 he voted against the attendance of the House of Lords at Chatham's funeral, though he 'formerly used to wait in the lobby to help him on with his great-coat' ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 7.65). It was not surprising that Junius called him 'a false, silly fellow' (Junius, 1.198). He spent the rest of his career as a courtier. He was appointed comptroller of the household on 1 December 1777 and became treasurer of the household in December 1779 until his appointment as a lord of the bedchamber in September 1780, a post which he retained until his death. 
During his father's lifetime Onslow had been heavily dependent on his official salary of $1000 per annum and was reportedly in financial difficulties, but in 1768 he inherited his father's pension of $3000, which he kept secret from his creditors. On succeeding to the Onslow title in 1776, he acquired estates reputed to be worth $18,000 a year. He supported the 'Fox-North India Bill' at first, but, on discovering the king's wishes, voted against it when it was defeated in the Lords. He appears to have spoken for the last time in the Lords on 19 March 1788, when he supported the third reading of Pitt's 'East India Declaratory Bill'. 
Onslow was in the royal coach, in his capacity of lord-in-waiting, when the king was mobbed on his way to open parliament on 29 October 1795. The king calmed him down and gave him a stone thrown into the carriage on their return. Onslow served as colonel of the Surrey regiment of fencible cavalry from 23 May 1794 to 27 March 1800. In 1798 Tierney moved in the House of Commons for an inquiry into Onslow's conduct with regard to the manner in which the act to provide for the defence of the realm had been carried into effect in the county of Surrey, but the motion was lost by 141 votes to 22. Onslow, whom Walpole described as 'a noisy, indiscreet man' (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 4.218), was created Viscount Cranley and earl of Onslow on 19 June 1801. His wife died on 27 May 1809, and Onslow himself died at his seat, Clandon Park, Surrey, on 17 May 1814, aged eighty-two. He was buried in Merrow church, near Guildford, on 22 May. 
Onslow was succeeded by his eldest son, 
Onslow was a crony of the prince of Wales and shared his passion for driving four-in-hand, which is commemorated in one of Gillray's caricatures and in the lines: '
What can little T. O. do? 

Why, drive a phaeton and two!! 

Can little T. O. do no more? 

Yes, drive a phaeton and four!!!! 
(T. Wright and R. H. Evans, 'Historical and Descriptive Account of the Caricatures of James Gillray', 1851, 463)' Wraxall commented that he was short in stature, and 'destitute of any elegance or grace' and that 'he passed the whole day in his phaeton, and sacrificed every object to the gratification of that 'ignoble ambition', as he himself called it' ('Historical and Posthumous Memoirs', 5.309-10). Gronow recalled that he possessed 'four of the finest black horses in England [and]... his carriage was painted black, and the whole turn-out had more the appearance of belonging to an undertaker' ('Reminiscences', 2.113). 
Onslow supported the Foxites, but rose in the Commons on very few occasions; in 1781 he presented a petition of 'a numerous body of the innholders of England', complaining of the billeting of soldiers on them. His most notorious service to the prince was his mission to Mrs Fitzherbert in 1784 to tell her that the prince had attempted suicide and that she must go to him to save his life. In December 1785 he accompanied the prince to Mrs Fitzherbert's house and stood guard, with a drawn sword, at the door while they were married in secret. Later, for reasons which are unknown, he fell out with the prince; he voted for Pitt's regency proposals in 1789, and against the abolition of the slave trade in 1796. He died on 22 February 1827, aged seventy-two, at Clandon Park. 


@@@@@


doc= 20791


Onslow, (Andre) George Louis (1784-1853), composer, was born on 27 July 1784 at Clermont-Ferrand, Auvergne, France, the son of Edward Onslow (1758-1829), youngest son of the first earl of Onslow, and his wife, Marie Rosalie de Bourdeilles de Brantome (died 1842), a renowned beauty from a local aristocratic family. There is much conflicting detail concerning Onslow's youth, but the most accurate accounts suggest that he was sent to London while a young boy to be educated under the watchful eye of his paternal grandfather, and there he received piano lessons from N.-J. Hullmandel and Jan Ladislav Dussek. He was then sent to Germany for two years (1799-1800), where he took piano lessons from Hullmandel, Dussek, and J. B. Cramer as part of the education which befitted an aristocrat, although he apparently remained unmoved by the great music of his day. On returning to the Auvergne, taking with him the piano he had used in London, which was the first known in that area of France, he became friendly with a group of local musicians. This, according to some sources, prompted him to learn the cello, and thus it was that he became familiar with the chamber works of Haydn, Mozart, and Boccherini. 
It was when Onslow was in Paris in 1801 that, according to an autobiographical note, the overture to Mehul's opera 'Stratonice' awakened his sensibilities to the profound effect music could have on the emotions. The idea of composition came some while later and led to the writing of his first three string quintets (op. 1) and three quartets (op. 4) in 1807, and their publication in Paris at his own expense, before he had received so much as one formal lesson in composition. F.-J. Fetis, damning with faint praise, writes that Onslow had no real idea of the labour of composing, but that, as a man of independent means, he had all the leisure necessary to overcome these obstacles. Onslow recognized his shortcomings and sought lessons with Antoine Reicha, who had recently settled in Paris. Some sources say that it was about now that he learned to play the cello in order to become better acquainted with the chamber music of Beethoven, Haydn, and Mozart. In the same year (1808), on 23 June, he married Charlotte Francoise Delphine de Fontanges, the daughter of a rich Aurillac landowner. They had two daughters and a son. 
From this time on Onslow produced a steady series of works for publication. His attempts at opera, the most highly favoured genre at the time, were limited. 'L'Alcalde de la vega' and 'Le colporteur' were both produced at the Theatre Feydeau, in 1824 and 1827 respectively, and both achieved a 'succes d'estime'. His third and final effort, which appeared ten years later, was 'Guise'. 'Le colporteur' also found modest success in Germany under the titles 'Der Hausirer' and 'Der Spion', and was given in an adaptation by Barham Livius as 'The Emissary, or, The Revolt of Moscow' at Drury Lane, London, on 13 May 1831. 
In 1829 Onslow was injured when out boar-hunting while taking a rest to jot down a musical idea. His ear was damaged by a spent ball, leaving him unable to play the cello, and his hearing was impaired for the rest of his life. One of his most famous quintets, the fifteenth, was written as a result of this misfortune, being developed out of the theme he was sketching at the time of the accident: he charted his pain in the minuet ('Dolore'), convalescence in the andante ('Convalescenza'), and recovery in the finale ('Guarigione'). Having maintained his English connections, he was elected the second honorary member of the newly founded Philharmonic Society of London in 1830, Mendelssohn having been the first. His first symphony was performed at the Paris conservatory on 10 April 1831. 
In 1842 the death of his father-in-law, the marquis de Fontanges, left Onslow in possession of a large fortune. In the same year, coincidentally or not, he entered the Institut de France, replacing Cherubini in the chair of the Academie des Beaux-Arts, having gained more votes than, among others, Adam, Auber, and Berlioz. When he visited Paris for the last time in summer 1853 his health had deteriorated. He died suddenly at Clermont-Ferrand on 3 October 1853, after a morning walk. 
For about forty years Onslow had produced a succession of works, the international publication of which was awaited eagerly by his appreciative following. By the 1830s Breitkopf and Hartel were producing collected editions of scores and parts, which, in the case of chamber music, were adaptable to various combinations of instruments and eventually numbered some thirty-four string quintets, thirty-five string quartets, and twenty-six works for other combinations. Onslow was highly regarded as an amateur composer, although some contemporary commentators saw his chamber music as worthy to stand alongside that of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven, which accounted for his popularity in England and Germany. Many top French performers of the day also devoted much of their time and talent to playing Onslow's music, among them Pierre Baillot, Chretien Urhan, Theophile Tilmant, and Auguste Franchomme. But by 1880 his music was largely forgotten. He is credited, however, as being a 'modest, but legitimate' precursor, influencing several highly regarded French composers of the day, including Saint-Saens, Massenet, Lalo, and Franck, although his music is not French in style. The quartets and quintets, irrespective of any influence they may or may not have had, are of exceptional quality. From the standpoint of the late twentieth century his musical language shows parallels with that of Beethoven, Schubert, and Mendelssohn, along with a semblance to the style of the later Brahms. 


@@@@@


doc= 20792


Onslow, Richard (1527/8-1571), lawyer and speaker of the House of Commons, was a younger son of Roger Onslow of Shrewsbury, Shropshire, and his first wife, Margaret, daughter of Thomas Poyner. His elder brother, Fulk (died 1602), was clerk of the parliaments in the reign of Elizabeth I. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1545, aged seventeen, at the instance of Sir Nicholas Hare, and called to the bar some time before 1554. Although he was expelled from the inn in 1556, with seven others, after an outbreak of disorder, this did not prevent him from being elected a bencher in 1559 in advance of reading. Several copies survive of his first reading, given in the autumn of 1562 on the Henrician statute concerning final concords (32 Hen. VIII c. 36). By this time he was a member of parliament, having been elected for Steyning in 1558 and Aldeburgh in 1559. In 1559 he married Katherine (died 1599), daughter and heir of William Harding of Knowle, Surrey; they would have seven children. In 1560 he became a member of the council in the marches of Wales, in 1561 clerk of the council to the duchy of Lancaster, and in 1562 a justice of the quorum for his home county. These positions, which he retained until his, did not prevent his practice at the bar, and in 1561 he argued successfully for the plaintiff in the earliest known reported case on the doctrine of consideration, when it was held by the queen's bench that an exchange of conditional promises could constitute a binding contract. 
In 1563 Onslow was chosen recorder of London, and occupied that office until he became solicitor-general in 1566. In 1563 he was again elected member for Steyning, and in 1566 for the city of London as well as for Steyning, serving for the latter. It was in this last parliament that he was elected speaker of the House of Commons, though not without difficulty. Onslow attempted to disqualify himself on the grounds that the speakership was incompatible with his office as solicitor-general, which bound him not only to the queen but also to attendance on the Lords; but he was elected after a division (eighty-two against seventy). Well might he seek to be excused, for it proved to be a turbulent session, during which the burning issues were the succession to the crown and the queen's marriage. On 25 November 1566, after the suppression of a 'Bill for Regulating the Succession', Onslow read to the house the queen's command to stay all proceedings touching the crown, which she considered 'very unmeet for the time and place, and certainly very dangerous to the common quietness of all her good subjects now here assembled' ('Lost Notebooks', 125-6). This interference with freedom of speech -- a liberty that Onslow, perhaps with deliberate circumspection, had omitted to claim at the beginning of the session -- had been approved by a meeting of judges, and (according to Dyer) was observed by the house. Nevertheless, on 2 January 1567, when the parliament ended, Onslow made a two-hour speech during which he eulogized hereditary monarchy and daringly urged the queen to marry without delay. This earned a further royal rebuke to the Commons for busying themselves in matters that did not concern them. The incident did not harm Onslow's career, for in 1569 he was promoted from the office of solicitor-general to the lucrative attorneyship of the court of wards and liveries. 
Onslow is said to be the author of 'Arguments proving the queene's majestie's propertye in the sea landes and salt shores', which survives in several manuscripts and was edited for publication by J. W. Pycroft in 1855. However, his promising career was cut short by the plague. He died on 2 April 1571, still in his early forties, from a pestilential fever caught while visiting his uncle at Shrewsbury, and was buried in St Chad's, Shrewsbury, on 7 April. His will mentions lands in Buckinghamshire, Gloucestershire, Kent, Middlesex, Shropshire, Surrey, Sussex, Warwickshire, and Wiltshire, and a house in the Blackfriars, London, which his widow had as part of her jointure. Among his bequests were a standing cup and cover for the earl of Leicester, to whom he was 'most bounden', and a gilt bowl for Lord Burghley. His second son (and eventual heir), Sir Edward Onslow (died 1615), was the father of Sir Richard Onslow (d. 1664) and ancestor of the earls of Onslow. 


@@@@@


doc= 20793


Onslow, Sir Richard (bap. 1601, d. 1664), politician, was baptized on 30 July 1601, the second son of Sir Edward Onslow (died 1615) of Knoll in Cranleigh, Surrey, and Isabel Shirley (died 1630), daughter of Sir Thomas Shirley of Wiston, Sussex. Richard succeeded to the family estates on the death in December 1616 of his elder brother, Sir Thomas Onslow. He matriculated at Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1617 and entered Lincoln's Inn on 8 November 1618. In 1620 he married Elizabeth (died 1679), daughter and heir of Arthur Strangways of Holborn Bridge, London; they had six daughters and eight sons. He was knighted on 2 June 1624, was colonel of horse in Surrey by July 1626, a Surrey JP by December of that year, and a deputy lieutenant by the following March. 
Onslow served as knight of the shire for Surrey in the parliament of 1628 and in both the Short and Long parliaments. In January 1642 he was one of the commissioners who met at Guildford to determine the bounds of Windsor Forest in Surrey, following representations from local residents who were anxious to free the parishes of north-west Surrey from forest law. The commission, which sat in contravention of an order of the House of Lords for the meeting to be postponed owing to the prevailing conditions of political instability, found that no part of Surrey except Guildford Park lay within the bounds of the forest. 
Onslow was removed from the commission of the peace on 19 July 1642, but he attended the assizes at Kingston in August in order to serve parliament's arrest warrant on Justice Mallet. In September and October he was active in raising forces in the county for parliament. His house was plundered when the king's army entered Surrey in November. Following the death in December of Anthony Fane, Onslow emerged as the dominant figure among Surrey's parliamentarians, and was chiefly responsible for the moderate and conciliatory policies adopted by the county's parliamentarian administration. He was later praised by one Surrey royalist for striving 'to prevent and stop (to his utmost capacity) the rapines and oppressions of those times of Blood and Violence' (E. Andrews, 'Gratitude in Season', 1661, 6), while the poet George Wither was to accuse him of being 'the greatest Favourer of Delinquents, and the most implacable Enemy to them, who are eminently Well-affected to the Parliament, of any man in Surrey' (G. Wither, 'Justitiarius justificatus', 1646, 11). Although Onslow was a committed presbyterian, and was instrumental in attempts to establish a classical system in Surrey, he gained a reputation for protecting ministers who faced ejection, including the rector of Albury, William Oughtred, who dedicated the 1647 edition of his 'The Key of the Mathematicks New Forged and Filed' to Sir Richard and his son Arthur. Onslow was also active, as a trustee for the earls of Arundel, in protecting the Howards' property interests in Surrey during the civil war. 
Onslow's authority in Surrey was challenged in mid-1643 by rival parliamentarians, led by Sir John Maynard, who sought to increase the county's contribution to the war effort. Maynard and his allies gained temporary control of the Surrey county committee in July 1644, while Onslow was absent from the county as commander of the Surrey regiments at the siege of Basing, but their attempt to place George Wither in command of the militia forces of Surrey's east and middle divisions proved unsuccessful. Maynard was removed from the county committee at the end of August, and in March 1645 his kinsman Colonel Samuel Jones was forced to relinquish his command of Farnham Castle. An ordinance of parliament of 1 July 1645 led to the creation of a new committee dominated by Sir Richard and his supporters. The successful outcome of these disputes owed much to the support that Onslow obtained from the earl of Northumberland, the county's lord lieutenant, and from the middle group in parliament. 
In April 1646 George Wither's belated attack on Onslow in 'Justitiarius justificatus' included the accusation that Sir Richard had sought to betray the parliamentarian cause. The pamphlet was voted false and scandalous in the House of Commons on 7 August, and Wither was fined $500 and imprisoned, but a subsidiary charge relating to his claim that Onslow had sent $500 to the king at Oxford went unpunished. 
Onslow was named to the revived committee of safety on 11 June 1647, and again on 30 July, but it is doubtful whether he played any significant part in its activities. On 1 June 1648 he was appointed a member of the Derby House committee, and later that month he was nominated by the Commons to the joint committee to consider terms for a personal treaty with the king. He was imprisoned briefly at Pride's Purge, but he remained on the Surrey bench and continued to attend meetings of the county committee. Although he was said in April 1651 to be 'fierce upon the Presbyterian score and also upon the King's' ('Portland MSS', 1.582), he was active as a militia commissioner and commanded the Surrey regiment which was raised in July 1651 to resist the Scottish invasion. 
Sir Richard Onslow sat for the county of Surrey in both the first and second protectorate parliaments. In April 1657 he was prominent in moves to persuade Cromwell to accept the crown, arguing that a king was more accountable than a protector, and in December he was made a member of Cromwell's upper house. He withdrew from national affairs following the fall of Richard Cromwell, but remained active as a JP until the autumn. At the recall of the secluded members of the Long Parliament in February 1660 he was appointed a member of the new council of state. He stood with his son Arthur for the county seats at the elections to the Convention Parliament in April, but lost, partly as a result of local hostility to presbyterians and partly, as his kinsman Denzil Holles suggested, 'by his owne fault, for he was offred one place, but he desired them both, for himself and his sonne, and so hath lost both' (BL, Add. MS 32679, fol. 9'v'). The Onslows were able to sit instead for the town of Guildford. 
By July 1660 Sir Richard had been removed from the commission of the peace in Surrey, and attempts were made to exclude him from the 'Act of Indemnity'. The reasons given for this included his involvement in the arrest of Judge Mallet in 1642, his military activities during the civil war and in 1651, and his having compared Charles I to a hedgehog. He succeeded in obtaining a pardon on 5 November 1660. In May 1661 he was elected, again as burgess for Guildford, to the Cavalier Parliament, of which he became an active member. He was restored to the Surrey bench and attended quarter sessions regularly between April 1662 and his death in 1664. 
Onslow's great-grandson, Speaker Arthur Onslow, was to describe him as 'a man of high spirit, of a large fortune and great parts, knowledge and courage, with the gravity and sobriety of the times'. He 'had a sort of art and cunning about him' which could, he suggested, 'only be justified by the uncertainty and confusion of the times he lived in, which made it very difficult for a man to act in them, whose principles did not lead him to the extremes of any party' ('Buckinghamshire MSS', 476, 482). Onslow died on 19 May 1664 at Arundel House, the Strand, Middlesex. Although William Mountague believed that the cause of death was a gangrene brought on 'by the relics of an ague, which settled in his thigh' ('Buccleuch MSS', 1.315), most accounts suggest that he died after being hit by lightning. In his will, which was completed in March 1664, he described himself as of West Clandon, Surrey, where the seat he had purchased from Sir Richard Weston in 1642 -- subsequently his main residence -- was situated. The bequests in his will included $2500 to his unmarried daughter Elizabeth, and $1000 each to his sons Richard and Denzill and granddaughter Mary. He was buried in Cranleigh church and was succeeded by his eldest son, Arthur Onslow. 


@@@@@


doc= 20794


Onslow, Richard, first Baron Onslow (1654-1717), speaker of the House of Commons, was born on 23 June 1654, the eldest son of Sir Arthur Onslow, second baronet (1622-1688), politician, of Knowle and West Clandon, Surrey, and his wife, Mary, second daughter and coheir of Sir Thomas Foot, first baronet, mayor of London. He matriculated from St Edmund Hall, Oxford, on 7 June 1671, and was admitted to the Inner Temple three years later, but was never called to the bar. He married Elizabeth ('bap'. 1661, died 1718), the daughter and heir of Sir Henry Tulse, grocer, of Lothbury, London, on 31 August 1676. They had three sons and one daughter. The Onslow family were well established in the political life of Surrey and Sir Richard's career benefited from these foundations. On 1 March 1679 he entered parliament for the borough of Guildford and supported attempts to exclude the Roman Catholic duke of York from the throne, voting for the first 'Exclusion Bill'. Despite the later tory reaction he retained his seat in 1685. Following his father's death, on 21 July 1688, he succeeded to the baronetcy and as a mark of his new status was returned for one of the Surrey county seats in the Convention Parliament of 1689. 
Onslow was later described by his nephew, Sir Arthur Onslow, as 'a person of great probity, courage and honour... tall and very thin, not well shaped and with a face exceeding plain, yet there was a certain sweetness with a dignity in his countenance and so much of life and spirit in it that no one who saw him ever thought him of a disagreeable aspect. ('Buckinghamshire MSS', 489)' His staunch and consistent country whig sympathies made him the victim of some mockery. The first earl of Dartmouth, a moderate tory, described Onslow as a 'vain trifling man of a ridiculous figure, full of party zeal' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 5.395n.). He also gained the unwelcome sobriquet Stiff Dick as a result of his rigorous devotion to principle. 
He was an active back-bencher during the 1690s and served as one of the commissioners of the Admiralty from May 1690 to February 1693. Onslow's political activity was frequently related to commercial affairs and country issues such as disbandment of the armed forces, regulation of elections, and the number of placemen in the Commons. As a consequence of this activity he was nominated as a moderate whig candidate for the speakership in February 1701, but was defeated by Robert Harley. The same year, in another indication of his increasing status, he became high steward of Guildford. 
Onslow gained the speaker's chair in the 1708 parliament. Unfortunately his whiggish zeal was unabated and his inability to pretend any kind of neutrality in the chair lost him the goodwill of moderates and tories alike. He was diligent, even pedantic, as a speaker, and very conscious of his role as a defender of the rights of the Commons. He played a significant part in the trial of the high-church clergyman Dr Henry Sacheverell, and on 23 March 1710 led the Commons to the House of Lords to hear the judgment in the case. This resulted in Onslow's successfully challenging black rod on a matter of privilege which, although it increased his unpopularity with the tories, did not prevent his elevation to the privy council on 15 June 1710. The tide of tory support proved so strong in the 1710 election that Onslow lost his Surrey seat and was forced to sit for St Mawes, Cornwall, on Godolphin's recommendation. The tories 'thought there could not be a greater mark of an universal disaffection to the Whig cause' ('Buckinghamshire MSS', 492). 
On the death of Queen Anne, Onslow supported the protestant succession and gained a strong position at court. In October 1714 he became chancellor of the exchequer and after resigning from office a year later he was given a tellership of the exchequer on 4 November 1715 for life. On 19 June 1716 he was elevated to the peerage as Baron Onslow of Onslow, Shropshire, and of Clandon, Surrey, and the following month (6 July) he was appointed lord lieutenant of Surrey. 
Onslow died of fever on 5 December 1717 at Soho Square, London, and was buried on 13 December at Merrow, Surrey. His estate passed to his eldest son, Thomas. 


@@@@@


doc= 20795


Onslow, Sir Richard, first baronet (1741-1817), naval officer, was born on 23 June 1741, the younger son of Lieutenant-General Richard Onslow ('c'.1697-1760) and Pooley, daughter of Charles Walton of Little Burstead, Essex; his elder brother was George Onslow (1731-1792). Arthur Onslow, speaker of the House of Commons, was his uncle, and this 'interest' brought the young Richard rapid promotion. In the East Indies, Vice-Admiral George Pocock made him fourth lieutenant of the 'Sunderland' on 17 December 1758; fifth of the 'Grafton' on 3 March 1759 and, on 17 March 1760, fourth of the 'Yarmouth', Pocock's flagship, in which he returned to England. On 11 February 1761 he became commander of the 'Martin' cruising the Skagerrak, until promoted on 14 April 1762 to captain of the 'Humber' (40 guns), which he joined in June. The 'Humber' was wrecked off Flamborough Head on her return from the Baltic in September, but Onslow was acquitted at a court martial (the pilot being blamed) and was appointed to the 'Phoenix' on 29 November. 
As a founder member in 1765 of the Navy Society dining club Onslow indulged 'a nautical predilection for conviviality' (Franks, 328). From 18 January 1766 to 1769 he commanded the frigate 'Aquilon' in the Mediterranean and, from 12 October 1770, the 'Diana' in the West Indies. On 18 January 1773 George Rodney gave him the 'Achilles', in which he returned to England, where he acquired an estate. In the same year he married Anne Michell, daughter of Commodore Matthew Michell, with whom he had three sons and four daughters. 
After three years ashore Onslow was appointed to the 'St Albans' (64 guns) on 31 October 1776, and in April 1777 took a convoy to New York, joining Howe's fleet in time to take part in the frustration of D'Estaing at Sandy Hook on 22 July. On 4 November 1778 he sailed for the West Indies with Commodore William Hotham, and was involved in both the capture of St Lucia and its subsequent defence against D'Estaing's attempt to retake the island in the Cul-de-Sac (15-29 December). 
In August 1779 Onslow arrived at Spithead with a convoy from St Kitts, and in February 1780 joined Admiral Francis Geary's Channel Fleet in the 'Bellona' (74 guns), capturing the Dutch 'Prinses Carolina' (54 guns) on 30 December. Onslow was next involved in the relief of Gibraltar by Admiral George Darby in April 1781, and again under Howe in October 1782, when he took part in the night action of the 21st. Later, the 'Bellona' captured 'La Solitaire' in the West Indies, before Onslow returned to England and peacetime half pay in June 1783. Early in 1789 he was appointed to the 'Magnificent' (74 guns) at Portsmouth, and during that summer, while at Weymouth, the royal family apparently made some short cruises in her. Unemployed again from September 1791 to 1796 (but promoted rear-admiral of the white on 1 February 1793 and vice-admiral on 4 July 1794), he became port admiral at Portsmouth in 1796, and then in November, in the 'Nassau', second-in-command of the North Sea Fleet under Admiral Adam Duncan. 
During the mutinies of 1797, when the fleet was at Yarmouth, Duncan reported on 1 May that 'a rising in the 'Nassau' was suppressed by Admiral Onslow', and on the 14th that he 'had sent Onslow to quell the 'Adamant'' (Franks, 332). On 26 May the 'Nassau' refused to sail, so Onslow shifted his flag to the 'Adamant', and from 30 May to 17 June, when the mutiny ended, Duncan in the 'Venerable' and Onslow in the 'Adamant' were alone off the Texel, keeping up an elaborate ruse of signals to an imaginary fleet over the horizon. On 25 July Onslow moved to the 'Monarch' (74 guns), in which he took a leading role in the battle of Camperdown on 11 October 1797. Reputedly, his flag captain, Edward O'Bryen, observed that the enemy ships were too close together for him to get between. Onslow is supposed to have replied 'The 'Monarch' will 'make' a passage' (Vulliamy, 242), and certainly she was the first to cut through the Dutch line and luff up alongside the 'Jupiter' (72 guns), flagship of Vice-Admiral Reyntjes, whose surrender Onslow took. In appreciation, Onslow was created a baronet, and the corporation of London presented him with the freedom of the City and a 100 guinea sword. 
Granted sick leave on 10 December 1798, Onslow retired from the sea. Admiral of the red on 9 November 1805, and a GCB in 1815, he died at Southampton on 27 December 1817, leaving directions that no more than $20 was to be spent on his funeral 'to prevent any unnecessary ostentation; the funeral of a brave and honest sailor costs a much less sum' (Franks, 337). 


@@@@@


doc= 20796


Thomas Onslow, second earl of Onslow (1754-1827), politician and eccentric, who was born on 15 March 1754 at Imber Court, Surrey. Commonly known as Tom Onslow, he was MP for Rye from 1775 to 1784, and for Guildford from 1784 to 1806. He married first, on 30 December 1776, Arabella (died 1782), the third daughter and coheir of Eaton Mainwaring-Ellerker of Risby Park, Yorkshire, and his wife, Barbara; they had three sons and one daughter. Following Arabella's death, aged twenty-six, on 11 April 1782, he married, on 13 February 1783, Charlotte (died 1819), the daughter of William and Elizabeth Hale of King's Walden, Hertfordshire, and the widow of Thomas Duncombe of Duncombe Park, Yorkshire; they had only one child, a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 20797


Onwhyn, Thomas (1814-1886), illustrator, was born in Clerkenwell, London, the eldest son of Joseph Onwhyn, a bookseller and newsagent at 3 Catherine Street, the Strand, London, and his wife, Fanny. In the 1830s and 1840s Joseph Onwhyn published a number of guides for tourists -- to the highlands, Killarney, Wales, and the Lakes -- chiefly compiled from his own notes and observations. Founded in 1864, 'The Owl' (a society newspaper) was published by Joseph Onwhyn, though its success afterwards affected his mind. 
Thomas Onwhyn came to public notice by his contribution of a series of 'illegitimate' illustrations to works by Charles Dickens. He executed twenty-one of the whole series of thirty-two plates to 'The Pickwick Papers', which were issued in eight (though intended to be in ten) monthly parts by E. Grattan, 51 Paternoster Row, London, in 1837; they are for the most part signed with the pseudonym Samuel Weller, but some bear Onwhyn's initials. From June 1838 to October 1839 Grattan issued a series of forty etchings by Onwhyn, illustrating 'Nicholas Nickleby'. In a letter of 13 July 1838 Dickens referred to 'the singular Vileness of the Illustrations' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 1.414). He objected to piracy but not to imitation and was friendly with Charles Selby, the author of 'Maximums and Specimens of William Muggins' (1841), which was also illustrated by Onwhyn (ibid., 2.332). After his death an additional set of illustrations to 'The Pickwick Papers' made by Onwhyn in 1847 was discovered and they were published in 1893 by Albert Jackson of Great Portland Street, London. 
Onwhyn's most lasting contribution was to the ephemeral end of the book trade in the 1840s and 1850s, illustrating the comic side of everyday life. Undertaken for shadowy publishers such as Rock Bros and Payne, and Kershaw & Son, he produced a score of pull-out or panorama books, coloured and plain, lithographed or etched for the popular market. Satirizing tourism, teetotalism, and fashion, they included 'Etiquette Illustrated' (1849), 'A New Matrimonial Ladder' ('c'.1850), 'What I Saw at the World's Fair' (1851), 'Mr and Mrs Brown's Visit to the Exhibition' (1851), 'A Glass of Grog Drawn from the Bottle...' (1853), 'Cupid's Crinoline' (1858), 'Nothing to Wear' (1858), and 'Scenes on the Sands' ('c'.1860). He signed his work T. O., O., or with the pseudonym Peter Palette, as in 'Peter Palette's Tales and Pictures in Short Words for Young Folks' (1856). He sometimes etched the designs of others -- for example, 'Oakleigh, or, The Minor of Great Expectations' by W. H. Holmes (1843). He was an indifferent draughtsman but showed real humour in his designs. His talent was somewhat overshadowed by those of his most eminent contemporaries such as George Cruikshank and Hablot K. Browne (Phiz). Onwhyn, who also drew views of scenery for guidebooks and illustrated six novels by Henry Cockton, abandoned artistic work, becoming a newsagent for the last twenty or thirty years of his life. He died on 21 January 1886, at his home, 9 Great Mays Buildings, St Martin's Lane, London. He was survived by his wife, Maria. 


@@@@@


doc= 20798


Opicius, Johannes (fl. 1492-1493), poet, is known only by his works, which are unusually uninformative about their author. Evidently, he (or at least his family) was of Italian origin, though nothing is known of his birthplace or training. He may possibly have belonged to the family of John de Opiczis or Opizis, papal collector in England in 1429, and prebendary of York in 1432. 
Opicius's poems, five in number, are contained in a humanist, Italianate illuminated manuscript now in the Cottonian collection (Vespasian B.iv) in the British Library. They are: a heroic poem in Latin hexameters on Henry VII's French campaign of 1492, likening it to the epic struggles of antiquity; a pastoral dialogue between Mopsus and Meliboeus in praise of Henry's political settlement in England, using 'Tudor rose' symbolism; an exhortation to mortals to celebrate Christmas, which is likened to an ancient triumph, Christ being repeatedly called 'the Thunderer'; a prayer, in Sapphic stanzas, for the preservation of the Tudor dynasty, mentioning the king's mother, his wife, and their children, in addition to Henry himself; and lines on the presentation of his book to the king, which would have taken place at new year 1493. 
These stylish, affectedly humanist poems are the work of a learned, accomplished writer, who was well informed about his English circumstances. In the first of them, Opicius speaks familiarly of Henry VII's 'blind poet' Bernard Andre, but no other contributions from Opicius to the work of Henry's literary establishment, of which Andre was the central figure, are known. 


@@@@@


doc= 20799


Opie, Amelia (1769-1853), novelist and poet, was born on 12 November 1769 in the parish of St George, Norwich. She was the only child of James Alderson (died 1825), physician -- son of James Alderson, dissenting minister of Lowestoft -- and his wife, Amelia, 'nee' Briggs (died 1784), daughter of Mary Worrell Briggs, from an established Norwich family, and Joseph Briggs, descended from an old Norfolk family but then on East India Company service at Cossambaza, Bengal. 
As a child Amelia Alderson was high spirited and impetuous, traits which her mother, who was 'as firm from principle, as she was gentle in disposition' (Brightwell, 12), tried to restrain. Mrs Alderson was 'somewhat of a disciplinarian' (ibid., 6) and forced her daughter to overcome girlish fears of beetles and frogs by holding them in her hand. She was also taught to replace fear of the socially marginalized with philanthropic sympathy. She was fascinated by extremes of human experience, as exemplified by inmates of the local insane asylum, women who disguised themselves as men to follow lovers, and those tried at the local assizes. By her own account, interest in French, dancing, and other accomplishments considered appropriate for a lady began to displace these fascinations by the time she was in her early teens. 
Upon her mother's death (31 December 1784), and in accordance with contemporary social convention, Amelia Alderson became her father's housekeeper and hostess. She was later described by a friend as 'universally loved and respected' for uniting 'manly wisdom', 'feminine gentleness', and 'attractive manners' (Brightwell, 32). She had a flair for dramatic performance and a taste for music. She wrote part of a play based on Roman history and at least part of a Gothic drama. She also completed a tragedy, 'Adelaide', which revolved around family conflict caused by a socially unequal marriage (Macgregor, 12, 14). With her father's sanction, it was staged at Norwich on 4 and 6 January 1791 in Mr Plumptre's private theatre, with herself in the title role and the Plumptre sisters taking other parts ('Ladies' Monthly Museum', 5, 1817, 62). In 1790 she had published anonymously 'The Dangers of Coquetry' (2 vols.). She was vivacious, attractive, interested in fine clothes, educated in genteel accomplishments, and had several admirers. 
Amelia Alderson also had strong intellectual and political interests, which were soon fully engaged. Norwich was then a town of almost 40,000, with a large number of weavers and an influential community of religious dissenters; the Aldersons attended the Octagon Presbyterian Chapel, which had a cultivated and well-to-do congregation, many of whom were Unitarians. Norwich had a relatively large electorate of over 2400; political opinion was divided between supporters of government and whig reformists, and municipal and parliamentary elections were strongly contested. The outbreak of the French Revolution intensified these contests. Alderson's father and his friends were active in Norwich reform movements, then among the most vocal in England. They supported parliamentary reform and repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts', which imposed second-class citizenship on religious dissenters. The Aldersons visited London circles of liberal dissenters and met other reformists at such places as the bookshop of Daniel Isaac Eaton. 
In September 1794 some Norwich reformers began a periodical of their own, 'The Cabinet', and Amelia Alderson contributed fifteen poems to the first three issues. Increasing revolutionary violence and warfare polarized public opinion, however, and a large show trial of leading 'English Jacobins', including the Aldersons' acquaintances Thomas Holcroft and John Horne Tooke, was scheduled for November 1794. A month earlier Amelia Alderson had told Susannah Taylor that she was pessimistic at the outcome, that 'The Cabinet' was considered a 'dangerous' publication, and that the Aldersons and their friends would emigrate to the United States should the trial have a 'fatal' result (Brightwell, 45-6). Horne Tooke was acquitted, and the government abandoned the other prosecutions; Amelia Opie later denied indignantly William Beloe's story that in her joy she had climbed over benches to kiss Horne Tooke. 
Amelia Alderson associated with the controversial literary and political Godwin circle, which included such prominent writers as Thomas Holcroft, Elizabeth Inchbald, and Mary Wollstonecraft, and saw such friends as Sarah Siddons, Anna Letitia Barbauld, and French Girondin refugees. She wrote a tragedy with a view to London production, and submitted it for criticism by William Godwin and others. She attracted the romantic interest of several men, including Holcroft, John Opie (1761-1807), and perhaps Godwin. Opie was a carpenter's son from Cornwall and a self-taught artist married to a woman Wollstonecraft found 'too much of a flirt to be a proper companion for him'; he divorced her in 1796 ('Collected Letters', 210). After a courtship of some months, he and Amelia Alderson were married at Marylebone church, London, on 8 May 1798, and then lived at 8 Berners Street. In December 1800 Amelia Opie indicated to Susannah Taylor that she thought herself pregnant, but despite their wish the Opies had no children. Self-conscious about his lower-class origins and culture, John Opie preferred literary and artistic friends to the fashionable circles that his wife enjoyed. Writing to Robert Garnham in 1801 Amelia Opie described herself as 'more a wife of the 'old', than 'new' school' (Crabb Robinson MSS). To support their household John left the more prestigious historical and mythological painting for the more lucrative portraiture. He encouraged his wife's writing, and she later declared, 'On no subject did Mr. Opie evince more generosity, and liberality of mind, than in his opinions respecting women of talents, especially those who had dared to cultivate the powers which their Maker had bestowed on them, and to become candidates for the pleasures, the pangs, the rewards, and the penalties of authorship. (memoir in J. Opie, 'Lectures on Painting', 1809, 2.25)' His professionalism, diligence, and independence inspired her, and her literary career developed rapidly. 
Amelia Opie published five poems in the 'Annual Anthology' (1799 and 1800), edited by Robert Southey and including contributions by many English Jacobins. In 1801 she published more poems with her first acknowledged fiction, 'The Father and Daughter', which her preface asserts is not a novel but 'a simple, moral tale'. This distinction rejects the novel of manners, the dominant form of prose fiction, with its complex plots and numerous characters set in fashionable society, which was often criticized for encouraging middle-class emulation of decadent upper-class life. By contrast, the tale was to be simply structured, appealing to readers' moral feelings with post-revolutionary emphasis on common humanity and sentimentalized criticism of social differences that produce inequality and suffering. 
The tale recounts the seduction and abandonment of a naive young woman by an aristocratic rake, the ensuing grief and madness of her father, the later remorse of the rake, and the reconciliation of father and daughter at death. Such fictionalized social protest was popular with reformists and liberals, and Opie's tale went through numerous editions. Fifteen years later Walter Scott told her 'he had cried over it more than he ever cried over such things' (Brightwell, 175). On it Maria Theresa Kemble based her play 'Smiles and Tears' (1815) and W. T. Moncrieff his 'domestic drama' 'The Lear of Private Life'; Filippo Casari turned it into a 'serio-comic drama' with a happy ending, later adapted by Luigi Buonavoglia, set to music by Ferdinando Paer (1817); and there was a Russian version to music by I. Svechinsky (1823). As late as 1837 'Blackwood's Magazine' predicted that 'The Father and Daughter' 'will endure 'till pity's self be dead'' ('Blackwood', 41, 1837, 409). 
In August 1802 the Opies joined other British tourists flocking to Paris during the brief peace of Amiens. There they met the whig hero Charles James Fox, Benjamin West, the Polish patriot Kosciuszko, the painter David, the actor Talma, and Helen Maria Williams, and they viewed the Louvre and sites of revolutionary history. After watching Bonaparte at a military review Amelia Opie was left shaking with excitement. In 1802 Amelia Opie also published two books of poetry. 'An Elegy to the Memory of the Late Duke of Bedford' celebrates in heroic couplets a leading reformist whig of the 1790s, representing him as a virtuous aristocrat uniting different classes around a patriotic ideology of merit. 'Poems' includes pieces published with 'The Father and Daughter'. Subjects include 'The Dying Daughter to her Mother', 'The Maid of Corinth to her Lover', 'The Negro Boy's Tale', 'Lines respectfully inscribed to the Society for the Relief of Persons imprisoned for Small Debts', and 'The Orphan Boy's Tale' and 'Address of a Felon to his Child', described in 1894 as 'the most popular of all her poems' ('DNB'). There is the same combination of moral sentiment and social criticism that made Opie's fiction popular and respected, and 'Poems' went through six editions in nine years. She was now a public figure, and accounts of her began to appear in magazines. In 1803 the 'European Magazine' praised her 'great sweetness of countenance', 'eyes beaming with intelligence and good humour', 'unaffected, affable, and engaging' manners, fascinating conversation, and a singing style that 'reaches the heart' ('European Magazine', 43, 1803, 323). 
Despite such adulation Opie maintained her pace of publication with 'Adeline Mowbray, or, The Mother and Daughter' (3 vols., 1804). It fictionalizes Wollstonecraft's and Godwin's attempt to counter the sexism and female subordination within conventional marriage. The heroine holds similar ideas and refuses to marry, living openly with her lover, until a series of disasters force her to repent of such free-thinking. Though the novel was read as a 'roman-a-clef', Opie generalizes her material as did the novelists of Godwin's circle, links the domestic and the public political sphere, and develops the pre-revolutionary literature of sensibility for post-revolutionary liberalism. Such fiction appealed to many in the reading public, and a third edition appeared in 1810. P. B. Shelley who, like Godwin, objected to marriage on philosophical and political grounds, later claimed to have been persuaded otherwise by Opie's novel, though James Mackintosh thought that it could as easily be read as 'a satire on our prejudices in favour of marriage, as on the paradoxes of sophists [such as Godwin] against it' ('Memoirs of... Mackintosh', 1.255). 
Meanwhile Opie continued her pursuit of music. From the 1790s to the 1820s she published songs to music by composers including E. S. Biggs, Thomas Wright, William Horsley, T. Traetta, James Hook, F. H. Jones, Frances Alsop, Sir Henry Bishop, and Bianchi Lacy. Now she sacrificed attendance at the opera in order to take singing lessons; Susannah Taylor commented, in another magazine portrait of Opie, that she 'created a style of singing of her own, which though polished and improved by art and cultivation, was founded on that power which she appears so pre-eminently to possess, of awakening the tender sympathies, and pathetic feelings of the mind. ('The Cabinet', 1, 1807, 218)' Opie continued to exercise this power in her writing. In 1806 she published 'Simple Tales' (4 vols.), first of several collections of stories varying in length and narrative methods, themes, characters, plots, and modes, from a few pages to a full volume, from common life to high society, from the comic to the pathetic, from the historical to the contemporary, from the sentimental to the Gothic. There followed 'Tales of Real Life' (1813), 'New Tales' (1818), and 'Tales of the Heart' (1820). These collections were interspersed with triple-decker novels, really tales of greater length, including 'Temper, or, Domestic Scenes: a Tale' (1812), 'Valentine's Eve' (1816), and 'Madeline: a Tale' (1822). An anonymously published novel entitled 'Self-Delusion' (1823) was attributed to her by the 'Ladies' Monthly Museum' (18, 1823, 284), but there is no other evidence it is hers. Her story 'The Ruffian Boy' was turned into a chapbook by the indefatigable Sarah Wilkinson, and dramatized by Thomas Dibdin and Edward Fitzball (1820), and her tale 'Love and Duty' was turned into a melodrama by Isaac Pocock. 
In their time, her tales and novels made Opie the most respected woman fiction writer of the 1800s and 1810s after Maria Edgeworth. Francis Jeffrey, leading liberal critic in Britain, reviewed 'Simple Tales' emphasizing Opie's ability to represent feelings in 'common' life so as 'to reach the heart of every reader' ('Edinburgh Review', 8, July 1806, 465). Implicitly, this was a democratic art, uniting readers of different classes in a common sympathy, and this judgement was echoed through the nineteenth century. In her fiction, as in her poetry, Opie repeatedly links the conditions of common life to those in the public and political sphere; this was a central element in nineteenth-century liberal literature, and kept her fiction in print. The tales and novels, singly and in various collections, were reprinted through the nineteenth century, especially in the United States, with translations of individual works in France, Spain, and Sweden. 
After John Opie's unexpected death on 9 April 1807 his widow returned to her father's home in Norwich. In a preface to Opie's 'Lectures on Painting' (1809) she eulogized her late husband in that Romantic genre, the bereaved spouse's memoir connecting intellectual or artistic achievement to private and domestic character. She visited London often, frequenting fashionable and literary society, and meeting such figures as Richard Brinsley Sheridan, Germaine de Stael, Lord Byron, and Walter Scott. 'The Warrior's Return, and other Poems' (1808) comprises pieces written earlier expressing sentimental humanitarianism and opposing war ('The Warrior's Return'; 'Lines on the Opening of a Spring Campaign'), slavery ('The Lucayan's Song'), political violence ('Lines on the Place de la Concorde at Paris'), and courtly decadence ('To Lothario' and numerous songs). She had suitors, and Mary Mitford later insisted that Opie had engaged to marry Lord Herbert Stuart. She also corresponded and visited with William Hayley. 
Opie renewed friendship with the Gurneys, a prominent Norwich Quaker family, and especially Joseph John Gurney. She addressed him as her 'monitor' (letters of Opie to Gurney, RS Friends, Lond.), and he repeatedly advised her to resist worldly pleasures, in 1817 anxiously inquiring in verse, '
Shall fashion's lure, shall flattery's heartless smile, 

Thy higher, better, safer hope beguile? 
(Braithwaite, 1.241)' She gradually abandoned her family's Unitarianism but continued to enjoy society and admiration. The young dramatist Edward Fitzball saw that 'she was worshipped in society, not only for her great talent and her polished manners, but for her peculiar beauty', which reminded him 'of a lovely Bacchante, it was so voluptuous, yet so delicate and feminine, especially when she sang' (E. Fitzball, 'Thirty-Five Years of a Dramatic Author's Life', 2 vols., 1859, 2.61). The young Anna Eliza Bray met her at Norwich in 1819 and later declared she had rarely encountered a woman 'of such fascinating powers of conversation' (J. A. Kempe, ed., 'Autobiography of A. E. Bray', 1884, 138). 
Opie also continued to write. In 1815 she edited her late friend Margaret (Wade) Roberts's 'Duty: a Novel' (3 vols.), with a prefatory memoir representing Roberts 'as a wife, that character which is best calculated to call forth the virtues of a woman, and in which the heart and the temper are most tried and most displayed to view' (p. 1.5). In 1818 she told a friend that she was writing eight or ten hours a day. She also tried magazine writing, publishing several pieces in the 'European Magazine' (1823): a series of verse letters supposedly written by Mary, queen of Scots, at that time regarded as a victim of religious and political conflicts resembling those of Europe in the early 1820s; a memoir of Henry Bathurst, bishop of Norwich, advocate of religious toleration and champion of Catholic emancipation; and two stories, 'False or True' and 'The Shipwreck', anticipating Opie's contributions to the newly fashionable literary annuals. She also continued to socialize, to follow events and literature of the day, and to enjoy material things such as fine clothes, though frequently reproaching herself for doing so. She admitted to enjoying Byron's 'Don Juan', though she was disappointed to find its reputed wickedness over-rated. 
From 1820 Opie's father's health declined. She had attended Quaker services since 1814, and with her father's approval she was admitted to the Society of Friends in August 1825, after close questioning about her willingness to relinquish 'the world' (Opie to Arthur Corder, 4 July 1825, Gurney MSS). Her father died two months later, and at his wish was buried in the Friends' cemetery, Gildencroft, Norwich. Years later, someone's dinner-table reference to a father's affection for an only child caused Opie to burst into tears and flee the room. 
It had taken Opie some years to commit herself fully to the Friends, partly because of the linguistic and sartorial distinctness practised by Quakers, and she told Joseph John Gurney 'of the agony of her mind in the view of changing her dress, and of addressing her numerous friends and acquaintances by their plain names, and with the humbling simplicity of 'thee' and 'thou'' (Braithwaite, 1.242). At the time Mary Mitford heard that Opie 'is all over Quakerized', though 'just as kind and good-humoured as ever' and after 'about a quarter of an hour's chat' able to forget 'her 'thee's' and 'thou's'' and 'altogether as merry as she used to be' (L'Estrange, 2.198-9). Opie plunged into the kind of philanthropic work promoted by Quakers. She visited workhouses, hospitals, prisons, and the poor; promoted a refuge for reformed prostitutes; supported the Norwich branches of the Bible Society and the Anti-Slavery Society; and in 1840 represented Norwich at the national anti-slavery convention. 
Opie claimed that joining the Friends meant abandoning fiction, which Quakers considered a form of lying, and thus sinful. In December 1823 she told Elizabeth Fry that a novel by her entitled 'The Painter and his Wife' was advertised and several hundred copies had been ordered, but she now intended to abandon it, declaring, 'I have felt the sacrifice, but I do not repent of it' (Brightwell, 190). It would have comprised letters and narration, and presented two women both in love with the same man. In 1827 Mrs S. C. Hall requested a short story for a literary annual, and Opie replied that 'since I became a Friend I am not free to what is called 'make a story,' but I will write a 'fact' for thy annual, or any little matter of history, or truth, or a poem if thou wishest, but I must not write pure fiction; I must not 'lye', and say, 'so and so occurred,' or 'such and such a thing took place,' when it did not. (Hall, 'Memories', 169n.)' Opie did however publish fiction of explicitly didactic and ethical purpose; as she wrote to Gurney years later, defending a new, revised edition of 'Adeline Mowbray' and some tales, 'I believe simple moral tales the very best mode of instructing the young and 'the poor'' (23 Feb 1844, Gurney MSS). Harvey and Darton, leading publisher of books for children, issued 'The Negro Boy's Tale' (1824; reprinted from 'Poems', 1802); the prose 'Tales of the Pemberton Family' (1825), resembling 'tales for youth' by the prolific Barbara Hofland; and another anti-slavery poem, 'The Black Man's Lament, or, How to Make Sugar' (1826). 'Illustrations of Lying in All its Branches' (1825) presents moralistic social philosophy with a taxonomy of lies, particularly those kinds used for social competition and self-interest, and each illustrated by a tale, with the declared purpose of national reform designed to avoid social rebellion. 
From 1824 to 1834 Opie contributed thirty-nine poems and prose pieces to literary annuals. In 1828 she published 'Detraction Displayed', a combination of conduct book and social analysis attacking social emulation and competition and defending such frequent objects of detraction as 'authoresses', bluestockings, and 'converts to serious religion', groups in which she included herself. 'Lays for the Dead' (1834), her last collection of poems and last book, follows Felicia Hemans's popular treatment of Romantic death, but also resumes central themes of Opie's earlier poems, such as opposition to war, and incorporates expressly religious resignation to divine providence. 
Opie continued to take a great interest in public affairs and to compare them to the heady 1790s. She visited Paris in 1829 and felt ambivalent about the restored monarchy and awe-struck at the sight of a guillotine once more erected in public, though to execute a wife-murderer (the only case in which she thought she might support the death penalty). When she heard of the July Revolution in the following year she rushed to Paris and 'was in such a state of uncontrollable enthusiasm, all the visions of human perfectibility which the friends of her childhood had associated with the French Revolution rushing on her brain, that while sitting in the boulevards she sang in her clear, brilliant soprano, 'Fall, tyrants, fall!' (G. T. Mayer, 'Women of Letters', 2 vols., 1894, 2.82)' In her own account, Opie placed the July Revolution in the light of eternity and divine wisdom ('A morning at Paris in 1829', 'Aurora Borealis', 1833, 234-40). She also met the French queen, who claimed to have read her works. 
In 1832 Opie gave up her Norwich house for freedom to travel. She toured the Scottish highlands in 1834, went from Belgium up the Rhine to Switzerland in 1835, visited Keswick in 1836, and stayed in London often. In 1851 she went around the Great Exhibition in a wheelchair and, meeting Mary Berry in a similar vehicle, challenged her to a race. She indulged her passion for prisms and for flowers: 'Light, heat, and fragrance were three indispensables for her' (Brightwell, 334). She wrote letters constantly, estimating in 1849 that she averaged six a day plus notes, and she maintained the custom of sending anonymous Valentines. She holidayed at Cromer on the Norfolk coast, spring and autumn, as she had done all her life. She continued to attend trials at London and Norwich. 
From 1842 to 1846 Opie looked after an ageing aunt. She herself aged well. In 1842 Caroline Fox reported, 'She is having her swing of London excitement' (Fox, 1.263), and in 1843 found her 'in great force and really jolly'; she 'reads Dickens voraciously, takes to Carlyle, but thinks his appearance against him; talks much and of great spirit of people, but never ill-naturedly' (ibid., 2.24). In 1851 S. C. Hall found her 'a charming picture of what goodness of heart and cheerfulness of disposition can do to make age lovely to the last' ('Retrospect', 2.185). In later life she was described as of average height for a woman, with fine hair, fair complexion, expressive eyes, and very fine clothes. Enjoying life almost to the end, she died at Norwich at midnight on 2 December 1853, after a few months of declining health and memory. She was buried in her father's grave. 
In 1830 the 'Edinburgh Review' placed Opie with Maria Edgeworth and Jane Austen among the major women novelists of the previous three decades, and defined her particular 'province' as 'the passions' and 'the exhibition of their workings' ('EdinR', 51, July 1830, 450). Opie's Quakerism, stressed by her Victorian biographers, obscured the political motive in her fiction, derived from the English dissenting and provincial Enlightenment and contributing to international Romantic liberalism. Well into the nineteenth century critics acknowledged what the 'Edinburgh Review' called her ability 'to interest the feelings of her readers in a powerful degree'. As with Felicia Hemans, this sentimentalism was philosophically grounded, politically mobilized, and essential to her feminized social criticism. By century's end, however, the 'Dictionary of National Biography' could declare that 'Her novels, which were among the first to treat exclusively of domestic life, possess pathos and some gracefulness of style, but belong essentially to the lachrymose type of fiction, and are all written to point a moral.' Such traits were rejected by early twentieth-century literary modernism and remained a problem for the later feminist criticism that retrieved other women writers from oblivion. Late twentieth-century historical and contextual research has initiated new understanding of the complexity and originality of her fiction and poetry. 


@@@@@


doc= 20800


Opie, John (1761-1807), portrait and history painter, was born in May 1761 at Blowing House, Mithian, St Agnes, near Truro, Cornwall. He was the son of Edward Opie (pronounced Oppy in Cornwall and sometimes so spelled), a mine carpenter, and Mary Tonkin (1713-1805), of the Tonkin family of Trevaunance. (The house, renamed Harmony Cot by Opie's first wife, survives.) He was educated at the village school where he proved precocious, not least in mathematics, which he was teaching to other children by the age of twelve. By ten years old, he had already shown skill in drawing and painting, beginning with a copy of a landscape hanging in Mithian, the house of Benjamin Nankivell in the same parish, and a portrait of his own father. His father, however, disapproved both of this pursuit and of his studying, and early on bound him as his own apprentice and subsequently to a sawyer called Wheeler. 
When he was fourteen or fifteen, Opie was 'discovered' by Dr John Wolcot (pseudonym Peter Pindar), an amateur artist and critic who was both a pupil and a friend of Richard Wilson, and who had valuable acquaintances in the artistic world (a portrait of him by Opie is in the National Portrait Gallery, London). Wolcot proved to possess something of genius as a publicist and he and Opie went into partnership in the promotion of Opie's career. To begin with Wolcot took Opie into his own house in Truro, where he evidently coached him to some extent: 'I want to polish him... he is an unlicked cub yet, I want to make him respect himself' (Earland, 14). It became important, however, that he should not become too polished, as Wolcot perceived that Opie's greatest chance of swift success in London was to cultivate the impression of a kind of 'noble savage', 'a wild animal of St. Agnes, caught among the tin-works', as the Revd Richard Polwhele put it (Earland, 15). Opie's incapacity to change assisted this impression, and he remained (allowing for the animosity which he sometimes incurred) 'a man of invincible vulgarity'. Opie's first exhibit at the Society of Artists in 1780 was duly billed as 'Master Oppy, Penryn, A Boy's Head, an instance of Genius, not having seen a picture' (ibid., 25). This was nothing like the truth, and by this date Opie had been working for about four years as an itinerant portrait painter in Cornwall, producing works which have been described as having 'unaffected virtues of a high order' (Waterhouse, 263). 
Wolcot had attempted in a letter of 25 October 1777 to get Ozias Humphry to take his protege on as an assistant, without success. In 1779 the two moved to Coinage Hall Street, Helston, and Opie worked there and in Falmouth, with a brief interlude at Exeter and then at Plymouth in 1780, until they both arrived in London in autumn 1781. Wolcot and Opie took lodgings at Mr Ricardo's in Orange Court, Castle Street, Leicester Fields (behind what is now the site of the National Gallery), living at the top of the house, with an agreement that they should share all expenses between them. Opie was now launched as the 'Cornish wonder', and he can certainly not have had any more training than Wolcot was able to give him. His unpromising personal appearance, carefully preserved and touched up by Wolcot, gave credence to the near-fiction created, and he was described at this time by Thomas Hearne, the engraver and publisher, in unflattering terms as 'a rude, clownish boy with lank, dark hair, and a green feather' (Earland, 28), the latter detail presumably being Wolcot's hint at 'savagery'. Sir Martin Archer Shee, who became a friend and wrote valedictory verse in Opie's praise (published in the preface to Opie's Royal Academy lectures, 1809) described him in 1789 as 'in manners and appearance, as great a clown and as stupid a looking fellow as ever I set my eyes on' (Earland, 73). 
Wolcot's stratagem was successful and Opie was immediately inundated with visitors and sitters. As a fashionable curiosity he was presented to George III and Queen Charlotte at the end of 1781 or beginning of 1782. He took with him four or five pictures to the Queen's House (Buckingham House, now Palace), of which the king bought two: 'A Beggar and his Dog', and a portrait of Mrs Delany (Royal Collection), apparently commissioned earlier by the king. Hanoverian parsimony meant that Opie was not well rewarded, a point made by John Williams (pseudonym Anthony Pasquin): 'the zealous youth... carried [his payment] triumphantly home that he might ruminate upon the bounty of his sovereign: he arrived, and, unfolding the paper with a panting heart, saw nine guineas and a half and sixpence!' (Earland, 37). The tale is substantiated by a letter from William Mason to Lord Harcourt (Whitley, 1.378). A second version of 'Mrs Delany' (NPG) was commissioned by Lady Bute and originally had a frame designed by none other than the exacting Horace Walpole, who approved of the picture: ''Oui vraiment', it is pronounced [i.e. striking] like Rembrandt' (letter of 14 Feb 1782 to the Revd William Mason, Earland, 36). 
Wolcot introduced Opie to Sir Joshua Reynolds, who was very much impressed and rather crushed his former pupil James Northcote, who was then trying once again to establish himself in London: 'You have no chance here', Northcote recorded Reynolds as saying to him, 'There is such a young man come out of Cornwall... Like Caravaggio, but finer' (Leslie and Taylor, 2.341-2). Northcote nevertheless became a lifelong friend of Opie, for whom he retained the highest regard, remarking to Hazlitt, 'He was a true genius' (Earland, 31), and Opie's portrait of Northcote dates from about 1799 (priv. coll.; see Peter, no. 60). 
On 4 December 1782, at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Opie married, unhappily as it turned out, Mary, daughter of Benjamin Bunn, a solicitor and moneylender of St Botolph's, Aldgate. Her father was described as 'a Jew broker to whom Opie used to sell his pictures' (Earland, 46). Alfred Bunn, the tyrannical theatre manager, was apparently a relation of his wife's with whom Opie stayed in touch. 
The marriage led to Opie's parting from Wolcot. Opie was earning more than Wolcot, but now had a wife to support. Wolcot, on his side, was later wont to point out that he had given up his medical practice and $300 or $400 a year in order to promote Opie. While they were in partnership Wolcot earned some money with his Peter Pindar satires, which also provided a useful vehicle for favourable publicity on Opie's behalf as, for example, with one of two portraits of the organist and composer William Jackson, exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1783. This was the year after Wolcot had written: '
Speak, Muse, who form'd that matchless head, 

The Cornish boy, in tin-mines bred; 

Whose native genius, like his diamonds, shone 

In secret, till chance gave him to the sun? 

'Tis Jackson's portrait -- put the laurel on it, 

Whilst to that tuneful swan I pour a sonnet. 
('Lyric Odes to the Royal Academicians for 1782', Ode III)' The break with Wolcot was not final at this stage: Opie and his wife together with Wolcot visited Wales in 1783 or 1784, and Wolcot and he toured the south-west in 1783-4, for example, but in 1783 Opie was set up independently by a patron, Richard Wyatt (1730-1813) of Egham, Surrey, in a house in Great Queen Street. His first early success as a curiosity to the fashionable 'beau monde' was thus succeeded by solid patronage, and for Wyatt he painted a number of portraits of the Hoare and Burrell families (Wyatt was the nephew of Sir Merrik Burrell, bt, whose portrait by Opie remains with the family (Peter, no. 16). Opie's particular gift for child portraiture was demonstrated at this time ('c'.1784), with paintings of the children of the fifth duke of Argyll and his famously beautiful duchess, the former Elizabeth Gunning (priv. coll.). One of Opie's finest fancy pictures, 'A Peasant's Family' (Tate collection) is also of children and was painted 'c'.1783-5, while Opie further demonstrated his range in a groundbreaking genre group showing a schoolmistress and her varied pupils (priv. coll.). It was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1784 under the title 'A School' and drew Walpole's approving note, 'Great nature, the best of his works yet' (Earland, 54). At the same time in his more original portraits, for example, 'Thomas Daniell and Captain Morcom, with Polperro Mine, St. Agnes, in the Background' (1786; Truro, County Museum and Art Gallery; another version ex Sothebys, London, 13 July 1994, no. 66), Opie developed this same rare seam of realistic genre, of a kind which seems to reach back to John Riley's portraits in the preceding century. 
Opie was also attracted, however, by that chimera of the British school, history painting on a large scale. By the winter of 1786 he was signed up to create a substantial number of canvases for Alderman John Boydell's Shakspeare Gallery, a commission mentioned in a letter to the Revd John Owen (Earland, 62-4). This commission followed close upon Opie's dramatic success with his first large history picture, 'The Assassination of James I of Scotland', when it was exhibited at the Royal Academy that year. It was bought by Boydell, as was its successor at the next year's academy exhibition, 'The Murder of Rizzio', which itself features prominently on the left wall of the engraving by Pietro Martini after J. H. Ramberg of 'The Exhibition of the Royal Academy, 1787'. Boydell gave both paintings to the Guildhall in the City of London but 'The Assassination of James I' was destroyed in the Second World War. Photographs of them, and of a smaller-scale oil replica (on panel) of 'Rizzio' (ex Sothebys, London, 25 November 1998, lot 88), referred to by John Jope Rogers as 'the beautiful reduction... which Opie himself made' (Rogers, 56), reveal the influence of Caravaggio, not only in the lighting but also in the gestures, although contemporary reference was more often made to the influence of Lo Spagnoletto (Jusepe Ribera). 
One can only speculate about how these influences came to bear upon Opie, since the tracks of his artistic education were so carefully covered by Wolcot, but prints after Caravaggio were certainly in circulation in eighteenth-century Britain. At the time, however, Opie was even more widely talked of as an 'English Rembrandt' and Caravaggio's influence would have been mediated through the many works of Rembrandt which Opie could have come across in English collections. He also gained firsthand knowledge of Rembrandt in summer 1786 with a trip to the Low Countries in the company of his father-in-law and 'Mr Gardner, a painter' 
(possibly Daniel Gardner, 'c'.1750-1805)
. They took in Bruges, Ghent, Brussels, Antwerp, Rotterdam, Amsterdam, and The Hague, and Opie particularly remarked in a letter to Owen upon Rembrandt: 'We saw some fine Rembrandts -- he was wonderfully simple in his heads, & his compositions singularly grand, with prodigious force and roundness, & his colouring sometimes exquisitely true' (Earland, 63). 
The success of Opie's history pictures assisted his election as associate of the Royal Academy in 1786 and as Royal Academician in 1787, at an early age, although he had failed to become an associate at his first attempt, even earlier in his career, in 1782. From 1791 he lived at 8 Berners Street. His career is one of more or less unbroken success from then onwards but was interrupted by his wife's leaving him in 1795. Opie had apparently been too absorbed in his work, which also included, however, teaching the attractive young Jane Beetham. His wife went out of the house on 20 May 1795, saying she was going to dine with her father, and never came back, having run away to Clifton, Bristol, with a Major Edwards. The marriage was dissolved by act of parliament in 1796, leaving both free to marry again. Mary married Edwards; Opie did not marry Miss Beetham, despite rumours in the press. In 1796, also, he wished to marry another of his pupils, Elizabeth Mary, the daughter of Benjamin Booth (whose portrait by Opie of about 1790 is in a private collection) but in 1797 Booth refused to allow the match. Opie's name was also linked with that of Mary Wollstonecraft in 1796 according to Joseph Farington, but she married Opie's friend William Godwin in March 1797. (Opie's portrait of her, 'c'.1797, is in the National Portrait Gallery.) Instead, on 8 May 1798, at Marylebone Church, Opie married Amelia (1769-1853) ['see 'Opie, Amelia], the daughter of a Norwich doctor, James Alderson. One of Opie's several portraits of her dates from this year (NPG). 
His second marriage was successful, although Opie became more highly strung (or just difficult) as he got older, and, with his encouragement, Amelia became a successful novelist, her first book, 'Father and Daughter', appearing in 1801. She for her part championed Opie, almost to a fault, but Wolcot she refused to tolerate. The break in 1798 between Opie and Wolcot was never explicit, but clear enough for Wolcot to grumble about ingratitude. Following his second marriage the number and size of Opie's fancy pictures at first increased, perhaps reflecting the influence of his wife. In 1802 the two of them went to Paris, a hard-won holiday on Amelia's part, since Opie was inclined to be careful about money. For him it was primarily a chance to study the huge number of paintings looted by Napoleon from all over Europe, and then displayed in the Louvre. Opie was thus able to see Raphael's 'Transfiguration' without travelling to Rome, and Raphael forms a touchstone in Opie's lectures to the Royal Academy, where he became professor of painting in 1805. While in Paris the couple dined with Charles James Fox, in the company of Benjamin West (Opie painted Fox in 1804, a picture exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1805; priv. coll.); visited the studio of J. L. David; caught a glimpse of Napoleon; and met Maria Cosway, and went with her and West to look at the fabled collection of the then Archbishop (later Cardinal) Fesch. 
Like many another English artist, Opie was frustrated by having to paint portraits for a living rather than grander history paintings, and his income was also augmented by a few pupils: Henry Thomson RA; Theophilus Clarke ARA; Thomas William Stewardson; Jane Beetham; William Chamberlain; John Cawse; and the amateurs Elizabeth Mary Booth and the Revd John Owen (both referred to above) and Katherine St Aubyn. However, despite his yearning for fancy pictures and histories, and his skill at them, Opie exhibited his last historical painting at the academy in 1804, a scene from 'Gil Blas', and thereafter painted only portraits. The focus and freshness of his vision in portraiture gave way in his last years to imitative eclecticism, picking up a hint of Gainsborough here or a touch of Hoppner there. 
Opie's further ambition to become professor of painting at the Royal Academy began unpromisingly with a course of lectures at the British Institution in 1804-5 which he failed to finish. Nevertheless, when, on his becoming keeper, Henry Fuseli resigned the professorship at the academy in 1805, Opie was elected to the post, and the four lectures he managed to deliver in February and March 1807 were both better written and better presented than his earlier series. They were published as 'Lectures on Painting' (1809). The last lecture was given on 9 March and, after a visit to Henry Tresham a few days later, Opie caught cold and subsequently a fever. He died in London on Thursday 9 April 1807. Opie's death, which followed the intense preparation of these lectures, and his customary incessant painting, has been partly at least attributed to overwork. 
Opie enjoyed a remarkable reputation in his lifetime, although his own (and his second wife's) high estimation of his achievement has not lasted. He had genuine, if often sarcastic, wit and real talent and produced a handful of striking and original images. He struck a distinctive note among his contemporaries which can still be recognized. Technical shortcomings in drawing and in creating coherent figures, of a kind not unknown among his peers, made him inconsistent as a portraitist, but his fancy pictures and portraits of children can be better than those of almost any British artist of his time. He was not congenial and was liked and disliked in almost equal measure, not always for the right reasons in either case. It was noticeable at the time, for instance, that he was reluctant to stay long with his second wife's relations on visits to Norwich, and it may be that they did not heartily approve of him. A story told of Amelia's cousin Robert Alderson after the funeral on 20 April (a lavish affair at St Paul's Cathedral, where Opie was interred in the same vault as Reynolds) suggests this family mistrust, and also Opie's idiosyncratic character. The undertaker apologized to Alderson for putting the coffin the wrong way round (with Opie's feet towards the west rather than the east). 'Shall we change it?' he asked. 'Oh, Lord, no!' replied Alderson. 'Leave him alone! If I meet him in the next world walking about on his head, I shall know him' (Earland, 234). 


@@@@@


doc= 20801


O'Quinn, Jeremiah (d. 1657), Presbyterian minister, was born at Templepatrick, co. Antrim, of parents whose names are unknown but who were Roman Catholic in faith. A native Irish speaker, he converted to protestantism about 1635 and was sent to university by Arthur Upton, the proprietor of Templepatrick, with a view to becoming a preacher to the Irish-speaking population. O'Quinn subsequently attended Glasgow University, where he studied arts and theology, and graduated MA in 1644. Shortly afterwards he was licensed by the army presbytery, the first presbytery in Ireland. With the Church of Ireland then in disarray and suffering a shortage of clergy, Presbyterian ministers could be inducted to parishes, and O'Quinn was ordained at Billy (near Bushmills), co. Antrim, in 1646. He was the first native Irishman to be ordained to the Presbyterian ministry in Ireland, as before the 1640s Presbyterian ministers were brought over from Scotland. 
Although O'Quinn had the support of most of the Billy parish, there were a handful of dissidents who opposed his installation, in particular Daniel McNeill, the Church of Ireland vicar who had been ejected to make way for O'Quinn, and Archibald Stewart of Ballintoy. After a thorough examination of their evidence against O'Quinn their accusations of unsoundness of doctrine were rejected by the presbytery. O'Quinn had strength of character, was forthright in public, and had an appetite for debate which resulted in controversy with his own presbytery. In February 1649 he, along with the Revd James Ker of Ballymoney, opposed the presbytery's 'representation'. This strongly condemned the execution of Charles I, putting the fledgeling Presbyterian church on the wrong side of the new military government. O'Quinn's refusal to read the 'representation' in church and his subscription to the engagement of loyalty to the Commonwealth resulted in an order to suspend him from his office as minister. His refusal to recognize his suspension created strained relations with the presbytery. He continued to minister in Billy with the support of his congregation and also of the Cromwellian government, which before long had either imprisoned or forced most other Presbyterian clergy into hiding. However, O'Quinn eventually tired of his exclusion from the presbytery and, acting as mediator, succeeded through his moderating influence in effecting a reconciliation between the Presbyterians and the Cromwellian government in Ireland. Nevertheless, the personal cost to him was great, and he was looked on with suspicion by both sides. His own brethren refused to shake hands with him at the treaty interview in Antrim church, and in a letter dated 13 November 1651 to Colonel Robert Venables, the Cromwellian government commissioners said they had heard that O'Quinn 'is somewhat embittered against the interest of England and hath of late publicly expressed the same in prayers and other public exercises' ('DNB'). They asked Venables to confirm this and suggested that, if true, O'Quinn might be sent away for a while to Dublin or other places where he could preach to those with no knowledge of the English language. By 1652, however, circumstances had changed and he was in harmony with both sides. 
By 1654 O'Quinn was a Commonwealth minister receiving an annual income of $100. On grounds of his fluency in Irish he was frequently sent on preaching missions throughout Ireland, for each of which he usually received the sum of $20 for expenses, and some of the written invitations to him to preach survive. In 1654 he was sent to preach in the Irish-speaking west of Ireland, for which he received expenses of $40 from the government. In June of the following year Colonel Thomas Herbert, clerk of the council, wrote a letter to O'Quinn and James Wallis of Manor-Cunningham, co. Donegal, requesting them to travel to Dublin and Connaught, where they were to preach the gospel in Irish. On O'Quinn's return he continued with his ministry at Billy, where he died on 31 January 1657 and was buried. The executor of his will, Teig O'Mooney, received a grant of $25 from the government to pay for his funeral expenses. Part of this was spent on a fine Latin memorial. The present stone in the graveyard at Billy is a copy of the original and is still clearly legible. 
Some fifty-three years after the death of O'Quinn his work among the Irish-speaking population was praised at meetings of the Presbyterian synod of Ulster. He and Gabriel Cornwall gained special mention because of their remarkable success in communicating with Irish speakers. Their good example, and the large number of Irish-speaking ministers, encouraged the synod in 1710 to undertake a programme of preaching to be supplemented by the use of bibles, confessions of faith, and catechisms, all then available in Irish. 


@@@@@


doc= 20802


Edward Oram (d. in or after 1799), son of the above, also practised as a landscape painter. He exhibited landscapes at the Royal Academy from 1775 to 1790, and again in 1798 and 1799. He was also engaged in scene-painting as assistant to Philip James de Loutherbourgh, and painted scenery for the Royalty Theatre in Wellclose Square. He was one of the artists patronized, like John Flaxman and William Blake, by the Revd Henry and Mrs Mathew, and he assisted Flaxman in decorating their house in Rathbone Place, London. In 1799 Oram was residing in Gresse Street, Rathbone Place. All later trace of him is lost. 


@@@@@


doc= 20803


Oram, William (d. 1777), painter and architect, was educated as an architect, and, through the patronage of Sir Edward Walpole, obtained the position in 1748 of master carpenter in the office of works, a post he held until his death. He designed a triumphal arch in Westminster Hall for the coronation of George III, of which he published an engraving by Anthony Walker. His posthumously published 'Precepts and Observations on the Art of Colouring in Landscape-Painting' (1810) records only one building designed by Oram, a house in Lancashire. Walpole noted that he 'was bred an architect, but taking to landscape painting arrived at great merit in that branch' (cited in Colvin, 'Archs'., 716). He painted in the style of Gaspar Poussin and also of John Wootton, under whom he may have studied. His works were often applied to decorative purposes and inserted over doors and mantelpieces. He designed and painted the staircase at Buckingham House, and was employed to repair the paintings on the staircase at Hampton Court. He published an etching of Datchet Bridge in 1745. In the same year he proposed a similar set of eight views in Yorkshire and Derbyshire, one of which, 'Knaresborough', engraved by Edward Rooker, was published by Oram in 1745 (Clayton, 159, plate 174). Clayton records that in advertising his views Oram had taken great pains: 'in the Choice of Prospects as well as in the Points of View, in order to render them the most Picturesque that have hitherto appeared: the whole not considered with Respect only to any one Object, as a Town, Bridge or River; but to such only as would make beautiful Pictures. ('General Advertiser', 19 March 1745, 12 Aug 1745)' 'Thus', Clayton observes, 'fifteen years before Gilpin first examined 'the face of the country by the rules of picturesque beauty', Oram was explaining the rules of picturesque composition to subscribers' (Clayton, 158). 
In 1765 Oram was elected a member of the Florentine Academy. In 1766 he exhibited three landscapes at the Society of Artists exhibition. Oram, who was generally known as Old Oram, to distinguish him from his son, had died by 17 March 1777, leaving a widow and a son, Edward Oram ['see below']. In his will, dated 4 January 1776, and proved on 17 March 1777, Oram describes himself as of St John's, Hampstead, and leaves everything to his wife, Elizabeth. His widow gave Oram's manuscripts to his near relative, Charles Clarke FSA, subsequently published as 'Precepts and Observations on the Art of Colouring in Landscape-Painting'. 




@@@@@


doc= 20805


Ord, Craven (bap. 1755, d. 1832), antiquary and brass-rubber, was born in London and baptized at the Temple Church on 6 August 1755, the younger son of Harry Ord, of the king's remembrancer's office of the exchequer, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Francis Hutchinson of Barnard Castle, co. Durham. His uncle Robert Ord (1700-1778) was chief baron of the Scottish exchequer. 
Ord's schooling seems to be undocumented and he did not matriculate from either of the English universities. He was, however, a competent classicist, and he developed a strong interest in the middle ages. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 26 January 1775, when his tastes were probably already formed, and there he found congenial companions. In June 1784 he married Mary Smith, daughter of John Redman of Greenstead Hall, in Greenstead by Ongar, Essex. They had five sons and a daughter, most of whom were born at Greenstead Hall, where Ord lived until the last few years of his life. 
Ord's marriage probably accounted for a substantial part of his fortune but it evidently did not make him idle. He was a purposeful and energetic student of history whose works are mainly to be found in other men's books. He made several contributions to 'Archaeologia', the first of which (1790) was an edition of the inventory of the crown jewels made in 1329-30. His interests were not narrowly focused. He ranged over southern England in search of antiquities, in and out of churches, and he read in manuscripts and printed books even more widely. He gave substantial assistance to John Nichols (1745-1826), the geologist Gideon Algernon Mantell (1790-1852), and George Ormerod (1785-1873) in their respective histories of Leicestershire, Surrey, and Cheshire. 
Mantell and Ormerod were younger men but Nichols, the master printer and antiquary, was of Ord's own generation. Ord was also a friend of Richard Gough, and worked with him closely and harmoniously. Gough's 'Anecdotes of British Topography' appeared in 1768 and in an enlarged edition, of two volumes, in 1780. It led on to his celebrated edition of Camden's 'Britannia' (3 vols., 1789; 4 vols., 1806) but its wide array of material also suggested a more detailed study, which was warmly encouraged by Sir John Cullum, of Hardwick, Suffolk, another learned enthusiast, and Ord. Gough had always made sketches of subjects that interested him, and he came to recognize the exceptional value of tombs and memorials as records of costume and other features of medieval life. The outcome was his 'Sepulchral monuments of Great Britain applied to illustrate the history of families, manners, habits, and arts from the Norman conquest' (1786-99), a carefully documented survey extending to the end of the fifteenth century. Ord in the meantime had been taken by the lure of medieval brasses. The three friends made a particularly successful tour of the great parish churches of the Lincolnshire and Norfolk marshland in 1780, which began in Wisbech and ended in King's Lynn, proving rich in architectural wonders, and yielding a splendid crop of brasses in Lynn. 
Ord's concern, besides assisting Gough, was to further the detailed and comparative study of brasses, which lent themselves to accurate reproduction at a time when other artefacts could only be, with whatsoever pains, drawn and engraved. Instead of taking a simple rubbing from the surface of the brass he took a reverse impression with equipment of his own devising. Its only disadvantage, trifling to the enthusiast, was that inscriptions appeared in mirror-writing. His operations required large sheets of French paper kept damp in a specially commissioned case, a supply of printer's ink, some lengths of cloth, and an abundance of rags. The paraphernalia were clearly such as a gentleman might use for his own dedicated purposes, but probably not such as he might himself carry. He inked the surface of the brass, then wiped it clean with the rags, leaving ink only in the incisions, as though it were an engraver's plate. He then arranged the paper over the brass, covered it with an adequate thickness of cloth, and trampled on it to take an even impression. For intricate images he wetted the paper more thoroughly, on one occasion at least in the neighbouring Thames. At home he cut out the figures and any accompanying features, mounted them, and finally bound them in enormous volumes in deal boards more than 6 feet high. They were acquired after his death by the British Museum and have since been transferred to the British Library (BL, Add. MSS 32478-32479). 
Ord collected manuscripts, printed books, drawings, and engravings. He assembled and indexed some twenty volumes of material relating to Suffolk but he also acquired fine manuscripts for their own sake, and large numbers of medieval deeds. He took a close interest in the business of the Society of Antiquaries, and served for several years as its vice-president. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1787. He began to sell his collections in 1829, when he travelled abroad for his health, and Francis Douce and Sir Thomas Phillipps bought extensively at his sales. 
Ord died at Woolwich Common in January 1832. Of his children, his eldest son, Craven Ord (1786-1836), a prebendary of Lincoln, succeeded him at Greenstead and married a niece of Sir John Cullum. Three other sons, Sir Robert Hutchinson Ord, William Redman Ord, and Harry Gough Ord, served in the army, the artillery, and the engineers. Harry Gough's son Sir Harry St George Ord (1819-1885) became a major-general of the engineers and a colonial governor. Ord's fourth son, John, practised as a physician in Hertford, and his daughter, Harriot Mary, married the Revd George Hughes of Stamford Rivers, Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 20806


Ord, Sir Harry St George (1819-1885), army officer and colonial governor, the son of Captain Harry Gough Ord, Royal Artillery, and his wife, Louisa Latham of Bexley, Kent, was born at North Cray, Kent, on 17 June 1819. He was educated privately at Woolwich, and entered the Royal Military Academy there in 1835. He received a commission as second lieutenant in the corps of Royal Engineers on 14 December 1837, and was trained at Chatham. Having been promoted lieutenant on 27 May 1839, he was quartered at Woolwich and afterwards in Ireland. In January 1840 he was sent to the West Indies, where he remained for the next six years. He returned home in December 1845. On 28 May 1846 he married Julia Graham, the daughter of Admiral James Carpenter RN, and on 29 October he was promoted second captain. 
In December 1849 Ord was sent on special duty to the west coast of Africa and Ascension Island. Following his return in September 1850 he received the thanks of the Board of Admiralty for his report and recommendations on naval works at Ascension Island. On 1 January 1852 he was appointed adjutant of the Royal Engineers at Chatham. He was promoted first captain on 17 February 1854, but continued as adjutant until July, when he was appointed brigade major of the Royal Engineers under Brigadier-General Harry David Jones in the combined French and English expedition to the Baltic. Ord was present at the siege and capture of Bomarsund, and was mentioned in dispatches. He received the war medal and was promoted brevet major on 8 September 1854. On his return to England he was quartered at Sheerness. 
In November 1855 Ord entered the Colonial Office, and until May 1856 served as a commissioner on a special mission to the Gold Coast. From June to October 1856, and again from February to May 1857, he assisted the British minister at The Hague and the British ambassador in Paris in negotiations respecting the Netherlands' and French possessions on the west coast of Africa. 
On 2 September 1857 Ord was appointed lieutenant-governor of the island of Dominica in the West Indies. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 28 November 1859. In April 1860 he accepted the governorship of Bermuda, and assumed the position in March 1861. In January 1864 he returned home on leave of absence, and on 28 November was promoted brevet colonel. He was then sent to the west coast of Africa as commissioner on special service under the Colonial Office in connection with the Asante disturbances. On 9 October 1865 he was made a CB, and the same month he resumed the government of Bermuda, which he finally left in November 1866. 
On 5 February 1867 Ord was appointed the first colonial governor of the Straits Settlements, these possessions having previously been administered by the government of India. He was knighted, assumed the government on 1 April 1867, and was promoted major-general on 16 April 1869. His tenure of the government was, by request of the Colonial Office, extended beyond the usual time, and he remained at Singapore until November 1873, continuing to promote colonial trade and financial reforms. His administration was the subject of a court of inquiry after his departure. 
Ord's health had suffered from the tropical climate, and for the next four years he remained unemployed. He was made a KCMG in 1877, and was offered the governorship of South Australia, which he declined. However, in November 1877 he became governor of Western Australia. Here he opposed demands for responsible government, and sought, with only limited success, to resolve some of the colony's economic difficulties. Having completed the term of office, he retired on full pension in 1880 and returned to England, where he resided at Fornham House, Fornham St Martin, near Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk. The following year he was made a GCMG. He was an honorary fellow of the Zoological Society of London, and presented it with many animals from his various postings. 
Ord died suddenly of heart disease at Homburg, Germany, on 20 August 1885. He was buried in the churchyard of Fornham St Martin. A village institute was erected at Fornham St Martin in his memory by his friend the sultan of Johore. 
Ord was survived by his three sons: Harry St George, who settled in Australia; William St George, a retired captain of the Royal Engineers, of Fornham; and St John St George, a retired major of the Royal Artillery. 


@@@@@


doc= 20807


John Ord (bap. 1729, d. 1814), also a politician, was baptized on 11 October 1729. He went to school at Hackney and entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1746, graduating BA in 1751, holding a fellowship from 1752, proceeding MA in 1755, and meanwhile enrolling at Lincoln's Inn in 1747. In 1761 his father arranged for him to stand for parliament at Morpeth as the second candidate in Carlisle's interest, but he was rejected, the electorate preferring a second candidate unconnected with the Carlisle interests. He married, on 30 October 1762, Eleanor (1741-1818), daughter of John Simpson of Bradley, co. Durham; there were no children of the marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 20808


Ord, John Walker (1811-1853), poet and journalist, was born at Guisborough, Yorkshire, on 5 March 1811, the son of Richard Ord, principal partner in the firm of Richard Ord & Son, tanners and leather merchants of that place, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Ovington. He entered the University of Edinburgh, and, being intended for the medical profession, was apprenticed to Robert Knox, the lecturer on anatomy who employed the body snatchers Burke and Hare. While at Edinburgh he was friendly with John Wilson, the essayist, and James Hogg, the 'Ettrick Shepherd'. Eventually he abandoned the study of medicine, and, moving to London in 1834, he started, two years later, the 'Metropolitan Conservative Journal', a paper which was afterwards merged with 'The Britannia'. His literary labours brought him into contact with Thomas Campbell, Sheridan Knowles, Douglas Jerrold, the countess of Blessington, and other eminent literary figures of the day. 
Ord's first publication was 'England: a Historical Poem' (2 vols., 1834-5). This was followed by 'Remarks on the sympathetic condition existing between the body and the mind, especially during disease' (1836), forming a supplement to the 'Metropolitan Literary Journal'; 'The Bard, and Minor Poems' (1841); 'Rural Sketches and Poems, Chiefly Relating to Cleveland' (1845); and 'The History and Antiquities of Cleveland' (1846). The varied nature of his interests is also reflected in the positions he held, including member of the council of the British Archaeological Association, fellow of the Genealogical Society of London, and president of the Charing Cross Medical and Scientific Society. In his later years Ord also edited the 'Northern Times' and a poem by Thomas Pierson, 'Roseberry Topping', published in 1847. He retired to his native county and began work on 'The Bible Oracles', which was left unfinished when he died at Guisborough on 29 August 1853. He was buried in the churchyard at Guisborough. 


@@@@@


doc= 20809


Ord, Robert (1700-1778), politician, baptized on 27 March 1701 at Newcastle upon Tyne, was one of the three sons and a daughter to survive from the thirteen children born to John Ord (died 1721), solicitor, and his second wife, Anne Hutchinson. John Ord was under-sheriff for Newcastle from 1685 to 1703; his second wife brought a considerable fortune, with which he purchased Fenham, Newminster Abbey, and Hunstanworth. He also founded St John's School, Newcastle, for forty boys. 
Robert Ord was educated at Lincoln's Inn in 1718, and called to the bar in 1724, having been elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1723. He inherited Hunstanworth at his father's death. He married in October 1727 Mary, daughter of Sir John Darnell, with whom he raised a son, John Ord ['see below'], and five daughters. 
In the election of 1734 Ord secured the Cornish seat of Mitchell, which he held until 1745, after which he sat for Morpeth, Northumberland, representing the interests of Henry Howard, fourth earl of Carlisle. He held, successively, the offices of secretary to the chancellor of the exchequer and deputy cofferer of the household. In 1755, supported by Carlisle and Hardwicke, he vacated his seat in the house to become chief baron of the Scottish exchequer. He thereupon moved north, where Boswell remarked on him: 'This respectable English judge will be long remembered in Scotland, where he built an elegant house, and lived in it magnificently. His own ample fortune, with the addition of his salary, enabled him to be splendidly hospitable' ('Boswell's Life of Johnson', 5.28). Ord retired in 1775 and died in Edinburgh on 12 February 1778. 
His son 
Ord next stood for parliament in 1774 when he was returned unopposed for Midhurst in Sussex. He supported the administration until the fall of Lord North. He transferred to the Hastings seat from 1780 to 1784, and served as chairman of the ways and means committee until the dismissal of the coalition. In 1783 he had voted for the second earl of Shelburne's peace preliminaries, and for Charles James Fox's 'East India Bill'; by 1874 he was being classed as 'opposition'. In the general election of 1784 he stood for Wendover, voting with the opposition, and he retired from parliament in 1790. 
For many years Ord lived at Purser's Cross, near Fulham, where, according to the gardener John Loudon, his garden in 1756 'contains a greater number of fine specimens in a very limited space than any garden we know of in the neighbourhood of London' (Loudon, 1.72-3). This interest in horticulture led to his election as a member of the Horticultural Society, and in 1780 as a fellow of the Royal Society. He died at Purser's Cross on 6 June 1814 and was buried in Fulham churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 20810


Orde, Sir John, first baronet (1751-1824), naval officer and politician, was born on 22 December 1751 at Nunnykirk, Morpeth, the youngest of three sons of John Orde ('c'.1704- 'c'.1786) of East Orde and Morpeth. Thomas Orde-Powlett, first Lord Bolton, was young John's brother, both being the sons of Anne (died 1788), their father's second wife, daughter of Ralph Marr of Morpeth and widow of the Revd Pye. 
Orde is thought to have attended grammar school at Morpeth before entering the navy in 1766 on the 'Jersey', bearing the broad pennant of Commodore Richard Spry, officer commanding the Mediterranean station. After further service on the Newfoundland and Jamaica stations he was promoted lieutenant of the sloop 'Ferret' in 1773 by Sir George Rodney before returning home in the 'Rainbow' the following year. After travel in France, in 1775 he sailed for America at the outbreak of the American War of Independence in the 'Roebuck' with Captain Andrew Snape Hamond. 
In early 1776 Orde was captured and held for a short period during the evacuation of the governor of Virginia, the earl of Dunmore, to Gwynn Island. At the time of his capture Orde had been leading an advance party under a flag of truce onto Gwynn Island to deliver a proclamation and negotiate a ceasefire and surrender. He became first lieutenant in August 1776 after that officer, M. S. Leake, was killed in the combined offensive launched on New York when a squadron, including the 'Roebuck', ran the gauntlet of a barrage of fire from onshore batteries. Early in 1777 Lord Howe appointed Orde first lieutenant of his flagship, the 'Eagle', and soon afterwards he promoted him commander of the sloop 'Zebra', in which command he assisted in the reduction of both Philadelphia and the forts of Delaware, for which, in May 1778, he was made post captain with command of the frigate 'Virginia'. In the summer of 1779 the 'Virginia' led Sir George Collier's squadron up the Penobscot River in pursuit of Commodore Saltonstall's expeditionary force which was advancing on Fort MacLean. When caught, the Americans ran for the shore and there set fire to all but one of their ships. 
In 1780 Orde took part in the reduction of Charlestown. In a combined naval and military offensive Admiral Marriot Arbuthnot's squadron, including the 'Virginia', succeeded in clearing the estuary by forcing a passage through the gut guarded by the well-defended Fort Moultrie, the chief defence of the town. Arbuthnot afterwards singled out six officers for commendation, including Orde, who had taken Mount Pleasant with a contingent of 500 seamen, after which Fort Moultrie had quickly capitulated. At the close of the campaign he was given command of the 'Chatham', in which he captured the 'General Washington', and then, on 14 April 1781, the 'Confederacy'. In July he sailed for London as Arbuthnot's flag-captain. In April of that year he had married Margaret Emma (1759-1790), daughter of Richard Stevens of St Helena, Charlestown; the couple had one child who died in infancy. 
On his return to England, Orde remained first in the North Sea and then off the coast of France, until, in February 1783, he was appointed governor of Dominica, restored to Great Britain under the peace of Versailles. There his primary objectives were to develop the harbour in Prince Rupert's Bay, restore law and order among the quarrelsome white, black, and Carib population, and retain the island for the British. In all this he was largely successful, so much so that he was rewarded with a baronetcy in 1790, though proceedings were later taken against him by the colonial assembly over his plans for funding improvements to the harbour and fortifications. The privy council dismissed the allegation as 'frivolous'. With the onset of the war with France in 1793 Orde returned to naval duties. He served in the 'Victorious', the 'Venerable', and the 'Prince George', and then, on 1 June 1795, moved out of the 'Prince George' on being raised to the rank of rear-admiral of the white in a general promotion. William Dillon described him at this time as 'tall, well-limbed [and]... of a haughty disposition' (Dillon, 1.188, 191), while James Ralfe assessed him as 'firm, cool, kind, dignified, with a noble prepossessing appearance finished by high good breeding' (Ralfe, 2.78-80). 
Orde was appointed to temporary command at Plymouth in March 1797, but then, in recognition of his success in suppressing mutinous elements there, he was moved to Portsmouth to preside over the courts martial of the more serious mutineers at the Nore. That autumn he hoisted his flag in the 'Princess Royal' and joined the Mediterranean Fleet standing off the Tagus as third in command to Lord St Vincent. After a winter of successful blockade duty at Cadiz, Orde was bitterly disappointed to learn that the more junior Horatio Nelson had been given command of an independent squadron to hunt down and destroy Napoleon's expeditionary force. This was followed on 24 May 1798 by the arrival of reinforcements under Sir Roger Curtis. Orde was thus relegated to fourth in command. A childish squabble then arose between himself and St Vincent concerning a complaint written to St Vincent which he wrongly attributed to Orde and which permanently soured their relationship. St Vincent ordered Orde to strike his flag and return to England in the 'Blenheim'. On his return Orde's request that St Vincent be court-martialled was refused; however, the Admiralty gave St Vincent a written reprimand. Orde turned down an offer of employment with the Channel Fleet. Rather, he chose to wait for the arrival of St Vincent in October 1799 and demand satisfaction. However, word of Orde's intention reached Lord Spencer and both Orde and St Vincent were bound over to keep the peace and then forbidden by the king to accept any challenge. 
Orde was promoted vice-admiral on 14 February 1799, but remained unemployed until St Vincent's removal as first lord. In the autumn of 1804 he was given command of a squadron formed to strengthen the British presence off Cadiz now that Spain had entered the war. However, although he mounted a most efficient blockade which kept the Spanish fleet in harbour throughout that winter, many complaints emanated from Nelson in the Mediterranean about Orde's policing of the strait and Nelson's lost opportunity to obtain prize money. Weary of his task, Orde made a written request that he should be allowed to retire home. However, soon afterwards Villeneuve escaped through the Strait of Gibraltar and sailed for Cadiz, where Orde's squadron lay at anchor. Outnumbered, and complying with standing orders, Orde skilfully withdrew to join the Channel Fleet off Ushant. His dispatches to London were the first to divine Napoleon's plan that Villeneuve should draw off the Channel Fleet by sailing west and then return to escort his army of invasion across the channel. 
On 9 November 1805 Orde was promoted admiral of the blue, in October 1809 of the white, and in June 1814 of the red. A professed admirer of Nelson, his admiration was probably not reciprocated although he acted as a pallbearer at Nelson's funeral. After the death of his first wife in 1790 Orde married Jane ('c'.1773-1829), daughter of John Frere; the couple had five children, including a son, John Powlett Orde, who was to inherit the baronetcy on his father's death. In 1807 Orde became MP for the Yarmouth division of the Isle of Wight. This followed the death of his brother Lord Bolton and the elevation of Bolton's son, the then sitting MP, to the peerage. Orde represented the seat until 1812. He died at his home, 20 Gloucester Place, Portman Square, London, on 19 February 1824 after a long and painful illness. He was buried at Hanwell parish church, Middlesex, and was survived by his wife, who died on 16 September 1829. 


@@@@@


doc= 20811


Powlett, Thomas Orde-, first Baron Bolton (1746-1807), politician, the elder son of John Orde (died 1784), a landowner, of East Orde and Morpeth, Northumberland, and his second wife, Anne Marr (died 1788) of Morpeth, was born on 30 August 1746 at Morpeth, where he was baptized Thomas Orde on 2 October. He was descended from a prominent Northumbrian family -- his great-uncle William represented Berwick upon Tweed between 1713 and 1715 -- and he had a half-brother, William, from his father's first marriage, to Mary Ward, and a younger brother, John Orde, who became first baronet. He was educated at Eton College from 1755 until he went up in 1765 to King's College, Cambridge, where he was made a fellow in 1768 and graduated BA in 1770 and MA in 1773. A competent artist, he became known for his etched caricatures of local celebrities in Cambridge; these were published by his drawing-master, James Bretherton. Having been admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1769, he was called to the bar in 1775. In the intervening years he travelled in France, Switzerland, and Italy (1772-3) and Flanders, the Netherlands, and Germany (1774). On 7 April 1778 he married Jean Mary Browne Powlett (died 1814), the natural daughter of Charles Powlett, fifth duke of Bolton, and Mary Browne Banks, on whom the greater part of the Bolton estates was entailed. 
The holder of a succession of offices in the duchy of Lancaster from 1772, which he owed to the patronage of Lord Hyde, later earl of Clarendon, who was a personal friend, Orde also owed his entry to parliament to the influence of powerful patrons. He was elected to represent the borough of Aylesbury in 1780 on the nomination of the earl of Chesterfield, to whom he had been recommended by John Robinson. Robinson allocated a substantial sum of secret service money to defray the cost of his election to this 'venal and expensive borough' (Namier, 232). Though a reluctant parliamentary performer, Orde was a loyal and not inactive supporter of Lord North's ministry in its final years. He seconded the address on 27 November 1781 defending the government's American policy, but his major contribution was made in the secret committee established on 2 May 1781 to investigate the causes of the war in the Carnatic. Although this was chaired by Henry Dundas and included Charles Jenkinson among its membership, Orde 'took over the detailed work of the committee' (ibid., 233). It was a task for which he was eminently suited, as Nathaniel Wraxall noted when he observed of the fifth report of the committee, which was attributed to Orde, that it was 'one of the most able, well-digested, and important documents ever laid upon the table of the House of Commons' ('Historical and Posthumous Memoirs', 2.108). Publicly complimented for his efforts by Dundas, Orde was made under-secretary to Lord Shelburne at the Home Office on the creation of the short-lived Rockingham ministry, and on the formation of a new ministry under Shelburne in July 1782 he was promoted to the position of secretary to the Treasury. Orde and Shelburne established a close attachment arising out of their period in office together, so much so that, when William Pitt came to form a new ministry on the dismissal of the Fox-North coalition in December 1783, Orde declined Pitt's request that he should resume his place at the Treasury. A number of other offers and requests for help at this time merely underlines the point that he was identified in the corridors of power as a man of ability. In spite of his expectation that he would soon be without a seat in the House of Commons should a general election be called -- he could not sustain an expensive election contest at Aylesbury out of his own resources without government backing -- he declined every invitation until the newly appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland, the duke of Rutland, approached him through Shelburne with the request that he should become his chief secretary. This assured him of the support he required, and he was returned for the Treasury borough of Harwich in the general election of 1784. 
Orde accompanied Rutland to Ireland in February 1784. On the face of it, they were an unlikely combination. Rutland was better known for his prodigal lifestyle than for his political skill, but his style, convivial disposition, and lack of interest in the daily grind of administration well complemented Orde's strengths. As Irish chief secretary Orde was particularly attentive to the detail of business, and though he demonstrated a perturbing readiness to indulge in self-pity when things got difficult it never eclipsed his strong commitment to duty. Where hard work and application were sufficient, he ensured that the work of government was conducted efficiently. His judgement of men and measures was less secure; he was prone to lose perspective when the matter at issue was complex and contested, and his lack of social grace ensured that he was never very good at the task of man management, which was an essential part of the work of an Irish chief secretary. These limitations became apparent only with time. In the short term Orde worked well with the conservative men of business that Rutland's predecessor, Lord Northington, had introduced into the Irish executive. 
The greatest challenge the new administration faced in 1784 was to deflect the demand for a reform of the representative system that was promoted by a loose coalition of patriot parliamentarians and middle-class radicals. In common with his colleagues on the Irish administration, Orde believed that any liberalization of the representative system must exacerbate the task of maintaining English control in Ireland, so when the rejection by the Irish parliament in the late spring of popular measures for the reform of parliament and for protecting duties prompted a prolonged bout of public disorder, he was easily convinced that its purpose was 'to weaken the government and to sever the bonds of union between the two countries' (Bolton MS 16355, fols. 1-4). Indeed, Orde was so persuaded by evidence gleaned from intercepted correspondence and spy reports that there was a conspiracy afoot involving 'connections and confederacies' (ibid., fols. 10-12) of Roman Catholics, Presbyterians, and the French crown that, when Pitt contemplated responding with a plan of reform that would provide for the increased admission of protestants to the political process, he categorically condemned the suggestion as inappropriate and counter-productive. 'The measure could not succeed here without the most extreme hazard, not the administration merely, but the British government in the kingdom', he pronounced at the outset of an exhaustive 27-page rebuttal (Chatham MS 30/8/329, fols. 145-59). Orde's disposition to indulge in self-pity under pressure was first manifested at this point. Distressed by the death of his father and harassed by his inability to get to the root of the disorder that continued to disturb the streets of Dublin, he confided to Henry Dundas that 'never was a man placed in a situation which he more cordially detested, or where he makes a more complete sacrifice of his feelings, his habits and comforts' (Melville MS 54, fol. 25). However, he vowed 'to endure all rather than to risk my character... or... the success of the King's government' (ibid.), and before the year was out he had the satisfaction of witnessing the return of order to the city streets and the virtual disintegration of the parliamentary reform movement. 
Because, as chief secretary, he was the key link in the chain that bound the British and Irish executives, Orde enjoyed little respite from the pressures of high office. Arising out of his conviction that the Anglo-Irish relationship had been left dangerously undefined as a result of the concession of legislative independence in 1782, William Pitt's determination to bind Britain and Ireland in a commercial union demanded the total engagement of the Irish chief secretary in its elaboration and presentation. It was Orde who provided the prime minister with 'a short state of the case' upon the commercial points around which Pitt devised his initial outline of a settlement. Subsequently he unsuccessfully advised the prime minister against including a provision for an annual financial payment from the Irish to the British exchequer. As Orde forecast, this proved the sticking point with the Irish parliament when on 7 February 1785 he presented the scheme in the form of ten propositions 'in a most correct and masterly manner' ('Rutland MSS', 3.175). Determined that it should not fail at the first hurdle, Orde agreed to the inclusion of an additional proposition to ease Irish anxieties, but the perception in Britain that this put an Irish financial contribution at risk was a serious complication. It little impressed ministers that the modified propositions were warmly endorsed by the Irish parliament. Pitt insisted that a formula was devised that secured a contribution from Ireland. Orde was so deflated by this and by criticism of the amended propositions that he contemplated resignation. There was no question of his resignation being sought or accepted, but the resulting tortuous efforts to devise an acceptable strategy to ensure a secure financial contribution from Ireland, which necessitated his departure for London in March, in an 'unpleasant hurry' (Bolton MS 16352, fol. 9), proved difficult and distressing. 
Obliged to represent the English case in Ireland and the Irish case in England, Orde felt he was engaged, he explained to Pitt, 'in a perpetual scene of warfare both on the one side and on the other' (Bolton MS 16358, fols. 93-6). Matters became even more difficult following Pitt's decision to respond to pressure at home by recasting and expanding the propositions to take account of wider imperial and domestic vested interests. Orde attended to the myriad issues that arose out of this with scrupulous care, but he continued to find this task and that of endeavouring to keep political interests in Ireland on side extremely trying: 'My brain is almost unsettled by the endless conversations and explanations which I am obliged to endure' (ibid., fols. 119-20), he conceded to George Rose on 3 June. Despite this, and occasional bouts of debilitating illness that necessitated recourse to an amanuensis, a broadly acceptable bill for a commercial settlement was finally drafted in the late summer, and Orde was ready to present it to the Irish parliament on 12 August. The task that faced him that day would have tested even the most expert of parliamentarians, and Orde failed to rise to the occasion. According to 'Memory' Woodfall, who was present to record the debate, the chief secretary was 'so far unintelligible that, had I not known the business practically before, I could not have conceived its true tendency' ('Journal and Correspondence of... Auckland', 1.79). Irish dislike of the proposal rather than Orde's poor performance ensured that the measure did not advance beyond first reading stage. None the less, the chief secretary's limitations in the Commons and inattention to man management reinforced the perception that he was not possessed of the qualities necessary in an Irish chief secretary. Arising out of this, Pitt suggested to the duke of Rutland late in 1785 that he might wish to replace Orde, but the lord lieutenant's stout defence of his beleaguered chief secretary ensured his survival, and Pitt signalled his support by nominating him to the British privy council shortly afterwards. 
Encouraged by their experiences in 1785, the Irish administration 'attempted nothing out of the common course' ('Rutland MSS', 3.264) during the 1786 parliamentary session. The commercial arrangement was quietly shelved, and Orde overcame his increasing susceptibility to illness to oversee the ratification of a measure that provided for the introduction of a government-controlled police force for Dublin city. He had become convinced of the necessity for such a body by the disorder that gripped the city in 1784, and his identification and implementation of this pioneering experiment in policing, in the teeth of strong opposition, emphasized his skills and capabilities as an administrator. He demonstrated this further by developing a suggestion made to him by the earl of Shelburne that he should reform Irish education. Persuaded by his own observations, as well as by reports of the serious failings of existing institutions, that an enhanced educational system would serve both to dispel 'the mists of ignorance' (Giffard, 29) and to attach Catholics to the state, he presented the Irish parliament on 12 April 1787 with a plan for a five-tier educational system encompassing parish, provincial, diocesan, and collegiate schools and two universities. Orde conceded that it was not possible 'to accomplish the whole system at once' (Bolton MS 16360, fol. 1). Considerable efforts were made to overcome the opposition of vested interests during the summer of 1787 and to secure funding, but Orde's own capacity to engage with the subject was restricted by illness. His departure from Ireland was assured even before the death of the duke of Rutland in October brought down the curtain on the Rutland administration and on Orde's eventful and significant chief secretaryship. 
Orde left Ireland with a pension of $1200. Ill health and his own political limitations ensured he never again held major office; while he continued to act as MP for Harwich in the government interest until 1796, he rarely contributed to debates. He was appointed governor of the Isle of Wight in succession to his father-in-law in 1791, and the Bolton estates passed to him in right of his wife on the death of the sixth duke of Bolton on 24 December 1794. On 7 January 1795 he took the additional name of Powlett, and on 20 October 1797 he was created Baron Bolton of Bolton Castle, Yorkshire. His last appointment was to the lord lieutenancy of Hampshire in 1800. He died on 30 July 1807 at his home, Hackwood Park, near Basingstoke, some seven years before his wife (who died on 14 December 1814) and was buried on 8 August 1807 at Old Basing, Hampshire. He was succeeded by William Powlett Orde (1782-1850), the elder of his two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 20812


Orderic Vitalis (1075-c.1142), Benedictine monk and historian, was the son of Odelerius d'Orleans, son of Constantius, and of an English mother. His childhood was passed in or near Shrewsbury, but he was sent aged ten to become an oblate monk in the Norman monastery of St Evroult where he spent the rest of his life, and where he was given the name of Vitalis. He ordinarily referred to himself as Vitalis the Englishman, though he is known to historians as Orderic Vitalis. His great work, the 'Ecclesiastical History', completed in 1141, is of exceptional value for the history of the Anglo-Norman world. 
Orderic was born near Shrewsbury on 16 February 1075 and was baptized at Atcham, on 4 April 1075, by a priest who gave the child his own name, Orderic. His father, Odelerius, had come to England as a chaplain influential in the service of Roger de Montgomery, earl of Shrewsbury from 1074 to 1094, and successfully urged on his master the foundation of Shrewsbury Abbey. Odelerius was firmly committed to the cause of Benedictine monasticism. He gave generously to the new abbey, and both his second son, Benedict, and Odelerius himself became monks there, while his third son, Everard, was a tenant of the abbey. At the age of five Orderic, the eldest son, was sent to school in Shrewsbury to be taught by an English priest, Siward, and then, aged ten, was sent by his father in 1085 to the monastery of St Evroult, which had been refounded in 1050. In the deeply felt epilogue to his 'Ecclesiastical History' Orderic wrote of never having seen his father again and having left his country, family, and friends for exile, ignorant of French. He never mentioned his mother, presumably because he was troubled by his father's having been a married clerk. 
Orderic was tonsured on 21 September 1085, ordained subdeacon on 15 March 1091, deacon on 26 March 1093, and priest on 21 December 1107. When he laid down his pen in 1141 he had spent fifty-six years in St Evroult, never holding administrative office, though he probably came to be in charge of the library. He made occasional journeys, on one occasion to Crowland where he spent five weeks, and it may have been then that he visited Thorney and Worcester. He visited Cambrai, was almost certainly present at the Council of Rheims in 1119, and attended the general chapter at Cluny in 1132. The chief formative influences on Orderic were the teaching of Jean de Rheims, his master in the abbey school whom he so deeply respected, and above all his own extensive reading and work as an accomplished scribe copying manuscripts. From 1095 to 'c'.1114 he was learning his craft as a historian. He compiled the annals of St Evroult from 1095, and he made his own copy of the 'Gesta Normannorum ducum' of William of Jumieges, revising it, adding an account of the Normans in southern Italy, and virtually rewriting the narrative of the Norman conquest of England, quietly correcting the bias of a work that had originally been dedicated to William the Conqueror. Orderic also made his own copy of Bede's 'Ecclesiastical History of the English People', a work that had the deepest influence on Orderic's outlook and ambitions as a historian, and which may well have led Orderic to call his own major work the 'Ecclesiastical History'. 
In its final form the 'Ecclesiastical History' consists of thirteen books which occupied Orderic for over quarter of a century, from 'c'.1114 to 1141. Its structure is complex. It began as what Orderic called 'a little work' on the history of St Evroult from its refoundation 'c'.1050, commissioned by Roger du Sap, abbot from 1091 to 1123. It was designed, like so many such works, to provide a record of the founders, benefactors, abbots, and properties of the house. At an early point Orderic glanced at the possibility of a great history centred on William the Conqueror and his family, regretfully dismissing it as unsuitable for a cloistered monk. But even within book 3, the first to be written, Orderic suddenly took up the story of the Norman conquest without apology or explanation. Orderic spent at least ten years on book 3, but under Abbot Warin des Essarts (1123-37) the pace of his work was quickened and its scope widened. By 'c'.1130, in books 4, 5, and 6, Orderic had combined the history of his abbey with the story of Norman achievements down to 1083. In seven further books he dealt with events of his own lifetime down to 1141, writing rapidly and at times in a mood of exhilaration, as when he described himself as having left the subject of St Evroult and having 'surveyed the wide kingdoms of the world as one caught up in a trance, flying hither and thither' (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 4.337). Elsewhere he described his own part of the world, as distinct from the kingdom of Jerusalem, as Italy, Gaul, Spain, England, and Flanders. The structure of the history was further modified and sometimes enlivened by digressions such as that on the history of the archbishops of Rouen, the legend of the Turkish princess who organized the release of Bohemond from captivity, the prophecies of Merlin, Spanish history, and a judicious treatise on the new monastic orders. At a late stage books 1 and 2 were compiled in order to convert the whole work into a universal history beginning with the birth of Christ. 
Orderic's expressed aims were unexceptionable and sincere. He was, he told his readers, concerned with the simple truth, impartial between English and Normans, looking for no rewards from victors or vanquished, and while he would have preferred edifying subject matter, he had to recognize that miracles had ceased and that his task was to describe the follies, fashions, and disputes of men as they were and not as he would have had them be. It is easy to criticize his practice. He copied earlier writers extensively, had no consistent principles of selection or arrangement, and was remarkably careless of chronology, even of events in his own lifetime. But his history remains of inestimable value for the range, variety, and volume of the information he acquired, and above all for his knowledge and understanding of the lay aristocracy of his day, often expressed in the many imaginary speeches and dialogues he composed. 
When Orderic wrote the very moving epilogue to his work in 1141, shortly before he died, his ordered Anglo-Norman world had disintegrated after the death of his hero, Henry I, the architect of peace and justice. He had been unable to bring himself to record what he regarded as the useless proceedings of the Lateran Council of 1139. Perhaps this sense of the end of an era partly explains the virtual neglect of Orderic's history until it was printed by Duchesne in 1619. But if Orderic was unlucky in failing to attract the readers for whom he had hoped, he was fortunate in the survival of his own autograph manuscripts for all but books 7 and 8, for which there is an incomplete twelfth-century transcript by a Caen scribe. In the mid-nineteenth century justice was at last done in the great edition of the 'Ecclesiastical History' by A. Le Prevost, assisted by L. Delisle. In the second half of the twentieth century M. Chibnall made this the basis of her own edition, a definitive work of outstanding scholarship, especially effective in relating Orderic to the varied beliefs, prejudices, and passions of his age. One result of the revival of interest in Orderic was the erection of a statue to him in 1912 on the site of the church in St Evroult. Another, some scholars have suggested, was that Orderic has been allowed too much influence on the interpretation of the past, since he had almost single-handedly created a Norman 'myth', imposing on the evidence his thesis of the unity of the Normans and their destiny as a conquering and colonizing people. Orderic himself, it may be surmised, would have been gratified by the statue, but dismayed by the charge that he, an Englishman and a conservative of a compassionate temperament, had been a propagandist for men whose cruelties and oppressions he had so often condemned. 


@@@@@


doc= 20813


Ordgar (d. 971), magnate, was a prominent landowner in the west country in the middle of the tenth century and maternal grandfather of King AEthelred II. Although apparently without any official position at the court of King Eadwig ('r'. 955-9), he was clearly a figure of some importance, because in 956 his daughter AElfthryth married AEthelwold (II), eldest son of Ealdorman AEthelstan Half-King. He witnessed King Edgar's charters as a thegn from 962. AElfthryth was widowed in 962 or 963, and in 964 married the king. The charter by which Edgar endowed his new wife with an estate in Berkshire was the last which his new father-in-law witnessed as a mere thegn, since Edgar made him an ealdorman later in 964. Later tradition called him ealdorman of Dumnonia, probably meaning Devon and Cornwall, and a connection with the latter shire is evident from the fact that he is known to have freed one of his slaves at the altar of St Petroc in Bodmin. As a thegn, Ordgar had witnessed only a handful of Edgar's charters between 962 and 964; as an ealdorman he was named on almost all of those issued between 964 and 970, a period when he must have been among the king's closest advisers. Ordgar died in 971 and was buried at Exeter. In the twelfth century William of Malmesbury claimed that he had founded and been buried at Tavistock Abbey, through a confusion with his son Ordwulf, the real founder of Tavistock, and with a later Ordgar who was buried there. Although Ordwulf did not become an ealdorman, he was a figure of great importance in the reign of AEthelred. 
Ealdorman Ordgar featured as a rich widower with lands in every town and village between Frome and Exeter in a tale elaborated by Geoffrey Gaimar in the twelfth century, which centred on Ordgar's beautiful daughter AElfthryth, King Edgar, and the deceitful knight AEthelwold, who wooed the girl for himself. In Gaimar's version the story begins with AElfthryth and her doting father, Ordgar, playing chess when AEthelwold arrives. AElfthryth's two marriages clearly formed a foundation for the story, though it adds nothing credible to knowledge of Ordgar or anyone else. 


@@@@@


doc= 20814


Ordgar (fl. 1066), landowner, was sheriff of Cambridgeshire before 1066. He was typical of Edward the Confessor's sheriffs in being a thegn with a moderate landed estate. He certainly owned manors at Chippenham and Isleham in east Cambridgeshire, on the edge of the Isle of Ely, and was presumably the same Ordgar who had land and men in the south of the county and near by in north Essex. Harston in south Cambridgeshire might have been part of his official endowment as it passed to the Norman sheriff Picot, and Ordgar held Sawston as a tenant of Earl Harold. In all Ordgar's estate amounted to six manors assessed at 20 hides and worth almost $40 a year. Probably after the battle of Hastings, Ordgar placed himself under the protection of Asgar the Staller, one of the great English magnates of the south-east midlands. The sheriff can perhaps be identified as the Ordgar who joined Hereward the Wake as a leader of the outlaws and rebels based at Ely in 1070-71. The traditions preserved about the rebellion were that Ordgar was a rich thegn ('procer'), and that a monk of Ely who was presumably his son, Alwine son of Ordgar, slipped out of the abbey to warn Hereward when the other monks decided to surrender to King William, and then persuaded the rebels not to burn Ely in revenge. Conversely, there is no reason to identify sheriff Ordgar with any of the other eight or so Ordgars who were minor landowners in other shires in 1066. 


@@@@@


doc= 20815


Ordgar (d. 1094?), landholder and soldier, was apparently an Englishman who served William II as a household knight. The story of his duel with Edgar AEtheling's champion is told in John Fordun's fourteenth-century history of Scotland from an unknown source, though it may well have taken place and Ordgar's opponent certainly seems to have existed. Fordun related the episode after the death of Malcolm III of Scotland and the consequent flight of his children with Edgar to England in late 1093, and before Duncan's invasion of Scotland in 1094, though it could have taken place later in William II's reign. Ordgar, wishing to win favour with the king, accused Edgar of treachery; the challenge was taken up by Edgar's knight Godwine of Winchester (very likely the Godwine who was Edgar's tenant in Hertfordshire in 1086); Godwine won the duel, killed Ordgar, vindicated Edgar's loyalty, and was awarded Ordgar's lands. Ordgar was a common enough name in the later eleventh century and it is impossible to be certain about the knight's identity; but he may have been the Ordgar who in 1086 held one small Oxfordshire manor as a king's thegn and two others as Miles Crispin's tenant, claiming that he ought to have them as the king's man because he and his father and uncle had held them freely before 1066. The Godwine who had formerly held the first manor is therefore more likely to have been Ordgar's father or uncle, rather than the combatant in 1094 as Freeman suggested. 


@@@@@


doc= 20816


Ordish, Rowland Mason (1824-1886), engineer, was born at Melbourne, Derbyshire, on 11 April 1824, the son of John Ordish, land agent and surveyor. Nothing is known about his education prior to his arrival in London in his twenties. After some time in an architect's office, in 1847 he went to work as an assistant in the office of the engineer R. E. Brounger. He was engaged on the design of structures and is said to have soon showed particular promise for this work. He was sent to survey the proposed route for a railway in Denmark, a country to which he returned for a short while in 1855. While involved in preparing drawings for a bridge at Windsor he obtained permission from his employer to submit a scheme of his own. This was selected by the queen and the bridge was constructed to his design. At about this time he worked on the caisson foundations of the Black Potts Bridge on the South Western Railway. 
In the summer of 1850 Ordish was working for Fox Henderson as a draughtsman, helping with the preparation of the working drawings for the 1851 Exhibition building in Hyde Park. These were prepared by Charles Fox and Ordish in London and sent to foundries in Smethwick and Dudley. Ordish is reported to have carried out his work so efficiently that more and more important tasks were entrusted to him. In late 1850 he was sent to Birmingham to work with Charles Fox and E. A. Cowper on the details for the roof of New Street Station, Birmingham. This roof and the 1851 Exhibition building were both structures that involved innovative uses of cast and wrought iron and working on them provided useful experience. In 1853-4 he was at Sydenham supervising the re-erection and extension of the Exhibition building, even though he had expressed doubts about the suitability of this use of columns and beams for glass and iron roofs. His work with Charles Fox on these schemes was the basis for a lasting friendship and working relationship that continued for many years. 
From January 1856 to March or April 1858 Ordish was employed as a draughtsman in the works department of the Admiralty, where Colonel G. T. Greene was director and William Scamp was the civil engineer. This again was an office where innovative ideas were developed, especially during 1857 when the rigid iron frame structure for the Sheerness boat shed was being designed. In 1858 he resigned from the works department and set up in practice at 18 Great George Street, Westminster, first in partnership with a Mr Dawdney and very soon after with W. H. Le Feuvre. In April 1858 he took out a patent for improvements in the design and construction of suspension bridges, which involved a rigid road girder suspended on rigid straight chains, which became known as 'Ordish's rigid chain suspension system'. He proposed a low-level bridge of this type across the Thames at the Tower of London in 1862 but the system was not used until 1868 when the Franz Joseph Bridge over the Moldau at Prague was constructed using a chain of steel link bars. For this scheme he received the Austrian gold medal for Arts and Sciences. Another bridge on the same principle was shortly constructed nearby, and later one in Singapore, and one in the USA. 
In 1872 a scheme for a bridge at Chelsea was authorized in parliament with, it is said, the promoters insisting that it be designed by Ordish. The Albert Bridge was constructed to his design, but the owners substituted steel wires in place of the link chains he proposed. These were later replaced with the steel link chains he had recommended. He prepared three schemes for other bridges that were not built: in 1872 for a twin-span toll bridge and four tunnels at the Tower; in 1874 with Max am Ende, his chief assistant, for one across the Neva at St Petersburg (for which he received a prize of $300); and, with Ewing Matheson of Andrew Handyside Ltd, in 1885 for a scheme on the site of the present Tower Bridge. 
In 1866 Ordish obtained a bill for an underground railway from Charing Cross to Euston, running under Tottenham Court Road, which included a new street through Seven Dials. His skill and experience in the design and detailing of iron structures was much admired and his assistance and expertise were sought and used by many engineers in the sixties and seventies. When the domes of the 1862 Exhibition building in South Kensington were found to be unstable he was asked to prepare a scheme for a form of internal bracing. In 1863-4 he assisted Charles Fox with schemes for the series of bridges south of the Thames and the bridge over it at Pimlico for the London, Chatham, and Dover Railway. Again with Fox he worked on the design for a railway bridge across the River Bremer, Queensland, Australia. 
The roof over the train shed at St Pancras Station, commenced in 1865, clearly demonstrates his ability and skill in designing and detailing aesthetically pleasing, practical, and economic wrought-iron structures. With its clear arched span of 240 ft it attracted wide attention in both the technical and lay press and Ordish's contribution was publicly acknowledged by W. H. Barlow at a meeting of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1870. 
Ordish collaborated with Owen Jones on an 80 ft by 40 ft kiosk in India made of cast iron. To stabilize the bases of the columns he used a beam extending into the building below floor level. A similar device was used in 1876 for the bases of the arched roof of St Enoch's Station, Glasgow. This roof was of much the same form as St Pancras and the roof of Cape Town Station, on which Ordish worked. In 1868 he designed, for G. G. Scott, a rectangular dome of iron ribs and glass for the Leeds Infirmary winter gardens. For the next ten years Scott consulted Ordish about the structural ironwork on his schemes and, at Westminster Abbey, Ordish designed for him a polygonal iron framework in the roof space of the chapter house to support the stone vault. 
In 1863, with his partner Le Feuvre, Ordish designed and constructed the Dutch-Rhenish railway station at Amsterdam. This was constructed with many cast-iron components, a material that Ordish, unlike many of his contemporaries, considered to be suitable for a variety of structures. His connection with iron founders like Fox Henderson, Handyside, and Heywoods (for whom he designed a cast-iron fronted house) provided him with opportunities to exploit the material. One of his cast-iron bridges is that over Farringdon Street, on the Holborn Viaduct, designed in 1863. 
Between 1860 and 1875 Ordish worked on the details of numerous structures, including the Amsterdam Crystal Palace, the Dublin Exhibition building (later re-erected as the Albert Palace at Battersea), the Holloway College at Egham, and another all cast-iron building, the Watson's Hotel at Bombay. In 1869, in conjunction with J. W. Grover, a former Fox Henderson employee, and W. Fairbairn, he designed and detailed the oval, shallow domed roof at the Albert Hall, South Kensington. In 1876, with Perry F. Nursey, he published a scheme for a double cast-iron tube tunnel to be laid on the bed of the channel between Dover and Calais. In addition to the patent he took out for suspension bridges in 1858 he obtained other patents for various devices. One, an elastic chair and rail fixing taken out in 1859, was used on the Stratford upon Avon Railway but was not widely adopted. 
Ordish became a member of the Society of Engineers in 1857 (when it was still the Putney Club) and its president in 1860. In September 1857 he gave a paper on suspension bridges and another in May 1858 on the forms and strength of beams, girders, and trusses. He was a member of the Society of Arts, but although asked to join other professional organizations never did. He was a talented designer of structural details with a facility for making rapid mental estimates of the cost of structural ironwork. At the time of his death contemporaries commented that he did not appear to take advantage of the numerous opportunities for advancement that had presented themselves, and that he had little interest in society, which he shunned rather than courted. His death was regretted by the large number of pupils who had been trained in his office and who were in posts all over the world. 
In 1881 Ordish became engineer to Dennet and Ingle of Whitehall, and he was inspecting work in progress on their behalf the day before he died. He had suffered from oedema and heart disease for some time and died in his sleep at his home, 19 Stratford Place, Kentish Town, on 12 September 1886. He was buried in the Old Ground, Highgate cemetery, on 17 September 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 20817


O'Reilly, Alexander, Count O'Reilly in the Spanish nobility (bap. 1723, d. 1794), army officer in the Spanish service, was baptized on 24 October 1723 at the parish church, Baltrasna, co. Meath, Ireland, the son of Thomas O'Reilly. His father, a Roman Catholic, took the family to Spain and O'Reilly was schooled in Saragossa at the Colegio de Padres de las Escuelas Pias. At the age of eleven he entered the Spanish army and by 1739 he was stationed in Catalonia. He served in the Hibernia infantry regiment in the campaigns against Austria in Italy and in 1741 he travelled to Naples in the army of the duke of Montemar, who promoted him to lieutenant. At the battle of Campo Santo in February 1743 he was shot in the boot and lamed for life. 
In 1757 O'Reilly volunteered to join the Austrian army in the war against Prussia so that he could study the new infantry tactics introduced into the Prussian army by Frederick the Great, and he took part in two campaigns against the Prussians commanded by his countryman Count Maurice Francis Lacy. His reports on the Prussian infantry were well received by the Spanish high command and O'Reilly was promoted brigadier in 1759. He served in the war with Portugal from 1761 onwards and gained the reputation of being one of the best officers in Spanish service. At the peace of 1763 he was promoted major-general and appointed governor of Havana in Cuba, where he arrived later that year. By 1764 he was advising the Spanish government to encourage Irish immigration to Cuba as a means of improving the local economy and strengthening the island's defences; in 1765 he was transferred as governor to San Juan in Puerto Rico. In the following year he returned to Spain, where, as inspector-general of the Spanish infantry, he was responsible for introducing Prussian tactics to the whole of the Spanish infantry. Rewarded with the order of Alcantara and the rank of lieutenant-general, O'Reilly was sent to restore Spanish rule in Louisiana in 1769 after the previous governor had been thrown out by the largely French population. 
O'Reilly benefited greatly from the personal patronage of Charles III, who created him Count O'Reilly in 1772 and selected him to command the Spanish expedition against Algiers in 1775. The king's choice of a foreigner, however, provoked jealousy among the Spanish officers. His fleet of 40 ships of the line and 350 other vessels carried a force of 22,000 infantrymen, but the ships failed to arrive at Algiers at the same time and the flat-bottomed boats for landing the troops never materialized. Fearing that his ships would run aground, O'Reilly prepared to land and on 8 July put ashore some 10,000 troops under the command of the marques de La Romana to cover the landing of the rest. The Moroccan counterattack surprised the second landing of Spanish infantrymen, entrenched behind the hedges of prickly pears and aloes, and the Spanish suffered an appalling defeat. 2000 infantrymen were killed, including Romana, and many more were wounded; O'Reilly took full responsibility for the disaster and was exiled to the Chafarinas Islands. 
O'Reilly was soon allowed to return to Spain by Charles III, who placed him at the head of the military school, established first at Avila and then at Port Sta Maria in Cadiz Bay. He later became commander-in-chief in Andalusia and governor of Cadiz, but after the death of Charles III he fell into disgrace and was stripped of his military offices and appointments. He retired to Galicia on a small pension, yet his military career was not over for good. Following the outbreak of war with France in 1793 he was restored to his old rank and appointed commander of the naval base at Toulon to help the French monarchists against Bonaparte. The death of General Antonio Ricardos on 11 March 1794 led to his final appointment as commander of the Spanish army in the east Pyrenees. On his way to his troops in Alicante, O'Reilly died from a stroke at a small village, Bonete, in Murcia, Spain, on 23 March 1794. He was married and was survived by his son, Alejandro O'Reilly y Casas (1769-1832), who married a rich Cuban heiress and became commander of the central region of Cuba. 


@@@@@


doc= 20818


O'Reilly, Andrew, Count O'Reilly in the Austrian nobility (1742-1832), army officer in the Austrian service, was born at Ballinlough, co. Roscommon, on 3 August 1742, the second son of James O'Reilly of Ballinlough and his wife, Barbara, the daughter of Andrew Nugent and his wife, Catherine. The O'Reillys traced their ancestry back to Rufus Gelasius, a thirteenth-century Irish petty prince. Andrew O'Reilly entered the Austrian service as a cadet in the 54th infantry regiment (Sincere, later Callenberg) on 1 November 1763. He was promoted lieutenant on 7 November 1764 and advanced to first lieutenant on 1 October 1767 and to captain on 1 December 1768. On 5 July 1778, now a major, he was transferred to the general staff, and he served as an aide-de-camp during the War of the Bavarian Succession (1778-9). On 17 June 1779 O'Reilly was transferred to the 2nd regiment of Carabiniers (Erzherzog Franz); he was nominated first major on 22 December 1781 and lieutenant-colonel on 24 April 1784. He married, in 1786, Countess Maria Barbara von Sweerts-Spork (1760-1834). Together they owned considerable property in Bohemia and Galicia. 
In the summer of 1787 O'Reilly killed the major of his regiment in a duel but was acquitted by a court martial. He was elevated to the rank of count (Graf) on 8 October 1787. From December 1787 he served with the Hohenzollern cuirassiers, and from 1789 to 1794 he was commanding colonel of the Modena chevauxlegers. He was present at the taking of Belgrade in 1789 during the Turkish War. In the war against revolutionary France he fought in the Low Countries (1792-4) and was promoted major-general (22 July 1794). While serving with the Austrian army in Germany he distinguished himself repeatedly during the campaigns of 1796-7, but he was wounded and made prisoner in April 1797. 
After being promoted Feldmarschall-Leutnant on 6 March 1800 O'Reilly served with the Austrian army in Italy during the campaign of 1800. On 18 August 1801 he received the knight's cross of the military order of Maria Theresa, and the same year he was made imperial chamberlain. He was promoted colonel-proprietor of the 3rd regiment of chevauxlegers on 2 October 1803. In the campaign of 1805 he fought at the head of a division at the battle of Caldiero (29-31 October 1805). His personal bravery won him the commander's cross of the order of Maria Theresa (April 1806). From February to May 1809 he was vice-commander of Lower Austria and in charge of the provincial militia forces, but he was then ordered back to Vienna to help organize the defence of the Austrian capital against the approaching French forces. After two days of heavy bombardment Vienna surrendered on 13 May 1809; the garrison escaped across the Danube. The thankless task of signing the capitulation fell to O'Reilly, who retired with the rank of General der Kavallerie on 7 January 1810. He died at Vienna on 5 July 1832 and was buried at the cemetery of Matzleinsdorf in Vienna. As he had no children O'Reilly had adopted as his heir John O'Reilly ('b'. 1800), the son of his elder brother Sir Hugh O'Reilly and his wife, Catherine Mary Anne Matthew; John served until 1850 as a major of hussars in the Austrian service. Andrew O'Reilly's younger brother James also entered the Austrian army. 


@@@@@


doc= 20819


O'Reilly, Edmund (1598-1669), Roman Catholic archbishop of Armagh, was born, according to his own account, on 2 or 3 January 1598, almost certainly in south co. Dublin. His father, perhaps Garret O'Reilly, seems to have belonged to a line not far removed from the main stem of what was the principal family of East Breifne (now co. Cavan), but no reliable personal detail concerning his parents has survived. He received his classical education in Dublin city, probably in one of the schools the Jesuits and Franciscans were able to maintain there at this time. About 1620 he went to the Irish seminary in Douai in the Spanish Netherlands, and may also have spent some time in the Irish College very recently opened in Antwerp. He was ordained priest by the exiled Archbishop Florence Conry of Tuam, though no official record of this has been located. 
O'Reilly set out for Ireland in 1626, but on his way through England was arrested and imprisoned for almost two years. On his release in March 1628 he went to Ireland and took up duty in Dublin, where a pragmatic and political toleration succeeded a show of force by the government in 1629. He commended himself to the archbishop, Thomas Fleming, who decided to appoint him his vicar-general, though it is uncertain whether this appointment was made before O'Reilly went to the University of Louvain for further studies about 1637 or after his return in 1641. From 1641 onwards he was, in practice, in charge of ecclesiastical affairs in the diocese because the archbishop was in Kilkenny engaged in the political affairs of the confederate Catholics. 
In 1648 the confederates were finally divided: on the one side the supporters of the papal nuncio Rinuccini, who demanded a complete repeal of the penal laws, and on the other side the party, largely Old English in composition, that was ready to accept from the lord lieutenant, the marquess of Ormond, the kind of practical toleration they had grown accustomed to. O'Reilly was a committed supporter of the nuncio's party, and was the chief intermediary in negotiations between the old Irish military leader, Owen Roe O'Neill, and Michael Jones, commander of the parliamentarian forces in Dublin. Rumour even attributed to him responsibility for Ormond's defeat by Jones at Rathmines (August 1649) through his betraying Ormond's position. The rift between the two confederate factions was patched up after the arrival of Oliver Cromwell, but over the course of a few years the country was conquered. O'Reilly had joined the resistance in the mountains of Wicklow, but when this collapsed in 1652 he was arrested. In September 1653 he was put on trial on the charge of having approved of murders at the capture of Wicklow Castle in December 1642. The military court found him guilty, but after more than two years in prison he was deported. 
On 16 April 1657 O'Reilly was appointed archbishop of Armagh, principally, it would appear, on the recommendation of Dionisio Massari, who had been Rinuccini's chief assistant in Ireland, and had returned to become secretary of the Roman Congregatio de Propaganda Fide. His appointment was resisted by the English court in exile, but he was consecrated quietly in Brussels on 26 May 1658. He made his way to London, where in the political uncertainties of the Commonwealth he made hostile contact with his future opponent the Irish Franciscan Peter Walsh. He was expelled to France, but he now sailed directly to Ireland, where he arrived at the beginning of October 1658. He found a church that had barely survived the persecutions of the 1650s, but his own position worsened with the Restoration in May 1660. The Roman authorities ordered his recall and the government ordered his arrest, and he was deported in April 1661. 
In Ireland the Restoration revived the bitter controversies of the 1640s. By 1663 there were reports that O'Reilly was acting to produce a conjunction between former supporters of the nuncio and exiled English republican opponents of the new regime. By contrast, in Ireland a party loyal to the monarchy and to Ormond felt it necessary to make a dramatic display of loyalty if they were to have any hope of dislodging those who had benefited from the confiscation of their landed property. Under the theological guidance of Peter Walsh, a declaration of loyalty emerged that drew heavily on the Gallican ideas now maturing in France, with the additional complication in Ireland that the monarch was protestant. Ormond, once again lord lieutenant, insisted that it be signed by the clergy, but when Walsh convened a meeting in Dublin he got little support. 
Ormond kept up the pressure, however, and Walsh managed to convoke a national synod for Dublin for June 1666. O'Reilly was anxious to attend, and in seeking permission to return he was so obsequious to Ormond and Walsh that they assumed he would support them. The Roman authorities had been warning the Irish clergy, against a background of French developments that had already led to a serious clash, and the nuncio in Brussels personally advised him not to attend. But he arrived in Dublin on 12 June, and the next day made it clear to the synod that he could not accept the proposed formula. 
It was decided that O'Reilly be again deported. He left Ireland late in the summer of 1666. He went first to the Netherlands, where he found the nuncio hostile. He then went to Paris, living in poverty there. Early in 1669 he set out for Nantes, apparently because he considered it would be cheaper to live there. He died on the journey, at Saumur, and was buried in the Oratorian church of Notre Dame. Lynch gives 8 March as the date of his death (Lynch, 1.145), but this cannot be quite accurate, for a surviving parish register notes his burial on 17 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 20820


O'Reilly, Edmund Joseph (1811-1878), Jesuit and theologian, was born in London on 30 April 1811. His mother was a daughter of Edmund O'Callaghan of Killegorey, co. Clare. In 1817 the family moved to Mount Catherine, near Limerick, where the father soon died, and after receiving private tuition O'Reilly was sent to the Jesuit school at Clongoweswood, near Kildare. He later studied metaphysics at Maynooth College, co. Kildare. About 1830 he entered the Irish College, Rome, where Paul Cullen (1803-1878) (later archbishop of Dublin) was rector; they became lifelong friends. He graduated as a doctor in theology in 1835 and, after acting as assistant to Cullen, was ordained in 1838. Soon afterwards he returned to Ireland, where he was appointed professor of theology at Maynooth, a position which he held until 1850. 
In August 1850 O'Reilly acted as theological adviser (at the Synod of Thurles) to Cullen, who had just been appointed archbishop of Armagh. He performed the same service for Bishop James Brown of Shrewsbury at the provincial synod of the English Catholic bishops held at Oscott, and for Bishop Furlong of Ferns at the Synod of Maynooth. In the summer of 1851 he applied for admission to the Society of Jesus; he undertook his noviciate at the Jesuit house in Naples, and during his time there published a revised 'Catechism of Scripture History' (1852) which had been compiled by the Sisters of Mercy at Limerick. After completing his noviciate and taking his final vows he was appointed to teach theology at the Jesuit college of St Beuno's, near St Asaph, north Wales. His lectures there attracted attention, and in the summer of 1858 he was selected by J. H. Newman and the Irish bishops to teach divinity at the newly founded Catholic University in Dublin. Early in 1859 he was withdrawn from his university post and appointed superior of a new Jesuit retreat at Milltown Park, near Dublin, where he remained for the rest of his life. From 1863 to 1870 he was Irish provincial of the Society of Jesus. 
Newman, in his 'Letter to the Duke of Norfolk' during the Vatican controversy, mentioned O'Reilly as 'one of the first theologians of the day'; and W. G. Ward, writing in the 'Dublin Review' in praise of his essays, regretted that he had published so little. O'Reilly's knowledge of patristic theology was especially extensive, and he was continually referred to by the Irish bishops and clergy as a high authority. Even in questions of civil law his opinion was thought to be of value. He was scrupulously truthful in controversy, and in private life he was well known for his courtesy and geniality. 
In 1873-4 O'Reilly contributed one essay to the 'Illustrated Monitor', and others to the 'Irish Monthly', and from 1875 he assisted Matthew Russell, the editor of the 'Irish Monthly', to revise accepted articles. O'Reilly's essays, which included four on the question of papal infallibility, three on church legislation, and a number of others on papal obedience, the clergy, the temporal power, Catholic education, and the Council of Constance (in reply to W. E. Gladstone's 'Vatican Decrees'), were posthumously published by Russell as 'The Relations of the Church to Society' (1892). O'Reilly died at Milltown Park on 10 November 1878, in the same year as his friend, Cardinal Cullen, and was buried at Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 20821


O'Reilly, Edward (c.1770-1829), lexicographer, was born either in Harold's Cross, near Dublin, or in co. Cavan, and was a member of a branch of an Irish sept which had dominated Cavan in ancient times. It is known, however, that he settled in Dublin about 1790, and there began to learn Irish. After the death of the translator and grammarian William Haliday in 1812, O'Reilly received Haliday's extensive lexicographic collections. Combining these with materials of his own, O'Reilly arranged the whole to form the first Irish-language dictionary. O'Reilly initially met with little encouragement, but eventually succeeded in raising enough subscriptions to enable him to print the work in Dublin in 1817, entitling it 'Sanas Gaoidhilge/sags-bhearl'. The dictionary contained more than 20,000 words that had never before appeared in any Irish lexicon, along with illustrative quotations from a wide variety of ancient and modern writers, and numerous comparisons of the Irish words with those of similar orthography, sense, or sound in Welsh and Hebrew. The work was something of a 'tour de force', also containing a concise Irish grammar and the Irish names of various indigenous plants alongside their English and Latin names. O'Reilly's dictionary was reissued in 1821, and again in 1864 with a supplement by John O'Donovan. 
Not content with this mammoth lexicographic feat, O'Reilly founded the Iberno-Celtic Society in Dublin in 1818, for which he also acted as assistant secretary. The society was primarily a historical and cultural organization, principally formed to preserve and publish the numerous fragments of the laws, history, topography, poetry, and music of ancient Ireland. Through it, O'Reilly published, in Dublin in 1820, 'A Chronological Account of Irish Writers', composed of nearly 400 entries, and with a descriptive catalogue of those prose and verse works which were still extant. The book, written in traditional annals form, was the first of its kind and although the dating is often erroneous, O'Reilly's familiarity with the manuscript sources was unprecedented. He had planned a second volume, this time of anonymous manuscripts, but it was never finished. 
O'Reilly's commitment to Irish history and culture continued unabated throughout the 1820s. In 1824 he received a prize from the Dublin Royal Irish Academy for an essay on the nature and influence of the ancient Brehon laws, containing useful information on the number and authenticity of the various available documents, accompanied by translations of some of the most interesting sections. The academy awarded O'Reilly a second prize five years later, this time for an essay questioning the authenticity of Macpherson's Ossian poems, which had been published in Gaelic in 1807, under the sanction of the Gaelic Society of London. In the same period, O'Reilly prepared catalogues of Irish-language manuscripts in Dublin libraries, and also assisted Sir William Betham in his genealogical and antiquarian research. Towards the end of his life, O'Reilly was employed to help with Irish nomenclature for the Ordnance Survey maps of Ireland. He was still at work on this project when he died in Dublin in August 1829. 
In the second half of the nineteenth century O'Reilly's reputation began to decline following an inaccurate 1864 Dublin reprint of the dictionary, and his grammatical and lexicographic skills were also brought into question by later Victorian linguists and historians. Eugene O'Curry, for instance, drew attention to his inaccuracies in 'On the Manners and Customs of the Ancient Irish' (3 vols., 1873). 


@@@@@


doc= 20822


O'Reilly, Hugh (c.1581-1653), Roman Catholic archbishop of Armagh, was born in co. Cavan in Ireland, the son of Maolmordha Mac Aodh O Raghallaigh and his wife, Mor. He was sufficiently closely related to the principal family of the O Raghallaigh or O'Reillys of east Breifne to have been eligible for election to the chieftainship under the Gaelic system of 'deirbhfhine'. Until 1611 his father lived at Ballintemple in the barony of Clonmahon in central co. Cavan. These lands became part of the Ulster plantation, and the family was moved to 300 acres of poorer land in Tullyhaw in the west of the county. Aodh's early education was in co. Cavan, possibly under Franciscan auspices in the convent of St Mary in Cavan town. He was ordained a priest in Ireland and then went to continue his education on the continent. In 1618 he was studying philosophy at Rouen, and he later studied theology at Paris before going to Rome. Irish was his first language, and he knew Latin well. He probably learned English only as an adult. 
O'Reilly's appointment as Roman Catholic bishop of his native diocese of Kilmore was provided for on 30 May 1625, and he was consecrated in July 1626 at the church of St Peter, Drogheda, by Thomas Fleming, archbishop of Dublin. He was transferred to the archiepiscopal see of Armagh on 11 August 1628. Even as primate, he continued to live in the Lough Uachtair district, close to Kilmore, in the neighbourhood in which he had spent his youth. The first resident primate of Ireland for almost two generations, he was well regarded by Rome and maintained cordial relations with both the hierarchy and the religious orders at home. He maintained a particularly close working relationship with prominent members of the Franciscan order. He was a supporter of the researches of the Irish Franciscans at Louvain into the lives of Irish saints, and in 1645 financed the publication of the first volume of John Colgan's 'Acta sanctorum Hiberniae'. The work is dedicated to him. 
O'Reilly was a reforming prelate anxious to implement the decrees of the Council of Trent. He has been judged a zealous churchman working in the interests of the Catholic church in Ireland. He presided at synods in his diocese in July 1632 and in 1637. After the outbreak of the uprising in 1641 he presided at the synod held at Kells in 1642 at which the foundations were laid for the Catholic confederation of Kilkenny. He spent time in Kilkenny, particularly in 1643, while serving on the supreme council of the confederation. He was among the influential members of the council until the first Ormond peace treaty of 1646, but was not politically active thereafter. At the time of his death on Trinity Island, co. Cavan, near his lifelong home, in February 1653 when he was said to be in his seventy-second year, O'Reilly was the only resident Roman Catholic bishop in Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 20823


O'Reilly, John Boyle (1844-1890), Irish nationalist and writer, was born on 28 June 1844 at Dowth Castle, co. Meath, 4 miles from Drogheda, second of three sons and five daughters of William David O'Reilly (died 1871), who for thirty-five years was master of the national school attached to the Netterville institution for widows and orphans there, and Eliza Boyle (died 1869/70), daughter of a Dublin tradesman. He was educated by his father, and in 1854 became an apprentice compositor on 'The Argus' newspaper in Drogheda, replacing an older brother, William, in order to ensure that the premium of $50 would not be lost. 
The apprenticeship terminated when the proprietor of the newspaper died in 1858. In late summer 1859 O'Reilly went to Preston, England, where an aunt resided, becoming a compositor on 'The Guardian', a local newspaper. After mastering shorthand he was elevated to reporter. In early 1863 O'Reilly returned to Ireland, enlisting in May as a trooper in the 10th hussars. A moderately built man of 5 feet 71/2 inches, but athletically inclined, O'Reilly was regarded as a model soldier. Whether he joined the Fenian movement before or after enlisting in the army is uncertain but he became an active recruiter for it only from October 1865 after meeting John Devoy, who in spite of later differences in political outlook remained a lifelong friend. According to Devoy's later account, he then enlisted as many as eighty other Irish soldiers (Devoy, 152-9). On 13 February 1866 O'Reilly was arrested and on 9 July condemned by a military court martial to death, a sentence that was quickly commuted to twenty years' imprisonment. After brief incarceration in Mountjoy gaol, Dublin, then in English prisons, O'Reilly was transported to Western Australia, arriving on 10 January 1868. After a short and fairly comfortable confinement in Freemantle as an assistant in the library he was sent to Bunbury. There he soon became a constable in the convict colony but unlike the political prisoners of 1848 O'Reilly was subjected to ordinary regulations. With the aid of Father Patrick McCabe he absconded on 18 February 1869 to an American whaler. Following a perilous journey, during which he narrowly evaded capture, he reached Philadelphia on 23 November 1869 where he immediately took out his first American naturalization papers. He quickly decamped for New York before travelling onwards to Boston, which he reached on 2 January 1870. Fenian connections obtained him a clerkship in a shipping office, and in spring 1870 he joined 'The Pilot'. O'Reilly remained associated with this Catholic newspaper for the rest of his life. One of his first assignments as a correspondent was to accompany the Fenian raid on Canada in June, an escapade about which he expressed frank reservations. O'Reilly's mother had died while he fled to America; on 17 February 1871 his father also passed away. On 15 August 1872 O'Reilly married Mary Murphy of Charlestown, Massachusetts, who was the daughter of Irish immigrants. They had four daughters between 1873 and 1880. 
O'Reilly began writing while being held for court martial at Arbour Hill, Dublin. His poem 'The Old School Clock' dates from then. He continued writing while in Western Australia, and by the time of his arrival in Boston was known for his daring escape and as 'the poet'. With Devoy and others in 1876 he helped organize the escape of six Fenians prisoners from Western Australia. In the same year he and the Roman Catholic archbishop of Boston purchased 'The Pilot', which O'Reilly edited until his death. He was a committed supporter of the American Democratic Party and advocated advanced positions, championing the cause of southern black people and the toleration of Jews while emphasizing the duties of American citizenship. O'Reilly rapidly established himself in literary, intellectual, and political circles to an extent unusual among recently arrived Irish immigrants. He helped found the literary society the Paphyus Club in 1873, becoming its president in 1879. O'Reilly was prominent in the formation of the Catholic Union of Boston in March 1873, serving as recording secretary. He became a friend of Wendell Phillips. In 1873 he committed himself to the new demand for home rule in Ireland, urging Fenians to give the new movement a fair trial. In 1875 O'Reilly was chosen as the poet for the celebration of Daniel O'Connell's centenary celebration in Boston. In 1878 he promoted the American lecture tour of Michael Davitt, recently released Fenian prisoner. At the close of the decade O'Reilly endorsed the 'new departure' which linked Fenianism and the 'active' section of Irish parliamentarians headed by Charles Stewart Parnell. A regular lecturer, he also published 'Songs from the Southern Seas' (1873), 'Songs, Legends and Ballads' (1878), and 'Moondyne' (1879) during his initial decade in Boston. This last, a portrayal of convict life in Western Australia, was particularly popular, running through numerous editions. In 1879 he was president of the Boston Press Club and in the following year helped form the Cribb Club, dedicated to boxing. This sport fascinated O'Reilly, who was a proponent of 'muscular Christianity'. In 1888 he authored 'The Ethics of Boxing and Manly Sport' to 'bring into consideration the high value, moral and intellectual as well as physical, of those exercises that develop healthy constitutions, cheerful minds, manly self-confidence, and appreciation of the beauties of nature and natural enjoyment' (p. xi). 
During the 1880s O'Reilly's hectic work schedule continued. His voice was by then a prop to the constitutional home-rule movement. He assisted Parnell's tour of North America at the beginning of 1880 and helped found the Irish National Land League of America in March, chairing its first national convention in May. During the imprisonment of Parnell and others in Ireland (1881-2), O'Reilly was at the forefront in urging that home rule should supplant the land agitation as the chief plank in the national programme. He was present in an unofficial capacity when in April 1883 the Irish National League of America was inaugurated in Philadelphia. Identifying with the conservative wing of Irish-American nationalism, he worked to break the influence of the radical Patrick Ford of the 'Irish World', and he eschewed the dispute between Alexander Sullivan of Chicago who controlled the Irish National League and Devoy. His writing won acclaim as well, and O'Reilly was selected to write odes in commemoration for many celebrations such as the reunion of the army of the Potomac at Detroit in 1881, and in 1888 for the dedication of the monument to Crispus Attucks in Boston. O'Reilly received several major recognitions. In 1881 Notre Dame University (Indiana) awarded him an honorary doctor of laws and Dartmouth College (New Hampshire) made O'Reilly an honorary Phi Beta Kappa. In 1889 Georgetown University (Washington, DC) gave him an honorary doctorate. 
O'Reilly was a workaholic who suffered from chronic insomnia. To Devoy on 3 May 1886 he complained, 'I am terribly overworked and cannot go to sleep' (O'Brien and Ryan, 2.281). His work schedule was hectic and the health of his wife, who had been an invalid for several years, was a strain. On 3 March 1890 he began a strenuous lecture tour of the American west, returning exhausted to Boston on 5 May. He died there on 10 August 1890 from a self-administered overdose of chloral for insomnia. His funeral on 12 August in Boston was hugely attended; he was interred in Holyhood cemetery, Brookline, Massachusetts. Subsequently memorials were erected in his native Dowth and in Western Australia, and a park was named in his honour in Charlestown, Boston. The final stanza of 'The Feast of the Gael' written for St Patrick's day epitomized O'Reilly's vision of an inclusive Irish people, something increasingly out of fashion in the militant nationalism sweeping over his native land, revealing why his appeal stretched far beyond his own community: '
Then drink, all her sons -- be they Keltic or Danish, 

Or Norman or Saxon -- one mantle was o'er us; 

Let race lines, and creed lines, and every line, vanish -- 

We drink as the Gael: 'To the Mother that bore us!' 
(Roche, 555)' 



@@@@@


doc= 20824


O'Reilly, Myles William Patrick (1825-1880), soldier and politician, was born in Dublin, the son of William O'Reilly of Knock Abbey, co. Louth, and Margaret, daughter of Dowell O'Reilly of The Heath, Queen's county. He was educated at St Cuthbert's College, Ushaw, near Durham, and at the University of London, where he graduated BA in 1845; subsequently he took the degree of LLD at Rome. In 1859 he married Ida (died 1878), daughter of Edward Jerningham. 
A gentlemen farmer who bred prize cattle and kept racehorses, O'Reilly joined the Louth rifles militia, in which he held a captain's commission. Invited to Rome by Pius IX he entered the pontifical service, with the rank of major, and was appointed to the command of the Irish brigade. He rose to the challenge of training an undisciplined body of men under very difficult circumstances. In September 1860 the battalion of St Patrick gallantly defended Spoleto against Piedmontese troops, who were repeatedly repulsed. O'Reilly's wife was with him until the women were granted safe conduct by the Piedmontese; O'Reilly himself surrendered only when his position had become untenable. 
After his return to Ireland, O'Reilly was elected MP, in March 1862, for the county of Longford, and for many years he was prominent in the House of Commons among the debaters on Irish and military subjects. He was a member of Archbishop Cullen's National Association, urging Catholic causes in the Commons, especially the issue of Catholic education, and of Isaac Butt's Home Rule Party. He was also a magistrate for the counties of Louth and Dublin. Besides occasional pamphlets and articles, he published 'Memorials of those who suffered for the Catholic faith in Ireland in the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries' (1868), reissued in New York in 1869 and reprinted there in 1878 under the title 'Lives of the Irish martyrs and confessors, with additions, including a history of the penal laws, by [the] Rev. Richard Brennan, A.M.'. On at least one occasion he acted as examiner in classics at the Catholic University, Dublin, at the time when John Henry Newman was at its head. In 1878 his wife died, and in April 1879 he vacated his seat in parliament, when he accepted the post of assistant commissioner of intermediate education in Ireland. 
O'Reilly died at 14 Fitzwilliam Place, Dublin, on 6 February 1880, and was interred in the family burial-place at Philipstown, near Knock Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 20825


O'Reilly, Phillip McHugh (b. 1599, d. in or after 1664), Irish rebel, was the second son of Hugh O'Reilly of Ballynacargy in co. Cavan, chief of the O'Reillys, and Katherine Mac Mahon, a sister of Hugh Mac Mahon. His father had supported the English during the Nine Years' War and received land under the Ulster plantation. Despite being a younger son, Phillip succeeded to the family lands upon his father's death in 1629 and to the chieftainship of the O'Reillys in 1635. He was a commissioner of the peace for Cavan in 1625, sheriff of Cavan in 1629, and was elected MP for co. Cavan in 1640. Although he sat on the committee which drew up charges against leading government ministers in February 1641, he did not play a prominent role in the opposition to the government within the Irish parliament. 
Indeed that very month O'Reilly met with other leading Gaelic landowners Rory O'More, Rory, Lord Maguire, Turlough O'Neill, and Colonel Brian McMahon to discuss plans to rebel against the government. The conspirators were alarmed by the anti-Catholic rhetoric emanating from the English parliament and hoped to take advantage of the political deadlock in England between the king and parliament. O'Reilly played a key role in the preparations for the rebellion owing to his connections with exiled Irish on the continent. By 1628 he had married Rose, sister of Owen Roe O'Neill, commander of the Irish regiment in the Spanish Netherlands. O'Reilly was in constant contact with O'Neill during summer 1641. The plotters originally planned to act in concert with Old English Catholic officers in the Irish army. However, by the start of September the Old English officers had cancelled their plans. Undeterred, the Gaelic plotters decided to go ahead with their rebellion on 21 October 1641, which would involve the seizure of Dublin Castle and of key fortifications in Ulster. 
O'Reilly led the rebellion in Cavan and, owing to his clever tactics and good organization, soon achieved complete control over the county. On 23 October, O'Reilly's nephew and sheriff of Cavan, Myles Mulmore O'Reilly, visited many of the British protestant settlers in the county and asked for their weapons so that he could arm his forces to fight the rebels. The ruse worked and most of the settlers were peaceably disarmed. The O'Reillys then assembled 3000 men, prompting the English garrison at Belturbet to flee and that at Cavan Town to surrender. Phillip had also divided his enemies by declaring that his rebellion was aimed only against the English, and he made no attempt to take the less important Scottish garrisons at Kelagh and Croaghan. By 29 October Cavan was more or less under rebel control with virtually no bloodshed. At this point many of O'Reilly's men and the Catholic population generally began robbing and assaulting the local protestants. He did his utmost to preserve the protestants' lives and property, but it is apparent that O'Reilly was struggling to maintain his authority over his own troops. Indeed, he even had to rebuke his own wife for inciting the murder of protestants. He arranged for the protestant inhabitants of Belturbet to be convoyed out of the county, but they were robbed and roughly handled by O'Reilly's men as they left. 
During November 1641 O'Reilly mustered about 3000 men and, linking up with other rebels from Monaghan and Fermanagh, swept into Meath, capturing a number of towns. After some debate the rebels decided to march on Drogheda instead of Dublin and crossed the Boyne at Trim, intending to complete the encirclement of Drogheda from the south. Hearing of the approach of an English force of 600 foot and 50 horse sent to relieve Drogheda, O'Reilly and his men ambushed them on 29 November at Julianstown, 5 miles south of Drogheda, taking advantage of the morning mist to rout their enemies. This victory had a major bearing on the decision of the Old English Catholics of the pale to join the rebellion. O'Reilly participated in the rebels' unsuccessful siege of Drogheda in the winter of 1641-2 and returned about March 1642 to Cavan, where the two Scottish garrisons continued to hold out. A tight siege was thrown up around the two castles, which surrendered on 15 June. 
O'Reilly was based mainly in Cavan for the rest of the war and served as a colonel in the Ulster army of the Catholic confederation under the command of his brother-in-law, Owen Roe O'Neill. He was also appointed to the first supreme council of the Catholic confederation in November 1642 and attended a number of general assemblies in Kilkenny. However, he was usually preoccupied with his military responsibilities. During the political infighting that slowly ripped the confederation apart in 1646-9, O'Reilly remained a staunch supporter of O'Neill. When O'Neill's troops mutinied at Kilbeggan, co. Westmeath, in 1647, O'Neill relied on O'Reilly's regiment to restore order. During the 1648 civil war within the confederation, O'Reilly was the only important Ulster landowner to support O'Neill. Following the destruction of the Ulster forces at the battle of Scarrifhollis in co. Donegal on 21 June 1650, O'Reilly became the main leader of resistance to the parliamentarians, prosecuting an increasingly futile guerrilla war for the next three years. His surrender on 27 April 1653 at Cloughouter in co. Cavan marked the formal end of the wars in Ireland. 
Under the terms of his surrender, O'Reilly and 1000 of his men were transported out of Ireland to join the Spanish army, landing in August 1653 in Corunna, where they were garrisoned. This proved an unhappy posting. Relations between the Irish soldiers and the local populace deteriorated rapidly and O'Reilly was furious that Hugh Dubh O'Neill was appointed commander of the Irish forces in Spain instead of him. Eventually, at O'Reilly's insistence, his garrison was transferred to the Spanish Netherlands in August 1654. There his troops mutinied at Armentieres in early April 1655, but they were quickly appeased. In 1658 O'Reilly was arrested and imprisoned by the Spanish authorities on suspicion of conspiring to defect with his regiment to the French in order to win the favour of the English and recover his lands in Ireland. His regiment was also disbanded. On 20 March 1660 he received a pension from the Spanish government, although he seems to have had problems in getting it paid. His last years were spent in some poverty as part of a company of Irish infantry in the Spanish Netherlands. He was still alive in October 1664. 


@@@@@


doc= 20826


Orem, Thomas (d. 1730), historian, is of unknown background. He was married on 23 July 1693 in Kemnay parish, Aberdeenshire, to Katherine Gordon (died 1732), widow of Robert Keith, minister of Ballantrae, Ayrshire. Orem lived in the burgh of Old Aberdeen from 1698 until his death, apparently without paid employment, and was made an honorary burgess of the burgh on 12 September 1702. He compiled his manuscript 'A description of the chanonry of Old Aberdeen' in 1725. This account of the history and topography of St Machar's Cathedral and its precincts was later combined with similar accounts of the burgh of Old Aberdeen and of King's College. He died in Old Aberdeen on 9 July 1730, and was buried in St Machar's Cathedral, The Chanonry, Old Aberdeen, on 11 July. His works are based heavily on primary sources, and include extracts from key documents. They also provide a detailed description of Old Aberdeen in the early eighteenth century and remain a major resource for local historians. Copies of the accounts were circulating in manuscript in the eighteenth century, one of which was purchased by Richard Gough in 1771. In 'British Topography' (1780) Gough attributed the manuscript to William Orem (d. 1692), town clerk of Old Aberdeen. This mistake was then repeated in the four editions of the manuscript that were published between 1782 and 1832. 


@@@@@


doc= 20827


Orford, Robert (fl. c.1280-c.1293), Dominican friar and theologian, also known as Robertus de Colletorto or Guillelmus de Torto Collo in the manuscript tradition and as Robert of Oxford by English bibliographers, is known almost entirely through his surviving works. He was a member of a group of English Dominican friars at Oxford who defended the teachings of Thomas Aquinas after the condemnation of certain of them by the archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Kilwardby, in 1277. 
Orford's 'Correctorium corruptorii 'Sciendum'' was among the responses issued before 1284 to the Franciscan William de la Mare's 'Correctorium' of Aquinas's alleged errors. 'Sciendum' is a hurried work, noted for the mildness of its polemic. A chief cause of controversy was the question whether there was only one substantial form (the rational soul) in man, or a plurality. Orford argues against de la Mare for unicity of form, while rejecting Averroist arguments in favour of it; the influences of Giles of Rome and of Thomas Sutton can be detected. Sutton, the most distinguished of Orford's group, was possibly himself already influenced against Averroist arguments by Orford, if Orford wrote the 'De natura materiae' formerly attributed to Aquinas. 
Orford and his circle continued to defend Thomism after the renewal of the prohibition in 1284 by Kilwardby's successor, Archbishop John Pecham. From 'c'.1284 to 'c'.1286 he was responding as a bachelor of the 'Sentences' to Richard Clive, fellow of Merton, and to the Franciscan Alan de Wakerfeld. It was not he, however, but his fellow Dominican Richard Knapwell (with whom Orford would have agreed on unicity of form while dissenting from his Averroist arguments) who was the main target of the condemnation of unicity as heretical, and of the excommunication of unicity's defenders, which were issued by Pecham in 1286. 
Orford probably incepted as a master some time after 1285, when his group's concerns were broadening in response to the alternative metaphysics being developed in Paris by Giles of Rome and by Henri de Gand. In his 'Contra dicta Fr. Aegidii Romani' (1288-92) he manifests his irritation at Giles's apparent change of heart concerning Aquinas. However, his attack on Henri over the real distinction between essence and existence in the 'Contra dicta Magistri Henrici de Gandavo' (1289-93) still shows Giles's influence. Orford also criticized Henri on the soul and its faculties and on the creation of matter without form, but his work was overshadowed by Sutton's superior critique. 
Though Orford's interest in Parisian theologians was common to his Oxford circle, it has suggested to some that he was in Paris at about the time of these writings or perhaps studied there earlier in life. It has also been suggested that he studied in Cambridge, but there is no evidence for this. He is last heard of preaching a university sermon in the Dominican church at Oxford on 22 February 1293, the second Sunday of Lent. 


@@@@@


doc= 20828


Orford, Robert (d. 1310), bishop of Ely, presumably originated from Orford, Suffolk. Ely Cathedral priory had lands there, and Orford became a monk, and eventually prior, of that house. Following the death of Ralph Walpole on 20 March 1302, Orford was elected bishop by the convent by the way of compromise on 14 April, and gained royal assent on 6 May, but the election was quashed on 16 July by Archbishop Robert Winchelsey, on the grounds of the elect's inadequate learning. Orford immediately appealed to Rome, pleading his own case before Pope Boniface VIII. He displayed skill and learning in expounding the hostile hearing he had been given by Winchelsey, and caused pope and cardinals to burst into laughter by describing how, having countered the first two of the archbishop's arguments, he had dealt with the difficult third by answering not theologically but logically, so as to avoid a conclusion. Boniface, deciding that Orford was not, as Winchelsey had described him, an empty vessel, confirmed the election on 22 October, and ordered Orford's consecration, which took place in Rome on the 28th. The temporalities were restored on 4 February 1303, and the new bishop then rebutted Winchelsey's claim to the right to enthrone him, on the grounds that the throne had already been granted by apostolic authority. 
As bishop, Orford succeeded in completing the gift made to the priory by his predecessor John Kirkby (died 1290) of property in Holborn, Middlesex, and Hadham, Hertfordshire, and negotiated with the crown a confirmation of the priory's liberties. He subsequently made gifts to the convent of fine vestments, and also of a precious breviary which was assigned to the priory chapel (Prior Crauden's chapel, in the cathedral precinct). The monastery was in some financial trouble, and Orford, by his injunctions of 1307, made some effort to remedy this: thus the prior was instructed to make customary payments due to the obedientiaries, who in turn were to pay off their predecessors' debts as soon as possible; the accounts of the obedientaries were to be audited; and restrictions were placed on the prior's giving of hospitality. Orford himself, by his journey to Rome, was said to have incurred a debt of $15,000. Despite these difficulties, the building work that beautified the cathedral in the first thirty years of the fourteenth century has led to Orford's episcopate being described as part of 'the flowering time of genius' at Ely (Evans, ix). Orford died at Little Downham, Cambridgeshire, on 21 January 1310 and was buried in Ely Cathedral before the high altar, next to Ralph Walpole. 


@@@@@


doc= 20829


Orger, Mary Ann (1788-1849), actress, was born in London on 25 February 1788, one of the three daughters of William Ivers, a musician in a provincial company. Her mother was occasionally seen on the stage with her husband in Henry Thornton's company, and carried her infant daughter on as the child in 'King Henry VIII'. The first record of Mary Ann performing is on a bill of the Newbury Theatre when she was five, as the Boy in 'Children in the Wood', although she had probably already acted several other parts under her father's instruction. She played this role for several years. When she was about nine years old she sang in concerts in Brighton and at about eleven was the Gypsy at a fete given by Queen Charlotte at Frogmore. She then acted with Thornton, and appeared in Croydon, Reading, Windsor, Gosport, Newbury, and Chelmsford. George III was a frequent visitor to the Windsor theatre at this time. When she was fifteen, in 1803, Thomas Orger, the son of George Orger of High Wycombe, and a man of literary tastes, fell in love with her. He was a Quaker and had to renounce this affiliation when he married her in July 1804. He agreed to her returning to the stage, and she played in 1805 in Glasgow with Master Betty and in Edinburgh, where her benefit on the last night of the season, 7 May 1806, brought her $78. She also performed in other Scottish towns. In Glasgow in the summer of 1807 she appeared as Caroline Sedley in James Kenney's 'False Alarm' at Rosoman Mountain's benefit. 
Mrs Orger met John Bannister in Aberdeen in the summer of 1808 and played Nell to his Jobson in 'The Devil to Pay' and Ann Lovely to his Colonel Feignwell in 'A Bold Stroke for a Wife'. He recommended her for Drury Lane, and she made her first appearance there as Lydia Languish in 'The Rivals' on 4 October 1808. She remained at Drury Lane until 1831, while also taking engagements at minor theatres during the summer months. After the destruction of the theatre by fire on 24 February 1809 she went with the company to the Lyceum, where she played an original part in 'Temper, or, The Domestic Tyrant'. On 20 November 1809 she was the original Mrs Lovell in 'Not at Home', and she had another original part, as Madge in S. J. Arnold's comic opera 'Up All Night, or, The Smuggler's Cave'. She distinguished herself as Patty Larkins in 'The Highgate Tunnel' in 1812. A dispute then arose between her and the management of Drury Lane, who prohibited her from appearing at the Lyceum; her correspondence with Arnold and Douglas Kinnaird MP of the management was published. When the Victoria Theatre opened Mrs Orger performed there, but at the same time continued at Drury Lane and at the Haymarket, where she was the original Mrs Sophia Smith in 'Mrs Smith, or, The Wife and the Widow'. On leaving Drury Lane she was engaged by Madame Vestris for the Olympic, where she was, in 1832, Mrs Deputy Butts in Dance's farce 'The Water Party'. She remained there during Madame Vestris's management, playing with complete success a series of parts suited to her talents, which included a capacity for imitating various local accents. She moved with Madame Vestris to Covent Garden, and just before the sudden closing of the theatre in 1843 she attempted what was for her a new type of character, Old Lady Lambert in Isaac Bickerstaff's 'The Hypocrite'. 
When the Strand Theatre opened under Maywood, Mrs Orger accepted an engagement which she was prevented by illness from fulfilling, and shortly afterwards, in 1845, her physician recommended that she retire from the stage. The Drury Lane Theatrical Fund provided her with a pension of $120 a year, which enabled her to enjoy in comfort the company of her numerous circle of friends and literary men of the day. She was herself the author of a farce, 'Change Partners', which was produced at Drury Lane on 10 March 1825. She died on 1 October 1849. She left one daughter, Caroline ['see 'Reinagle, Caroline], a pianist and composer. Mary Ann Orger was very pretty, above medium height, with a fair complexion, light brown hair, and hazel eyes. 


@@@@@


doc= 20830


Orival, Hugh de (d. 1085), bishop of London, was consecrated by Archbishop Lanfranc in 1075, being the first bishop appointed to that see by William I and probably previously a royal chaplain. Although nothing is known of his background, it is pretty certain that, like William's other bishops, he was a Norman. He was afflicted with leprosy and resorted to the drastic cure of castration, but without effect. He died of the disease on 12 January 1085. The location of his burial is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 20831


Orm (fl. c.1175), homilist and Augustinian canon, is known by one work only, the 'Ormulum', in the dedication to which he indicates the order of which he was a member. The Augustinian house to which he belonged cannot be definitely identified; but Orm's dialect of English has been localized in south Lincolnshire, and it is possible that the 'Ormulum' was written in the Arrouaisian abbey at Bourne, a house of Augustinian canons founded in 1138. The name Orm (or Orrm, as he himself spells it in the dedication) is Scandinavian in origin, and its variant Ormin may have been formed by analogy with names such as Austin. 
The 'Ormulum', preserved in Bodl. Oxf., MS Junius 1, is a collection of homilies in English, in which paraphrases of passages from the gospels are followed by exegetical commentary. Its title was given by Orm himself, who may have modelled the name on Latin 'speculum' ('mirror') used in the title of works such as 'Speculum ecclesiae'. In the dedication Orm states that he was enjoined to undertake the work by Walter, his brother both physically and in God, for Walter too was an Augustinian canon; and Orm sets out his purpose as the elucidation of the gospel for the laity. The homilies of the 'Ormulum' were based on gospel readings for mass, arranged to follow the chronological order of the life of Christ. The table of contents lists 242 homilies, and the dedication refers to the work as having been 'brohht till ende' ('brought to an end'; Bodl. Oxf., MS Junius 1, line 28), though as it survives in MS Junius 1 the 'Ormulum' contains only homilies 1 to 32 (the last of which is a fragment). It is certain that more was written than now survives in MS Junius 1, since Jan van Vliet, who owned the manuscript in the seventeenth century, left copies of some passages no longer present in Junius 1, which itself shows clear evidence of the loss of leaves. As well as having suffered damage the manuscript is irregular in form and untidy in layout, containing many corrections and alterations made during the process of copying; it is plainly not the work of a professional scribe, and is likely to have been written by Orm himself. On palaeographical grounds the completion of Junius 1 is dated early in the last quarter of the twelfth century, though its writing may have extended over a number of years. 
The 'Ormulum' is the first substantial cycle of homilies in English known to have been composed since the works of AElfric, written about the end of the tenth century. Orm's exposition of scripture, like that of AElfric, is allegorical in method, and the Latin sources on which he drew for his exegesis included the 'Glossa ordinaria' to the 'Bible', Bede's commentary on 'Luke', and the 'Enarrationes in Matthoei Evangelium', a twelfth-century compilation. The homilies are composed in an unrhymed metrical form based on the Latin iambic septenarius, and in the dedication Orm acknowledges that his phrasing has often been influenced by the need to fill out the verse. Orm's literary style is repetitive and wordy, and its effect is not enhanced by the monotony of his invariably regular metre; but in its scope the work is ambitious, and it testifies to the role of the vernacular in the spiritual education of the laity. 
The most remarkable feature of the 'Ormulum', however, is not its substance but its distinctive spelling system. This was probably intended as an aid to preachers who would read the work aloud, and it was evidently designed to represent speech sounds in a clearer and more consistent way than conventional orthography achieved. Orm's chief innovation was the use of double consonants to signify that the preceding vowel was short; in his system the first syllable of 'Crisstenndom' ('Christendom'), for instance, was spelt with double s since its vowel was short, whereas single s was used after the long vowel of 'Crist' ('Christ'). This method of denoting vowel length could not be extended to all words, since by its nature it was inapplicable to syllables that did not end in a consonant, and it was supplemented by the occasional use of accents to indicate long or short vowels. Orm's concern with the exact representation of sounds is shown also by his introduction of a new form of the letter g, which he used for the initial sound of words such as 'Godd' ('God'), while reserving inherited forms of g for the sounds now represented by y in 'yet' and dg in 'bridge'. As well as adopting innovations in orthography, Orm showed an exceptional concern to achieve consistency in spelling, best illustrated by his treatment of words which in Old English had been written with eo, such as 'beon' ('be') and 'cneow' ('knew'). In approximately the first 13,000 of the 20,000 lines of the 'Ormulum' that survive, such words were often spelt with eo, though in some instances with e; but after about line 13,000 Orm ceased to use eo, and o was then systematically erased from the words that had originally been written with eo in the preceding part of the manuscript. The magnitude of this labour of correction reveals the extraordinary care expended by Orm upon details of orthography. By virtue of its special system of spelling the 'Ormulum' is highly revealing about the pronunciation of the time, and it provides a major source of evidence for the linguistic study of early Middle English. 


@@@@@


doc= 20832


Orme, Daniel (1766-1837), painter and engraver, was born in Manchester on 25 August 1766, the son of Aaron Orme (1707-1782), a fustian manufacturer, and his third wife, Margaret Walmsley ('bap'. 1739, died 1808). He was an older brother of the artist and publisher Edward Orme and also of the painter William Orme (1771-1854). He entered the Royal Academy Schools on 7 March 1785 and was noted as being '18 years old, 25th last August' (Hutchison, 148). In 1787 he married Ann Barr, and the following year he reputedly competed for the Royal Academy's gold medal. He continued to live in London, where he practised as a portrait painter in oil and in miniature and also as an engraver, working closely in particular with the American-born artist Mather Brown (1761-1831). From 1792 to about 1797 Brown and Orme formed a partnership to exhibit large history paintings as a loss-leader for the sale of subscription prints after Brown's paintings. The pair concentrated on scenes from contemporary history -- similar to those popularized by the American artist John Singleton Copley (1737-1815) -- especially recent naval events. One instance of such collaboration between painter and engraver centred on the painting by Mather (now in the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich) of Lord Howe on the quarter-deck of the 'Queen Charlotte' with 'the affecting death of the amiable Captain Neville of the queen's regiment'. The picture was advertised as being nautically accurate and also 'entirely novel', as, it was claimed, it was the first naval and portrait subject painted for this type of exhibition. It was exhibited -- apparently without charge -- in Orme's premises at 14 Old Bond Street from January to April 1795. Orme's large print (943 cm x 58 cm), for which the oil was effectively the advance publicity, was issued on 1 October 1795, at 1 guinea to subscribers. Interestingly, Orme also produced separate small prints of individual portraits from the scene, as well as an informative key to the whole identifying the ships and the personnel shown (copies of the large print and of the key are also in the National Maritime Museum). Another of Orme's naval subjects has been immortalized on Sunderland pottery; the moment when John (Jack) Crawford, a sailor, 'heroically nailed Admiral Duncan's flag to the main top gallant mast of the Venerable after it had been shot away by Admiral de Winter in the glorious action off Camperdown Oct. 11th 1797' (inscription on pottery cited in Baker, cat. no. 51). Orme's engraving is after a sketch he is said to have made on board the flagship 'Venerable' and was published on 21 November 1797. It is notable that Orme exhibited at the Royal Academy only for five years, from 1797 to 1801; he showed nearly forty miniatures, many with a marked naval association, such as his portrait of Lady Nelson exhibited in 1799. 
Orme also engraved his own works -- subject pictures such as 'Alexander and Thais' -- as well as portraits after other artists, such as 'Admiral the Earl of St Vincent' after Daniel Gardner. He was appointed engraver to George III, and in 1814 he styled himself artist to his majesty and the prince regent. In October 1814 he returned to Manchester and resided at 40 Piccadilly, where he gave lessons in oil painting, drawing, and etching and continued his portrait painting both in oil and in miniature. He was represented in the first exhibition of the Royal Manchester Institution in 1827 by one portrait, 'William Butterworth, the Oldham Hermit'. He died at Buxton, Derbyshire, in 1837. There is a small drawing, slightly washed in colour -- 'New Pier, Margate' -- in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. A self-portrait in oil by Orme showing him with his sketchbook is still in the collection at Althorp, Northamptonshire. Other paintings and prints by him are in the National Maritime Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 20833


Orme, Robert (1728-1801), historian of India and East India Company servant, was born on 25 December 1728 at Anjengo in Travancore, India. One of four children, he was the second son of Alexander Orme (died 1736), chief of the settlement at Anjengo, a physician and surgeon in the service of the East India Company. At the age of two Orme was sent to England to be brought up by his aunt Mrs Adams, at her home in Cavendish Square, London. From 1734 to 1741 he was educated at Harrow School, where he showed considerable promise as a scholar and excelled himself at classics. Destined for a career in India, he was withdrawn early from Harrow and placed in a private academy in London to learn the business of trade and commerce. 
In 1742, aged thirteen, Orme was sent to Calcutta. Upon his arrival he was engaged to a private English mercantile concern, Jackson and Wedderburn. Two years later, in 1744, he was appointed a writer in the East India Company service. Not content with performing his daily duties, Orme devoted himself to improving and educating himself, reading and studying as widely as he could. His efforts earned him the affectionate nickname of Cicero and he acquired a reputation for his knowledge of Indian affairs. In 1752 he produced a study of Indian society entitled 'A general idea of the government and people of Indostan', eventually published in the new edition of his 'Historical Fragments of the Mogul Empire' (1805). At the same time he began work on his 'magnum opus', his history of the Anglo-French conflict in southern India. In 1753 he visited England in the company of his close friend Robert Clive. During this brief stay he used his writings to good effect, making several influential friends in the government and among the directors of the company. These new connections secured him an immediate and unprecedented promotion to the senior ranks of the Madras council. 
Orme arrived at Madras on 12 September 1754 as export warehouse keeper and seventh member in council. Despite an aloofness and arrogance which made him extremely unpopular, he proved himself a highly competent bureaucrat and administrator. Always conscious of his superior talents, Orme's besetting sins were his overriding ambition and impatience. In March 1756 he was appointed third in council, and in September 1758 he became next in line to the governor. However, not content with rapid promotion, he had begun sending home confidential reports to the directors, criticizing his seniors on the council. News of his activities leaked back to Madras, and Orme found himself completely ostracized. Within days of his final promotion he was indicted by the council, charged with extortion and with deserting his post. Finding his position quite untenable, Orme made no attempt to defend himself. By October 1758 he had already left India, his reputation in tatters and his career in ruins. He finally reached London in October 1760, having returned by way of France. He bought a house at 11 Harley Street, London, where he lived for the next thirty years. He had not had the chance to make his fortune and he returned with an estate of only $5597. For a man with his tastes and aspirations this proved a quite inadequate sum, and for the rest of his life Orme was beset by persistent financial difficulties. 
In 1761 Orme wrote another dissertation, 'The effeminacy of the inhabitants of Indostan', which analysed the effects of climate on the peoples of India (also published posthumously in 'Fragments', 1805). Then in August 1763 he published the first volume of his 'History of the Military Transactions of the British Nation in Indostan'. A work of military history, it narrated the battle for supremacy in southern India which had been waged from 1750 to 1754 between the English, the French, and their Indian allies. It was received with great critical acclaim: Orme was applauded on all sides for his style and accuracy, was hailed as a historian in the true classical tradition, and achieved renown and recognition. In 1769 he was created the first official historiographer of the East India Company, at a salary of $400 a year. In 1770 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. 
A cultured and very learned man, with a wide range of interests, Orme was well known and respected in the intellectual and social circles of the day. Described by Boswell as 'that able and elegant historian of Indostan' (Boswell, 'Life', 3.284), he was highly esteemed by his peers, who included the historian Dr William Robertson and the orientalist Sir William Jones. He became particularly close to Jones, with whom he forged a lifelong friendship. A passionate collector of books, Orme was also a great lover of art and beauty. Among his friends were the painter Joshua Reynolds and the sculptor Joseph Nollekens, who in 1774 made a bust of Orme at the age of forty-five, which shows a highly intelligent and very refined face, with finely drawn, sensitive features. 
In 1778, after an interval of fifteen years, Orme finally published the second volume of the 'History of the Military Transactions'. This recounted the third and final phase of the Anglo-French struggle in India, from 1756 to 1761. Critically this too was very well received, but once again sales were slow and rather poor, although the 'History' was to be reprinted four times between 1763 and 1803. Considered as something of a landmark in the history of writing on India, it made a substantial impression on the next generation of British historians. Macaulay later described it as one of the most authentic and finely written in the English language, although he found its attention to detail 'minute to the point of tediousness' (Macaulay, 3.110). 
As its title indicates, the 'History' was intended to commemorate Britain's military successes in India. It highlighted the stirring deeds of Orme's contemporaries, especially those of his great friend Clive, whom he made the hero of his first volume. Despite this, the 'History' was never meant to be a celebration of either conquest or empire. Orme regarded the sweeping conquests which had been made since 1753 with deep dismay. He believed that trade and commerce should remain the East India Company's primary objective. Conquest and empire only brought corruption and decay, which threatened to ruin all the benefits of trade. The saga of bribery and corruption which had followed the conquest of Bengal left Orme bitterly disillusioned with his subject and with Clive, his hero. Rather than continue to chronicle what he saw as an increasingly sordid story he turned elsewhere. 
In 1782 Orme published his last major work, 'Historical Fragments of the Mogul Empire', which described the reign of the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb, and the rise of Maratha power in India. Although dependent on secondary materials, the 'Fragments' was highly valued for its accuracy and information. James Grant Duff, writing almost half a century later in his 'History of the Mahrattas' (1826), was full of praise for Orme's efforts to open up such a difficult and uncharted field. 
The strain of so much work took its toll on Orme's health, which had always been fragile. By 1781 it had deteriorated very sharply, forcing him to retire to the countryside. He leased a house at Colney in Hertfordshire, and finally, in 1793, retired permanently to Ealing. In 1796 he gave up his house in Harley Street and, finding he was beginning to go blind, sold off part of his beloved library: 2000 items fetched the considerable sum of $1179 16's'. 3died Orme died at Ealing, aged seventy-two, on 13 January 1801, and was buried in the churchyard of St Mary's, Ealing. He left behind his mistress, whom he appears to have eventually married in secret. In his will he bequeathed $1000 and all his remaining possessions to 'my friend Mrs Mary Dixon who now lives with me'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20834


Orme, William (1787-1830), Congregational minister, was born on 3 February 1787 at Falkirk, Stirlingshire. His parents moved to Edinburgh, and in 1792 he began his education under a schoolmaster named Waugh. On 1 July 1800 he was apprenticed to a wheelwright and turner. He disliked the work, but completed his five years. His father died in October 1803, and about this time he became a protege of James Alexander Haldane, whom he had heard preach at the tabernacle on Leith Walk, Edinburgh. In October 1805 he was admitted by Robert Haldane as a student for the ministry under George Cowie in Edinburgh. The usual period of study was two years, but Orme's periods of study, interrupted by a spell of preaching in Fife during 1806, amounted to little more than a year in all. 
On 11 March 1807 Orme became pastor of the Congregational Tabernacle at Perth, where he was ordained. About 1808 he was married, but his wife died following childbirth, and he later remarried. In 1809 Robert Haldane adopted Baptist views and evicted Orme's Congregationalists in favour of those in his congregation who became Baptists. Orme refused an offer to move to the Congregational church in Dundee, and spent many years searching for a suitable place of worship. He played a leading part in the development of Scottish Congregationalism as one of the twelve who met in September 1812 to draw up a scheme for a Congregational Union of Scotland, which was formed in 1813, and as one of the founders of the Glasgow Theological Academy in 1814. 
On 7 October 1824 Orme moved to the Congregational church at Camberwell Green, Surrey, and soon afterwards was elected foreign secretary of the London Missionary Society. In 1827 he was one of a deputation to MPs known to be sympathetic to the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts', and he also played an important part in the founding of a college in Gower Street, in 1828, which led to the granting of a charter founding the University of London in 1836. 
Orme was a leading biographer of seventeenth-century puritans, and his 'The Works of John Owen, with Memoirs of his Life' (1820) and 'Life and Times of Richard Baxter' (1830) were particularly influential. Other works included 'A Catechism of the Constitution and Ordinances of the Kingdom of Christ' (1817), which was regarded by the Scottish Congregational churches as an authentic statement of their views of church membership, 'Remarkable Passages in the Life of William Kiffin' (1823), and 'Memoirs of John Urquhart' (1827). Orme died on 8 May 1830 at his home in Camberwell, and was buried on 17 May at Bunhill Fields. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 20835


Ormerod, Edward Latham (1819-1873), physician, sixth son of George Ormerod (1785-1873), historian of Cheshire, and his wife, Sarah (1784-1860), eldest daughter of John Latham (1761-1843), physician and president of the Royal College of Physicians, and his wife, Mary Mayer, was born in Welbeck Street, London, on 27 August 1819. The anatomist William Piers Ormerod (1818-1860) and the geologist George Wareing Ormerod (1810-1891) were his brothers. He was educated first at Laleham School, and afterwards at Rugby School, which he left in 1838. He was next a medical student at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, remaining there until October 1841, when he entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. At Caius he held both classical and science scholarships. He graduated MB in 1846 and MD in 1851, and he was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1850. 
At St Bartholomew's Hospital, Ormerod worked as demonstrator of morbid anatomy during 1846 and 1847, and he became the first registrar of the hospital. However, in the latter year his health broke down, and he left London and went to practise as a physician at Brighton. In 1848 he published 'Clinical Observations on Continued Fever'. He was elected physician to the Brighton and Hove Dispensary in 1850, and three years later he became physician to the Sussex County Hospital. He married, on 12 April 1853, Mary Olivia Porter, daughter of Edward Robert Porter of Brighton, who died three months later; on 29 March 1856 he married Maria Millett ('b'. 1831/2), daughter of Frederick Millett of Woodhill, Surrey, with whom he had six children. 
Ormerod published several papers on medical subjects, taking diseases of the heart as his main interest. He delivered the Goulstonian lectures to the Royal College of Physicians and gave an address to the British Medical Association at its 1864 annual meeting. In 1867 and 1868 he was an examiner for the MB degree at Cambridge. Like his sister, the renowned entomologist Eleanor Anne Ormerod (1828-1901), Edward Ormerod had a great interest in the study of insects. In 1868 he published a natural history, 'British Social Wasps', a work well regarded by contemporary entomologists, and in 1872 he was elected FRS. At the time of his death he was working on the change of colour observable in gurnards, fish of brilliant hues. 
Ormerod died at his home, 14 Old Steyne, Brighton, on 17 March 1873, of malignant disease of the bladder. A modest, shy, and sensitive man, his personal character and pathological attainments had won him the respect of a wide circle of professional colleagues. 


@@@@@


doc= 20836


Ormerod, George (1785-1873), county historian, was born in High Street, Manchester, on 20 October 1785, the only (and posthumous) son of George Ormerod (1757-1785) of Bury, Lancashire, who had died thirteen days earlier. His mother was Elizabeth (1752-1822), daughter of Thomas Johnson of Manchester and Tyldesley and his wife, Susanna Wareing of Bury. He was initially educated privately, probably at Ardwick Green, Manchester, but in July 1798 was sent to King's School, Chester, of which a family friend, the Revd Thomas Bancroft, was a former headmaster. From 1793 Bancroft had been vicar of Bolton, Lancashire, and in 1799 he agreed to take Ormerod as a private pupil. Ormerod remained at Bolton vicarage until midsummer 1803, receiving a thorough classical education. He matriculated from Brasenose College, Oxford, on 21 April 1803, graduated BA in 1806, received the honorary degree of MA in 1807 and that of DCL in 1818, the last being in recognition of his recently published history of Cheshire. 
On his twenty-first birthday Ormerod came into his inheritance, including the extensive estates in south Lancashire left by his paternal grandparents and his mother's family. On 2 August 1808 he married, at Sandbach, Cheshire, Sarah (1784-1860), daughter of Dr John Latham MD, and his wife, Mary Mayer; Sarah was the sister of John Latham, a college friend. Between 1809 and 1828 the couple had seven sons, including the anatomist William Piers Ormerod, and three daughters; the youngest child, Eleanor Anne Ormerod (1828-1901), became a distinguished entomologist. 
During 1808 the Ormerods lived at Rawtenstall, but in 1809 they moved to Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire. By this time Ormerod -- who had had a passion for genealogy and an interest in local history from his schooldays -- was involved in extensive research for his history of Cheshire. To make the task easier, he decided to move back north, and in 1811 he bought the 83 acre Chorlton House estate, 4 miles from Chester. From then until 1817 the family spent the summers there, living in London during the winter so that Ormerod could conduct research in the British Museum. In Chester Castle he made use of a large collection of original documents, and a valuable loan of books and documents was made to him by Hugh Cholmondeley, dean of Chester, whose assistance and sympathy Ormerod warmly acknowledged. Ormerod also borrowed material extensively from leading county families, using introductions from Cholmondeley as well as his own social connections. Although he supervised the research, and was self-taught in palaeography, most of the transcribing was undertaken by his research assistant the Revd J. Eaton, and by Faithful Thomas, the deputy keeper of the records at Chester Castle. Ormerod himself made lengthy tours of the county and claimed to have visited every township at least once, and to have made copious notes on the spot. 
The resulting work was entitled 'The history of the county palatine and city of Chester... incorporated with a republication of King's Vale Royal and Leycester's Cheshire antiquities', and it appeared in ten parts, forming three volumes, between 1816 and 1819. A second edition, revised and enlarged by Thomas Helsby, wholly independently of Ormerod's family, was published in parts during 1875-82. 
Ormerod's history of Cheshire is a classic antiquarian county history. He wrote only between a quarter and a third of each volume, the remainder being lengthy transcripts of documents, and reprinted portions of earlier printed works. The 'History' was very enthusiastically received at the time, and was well regarded for many years afterwards, although some doubting voices were heard at an early stage. The great Yorkshire historian Joseph Hunter described it in 1822 as 'a succession of facts detached, a rope of sand' (Hess, 62), while the editor of the second edition of the work, Thomas Helsby, felt that 'the swelling stems of genealogy were permitted to have all their own way' (Helsby, xvi). Ormerod himself deliberately excluded all reference to commerce, industry, and urbanization as being outside the scope of his work, and his emphasis was thus heavily towards family history, manorial history, and antiquarian topography. 
After the completion of the work on Cheshire, in the autumn of 1817, Ormerod immediately left the county and never again lived in the north of England. In 1823 Chorlton House was sold and in the same year Ormerod inherited important property, mining, and financial interests from his uncle Thomas Johnson. With this increased wealth he was able, in 1825, to buy the 208 acre Barnesville estate at Sedbury, Gloucestershire, on the narrow peninsula between the Severn and Wye estuaries. He renamed the property Sedbury Park, and lived there from 1828 until his death. He was appointed a JP for Gloucestershire in 1827 and for Monmouthshire in 1830, and served as deputy lieutenant for the former in 1861, but otherwise his role in county administration was limited. 
As a leading county historian, Ormerod was a founder member of the Historic Society of Lancashire and Cheshire (1848) and of the Chester Archaeological Society (1849). He was a council member of the Chetham Society from its foundation in 1843 until 1846. For this society he edited, among other works, 'Lancashire Civil War Tracts' (1844), which is probably of more lasting value than his history of Cheshire. After 1819, with the exception of the 'Lancashire Civil War Tracts', Ormerod's output was drastically diminished and, although he made a number of contributions to the transactions of learned societies in the north-west, little of significance emerged. After his move to Gloucestershire he became particularly interested in the antiquities and Roman history of the Sedbury area, and in Offa's Dyke, which has its southern end close to Sedbury Park. He published a series of books and papers on these subjects between 1850 and 1861, culminating in 'Strigulensia' (1861), a volume on the archaeology of the district between the Severn and the Wye. 
Ormerod was thus a prosperous leisured gentleman with a genuine and abiding interest in antiquarian history and archaeology: his researches were undertaken in part to 'avert the irksomeness of superabundant leisure' but also because of a 'decided predilection' for the subject. His character was remembered by his niece Dorothy Latham: 'an autocrat in his own family and intolerant of any shortcomings or failings that came under his notice... The family discipline was strict, the younger children were expected to yield obedience to the elders' (Latham, 14). As he grew old his sight began to fail, and for the last few years of his life he was blind. He died on 9 October 1873 at Sedbury Park, Beachley, and was buried with his wife at Tidenham, Gloucestershire, on 15 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 20837


Ormerod, George Wareing (1810-1891), geologist, was born on 12 October 1810 at The Damhouse, Tyldesley, Lancashire, the second son of George Ormerod (1785-1873), local historian, and his wife, Sarah (1784-1860), the eldest daughter of John Latham (1761-1843), physician, and his wife, Mary. He was educated at private schools and by a private tutor at Harborne, near Birmingham, matriculated in 1829 at Brasenose College, Oxford, and graduated BA in 1833 and MA in 1836. He was admitted a solicitor in 1836 and practised in Manchester until 1855. Ormerod became a fellow of the Geological Society of London in 1833, and studied the Cheshire salt deposits, the Permian of Lancashire, and the drainage and subsidence of Chat Moss, publishing eight papers on these subjects between 1842 and 1853. He was a member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, and became treasurer in 1854. 
In 1855 Ormerod moved to Devon, where he spent the rest of his life. He practised in Chagford until 1869, when he moved to Teignmouth. He continued his geological studies, publishing papers on the northern edge of the Dartmoor granite, on minerals from the Trias, on fossils from Kent's cavern, and on the geology of south Devon. Ormerod joined the Devonshire Association in 1862 and served on the council and as a local secretary. He published a classified index to the association's publications in 1886, and a similar index to the Geological Society's publications in 1858, with later supplements. In addition to his geological work, Ormerod published papers on prehistoric and later antiquities in Devon, and on local history, including the 'Annals of the Teignmouth Cricket Club' (1888). Ormerod, who never married, died at Bonnicliff, East Teignmouth, on 6 January 1891. 


