@@@@@


doc= 20838


Ormerod, Oliver (d. 1626), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was the second son of Oliver Ormerod of Ormerod, Lancashire, and his wife, Sibill Hargrave. He was admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 6 June 1596, and graduated BA in 1600. In 1605-6 he was rector of Little Wenham, Suffolk. 
Ormerod was the author of two works of religious controversy, attacking puritans and Roman Catholics respectively. 'The Picture of a Puritane' (1605) is written 'in a most plaine and familiar manner', designed (as Ormerod states in the preface) to 'bring yourselves, your wives, your children and your servants, to a full detestation of the Puritan-faction'. It consists of two sets of dialogues: the first between an 'Englishman' and a 'Germaine', showing the doctrinal similarities between English puritans and German anabaptists, with examples drawn from the Marprelate tracts and the writings of Thomas Cartwright, 'which many nowadays doe make as great account of as Oracles'; the second between a 'Protestant' and a 'Puritane', including a report of the Hampton Court conference, in which the puritans were 'vanquished in open disputation... and driven to confess that their opinions were mere novelties and new devised fancies'. In the final dialogue Ormerod criticized the episcopal toleration of moderate puritan ministers, arguing that 'it does not stand with equitie, that some Ministers should be bound to shew their conformitie, and others be dispensed with'. 
The success of the work led Ormerod to publish a companion-piece entitled 'The Picture of a Papist' (1606), written in similar style as a set of dialogues between a 'Minister' and a 'Recusant'. The work was entered in the Stationers' register on 9 December 1605, only a month after the discovery of the Gunpowder Plot, and violently denounces the conspirators, expressing the hope: 'that their privities might be cut off, and thrown into the fire... that their bellies might be ripped up, and their hearts torn out... and that their quarters might be fixed upon the gates of our Cities, and exposed to the eyes of men.' In the preface Ormerod denied any connection with Thomas Dekker's pamphlet 'The Double PP' (1605), 'which some in London have reported to be of my drawing', and declared that it was 'a greate disgrace to our Religion' that 'histrionicall jesters and stage players should be suffered to write books of such matters'. 
Both these works provoked indignant responses from other writers. In his 'Short Dialogue' (1605) the puritan minister Samuel Hieron challenged the accuracy of Ormerod's account 'of a man in Oxfordshire who as the Pamphletter saith, being one of the puritan faction, when his Father's ribs were broken, would not ride for a bonesetter on the Saboth day'. According to Hieron, 'the Father's ribb was never broken; he had a bruise indeede with a fall, and the meanes was seasonably used, and he soone recovered'; however, the story was repeated without alteration in the second edition (1605) of 'The Picture of a Puritane', 'newly corrected and enlarged'. The anonymous Roman Catholic author of 'The Image of Bothe Churches' (1623) also criticized 'Ormerode, the picturemaker, who upon erroneous misconceaving, condemned that singular and renowned Doctor Allen, for affirming that princes might be slayne by their subjects'. 
On 20 March 1610 Ormerod was presented to the rectory of Norton Fitzwarren, Somerset, resigning on 31 March 1617 when he was presented to the rectory of Huntspill, Somerset, where he remained until his death; the patron of both livings was William Bourchier, third earl of Bath. In or before 1619 he married Joan 
(or Johanna; died 1638/9)
, daughter of Richard Hinkson, possibly from Kent. Ormerod's will, dated 17 January 1626, shows him to have been a wealthy man: it bequeathes the sum of $100 to his son Richard, $300 to his eldest daughter, Anne, and $200 each to his younger daughters Jane and Elizabeth. He charged his widow 'to be careful in the tutoring and well bringing up of my children', and left their legacies to be managed by her, 'because my said children are young and not of themselves able to govern their estates'. Ormerod died soon afterwards; his will was proved on 28 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 20839


Ormerod, William Piers (1818-1860), anatomist and surgeon, was born in London on 14 May 1818, the fifth son of the historian George Ormerod (1785-1873), of Sedbury Park, Tidenham, Gloucestershire, and Sarah (1784-1860), daughter of John Latham MD (1761-1843); George Wareing Ormerod and Edward Latham Ormerod were his brothers, Eleanor Anne Ormerod his sister. He was sent to a private school at Laleham, Middlesex, together with his younger brother, Edward, and afterwards (in 1832) to Rugby School, where three of his elder brothers had been educated. In 1835 he went to St Bartholomew's Hospital where, on the advice of his uncle, Dr Peter Mere Latham, he was articled to Edward Stanley, and was helped by James Paget. He was a quiet and diligent student, and did well in examinations. 
In 1840-41 Ormerod was house surgeon to William Lawrence, and in 1842 he gained the Jacksonian prize of the Royal College of Surgeons for his 'Essay on the comparative merits of mercury and iodine in the treatment of syphilis'. In 1843 he was appointed demonstrator of anatomy, and in the following year he printed, for the use of the students of the hospital, a collection of 'Questions in Practical Anatomy' (1844). He became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1843, and afterwards a fellow (1845); he also belonged to the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society. His health began to fail from overwork, and in 1844 he left London and retired to his father's house at Sedbury Park. Here he arranged the surgical materials that he had collected in the hospital between 1835 and 1844. He published them in 1846, together with the substance of his 1842 Jacksonian prize essay, under the title 'Clinical Collections'. 
In the summer of 1846 Ormerod returned to work and went to Oxford. He was elected a surgeon to the Radcliffe Infirmary, and in 1848 he published an essay, 'On the Sanatory ['sic'] Condition of Oxford', based on the annual reports of the registrar-general for 1844-6; this paid special attention to the sanitary condition of the different places in which deaths from infectious diseases had occurred. But in December 1848, 'after a period of great hurry and anxiety', he suffered from epileptic fits and retired from practice altogether. He never married. He left Oxford in 1849, and in 1850 settled at Canterbury. He hoped to be strong enough to train as a missionary. However, his mind failed gradually, and he died at his home, 33 St Peter's, Westgate, Canterbury, on 10 June 1860, having fractured the base of his skull from a fall during an epileptic seizure. He was buried in the churchyard of St Martin's, Canterbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 20840


Ormesby, Sir William (d. 1317), justice, probably derived his name from one of two adjacent villages of Ormesby (St Michael and St Margaret) in south-east Norfolk, about 5 miles north of Great Yarmouth. Nothing else is known of his origins and, if he inherited any property from his parents, it seems only to have been of very modest extent. His first appearance in the records is probably in 1275 when a William of Ormesby, who is probably to be identified with the future judge (although he had at least one contemporary namesake), made a bid to farm three hundreds in south-east Norfolk. By 1283 Ormesby was being paid a retainer, probably for his professional legal services, by the prior of Norwich. He acted as a serjeant on the Norfolk eyre of 1286 and in the Norfolk assizes at Norwich in 1288, although there is no evidence of his acting as a serjeant in the Westminster bench, either then or later. By 1291 he had entered the service of the earl of Norfolk, subsequently receiving a grant of the contested Yorkshire manor of Thornton in Pickeringlithe from the earl, and he continued to witness the earl's charters for at least a decade after he had entered the king's service. This happened in 1292 when he was appointed a junior justice of the northern eyre circuit led by Hugh Cressingham, who also came from Norfolk. Ormesby was particularly associated with the hearing of crown pleas, and he was also commissioned to hold gaol deliveries to try those who surrendered to justice after the eyres had left the counties concerned. Surviving law reports indicate, however, that he also played a part in the hearing of civil pleas. 
Ormesby remained in the king's service after the eyre circuits were suspended in June 1294 and was henceforth regularly appointed both to oyer and terminer commissions and to deliver gaols, mainly in East Anglia but also on occasion elsewhere in the country. He was summoned to the August parliament of 1295, and was sent as a messenger to the king of the Romans later that month. It was also apparently at about this time that he became a knight. At the end of 1295 or early in 1296 he became a justice of the king's bench. He had served there for no more than a year when he was appointed a justice in the newly conquered Scotland, at about the same time that his erstwhile judicial colleague Cressingham was appointed treasurer of Scotland. The beginning of a general revolt of the Scots against the English occupation regime was marked by an attack led by William Wallace against Ormesby while he was holding a session at Scone in May 1297. Ormesby lost all his personal possessions and was lucky to escape with his life. He seems to have fled to England but returned later that summer to Scotland. He had, however, been removed from office in Scotland before the debacle at Stirling Bridge at which Cressingham was killed, and was commissioned in October 1297 to levy foot soldiers in the northern counties for service against the Scots. 
Late in 1297 or early in 1298 Ormesby was reappointed to the court of the king's bench, and was paid as one of its justices until Michaelmas term 1303, although he left the court to act as one of the justices of the eyres for Cambridgeshire and the Isle of Ely in 1299, and to act as a justice in the liberty of Durham while it was in the hands of the king in 1302-3. In 1305 and 1306 he was appointed leader of the groups of trailbaston justices who held sessions in his own home county of Norfolk and in Suffolk, and in 1307 he served briefly as justice of Chester. By September 1308 he had been appointed as the senior assize justice for Norfolk and Suffolk and retained that position, although apparently with some intermissions and with Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire later being added to the circuit, until the time of his death. He also continued to be appointed to a variety of other judicial commissions, mainly but not exclusively in the same counties. These included commissions for the enforcement of the 'Statute of Winchester' and commissions to punish the wrongdoing of local officials. He was appointed a justice both of the abortive Durham eyre of 1311 and of the Kent eyre of 1313-14, where he heard both civil and crown pleas. 
William Ormesby was married twice. By 1286 he had married his first wife, Agnes, the heir to a considerable landed estate in Norfolk which included lands in Ormesby. He was almost certainly her second husband. If, as seems probable, she was the mother of Ormesby's son John, the marriage must have taken place some years before 1286, for in 1294 William and Agnes settled two Norfolk manors belonging to Agnes on John and his wife, Katherine, and in 1296 and 1297 John accompanied his father to Scotland. Agnes died not long before Michaelmas term 1306. Between 1306 and 1308 Ormesby married as his second wife Sibyl, the widow of the royal justice Roger Loveday who had died in 1287. She brought him a life interest in extensive lands in Cambridgeshire and Suffolk, which had either been settled jointly on Roger and herself or which she held in dower. Ormesby was still alive and capable of transacting business with judicial colleagues on 28 April 1317, but was dead by 12 June 1317, when his executors were instructed to send in to the exchequer his assize and other plea rolls. He was buried in the abbey of St Benet of Hulme, not far from Ormesby, a house of which he had been a benefactor during his lifetime. 


@@@@@


doc= 20841


Ormond, Sir James (d. 1497), administrator, was the illegitimate son of John Butler, sixth earl of Ormond (d. 1476/7), and Raynalda O'Brien. Ambitious and quarrelsome, he was apparently raised at court by his uncle, Thomas, the seventh earl. He became expert in arms and entered Lincoln's Inn in June 1486. In 1487, Earl Thomas appointed Ormond as his deputy in Ireland in succession to Sir James Butler of Dunboyne. Yet this appointment was contested by the latter's son, Piers, son-in-law to Gerald Fitzgerald, eighth earl of Kildare (died 1513), and to whom Butler had bequeathed the office. Ormond did not return to Ireland until December 1491, when, as squire for the king's body, he was sent with Thomas Garth and 200 soldiers to defend the Ormond region against Perkin Warbeck, being appointed captain and governor of Kilkenny and Tipperary. In June 1492, now king's councillor, he was appointed joint governor of Ireland with Archbishop Walter Fitzsimons of Dublin, the deputy lieutenant, after the earl of Kildare's dismissal. Ormond also succeeded Lord Portlester as lord treasurer and apparently had primary responsibility for the rule of the southern shires. The new Butler-dominated administration gradually strengthened central government control over the outlying shires, as the proceedings of the 1493 parliament show; and supported by his mother's relatives, the Gaelic O Briain family, Ormond also consolidated his authority over his uncle's estates. Yet Kildare's dismissal also stoked the old Butler-Fitzgerald feud: clashes followed in Dublin between rival bands of retainers, Ship Street was burned, a former mayor was murdered, and in early summer 1493 there occurred Ormond's famous reconciliation with Kildare when Sir James, having taken refuge in St Patrick's Cathedral, shook hands with Kildare through a hole cut in the chapter house door. 
Probably fearing that these disturbances would encourage another invasion by Warbeck, Henry VII dispatched reinforcements and in September 1493 replaced Ormond and Fitzsimons with Viscount Gormanston as caretaker governor. Ormond sailed for England soon after, to be joined shortly at court by other prominent magnates and officials. Over the winter, old quarrels were composed and a new initiative prepared to hold Ireland against Warbeck. This resulted in the appointment of an experienced captain, Sir Edward Poynings, as deputy lieutenant, with 653 soldiers and five or six experienced administrators and lawyers, one of whom, Sir Hugh Conway, replaced Ormond as treasurer. On his return to Ireland in June 1494, Ormond received a grant of manors in Meath, Kilkenny, and Tipperary in compensation, and was also appointed constable of Limerick Castle to keep an eye on Maurice Fitzgerald (died 1520), the unreliable ninth earl of Desmond. He remained closely associated with Poynings, accompanying the deputy and Kildare on an expedition into Ulster in November; and after Poynings's breach with Kildare, the deputy became even more reliant on Ormond's troops and local connections. Following Kildare's arrest for treason in February 1495, his brother seized Carlow Castle. Poynings and Ormond besieged it during the spring, retaking it in July; but by then Warbeck and Desmond were besieging Waterford. Ormond had to organize the defence of the Butler territories against Desmond's raiding parties and bring troops to raise the siege. After this, support for Warbeck collapsed and Poynings was recalled; and with the departure of many of Poynings's troops, Ormond's military role expanded still further. 
In the spring of 1496, however, Ormond's leading position was jeopardized by the king's decision to rehabilitate and restore as governor the earl of Kildare. Sir James was summoned to court in July for a formal reconciliation between the earls of Ormond and Kildare and their supporters, but his role and prospects were now greatly reduced: the English troops he had commanded were withdrawn and Kildare favoured Ormond's rival, Sir Piers Butler. He became aloof and aggressive, mobilizing support in the Butler territories in alliance with the O Briain chief and, according to Sir Piers, intriguing with Warbeck and claiming to be rightful earl of Ormond. Reports of his behaviour drew a royal summons early in 1497, and a second in May, both of which he ignored. Finally, he was attacked and killed by Sir Piers on 17 July 1497 in a kind of impromptu duel near Kilkenny, shortly before Warbeck's last visit to Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 20842


Ormsby, John (1829-1895), writer and translator, was born at Gortner Abbey, co. Mayo, on 25 April 1829, the eldest child and only son of George Ormsby (died 1836), of the 3rd dragoon guards, who had fought in the Peninsula and became high sheriff of co. Mayo in 1827, and his wife, Marianne ('b'. 1801), third daughter of Humphrey Jones of Mullinabro, co. Kilkenny. He was a direct descendant of the Ormsby family which migrated from Lincolnshire to co. Mayo in the reign of Elizabeth I, and, on his mother's side, of Catherine Cromwell, eldest sister of Oliver Cromwell. On the death of both parents during his childhood, he was made the ward of Denis Browne, dean of Emly, sent to Dr Homan's private school at Seapoint, near Dublin, and subsequently educated at Trinity College, Dublin, which he entered as a pensioner in 1845. In 1850 he was admitted at the Middle Temple, and kept his terms, but he was never called to the bar. However, the distinguished Hispanist and friend of Ormsby, James Fitzmaurice-Kelly, observed that 'Mr Ormsby took with him into letters an intelligence trained in logical methods, an exact appreciation of the value of evidence' ('Revue Hispanique', 2, 1895, 364). Leslie Stephen recalled him living amid a book-stacked confusion at 7 King's Bench Walk in the Temple, a 'denizen of [...] the cultivated and scholarlike Bohemia' of London ('Alpine Journal', 34). He had prints of Hogarth and was very well read in eighteenth-century English literature, especially Defoe and Fielding. T. E. Kebbel remembered him as a convivial and much appreciated fellow-member of the tory Rambler Club, a kindly man with wide sympathies 'whom it was refreshing even to look at and [who] had a humour of his own, which was always finding vent, no matter what the subject' (Kebbel, 198-9). 
Ormsby joined the Alpine Club in the first year of its existence -- 1858 -- and contributed a vivid account, 'The ascent of the Grivola', about a climb that he made with others in August 1859 to 'Peaks, Passes, and Glaciers' (1862). In 1864 he published 'Autumn Rambles in North Africa', travel sketches illustrated by himself and previously brought out in 'Fraser's Magazine' recounting 'two seasons' wanderings' starting at Constantine and ending at Tunis. Here a sharp perception of visual detail (as in his account of the Tunis bazaars) and a sympathetic but realistic response to places and people are conveyed with considerable narrative skill. In 1876 he published a volume of pieces ('Stray Papers') he had contributed to the 'Saturday Review', the 'Pall Mall Gazette', and other journals, where his amused eye is turned mainly towards London and features of English life and culture. He also contributed articles to 'Chambers' Encyclopaedia' and the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. 
It is not clear when or how Ormsby first took an interest in Spain, its language, and its literature. He is plausibly credited with publishing, in 1872, a work entitled 'Mountains of Spain'. In any case, it was after an extensive ramble in Spain, following the scenes of the exploits of that country's medieval hero El Cid in Valencia, Aragon, and Castile, with Sanchez's edition of the epic recounting that hero's story as his only book, that he undertook its translation, published in 1879. It is a much reduced version of the original, the greater part of it rendered into prose and only those passages that Ormsby judged to be the most vivid and dramatic put into English rhyming couplets. Here, however, his concern was 'to render [...] line for line and as literally as was compatible with justice to the original' ('The Poem of the Cid', ed. and trans. J. Ormsby, 1879, 6). The text is preceded by a lengthy and well-informed introduction based on wide scholarly reading and offering an alert examination of the issues that have continued to preoccupy Cidian scholars. The work is dedicated to the eminent Spanish scholar Gayangos. 
In 1885 Ormsby's four-volume translation of 'Don Quixote' appeared, rounded off with annotated bibliographies of Spanish romances of chivalry and of editions and translations of the 'Quixote', where he displays his interests and learning as a literary scholar, and finally with a list of the proverbs contained in that work. U. R. Burke acknowledged his indebtedness to this list in the third edition (p. viii) of his own 'Sancho Panza's Proverbs' (1892). He also rightly judged Ormsby's translation of the 'Quixote' to be the best to have been produced in English, an estimate that may be held to remain valid down to the 1990s. The translation is introduced by a discerning evaluation of earlier English versions, an account of Cervantes' life that seeks 'to separate what is a matter of fact from what is a matter of conjecture', and a literary examination of the work itself, written in vigorous reaction against the Romantic idealization of Don Quixote (including 'Byron's melodious nonsense' on the subject) that represents a highly perceptive and in some respects remarkable contribution in its time to Cervantine criticism. According to Palau, the 'notable edition' of the 'Quixote' in Spanish published at Edinburgh and London in 1898-9 was the outcome of a scholarly collaboration between Ormsby and Fitzmaurice-Kelly. The latter's edition of 1901 uses Ormsby's 1885 translation as revised in Ormsby's own MS annotations; Fitzmaurice-Kelly comments that 'I have known no man who was a sterner critic of himself and of his own writings' (Cervantes, 'Don Quixote', 1.xxxvi). Ormsby lived out his later years much isolated by deafness and died, unmarried, at 19 Nelson Crescent, Ramsgate on 30 October 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 20843


Ornsby, George (1809-1886), antiquary, born on 9 March 1809 at Darlington, co. Durham, was the eldest son of George Ornsby (1772-1823), a solicitor, of The Lodge, Lanchester, and his wife, Margaret Askwith. Robert Ornsby (1820-1889) was his younger brother. His father, an accomplished scholar, instructed his sons at home until his death in 1823; George was then sent to Durham grammar school (1823-6). After practising as a solicitor in Durham, he entered University College, Durham, as a theological student in 1839. In 1841 he was ordained, and held in succession the curacies of Newburn, Northumberland (1841-3); Sedgefield, co. Durham (1843-4); and Whickham, in the same county (1845-50). On 1 May 1843 he married Anne (died 1872), eldest daughter of John Wilson JP and deputy lieutenant, of The Hill, Brigham, Cumberland; they had two sons and two daughters. 
In July 1850, on the presentation of the dean and chapter of Durham, Ornsby was inducted to the vicarage of Fishlake, West Riding of Yorkshire; the charge of this small parish left him ample opportunity for literary pursuits. In 1872 the University of Durham conferred on him the honorary degree of MA, and on 29 May 1873 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. In 1879 he was preferred to the prebendal stall of Ampleforth at York. He was also a JP and deputy lieutenant. 
Ornsby was a model parish priest and an accurate, painstaking antiquary. He was the lifelong friend of James Raine, the historian of north Durham. In 1846 he published a valuable little topographical work entitled 'Sketches of Durham', still a sought-after volume at the end of the twentieth century. For the Surtees Society he edited Dean Granville's 'Remains', (2 vols., 1861 and 1865), Bishop John Cosin's 'Correspondence' (2 vols., 1869-72), and 'Selections from the Household Books of Lord William Howard of Naworth' (1878). He also undertook for the same society an edition of Dean Thomas Comber's 'Correspondence', but never finished it. In 1877 he wrote the historical introduction to the volume of sermons preached at the reopening of Durham Cathedral, and in 1882 his 'Diocesan History of York' was published. Ornsby died at his home in Fishlake on 17 April 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 20844


Ornsby, Robert (1820-1889), classical scholar and biographer, was the third son of George Ornsby of Lanchester, Durham. George Ornsby was his eldest brother. He matriculated in 1836 at Lincoln College, Oxford, where he became a friend of Mark Pattison. Obtaining one of Lord Crewe's exhibitions, he graduated BA in 1840, after gaining a first class in 'literae humaniores'. In 1843 he was elected to a fellowship at Trinity College, and graduated MA. Thereafter he held the college office of lecturer in rhetoric and the university office of master of the schools, and for four or five years was actively engaged in private tuition. For a time he was curate of St Olave's, Chichester, but he seceded from the Church of England, and was received into the Roman Catholic communion in May 1847. In 1846 he married Elizabeth, daughter of William Dalgairns and sister of Newman's close associate, J. D. Dalgairns. She became a Roman Catholic in 1848. 
For some years after this Ornsby assisted Frederick Lucas in conducting 'The Tablet' newspaper while it was published in Dublin. When Newman undertook the task of founding a Catholic university for Ireland in 1854, Ornsby accepted his invitation to become professor of Greek and Latin literature in the new institution. Later on he became private tutor to the future duke of Norfolk and his brother, whom he accompanied on a short tour through southern and eastern Europe. He was subsequently for a short time librarian at Arundel Castle, but he returned to his old post at the Catholic university in 1874, at the request of the Irish bishops. In 1882, when the senate of the Royal University of Ireland were forming their first staff of examiners, Ornsby was elected a fellow of the university and an examiner in Greek. He died at Earlsfort Terrace, Dublin, on 21 April 1889. He published a life of St Francis of Sales (1856), an edition with notes of the 'Greek Testament' (1860), and 'Memoirs of James Robert Hope-Scott, Q.C.' (2 vols., 1884), which involved him in correspondence with W. E. Gladstone. 


@@@@@


doc= 20845


O'Rourke, Sir Brian (d. 1591), chieftain and rebel, was a younger son of Brian Ballagh O'Rourke (died 1562), chieftain, and his wife, Grainne (died 1551), daughter of Manus O'Donnell (d. 1563), chieftain. Brian Ballagh is considered to have been the last king of West Breifne, co. Leitrim. 
Following the death of Brian Ballagh in 1562 his son Aodh Gallda was declared chief of the O'Rourkes of Breifne, but was murdered in Leitrim in 1564. Contemporaries suspected that this was done on Brian O'Rourke's behalf. Brian Ballagh's next eldest son, Aodh Buidhe, declared himself chief, but he was killed in 1566, again possibly at Brian O'Rourke's instigation -- at which point O'Rourke was declared chief. The remainder of O'Rourke's life was characterized by resistance to the English occupation of Connaught, interspersed with battles with his nephews. During the 1570s the Irish administration increased its efforts to bring Connaught under royal control by pressuring the Irish chieftains to surrender their lands, receiving them back again on English tenures, and allow sheriffs into the province. Like many Irish chieftains, O'Rourke was opposed to this interference; consequently, he maintained a large host of galloglass, and often led raids within the province. 
Brehon law in Ireland allowed for multiple marriages, and O'Rourke had more than one wife. The first of whom there is record is Annably ni Crean (died after 1582). He seems to have been married to his second wife, Mary (died in or before 1589), daughter of Richard Burke, second earl of Clanricarde, and widow of Theobald Burke, while still married to Annably. However, the English government, opposed to multiple marriages, recognized only Mary as O'Rourke's legitimate wife. O'Rourke married her some time after 1582. While he wrote of the death of his wife in 1589, he was probably referring to a later wife, Eleanor (died 1589), daughter of James fitz John Fitzgerald, thirteenth earl of Desmond, nobleman, and his fourth wife, Ellen. Eleanor O'Rourke's death is recorded in the Irish annals under 1589. Brian O'Rourke had at least six children by his various wives, the eldest two being Brian Oge ['see below'] and Owen (died 1589), from his marriage to Annably; however, the English considered only Tadhg, the son of Mary, legitimate. 
By 1576 O'Rourke was among the growing number of chieftains who had agreed to submit, meeting the lord deputy, Sir Henry Sidney, in Dublin in June. By October 1577 O'Rourke had made an agreement with Sir Nicholas Malby, governor of Connaught, to pay rent to the crown. Despite these agreements, Malby suspected Hugh O'Donnell and O'Rourke of conspiring to revolt in 1578. Malby's men seized O'Rourke's castle at Leitrim. O'Rourke met Sidney shortly after and Leitrim was returned to him; it is likely at this point that he was knighted. If a knighthood was meant to pacify him, it had little effect, for he took advantage of the rebellions that had spread under his brothers-in-law Gerald fitz James Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond, and James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, and rejoined the resistance in Connaught against the government. However, he twice agreed to give Brian Oge to Malby as a pledge, but failed to deliver him. 
In summer 1580 O'Rourke hired 500 galloglass to support O'Donnell, and fought Malby over control of Leitrim. In 1581 O'Donnell ended his rebellion and, along with Donough O'Conor Sligo, agreed to guarantee O'Rourke's good behaviour on 3 October. The following year O'Rourke agreed to a one-year truce. Nevertheless, in 1583 he attacked Sligo; it was probably during this raid that he captured his nephew, Tadhg, who later died in his custody. In January 1585 another of O'Rourke's nephews, Brian O'Rourke, sheriff of Sligo, made an incursion into Dartry; O'Rourke came to the aid of Dartry. His men then took his nephew under their own protection, but they killed him three days later. O'Rourke was blamed for being involved in 'this unbecoming deed' ('AFM', 5.1826-7). 
Increasingly preoccupied with the threat from Spain, Elizabeth I charged the new lord deputy, Sir John Perrot, with the task of bringing order to Connaught. Along with the new governor of Connaught, Sir Richard Bingham, Perrot began taking inquests in 1585 to determine the ownership of all the lands in the province and the rent due from each chieftain to the crown. These inquests were to form the basis of the composition of Connaught. On 27 September O'Rourke signed an indenture which identified his lands from which rent was due to the crown. He did well under the composition and was granted the castles of Dromahair, Leitrim, and Newtown rent-free. Despite these favourable terms, he refused to pay the rent he did owe. By 1586 Bingham had pressured him to agree to make payments, to give up his galloglass, and to surrender his eldest son, Brian Oge, as a pledge. In turn, Brian Oge was sent to study at Oxford. 
Following the defeat of the Spanish Armada in summer 1588, a portion of the remaining Spanish fleet was wrecked off the coast of Ireland. Fearing a Catholic alliance, Elizabeth ordered Bingham to execute all Spanish survivors captured in Ireland, and declared it treason to offer them aid. The remaining Spanish, starving and destitute, had to rely on the help of the Irish. Faced with such a stark choice, many of the Irish chieftains who found Spanish survivors handed them over to the English authorities; O'Rourke did not. Captain Francisco de Cuellar, one of the survivors to whom he offered comfort, later wrote to Philip II of his ordeal. Cuellar described O'Rourke as 'a very good Christian and an enemy to the heretics, and always fights against them' ('Letter', trans. Sedgwick, 59). Philip wrote to O'Rourke, thanking him for his support. 
Once the Spanish threat had receded, Bingham redoubled his efforts to subdue Connaught, but his brutal approach prompted another revolt in 1589. The chieftains, including O'Rourke, cited Bingham's harassment as the cause of their revolt. O'Rourke complained specifically about Bingham's attacks on him, of his son Owen's death at the hand of William Taaf, and of Dromahair having been burnt. Bingham, it seems, had also attempted in spring 1589 to exact payments from O'Rourke for Brian Oge's board at Oxford. He responded to O'Rourke's complaints, declared 'how naughtily O'Rourke hath always carried himself', and accused him of having defiled an effigy of the queen ('CSP Ire.', '1588-92', 141). According to the lord deputy, Sir William Fitzwilliam, O'Rourke apparently made an effigy of Elizabeth which his galloglass hacked with axes, before tying it to a horse's tail and dragging it along the ground. These complaints aside, it is also quite possible that O'Rourke was stirred to revolt through the machinations of the chief justice of the common pleas, Sir Robert Dillon. Bingham had many enemies, including Dillon, who may have wished to oust him by fomenting revolt in Connaught. There is evidence that Dillon and O'Rourke corresponded. 
After smuggling Brian Oge back from Oxford, O'Rourke renewed his revolt. Despite half-hearted attempts at pacification by Fitzwilliam, the fighting continued. However, the situation deteriorated to the point where, on 14 March 1590, Fitzwilliam ordered Bingham to attack O'Rourke. Bingham, aided by O'Rourke's nephews, Donnell and Hugh Oge (Aodh Og), drove O'Rourke out of Breifne within the month. Brian Oge returned to his father's territory and continued the fight against Bingham. With the tide in their favour, the government now determined to remove O'Rourke permanently. Confident, Bingham described him as 'more like a beggar than a king, for above a king he esteemed himself, and assuredly the proud beggar held that opinion of his own greatness, as he thought all the force Her Majesty had, durst not meddle with him; but I hope this journey will end his kingdom, if not himself, and haply they may get his head' ('CSP Ire.', '1588-92', 329). On 30 April the privy council informed Fitzwilliam that they wanted additional forces for Bingham's attack on O'Rourke, considering that 'the subduying of whom wee thought allmost as needefull as the defence against the Spaniardes' ('APC', '1590', 77). O'Rourke fled to Tyrconnell in late May, sending word that he would consider surrendering if he was promised an 'indifferent' trial. Bingham responded by calling him 'the veriest beggar and wretch, whose demeanour is most odious to all good subjects' ('CSP Ire.', '1588-92', 231). In December Sir George Carew, president of Munster, informed the privy council that O'Rourke was expected to return to his territory with galloglass in support. 
Instead, O'Rourke fled to Scotland in 1591, possibly to raise Scottish troops, although he professed that it was to receive protection from James VI. After reaching Glasgow in February, he wrote to James, complaining of his rough treatment and asking for royal protection. James informed Robert Bowes, the English ambassador. Keen to have him captured, Elizabeth asked that O'Rourke be kept waiting in Glasgow until he could be apprehended, and James complied. On 16 March the king ordered O'Rourke's arrest in Glasgow, which caused a riot among the townspeople, who feared that their trade with Ireland would be disrupted. 
O'Rourke was sent to the Tower of London by May and the privy council instructed Fitzwilliam and Bingham to supply evidence of treason. On 28 October, O'Rourke was tried in Westminster Hall on eight counts of treason, including trying to depose the queen, abusing an effigy of her, offering protection to survivors of the Armada, and receiving letters of thanks from Philip. When he refused to honour the privy council by kneeling before it, the privy councillors asked why he was willing to kneel before Catholic images but not before them. He is reported to have replied, 'because between God and his saints, whose images I respect, and you, I have ever thought there was a great difference' ('Ireland under Elizabeth', 63). Through an interpreter, John Ly, he informed the judge that he would not consent to be tried by the jury without being given access to a lawyer and a week to prepare his defence. O'Rourke also asked for Elizabeth to be one of the jurors. He refused to enter a plea, but was found guilty none the less. When he was told that he would suffer a traitor's death, he remained unmoved. 
O'Rourke was hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyburn on or soon after 3 November (he was certainly dead by 23 November). On his way to the scaffold, his interpreter asked him to beg forgiveness of the queen, to which he replied that if she had given him the time to defend himself or spared his life he would have asked her forgiveness and promised to serve her. He also remarked that he had not expected James to hand him over to Elizabeth without any protection. His death was described by the four masters as 'one of the mournful stories of the Irish' ('AFM', 6.1906-7). 
O'Rourke was the subject of poems by a number of Gaelic bards. Sean MacTorna O Maelchonaire composed a poem for him when he became lord of Breifne in 1566. Tadhg Dall O hUiginn, who wrote for various families in Ulster, Connaught, and Leinster, composed a poem to him about 1580. In 1589 Conaire O Maoil Chonaire was accused of writing a poem for O'Rourke; however, in a letter he urged Donough O'Brien, fourth earl of Thomond, to intervene on his behalf, pointing out that the charge was groundless, since his family wrote chronicles, not poetry. 


During the 1590s Brian Oge's own problems became linked to the Nine Years' War. Unable to return to Breifne, in 1592 he stayed with the MacSweenys and the Maguires, joining the developing confederacy of Irish chiefs under Hugh Roe O'Donnell. According to Philip O'Sullivan Beare, a contemporary who wrote his own history of the period, Brian Oge was committed to the confederacy, losing 'no opportunity of avenging the death of his father, who was killed by the Queen' ('Ireland under Elizabeth', 69). Brian Oge also had more immediate reasons for revolt. In 1593 Clement VIII acknowledged him as O'Rourke's legitimate heir. However, he was still not allowed to occupy his land, despite the fact that the government demanded that he continue to pay rent on it. 
Elizabeth knew that the confederacy was in contact with Philip and that he had promised to send Spanish troops to Ireland. Consequently, Brian Oge, Hugh O'Neill, second earl of Tyrone, Hugh Roe O'Donnell (1572-1602), Hugh Maguire, and Hugh Roe MacMahon were declared traitors on 23 June 1595. Despite his position, Brian Oge was declared chief of the O'Rourkes by his clansmen in 1595. In 1596, as the rebellion spread, Bingham was dismissed as governor of Connaught and replaced by Sir Conyers Clifford, who took a more conciliatory approach. He sent envoys to Tyrone and O'Donnell to negotiate a peace. Loath to trust the government, Tyrone and O'Donnell rejected the offer, and Elizabeth sent a stronger force to Connaught under Sir John Norreys. Upon his arrival Norreys marched towards the territory of Theobald MacWilliam Burke, who in turn sent to O'Donnell for help. O'Donnell summoned his supporters, among whom Brian Oge was the first to arrive. After some sporadic fighting the two sides met at the Robe River, co. Mayo, to negotiate. Norreys promised O'Donnell, Brian Oge, and others consideration if they returned to the queen's allegiance, but after several attempts by both sides to spy on each other, he ran out of provisions and had to leave. 
In summer 1597 the new lord justice, Thomas Burgh, fifth Baron Burgh, removed Norreys and took over as general himself. Brian Oge and Maguire joined O'Donnell against Burgh and Clifford, but little fighting occurred over the summer. In the autumn O'Donnell decided to attack the government forces as well as Hugh O'Conor Roe, who had defected from the rebels. However, Brian Oge had promised O'Conor that he would inform him if O'Donnell planned to attack him. To thwart this, O'Donnell sent for Brian Oge to meet him at his camp, but headed himself for O'Conor's territory, which he plundered and then left. About this time Brian Oge married Mary, daughter of Cuchonnacht Maguire and his wife, Nuala, and sister of Sir Hugh Maguire (d. 1600). 
Following a dispute with O'Donnell, Brian Oge requested a royal pardon in late 1597, asking that he be restored to his father's lands. About a month later he presented the terms for his submission: he requested both a pardon, and to have his land given back to himself and his heirs; both were granted. He also asked that Bingham not be allowed to arrest him without order from the queen, stating, 'it is openly known how the Binghams maliciously urged [Brian Oge's] father to go into exile' (Brewer and Bullen, 3.279). In May 1598 Brian Oge surrendered hostages to Clifford and the two men promised to support each other, which served only to antagonize O'Donnell further. Nevertheless O'Donnell was loath to attack Brian Oge, since they were related, and tried instead to pressure him into rejoining the rebellion. Brian Oge's retainers feared an attack from O'Donnell more than one from the government and persuaded him to return to O'Donnell. 
On 5 August 1599 Brian Oge joined O'Donnell in the battle of the Curlews (in Gaelic, Coirrshliabh). In the continuous warfare, O'Conor Sligo had been stripped of almost all his castles, and joined up with Clifford in order to recoup his losses. He also stole some of O'Donnell's cattle, which O'Donnell used as a pretext and attacked him, causing Clifford to come to O'Conor's aid. Clifford was killed during the battle, and Brian Oge ordered his corpse to be beheaded. Brian Oge himself was shot in the hand and leg. As a result, O'Conor submitted to O'Donnell and the chieftaincy of Sligo was restored to him. 
In summer 1600 Charles Blount, eighth Baron Mountjoy, the new lord deputy, appointed Sir Oliver Lambert governor of Connaught. In September 1601 a Spanish force sent by Philip III arrived at Kinsale, co. Cork, to assist the Irish. Mountjoy immediately made for Kinsale, as did Carew and his forces. Tyrone and O'Donnell summoned their supporters, including Brian Oge, to aid the Spanish. The rebels arrived, and besieged the garrison, but on 24 December they were routed, and the Spanish left on 2 January 1602. Kinsale was a disaster and heralded the end of the Nine Years' War. In January 1602, O'Donnell went to Spain to seek help from Philip, but died there, and support ebbed away. O'Donnell's brother Rury O'Donnell (1574/5-1608) sought Brian Oge's continued backing, but Brian Oge refused, instead returning to Breifne to fight his brother Tadhg, who was attempting to seize the chieftaincy. 
On his accession as James I in 1603, the new king offered a pardon to all those involved in the rebellion willing to submit. Most of the chiefs, including Tyrone, accepted. On 9 January Mountjoy informed the privy council that only the 'proud, insolent, and faithless rebel' Brian Oge had not submitted, but while it would be difficult to hunt him down, the lord deputy would eventually be able to overcome his 'pride and contempt' ('CSP Ire.', '1601-3', 554). In March 1603 Lambert launched an attack on Brian Oge but was driven back. However, Brian Oge's victory was short-lived, for Lambert's attack was followed by another from Brian Oge's brother Tadhg, who succeeded in capturing most of Breifne. Tadhg then went to Mountjoy who planned to give him the territory and aid him in banishing Brian Oge. 
On 4 May Brian Oge wrote to James reminding him of how his father had fled to Scotland and been turned over to Elizabeth, at whose hands he had been unjustly killed. He asked the king that he be restored to O'Rourke's lands as his rightful heir. James was unmoved, for he wrote to Mountjoy (now earl of Devonshire) on 11 September in support of Tadhg, who was subsequently granted the entire territory. Brian Oge's situation turned from bad to worse. He was attacked by Rury O'Donnell, who was still angry with him for his refusal to support him after the defeat at Kinsale. He plundered Breifne and seized Dromahair, driving Brian Oge into the woods. Without his lands, and deprived of his patrimony, Brian Oge died in co. Galway on 28 January 1604 and was buried in the monastery of Rosserilly, co. Galway. According to O'Sullivan Beare, he died of a fever, 'deserted by those to whom he had entrusted his government'; however, at least one more recent historian suspects that he was poisoned by Lambert ('Ireland under Elizabeth', 177; MacDermot, 118). 


@@@@@


doc= 20846


Brian Oge O'Rourke (c.1569-1604), chieftain and rebel, was the elder of two known sons of Sir Brian O'Rourke and Annably ni Crean. He was educated at New College, Oxford, from 1584 to 1588. In 1588 his father arranged his escape, and he was back in Ireland by 1589, taking part in O'Rourke's revolts of 1589-90. Following his father's execution his lands were assessed, and the government considered whether to divide the territory among his heirs, or to take control of it. The chief lords, including Brian Oge, wanted the seignory divided among them, and his ensuing battle with his brother Tadhg for the patrimony lasted for the rest of their lives. 


@@@@@


doc= 20847


Ua Ruairc, Tigernan (d. 1172), king of Breifne, was the son of Aed, king of Breifne (died 1122), and is first mentioned as king of Breifne in 1124. His mother was Aillend, daughter of Ua Baigellain of Fir Manach, who was also mother of Donnchad Ua Cerbaill, king of Airgialla (died 1168), with whom he later competed to expand into the area of what is now co. Louth. 
In 1125 Ua Ruairc submitted to Toirdelbach Ua Conchobair, king of Connacht, contender for the high-kingship, and effective overlord of Ireland, who deposed Murchad Ua Maelsechlainn, king of Mide (died 1153), and allocated a quarter-portion of Mide to him. Eight years later, however, in 1133, Ua Ruairc took part in a grand alliance against Ua Conchobair, fighting alongside Ua Maelsechlainn and destroying the bridge and castle at Athlone. In 1137 he and Ua Maelsechlainn placed a fleet of between 140 and 200 ships on the River Shannon at Lough Ree, against Ua Conchobair. In the next year, however, Ua Ruairc switched his support back to Ua Conchobair, while Ua Maelsechlainn concluded an alliance with Diarmait Mac Murchada, king of Leinster, and the Hiberno-Norse of Dublin. After renewed conflict Ua Conchobair divided east Mide between Mac Murchada and Ua Ruairc in 1144. 
In a further political shift, Ua Ruairc in 1149 submitted to Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn, king of Tir Eoghain, a rising power and contender for the high-kingship against Ua Conchobair; and the following year Mac Lochlainn effected a tripartite division of Mide between Ua Conchobair, Ua Ruairc, and Donnchad Ua Cerbaill, king of Airgialla. In 1152 Mac Lochlainn, having concluded an alliance with Ua Conchobair and Mac Murchada, invaded Breifne and temporarily deposed Ua Ruairc from the kingship in favour of a collateral, Aed, son of Gilla Braite Ua Ruairc (died 1176). It was on this occasion that Mac Murchada carried off Ua Ruairc's wife, Derbforgaill (died 1193), daughter of Murchad Ua Maelsechlainn, as a calculated political insult. Ua Ruairc was restored by Ua Conchobair, who in 1153 led an army into Leinster which brought Derbforgaill back to Breifne. Nevertheless, Mac Lochlainn 'compelled the men of Breifne to submit to him' ('Annala rioghachta Eireann', s.a. 1154). In 1156 Ua Ruairc negotiated a peace with Toirdelbach Ua Conchobair; but following the latter's death, he was defeated at Liss Luigdi, Meath, by Mac Murchada, accompanied by the Hiberno-Norse of Dublin. 
Ua Ruairc attended the consecration of the church of Mellifont in 1157, a ceremony which endorsed the high-kingship of Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn and at which Derbforgaill donated gold, altar cloths, and vessels. In 1159 Ua Ruairc swore mutual oaths with Ruaidri Ua Conchobair, who had succeeded his father, Toirdelbach, as king of Connacht in 1156 and who married Ua Ruairc's daughter Dub Coblaid (died 1181); the two then hosted together against Mac Lochlainn, who retaliated by attempting to expel Ua Ruairc from Mide. The next year, when Mac Lochlainn sought hostages from Ua Ruairc, Ua Conchobair led an army to support his ally. One of Ua Ruairc's sons, Maelsechlainn, was killed in 1162 and another, Sitric, in 1165 in renewed warfare between the men of Mide and of Breifne. In 1166 he hosted with Ua Conchobair to Dublin city, which submitted, and into Leinster against Diarmait Mac Murchada, on whom they inflicted a defeat. While Ua Conchobair moved on to campaign in Tir Conaill, Ua Ruairc's army, probably as part of a co-ordinated strategy, invaded Tir Eoghain, where Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn was routed and killed. Ua Ruairc then returned to Leinster and drove Mac Murchada into exile, ostensibly in vengeance for the abduction of his wife. In 1167, following Mac Murchada's return, Ua Conchobair and Ua Ruairc hosted into Leinster and obliged him to submit to Ua Conchobair as high-king and pay 100 ounces of gold to Ua Ruairc in compensation for his wife's abduction. 
Two years later, in 1169, Ua Conchobair apportioned the eastern half of Mide to Ua Ruairc, retaining the western half himself. Ua Ruairc subsequently accompanied Ua Conchobair to Leinster where hostages were taken from Mac Murchada, who, his forces augmented by additional Norman mercenaries, then raided in Mide and Breifne and secured the submission of east Mide. As Mac Murchada's position strengthened, Ua Ruairc made his acknowledgement of Ruaidri Ua Conchobair's high-kingship conditional on the execution of the hostages whom Ua Conchobair held from Mac Murchada. Following Mac Murchada's death about May 1171, Ua Ruairc hosted with Ua Conchobair to besiege the Anglo-Norman garrison in Dublin and, in an engagement with Miles de Cogan, Ua Ruairc's son (and almost certainly his successor designate), Aed Manach, was killed. At Christmas 1171 Ua Ruairc submitted to Henry II at Dublin. He was killed by Hugh de Lacy at Tlachtga (Hill of Ward, Meath) in 1172, a rival dynast, Domnall, son of Annach Ua Ruairc, being in the company of Lacy; the dead man was decapitated, his head fixed on a gate of Dublin city, and his body hung by the feet from a gibbet. Aed, son of Gilla Braite Ua Ruairc, succeeded him as king. 
Tigernan Ua Ruairc was involved in partitions of Mide in 1124, 1144, 1150, and 1169 and his designation by Gerald of Wales as 'king of the men of Mide' reflected his expansion into Meath, where he erected bases at Kells (to the church of which he made grants of land, recorded in the 'Book of Kells') and Slane. His encroachments into Meath were the real source of the tension between himself and Mac Murchada which occasioned the abduction of Derbforgaill, as Mac Murchada sought to extend the borders of Leinster into the same area. Ua Ruairc's territorial expansion was reflected at the Synod of Kells in 1152, when the dioceses of Breifne (later Kilmore), with a see at Kells, and of Ardagh were created, the latter coterminous with his sub-kingdom of Conmaicne. Despite Ua Ruairc's shifting alliances between claimants for the high-kingship, Diarmait Mac Murchada remained his constant and implacable enemy. The sizeable overkingship of Breifne which he had assembled, extending from the mouth of the Erne to the mouth of the Boyne, collapsed following his death; his conquests in Meath came under the control of Hugh de Lacy; and the see of Kells was extinguished and absorbed into the Anglo-Norman diocese of Meath. 


@@@@@


doc= 20848


Orr, Hugh (1715-1798), toolmaker and textile manufacturer in America, was born probably on 2 January 1715 (other sources give 13 January 1717) at Lochwinnoch, Renfrewshire, the son of Robert Orr. Trained as a gunsmith and door-lock filer he emigrated to America in 1740, in his twenties, and settled at Bridgewater, Plymouth county, Massachusetts, where he manufactured scythes and edge-tools. He set up the first trip-hammer ever constructed in Massachusetts, and he succeeded in spreading the manufacture of edge-tools through the states of Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. He married, on 4 August 1742, Mary Bass; they had ten children. In 1748 Orr made 500 muskets for the province of Massachusetts Bay, believed to have been the first weapons of the kind produced in the country. During the American War of Independence he engaged in casting iron and brass cannon and cannon balls, for which, in association with a Frenchman, he constructed a foundry. He also cultivated and marketed flax seed for which he invented a cleaning machine. 
After the revolution, Orr became a senator for Plymouth county in the Massachusetts legislature. In this position he expressed a strong interest in acquiring Britain's new labour-saving cotton-spinning machinery. In 1786 he recruited the brothers Robert and Alexander Barr from Scotland to Bridgewater to set up carding, roving, and spinning machinery and thus introduce Arkwright's system to the USA. Their work was supported by a $200 grant from the Massachusetts legislature and the machines were completed in 1787. Placed in the custody of Orr, and publicly exhibited in order to encourage replication, they were known as the 'state models'. Copies were made by Rhode Island artisans and then purchased by Moses Brown, the Quaker merchant of Providence, who employed Samuel Slater a few months after he arrived in New York in 1789, fresh from Jedediah Strutt's Derbyshire mills. When Slater (who subsequently pioneered Arkwright technology in the USA) saw the 'state models' he condemned them as worthless. Orr died at Bridgewater on 6 December 1798. His son Robert (1786-1876), a colonel in the Anglo-American War of 1812-14, was armourer of the United States arsenal at Springfield and a congressman, 1817-20. 


@@@@@


doc= 20849


Orr, James (1770-1816), radical and poet, born in the parish of Templecorran, co. Antrim, was the only child of James Orr, a linen weaver, who also farmed a few acres of land near Ballycarry. The family, like most of its neighbours, was of Scots descent and Presbyterian. The younger Orr never attended school, but was taught by his parents to read and write. He joined his father in weaving, and like several of his contemporaries began at an early age to write verse. This was locally popular, and many of his poems appeared in the Belfast 'Northern Star'. Orr's political beliefs were influenced by millennial hopes for the amelioration of mankind; these, and enthusiasm for education and freemasonry, are all found in his writing. He came to be known as the Bard of Ballycarry. He took part in the battle of Antrim on 7 June 1798, and is credited with having saved some lives on that occasion, by dissuading his fellow insurgents from unnecessary violence. After the failure of the uprising he escaped to America and published poetry in newspapers there. He returned to Ireland in a very short time, and came into possession of the tenancy of the farm on his father's death. His application in 1800 to join the yeomanry was rejected; his radical sympathies were still too obvious. In 1804 he issued a small collection of his poems by subscription at Belfast. Some of his later poems, originally published in newspapers, including the once well-known 'The Irishman', were collected after his death and at his request published for the benefit of the poor of Ballycarry. Several newspaper essays on morality, in prose, may have been by Orr, but have not been republished. His best writing is in the Ulster-Scots language of his own area; the poems have considerable fluency, charm, and power, and the accuracy of his observation of the linguistic and social characteristics of his community partly accounts for Orr's contemporary and continuing popularity in Ulster. His ambitious and often accomplished poems in the standard language, more accessible for a modern audience, provide evidence of the balance between local involvements and wider interests which is represented in Orr's personality as well as in his verse. Orr is probably Ulster's most important eighteenth-century poet; his work is increasingly recognized by scholars as of more than local significance. A sketch of his life by his friend A. McDowell prefaces the posthumous poems, published in 1817, and also appears in a collected edition published by Ballycarry people in 1935; a selection of his poems appeared in 1977 and another in 1992. 
Despite or perhaps partly because of his popularity and literary success, Orr drank heavily in the years after the deaths of his parents; this is said to have caused his own death at Ballycarry, co. Antrim, on 24 April 1816. He was unmarried. He was buried in Templecorran churchyard, and a large monument with masonic motifs was erected over his grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 20850


Orr, John (c.1760-1835), army officer in the East India Company, became a cadet in the Madras army, and arrived in India in 1777. On 18 August 1777 he was appointed ensign in the 21st Madras native infantry, and served with them in 1778 at the siege of Pondicherry, during which, the adjutant of the 2nd battalion of the 2nd Madras European regiment having been killed, Orr was transferred to that corps. After the siege he served for some time as brigade major to a detachment under Colonel Hopkins. Towards the end of 1780 he was appointed to command a mixed flying column, to escort supplies to Sir Eyre Coote's army and to various forts, many of which were blockaded. This was very onerous: it was impossible to carry tents and there was much exposure as well as fatigue, and Orr's health suffered. He was constantly in battle, and on one occasion was repeatedly charged by up to 2000 enemy cavalry. He was promoted lieutenant on 12 August 1781, and captain on 20 May 1785. At the end of the war in 1784 Orr, highly commended, was rewarded by being transferred to the cavalry, and appointed to the prestigious command of the governor's bodyguard. He held this appointment until 1787, when he had to go on sick-leave to England. 
Orr returned to India in 1789 and, joining the 1st native cavalry as second in command, took part in the Anglo-Mysore War of 1790-92. His regiment in March 1791 formed part of the force which, under Colonel Floyd, when close to Bangalore, was lured into an ambush. A sudden attack by a superior force followed, and nearly resulted in their destruction. Eventually Floyd was relieved by a supporting brigade of Indian infantry which came up to his support and made possible his retreat. His command consisted of the 19th light dragoons and five corps of Indian cavalry; 271 horses were lost, and 71 men killed, wounded, or missing, Floyd himself being among the wounded. In April 1791 Orr became major, and at the head of the 1st native cavalry took part in Floyd's charge on the Mysore army when it was retreating, shortly before the battle outside Seringapatam, in May 1791. In this charge Orr captured two standards with his own hand. In July of the same year he was transferred to the 5th native cavalry. In November 1798 he became lieutenant-colonel, and in January 1799, after transferring to the 3rd native cavalry, proceeded to England on leave. In April 1802 he became full colonel, and in December 1802, being still in England, was transferred to the command of the 7th native cavalry. In 1805 he obtained his regiment (that is, received colonel's allowances or off-reckonings). He became major-general in October 1809, and lieutenant-general in June 1814. He died in London on 26 November 1835. 


@@@@@


doc= 20851


Orr, William (1766-1797), Irish nationalist, was probably born in Kilbegs, co. Antrim, to where his father, Samuel Orr, had moved his young family from Coleraine. They were New Light Presbyterians and settled at Farranshane, where William Orr was brought up. The Orrs were small farmers involved in flax-growing, horse-trading, and the operation of a linen-bleaching green at Rathbeg, which provided them with a comfortable income and high-quality accommodation. In 1788 at Duneane Orr married Isabella Greer, with whom he had six children. 
Several of William Orr's brothers, uncles, and cousins had joined the revolutionary Society of United Irishmen by 1796 and he was evidently an early and popular member. Well known in the community from his service as a volunteer, sportsman, and an Antrim town freemason, Orr was voted that year on to the United Irish baronial committee which met near Carrickfergus. He contributed articles to the United Irish paper 'Northern Star' and his name reached the ears of Newry informer Samuel Turner. Orr was arrested at his father's Milltown home on 17 September 1796 on a warrant issued by local magistrate, the Revd George Macartney, vicar of Antrim and Templepatrick. The arrest was made by Macartney's son, Arthur Chichester Macartney, a student at Trinity College, Dublin. Orr was detained in Carrickfergus gaol along with several other prominent United Irishmen seized during a crackdown on the organization's middle ranks. It was alleged that he had administered the United Irish oath to Scottish privates Hugh Wheatly and John Lindsay of the Fifeshire fencibles on 24-25 April 1796. Doubt was later cast on whether the two men were actually soldiers, and both were advanced considerable sums from secret service funds by the crown solicitor, John Pollock. Wheatly was subsequently revealed to be suicidal and a suspected murderer. 
The recently enacted 'Insurrection Act' (36 George III) had reclassified the offence of administering an illegal oath from a transportable to a capital felony and this served to focus unusual attention on the Orr case. His lawyers, John Philpot Curran and William Sampson, were confident of acquittal given that their client's innocence was widely accepted. James Hope, a key Ulster organizer, apprised historian R. R. Madden many years later that William McKeever, a Derry city delegate, had made the approach to Wheatly and Lindsay at Jack Gourlay's barn in Farranshane. Orr had been present but had not trusted the two strangers in uniform. 
Orr was held on remand in Carrickfergus gaol with many other United Irish prisoners and wore a green necktie as a sign of his radical politics. He was not brought to trial, however, until 17 September 1797 when judges Barry Yelverton and William Tankerville Chamberlain considered the case presented by prosecuting counsel Arthur Wolfe (later Lord Kilwarden). The jury deliberated all night and, having consulted the judges on a point of law, recommended that Orr be found guilty but worthy of clemency. He was brought up for sentencing the following day, at which time Chamberlain refused to consider Curran's protest at the inebriated state of the jury. In accordance with the law Yelverton had no option but to pronounce sentence of death, a task he performed with, reputedly, great emotion and reluctance. Orr made a statement protesting his innocence while his supporters prepared an appeal. 
Orr's wife enlisted the support of Lady Londonderry who, according to Mary Ann McCracken, presented the appeal to her powerful brother, Lord Castlereagh. McCracken also ascertained that the elderly Alexander Thompson of Cushendall, foreman of the jury, had been threatened with violence and financial ruin if he failed to convict. Two other jury members claimed they had erred in their deliberations owing to drunkenness. More remarkable was Wheatly's admission that he had perjured himself in his affidavit against Orr and during the trial. The cumulative effect of the revelations suggested that Orr had been framed by the authorities to ensure the smooth running of a potentially vital test case. Several loyalists were convinced that a miscarriage of justice had occurred, but the lord lieutenant, Lord Camden, refused to intercede. 
James Orr, brother of the prisoner, claimed in a letter to 'The Press' of 28 October 1797 to have received assurances that clemency would be granted if William acknowledged his crime. This course was flatly rejected by William Orr, and James decided to forge a declaration of guilt which was seized upon by those wishing to uphold the verdict. An attempt to bribe the gaoler failed and the execution date, twice postponed, arrived without compromise. Orr wore his green ribbon to the gallows green outside Carrickfergus on 14 October 1797. He was buried at Templepatrick after a funeral procession viewed by thousands who defied a heavy military presence. 
Orr became the first major martyr of the United Irishmen and the slogan 'Remember Orr' soon replaced 'Remember Armagh' in their toasts, propaganda, and memorabilia. William Drennan's poem, 'Wake of William Orr', was immediately popular, as was William Sampson's suppressed trial account. The case precipitated an action for seditious libel against 'The Press' for the assertion by 'Marcus' (Deane Swift) that Orr should have been pardoned. The printer, Peter Finnerty, was convicted, imprisoned for two years, fined $20, and obliged to find a large security. Orr was survived by his wife, but his family was burnt out of their home by the military in the aftermath of the battle of Antrim in June 1798. 


@@@@@


doc= 20852


Orridge, Benjamin Brogden (1814-1870), antiquary, set up in business in London as a medical agent and valuer. From 1863 until 1869 he was an active member of the court of common council for the ward of Cheap. As chairman of the committee of the Guildhall Library, he distinguished himself by his exertions for the preservation and investigation of the mass of records belonging to the corporation. 
Orridge was a fellow of the Geological Society, and a member of the London and Middlesex Archaeological Society. To the 'Transactions' of the latter he contributed some valuable papers, including the 'City friends of Shakespeare' (3.578-80) and an 'Account of some eminent members of the Mercers' Company', read at the general meeting held at Mercers' Hall on 21 April 1869. In 1867 Orridge published his most substantial work, 'Some Account of the Citizens of London and their Rulers, from 1060 to 1867' (1867), a useful summary of the biography of the lord mayors, accompanied by pedigrees of the more distinguished of their descendants among the aristocracy. Among his other publications were a 'Letter' (1866) on civic records, 'Some Particulars of Alderman Philip Malpas and Alderman Sir Thomas Cooke, KB' (1868), and 'Illustrations of Jack Cade's rebellion, from researches in the Guildhall records; together with some newly found letters of Lord Bacon' (1869). Orridge died, after a long illness, at his home, 33 St John's Wood Park, London, on 17 July 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 20853


Cool, Jacob (1563-1628), scholar and writer, was born on 31 December 1563 in Antwerp, the son of Jacob Cool or Cole (died 1591), merchant, and Elisabeth Ortelius (died 1594), sister to the Antwerp map maker and geographer Abraham Ortelius (1527-1598). Both his parents belonged to the Dutch-Walloon refugee community in London and like them Cool settled in Lime Street, where he followed in his father's footsteps as a cloth merchant, specializing in silk production and the silk trade. However, it was Cool's learned interests in theology, history, poetry, art, numismatics, and botany which came to dominate his life and which formed the basis for his many friendships with scholars such as William Camden, Emanuel van Meteren, Carolus Clusius, and the royal botanist Mathias de Lobel, who later became his father-in-law. Surprisingly, although he seems to have been a competent Latinist from an early age, Cool does not appear to have received any formal schooling. He was largely self-taught, except for a period during the late 1580s when he was educated by his uncle Abraham Ortelius, who evidently inspired his lifelong interest in history and in his collection of Greek and Roman coins and medals, and who provided him with the nickname Ortelianus by which he became known within the republic of letters. Between 1584 and 1586 Cool wrote a short treatise on letter combinations to be found in different figures, 'Tractatus de scriptis in fictis characteribus legendis'; another two unpublished works, written in 1588, 'Fasti triumphorum et magistratuum Romanorum' and 'Graeca numismata externorum regum', were on numismatics, about which he continued to correspond regularly with the Augsburg collector and numismatist Adolph Occo. 
In 1592 Cool travelled widely in Germany and the Netherlands. That year and the next, as a liberal but firm Calvinist, he seems to have been temporarily in conflict with his uncle Ortelius, who held Familist and spiritualist views. In 1594 he married his first wife, Maria, daughter of Lodewijk Theus, an elder of the Dutch church in London, but by 30 November that year she was dead. In 1597 he went on a grand tour, seeing the major cities in southern Germany, in Italy, where he travelled as far as Naples, and in the United Provinces, 'en route' visiting many of the leading intellectuals of the day, with whom he later regularly corresponded. Among them were the Bohemian humanist and intelligencer Jacob Monau and the son of the famous Leiden printer Franciscus Raphelengius, Franciscus junior; Franciscus Raphelengius himself expressed his admiration for Cool's elegant Latin. That Cool was a Latin scholar and poet of some capacity can be seen from the 'Lacrymae' he wrote on the occasion of his uncle Abraham Ortelius's death in 1598 and from the verses attached to one of the later editions of Ortelius's great work, 'Theatrum orbis terrarum'. 
Cool's first two published works appeared in 1606. His deep scholarly interest in botany is demonstrated by his 'Syntagma herbarum encomiasticum', published in Leiden in 1606 under the Latin form of his name, Jacobus Colius; it is noteworthy that the Leiden botanist Carolus Clusius thought highly of Cool's botanical learning. The same year Cool married Louisa, daughter of the royal botanist to James I, Mathias de Lobel. Cool's Calvinist faith is prominent in his long descriptive poem about his personal experience of the outbreak and horrors of the plague in London in 1604, 'Den staet van London in hare groote peste' (published in Middelburg in 1606), as in his two later works, on the interpretation of 'Psalm 104', 'Paraphrasis... vanden CIV Psalm', and on how to die as a good Christian, 'Of Death, a True Description'. 
For many years Cool played a prominent role within the Dutch community in London. In 1604 he provided the poetry for the community's triumphal arch and tableaux in connection with James I's coronation entry, and he was one of the leading members of the community who contributed poetry to the elegy for its learned minister Simon Ruytinck, who had died in 1621, which was published in Leiden in 1622. From 1624 he served the Dutch church in London as an elder. At the coronation of Charles I in 1625 Cool was made supervisor of the design for the then planned triumphal arch by the community. Here his contacts with leading English artists such as the poet Ben Jonson and the painter Francis Cleyn proved extremely useful to the church, and both were recruited for the work. 
Cool died a very wealthy man on 20 May 1628: apart from his house in Lime Street and his house in Highgate, together with their furniture, jewellery, and paintings, he left more than $5000 in money and a number of large silver gilt cups, not to mention his considerable library, and his collection of prints, statues, antique coins, and medals, much of which he had inherited from Abraham Ortelius. His wife, Louisa, survived him, but there were no children from either of his marriages. 


@@@@@


doc= 20854


Ortelius, Abraham (1527-1598), map maker, was born at Antwerp on 4 April 1527, the eldest of the three children of Leonard Ortels (1500-1537), a merchant who probably dealt in antiques; his grandfather Wilhelm Ortels had migrated in 1460 from Augsburg to Antwerp, where he died in 1511. When Leonard died in 1537 he left a widow, Anne Herwayers ('fl'. 1527-1581), and three small children, Abraham, Anne (died 1600), and Elizabeth (died 1594). Little is known about Ortelius's education, but his father had started to teach him Latin and he must have studied mathematics on his own. After his father's death he came under the care of his uncle Jacob van Meteren, who had returned from England after spending several years there to escape persecution for his Reformation sympathies. Ortelius became a lifelong friend of his cousin Emanuel van Meteren, who would later settle in London. Ortelius's sister Elizabeth also moved to London following her marriage to Jacob Cole in 1562. Their eldest son, Jacobus Colius Ortelianus or Jacob Cool (1563-1628), was to be an important figure in Ortelius's later years, not least as a correspondent. Ortelius remained unmarried and spent his life in Antwerp, living with his unmarried sister Anne and his mother. 
In 1547 Ortelius was admitted to Antwerp's Guild of Saint Luke as an illuminator of maps. Besides colouring maps, assisted by his sisters, he soon traded in books, prints, and maps. He went to the Frankfurt book fairs, where he made contact with Gerardus Mercator in 1554. Business evidently went well, permitting Ortelius to accumulate a library of many volumes and an extensive collection including coins (represented by his 'Deorum dearumque capita', 1573), medals, and objects of natural history. He travelled widely in the Low Countries (reflected in the 'Itinerarium per nonnullas Galliae Belgicae partes', which he published with Joannes Vivianus in 1584), to France, Italy, Germany, and, in 1577, to England and Ireland. Next to his native Dutch (Flemish), he was reported to be versed in French, German, Italian, and Spanish. Ortelius became one of the leading humanists of the Low Countries, acquainted with many European intellectuals of his time. His extensive correspondence and his 'Album amicorum', which constitute the primary sources for his life and work, provide detailed evidence of his extensive network of correspondents. In England his numerous contacts included William Camden, whose 'Britannia' was first undertaken at Ortelius's urging, Richard Hakluyt the elder, the naturalist Thomas Penny, the puritan controversialist William Charke, and Humphrey Llwyd, who provided Ortelius with the map of England and Wales published in the 1573 edition of the latter's 'Theatrum'. 
Having started his professional career as an illuminator of maps, and then become a dealer and collector of maps, Ortelius eventually started making maps himself. His first map, a wall map of the world, was published in 1564 and was followed by a map of ancient Egypt (1565), a wall map of Asia (1567), a wall map of Spain (1570), and a map of the Roman empire (1571). He had already acquired some renown and means when in 1570 he published his 'Theatrum orbis terrarum', considered to be the first modern atlas, being a handy collection of maps of the same dimensions providing a survey of the world as known up to that moment. The first edition contained 53 map sheets and a list of 87 map makers ('Catalogus auctorum tabularum geographicarum') used as sources for the maps. The 'Theatrum' was an instant success, although it was the most expensive book produced in the second half of the sixteenth century. Altogether twenty-one enlarged editions and thirteen supplements ('Additamenta') appeared during Ortelius's lifetime, followed by another thirteen enlarged editions after his death, the last one in 1641. The original Latin text of the geographical descriptions was translated into German, French, Spanish, Dutch, Italian, and English (1606). Filips Galle issued a popular version of the 'Theatrum' as 'Spieghel der Werelt' ('Mirror of the world', 1577). Most editions of this pocket atlas are known under the name 'Epitome'. 
Ortelius was more of a map editor than an original cartographer. He obtained maps and information from the best authorities for the compilation of his atlas. At heart, he was less a 'cosmographus' than a humanist, obsessed by antiquity, and he was a pioneer in the construction of historical maps related to the ancient world. From 1579 onwards, historical maps were added to the 'Theatrum' as an appendix ('Parergon'). Unlike the modern 'Theatrum' maps, the 'Parergon' maps were designed by Ortelius himself. The latest edition of 1624, the only separate 'Parergon' edition, consisted of forty-four historical maps. Ortelius also compiled a catalogue of all place names listed by classical authors, along with their modern forms. Initially part of his 'Theatrum', the list assumed such dimensions that it was published separately ('Synonymia geographica', 1578; reworked as 'Thesaurus geographicus', 1587). Another list of classical place names, devoted exclusively to Ptolemy, continued to be included in the 'Theatrum' as 'Nomenclator Ptolemaicus'. Finally, Ortelius published a charming booklet devoted to the life and customs of the ancient Germans ('Aurei saeculi imago', 1596). 
Ortelius is depicted by his biographers as a pious, broad-minded, and tolerant man, highly regarded by his contemporaries. It has been suggested that he might have been in contact with the Family of Love, a heterodox sect, through his friend Christophe Plantin. Nevertheless his Catholic faith does not seem to have been questioned at any time by the agents of the Spanish crown, and he obtained the title of 'his majesty's geographer' from Philip II in 1573. From 1579 onwards an engraved portrait by Filips Galle was incorporated in the 'Theatrum'. Most later portraits, such as the one by Rubens (in the Museum Plantin-Moretus in Antwerp), are derived from Galle's engraving. 
Ortelius died in Antwerp on 28 June 1598. He was buried on 1 July in the church of St Michael in Antwerp, where a memorial stone and a funeral monument were erected to his remembrance. The monument was destroyed in 1796, and only its medallions were saved, one of them carved with Ortelius's effigy and another with his device around a globe ('Contemno et orno, mente, manu'; 'I scorn and adorn with mind and hand'); these remain today at the Nationaal Scheepvaartmuseum in Antwerp. The gravestone was transferred to Antwerp Cathedral in 1803. 


@@@@@


doc= 20855


Tichborne claimant (d. 1898), claimant of baronetcy, was the person who identified himself, in a series of dramatic legal cases, to be the long-lost Sir Roger Tichborne. The Claimant, as he was commonly known, is usually assumed not to have been Sir Roger Tichborne, but Arthur Orton ['see below'], although doubt remains as to his identity. 
In 1862 Sir James Tichborne died; were Roger still alive, he would have inherited the title and the property. In his absence, Sir James's second son, Alfred, succeeded to his title and estates, to be succeeded in his turn in 1866 by his own infant son, Henry. However, Roger's mother refused to believe that her son was dead, and in 1863 she placed advertisements in the world's press, asking for his whereabouts. Then, in 1865, a butcher calling himself Tomas Castro from Wagga Wagga, Australia, came forward, claiming to be Sir Roger. He reported that the 'Bella' had been overturned during a storm but that he had survived in a lifeboat and had been rescued by a ship, the 'Osprey', bound for Melbourne. In Australia he had worked as a cattle rancher before marrying an illiterate woman, Mary Ann Bryant, in 1865 and settling down to life as a butcher. The name Castro was adopted from a man he had met in Melipilla, Chile. The Claimant was identified as Sir Roger by a lawyer, William Gibbes, who was dealing with Castro's bankruptcy case. Gibbes's wife had noticed Lady Tichborne's advertisement and remembered that Castro had mentioned that he was entitled to some property in England. When challenged, Castro claimed that he was Sir Roger and contacted Lady Tichborne, who asked him to return home. 
After reaching London at the end of 1866, the Claimant discovered that Lady Tichborne had left for Paris. However, he took the opportunity to go to Wapping, where he asked after the Orton family (an incident that later helped bring about his downfall). In Paris, Lady Tichborne recognized him as her son on 10 January 1867. Most of the Tichborne family insisted that the new arrival was an impostor who was a threat to the inheritance of the infant baronet, Henry Tichborne. The Claimant (weighing about 27 stone) looked nothing like Roger, who had been extremely slim. He was also unable to speak French, in which Roger had been fluent, and had scant knowledge of Roger's past. However, there was little that the family could do as long as the dowager was still alive. An examination in chancery led to the revelation by the Claimant that, before leaving for South America, he had seduced Katherine Doughty (now Lady Radcliffe) and had been told she was pregnant. He had left instructions with Vincent Gosford about what to do in this eventuality (the contents of the 'sealed packet'). Enquiries in Australia and South America then began to connect the Claimant with Arthur Orton. A photograph of the Claimant was identified as Orton by the wife of a former employer of the Claimant in Melbourne. Furthermore, when enquiries were made with the family of Tomas Castro in Chile, no memories were forthcoming about Roger Tichborne, but they did remember a young sailor called Arthur Orton. 


In March 1868 Lady Tichborne died from heart failure, clearing the way to further legal action. A civil action was brought in the court of common pleas in the form of an action of ejectment against Colonel Lushington, the current lessee of Tichborne Park. Although he was nominally the plaintiff, it was clear that the Claimant was really the defendant. 'Tichborne v. Lushington' lasted from 10 May 1871 to 6 March 1872. The Claimant found more than 100 witnesses to support him in court, and the other side had 250. The case was particularly notorious for its revelation about the contents of the 'sealed packet', and the newspaper reports of the trial were eagerly read throughout the nation. The case finally ended in a non-suit after Lord Bellew testified that, during his schooldays at Stonyhurst, he had tattooed Sir Roger, marks that the Claimant did not possess. 
Criminal charges for perjury were then brought against the Claimant. Having no money to defend himself, he launched an appeal for funds and stumped the country in 1872-3, assisted by the Liberal MP Guildford Onslow, who had known Sir Roger and believed the Claimant to be genuine. An enormous popular campaign developed, drawing most support from working-class people, who believed in the Claimant and felt that his case represented the problems the poor faced in obtaining justice in a court of law. Subscriptions to the Claimant's defence fund came in from all over the country, and several Tichborne newspapers were published to promote his cause. In the criminal trial the Claimant was defended by a maverick Irish lawyer, Edward Kenealy, whose erratic behaviour in the courtroom contributed to the Claimant's defeat. 'R. v. Castro' lasted from 23 April 1873 to 28 February 1874, then one of the longest trials in English legal history. After a month-long summing up by the lord chief justice, Alexander Cockburn, the jury found against the Claimant, who was given two sentences of seven years, to run sequentially. 
Kenealy was disbarred from the legal profession for his hostile comments towards the judge during the case. He then took over the Tichborne movement, creating an organization called the Magna Charta Association, edited a Tichborne newspaper, 'The Englishman' (1874-86), and was elected to parliament as a 'people's candidate' in the Stoke by-election of February 1875, largely on the strength of the Tichborne cause. He failed in his attempt to obtain a royal commission on the Tichborne case. The Claimant was perceived by many as a martyr and his cause became one of the largest popular agitations between the end of Chartism and the coming of socialism. The movement began to decline in the later 1870s but retained pockets of strength well into the 1880s. Under Kenealy it became a focus for many radical causes, including demands for triennial parliaments, opposition to the income tax, and (half-heartedly) votes for women. The religion of the Tichborne family also introduced an anti-Catholic dimension into the agitation. 
A model prisoner, the Claimant was released on a ticket-of-leave on 11 October 1884, still insisting that he was Sir Roger Tichborne. He immediately signed with a theatrical agent and took no interest in the political dimensions of the Magna Charta Association, which shortly afterwards collapsed. Kenealy had died in 1880, having lost his seat in the general election. The Claimant began to appear in music-halls and circuses around the country. In 1886 he went to America to give lectures but was not a great success and ended up becoming a bartender; he returned home without any money. His wife had deserted him for another man while he was in prison and he subsequently married a singer called Lily Enever. He failed to make a living by showing himself off in pubs and the two were reduced to poverty. This may explain why in 1895 he signed a confession in 'The People' admitting he was Orton. After its publication he immediately retracted the confession and used the money to set up as a tobacconist. The business collapsed, and he was destitute when he died of heart failure on 1 April 1898 at 21 Shouldham Street, Marylebone. The Tichborne family graciously gave permission for Sir Roger Tichborne's name to be placed on his coffin when he was buried in an unmarked grave in Paddington cemetery. The Claimant had two sons and two daughters from his marriage to Mary Ann Bryant. His four children with Lily Enever all died in infancy. One daughter, Teresa, continued her father's crusade and, in 1912, attempted to shoot Joseph Tichborne on his wedding day after demanding financial assistance. Sir Joseph eventually married in 1913, in which year Teresa Tichborne, or Alexander, was imprisoned for six months for sending him and his mother threatening letters. 
The Claimant's identity remains elusive. While most commentators have assumed him to be Orton, Douglas Woodruff in the most substantial study of the case, 'The Tichborne Claimant' (1957), has raised the possibility that he might have been Sir Roger after all. Whoever he was, the Claimant provided the Victorian working class with a flamboyant hero. 


@@@@@


doc= 20856


Orton, Job (1717-1783), dissenting minister and theologian, the elder son of Job Orton (died 1741) and Mary Perkins (died 1762), was born on 4 September 1717 in Shrewsbury, where both his father and grandfather were in trade as grocers and where the family owned substantial property. He received his early education at the grammar school in Shrewsbury, where he remained for eight years until May 1733, when he left for Warrington. There he was under the care of Charles Owen, a dissenting minister of considerable learning; his sole fellow pupil was John Ashworth, eldest brother of Caleb Ashworth of Daventry. Orton remained at Warrington for a year, then spent the month of June 1734 with the family of Thomas Colthurst, Presbyterian minister at Whitchurch in Shropshire. Here it appears that Orton resolved to devote himself to the ministry. 
Orton entered the academy of Philip Doddridge at Northampton in August 1734, where he rapidly mastered the style of shorthand used by Doddridge and his pupils, and within a few weeks he was able to take down entire sermons. His ability and diligence evidently endeared him to Doddridge, who described him as ''omni laude major'... the darling of our congregation' and 'perhaps one of the best of preachers and men' (Nuttall, letters 575 and 663). In March 1739 Doddridge appointed him his assistant at the academy, and he began to lecture in the classics and geography; this position was later supported by a grant from the Coward Trust. He preached his first sermon the following month at Welford, Northamptonshire, and continued to preach regularly in the neighbouring villages and at Doddridge's own church of Castle Hill, Northampton; he was licensed as a minister later the same year. 
Orton's talents as a preacher brought him several invitations from dissenting congregations to settle with them as minister. Approaches were made by the nearby congregations at Welford and Rothwell, Northamptonshire, and by Salters' Hall, London, but Doddridge was reluctant to lose the valuable services of his able assistant, and in response to the deacons of Market Harborough in October 1740 wrote that he would not oppose the church's invitation, but neither could he support it. Eventually a vacancy arose in April 1741 through the death of Charles Berry, the minister of a Presbyterian meeting in Shrewsbury. At about the same time the smaller King's Head Independent society, which numbered among its members Orton's mother and father, also lost its pastor, John Dobson, who moved to Walsall. Thus a joint invitation from the united Presbyterian and Independent congregations presented Orton with an opportunity both to consolidate the new union and to return as minister to his family. In 1777 he wrote to Samuel Palmer, 'It was with much regret that I left Northampton. I should like to have lived and died in that post, but for the circumstances of uniting the congregation at Shrewsbury' (J. Orton, 'Letters to Dissenting Ministers', 2 vols., 1806, 2.187, 18 July 1777). Doddridge was resigned to his departure and Orton returned to Shrewsbury, where he preached his first sermon on 18 October 1741; he was ordained the following year. 
Within a month of his return, however, Orton's father died. He was greatly affected by the loss, which caused his health to deteriorate; he received treatment from Dr Cheney Hart, and in September 1742 retired to Bath to convalesce. An assistant was sought to ease Orton's burden and Francis Boult was appointed, remaining until the end of 1745, when he moved to Wrexham. Boult was succeeded by Moses Carter, a former student of Orton and Doddridge, but one who had disagreed with Doddridge and incurred his displeasure. Carter was highly regarded in Shrewsbury, but he died suddenly in 1747, and a third assistant, Joseph Fownes, was appointed in 1748. Fownes was to remain a lifelong friend. 
In December 1750 Philip Doddridge contracted a severe chill which further aggravated his already consumptive condition. His health continued to decline in 1751, and in July he left Northampton on his final itinerary. Together with his wife he stayed with the devoted Orton in Shrewsbury from 22 July to 21 August before embarking from Falmouth for Lisbon, where he died on 26 October. Orton preached his funeral sermon, 'The Christian triumph over death', on the text of 1 'Corinthians' 15: 54, a duty that he regarded as 'a signal honour' ('Memoir', viii). In his will Doddridge bequeathed his personal 'Bible', formerly owned by Samuel Clark, to his loyal pupil and friend and appointed him his literary executor. In this capacity Orton first published in 1755 a volume of Doddridge's hymns, which he presented 'with a chearful Hope, that they will promote and diffuse a Spirit of Devotion' (P. Doddridge, 'Hyms Founded on Various Texts in the Holy Scripture', 1755, preface, iv). He then oversaw the publication of the final three volumes of Doddridge's 'magnum opus', the 'Family expositor', which was completed in 1756. 
According to the terms of Doddridge's amended will, Caleb Ashworth was appointed his successor at the academy which, thereupon, moved to Daventry. The succession at Castle Hill, however, remained unresolved, and Orton was approached in March 1752 to fill the vacancy. Alarmed at the prospect of losing him, the Shrewsbury congregation sent Orton a unanimous address entreating him to stay, and Orton eventually declined the offer. Other attempts were made to entice him away from Shrewsbury, including an invitation from a large congregation at Westminster seeking a replacement for its recently deceased pastor, Obadiah Hughes. Orton showed no inclination for London, which he never visited, and he refused on the grounds of his health. The vacancy was eventually filled in 1753 by Andrew Kippis, another of Doddridge's pupils and, subsequently, Orton's biographer. 
Orton remained at Shrewsbury, seemingly comfortable with the assistance and companionship of Joseph Fownes, and his ministry passed uneventfully. In 1765, however, his health, never robust, had declined to the point where he reluctantly decided to resign his ministry. He preached his final sermon on 15 September 1765, his forty-eighth birthday as he continued to observe it in the new calendar. Shortly after, he completed his 'Memoirs of Doddridge', eventually published in 1766, attributing the long delay to 'A deep conviction of my own Incapacity for executing it in the most desirable Manner... my ill State of Health and the necessary Duties of my Station' ('Memoirs of Doddridge', xiii). 
The appointment of Orton's successor resulted in an unfortunate secession from the church in Shrewsbury, and Orton found it necessary to seek retirement elsewhere. On 26 October 1766 he duly set up house in Kidderminster, where Benjamin Fawcett, a near contemporary and fellow pupil at Northampton, had been minister since 1745. In retirement he settled into the role of dissenters' patriarch. Kippis remarked on Orton's 'considerable resemblance, in certain respects, to that famous divine' (Kippis, 314), referring to Richard Baxter, his great dissenting predecessor at Kidderminster. He became a prolific correspondent and, despite his lack of a formal university education, was offered an honorary DD by New Jersey College in 1773. He declined the honour; however, in later years he styled himself STP (Sanctae Theologiae Professor). 
Orton remained in Kidderminster for the rest of his life and was able to devote more attention to his own writings, which before his retirement had been confined to a few sermons and anonymous tracts. In 1769 he published a series of sermons, 'Religious Exercises Recommended', followed in 1771 by 'Discourses to the Aged', works which, according to Kippis, showed 'an earnest desire in the writer to advance the interests of genuine piety and practical religion' (Kippis, 311). He published three discourses entitled 'Christian Worship' in 1775, and a further series of sermons, 'Discourses on Practical Subjects', the following year. His final work, published in 1777, 'Sacramental Meditations', was a series of fifty reflections on the administration of the sacrament as practised by dissenters. 
Between 1744 and 1765 Orton had already compiled what would become his greatest work, a commentary on the 'Old Testament' that was eventually published posthumously as 'A Short and Plain Exposition of the Old Testament' in six volumes from 1788 to 1791. Publication was finally overseen by Robert Gentleman, another former student at Daventry academy, Orton's own successor at Shrewsbury, and later Fawcett's replacement at Kidderminster. It was mostly well received; Samuel Palmer, Orton's original choice as editor, thought it 'somewhat similar to Dr. Doddridge's 'Family Expositor'', and Kippis described it as 'calculated for general utility' (Kippis, 311) and conveying valuable instruction. 
Orton's ecumenical appeal and tolerance of the established church are apparent in the volumes of his correspondence that also appeared posthumously, 'Letters to a Young Clergyman' (1791), addressed to Thomas Stedman, a friend of long standing and vicar of St Chad's, Shrewsbury, and 'Letters to Dissenting Ministers' (1806), edited by Samuel Palmer. His collected works were eventually published in two volumes, 'The Practical Works', in 1842. 
During his years at Kidderminster Orton was fortunate to have the services of a very able physician, Dr James Johnstone, whose care evidently alleviated his sufferings but could not halt the continued decline in his health. By 1783 his condition had deteriorated beyond recovery, and he died at Kidderminster on 19 July, in his sixty-sixth year. According to his wishes, he was buried on 25 July in the chancel of St Chad's, Shrewsbury, in the grave of a former vicar, John Bryan, who had been ejected from St Chad's in 1662. Funeral sermons were delivered by Joseph Fownes and Samuel Lucas. However Orton had directed them to make no reference to himself but only 'exhibit the glory of the gospel and the honour of the Christian ministry'; the first was published later the same year. 
Orton had never married, and after a number of small bequests to his doctor and to fellow dissenting ministers the bulk of his estate passed to his nephews. Appropriately, he left a number of books, including the 'Bible' bequeathed by Doddridge, to Thomas Robins, another of Doddridge's former pupils, 'for the use of the Library belonging to the Academy in Daventry'. 
It is not easy to place Orton within the complex context of eighteenth-century dissent. His background was Presbyterian but he thought himself 'quite an Independent'. Like his mentor, Doddridge, his view of the Trinity was essentially Sabellian, and, again like Doddridge, his teaching found wide acceptance within other nonconformist traditions and he embraced a large circle of friends and correspondents within both the established and dissenting churches. He evidently regarded his own achievements as something of a disappointment, particularly the period of his ministry at Shrewsbury, although it was almost certainly his perpetual poor health that prevented his being more active. It was as a preacher that he was most successful: Fownes described his style as 'practical, serious and affectionate' (Kippis, 314). 
Orton was fiercely protective of what he saw as the traditions of the old dissent. When Lady Huntingdon's preachers came to Kidderminster, he criticized Benjamin Fawcett for encouraging 'strolling preachers' and he later berated him for allowing a drum-major of the Northamptonshire militia to preach from his pulpit. He was deeply suspicious of the spread of Methodism and saw Methodist preachers 'propagating their Antinomian notions' as a threat. Baptists, he considered, had also done much injury. 
Although a distinguished minister and theologian in his own right, Orton made no great contribution to nonconformist theology and is now chiefly remembered through his association with Philip Doddridge, first as pupil and protege, later as assistant, and finally as biographer and literary editor. 


@@@@@


doc= 20857


Orton, Reginald (1810-1862), surgeon, born at Surat, near Bombay, on 27 January 1810, was the only son of James Orton (died 1857), a surgeon in the East India Company's service and inspector-general of Bombay hospitals, and the grandson of Reginald Orton, rector of Hawksworth, near Richmond, Yorkshire. Reginald was educated at the grammar school, Richmond, under James Tate. He afterwards returned to Bombay, where he was apprenticed to his father. On the completion of his apprenticeship he returned to England and entered St Thomas's Hospital as a medical student. He was admitted a member of the Royal College of Surgeons of England in 1833 and a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries the following year. 
In 1834 Orton became a partner in a Mr Fothergill's practice in Sunderland. On 4 October 1836 he married Agnes Caroline, the second daughter of Orton Bradley of Westmorland. They had one son and two daughters. Agnes died on 31 January 1840, and on 25 March 1841 Orton married Mary Isabella, the eldest daughter of Turner Thompson, a shipowner of Sunderland. They had four children. 
Orton lived in Sunderland until shortly before his death, when he took a farm at Bishopwearmouth. He was surgeon to the Sunderland Eye Infirmary and consulting surgeon to the Seaham Infirmary. Throughout his life he was a busy medical practitioner and an active reformer. Sunderland owed to his initiative its system of gas lighting, its water supply, its public baths, its library, and its institute. Orton was one of the leading campaigners against the duty on glass and windows, which was repealed in 1845. He suggested to the government that, if light was still to be taxed, the duty should be regulated by the size of the panes, so that those who could afford large sheets of plate glass should pay more than their poorer neighbours. If it were to be found that the duty could be entirely abolished, however, he advocated the imposition of a moderate house duty, commencing at a certain rental, to make good the loss of revenue. This scheme was eventually adopted. 
Orton also took a lively interest in maritime matters, and turned his attention to appliances for saving life at sea. He projected a new form of reel lifebuoy, and invented a lifeboat which was light, low in the water, open so that the sea passed through it (the crew being encased in waterproof bags), and practically incapable of being capsized; for these he took out a patent in 1845. The boat was used on one or two occasions. 
Orton died on 1 September 1862 at Ford North Farm, Bishopwearmouth, and was buried in the town cemetery. He wrote no books (the 'Essay on the Epidemic Cholera of India' (1831) is by his uncle of the same name) but did publish two medical papers. 


@@@@@


doc= 20858


Orum, John (b. in or before 1364, d. 1436), ecclesiastic and theologian, was probably a member of a Wells merchant family, who by 1388 had begun his career relatively humbly as a vicar-choral of Wells Cathedral. In 1388 and 1391 the chapter granted him absence for study at Oxford University, where by 1406 he had graduated with a doctorate in theology. While at Oxford he made useful connections, gaining access to royal patronage, and serving as the university chancellor's commissary in 1406-7. From 1398 to 1414 his career advanced steadily through a succession of benefices, the most important of which were cathedral appointments: the archdeaconry of Barnstaple, held from 1400 to 1429, canonries at Wells from 1407 to 1431 and Exeter from 1414 to 1436, and the chancellorship of Exeter from 1429 to 1436. On leaving Oxford Orum became a residentiary canon, first at Wells from 1407 to 1422, and later, from 1414 until his death, at Exeter, unusually combining simultaneous residence at two cathedrals. 
Orum's principal activity in both chapters was as a scholar rather than administrator. He belonged to a post-Wycliffite generation of highly orthodox theologians promoted by reforming bishops to defend the church against Lollardy: he was active against heresy in the diocese of Wells in 1417. His theological reputation rests on a series of lectures on the 'Apocalypse' delivered to the clergy at Wells Cathedral about 1407-29 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 859). They concern aspects of clerical office, including church unity, heresy, avarice, and music. Orum owned theological works by Anselm, Aquinas, and Duns Scotus and was interested in mysticism, possessing a copy of the 'Revelations' of the Swedish mystic St Bridget. As chancellor of Exeter he was expected to give theology lectures and is known to have preached in the diocese. It may be a reflection of his interest in music that he endowed the singing of an antiphon near his tomb, which in his will he asked should be in the north porch of Exeter Cathedral. Orum exemplified the educated resident clergy advocated by conciliar reformers of the early fifteenth century like Richard Ullerston (died 1423). He died at Exeter in September 1436. 


@@@@@


doc= 20859


Osbald (d. 799), king of Northumbria, may be identical with the ealdorman ('dux') of that name who in 780 (the date 779 given by the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' is probably incorrect) gathered an army with another ealdorman called AEthelheard and burned King AElfwald I's patrician ('patricius') Bearn at an unidentified place called 'Seletune'. The burning happened on 24 December, so presumably Bearn was incinerated in his house while celebrating Christmas. At some time after 793, Alcuin wrote to King AEthelred I (died 796) and Osbald, now designated as his patrician, and warned them against following those kings and princes who 'perished because of their injustices, rapines, and uncleanliness of life' (Dummler, no. 18). In 796, following the murder of AEthelred I, certain nobles (presumably those responsible for the murder) made Osbald king, but after only twenty-seven days he was 'deprived of the society of the royal household and of the princes' (Symeon of Durham, 'Opera', 2.57) and forced into flight, first to Lindisfarne and then, in company with some of the monks, by sea to Pictland. Following his deposition, perhaps in the same year but possibly in 798, Alcuin again wrote to him reminding him that more than two years previously he had sworn a vow to give up secular life and enter religion and urging him to fulfil that vow. Apparently he did so, for he died an abbot in 799, when he was buried in St Peter's Minster, York. Osbald's origins are unknown, but his family had clearly been ruthless contenders for royal power, since Alcuin urges him to 'think how much blood of kings, princes and people has been shed through you and your family' (Dummler, no. 109; 'English Historical Documents', 1, no. 200). 


@@@@@


doc= 20860


Osbaldeston, George (1786-1866), sportsman, was born on 26 December 1786 at Welbeck Street, London, the only son of the five children of George Osbaldeston (1753-1793), previously Wickins, landowner and MP for Scarborough, and his wife, Jane (died 1821), daughter of Sir Thomas Head. His parents, who were from ecclesiastical, academic, and political families, were from the south of England, but in 1770 Osbaldeston's grandfather had inherited half the Yorkshire estates of his wife's uncle Fountayne Wentworth Osbaldeston (1694-1770), on condition that he took the Osbaldeston name. The family lived in the Osbaldeston house at Hutton Buscel, near Scarborough. When his father died, the estate was left in trust for six-year-old George, whose mother squandered much of it. 
Osbaldeston lived at Hutton Buscel until he was nine years old, from which time he attended successively the schools run by the Revd Carr and the Revd Wallington, both at Ealing, London, and then Eton College (1802-3), where sport was his sole interest. Following a wild spell at Brighton (1803-4), he went to Brasenose College, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1805, but sport took precedence over study and he left in 1807 without a degree. His wealth qualified him to be commissioned lieutenant-colonel of the 5th regiment North Riding local militia from 1809 to 1811, and family connections enabled him to be elected as a whig MP for East Retford, Lincolnshire, from 1812 to 1818, although he rarely attended parliament. The appointment as high sheriff for Yorkshire, in 1829, was more to his taste, as it involved much socializing. 
Osbaldeston's obsession was to be the best at competitive sports; he was skilled at billiards, cricket, shooting, rowing, tennis, horse-racing, carriage-racing, and especially fox-hunting. He was sixteen when he first bought hounds; they were Southern hounds, and were too slow for him, so he bought Lord Jersey's dwarf foxhounds and built kennels, to Beckford's design, at Hutton Buscel. In 1810, when a fire destroyed Hutton Buscel Hall, he rented a house with his mother, the Palace, Lincoln, where she could entertain, and he hunted the local Burton country, after purchasing the late Lord Monson's pack. He was reputed to have a son, by a Miss Green, a Lincoln prostitute, but the child was sent abroad. For the next twenty-four years he was an itinerant master of foxhounds, serving nine hunts, including the Atherstone (1815-17), the Quorn (1817-21 and 1823-7), and the Pytchley (1827-34), usually subsidizing the cost; he may have been tolerated only for this reason, as he antagonized all ranks of society by his self-centred, arrogant attitudes and his persistent belief that people cheated him. W. Sparrow has suggested that Osbaldeston's great reputation as a huntsman and hound-breeder was mainly due to the skill of his whipper-in, Tom Sebright: after they parted company, Osbaldeston's hunt declined considerably, and he overworked his hounds (Sparrow, xviii). At cricket, he first played at Lord's in 1808 and bowled and batted for the All England team. He rowed competitively, with success from boyhood to middle age. He was a famous shot, both at game birds and at live pigeons, released from traps, at the Old Hat and Red House clubs, although the bore of his gun was 11/2 inches, so he may not have been particularly skilful. 
Horse-racing was an obsession that Osbaldeston pursued in many forms. Nicknamed the Squire by the press, he was only 5 feet 6 inches tall but weighed 11 stone and was a powerful man, who rode well as a gentleman jockey in horse races and steeplechases, as well as carriage races with the Four-in-hand Club and trotting races. He rode at least one horse to death. He also bred racehorses at his new seat at Ebberston Hall, Scarborough, Yorkshire, where he desperately prospected for coal, hoping to solve his financial problems. In 1831 he rode an endurance horse race against time, covering 200 miles in ten hours, for a bet of 1000 guineas, which he won easily. The same year he fought a duel on Wormwood Scrubs with Lord George Bentinck over a gambling debt, following a race in which Osbaldeston probably bent the rules; neither was hurt, and the two men later became reconciled. 
Gambling was Osbaldeston's downfall; he lost about $200,000 on horses, and was forced to sell his estates in 1848 for $190,000 to pay his debts of $167,000. This sale allowed the purchase of an annuity for $10,500, and provided a safe income for life. On 29 July 1851 he married a widow, Elizabeth Williams, 'nee' Cornes; they lived in her houses in Regent's Park, London, and in the south of England, where he kept a few racehorses, without success, until his death; he rode his last race in 1855. Osbaldeston, whose exploits made him a folk-hero of the hunting classes, died intestate and virtually penniless at his home, 2 Grove Road, St John's Wood, London, on 1 August 1866, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 20861


Osbaldeston, Lambert (1594-1659), schoolmaster, was the second son of Lambert Osbaldeston, haberdasher, of London, and his wife, Martha Banks, and brother of William Osbaldeston. Lambert was educated at Westminster School, where he was a scholar by 1609, and he was elected to a scholarship at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1612. He matriculated as the son of a gentleman on 20 October 1615, and was admitted to Gray's Inn on 25 October. He graduated BA at Oxford on 13 June 1616 and proceeded MA on 27 April 1619. 
On 7 December 1621 Osbaldeston had with John Wilson a joint patent from the dean and chapter of Westminster of the headmastership of Westminster School, which was granted to him alone on 4 December 1622. He was incorporated MA at Cambridge in 1628. Having been promised by 13 August 1628 the next vacant canonry of Westminster, he was on 22 July 1629 presented to the tenth stall. In July 1629 he was collated by his friend Bishop John Williams (also dean of Westminster) to the prebend of Biggleswade in Lincoln Cathedral. In 1637 he was presented to the rectory of Wheathampstead, with the chapel of Harpenden, Hertfordshire. Osbaldeston's close association with Williams made him a target for those in the Westminster chapter, led by Peter Heylyn, who wanted to oust the dean. Osbaldeston was accused of charging fees in what ought to have been a 'free' school, of being 'given to company, good fellowship, and muche gadding abrode', and even of pilfering cups and spoons. 
In 1638 letters written by Osbaldeston were found in Williams's house at Buckden referring to 'the little urchin' and 'the little medling hocus-pocus' (Rushworth, 2.803). Laud naturally assumed this referred to him. Williams and Osbaldeston were brought to trial in Star Chamber on 14 February 1639, and the latter was condemned to lose all his spiritualities, to pay a fine of $5000 to the king and a like sum to Laud, and to have his ears nailed to the pillory, one in Palace Yard, Westminster, the other outside the school. While the lord keeper was giving judgment Osbaldeston, who was in court but not in custody, hurried home, burnt some documents, and wrote on a paper left on his desk: 'If the Arch-bishop inquire after me, tell him, I am gone beyond Canterbury' (ibid., 2.817). This simple ruse outwitted his pursuers, who searched the Kent ports in vain. It was to be alleged that the archbishop had been prepared to intercede for remission of the corporal punishment and to forbear 'anything done in order to his apprehension' (Heylyn, 221). Osbaldeston hid in Drury Lane until parliament met in November 1640. 
Meanwhile Osbaldeston had been deprived of his mastership and his church preferments, but he was restored to the latter by the Long Parliament in 1641 after he had petitioned the Lords through the earl of Bedford (BL, Harleian MS 6424, fol. 8, cited in C. S. R. Russell, 'The Fall of the British Monarchies', 1991, 249). He was pardoned by the king on 28 May 1641 and restored to his Westminster canonry. On 2 November following he was collated to the prebend of Ilton in Wells Cathedral, being installed on 8 November. Subsequently his parochial living was again sequestered. In 1645 an ordinance of parliament for the college of Westminster named him as the only canon who had not deserted his charge. By the act of 1649 which continued the school (following the abolition of deans and chapters) he was given an annuity of $100, which he received until his death. 
As headmaster Osbaldeston promoted the study of English composition and of geography. He fostered the school's dramatic tradition, though he may have discontinued the play briefly in sympathy for his friend William Prynne, punished in 1634 for writing against the stage. Osbaldeston's pupils included the future Archbishop John Dolben and future politicians Henry Bennet, later earl of Arlington, and Heneage Finch, later earl of Nottingham, as well as Abraham Cowley, whose 'Pyramus and Thisbe', written at the age of ten, was dedicated to his headmaster. Osbaldeston received a poetic dedication from another Westminster, Thomas Randolph. The only known composition by Osbaldeston himself is a poem presented to Charles I on the king's recovery from smallpox in 1632. Osbaldeston was buried on 7 October 1659 in the south aisle of Westminster Abbey, without any memorial. 


@@@@@


doc= 20862


Osbaldeston, Richard (1691-1764), bishop of London, was born on 6 January 1691, and baptized on 13 January at Hunmanby, Yorkshire, the second son of Sir Richard Osbaldeston (1665-1728) of Havercroft, Yorkshire, and his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1697), daughter and coheir of John Fountaine, of Melton, Yorkshire. He was educated at Mr Lambert's school at Beverley before being admitted a pensioner at St John's College, Cambridge, on 2 June 1707. He graduated BA in 1711, as 16th on the tripos list, and proceeded MA in 1714 and DD in 1726. He was elected fellow of Peterhouse on the Park foundation on 26 July 1714, which he resigned on 22 March 1715. He was ordained deacon by Sir William Dawes, archbishop of York, in September 1714 and priest early the next year. 
Osbaldeston was an ambitious and wealthy whig cleric in Yorkshire. In 1715 he was favoured by William Henry Bentinck, second earl of Portland, with the rich living of Hinderwell, which he resigned in 1747; the same year he was appointed vicar of Hunmanby, the large parish where the Osbaldestons held the manor, a living that he retained until 1762 and where he built a new rectory. While a chaplain to both George I and George II (appointed 23 February 1725, reappointed 1727) he was made rector of Folkton in 1727 (a sinecure worth nearly $900 p.a. and held until 1762), and was dean of York from 19 September 1728. His main achievement at York was collecting the money for a new pavement in the minster and having Richard Boyle, third earl of Burlington, and William Kent lay it; he also officiated at the marriage of Laurence Sterne. He himself married, at Hutton Buscel, Yorkshire, on 30 July 1733, Elizabeth ('bap'. 1694, died 1748), daughter of Thomas and Elizabeth Farside of that parish. She was buried on 10 April 1748, having been known, apparently, for her piety. In the words of William Coates: '
Smooth as the gentle stream her passions flow'd, 

Her Lord, her Love, her only Rapture GOD. 
(Coates, 61)' On 4 October 1747 Osbaldeston was consecrated bishop of Carlisle. He remained in this manageable diocese for fifteen years and ran it with a modest efficiency, thanks to the assistance of the Revd Dr John Waugh, chancellor of the diocese and dean of Worcester, and his chaplains John Brown and Gustavus Thompson. Though he acted as one of George III's first tutors, Osbaldeston spent most of his summers in Carlisle. The sharp exchange of letters with his successor, Bishop Charles Lyttleton, about the decrepit state of the main episcopal residence, Rose Castle, should not count too much against him; Osbaldeston had an interest in building and had spent $1000 on the repair of the castle, selling timber from the park to reimburse himself. It seems likely that the castle was starting to fall into disrepair only in the last few years of Osbaldeston's episcopate as age and ambition for a translation made him opt to spend more time on his estate at Hutton Buscel, where two ordinations were conducted. Until then his pastoral concern is undeniable. In 1753 he conducted an episcopal visitation of the cathedral and made several recommendations for improvements. He attended the coronation of George III as bishop of Carlisle and held the 'Bible'. 
As a Pelhamite loyalist Osbaldeston set his hopes on a return to York as archbishop. He applied to the duke of Newcastle for the northern primacy twice, on neither occasion with success. On 13 March 1757 he stressed his 'many connexions' in Yorkshire (BL, Add. MS 32870, fol. 271); on 14 August 1761 the best he could say was that 'my family and I for many years past have never failed to do all in our power for the service of the present government' (BL, Add. MS 32927, fol. 30). He finally achieved promotion the following year, when on the death of Bishop Hayter he was translated to London as his replacement, 'to nobody's joy that I know of', as Richard Hurd waspishly remarked ('Works of William Warburton', ed. R. Hurd, 7 vols., 1788-94, 1.84). He was in possession for only two years but managed to leave his mark on the diocese, principally by holding a visitation in 1763. Osbaldeston was a discerning patron. He recommended Hurd for preferment, made the historian John Jortin first his domestic chaplain and then archdeacon of London, and in 1762 nominated Cesar de Missy one of the French chaplains to the king. He took an immediate interest in the see of London's supervisory role over the British colonies in North America, where he attempted to uphold church and crown interests, for instance recommending to the Board of Trade in May 1762 that all vestrymen in North Carolina declare their conformity to the liturgy of the Church of England. Osbaldeston had already become involved in colonial Anglicanism before his elevation as bishop of London. Acting for Bishop Thomas Sherlock he had ordained Samuel Seabury as priest on 23 November 1753. As bishop, Osbaldeston lived in Frith Street while putting in hand plans for the rebuilding of Fulham Palace. 
Osbaldeston died on 15 May 1764 and was buried in Hutton Buscel church on 29 May. His second wife, Lucy Digby (1723/4-1793), daughter of John and Jane Digby of Mansfield Woodhouse, Nottinghamshire, died on 11 April 1793, aged sixty-nine. He had no children with either wife and his estate at Hutton Buscel passed to his brother Fountayne Wentworth Osbaldeston (1696-1770). He presented communion plate to most of the parishes where he had been incumbent. Osbaldeston's only publications were three sermons, his papers having been burnt on his instructions, and this has not helped his posthumous reputation. Archbishop Thomas Secker was reported to have considered him in 'every way unequal to the situation' of running the London diocese (Chandler, 197). One of his archdeacons, Charles Moss, was in no doubt, however, of Osbaldeston's merit: 'a general knowledge of the world, and of business, a gentlemanly address and deportment, a just sense of his own dignity and a becoming zeal for the interests of religion, are valuable qualities in a Christian Bishop' (Moss, 20). 


@@@@@


doc= 20863


Osbaldeston, William (c.1578-1645x7), Church of England clergyman, eldest son of Lambert Osbaldeston, haberdasher, of London, and his wife, Martha Banks, and brother of Lambert Osbaldeston, attended Westminster School before election to Christ Church, Oxford. Having matriculated early in 1598, aged nineteen, he graduated BA on 24 October 1601 and proceeded MA on 4 July 1604. He resided at Oxford for some years after taking his bachelor's degree, and contributed to poems written at Christ Church on the visit of James I in 1605. 
In 1610, having become rector of Great Parndon, Essex, on 13 December Osbaldeston also succeeded George Montaigne as divinity professor at Gresham College. Although he proceeded BD on 19 June 1611 he resigned his Gresham post that year, and in 1612 unsuccessfully sought to return to the college as rhetoric professor. Meanwhile, on 12 May 1612, he was licensed to preach. On 21 January 1617 he became rector of East Hanningfield, again in Essex. 
In 1643 Osbaldeston was deprived of Great Parndon, having been charged with preaching against frequent sermons, of encouraging football, and of saying he would cut his throat rather than contribute to the parliamentary cause. On 24 May 1645 he was further summoned before the committee for plundered ministers, which on 5 August deprived him of his other living. His will, made on 3 November 1629 and proved on 25 February 1647, mentions his wife, Mary, and brothers Lambert and Robert. Robert's son, also Robert, was rector of Great Parndon between 1662 and 1680. 


@@@@@


doc= 20864


Osberht (d. 867), king of Northumbria, is an extremely obscure figure, owing to the lack of contemporary annals for ninth-century Northumbria. Writing in the thirteenth century, Roger of Wendover represented him as succeeding to the throne in 848, reigning for eighteen years, and being deposed (presumably in 866) in favour of AElle. Symeon of Durham's 'Libellus de exordio... Dunhelmensis ecclesie' suggests that his reign lasted from 849 to 862, and this is consistent with the length of thirteen years assigned to the reign by other twelfth-century sources associated with Durham. Numismatic evidence, however, indicates that the reign was shorter than either of these spans, perhaps only five years in length; combined with the apparent contemporaneity between coins issued by Osberht and those of Archbishop Wulfhere (elected 854), this suggests that the king's reign in fact extended from 'c'.862 to his death. Little is known about him. According to the eleventh-century 'Historia de sancto Cuthberto', he alienated Warkworth and Tillmouth from the church of St Cuthbert. The same source agrees broadly with the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', and Asser, in describing how Osberht and AElle were in conflict for the throne, but united in face of the first viking assault on York, on 1 November 866. They successfully retook the city, only to be killed in a fresh viking assault on 21 March 867. In the twelfth century Geffrei Gaimar told a story about how Osberht had raped the wife of a Northumbrian called Buern, who took revenge by having Osberht deposed in favour of AElle and calling in the vikings to kill Osberht. 


@@@@@


doc= 20865


Osbern (d. 1094?), Benedictine monk, hagiographer, and musician, was precentor of Christ Church, Canterbury, whose life centred around the saints and relics of his priory. The earliest information concerning him comes from his 'Miracula S. Dunstani', where he describes how as a boy he was witness to two of the saint's miracles. It is also known that he visited Dunstan's cell at Glastonbury, perhaps as a pilgrim, and that later in life he experienced directly the saint's miraculous powers when Dunstan enabled him to win an apparently hopeless legal battle. 
This love for Christ Church's saints perhaps brought Osbern into conflict with Archbishop Lanfranc, who seems initially to have played down the role of relics in monastic devotion. The first indication of trouble between the two appears about 1076, when, as a disciplinary action, Osbern was sent to Bec to study with Anselm, at that time prior. The exact character of the problem is unknown, but in a letter to Prior Henry, Anselm begs indulgence for Osbern 'who knows himself to have sinned not through pride but through imprudence' ('Anselmi opera omnia', letters 58, 66). Disobedience to Prior Henry was in fact to be a recurring theme in Osbern's life. 
Another of Anselm's letters on Osbern's behalf, written to Lanfranc, provides a surprisingly intimate picture of the monk. He was possessed of a quick mind and a tenacious memory, one who had 'grown venerably fat' under Anselm's tutelage ('Anselmi opera omnia', letter 39). He also suffered from a recurrent and debilitating illness which manifested itself in a variety of symptoms, making Osbern perhaps especially dependent upon the aid of the saints. Anselm concludes the letter with a request for a life of St Dunstan and for the 'Regularis concordia', which demonstrates that Osbern was not without influence on Anselm, and that his thoughts were never far from the Canterbury saints. 
In 1080 Osbern returned to Canterbury, perhaps with Anselm during the latter's first visit to Christ Church. During that visit Anselm convinced a sceptical Archbishop Lanfranc of the validity of St AElfheah's martyrdom. Lanfranc then embraced the cult with some enthusiasm and commissioned a verse 'passio' of the martyr from Osbern. Later, apparently under his own initiative, Osbern composed a prose life and an account of the saint's translation from London to Canterbury during the reign of Cnut. Almost nothing seems to have been known about AElfheah's career, but Osbern expanded freely on the few details that he did have. At least one event -- AElfheah's reception of two pallia at Rome, one of them belonging to the pope himself -- he took from the career of Lanfranc. 
Osbern wrote his other book, the 'Vita et miracula S. Dunstani', during the vacancy after Lanfranc's death. Two earlier lives of Dunstan existed which Osbern used, but again he expanded freely upon the information he had to hand. Some of the details that he added -- such as the story of the saint's catching the devil's face in hot tongs, or the description of Dunstan's deathbed rising towards the ceiling in anticipation of his ascension towards heaven -- became the most well-known events associated with Dunstan's life. Osbern's was also the first life to state repeatedly and explicitly Dunstan's position of leadership in the tenth-century monastic revival. Earlier lives had made only oblique references to Dunstan's role as a reformer, but Osbern characterized the archbishop as one who directly and forcefully expelled secular canons from their churches. This portrait is undoubtedly inaccurate. But it must have seemed an important claim to make if, as Eadmer suggests in his 'Historia novorum', Christ Church's monastic status was under attack during Lanfranc's archiepiscopate. 
The full extent of the authority enjoyed by Osbern within the Christ Church community is indicated by two letters he wrote to Anselm in 1093, enjoining the abbot of Bec to accept the office of archbishop to which he had been elected. He also urges Anselm to take no action towards his consecration or in regard to any ecclesiastical issue without first consulting Osbern himself. This sense of authority must have brought him into further conflict with Prior Henry, and in fact Eadmer does say that, during the vacancy, Osbern led a search of Christ Church's relics without first seeking permission from the prior, as monastic obedience required. 
The last extant reference to Osbern is in one of Anselm's first letters as archbishop, addressed to Prior Henry, Osbern, and to certain other monks. The letter concerns disorder at the monastery because of the reluctance of some of the brethren to obey Henry's commands. Whether Anselm addressed Osbern as a respected member of the community who could restore order or as a possible source of the turmoil itself must remain uncertain. Osbern may have been the disobedient monk whose death in 1094 is reported by Goscelin. 
Osbern was also a renowned musician. None of his musical compositions has been identified, which is unfortunate, since William of Malmesbury described Osbern as 'taking the prize' in music. 


@@@@@


doc= 20866


Osbern (d. 1103), bishop of Exeter, was the son of Osbern the seneschal, who was guardian of Normandy for the then Duke William. He was therefore brother of William Fitz Osbern, earl of Hereford. He went to England during the reign of Edward the Confessor, and was one of the king's chaplains, holding land at Stratton, Cornwall, at the time of Edward's death. As a royal chaplain he was present at the dedication of Westminster Abbey on 28 December 1065, and retained that position after the conquest, when he witnessed a charter to St Martin's, London, in 1068. The suggestion that he became the king's chancellor depends entirely upon a charter to St Augustine's, Canterbury, which is largely spurious. 
Osbern was consecrated bishop of Exeter at St Paul's, London, on 27 May 1072, by Archbishop Lanfranc. He was present as bishop at the councils held at Windsor in 1072 and London in 1075. A dispute arose between Osbern and the monks of St Nicholas's, Exeter, which he seems to have resolved after prompting from Pope Paschal II. William of Malmesbury relates with approval Osbern's preference for English rather than Norman customs. He seems to have made little impact at Exeter, since, according to Malmesbury, 'after the manner of ancient prelates, he was content with old buildings'. The earliest building work there dates from the time of his successor. Osbern was blind for some years before his death and for this reason William of Warelwast, who eventually succeeded him, may have tried to have him deprived of his bishopric. Osbern died in the latter part of 1103, before the scheme could take effect. 


@@@@@


doc= 20867


Pinnock, Osbern (fl. c.1148), Benedictine monk, theologian, and lexicographer, was a monk at St Peter's Abbey, Gloucester, under Abbot Hamelin (1148-79) and possibly Gilbert Foliot (1139-48). The name Pinnuc (BL, Royal MS 8 B.xxi) suggests birth near Stanway, Gloucestershire; the name Claudianus ('DNB') means 'of Gloucester'; he may be the Osbern who maintained a cell in Wales, perhaps Cardigan ('Letters and Charters', letter 10). His theological works, preserved in BL, Royal MS 6 D.ix (owned by the Lincoln Carmelites, but probably written at Gloucester), are unpublished: a dialogue with a Nicholas on the 'Pentateuch' (there is an extract in Wright, 'Biographia'); a six-book treatise on 'Judges', addressed to Foliot when he was bishop of Hereford (1148-63); treatises on the incarnation, nativity, sacraments of the passion, and resurrection. His most influential work, extant in at least twenty-five manuscripts, was the 'Panormia' or 'Liber derivationum', an alphabetical list of lexical derivatives, dedicated to Hamelin; this is rich in its citations and is a modest advance on Papias's mid-eleventh-century 'Elementarium doctrinae rudimentum'. Its prologue, in a very exotic style, recounts a dream in which Grammar laments her neglect and says that she intends to pour lists of words into Osbern's mouth. The 'commedia' 'Babio' uses the 'Panormia''s vocabulary for comic effect. 


@@@@@


doc= 20868


Osbwrn Wyddel (fl. 1292-1293), dynastic founder, is said to have come from Ireland to settle in the commote of Ardudwy in north-west Merioneth. According to tradition he was a member of the Geraldine (Fitzgerald) lineage and therefore a descendant of Gerald of Windsor and his wife, Nest, the daughter of the Welsh king Rhys ap Tewdwr (died 1093). There is no firm evidence to confirm this but his name may suggest Norman antecedents. The only definite reference to him is in the 1292/3 Merioneth lay subsidy roll, in which he is listed as a substantial taxpayer in the township of Llanaber. His descendants included several prominent local families, including those of Corsygedol, Maes-y-neuadd, and Ynysmaengwyn. The Corsygedol family, descended from his son Cynwrig, played an active part in the affairs of the county in the later middle ages. Osbwrn's great-grandson Gruffudd ap Llywelyn ap Cynwrig and his great-great-grandson Einion ap Gruffudd held the office of sheriff in the late fourteenth century; Gruffudd also founded a hospice for travellers at Egryn in Llanaber and in 1391 was granted a papal licence to have masses celebrated in the oratory there. Another descendant was Dafydd ab Ieuan ab Einion, who conducted the epic Lancastrian defence of Harlech Castle during the Wars of the Roses. Osbwrn's significance is genealogical rather than historical and his own ancestry and the circumstances of his arrival in Merioneth must remain a mystery. 


@@@@@


doc= 20869


Osborn, Elias (bap. 1643, d. 1720), Quaker minister, was born at Chillington, Somerset, where he was baptized on 24 June 1643, the son of Timothy Osborn; his mother, whose name is unknown, died when he was two years old. Osborn records in his autobiography that his parents 'were religious people, of those who were then called Puritans' (Osborn, 16), and that his father kept him at school and made him attend weekly lectures and repeat the substance of the sermon on the way home. Elias was, as he recalled, 'inclined to religion' when he was thirteen, but also loved 'pleasure and vanity' (ibid., 18). At about fifteen he left school and was employed in the clothing trade. At the Restoration he records how 'I tried the common prayer, but was very soon weary of it, and indeed of all other religions that I then knew' (ibid., 19). 
At the age of nineteen Osborn first heard of the Quakers, and after reading some of their books finally became 'convinced of the truth' (Osborn, 19). His father and other puritan relatives strongly opposed his conversion, and Osborn left home and began working in the clothing trade for a widow with two daughters, all of whom were Quakers. On 1 October 1665, at the age of twenty-two, Osborn married Mary Horte (died 1675), the younger of the daughters. His father, though strongly objecting to this Quaker daughter-in-law, afterwards 'loved her dearly', and desired her to be buried by his side (ibid., 21). Indeed, he eventually accepted his son's beliefs and 'came to have a love for Friends, and would sometimes go to meetings, which was a great comfort to me' (ibid., 29). 
Osborn and his family entertained many travelling Friends at their home in Chillington, but began to feel the brunt of persecution in the 1670s. In 1670 Osborn and his mother-in-law were imprisoned at the suit of Lord Paulet's steward for non-payment of tithes, and their goods were seized more than once for the same cause. After the passage of the 1670 'Conventicle Act', Osborn remembered, 'the nation seemed all of a flame' and the 'worst of men let loose to ruin honest neighbours by a law' (Osborn, 23). A large monthly meeting at Stoke Gregory was the first in the area to be broken up, and other meetings were disturbed, chiefly by Henry Waldron, a JP and militia captain who employed informers and illegally consigned numbers of Quakers from meetings as 'rioters' and 'conventiclers' (ibid., 25). Osborn and some others procured a counsel to plead their case and defeated Waldron at quarter sessions. Some land was then bought and a large meeting-house built at Ilminster, 3 miles from Chillington, mainly at the expense of Osborn and his family. 
In 1673 Osborn moved to Chard, where he continued to suffer frequently from distraints on his property. On 12 July 1675 his wife died, leaving four children. About three years later, in 1678, he married Mary Smith, with whom he had a further three children. Of the seven children, the eldest son, Elias, born at Chillington on 15 June 1668, settled at Bristol and died there on 3 August 1703, and the second son, Timothy, born on 30 April 1670, died at Ilminster on 15 November 1704. 
On 23 September 1680, the day appointed for the Somerset quarterly meeting at Ilchester, the Friends met in the house of an innkeeper named Abbott, as the house usually rented by them from the gaolkeeper was full of prisoners. After the meeting for worship they had divided as usual for separate business meetings -- women upstairs, men below -- when Captain Waldron appeared with his troop, took down many names, and, treating the assembly as two conventicles, fined Abbott $40. Assisted by Osborn and other Quakers, the innkeeper brought an action at common law against Waldron at Wells assizes, but without success. A month later Waldron went to Ilminster while Osborn was preaching, and carried him and sixty-nine others before Sir Edward Phillips. The group included Osborn's wife, who suffered a miscarriage as a result of the turmoil. Phillips fortunately allowed Osborn time to explain the case, so that only he and a few others were committed to prison. They appeared at Bath and were remanded until the next sessions, but through the influence of Lord Fitzhardinge, who represented that the Quakers were clothiers and large employers of labour, were released. Osborn was returned to prison, but allowed considerable liberty and discharged at the next sessions. On 28 April 1685 Osborn and three Somerset Quakers drew up an address to the county MPs in which they outlined the ill treatment of Friends, quoting the declaration of Breda as a guarantee for liberty of conscience, apparently to no effect. 
After his release Osborn continued preaching around the villages of Somerset, whose inhabitants joined the Quakers in large numbers. He held a meeting of 500 people in the market-house of Wellington, and in Devon at Spiceland, Collumpton, Okehampton, and Crediton. He was prominent in the local business meetings of the Society of Friends as well as in the quarterly meeting, and he was often chosen to represent his county at the yearly meeting in London. He was evidently well liked in these circles, for a testimony by the quarterly meeting written after his death described him as 'a great and good man', who was 'well gifted in the ministry' and 'of good service' in meetings for business (Osborn, 4-7). 
On 26 October 1711, aged sixty-eight, Osborn completed his autobiography, published after his death as 'A Brief Narrative of the Life, Labours and Sufferings of Elias Osborn' (1723). On 13 December 1718 he wrote of his inability through age and deafness to be present at the funeral of William Penn, of whom he said, 'I can truly say, that I never loved any man better on a religious or civil account' (Osborn, 121). Osborn died on 29 June 1720 in his own house at Chard, and was buried in the Quaker burial-ground there on 5 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 20870


Osborn, George (1808-1891), Wesleyan Methodist minister, was born at Rochester, Kent, on 29 March 1808, the eldest of ten children of George Osborn (1764-1836) and his wife, Hannah ('nee' Lambly). His father was a draper in the town, a class leader among the Methodists for twenty-one years, and a member for over fifty. George junior was educated at Dr Hulett's school at Brompton. He married Elizabeth Chubb, with whom he had eleven children, one of his sons entering the Wesleyan ministry. 
Osborn entered the Wesleyan ministry in 1828, and was initially appointed to the St Albans circuit. Thereafter he had nine more appointments in Brighton (1829-31), Liverpool (1831 and 1845-8), Deptford (1832), Stockport (1833-6), London (1836-42), and Manchester (1842-5 and 1848-51). He was conspicuous as a debater very early in life, and rose rapidly in the estimation of his co-religionists, being elected in 1849 into the legal hundred, the governing body of the conference. In 1851 he was nominated one of the Wesleyan foreign missionary secretaries, and retained that office for seventeen years. The jubilee of the foreign missions took place in 1863. In the same year Osborn was elected president of the conference, albeit by the narrowest of majorities, and rendered great service to the missions by his advocacy of their claims in the large towns in England. On the retirement of the Revd Thomas Jackson in 1868 he was elected theological tutor at Richmond College, the institution for training Wesleyan missionaries, and continued to reside there until 1885. He was invited to deliver the first Fernley lecture in 1870, on the work and mission of the Holy Spirit. In 1881, in the year of the first ecumenical Methodist conference, he was for the second time elected to the chair of the conference, on this occasion by a large majority. From 1885 he was a supernumerary minister, and died at his home, 24 Cambrian Road, Richmond, Surrey, on 18 April 1891. 
In his approach to theology and church polity Osborn was emphatically on the conservative wing of Wesleyan Methodism, regarded by many as carrying the torch of Jabez Bunting, to whom he largely owed his own elevation in the connexion. Indeed, he himself once declared that in resisting any attempt to alter the principles of Methodism he would spend his last sixpence and breathe his last breath. He therefore became an implacable opponent of all significant reformist tendencies in Wesleyanism, passionately defending the conference line during the secessions in the 1830s and 1840s, and resisting the admission of lay representatives to the conference in 1875-6. At the same time, his commitment to Methodist tradition resulted in two major and long-enduring pieces of historical scholarship, a thirteen-volume edition of 'The Poetical Works of John and Charles Wesley' (1868-72) and his 'Outlines of Wesleyan Bibliography' (1869). He also wrote or edited eleven other books and pamphlets, furnished prefaces or introductions to at least seven works, and contributed articles to the 'Wesleyan Methodist Magazine' and 'London Quarterly Review'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20871


Osborn, John (c.1580-c.1634), worker in pressed horn and whalebone, was born in Worcestershire, where he appears to have been engaged in making cases, sheaths, or small boxes in horn and other material. About 1600 he emigrated to the Netherlands, possibly for religious reasons, and settled at Amsterdam. There, on 2 June 1607, he married Frances Cotton of Berkshire, then living at Uilenburg in the Netherlands. Osborn became one of the principal workers in horn and whalebone in Amsterdam, and his works appear to have been highly valued. When the Northern Company of Amsterdam was granted a monopoly of Dutch whaling in 1614, it sought to market its products, and in 1618 John Osborn was granted an exclusive patent to prepare and supply baleen. This was disputed in 1620 by a Dutch cabinet-maker, and in that year Osborn obtained a second exclusive patent. This was disputed by Osborn's brother, Richard, in 1624, when John Osborn obtained a third patent giving him the exclusive right to work baleen. Osborn specialized in pressing portrait medallions in horn and baleen, using copper stamps made from models provided by the goldsmith Jan Lutma the elder ('c'.1584-1669). The reliefs were made by pressing the prepared baleen between pairs of positive and negative copper stamps, and were finished by being blackened to imitate ebony, then a fashionable and expensive import. Twelve surviving reliefs in public collections can be attributed to Osborn on the basis of four signed and dated portrait medallions of Frederick Henry, prince of Orange, and his wife, Amalia von Solms (a pair in the British Museum, London, and single portraits of Amalia von Solms in the Koninklijk Penningkabinet, Leiden, and the Kunstgewerbe Museum, Berlin). Osborn died about 1634 in Amsterdam. 


@@@@@


doc= 20872


Osborn, Robert Durie (1835-1889), army officer, was born at Agra, India, on 6 August 1835, the son of Henry Roche Osborn ('bap'. 1798, died 1849) and his wife, Charlotte (1808/9-22 Sept 1894), third daughter of Major Robert Durie, 11th light dragoons. Henry Roche Osborn was baptized at Swanage on 29 June 1798, entered the East India Company's service in May 1819, and served mostly with the 54th native infantry, but latterly was lieutenant-colonel of the 13th native infantry; he died at Ferozepore on 10 March 1849. Robert was educated for a cadet at Dr Greig's school at Walthamstow, and was appointed ensign of the 26th Bengal native infantry on 16 August 1854, becoming lieutenant on 31 July 1857. He served throughout the Indian mutiny of 1857-9, and was present in the actions of Bulandshahr on 27 September and of Aligarh on 5 October 1857. He commanded a detachment of the 4th Punjab infantry at the actions of Gungaree and Puttiallee, was present in various operations against the rebels in the Agra district, served with Colonel Troup's column in Oudh in November 1858, and took part in the action at Biswan. From January to May 1859 he was with the Saugor field force under General Whitelock; he afterwards commanded a field detachment in the Ooraie district, and later on defeated a rebel force at Tudhoorkee. In 1859-60 he was with the Bundelkhand field force under Brigadier Wheeler. He was lieutenant in the Bengal staff corps (30 July 1857) and captain (20 December 1865). On 25 August 1859 he became adjutant of the 2nd regiment of Sikh irregular cavalry, converted into the 12th regiment of Bengal cavalry in 1861, in which Osborn was third squad officer from 4 November 1865 to 17 May 1866. He was captain in his regiment from 8 June 1868 to 1872. In the latter year he was appointed tutor to the Paikharah wards, became major on 20 December 1873, and retired with the honorary rank of lieutenant-colonel on 1 May 1879. He served through the Afghan campaign of that year, but retired after the signature of the treaty of Gundamuk. 
Osborn was a serious thinker on both religious and political topics. As a young man he enjoyed the friendship of F. D. Maurice and of Charles Kingsley, and occasionally wrote papers in the magazines on Maurice's religious position and influence. While in India he studied oriental religions, and spent fourteen years on the complex materials for his two works, 'Islam under the Arabs' (1876) and 'Islam under the Khalifs of Baghdad' (1877), which were highly valued by serious students. Osborn was a zealous advocate of Indian rights, and his retirement from the army was largely due to his dissatisfaction with Lord Lytton's policy which, in his opinion, outraged Indian sentiment and needlessly provoked the Anglo-Afghan War of 1879. On his return from India he settled at Hampstead, and mainly devoted himself to journalistic and literary work. He became London correspondent of the Calcutta 'Statesman', and took a leading part in the conduct of the London 'Statesman', which was published for a few months in 1879 and 1880 to oppose Disraeli's Indian policy. In the 'Scotsman', the New York 'Nation', and the 'Contemporary Review' he also wrote much on India and on native claims to popular government. He also wrote 'Friends of the Foreigner in the Nineteenth Century: a Critique' (1879) and 'Lawn Tennis: its Players and How to Play' (1881). Osborn married at Trinity Church, Bayswater, on 12 November 1864, Edith, daughter of the Revd Gregory Rhodes; they had two daughters and she survived him. A keen lawn-tennis player, Osborn collapsed from syncope on Good Friday, 19 April 1889, while playing Ernest Renshaw, the champion of all England, at the Hyde Park tennis court, London, and died that day at 3 Porchester House, Porchester Road, Bayswater, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 20873


Osborn, Sherard (1822-1875), naval officer, son of Colonel Edward Osborn of the Madras army, was born on 25 April 1822. In September 1837 he was entered by Commander William Warren as a first-class volunteer on board the sloop 'Hyacinth', fitting for the East Indies. The 'Hyacinth' arrived at Singapore in May 1838, and in September was ordered to blockade Kedah, then in a state of revolt. Osborn was appointed to command a tender and so from December 1838 to March 1839 he was 'captain of his own ship'. The responsibility thrust on him at such an early age went far to strengthen and mature his character. Parts of his journal during the time were published in 1857 as 'Quedah, or, Stray Leaves from a Journal in Malayan Waters'. In 1840 the 'Hyacinth' went to China, and took part in the operations in the Canton River. In 1842 Osborn was moved into the 'Clio' with Commander Troubridge, and in her was present at the capture of Woosung (Wusong) on 16 June. He was afterwards transferred to the 'Volage', and came home in the 'Columbine' in 1843. He passed his examination in December, and, after going through the gunnery course in the 'Excellent', was appointed gunnery mate of the 'Collingwood', fitting out for the Pacific as flagship of Sir George Seymour. 
On 4 May 1846 Osborn was promoted lieutenant of the 'Collingwood', in which he returned to England in the summer of 1848. He then had command of the 'Dwarf', a small screw-steamer, employed during the disturbances of the year on the coast of Ireland. In 1849, when public attention was turned to the fate of Sir John Franklin, Osborn entered into the question with enthusiasm and energy, and in 1850 was appointed to command the steam tender 'Pioneer', in the Arctic expedition under Captain Austin in the 'Resolute'. Considered as a surveying expedition, it was eminently successful, and proved that Franklin's ships had not been lost in Baffin's Bay. Much of the success of the voyage was due to the steam tenders, which, during the summers of 1850 and 1851, held out new prospects for Arctic navigation. The way in which the 'Pioneer' or 'Intrepid' cut through rotten ice, or steamed through the loose pack in a calm, led directly to the employment of powerful screw-steamers in the whaling fleet. On his return to England in 1851, Osborn urged the renewal of the search for Franklin. 
Osborn married, in January 1852, Helen, daughter of John Hinksman of Queen Anne Street, London, who survived him; they had two daughters. In February 1852 he published an account of the two previous years' work, 'Stray Leaves from an Arctic Journal', which further stimulated public interest; and early in the year he joined another expedition under Sir Edward Belcher in the 'Assistance', Osborn again going in command of the 'Pioneer', to which he was formally promoted on 30 October. By what Osborn considered a most serious error of judgement, the 'Pioneer', with the other ships of the expedition, was abandoned on 20 August 1854, the officers and men being brought to England on 28 September. His Arctic service, including five summers and three winters, had severely tried Osborn's health, and for some time he had charge of the coastguard in Norfolk. 
Early in 1855 Osborn was sent out to take command of the 'Vesuvius' in the Black Sea, where he took part in the capture of Kerch, and, after the death of Captain Lyons, he remained as senior officer in the Sea of Azov, in command of a large squadron of gunboats, with which he destroyed many depots of provisions and stores destined for Sevastopol. On 18 August he was advanced to the rank of captain, but, by Sir Edmund Lyons's desire, was appointed to the 'Medusa', a small steamer, in which he remained as senior officer in the Sea of Azov until the conclusion of the war, for his conduct in which he received the CB, the cross of the Legion d'honneur, and the Mejidiye of the fourth class. The occupation of the Sea of Azov destroyed the Russian logistics' support for its Crimean army, and led directly to the fall of Sevastopol. Osborn was consulted by the Admiralty on the strategy to be followed in 1856. 
In the spring of 1857 Osborn was appointed to the paddle-frigate 'Furious' and ordered to escort fifteen gunboats to China, a duty considered at the time one of serious difficulty. The gunboats, however, arrived safely at Hong Kong where they contributed to the success of the attack on Canton, in which Osborn was actively engaged. In December 1857 the 'Furious' was appointed for the use of the plenipotentiary, Lord Elgin, and in the following year took him to Shanghai and the Gulf of Po Hai (Bohai). After the signing of the treaty of Tientsin, Lord Elgin, still in the 'Furious', went to Tokyo, where he concluded a treaty which largely opened Japan to relations with the West; and in September 1858 he went up the Yangtze (Yangzi) River as far as Hangchow (Hangzhou), a piece of difficult and intricate navigation. 
In 1859 Osborn returned to England in bad health, and, while on leave, contributed many articles to 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', mostly on naval or Chinese topics. In 1861 he was appointed to the 'Donegal', which he commanded in the Gulf of Mexico during the Mexican war, and was paid off in the beginning of 1862. In the following June he agreed to the Chinese government's request to take command of a squadron fitted out in England for the suppression of piracy on the Chinese coast. In 1863 he went out with six specially built steamers. It had been expressly stipulated that Osborn was to receive his orders from the imperial government alone, independent of the local authorities; but on his arrival in China he found that the government had determined that the squadron was to be under the command of the mandarins at the several ports. Osborn refused to accept this, resigned, and returned to England. In 1864 Osborn commanded the 'Royal Sovereign', a ship fitted with turrets on the plan proposed by his friend Captain Cowper Phipps Coles. In this experimental command, Osborn demonstrated the value of the turret system of mounting heavy guns, and, despite his well-known connection with Coles, advised the Admiralty on the adoption of the system. The 'Royal Sovereign' was the prototype of the first-class coast assault battleships which were a feature of the navy for the next thirty years. On the 1871 Admiralty committee on designs he stressed the need for first-class ships to be capable of breaking into defended bases, specifically Brest and Cherbourg. 
In 1865 Osborn accepted an appointment as agent to the Great Indian Peninsula Railway, the traffic organization of which he remodelled and improved. Ill health compelled him to resign in 1866, and in 1867 he became managing director of the Telegraph Construction and Maintenance Company, an office which he held until 1873. In 1871 he commanded the 'Hercules' in the channel for a few months, and on 29 May 1873 attained the rank of rear-admiral. He continued to take great interest in Arctic exploration, and in 1873 suggested to Commander Albert Markham that he examine for himself the new conditions of the work under steam, which Markham did by a summer voyage in a whaler. Markham's favourable report strongly influenced public opinion. An expedition was determined on, and an advising committee of experts, of whom Osborn was one, was appointed. On Monday, 3 May 1875, when the ships were on the point of sailing, Osborn went down to Portsmouth to wish the officers farewell. He died suddenly at his home, 33 Charles Street, Berkeley Square, London, on 6 May, and was buried in Highgate cemetery on the 10th. 
Osborn's more important works, including 'The Discovery of a North-West Passage by Captain M'Clure', 'Arctic Journal', and 'Last Voyage and Fate of Sir John Franklin', were published in a collective edition of three volumes in 1865. He also published many articles in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' and in the 'Journal' or 'Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society'. Osborn was an intelligent and resourceful officer, better suited to independent command than the restrictions of peacetime squadron service. He held strong views on a number of issues and was never behindhand in setting them before the public. His services in the Sea of Azov were the highlight of a brilliant, if unconventional, career, largely devoted to the projection of power from the sea against the shore. 


@@@@@


doc= 20874


Osborne, Sir Edward (c.1530-1592), merchant and local politician, was one of the four children of Richard Osborne, of Ashford, Kent, and his wife, Jane, the daughter of John Broughton. Both parents probably came from minor gentry families, although Richard is described only as a yeoman in his son's apprenticeship records. 
His father's lands at Ashford passed to another son, Thomas, while Edward was apprenticed in 1544 or 1545 to William Hewett, master of the Clothworkers' Company. Hewett was an overseas merchant whose premises included The Rose in Fish Street on the approach to London Bridge, and the story was preserved in the Hewett and Osborne families that the young apprentice made his fortune by leaping gallantly into the Thames to save his master's little daughter when a careless maid let her fall in. Between 1560 and 1562 he married Anne Hewett (1543/4-1585), by then the only child of the wealthy lord mayor. The romantic tale of the rescue and their courtship was first published in 1720 by John Strype: 'Sir William was pleased to say, Osborn saved her, and Osborn should enjoy her' (Stow, 2.v.133-4), and became the subject of a popular Victorian novel, 'The Colloquies of Edward Osborne' by Anne Manning. 
Hewett died in 1567, leaving the Osbornes heirs partly by settlement and partly by bequest to the greater part of his real and personal estate, although his nephew and partner Henry Hewett was left his main business premises at the Three Cranes in Candlewick Street. Anne and Edward Osborne acquired the Fish Street premises, a mansion house with adjoining buildings in Philpot Lane, The Crown in Fenchurch Street, and other London properties, as well as extensive estates in Hewett's native Yorkshire and nearby parts of Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire. The lands in the southern tip of the West Riding -- at Harthill, Thorpe Salvin, Todwick, Waleswood, Woodall, and Woodsetts -- and adjacent lands at Killamarsh, Derbyshire, would later form the nucleus of the Kiveton estate of the dukes of Leeds. The manor of Parsloes in Dagenham, Essex, where the Osbornes built themselves a country house, was not (as often stated) inherited from Hewett, but bought several years after his death from another master of the Clothworkers' Company, Sir Rowland Hayward, and Thomas Wilbraham. 
Osborne had become a freeman of the Clothworkers' Company in 1553, a week after Queen Mary's accession. He then disappears from the record for the rest of her reign. He took his own first apprentice in 1559, was admitted to the livery in 1560, and was elected steward in 1562 and a warden in 1565 and 1569, but rather surprisingly never went on to serve as master, although he remained closely associated with the company and left money for a memorial dinner to be held there after his death. Instead he sought city office, and served as alderman for Castle Baynard ward (1573-6) and Candlewick ward (from 1576), sheriff (1575-6), and lord mayor (1583-4; he was knighted on 2 February 1584). He was also MP for London in the parliament of 1586, where the only record of his activity is as a member of the committee attending the queen to present reasons for executing Mary, queen of Scots. From 1586 until his death he was president of St Thomas's Hospital (having been treasurer in 1571-3), and from 1590 surveyor-general of hospitals. From 1587 he was a commissioner of sewers for the River Lea. 
Osborne was also called on by the privy council to arbitrate in disputes concerning the wholesale cloth trade, maritime insurance, foreign contracts, patent infringements, and the mining industry (he had his own coal pit in Yorkshire). He was evidently regarded as a fair-minded man, in spite of occasional accusations of sharp practice. In 1566 he was indicted in the court of exchequer, together with a broker married to Lady Hewett's sister, for fraudulent conveyancing designed to circumvent the laws against usury, but the case was dismissed for lack of evidence. After this he was careful only to lend at interest if repayment was in another currency, when it was legitimate to charge a fee for money-changing. This made him unpopular with acquaintances such as the earl of Shrewsbury and his family, who expected an interest-free loan of ready money and were offered instead an expensive bill of exchange payable in Antwerp. And even internationally agreed loans could give rise to prolonged disputes, as Osborne and other lenders discovered when a debt incurred in 1561-2 by the Swedish ambassador Guildenstern was later disowned by the Swedish king's usurping brother. 
It was probably characteristic that Osborne made interest-free loans to close relatives but recorded them all in a ledger. At his death he subtracted from their legacies the small sums owed by his two brothers, his brother-in-law, and a cousin. Humane views, however, emerge in connection with the education of his sons. Both were sent to learn Latin and Greek at the boarding-school kept by Elias Newcomen and went on to Cambridge and the Inner Temple. In a testimonial written in 1586 for Newcomen when he applied for a post at Merchant Taylors' School, Osborne not only praised the schoolmaster's 'skill and longe Experience in teachinge', his being of a sincere religion, 'a thinge in a teacher muche to be respected', and his daily catechism of the children in the same, but also 'the great Lenitie and gentlenes which he useth towardes his schollers' (Merchant Taylors' Company, court minutes, vol. 3, fol. 149). Osborne's closest personal friend was not another businessman but the deputy recorder of London, William Daniell, a man with a reputation for learning and wisdom who was later knighted and made a justice of the common pleas. 
It was as a merchant, however, that Osborne made his own reputation. The first surviving record of his trading activities is in 1559, when he exported thirteen unfinished cloths to Antwerp. He must therefore have belonged then to the Company of Merchant Adventurers, but he had ceased to be actively involved by the time they were incorporated in 1564 and fell out with the Clothworkers' Company in 1565-6. Instead he became a pioneer in sending to more distant outlets cloths and kerseys which had been dyed and dressed in England. The port books show that from 1567 to 1577 he exported these mainly to Spain and Portugal, importing in exchange oil and raisins from Spain, spices from Portugal, and wine, vinegar, and canvas from France. When he used a partner it was at first his brother-in-law Lawrence Mellowe, a clothworker married to his sister Julian or Gillian. Later it was Mellowe's regular partner, Richard Staper, a younger clothworker who joined the family in 1567 by marrying Henry Hewett's sister Dionis. In 1577 Osborne and Staper were both named as assistants in the charter of the new Company of Spain and Portugal. In 1578 they were the first merchants to be approached with a project to open up the trade with Brazil. In 1579 Osborne's name was the first of sixty-five in the charter of the Eastland Company, the new regulated company granted a monopoly of much of the Baltic trade, with Staper another charter member, and within a few months they exported cloths and kerseys worth over $1000 to Danzig. The Russia Company became another interest; in 1584 Osborne was the first signatory of a petition from Muscovy House demanding reimbursement of sums laid out by the company for Sir Jerome Bowes during his embassy to Russia. 
Above all Osborne is to be credited with the revival of direct trade on a large scale between England and the Levant. Antwerp had been the entrepot in recent decades for Levant goods, but was in decline by the 1570s; the Turks, after Lepanto, were desperate for English tin and lead, and they represented a huge potential market for English cloth. Osborne and Staper seized this favourable conjunction by sending out to Constantinople through Poland in 1575 two agents who procured a safe conduct for a more substantial emissary, William Harborne. Osborne had obtained his freedom of the Clothworkers' Company and subsequently employed him in Spain. Now unofficially backed by the English government as well as the merchants, he arrived in Constantinople late in 1578 and within a few months had persuaded the sultan to write to Queen Elizabeth offering security of trade to all her subjects. This was not what Osborne and Staper had had in mind. By the time the letter's Latin translation reached the queen, crucial phrases had been rewritten to convert it into a monopoly for themselves and Harborne. The queen then replied asking for the privileges to be extended to all her nationals, and the Turks responded in 1580 by issuing a more specific charter of liberties, which became the model for all later renewals of the capitulations under which the English continued to trade in the Ottoman empire until 1923. The enterprise was nearly sabotaged at the outset by French machinations and English piracy, but the Turks accepted Elizabeth's apology for the latter and allowed Harborne to return as a fully accredited ambassador. As was to remain the pattern for two centuries, he acted both as the crown's representative and as the salaried agent of the London merchants granted the monopoly of the trade. These were led by Osborne, who was named in the Turkey Company's charter of September 1581 as its governor for the seven years of its monopoly, 'in consideration that the said Edward Osborne hath bene the principall setter foorth and doer in the opening and putting in use of the said trade'. He was given wide powers over the company, which was known to the customs as Edward Osborne, Richard Staper & Co., and traded from his own premises in Philpot Lane. At his death it was still paying him $20 a year to store its bulky bales in 'certayne warehouses, vaults and chambers' attached to his mansion. Nevertheless it was no family business, but was conceived from the outset on the grand scale required for success. The heavy initial outlay was subsidized in part by a loan of 10,000 lb in silver from the queen -- the New World fuelling development of the Old -- and contributions to the joint stock were broadly based. Consulates were quickly established in Chios, Tripoli in Syria, Alexandria, Algiers, and Patras, and soon convoys of richly laden English merchantmen had become a familiar sight in the eastern Mediterranean. The main exports were cloth and tin, the main imports raw silk, cotton yarn and cotton wool, grograms and camlets (mohair/silk and mohair fabrics respectively), carpets, currants, galls, and a wide range of spices and drugs. This was to remain the basic pattern of the Levant trade until the nineteenth century. 
Within a generation this influx of raw material was to revolutionize the silk and cotton manufacturing industries in England. In the 1580s these were still in their infancy, and there was therefore a large re-export trade in Levant goods for which there was as yet no home market. This in turn encouraged further expansion, in which Osborne and Staper again played a leading part. They exported Cretan wine via London to the Baltic. They took advantage of the detention of their ship the 'Bark Reynolds' at Malta on its way back from Syria in 1582 to negotiate a trading agreement there, together with the use of Maltese harbour facilities on the Levant voyage. They re-exported opium, mastic, cotton yarn, and cotton cloth to the Barbary coast, Osborne using Harborne's influence at the Porte to try to secure a friendly reception from the Ottoman regencies of Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli, while Staper was heavily involved in the earl of Leicester's partnership trading to Morocco. And Osborne had for some time been looking further east. With Mellowe and others he imported $1437 worth of East India goods in the 'Mildred' from Bombay in 1575. He sponsored John Newbery's expedition to Persia in 1580-82, as well as the longer exploration of the land route to the East Indies undertaken by Newbery between 1583 and 1591, partly in the company of Ralph Fitch and John Eldred. Eldred returned from Syria in 1588 in the 'Hercules', billed (with some justice) as 'the richest ship of English merchants' goods that ever was known to come into this realm' by the Turkey Company's invaluable publicist Richard Hakluyt, for whom Osborne and Staper had secured the award and continuation of a Clothworkers' exhibition at Oxford. This success was well timed. The Venice Company, which controlled the valuable trade in currants, wine, and oil with the Ionian Islands and the Morea, was already co-operating with the Turkey Company in freighting ships to the Levant, and when the charters of the two companies expired close together in 1588-9 their members quickly agreed to seek a new combined charter as Merchants of the Levant. 
This was issued on 7 January 1592. From this time in practice a regulated company, not a joint stock, the Levant Company was granted a twelve-year monopoly of trade with the Venetian and the Ottoman dominions, and also with the vast territories on the land route to the East Indies, although these were transferred eight years later to the first East India Company. Osborne, who was again named as governor (for the first year) in the charter, might well be regarded as the founding father of both great national enterprises. He had certainly earned the tribute paid by the Levant Company's historian A. C. Wood: 'With argosies on all the seas and ventures in every clime he was in fact the prototype of the merchant prince of the modern world.' 
Osborne died just four weeks later, in London on 4 February 1592. He was buried on 15 February at St Dionis Backchurch, where a monument was erected near his usual seat, as requested in his will. This was written on 18 January, properly witnessed on the 20th (by the future ambassador Henry Lello, among others), and cited in the inquisitions post mortem carried out in York and London, as well as in his son's will seven years later. Two fair copies survive among the family papers in Leeds, one annotated by a lawyer. Nevertheless there is no record of probate in the Prerogative Court of Canterbury or any other likely court. Unless this was a simple clerical error, the explanation may be connected with Osborne's second marriage. 
Anne Osborne had died in 1585, leaving five children -- Alice, Hewett, Anne, Edward, and Jane -- who all survived to marry and have children. On 15 September 1588 Sir Edward Osborne married secondly, at St Dionis Backchurch, Margaret ('c'.1554-1602), the daughter and coheir of Charles Pratt, citizen and leatherseller, and the widow firstly of John Midleton, citizen and merchant tailor, and secondly of Edmond Chapman, squire joiner to Queen Elizabeth and yeoman of the royal armouries at Greenwich. She already had three sons and three daughters from her first marriage and a son from her second (and was to have two more daughters from her fourth), but had none from her marriage to Osborne. She had inherited a third of her father's moveable property and of his substantial real estate in Southwark and Lambeth, and both her husbands had left her a life interest in their own leasehold and freehold property, as well as being generous with their moveable estate. Osborne followed their example by settling the Philpot Lane houses on her for life a fortnight before their marriage. In his will he confirmed this and also left her a life interest in other London and Essex properties in lieu of dower, including the Fish Street premises, now called the Rose and Pomegranate. His eldest son inherited the northern estates, but burdened with an annuity of $63, which Osborne calculated would bring his widow's total income from his estate up to $200. By the custom of London she also received a third of his moveable property. His three 'unadvanced' children -- Hewett, Edward, and Jane -- received another third (Alice and Anne had been well dowered on marriage and were left only silver dishes), and the remaining third was to be divided in equal fourths between his widow and the three unadvanced children. After Margaret's death Hewett Osborne was to have all the real property held by her except Philpot Lane; the reversion of this was to be sold immediately after Osborne's death, and the proceeds divided among all five children. Although the three eldest were over twenty-one, their stepmother was named as sole executor for the third time. Osborne's cousin Edward Osborne of the Inner Temple was to give her legal assistance in return for a $50 legacy, and William Daniell, Richard Staper, and Osborne's Levant merchant son-in-law Robert Offley were named as overseers. 
None of this depended on Margaret's continued widowhood, and she lost no time in marrying again, on 10 April 1592 at St Dionis Backchurch, as his third wife, Robert Clarke, of Pleshey, Essex, a baron of the exchequer. Later deeds and wills suggest that a deal was eventually made with her stepchildren whereby she dropped most of her other claims on the estate in exchange for having her interest in the Philpot Lane property extended from life to 1900 years. After her death in 1602 her interest was inherited by Sir Robert Clarke, who brought his fourth wife to live there. 
This arrangement allowed the Osbornes to consolidate their estates elsewhere, especially after the Essex lands were sold by Hewett Osborne's son Edward, the first baronet, to finance further purchases in Yorkshire. In the next generation the rapid rise through the peerage of Sir Edward Osborne's great-grandson Thomas Osborne, first duke of Leeds, was made possible not only by his own abilities and opportunities but also by the foresight of ancestors who had built up an estate capable of supporting a dynasty. Like the Levant Company, the dukedom was to survive for a quarter of a millennium. 


@@@@@


doc= 20875


Osborne, Francis (1593-1659), writer, was born on 26 September 1593, the fifth and youngest son of Sir John Osborne (1551-1628), administrator, of Chicksands Priory, Shefford, Bedfordshire, and his wife, Dorothy, daughter and coheir of Richard Barlee of Elsenham Hall, Essex. Osborne's early years were divided between Chicksands and his father's house in London; he was educated privately, 'bred mostly at home, not so much as in a free-school or university' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.706). He may have travelled abroad in his late teens, and refers in a later work to experiences 'beyond sea' (Potter, vii). 
After going to London 'at ripe years', writes Wood, Osborne 'frequented the court, became a servant in the Pembrochian family, and at length master of the horse to that most Noble Count William earl of Pembroke' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.706). For a time he held a minor post in the office of the lord treasurer's remembrancer, the office presided over by his father and eldest brother successively. The deaths of his father in 1628 and of the third earl in 1630 probably ended his ambitions of holding public office, and his writing often reveals a tone of disappointment in his failure to obtain preferment. His earliest biographer finds no record of his subsequent career until 1641, when he 'ran with the times, having been puritanically educated, [and] had public employments then, and under Oliver, conferr'd upon him' (ibid.). He married Anna Draper (died 1657), sister of William Draper of Nether Worton, Oxfordshire, who became a colonel in the parliamentary army, and by 1647 Osborne was a 'new made Justice and a Committee-man for this County' as well as a parliamentary visitor for the University of Oxford (Wood, 'History and Antiquities', 2.501, 511). 
About 1650 Osborne removed to Oxford; Wood notes that 'in his last days [he] lived in Oxon purposely to print certain books of his composition that then lay by him, and to have an eye on his son John' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.706). The only son among Osborne's four children, John was registered as a demy of Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1648, and, with Draper's assistance, was installed as fellow of All Souls College in 1650, after an altercation between the parliamentary visitors at Oxford and the parliamentary committee for university business in London. By 1653, also through Draper's influence, Francis Osborne was appointed 'one of the seven for the countie and city of Oxon, that was a judge as to all prisons and persons committed to any prisons in comitatu vel civitate Oxon 1653' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 1.185). He sympathized with parliament in politics and religion. During the last eight years of his life he published a series of historical, political, and moral works, which were read widely during the Restoration and early eighteenth century. His thinking shows the influence of Hobbes, whose 'great acquaintance' he was ('Brief Lives', 1.370). 
Osborne's son, John, received the degree of BCL in 1654 and proceeded to the Inner Temple in 1657; he married his first cousin, Elizabeth Draper, and served as prime serjeant-at-law in Ireland from 1680 until 1686. It was for John that Osborne wrote in two parts his chief publication, the 'Advice to a Son'. Part 1 was issued anonymously in late 1655. Its pragmatic and apothegmatic observations appeared under the headings: 'Studies', 'Love and marriage', 'Travel', 'Government', and 'Religion'. The work gained immediate popularity, passing through several editions in two years. In 1658 Osborne issued an enlarged edition of part 1, with his name on the title-page, and at the same time brought out a more discursive second part, inferior to the first, dedicated to Draper. 
The book's pragmatism and cynicism may have furthered its rapid acceptance. Its frank and practical aim was to guide the reader to material success in a treacherous, self-seeking world. Popular with Oxford scholars, it enjoyed a wide readership outside the university as well. In 1658 there appeared two curious replies by London hack writers. Misogynistic passages in 'Advice to a Son' ostensibly prompted the scurrilous parody, 'Advice to a Daughter', by John Heydon in 1658; as Eugenius Theodidactus, Heydon attacked Osborne as 'the unconquered enemy of Women' (sig. A4). Heydon was attacked in return by Thomas Pecke in 'Advice to Balaam's Ass' (1658), which asserted that Heydon's book was a collection of plagiarisms. Heydon answered in a second edition of the 'Advice to a Daughter' (1659), with an added section: 'Thomas Peck, Counsellor, examined, turn'd over the Bar and sent to Bedlam for his madness'. 
The tone of worldliness in the 'Advice' contributed to Osborne's reputation for atheism. In 1658, after complaints from local ministers that the 'Advice' 'did instil principles of Atheism into young Gentlemen', a formal complaint was brought to the vice-chancellor and a proposal put forward to have Osborne's books publicly burned (Wood, 'History and Antiquities', 2.684). 'But it taking no effect', Wood records, 'July the 27., the vice-cancellor [Dr John Conant] caused all the booksellers to appeare before him, and commanded them not to sell any of Mr. [Francis] Osborne's booke': as might be expected, 'The book afterwards sold the more' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 1.257). 
In later years Pepys fondly called the author 'my father Osborne' and recorded that Sir William Petty listed the 'Advice' with Browne's 'Religio medici' and Butler's 'Hudibras' as the works 'most esteemed and generally cried up for wit in the world' (Pepys, 'Diary', 19 Oct 1661; 27 Jan 1664). Swift complained that Osborne affected phrases fashionable at court, quickly rendering his writing unintelligible ('Tatler', no. 230). Johnson denounced Osborne as 'A conceited fellow'. 'Were a man to write so now, the boys would throw stones at him'; Boswell defended his work as 'shrewd and lively' and 'somewhat quaint', a book with 'an air of originality. We figure to ourselves an ancient gentleman talking to us' (Boswell, 'Life', spring 1772). 
After the 'Advice', Osborne is best-known for the 'Historical Memoires of Q. Elizabeth and James I' (1658), reprinted in Sir Walter Scott's 'Secret History of the Court of James I' (1811). Other works include 'A Persuasive to a Mutual Compliance under the Present Government' (February 1652), Osborne's contribution to the engagement controversy, dedicated to Cromwell and printed anonymously for the purpose of offering services as a secret agent; attached to it was 'A Plea for a Free State Compared with Monarchy', both reprinted by Sir Walter Scott in 1811 in 'Scarce and Valuable Tracts... Lord Somers' (6.153-77). Also appearing anonymously in 1652 was 'A Seasonable Expostulation with the Netherlands'. Neither 'A Persuasive' nor 'A Seasonable Expostulation' was included in editions of Osborne's collected 'Miscellaneous Works'. 
Other works include 'Political Reflections upon the Government of the Turks' (1656) and 'Miscellany of sundry essayes, paradoxes, and problematicall discourses, letters and characters, together with politicall deductions from the history of the earl of Essex' (1659); the latter was dedicated to his niece, Elizabeth Draper. An unattributed, undated manuscript of a play, 'The True Tragicomedy', in the British Library (Add. MS 25348) may be the work of Francis Osborne. 
Osborne's publications made him a celebrity, and he paid many visits to London; but his later life was one of straitened circumstances owing to the unhappy result of a legal battle over property. At the death of Osborne's father in 1628, the four youngest Osborne brothers inherited the North Fambridge estate in Essex, the eldest brother, Sir Peter, having received the family seat at Chicksands. Because Sir Peter fought for the king in the civil war he was fined, and he sued Francis for the North Fambridge manor. The first judgment came in favour of Sir Peter in 1653; an appeal also favoured Sir Peter's claim in March 1655, the property proceeding to his son Henry; by then Francis was the only surviving Osborne brother. Published letters place Francis at Kelvedon, Essex, in 1657; after the death of his wife, Anna, in that year he sold his remaining property and appears to have lived the rest of his life in the homes of others, with his publisher Thomas Robinson in Oxford and with William Draper at Nether Worton. He died at Draper's house on 4 February 1659 and was buried in Nether Worton chapel. His epitaph is recorded in the 1722 'Works'. 
On 13 March 1676 Osborne's 'Miscellaneous Works' (1673; 7th edn) was brought before the House of Lords as a seditious publication, apparently without consequence, for 'denouncing a monarchy and saying that the commonwealth is the best government' ('Ninth Report', HMC; Parry, xxii). The complainant, a Captain John Seymour, and the bookseller, Samuel Mearn, were brought before a committee of the house, but no recorded result of the proceeding exists. Further editions of the 'Miscellaneous Works' were issued in 1682, 1689, 1701, and 1722, the last containing previously unpublished letters from Francis to his brother-in-law and his wife, written between 1653 and 1658, and a memoir of his life by an anonymous editor, based on Wood's account of 1691. No manuscripts in his hand remain, with the possible exception of 'The True Tragicomedy'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20876


Osborne, Francis, fifth duke of Leeds (1751-1799), politician, was born and baptized on 29 January 1751 in the parish of St James's, Westminster, the only surviving son of Thomas Osborne, fourth duke of Leeds (1713-1789), politician, and Lady Mary Godolphin (died 1764), daughter and eventual heir of Francis Godolphin, second earl of Godolphin. Styled marquess of Carmarthen, he was educated at Westminster School (1764-7), and matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 11 June 1767; he was created MA on 30 March 1769 and DCL on 7 July 1773. A member of the Royal Society from 1773, he was also proud of his literary knowledge and even dabbled in amateur playwriting. 'If his knowledge was not profound it was miscellaneous and extensive', noted one memorialist ('Political Memoranda', ii); another that he was 'most polite and pleasing in his manners, with a sweet temper and an excellent understanding, happily cultivated' (Doran, 258). On 29 November 1773, at Holdernesse House, Hertford Street, London, he married Lady Amelia D'Arcy (1754-1784), daughter and heir of Robert D'Arcy, fourth earl of Holdernesse, and Mary Doublet, countess of Mertola (died 1801). They had two sons and a daughter, but the marriage ended in scandal in December 1778 when the marchioness ran off with Captain Jack Byron (died 1791), father by a subsequent marriage of the poet Byron. After obtaining a divorce on 31 May 1779, Carmarthen married, on 11 October 1788, at Hanwell, Middlesex, Catherine (1764-1837), daughter of Thomas Anguish, master in chancery, and Sarah Henley; they had a son and a daughter. 
In 1774 Carmarthen was returned at a by-election for the borough of Eye in Suffolk. The seat was made available as compensation for his father's surrendering of the office of chief justice on eyre north of Trent. 'My father', he noted, 'did not much approve the plan; but seeing my wish to come into the House of Commons, merely to oblige me consented'. In view of the burgeoning American crisis, Carmarthen was 'convinced of the necessity of strengthening government' and 'had no scruple in voting uniformly with them', the sole exception being a vote in the minority on 28 April over the Massachusetts petition, as he 'could by no means approve of the rejecting it unheard'. He spoke four times in favour of the bills to regulate the government of Massachusetts during May, but did not attend the debates on the 'Quebec Bill'. At the general election of 1774 he took advantage of an electoral interest at Helston in Cornwall which he had inherited from his grandfather Lord Godolphin. He was returned only to be unseated on petition on 15 March 1775. Of this second brief spell in the Commons he recalled that 'I took no active part... on account of the uncertainty of my situation; however, I voted with the government except upon Lord North's conciliatory plan' on 20 February 1775 ('Political Memoranda', 1-4). 
Carmarthen had already decided that in the event of losing his seat in the Commons he would request elevation to the Lords. On 15 May 1776 he was called up in his father's barony as Lord Osborne of Kiveton. He held court appointments as a lord of the bedchamber (1776-7) and lord chamberlain of the queen's household (1777-80). Having been made a privy councillor in 1777, he was also appointed lord lieutenant of the East Riding of Yorkshire the following year. He gradually became dissatisfied with Lord North's administration, and dated his change of heart to the time of Admiral Keppel's court martial in January 1779. Having also become a convert to economic reform, he resigned his place at court on 31 December and was summarily dismissed from his lord lieutenancy on 8 February 1780. Now an active member of the parliamentary opposition, he was on friendly terms with lords Shelburne and Rockingham, though belonging to the faction of neither. He published two political pamphlets advocating changes in men and measures, entitled 'A Letter to the Right Honourable, Ld. Th[urlo]w' (1780) and 'An Address to the Independent Members of both Houses of Parliament' (1782). He was restored to the lord lieutenancy at the insistence of the Rockingham administration in March 1782, and with the further change of ministry in July was appointed by Shelburne as ambassador-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary at Paris. He did not proceed to France, however, and resigned in April 1783 in the wake of Shelburne's fall. 
As an opponent of the Fox-North coalition of 1783 Osborne was ideally placed to be recruited by William Pitt, who was desperately short of cabinet material as he tried to establish a viable ministry during the constitutional crisis precipitated by the defeat of the 'East India Bill'. On 23 December 1783 Osborne was appointed secretary of state for foreign affairs in Pitt's administration. He succeeded his father as fifth duke of Leeds on 23 March 1789, and was elected a knight of the Garter on 15 December 1790, though for some reason he was never formally invested with this honour. Within Pitt's cabinet he remained something of a makeweight, proving an undistinguished foreign secretary. It was widely believed that the prime minister was the driving force behind foreign policy, as had clearly been the case in the commercial treaty with France of 1787. Conversely, Leeds's guiding principle was hostility to France. He was therefore delighted by the revolutionary turmoil of 1789. 'I defy the ablest heads in England', he wrote in July, 'to have planned, or its whole wealth to have purchased, a situation so fatal to its rival, as that to which France is now reduced by her own intestine commotions' (duke of Leeds to duke of Dorset, 31 July 1789, BL, Add. MS 28064). 
The duke of Leeds resigned as foreign secretary over the Ochakov affair of 1791. This complicated episode has often been glossed over as a minor incident. Indeed a contemporary journal described the affair shortly afterwards as being probably 'of small importance in the eyes of posterity' and 'already almost forgotten at home' ('Annual Register', 1793, 33). But the dispute over Russian retention of Ochakov -- a Black Sea port captured from the Turks in 1788 -- nevertheless marked an early appearance of the Eastern question in British diplomacy. Pitt, supported by Leeds, aimed at a complex diplomatic realignment involving Prussia and Poland, with additional support from Denmark. The scheme encountered difficulties because the true objectives could not be revealed in public for fear of undermining confidential negotiations still under way. It was naively hoped that Russia would back down in the face of a show of British naval force in the Baltic, and that Ochakov would be returned to Turkish control. This would open up new trade routes from Poland, in turn smoothing the path for her cession of Danzig to Prussia. The overriding objective was the strengthening of the British-Prussian relationship, but the brinkmanship involved proved unpopular. The parliamentary opposition led by Charles James Fox adopted an anti-war and pro-Russian stance, so Pitt wisely decided to back down. Leeds resigned in a fit of pique, believing his position to have been seriously undermined by the change in policy. Yet, the absurdity of continuing bellicosity towards Russia became apparent when Denmark refused to open her ports to the British navy, thus negating a key strategic element in the original scheme. 
Although he retained precious little political influence, Leeds suffered occasional delusions of grandeur, the most notable of which occurred in the summer of 1792, when he convinced himself that he might form a ministry of national unity as first lord of the Treasury, with Pitt and Fox serving under him as secretaries of state. The affair ended in a farcical interview with George III on 14 August. The notion of appointing a neutral figure to the Treasury struck the king as absurd: 'it would be awkward for Mr Pitt... to descend to an inferior situation... and that whoever was the First Lord must either be a cipher or Mr Pitt appear as a 'commis'' ('Political Memoranda', 189). In fact Leeds had been the dupe of an elaborate plan by Fox to counter the equally devious machinations of Lord Loughborough that were destabilizing the whig opposition. When Leeds reported that George III had also informed him that Pitt had not recently broached the subject of coalition, this confirmed the suspicions of the opposition leadership and simultaneously exposed Loughborough's self-seeking ambition. The affair was terminated by a confrontation between the duke and the prime minister. Leeds was astonished at Pitt's brazen assertion that 'there had been no thoughts of any alteration in the government, that circumstances did not call for it, nor did the people wish it, and that no new arrangement, either by change or coalition, had ever been in contemplation' (ibid., 194). Once Leeds had relayed this information to members of the opposition, they supplied him with sufficient details of the earlier approaches to Loughborough to confirm beyond 'all doubt that Mr Pitt's saying 'No change had been in contemplation' was not strictly true' (ibid., 196). The duke of Portland concluded that the affair had demonstrated that Leeds did not have 'any weight with Pitt, or in the Closet, or anywhere' (Portland to Fox, 21 July 1792, BL, Add. MS 47561, fol. 120). Lord Malmesbury noted acerbically that Leeds had been 'carried away more by his imagination and sanguine hopes, in which his string of toad-eaters encourage him, than by reason and reflection' (Harris, 2.470-73). 
Leeds spoke for the last time in the Lords on 30 May 1797, during the debate on the duke of Bedford's motion for the dismissal of the Pitt ministry. On this occasion he gave limited support to the notion of a change in administration, ridiculing the idea that 'the existence of the constitution was inseparably connected with the continuation of the present ministry in power', but he also distanced himself from the more radical opponents of government by declaring that parliamentary reform was 'a most dangerous remedy to resort to' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 32.762-3). 
Leeds died of erysipelas at his house in St James's Square, London, on 31 January 1799, aged forty-eight, and was buried in All Saints' Church, Harthill, Yorkshire. George William Frederick (1775-1838), his elder son by his first marriage, succeeded as sixth duke. One obituary commended the late duke's amiable manners and personal integrity, but inadvertently drew attention to the shortcomings of his political career by describing him as a man of 'higher talents than he was generally supposed to possess' ('GM', 1st ser., 69/1, 1799, 169). Indeed, his vanity had long been a standing joke in society. So frequent were his references to his time at the Foreign Office that some acquaintances had taken to placing bets on how long it would be before he mentioned it in conversation. 


@@@@@


doc= 20877


Osborne, George Alexander (1806-1893), pianist and composer, born on 24 September 1806 at Limerick, was the third son of the organist and a vicar-choral of Limerick Cathedral, and his wife, a member of the MacMahon family. As a boy he received organ lessons from his father, and when barely fourteen he was able to take the latter's place occasionally on the organ bench. With no definite idea of adopting the profession of music, when he was about eighteen he was sent by his father to Brussels to visit a sick aunt. A spirited account of his journey was published in the 'Proceedings of the Musical Association' (9, 1882-3, 95-113), in a paper entitled 'Musical coincidences and reminiscences'. Osborne remained in Brussels for several years, which he recollected as 'wearisome years of study and anxiety' ('Proceedings of the Musical Association', 9.97). At first he was intended for holy orders, and, with this in view, he attended the classes at Prince's classical academy. While he was a pupil there his skill as a musician attracted the attention of several prominent persons, among whom was the prince de Chimay, an able and enthusiastic musical amateur, and husband of the former Madame Tallien, of French Revolution fame. Osborne soon became a frequenter of the prince's chateau, where he met many prominent writers and musicians, including George Sand, F.-J. Fetis, Luigi Cherubini, and Daniel Auber, and where he benefited from a study of the music in the prince's library. At the Chateau de Chimay he often conducted performances of his own and other compositions by the prince's private orchestra, which included masses by Cherubini in the chapel. 
Meanwhile Osborne's theological studies were pursued with lessening interest, and when he was twenty years old he finally decided to adopt music as his profession. In this step he was warmly supported by the prince de Chimay, who procured for him the appointment of instructor to the eldest son of the prince of Orange, who was later to become king of Holland. In Brussels, as chapel-master to the prince of Orange, Osborne directed many successful concerts, at one of which he met the violinist Charles Auguste de Beriot and accompanied the singer Maria Malibran, who in 1836 became Beriot's wife. Beriot and Osborne became close friends, and together they composed thirty-three duets for violin and piano, many of which enjoyed a great vogue for a time. 
During the Belgian revolution of 1830 Osborne figured as a volunteer on the royalist side, and it is related that an attempt to shoot him was frustrated only by a defect in his assailant's gun. He was, however, made a prisoner, but released at the intercession of the prince. In 1831 Osborne went to Paris, where he lived for years in close contact with Cherubini, Auber, Stephen Heller, Liszt, and the violinist Heinrich Wilhelm Ernst. With Berlioz and Chopin he was particularly well acquainted, and he published his reminiscences of them, as well as some autobiographical matter, in two papers read before the Musical Association on 3 February 1879 and 5 April 1880 ('Proceedings of the Musical Association', 5, 1879-80, 60-75, 6, 1880-81, 91-105). Osborne was one of the four pianists who played the accompaniments to Chopin's F minor concerto on the piano (the composer playing the solo part) at the famous concert in Paris on 26 February 1832. When Berlioz and Chopin visited England, Osborne spent much time with them. 
While living in Paris, Osborne continued his musical studies under Johann Peter Pixis, Fetis, Antoine Reicha, and Friedrich Kalkbrenner. At the same time he wrote a large number of compositions, chiefly piano music of a light character. His sister Bessie Osborne, later Mrs Hampton, an amateur singer, visited him in Paris and became fashionable for her renditions of Irish melodies at social gatherings. In 1844 and 1845 Osborne spent some time in London and gave several concerts there. He made the city his permanent home from the end of 1847, when the threat of revolution forced him to relinquish his house in Paris. He paid a brief visit to Ireland in 1848. By the time of his establishment in London, Osborne had already published his piano piece 'La pluie de perles', which was said to have brought him several thousand pounds, twelve different publishers being licensed by him to produce editions of it. Its popularity gained for him numerous pupils in London, where his vogue as a teacher lasted almost until his death. Osborne also played frequently in public, making tours of the provinces with distinguished artists. Although upwards of eighty years of age, he made his last appearance in public at a concert of the Wind Instrument Society on 15 November 1889. He died at his residence, 5 Ulster Terrace, Regent's Park, on 16 November 1893, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. He left at least one son, George. 
Osborne excelled in his performances of Bach, and many young musicians sought his advice as to the correct manner of playing Chopin. He was one of the first English musicians to recognize the importance of the music of Schumann and Brahms, and to present a positive critical response to Wagner; he conducted the first performance in England of a work by Wagner, an orchestral arrangement made from the piano score of the march from 'Tannhauser', at a concert of the Amateur Musical Society at the Hanover Square Rooms in April 1854. In 1876 he visited Bayreuth. Besides numerous piano fantasias and transcriptions, mostly derived from well-known operas, Osborne composed three overtures (one of which, 'The Forest Maiden', was written for the Brighton festival of 1875 and performed at the Alexandra Palace in 1876), two operas (of which 'Sylvia' was rehearsed at Drury Lane but never performed), a few songs, and some accomplished chamber music, including a sextet (op. 63, for piano, flute, oboe, horn, cello, and double bass, published in Paris 'c'.1840), three piano trios and several string quartets (all unpublished), and a cello sonata (published in London in 1876). His music lacks originality, but is accomplished and possessed considerable popular appeal. While living in Belgium, Osborne was decorated by the king with the order of the Oak-Crown. He was also a member of the Philharmonic Society of London, a director of the Royal Academy of Music, and for years a prominent member of the Musical Association. He was a genial and kind friend to young musicians, and an admirable public speaker, especially when speaking extemporaneously. His cheerful nature, delightful sense of humour, and pleasant Irish brogue were all noted by his contemporaries, and Charles Villiers Stanford described him as 'that most excellent of men and most delightful of companions' (Stanford, 'Studies and Memories', 123). 


@@@@@


doc= 20878


Osborn, Henry (bap. 1694, d. 1771), naval officer, was baptized on 27 August 1694 at Campton, Bedfordshire, the second son of Sir John Osborn, second baronet (1659-1720), of Chicksands, Bedfordshire, and his second wife, Martha ('c'.1665-1713), daughter of Sir John Kelynge, serjeant-at-law. His parents were both from the Bedfordshire gentry. Following the example of his elder brother, Peter, Henry chose a naval career, entering as a volunteer per order in the 'Superb' (Captain James Moneypenny), on 20 December 1710, and proceeding to the Mediterranean. Rated as midshipman, he later joined the 'Lion' (Captain Robert Bouler, or Bowler), before passing for lieutenant on 8 March 1717. On 3 July 1717 he was promoted lieutenant in the 'Barfleur' by Sir George Byng, commanding the fleet in the Baltic (Byng's daughter Sarah had married his half-brother John). His subsequent service as lieutenant is not clear, as a Henry Osborne also passed for lieutenant a year later, and many conflicting appointments are found in 1720-21. It seems that the future admiral was in the 'Experiment' in 1719 on the north African coast and then in the 'Yarmouth' between 1722 and 1725. He was certainly in the 'Leopard' early in 1726, exchanging into the 'Bredah' on 22 June, the flagship of the fleet then in the West Indies. On 12 October 1727 he was appointed commander of the sloop 'Weazle', in which he returned to England, and was immediately appointed captain of the 'Squirrel' on 4 January 1728; while in command of her he was appointed governor of Newfoundland, a position he held until 1731. The post was at that time normally held by a sea officer who went there for each season. In 1734 he commanded the 'Portland' in the channel and in 1738 took the 'Salisbury' to the Mediterranean with Sir Chaloner Ogle. Later he was sent to the West Indies to join Edward Vernon's fleet and returned in the 'Chichester' (80 guns) in 1741. About 1740 he married Mary Hughes, daughter of the commissioner of Portsmouth Dockyard; they had two sons and three daughters. 
Osborn was next appointed to the 'Princess Caroline' (80 guns), and joined Thomas Mathews's fleet in the Mediterranean. He therefore participated in the unsuccessful battle off Toulon on 11 February 1744, where he was in the van division, next astern of Rear-Admiral William Rowley, and was closely engaged, despite his ship having her lower deck awash. In the subsequent courts martial, he deposed that he considered Vice-Admiral Richard Lestock's neglect to get into station in the day and night before to be a principal cause of the miscarriage. After the battle Osborn, now a senior captain, gained considerable experience in command of detached squadrons, being sent to escort a convoy of victuallers and storeships with the supplies urgently needed by the Mediterranean fleet. He was, however, blockaded in the Tagus for a time by a French squadron, but eventually brought the convoy to Gibraltar. He then operated against Franco-Spanish supplies on the Italian coast and made an unsuccessful attempt to intercept a French Levant convoy. During 1745, now a commodore, he commanded a force cruising between capes Spartel and St Vincent to intercept ships arriving at Cadiz. He returned to England later in 1745, and declined an offer of the governorship of Louisbourg, apparently for financial reasons. 
Osborn reached flag rank on 15 July 1747, and for a time commanded at the Nore, before being appointed commander-in-chief at the Leeward Islands on 5 February 1748. Reaching Barbados at the end of April, he arranged the homeward bound convoys and precautions against privateers, and initiated a programme of repairs for the dockyard at English Harbour, Antigua. However, the coming of peace cut short his command, and he left Barbados in December. Before sailing Osborn had to initiate proceedings against the first lieutenant of the 'Chesterfield' who had seized the ship off Cape Coast Castle, west Africa, before being overpowered and imprisoned by other members of the crew who then sailed on to Barbados. 
In early 1756 with the approach of the Seven Years' War, Osborn took a squadron to escort convoys and then reconnoitre Brest. He then commanded at Portsmouth for a time, until on 2 May 1757, as a full admiral since 2 February, he was appointed commander-in-chief, Mediterranean, Rear-Admiral Charles Saunders being second-in-command. Osborn's task of watching the French Toulon fleet and protecting British trade proved particularly difficult after the loss of Minorca. None the less he successfully performed this role with, it seems, aid from Augustus Hervey. The Toulon fleet emerged, but was obliged to take refuge in Cartagena, so Osborn based his force on Gibraltar to prevent their escape into the Atlantic. In 1758 rumours of a reinforcement coming from Toulon were prevalent, and Osborn took his squadron east in the hope of intercepting them. On 28 February the French squadron was sighted and Osborn ordered general chase, his ships separating after the four French ships. Two were captured, one was driven ashore, the smallest escaped. One of the captures was the 'Foudroyant' after a remarkable action by a ship of its size, the 'Monmouth' (Captain Arthur Gardiner). This success disposed of the threat and the squadron in Cartagena returned to Toulon. Osborn, however, soon afterwards suffered a stroke and was obliged to resign his command, though he recovered quite well. He received the thanks of the House of Commons, and by the influence of the duke of Bedford, was MP for Bedfordshire from December 1758 until 1761, though he is not known to have spoken or voted. In 1763 he succeeded Lord Anson as vice-admiral of England, and later he received a pension. Osborn died on 4 February 1771 at his home in Hill Street, Berkeley Square, Westminster; he was survived by his wife. 
Although John Charnock gives a very unflattering character to Osborn, other evidence does not fully support him. Augustus Hervey refers to him as a 'worthy good man' ('Hervey's Journal', 243), and while he puzzled Edward Boscawen, he made it clear that they were on good terms. Osborn seems to have cared for the seaman, for several sought to go with him to the Leeward Islands (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/306) and he was dismayed by the frequent arrests for desertion and proposed a 'rambling area' round Portsmouth to give seamen some freedom (Rodger, 191). His ability and humanity are further evident in his correspondence while commander-in-chief at Portsmouth (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/920-4). Although he may have had interest in Bedfordshire, from which county both Byng and the duke (first lord of the Admiralty, 1744-8) came, it is evident from his appointments that he was considered reliable, even if his principal action was a chase which did not require tactical skill. 


@@@@@


doc= 20879


Osborne, Peregrine, second duke of Leeds (bap. 1659, d. 1729), naval officer, was baptized on 29 December 1659 at Harthill, Yorkshire, fifth of the eleven children of Thomas Osborne, first duke of Leeds (1632-1712), and his wife, Bridget ('bap'. 1629, died 1704), daughter of Montagu Bertie, second earl of Lindsey, and his first wife, Martha. Osborne was tutored privately and, to complete his education, on 16 March 1671 accompanied his eldest brother to France for nine months. His father secured for him in 1673 reversions to the clerkship of the patents in the court of chancery and the lucrative auditorship of the exchequer, but he never obtained either office. On 15 December 1674, after his father became earl of Danby, Thomas Osborne's former Scottish title of Viscount Osborne of Dunblane was regranted to his son; in the new patent the title was given as Viscount Dumblane, by which Osborne was known until 1689. Though under age he was elected MP for Berwick upon Tweed in 1677, and spent a month attached to Ralph Montagu's Paris embassy, to learn the art of diplomacy. As a member of the court party, he was classed by Shaftesbury as 'thrice vile' (Cruickshanks, 184). He became MP for Corfe Castle, Dorset, on 26 February 1679, only to be unseated in April on petition. From 1679 to 1682 he actively sought his father's release from the Tower. 
Danby aimed to marry his son to a wealthy heiress, Bridget (1662-1734), daughter of Sir Thomas Hyde, second baronet, of Aldbury, Hertfordshire, and stepdaughter of the goldsmith-banker Sir Robert Viner, one of Danby's foremost business allies. Unfortunately, when aged twelve she had allegedly married her cousin John Emerton. While Danby was occupied in protracted legal and financial proceedings to get this marriage annulled, Dumblane wooed the heiress into a private marriage at St Marylebone Church on 25 April 1682. They had two sons (the elder died of smallpox in 1711) and two daughters; Dumblane also had an illegitimate son, who was a midshipman in 1729. 
In June 1685 Dumblane was slightly wounded in Feversham's army at the battle of Sedgemoor. He became a feckless spendthrift and, having squandered most of his wife's fortune and accumulated debts of $10,000, fled to the continent, only ten days after his wife miscarried, to avoid his creditors. On his return to England in January 1687 his financial affairs were put firmly under his father's control. In April 1688 he carried letters for Danby to William of Orange and, anticipating William's invasion, in November raided Welbeck, home of the duke of Newcastle, for arms. Elected MP for York in the Convention Parliament (January 1689), Dumblane, though nominal leader of his father's tory group, showed little interest in parliamentary matters. Although he voted on 5 February against declaring the throne vacant, the next day he followed Danby's change of heart in pledging loyalty to William, publicly recanting in the House of Commons. He was rewarded by a warrant for the office of postmaster-general; inexplicably it went to John Wildman, the veteran ex-republican. On his father's elevation to the marquessate on 20 April 1689, Dumblane was styled earl of Danby. 
His naval career developed from his hobby of designing yachts. In the summer of 1689 the new earl of Danby fitted out a privateer, an action which caused his father to seek a warrant for his arrest for treason; he was released after House of Commons protests at this breach of its privileges. On 3 March 1690 he was summoned to the House of Lords in his father's barony as Lord Osborne of Kiveton; for a time he attended with exemplary regularity, but he rarely spoke. In the same year he used one of his speedy yachts to arrest Lord Preston and other Jacobite conspirators 'en route' for France. He fought gallantly as second in command of the naval force in the unsuccessful attack on Brest, and commanded a regiment of dragoons raised by the City of London after the Anglo-Dutch defeat off Beachy Head on 30 June. This loyalty secured him the post of colonel commanding the first regiment of marines ever formed. His impulsive generosity and unpredictability endeared him to his ships' crews. 
After showing conspicuous gallantry at Barfleur in 1692, Danby was allowed to fly a special swallowtail pennant. If his offer to reconnoitre Brest had been taken up, French capture of the merchant fleet bound for Smyrna might have been avoided. On 12 July 1693 he was promoted to rear-admiral of the red, and given command of a special flotilla of bomb-vessels and fireships for an attack on St Malo. He became rear-admiral of the blue in January 1694, and the Admiralty backed his views on the girdling of ships against Navy Board opposition. After his father became duke of Leeds on 4 May, Peregrine became known as marquess of Carmarthen. His spirited exploits at Camarets Bay in 1694 were followed by publication of his 'Journal of the Brest Expedition'. In the summer of 1695 he was escorting home the eighty-sail Cadiz merchant fleet when he mistook eighteen East Indiamen for the French Brest squadron; considering himself outnumbered he retired to Milford Haven, where, wind-bound, he failed to prevent five of the East Indiamen falling into French hands. Summoned back to London, he was sacrificed by the Admiralty to mercantile ire, though a committee of the House of Lords praised his courage and fidelity. 
In the autumn of 1697 William III presented Tsar Peter the Great, in the Netherlands, with the 'Royal Transport', a heavily armed yacht designed by Carmarthen, and described (Luttrell, 4.290) as the 'best sailer' in the fleet. Peter was so pleased with the vessel that on his visit to England in 1698 he sought out Carmarthen, who had further improved its sailing performance. A model of the ship in the St Petersburg naval museum shows it to have had a schooner rig, so that it could sail closer to the wind than any contemporary square-rigged warship. Russian sources suggest that Carmarthen had a large collection of ships' models, and that Tsar Peter bought similar models on his advice. The marquess became quite intimate with Peter, and introduced him to his favourite tipple, brandy laced with peppers. He helped organize a mock battle at Portsmouth in Peter's honour, and gave him directions for the creation of a modern Russian navy. He even recommended personnel to achieve this: Henry Farquarson, later professor of mathematics at the St Petersburg naval academy; John Perry, who supervised the building of Russian dockyards and canals; and shipbuilders Nye and Dean. As a reward Carmarthen was given by the tsar the sole privilege of importing tobacco into Russia, which he immediately assigned to the Heathcotes and other London merchants in return for a lump sum of 1000 guineas and $1500 per annum for life. He received little of either grant. 
In 1699 Carmarthen was assigned a special galley, the 190 ton 'Peregrine', built at his direction and at royal expense, in lieu of $9000 arrears of a Charles II pension; however, William III refused to part with her, and a further compensatory pension of $1000 per annum was never paid. Although some aristocratic naval appointments under Anne were clearly 'dormant', Carmarthen rose to be nominally vice-admiral of the red in 1703. In 1705 he led the squadron that shipped Marlborough to the Southern Netherlands, and wrote a pamphlet, 'Method for the Speedy Manning Her Majesty's Royal Navy'. His naval career culminated in his appointment on 21 December 1708 as admiral of the red. At the trial of Dr Sacheverell in March 1710 he voted with a minority of the lords for acquittal. On the death of his father he became duke of Leeds, though most of his father's estates went to his own son, on whom he became financially dependent. He was lord lieutenant of the East Riding of Yorkshire in 1713-14. 
After 1714 Leeds seems to have reverted to his earlier political loyalties. During the 1715 Jacobite rising he declared, 'I had not a thought when I engaged in [the 1688-9 revolution]... that the Prince of Orange's landing would end in deposing the King' (GEC, 'Peerage', new edn, 7.511). 1716-17 saw him plotting with Jacobites in France as Mr Laurence. Although Bolingbroke termed him a 'madman' (ibid.), in correspondence with the Jacobite King James III he was promised (on 6 April 1716) $200,000, an earldom, and command of the fleet. While his wife, 'ruined by her cruel lord's inhuman usage' (ibid., 513), appealed in 1717 to the crown for assistance, Leeds remained in exile until pardoned in 1723. He died, in indigent circumstances, on 25 June 1729 and was buried at Aldbury, Hertfordshire on 4 July; his wife was buried with him on 16 March 1734. He was succeeded, as third duke of Leeds, by his second son, Peregrine (1691-1731), who married as his first wife the daughter of Edward Harley, earl of Oxford. 
A short, fair-complexioned, wiry figure, who in his youth played the violin well, Leeds was fiery (he fought at least three duels in 1693-8), 'bold, volatile and somewhat eccentric' (Macaulay, 4.1966). Undoubtedly something of a rake, he was permanently impecunious, though unlucky in office and pension (and he spent considerable amounts in the interests of the crown and starving marines). Yet he was a committed and not unsuccessful naval commander, and innovative in ship design. His father's political influence probably helped in his pursuit of yachting experiments, in the face of considerable Admiralty opposition; but one modern authority goes as far as to suggest that 'if [tsar] Peter [the Great] is known... as the 'Father of the Russian Fleet'... then surely [Osborne] can be regarded as at least its godfather' (Ryan, 81). 


@@@@@


doc= 20880


Osborne, Peter (1521-1592), administrator, was the second son of Richard Osborne of Tyld Hall, Lachingdon, Essex, and his wife, Elizabeth Coke. His family had long been settled at Purleigh in Essex. Osborne was possibly educated at Cambridge University. He entered Lincoln's Inn in 1543, becoming associate bencher in 1566 and assistant governor in 1570. 
Osborne probably married, before 1551, Anne (died 1615), daughter of Dr John Blythe, regius professor of physic at Cambridge, and niece of Sir John Cheke. The couple had eleven sons, including John (1551-1628), Christopher (1557/8-1600), who were both MPs, and Henry Osborne ('b'. 1557/8, died in or after 1648), and eleven daughters. John Osborne was the father of Sir Peter Osborne ['see below'] and the writer Francis Osborne (1593-1659). Peter Osborne's political success is probably attributable to his connection with two important men, William Cecil, Lord Burghley, and Cheke. Marriage ties and religious convictions established and reinforced his friendships with both men. Cecil became Osborne's parliamentary patron, turning to his fellow protestant Francis Russell, second earl of Bedford, to secure a seat for him. Osborne was returned as MP for Tregony in Cornwall in 1559, although he may have been elected to Bridport in Dorset as early as March 1553, when he was described as 'toward the Pryve Chamber, and a great officer in the Eschequier, being also of right good estymacion & lernyng, and one who in that place maye doe your towne mouche good' ('Sixth Report', HMC, 1.497). Cheke's position at court as chamberlain of the exchequer and principal secretary ensured that Osborne obtained lucrative offices in the exchequer under Edward VI. In 1551 Osborne was appointed clerk of the faculties and keeper of the privy purse. From 1552 to 1553, and again from 1559 until his death, he was the lord treasurer's remembrancer in the exchequer. He probably supported Lady Jane Grey in July 1553, for he was reported to have been in prison at some time during Mary I's reign. This seems probable because of his close association with John Dudley, duke of Northumberland, from autumn 1552. Cheke and Osborne were certainly close friends, even after Mary's accession: Cheke appointed him one of his executors and died at his house in Wood Street, London, in September 1557. Osborne's daughter Katherine later married Cheke's grandson Sir Thomas Cheke. 
Osborne again rose to prominence in the country's financial affairs under Elizabeth I, because he was considered 'an authority upon commercial matters' ('DNB'). In 1560, the same year in which he became involved in royal minting activities, the queen granted him the manor of South Fambridge, Essex. By 1562 Osborne had relocated from Wood Street to Ivy Lane, London, possibly to accommodate his growing household. In 1562 he became an ecclesiastical commissioner. He was added to the quorum of the peace for Middlesex at about the same time. His other posts included deputy governor of the Society of Mineral and Battery Works in 1568. Osborne was commissioner for disputes with Portugal in 1573 and for piracy in 1580. Burghley continued to be Osborne's primary patron, ensuring that he was elected as MP for Horsham, Sussex, in 1563, Guildford, Surrey, in 1571, Plympton Eagle, Devon, in 1572, Aldeburgh, Suffolk, in 1584 and 1586, and Burghley's own borough, Westminster, in 1589. During Elizabeth's reign, Osborne corresponded with Burghley, principally about commercial matters. They discussed merchant contractors, wine transport from the Netherlands to Spain, and contracts for the carriage of salt. By January 1578 Burghley had secured the reversion of lord treasurer's remembrancer to Osborne's eldest son, John Osborne. Peter Osborne was triumphant, for he considered that office the 'stay of his house, his wife and his children' ('Salisbury MSS', 2.177). 
Beginning in 1576 Osborne began to purchase from Edward Snowe parts of the priory of Chicksands in Bedfordshire, a house of the Gilbertine order with two cloisters. He never established a residence there, leaving this task instead to John Osborne. He died on 7 June 1592 and was buried at St Faith's under St Paul's. His widow died in 1615. 


When hostilities began between king and parliament in 1642, Osborne determined to take his family to the safety of Guernsey. However, Guernsey chose to side with parliament and Osborne held Castle Cornet for the king. Robert Rich, second earl of Warwick (1587-1658), became the governor of Guernsey in 1643 and several times ordered Osborne to surrender Castle Cornet. Osborne refused his old friend and kinsman in the most courteous terms and continued to hold out for aid from Charles. This assistance never materialized despite many assurances. Osborne and his men were in dire straits after the castle was besieged from March 1643, for they had always relied on Guernsey's residents for their sustenance. When he took over at Castle Cornet, his wife had retreated with her children to the safety of St Malo. She was soon forced to sell her plate and to contract heavy debts in order to aid her husband's plight. She became ill towards the end of 1643 and left St Malo with her children on a Dutch ship for England. Since Chicksands had been sequestered by order of the parliamentary committee for delinquencies on 27 April 1643, Dorothy Osborne took her children to live with her brother Sir John Danvers, a parliamentarian. There they met Oliver Cromwell, who reportedly favoured Osborne's youngest daughter, Dorothy. In early 1646 Osborne retreated exhausted to exile in St Malo after Sir Thomas Fanshawe was given command of Castle Cornet. His daughter Dorothy visited him there from 1648 until summer 1649. 'En route' she stayed on the Isle of Wight, where she met her future husband, William Temple. At the time of her marriage in 1654 she recorded that her father's income exceeded $4000 per annum. Her own portion may have been up to $4000. 
Sir Peter Osborne concealed some 41 per cent of the real value of his Chicksands estate and his fine was more manageable at $2440. In April 1649 his fourth son, Henry Osborne, attempted to compound for delinquency in order to regain Chicksands. On 29 May 1649 Sir Peter Osborne compounded for his delinquency for 'bearing arms in the first war against Parliament' (Green, 'Calendar of the Proceedings of the Committee for Compounding', 3.1974). His estate was discharged after the payment of a fine on 4 June 1650. There was also some trouble after his death over the reversion of Pickering rectory, Yorkshire, and over the manor of North Fambridge, Essex. Osborne effectively overturned his father's wishes regarding Chicksands and North Fambridge. Sir John Osborne's will of 1626 stipulated that his widow should enjoy possession of Chicksands for life, with reversion to Osborne, and that North Fambridge was to be divided between his four younger sons. After his father's death in 1628, Sir Peter Osborne convinced his mother to live in London with his brother Thomas Osborne and entered into the manor of North Fambridge and his father's other estates in Essex. He dispossessed his brothers. His youngest brother, Francis Osborne, and his nephew Richard Osborne initiated a chancery suit against his son Sir Henry Osborne. The chancery verdict of 27 March 1655 was for Sir Henry Osborne, and Francis Osborne was left the embittered author of 'Advice to a Son' (1656). 
Sir Peter Osborne made his will on 26 February 1650. A previous conveyance had already disposed of all his lands and the will allocated his personal goods, which he left, primarily to his wife and his heir, as his executors. Osborne also gave bequests of $10 each to two male servants, the poor of Campton, and the men to whom he had entrusted his estates. He directed that several of the hangings, two portraits (which had belonged to his grandfather Sir Peter Osborne), and his entire library at Chicksands should be handed down in perpetuity through the male line as heirlooms. He died in March 1653. 


@@@@@


doc= 20881


Sir Peter Osborne (1584/5-1653), administrator, was the eldest of five sons of Sir John Osborne (1551-1628), administrator, of Chicksands, and his wife, Dorothy (1561/2-1638), eldest daughter and heir of Richard Barlee of Elsenham Hall, Essex. He had one sister and was named after his grandfather. Sir John Osborne purchased Chicksands outright before 1600, making it his principal residence. There he restored Campton church, built a vicarage, and constructed a family mausoleum. His other sons included Christopher (died 1635x40), Thomas (died 1651), and Richard Osborne (died 1634). Peter Osborne was admitted as a fellow-commoner of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 11 July 1603. On 20 February 1610 he married Dorothy (1590-1650/51), the sixth and youngest daughter of Sir John Danvers of Dauntsey, Wiltshire, and his wife, Elizabeth. His wife's brothers were Henry Danvers, first Baron Danvers of Dauntsey and first earl of Danby (1573-1644), and Sir John Danvers (1584/5-1655), of Chelsea. Osborne was knighted on 7 January 1611. In 1621 he was appointed lieutenant-governor of Guernsey, with the governorship reverting to him on Danvers of Dauntsey's death. He thereafter took up residence at Castle Cornet, a small fort guarding the approach to the harbour of St Peter Port. It is doubtful that his wife and children ever lived there with him. He was MP for Corfe Castle, Dorset, in 1623-4 and 1625. On his father's death on 2 November 1628, he succeeded to the office of lord treasurer's remembrancer and his family took up residence at Chicksands. At this time he had nine children: Thomas (1609-1637), Elizabeth ('b'. 1610, died in or after 1631), Ann (1613-1642), Henry (1614-1645), Sir John Osborne, baronet ('c'.1615-1699), Sir Henry Osborne (1619-1675), Charles (1620-1642), Robert (1626- 'c'.1653), and Dorothy Osborne (1627-1695), who married Sir William Temple. There were other children, who all died young. Sir Peter Osborne spent most of his time away from his family, fulfilling his duties at Guernsey, where he was in charge of 200 soldiers. When he did go to London to report to the council of war, he often visited his wife and her relations at the earl of Danby's house. From November 1640 to August 1641 he was possibly resident in Chelsea. On 23 April 1640 he advanced $1000 to Charles I, who was desperate for money. 


@@@@@


doc= 20882


Osborne, Ruth (1682-1751), alleged witch, details of whose upbringing are unknown, lived with her husband, John Osborne ('b'. 1695, died in or after 1751), a labourer, at Gubblecote, a small settlement near Tring, Hertfordshire. For many years the couple were rumoured to be Jacobites and witches by many in the neighbourhood. It was believed by some that Ruth Osborne had even bewitched her own brother, a man named Haggenson, who lived in a neighbouring parish. Because of such rumours the Osbornes found it difficult to get work and they were reliant on poor relief. In 1745 Ruth went to the farm of one John Butterfield to beg for buttermilk. The farmer angrily told her to be off as 'he had not enough for his hogs', and Ruth retorted that 'the pretender would have him and his hogs too'. When, several months later, some of his calves died Butterfield concluded that Osborne must have bewitched them. Butterfield was eventually forced out of farming and by 1751 he was running the Black Horse alehouse at Gubblecote Cross. He believed he was still under a spell, however, as he suffered from recurring fits. Some of his customers, including one Thomas Colley, suggested he consult a cunning-woman. He followed this advice and she told him that he had been bewitched by 'two of his neighbours, a man and a woman'. This served to confirm Butterfield's suspicions about the Osbornes. It was decided that the community should consider their guilt at a witch swimming, a popular trial introduced in England in the early seventeenth century and which continued after the repeal of the statutes against witchcraft in 1736. 
The swimming of Ruth Osborne and her husband was well planned. The town criers of three neighbouring towns, Winslow, Leighton Buzzard, and Hemel Hempstead, announced that a man and a woman were to be 'publickly duck'd at Tring' on 22 April. Tring's overseer of the poor, Matthew Barton, knew the Osbornes and lodged them in the town's workhouse for protection. However, in the expectation of serious trouble on the day the workhouse master, Jonathan Tomkins, had them removed to the vestry of the church. His fears were confirmed as a frustrated mob, estimated to be several thousand strong, began to demolish the workhouse and threatened to burn it down if the Osbornes were not handed over. Tomkins gave in and Ruth and her husband were escorted out of town by the mob to a pool at Long Marston, near Gubblecote. There Ruth was partially stripped, her thumbs tied to her toes, and a rope placed under her armpits, before she was thrown into the water. According to the custom of witch swimming she would be judged guilty if she floated and innocent if she sank. She floated, and to confirm this outcome Thomas Colley pushed her under several times with a stick. Ruth Osborne died minutes after being dragged back on to the bank having 'been suffocated with Water and Mud'. Though not the last person to undergo this trial, Osborne was the last person in England to die as a result. Thomas Colley was subsequently hanged for his part in her death. 


@@@@@


doc= 20883


Osborne, Lord Sydney Godolphin (1808-1889), philanthropist, third son of Francis Godolphin Osborne, first Baron Godolphin (1777-1850), and Elizabeth Charlotte (died 1847), daughter of William Eden, first Baron Auckland, was born at Stapleford in Cambridgeshire on 5 February 1808. When in 1859 his elder brother, George Godolphin (1802-1872), succeeded his cousin, Francis Godolphin D'Arcy Osborne, as eighth duke of Leeds, he obtained the rank of a duke's son. 
Osborne was educated at Rugby School and from 1824 at Brasenose College, Oxford. He was awarded a BA in 1830, and, having taken holy orders, was appointed rector of Stoke Poges in Buckinghamshire in 1832. In 1841 he accepted the living of Durweston in Dorset, which was in the gift of Lord Portman, and he occupied that incumbency until 1875. Osborne married on 29 May 1834 Emily (died 1875), daughter of Pascoe Grenfell of Taplow Court, Buckinghamshire, and was thus brother-in-law of Charles Kingsley (1819-1875) and James Anthony Froude (1818-1894). The couple had two sons and two daughters. 
Osborne is best known for his series of 'lay sermons' delivered from the pulpit of 'The Times' under the signature S. G. O., which gained him something of a national reputation in his day. A militant and controversial philanthropist, in his published letters (1844-84) he addressed matters as diverse as free trade, education, sanitation, women's rights, cattle plague, and cholera. Despite his relationship to Kingsley and his link, through him, to the Christian socialists, Osborne was essentially a tory paternalist, although he kept clear of party politics. 
During the Crimean War, Osborne travelled to the East, made an unofficial inspection of the hospitals under Florence Nightingale's care, and published the results in 'Scutari and its Hospitals' (1855). He was publicly thanked in parliament for his self-appointed task. 
On the Irish question, in which he took a special interest after a visit to the west of Ireland during the famine of 1849, Osborne was a strong unionist, and in ecclesiastical matters he was an opponent of Tractarianism. His special cause was the plight of the agricultural labourer, of whom his knowledge was unrivalled, while his forecast of the villager's social and political emancipation and its results was remarkably acute. The last letters of Osborne's series addressed to 'The Times' were on the subject of the Whitechapel murders. A selection from the letters was published, with a brief introduction by Arnold White (2 vols., 1888). Osborne's other writings included 'Gleanings in the West of Ireland' (1850), 'Lady Eva: her Last Days: a Tale' (1851), 'Hints to the Charitable' (1856), 'Hints for the Amelioration of the Moral Condition of a Village' (1856), and 'Letters on the Education of Young Children' (1866). In 1875 Osborne resigned his benefice and retired to Lewes, Sussex, where he died at his home, Pelham House, on 9 May 1889. 


@@@@@


doc= 20884


Osborne, Thomas, first duke of Leeds (1632-1712), politician, best known under his earlier titles of earl of Danby and marquess of Carmarthen, was born on 20 February 1632, and baptized eight days later, the second son of Sir Edward Osborne (1596-1647) of Kiveton, Yorkshire, and his second wife, Anne (died 1666), widow of William Middleton of Stockeld, Yorkshire. He became his father's heir in 1638 when a chimney in the family house at York collapsed, killing his elder brother, Edward. Thomas avoided a similar fate only because he had stopped to play with the family cat which had crawled under a table, an early instance perhaps of his strong survival instinct as well as his persistent dancing with danger. He was well connected on both sides of his family. His father, the grandson of a lord mayor of London, Sir Edward Osborne, had been created a baronet in 1620 and risen under the patronage of Strafford to become vice-president of the council of the north in 1632, a post in which he displayed unswerving loyalty to the king. In 1639 and 1640 Sir Edward superintended the dispatch of troops to the border to take part in the threatened war with the Scots, resigning as MP for Berwick in 1640 because of his military responsibilities, and subsequently became lieutenant-general of the royalist forces raised at York. Sir Edward's first wife was Margaret Belasyse, daughter of Thomas Belasyse, Viscount Fauconberg. Thomas's mother was Sir Edward's second wife, the second daughter of Thomas Walmesley of Dunkenhalgh, Lancashire, and Elizabeth Danvers, who was the sister of Henry Danvers, earl of Danby, and descended from John Neville, fourth Baron Latimer. These connections gave Thomas impeccable royalist credentials and a network of influential relatives, both of which he was to exploit to the full during his later career. 
After defeat at Marston Moor in 1644 Sir Edward Osborne played no further part in the war, but the sequestration of his estate left a legacy of impoverishment that Thomas was later very keen to reverse. The war had also disrupted Thomas's education, for although he appears to have received some tuition in York he did not attend university or an inn of court. Two years after his father's death he left England to tour Europe, accompanied for some time by Sir William Temple, on whose knowledge of international affairs he was later to rely. Having visited Italy Osborne spent 1650 in Paris, where he and other exiles met at the house of Sir Richard Browne, with whose son-in-law, John Evelyn, he became 'intimately acquainted' (Evelyn, 4.14). The diarist's assessment that his one-time friend was 'haughty' captures something of Osborne's personality, for his pride was commented on by others (ibid., 4.20). In 1652 he was back in London, courting a distant cousin, Dorothy Osborne, but the match was vetoed by his mother. The following year, however, he married a much better connected bride, Lady Bridget Bertie ('bap'. 1629, died 1704), daughter of Montague Bertie, second earl of Lindsey. Dorothy Osborne dismissed the match as a piece of fortune-hunting but it seems to have been a loving marriage, which produced three sons, including Edward (died 1689), the eldest son, and Peregrine Osborne, the third son, the only one who survived his father, and eight daughters. Lady Bridget was depicted by her enemies as a domineering woman responsible for some of her husband's greed if not his success. Thomas and his wife returned to Kiveton, only 6 miles from Welbeck, the seat of the Cavendishes, with whom he became friends. But it was probably not until the Restoration that Osborne secured a connection with George Villiers, second duke of Buckingham, who was to be his political patron. In 1661, presumably due to Buckingham's influence, he served as high sheriff of Yorkshire, and his decision to carve out a local career may have resulted from a rebuff to an attempt that year to recover a $1000 fine imposed on the family in the 1640s. Although he was offered 'some good peniworths' (Browning, 2.9) if he would follow Lord Ossory to Ireland he declined to do so. The local knowledge gained by remaining in Yorkshire was to stand him in excellent stead during his ministerial career. In 1662 he was part of a local commission for enforcing the 'Corporation Act' against dissenters and the following year acquired considerable local standing as a result of his efforts to investigate and uncover a conspiracy, the so-called Yorkshire plot. Complaining to the government when he found others had been insufficiently zealous, he may have discerned the political mileage to be gained out of exploiting fears of rebellion. On 16 January 1665 he was elected as MP for York on Buckingham's interest, against a court candidate. 
Osborne followed his patron's hostility to Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon. Both he and Buckingham had been thwarted when Clarendon blocked a bill to restore the council of the north and Clarendon had also ruined Osborne's plan to farm the excise in Yorkshire, a project which he had presented to the king in 1665 and which marked his first foray into fiscal policy. It was therefore probably for factional reasons, rather than ideological ones, that in 1665 he opposed a proposal to extend to the whole nation an oath renouncing taking up arms against the king and promising not to alter the government in church and state. Certainly when there were renewed reports of a conspiracy in the north Osborne refused a commission to investigate, dismissing the danger to the government. His hostility to Clarendon proved the 'first step to... his future rise' ('Memoirs of Sir John Reresby', 71) because Osborne used it to show his loyalty to Buckingham. This was confirmed when he resigned his deputy lieutenancy to share his patron's temporary disgrace after the mud-flinging which formed Clarendon's counter-attack and again when he opposed the king's attempt to set up his own commission to examine the public accounts, even though Charles attempted to include Osborne on it. Even a long personal conversation with the king on 8 June failed to persuade him. Buckingham's return to favour would therefore mean Osborne's rise. 
According to Clarendon's own account Osborne told many before parliament sat that if the lord chancellor 'were not hanged he would be hanged himself' ('Life of... Clarendon', 3.309) and he certainly began one of the lines of attack; but although he was appointed to the committee that drew up the formal charge against Clarendon and acted as teller of the house on important votes against him, Osborne's part was less prominent than others. Always a solid rather than inspiring speaker he seldom contributed to debates and was distracted by illness and the death of his eldest daughter, Elizabeth. In 1668 he reminded Buckingham of his usefulness by co-ordinating an attack on the duke of Ormond and by harrying Arthur Annesley, first earl of Anglesey. Anglesey was suspended from the treasurership of the navy, and Osborne was rewarded on 5 November 1668 when, on Buckingham's recommendation, he and Sir Thomas Littleton kissed the king's hand for the post. He now had a salary of $1250 p.a, invaluable if he was to make any headway into his $10,000 debt, and was one of Buckingham's key allies. Thus when Clarendon's remaining prop, Sir William Coventry, was removed from privy council Buckingham pressed for Osborne to replace him, but his candidature was blocked in turn by Henry Bennet, the earl of Arlington, who now posed the chief threat to Buckingham's power. Osborne concluded that the duke of York and Buckingham ought to work together and wrote his first survey of party organization to show the advantages of such a collaboration. Although there were defects inherent in the scheme, Buckingham's mishandling of it irritated Osborne who told the duke in December 1669 that he intended 'to retire only to the businesse of that imployment I am charged with' (Browning, 2.24). To some extent he did withdraw, for his only recorded intervention in 1670 was in favour of the new 'Conventicle Act', which Buckingham opposed. Osborne's name was still mentioned in March 1670 as a possible member of the new governing cabal, but when he unsuccessfully tried to persuade Buckingham out of his Francophile policy relations between them cooled. By November of that year Osborne told the duke that he found himself 'much estranged both from your trust and usuall kindnesse' and, assuring Buckingham of his continuing fidelity, resolved 'to retire from all publique employment, in which as I have never received any profitt, so have I been as far from any other satisfaction but that of doing your Grace service' (ibid., 2.25-6). In fact Osborne dedicated himself to understanding the navy, and both his ambition and his competence pushed him in the direction of rejecting both his patron and his co-treasurer. In the summer of 1671 he accused Littleton of 'great disservice to his Majestie' (ibid., 1.86) and on 11 July privy council resolved that in future there should be a single treasurer. Osborne was duly appointed on 20 September, with an increased salary of $2000. 
Having rid himself of his rival Osborne set about using his post to replace the patronage offered by Buckingham with that of the crown. Indeed, he was to acquire the reputation of being false to his friends and to the nation; or, in the words of his enemy Shaftesbury, was 'cut out naturally for a courtier' (Christie, 2.312). His diary shows frequent visits with the king or duke of York to the fleet and these trips appear to have dispelled any bad impressions created by his earlier behaviour. On 29 April 1672 he was offered a seat on privy council, even though this was shortly after the stop of the exchequer, the declaration of indulgence, and the declaration of war against the Dutch, all of which he opposed. The tensions between Osborne and Buckingham over the direction of government policy were evident when Osborne sent him Slingsby Bethel's 'The Present Interest of England'. It is unlikely that Osborne agreed with Bethel's plea for toleration as a way of promoting trade, but the tract did challenge the basis of the war with the Dutch and extol the virtues of the triple alliance of Britain, Sweden, and the Netherlands, positions with which Osborne agreed wholeheartedly. Buckingham replied in 'A Letter to Sir Thomas Osborn', which set out the government position and poked fun at the number-crunching Osborne by claiming that it was impossible to make all this 'as plain as that two and two make four' (p. 18). A reply, 'Observations on the Letter Written to Sir Thomas Osborne', in turn ridiculed the idea that the Dutch were suited to pursuing imperial ambitions and claimed that France had a 'universal design', thus posing by far the greater threat. The exchange is important, since it marks the foundations of the foreign policy which Osborne was to pursue throughout his career. 
For most of the summer Osborne duly absconded from London. His attendance at several meetings of government supporters in late 1672 perhaps encouraged a bid to secure his support in the forthcoming session, for Osborne received, two days before parliament met, a warrant for his elevation to the Scottish peerage as Viscount Osborne of Dunblane. Although he was appointed to the committee drafting the address from the Commons against the declaration of indulgence and spoke against the bill to ease protestant dissenters, arguing that a relaxation of the requirement to renounce the solemn league and covenant would incite them to rebellion, Osborne was more an opponent of the religious policy than of the court itself. Thus although he supported the 'Test Bill', he sought to moderate some of its harsher clauses against Catholic officers serving in the army and the duke of York's household. On monetary matters, moreover, he argued the government case, urging for as much money for the navy as possible as the best safeguard against popery. This stance prompted a reconciliation between Osborne and the duke of York, an alliance that lasted until 1678 and which was partly behind his promotion on 19 June 1673 to the post of lord treasurer, though Buckingham's support was also instrumental. Lord Clifford had been forced to resign because of his Catholicism, but, according to Sir John Reresby, Osborne was to pay Clifford half of the salary of his office or, some said, a large one-off payment of $10,000-20,000. At his swearing-in Osborne was treated to a speech by the earl of Shaftesbury, who reminded him that the talents which allowed men to rise were often different from those needed to maintain themselves. Osborne thanked the earl at the time but, when the ambiguity sank in, 'sent a gentleman to desire him to return him the thanks he had given him' (Le Neve, 107). In explaining his friend's rise Evelyn acknowledged that he was 'a man of excellent natural parts' but thought he had 'nothing generous or gratefull' in him (Evelyn, 4.20). 
Promotion brought Osborne new status. On 15 August 1673 he was created Baron Osborne of Kiveton and Viscount Latimer of Danby in the English peerage, allowing him to resign his Scottish title to his son Peregrine. But his appointment did not bring immediate political dominance and there were plenty of obstacles in the way of his further success. Some of these, such as his rivalry with the secretary to the Treasury, Sir Robert Howard, and his own serious illness in the summer of 1673, were petty or personal. But the most important difficulty lay in the structural inadequacies of the king's finances: a shortfall in the revenue to the tune of an annual $500,000 deficit, debts increased by war, salaries in arrears, and advances paid by tax farmers that mortgaged future revenue. Latimer had never supported the war against the Dutch but recognized that on financial grounds alone it had to end. He immediately began disbanding troops and transferring others to the pay of England's ally, France, in order to transfer cost. His guiding principles were set down in a memorandum of October in which he noted his policy 'in all things to promote the Protestant interest both att home and abroad' and to maintain fiscal competence (Browning, 2.63). Latimer further promised he would either break the French alliance or his own white staff. In order to achieve these aims Latimer had finally to ditch Buckingham and create his own following in parliament. He began to foster close ties with the groups around Edward Seymour, whose rising fortunes had mirrored his own, and Sir Heneage Finch. Towards the close of the year the new treasurer submitted a stark assessment to the king: the crown's fortunes 'cannot bee amended but by force or by compliance', he argued (ibid.). Clearly showing the weakness or rather impracticability of the former course, Latimer highlighted the need to secure the latter, which meant accommodation with parliament over religion. The state of the finances thus reinforced, or were used to reinforce, Latimer's personal convictions about state and church. 
The final breach with Buckingham came in 1674 when the duke was attacked in parliament by the earl of Arlington. Although Latimer did attempt to rescue Buckingham's mastership of the horse his inability to do so provoked accusations of ingratitude from the duke and encouraged a rumour that Latimer might resign. Certainly Arlington appeared to emerge a strengthened rival, especially as he took most of the credit for negotiating the peace. But in the longer run Arlington's factionalism had reduced his usefulness to the king and the peace gave Latimer the opportunity to introduce a series of financial reforms. As a memorandum of 17 March 1674 put it, everything depended on Latimer's fiscal skills: 'the sinewes of the monarchy are to bee recovered in these three yeares or niver' (Browning, 2.65). Latimer urged retrenchment and asked, impossibly, for the king's 'steddy and unalterable resolutions to assist him' (ibid.). Using the money from salaries and pensions, Latimer paid off the armed forces and renegotiated the tax farms at more favourable rates. A settlement was also reached with the bankers affected by the 1672 stop of the exchequer. These early successes brought reward. On 27 June 1674 he was promoted to an earldom, using the title of his granduncle Danby. In the same year he was made lord lieutenant of the West Riding and a Scottish privy councillor. More importantly in September 1674 Arlington resigned as secretary of state. At last Danby seemed free of rivals. 
Between 1675 and 1678 Danby attempted to consolidate his power in a number of interlinking ways which were summarized in the maxim 'to settle the church and state; to defend the one against schismaticks and papists, and the other against commonwealthsmen and rebels' ('Supplementary Lindsey MSS', 377). First, he sought to rely on the Church of England for political as well as religious support. Second, he used propaganda to attract support for the court by appealing to the cavalier mentality, vilifying his enemies as republicans and dissenters. Third, he sought by these means to cultivate a party in parliament that was loyal to the court. Fourth, he employed the resources of the Treasury to achieve his aims while retaining sound financial policies. Fifth, for both ideological and financial reasons he sought to divert the king from a Francophile foreign policy. Vigour in the first four objectives, and ambiguity over the fifth, helped polarize English politics into embryonic parties. 
Danby's alliance with the Church of England was forged early. From October 1674 onwards Danby began meeting with senior clerics to consider how to suppress popery and support the church, and in January 1675 measures were agreed which included the repression of conventiclers and the formal voiding of the 1672 licences under the declaration of indulgence. A further appeal to Anglican cavalier loyalty was made by a plan to erect a statue of Charles I at Charing Cross and re-inter his body. More significantly, in the 1675 session of parliament Danby introduced in the Lords a 'Test Bill' which would have confined political power to Anglican royalists by requiring officeholders and MPs to take an oath against resistance to the king and promise never to endeavour to alter the government of church or state. The bill was debated for seventeen days in the upper house, with Lord Chancellor Finch as the principal court speaker, before Danby allowed it to be dropped. Even then he continued to promote a strict alliance with, and political power for, churchmen. In 1676 he directed each bishop to prepare a census of papists and nonconformists in their diocese. Although known as the Compton Census the idea originated with Danby, who believed the results should persuade the king of the viability of suppressing both papists and dissenters without provoking rebellion. Danby also allied with the bishops in the Lords to construct a formidable church-court axis. 
Defence of the church and reviving memories of the civil war and its aftermath also figured prominently in a brilliant propaganda campaign. Danby, in alliance with secretary Joseph Williamson and licenser of the press Roger L'Estrange, fully appreciated the power of the press, perhaps because he had witnessed how effective William of Orange's propaganda had been during the Dutch war but also because the treasurer was himself the victim of many libels. Perhaps the most famous of these, the 'Letter from a Person of Quality', attacked the court for attempting to construct 'a distinct party from the rest of the Nation of the High Episcopal Men and the Old Cavalier' (p. 1). Danby's administration replied with a barrage of tracts, often publicized in the government sponsored 'London Gazette', which harped on the themes of the church and civil war. But the most effective reply, sponsored by the treasurer and published on the eve of the 1677 session, was 'A Paquet of Advices and Animadversions', which undermined the reputation of the earl of Shaftesbury by warning that he sought to lead the nation back along the steps of 1641. 
Although ostensibly appealing to moderation, Danby's propaganda and policies were divisive and provoked opposition. In 1675 an attempt was made, supported by Arlington, to impeach him. Although he knew of the attack in advance and it found weak support, it may have prompted Danby to consider the need for a more disciplined court party. During summer 1675 he increased the number of MPs in receipt of a pension from the excise farm, and shortly before parliament reassembled Danby sent out more than 100 letters inviting MPs to attend. The government worked up lists of supporters which reckoned on about 100 loyal members. The scale of such management was new and resented, so that by creating one party Danby was helping to consolidate another: an anti-court or country party. Despite, or perhaps because of, Danby's methods the court suffered defeats on important supply motions and only very narrowly defeated a motion to address the king to dissolve parliament. These failures of management led Charles and Danby to different conclusions. While the king sought refuge in alliance with France, the minister pressed his master to ally with the Dutch and to renew efforts to construct a court party. Between the prorogation in November 1675 and the new session in February 1677 Danby and his manager Sir Richard Wiseman worked hard to increase the number of court dependants. As Bishop Burnet pointed out, where his predecessors had sought to buy off leading opponents, Danby 'reckoned that the major number was the surer game; so he neglected the great men who he thought raised the price too high, and reckoned he could gain ten ordinary men cheaper than one of those' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 2.71). Alternatively, he first made opponents the lowest offer that there was any chance of them accepting; if they agreed, he won his man, but if not he gave out that $100 more would have bought them and thereby 'made them odious... so that take or leave he gain'd his point' (Le Neve, 26-7). Danby later admitted to spending $252,467 in the three years 1676-9 as 'secret service' money and was alleged to have spent almost another $50,000 more. Danby's attempt to build a court party was thus more organized and on a more ambitious scale than anything undertaken before. Initially his methods seemed very successful. Lists compiled between the spring of 1675 and early 1676 named 137 court voters, and when parliament did reassemble the treasurer was able to head off claims made in the House of Lords that it had been dissolved by the long prorogation. The four ring-leading peers, including Buckingham, were sent to the Tower, and on the back of that success the treasurer secured supply. Paper calculations of support in 1678 even put the number of adherents at over 200. Danby's pensioners were nevertheless far from being a reliable or effective block of votes. Moreover, inside the house his methods inspired the country party to new levels of sophistication, and outside it they created the belief that, as Andrew Marvell put it, he sought 'the growth of popery and arbitrary government' (Marvell, 'An Account of the Growth of Popery and Arbitrary Government', 1677). 
Danby's chief difficulty, however, lay in the king's fondness for alliance with France. In 1677, pursuing a wholly different policy, Danby successfully manipulated parliament into making addresses promising aid if Charles declared war against France. When ambassador Ralph Montagu wrote suggesting that the alarm these caused in Paris could be used to extract money from Louis XIV, Danby suppressed the letter and on 4 April drew up his own statement for the king in which he argued that the success of the session was in part due to MPs' belief in Charles's firmness against France. He went so far as to suggest that failure to continue this policy would not only ruin future sessions but also alienate the nation so far that it would imperil the government. By contrast, he saw in the current situation 'the greatest conjunction of honour, wisedome, glory and nationall advantages that ever offered itselfe in any age to any prince or nation'. He added that a stance of war against France would gain arms and money for the crown by the consent of the people, force which 'might incourage you to speake boldly' if parliament refused to negotiate a healthy financial settlement (Browning, 2.66-9). Charles accepted this most important of policy statements; but his insistence on seeing the colour of parliament's money revealed the weaknesses in Danby's parliamentary management, for mistrust of the court put strings on the support for the war. Aware that Charles resented the attitude of MPs, Danby drafted a memorandum in June 1677 in which he desperately pleaded with the king that only 'unsteadinesse of resolution in those steps hee has begun' could spoil his domestic affairs. Danby put the situation as bluntly as he felt able: 'Till hee can fall into the humour of the people [the king] can never bee great nor rich, and while differences continue prerogative must suffer, unlesse he can live without Parliament. That the condition of his revenue will not permitt that. (ibid., 2.69-71)' Charles, however, had already decided that his revenue could be improved by underhand deals with France. Danby had little option but to try to wreck the negotiations or, which might have the same effect, maximize the king's demands. Fatefully, he chose the latter, pressing the French for more money in return for a long adjournment of parliament. Aware of the weakness of his position, particularly after the destructive Buckingham was released in July, Danby declared to the duke of York that it was impossible to serve a king who treated his faithful ministers in this way and threatened to retire from public life. Although James appeased him, both men must have known that in order to save his power Danby had conceded one of his major policy objectives. Attempting to salvage something from the situation he continued to haggle with the French for more money and made one last bid to win back the king to his policy by reviving the idea of a marriage between William of Orange and James's daughter Mary. Charles's agreement in October 1677 raised the stakes all round. The match laid the foundations for an important relationship between William and Danby that would have long-lasting consequences, and in the short term Danby gained considerable prestige. But the gambler's throw also provoked French anger against him. A formal offensive league between England and the Netherlands failed to materialize, allowing France to resume its assault on the king's vacillating mind and forcing an adjournment of parliament from 15 to 28 January 1678. This, Danby noted in a letter to Montagu, meant 'that nobody will now beleeve other then that the peace is concluded by concert betwixt us and France' (Browning, 2.332). Such forebodings were abundantly proved right during the subsequent session. When news of Louis XIV's victory at Ghent reached the Commons on 22 February 1678 a motion to draft an address calling for the removal of evil councillors was only narrowly defeated and, despite Danby's pleadings, a motion was passed to address for an immediate war with France. Ironically the treasurer had been forced into opposing a war which he had been trying for years to persuade the king to undertake and in doing so he lost the trust of both Charles and parliament. Moreover, since parliament had granted no supply and had stopped lucrative custom revenues from French goods, the treasurer was in no position to resist a French proposal to give the king money in return for an alliance. On 25 March Danby sent a letter to Montagu, later brandished against him, confirming English demands, though ironically, as he had predicted, the French offers dissolved. 
Danby's policies now lay in tatters. When parliament reassembled on 29 April 1678 it attacked him and proved so intractable that Charles had to prorogue it on 13 May without having been granted any money. The treasurer was all too aware that the king, who had been forced to raise troops without supply, was acutely short of money. He had hitherto maintained financial stability by maximizing revenue from the custom and excise farmers; but he had failed to make major innovations elsewhere and an outline of his fiscal policies shows a rather uncreative approach (Browning, 3.27-31). Thus although Danby refused to sign France's latest treaty on 17 May, he must have been glad of the money it offered. Even then on 18 June, with parliament back in session, he had to declare that the king could not live without an additional supply of $300,000 a year, but the motion for relief was again mishandled by Danby's parliamentary managers and rejected. It was probably an indication of how desperate he had become that the treasurer considered the possibility of using the army that had been raised to maintain royal authority, though it is also clear that he misread the international scene and expected the peace negotiations to fail. Either way, he failed to disband, flying in the face of direct parliamentary provisions to do so and thereby exacerbating fears about his intentions. By the autumn of 1678 Danby had earned the enmity of both France and the English opposition. 
The revelation of the Popish Plot, an alleged Catholic conspiracy to murder the king and massacre protestants, therefore offered Danby an opportunity to resurrect his fortunes. Ignoring Charles's desire to avoid bringing the plot before parliament, the treasurer hoped that he could benefit by proving the plot to be true, even though the duke of York's interests lay in proving it to be false. Thus while Danby wanted a parliamentary investigation in order to restore his anti-popish credentials, York wanted a quick examination before privy council. Danby was even prepared to sacrifice the duke for his own advantage, actively considering a bill of limitations 'to paire the nailes... of a popish successor' ('Memoirs of Sir John Reresby', 157). Such tensions led inevitably to a rupture, which was only temporarily patched up when it became clear to Danby that the plot threatened to backfire on him as well. Such a breach was dangerous, for Danby had few friends, and his enemies now numbered Ralph Montagu, whose ambition to become secretary of state had been frustrated by the treasurer. Supported by France, Montagu intended to reveal what he knew of Danby's role in the secret negotiations with Louis XIV. Danby knew of this plan and attempted to forestall it by seizing Montagu's papers. But at the end of the debate on 19 December 1678 Montagu informed MPs about a casket containing important letters which were then fetched and read. After hearing the letter of 25 March 1678, in which a proposal for money had been made to Louis only five days after the passage of an act authorizing the raising of money for war against France, the house resolved to impeach. On 21 December the committee reported the charges. These were that Danby had 'encroached to himself regal power' through his conduct of foreign affairs, that he had endeavoured to introduce arbitrary power by raising an army on pretence of a war, and that he was 'popishly affected' and had concealed the plot (Browning, 2.74-5). For the next six months Danby attempted, without success, to extricate himself from these legal proceedings. 
Danby's immediate response was to persuade the king to add an authorization to the drafts of the offending letters, to allow him to hide behind the power of royal command and neutralize the first and perhaps most damaging of the charges. On 23 December he duly made a defence, during which he ridiculed his concealment of the plot, declaring that 'this is the first time that any man was accused to be the concealer of that plot whereof he hath been a principal means of procuring the discovery' ('Memoirs Relating to the Impeachment', appendix, 40-48). He even tried to use the occasion to re-state his fundamental hostility to France. He then successfully made his case one of principle between the houses, ensuring that the Lords refused to order him into custody. To break the deadlock the session was prorogued on 30 December. Subsequent discussions between the king and leaders of the opposition offered the prospect that the prosecution might be dropped if Danby resigned, and he may therefore have leant his weight behind the dissolution of 24 January 1679 which was necessary for the deal's success; but in any case the minister had more positive plans. Having already purged his administration of those who had joined his enemies, the treasurer remodelled it further and came to an understanding with York, securing for him a declaration of the illegitimacy of the duke of Monmouth in return for James's temporary exile. He also sought to influence public opinion by publishing 'Two Letters from Mr Montagu', which contained his vindicating speech, and 'An Explanation of the Lord Treasurer's Letter to Mr Montagu'. Nevertheless the general election proved disastrous for Danby's pensioner MPs. On 1 March the king granted him a pardon for all offences committed before 27 February 1679, but he had still not resigned by the time parliament met on 6 March, and a paralysing dispute over the speakership erupted between him and Sir Edward Seymour, another former ally with whom he had fallen out. Seymour claimed that the king did not 'valew the Treasurer's power of a fiddlestick' (Browning, 1.320), but after much wrangling Charles did back Danby, and the house was adjourned in order to choose another candidate. Only then, on 13 March, did Charles ask Danby to resign and he softened the blow with the offer of a pension of $5000 a year for life and a marquessate. The manner in which Danby resigned ruined any chances that the prosecution against him would be dropped. In an attempt to quell the dissatisfaction Charles assured the Lords on 22 March that Danby was innocent of the charges made against him, but, fearful of what might come out in a full-scale trial, urged him into hiding. From his refuge Danby sent the white staff to the king on 25 March, formally ending his period in office. 
The impeachment process continued unabated, but first parliament needed to find Danby. On 26 March a bill was introduced in the Lords to ban him from entering the royal presence, from holding any public office or grants, and banishing him unless he surrendered himself by 1 May. Greater pressure was added by the Commons when, on 1 April, a bill of attainder was passed on the grounds that his absence confirmed the treason charges. Danby therefore surrendered himself and was committed to the Tower of London, where he remained until 1684. Having secured their quarry MPs turned their attention to other matters, but on 25 April he pleaded his pardon in an attempt to block further proceedings. This infuriated MPs since it undermined the whole impeachment process and the Commons voted the pardon illegal. This put the two houses in conflict, as Danby may have hoped, and relations were further soured by demands that the bishops should not be allowed to sit during the impeachment because it was a matter of blood. From the Tower Danby poured oil on the flames by warning that the Commons aimed at complete sovereignty and 'must either bee shortly dismiss't' or the king would be ruined (Browning, 2.82-3). Even after Charles prorogued parliament on 27 May, Danby continued to press for a dissolution. With remarkable foresight he also advised the king to issue a declaration and hold the next parliament outside London, policies which he would adopt two years later. 
Although Danby could bombard the king with written advice prison limited his influence, so he pressed Charles for his release. The king promised his continuing favour but either feared the reaction or was secretly quite glad to have Danby at arm's length, for the next five years were a continuous round of blocked appeals. For some the length of his imprisonment must have seemed only natural justice for a man who had vindictively locked up Shaftesbury for a year. Thus when Danby canvassed to secure his release in the autumn of 1680 Shaftesbury declared he would 'not abate him an ace' (BL, Add. MS 28053, fol. 203). Danby again petitioned the parliament which met at Oxford in March 1681 but its early dissolution deprived him of a hearing. The longevity of his captivity was also due to allegations, which went further than the impeachment charge, that Danby had not only tried to stifle the plot but was also responsible for the murder of Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey, the justice to whom Titus Oates had revealed the Popish Plot ('Some Reflections upon the Earl of Danby in Relation to Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey's Murder', 1679). On 16 May 1681 Edward Fitzharris attempted to free himself from a charge of treason by directly implicating Danby in the murder, and on this evidence a Middlesex grand jury (composed of a number of hostile MPs) indicted the earl. Danby petitioned the king to arrange for an immediate trial so that he could clear his name, but the execution of Fitzharris left him without such an opportunity. On 19 May 1681 he moved king's bench to take action against the publishers of Fitzharris's accusations but these proceedings also proved abortive. On 27 May and 29 June 1682 Danby had his plea for habeas corpus heard but refused at king's bench; the lord chief justice's speech made his ears 'tingle' (Le Neve, 98), prompting him to canvass for the case to be referred to the judges rather than parliament, a move disliked by the king. Despite these set-backs and a series of family disasters, including a near-fatal accident for his wife, whom he was nevertheless refused permission to visit, Danby remained resilient. On 17 August 1683 William Longueville found him 'pretty well, and ye same good company, and temperate in what he said' about the Rye House plotters who had been executed (Thompson, 2.35). 
Danby spent much of his time in the Tower preparing vindications of his administration. 'An Impartial State of the Case of the Earl of Danby' (1679) was a spirited defence. But he had also to engage with Sir Robert Howard, who accused him in 'An Examination of the Impartial Case' (1679) of gross fiscal mismanagement. There was some truth to these allegations, for the gap between income and expenditure was probably greater at the beginning of 1679 than it had been when he took office. On the other hand it was clear that the king's foreign policy had wrecked smooth relations with parliament that might have yielded supply, in return for only about $300,000 of French aid, and that the treasurer had not decreased the revenue. Danby's reply, 'The Answer of the Earl of Danby to a Late Pamphlet' (1680), sparked a further exchange: Howard attacked in print again in October 1680, in turn provoking 'The Earl of Danby's Answer to Sr Robert Howard's Book' (1680), in which he floated the proposal that offering incentives to the managers of taxes, as he had done in the case of the excise, would greatly improve the revenue. Vindication of his administration spilt over into a vindication of the king's conduct since Danby had lost office, for in 1681 he also penned a draft declaration for the king to issue after the abrupt dissolution of the third Exclusion Parliament. Although rejected in favour of a shorter version, the text contained the earl's characteristic appeal to memories of the civil war. 
The immediate cause of Danby's release was the king's decision in 1684 not to summon a new parliament as the law required. According to Danby's eldest son, Edward, Viscount Latimer, the king said in February 'that if the judges would not baile you (which hee would see and speake with the judges tomorrow) hee would by God free you himself' (BL. Add. MS 28049, fol. 214). This proved unnecessary, for on 12 February the judges declared that the earl could be bailed. Once free, Danby immediately sought to regain influence, but although feted by members of a loyalist club the earl received a much more frosty reception from the duke of York. He also found it difficult to persuade the king to show favour, despite a private interview and a pleading memorandum (Browning, 2.110-12). He therefore withdrew from court and retired to his Yorkshire estate. Illness prevented him from playing any more of an active role but in December he went back to London in an unsuccessful attempt to secure the mastership of the rolls for his son. Rumours that he himself might gain office in a remodelled ministry were crushed by the death of Charles. Yet James's accession did signal a turn in Danby's fortunes. He found 'the king and ministers outwardly very civill' (ibid., 2.128) and on the first day of the new parliament he presented a petition about his impeachment. Three days later the Lords, annulling a decision of 19 March 1679, declared that the impeachment had lapsed. Danby therefore sent James a new memorandum on 6 July reiterating his call for compensation. This time James summoned him, but the discussions about the 'Test Act', which the king sought to repeal, were evidently unsatisfactory. James called him again in November, perhaps with a view to him replacing the dismissed Halifax, and the king showed him the provocative speech he proposed to make about the 'Test Act' and army officers. But again the earl's response appears not to have pleased the king. Danby nevertheless avoided open confrontation. He made no recorded speech in the second session, though he did draft a speech proposing to refer the king's dispensing power to the judges. For the next two years he retired into private life. 
During this time Danby renewed his links with William of Orange. In 1686 the king refused him permission to travel abroad, and for much of that year the earl was preoccupied with the fall-out from the collapse of the marriage of his son, Peregrine, Viscount Dumblane. But in 1687, when many of his relatives were deprived of their posts as the king purged office-holders, Danby received a visit from William's agent Dykvelt. On 30 May 1687 William was sent a letter in which the earl declared proudly that 'no competitor can pretend an equall share' in his service (Browning, 2.117). When a second agent, Zuylestein, visited in August he brought a letter for Danby from William and carried one back from the earl. Danby became a key figure in William's plans. On 28 January 1688 Danby was so far identified with the opposition that he received an anonymous letter threatening his life unless he made peace with the king, but such intimidation did nothing to deter him. Danby was nevertheless careful to cultivate Princess Mary as well as her husband William, attempting to place his daughter, Lady Plymouth, in Mary's bedchamber. Danby was one of the first to consider the idea of inviting William, and was the most important tory signatory to the letter that was drawn up in the wake of the acquittal of the seven bishops, whose trial he had attended. 
Danby played a key role in the conspiracy against James. He advised William to land in the north, hoping thereby to have 'a share in the whole management by the interest he believed he had in that country' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.303). Certainly towards the end of August he was sending large sums of money to the continent and was soliciting gentry support among the tory Anglicans. He was also formally reconciled with the earl of Devonshire, the manager of his earlier impeachment but a fellow Williamite. Danby set up his headquarters at Ribston Hall in Yorkshire, where on 1 October he and Devonshire arranged the final details of their planned rising. Danby was summoned by the king to London but excused himself and moved to Kiveton, leaving his son Dumblane at York. While waiting for the invasion Danby played an important part in keeping up the spirits of the Williamites. The invasion force landing in the west both surprised Danby's plans and forced him and his allies into action. Danby took up arms on 20 November and wrote to the prince requesting further direction, though he also lamented William's neglect of the north. On 22 November Danby arranged a bloodless coup at York, riding at the head of horsemen shouting for 'a free parlament and the protestant religion and noe popery' ('Memoirs of Sir John Reresby', 529). Even if he was probably not its author, as the British Library catalogue implies, 'Some Thoughts of a Private Person' was published to justify the actions at York in terms of a right of resistance to defend legal rights and a denial that this infringed scriptural injunctions. 
Having been excluded from the principal share in William's glory, Danby had already begun to fear that complete victory by either James or William would be undesirable, but the prince's call for the forces marshalled at Nottingham under the command of the earl of Devonshire to march south and Princess Anne's departure from Nottingham destroyed any hopes the earl may have had of using his position in the north to act as mediator. It may be significant that James seriously considered the possibility of retreating to the north and throwing himself on Danby; but his flight confirmed Danby's intention to reach London as soon as possible. This he was unable to do because a fear of Irish soldiers seized the north and Danby decided to move westward to meet any threat. Danby did not reach the capital until 28 December, in time to hear William accept provisional control of the government. While the revolution consolidated Danby's power in the north he felt aggrieved by the prince's neglect and the favour shown to Halifax. But his followers did well at the elections to the Convention and the struggle transferred to the parliamentary arena. Danby chaired an address of thanks for William's administration but his supporters were quiet, absent, or perhaps confused in the early debates about the throne. On 29 January, after the Commons had decided on a vacancy, and with Danby in the chair, the Lords heard a proposal for a regency as 'the best and safest way to preserve the Protestant religion and the laws of this kingdom' ('JHL', 1685-1691, 14.110). Yet Danby spoke 'strenuously' (Le Neve, 113) and duly voted against this, thereby securing its defeat, even though Halifax thought he favoured the project; and then voted against giving William and Mary the crown. He appears to have been attempting to set up an interest for Mary as sole monarch, since he urged her to come to England. Under his influence the Lords therefore objected to the word 'vacancy' in the Commons resolution because that implied an elective monarchy. When the resulting conference between the houses reopened the debate in the Commons Danby's followers there voted against the vacancy of the throne. But Mary herself warned that 'she would take it extreme unkindly if any, under a pretence of their care of her, would set up a divided interest between her and the prince' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.393) and Danby was among those summoned to hear William declare that he would return to the Netherlands if he did not receive the kingship for life. The earl had no alternative but to submit. He broadcast his change of heart via Lord Dumblane who apologized on 7 February 1689 in the Commons for not voting in favour of the vacancy. Even so, the earl remained acutely sensitive to tory sensibilities and favoured a rewording of the oath of allegiance so that there was no recognition of the new monarchs as 'rightful and lawful', and when Halifax opposed this Danby 'schooled him so shamefully that my Lord Hallifax did not open his mouth' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ballard 45/27a). 
Despite the differences over the crown, William and Mary seemed to owe much to Danby, who therefore hoped for reward. In February 1689 he was nevertheless offered only the presidency of the council, not the treasurership he desired, while his rival Halifax became lord privy seal. Such was his reluctance to accept the presidency that he later told Reresby it had been 'forced... upon him' ('Memoirs of Sir John Reresby', 557). Moreover Danby felt compelled to write a remonstrance to the new king only five days into his reign to urge rewards for his followers who had been overlooked. His son, Lord Latimer, was refused the post of gentleman of the bedchamber, which he had held under Charles II, and Lady Plymouth equally failed to enter the queen's bedchamber. On 28 February 1689 Reresby was subjected to a dinner-table indictment by Danby of the government, particularly of its religious policy, and for the following month the earl hardly ventured into parliament, returning only to block the intended repeal of the 'Test Acts'. When confronted he told the king he 'would serve him in everything but against the Church' (Foxcroft, 2.211). He was appointed on 1 April as governor of Hull, though he told Reresby it was 'as a place of retreat, and whereby to make his terms, shoud there be a change of times' ('Memoirs of Sir John Reresby', 571). Not surprisingly the king exclaimed that 'as for my Lord Danby hee knew not what to make of him' (Foxcroft, 2.206). It was only with difficulty that, on 6 April 1689, he was created marquess of Carmarthen, taking his title from property in Wales granted in 1674. The truth was that William resented Carmarthen's imperiousness and remembered his naivety in the all-important European sphere. He was a useful if limited statesman but he was also a man with a divisive past. According to Halifax, Carmarthen's heart was never really in the compromise ministry that the king appointed and had allegedly advised that William had as well put himself in the hands of the fanatics as continue his trimming policy. 
Carmarthen's awkwardness was clear from his absence from council and parliament for much of May, perhaps a silent protest at what he perceived to be the inadequate financial settlement. But he was forced back when Oates, attempting to reverse the judgments made in 1685 against him, attacked him. Carmarthen declared that the sentence ought to be reversed in so far as Oates had formerly been whipped from Newgate to Tyburn and now ought to be whipped back again. Such rash language provoked the king to wonder whether the marquess was mad when he made the speech. Carmarthen, however, went further and had Oates sent to prison, an act which reanimated animus against him, resulting in a pointed resolution that a pardon was not pleadable to bar an impeachment. In June his son Peregrine, now styled the earl of Danby, was investigated over a privateer which he had fitted out, and John Howe moved that an address be presented to the king requesting that all persons who had ever been impeached by the Commons might be dismissed; from the beginning of the session Carmarthen was thought to be vulnerable to another impeachment. The request for the removal of impeached ministers nevertheless struck at Halifax as much as Carmarthen, and when on 2 August the house attacked the former, Carmarthen's son and followers joined the fray. It may have been the case that he was working with the whigs to overthrow his rival; if so, it merely disgusted William who, in his more exasperated moods, wanted to be rid of the earl. But Carmarthen refused to go unless dismissed and this the king was reluctant to do, for Halifax was deeply unpopular and events were pushing the king towards, not against, the churchmen whom the lord president represented. 
Carmarthen's credit rose in the remainder of 1689. The constant bickering between Halifax and the whigs in the second session of the Convention reduced the usefulness of both and alienated the king. By December there were even reports that Carmarthen might be reappointed as treasurer and he was generally held responsible for the dissolution of parliament on 12 January 1690. Halifax's resignation less than a month later signalled Carmarthen's victory in the factional struggle. But it was much more than a personal triumph. He brought ideological allies into government, and on the back of successful elections, in which the church became a rallying cry, Carmarthen returned to the business of creating a court party. Counting on a majority in the upper house but only a core of fifty supporters in the lower, he came to an understanding with Speaker Sir John Trevor to manage the court interest. The lord president also set about restoring financial probity, gaining the excise revenue for the life of the king and the customs for four years. Attempts were made by the whigs to wrongfoot him over the recognition of the king and queen as 'rightful and lawful', which they sought to include in an abjuration bill, and a motion was made calling for Carmarthen's removal. But these actions only confirmed the fact that he was now regarded as the king's principal adviser, a position consolidated when Shrewsbury resigned as secretary of state in June. Always pallid, he was nicknamed 'the White Marquis' (Thompson, 2.149) and for the next three years he appeared to head the government. 
But if Carmarthen's power had always been slightly illusory in his first ministry, it was even more so in his second. He now had no department to act as a power base, had a number of strong colleagues to counter-balance him, was an object of suspicion for those with long memories, and in his relations with the new king could not domineer. William's absences on campaign, however, provided a pretext for Carmarthen to try to engross power by cutting out Mary and thinking 'little by little to do all' (Dalrymple, vol. 2, appendix, 2.122). In her private memoirs Mary noted that he was 'of a temper I can never like' (Doebner, 29). Although he worked assiduously in the summer of 1690, he was peculiarly ill-suited to his role as power-broker and alienated both political extremes. The high-church leader the earl of Rochester thus thought him 'quite struck up with the Dissenters' (Browning, 1.481), while the whigs were alienated by his refusal to press for the dissolution of the tory-dominated parliament. When parliament resumed in October the lord president was thus again attacked. Carmarthen had nevertheless resorted to old techniques and been forming a body of 'managers of the king's directions', led by Sir John Lowther and Sir Henry Goodricke (ibid., 3.178-9). As a result of their and the king's pressure the Commons voted the unprecedented sum of $4 million supply. Carmarthen's position was boosted by his revelation of a Jacobite conspiracy, after Lord Preston was captured with incriminating papers. Thus when William left in January 1691 Carmarthen was again left as 'chief minister in his absence' (Luttrell, 2.137). He now received a pension of $3500 a year and rumours abounded that he would be created a duke. 
In 1691 Carmarthen was, in the words of his most astute biographer, 'all pervasive rather than all-powerful' (Browning, 1.489). His position in the government meant that he suffered for any errors, and long before the October session both parties had begun to muster an attack on him. When it came it centred on the miscarriage of the naval forces, but this was diverted onto the earl of Nottingham (perhaps not altogether unwittingly by the earl of Danby), and Carmarthen used evidence from the Preston affair, which implicated malcontents of both parties, to 'break the teeth' of his opponents (ibid., 2.192). In a sense Carmarthen's power rested on division. He was disliked by both extremes, but so long as they were not powerful enough to topple him he was able to head a composite ministry. When, therefore, tory malcontents Rochester and Seymour entered the government in 1692 and sided with Nottingham, the lord president's position was threatened. The zealots attempted to wrest leadership from him by urging a more violent party line. Thus when Rochester advised the king to shift from a land to a sea war, Carmarthen dismissed such tactics as 'sitting still and letting the French king take what he will' (Dalrymple, 2.242). Whereas Halifax had been ideologically committed to a balanced ministry, Carmarthen sought only a pragmatic coalition. He therefore saw his problems in terms of the lack of a solid body of supporters to rely on. He marshalled the court block and supported William's opposition to the 'Place' and 'Triennial Bill', both of which sought to limit royal power. 
Carmarthen's second fall from power was, though not without drama in its final stages, a gradual process. Power shifted during late 1693 and 1694 towards the whigs, and the emerging manager was not Carmarthen but the earl of Sunderland. During the 1693-4 session the lord president was pushed into awkward compromises. He was active in rejecting the 'Treason Bill', an issue about which he felt strongly out of personal experience, but while disliking the scheme to create the Bank of England he argued for it in order to preserve supply for the military campaign. Such ambiguity meant that Carmarthen was increasingly irrelevant to both the king and the whigs, as the remodelling of the ministry in March 1694 showed. Although created duke of Leeds on 4 May 1694, he had effectively been sidelined. Aware of his incongruous position at the head of a predominantly whig ministry Leeds retreated into caution. In August, when asked his views about the fleet, he would 'give no opinion but managed his arguments so well for and against' that Shrewsbury could not fathom his opinion, but was 'sure he has left himself latitude enough to be of either, as the event shall give occasion' ('Private and Original Correspondence of... Shrewsbury', 66). As he must have suspected, it was only a matter of time before the whigs sought to be rid of him. In November 1694, perhaps in an attempt to stave off dismissal, he supported (against the king's wishes) the 'Triennial Act', which required general elections to be held at least every three years. According to his own later memoir, William told him that he 'should live to repent it' ('Copies and Extracts of some Letters', xi). He now also advocated acceptance of the 'Treason Bill', albeit with a wrecking amendment. But in the spring of 1695 the House of Commons began to investigate corruption in the East India Company. A bill of penalties against one of the chief culprits, Sir Thomas Cooke, roused Leeds into daily attendance, for he had been accused of receiving $10,000 for speaking against the bill to grant the new East India Company a charter. Although Leeds denied this, with 'a most solemn protestation of his cleanness and innocence' (Le Neve, 121), the investigation revealed that Cooke had enlisted the duke's support through the agency of Sir Basil Firebrace and that a sum of 5500 guineas had been paid. Leeds, most unconvincingly, claimed that he told the intermediary to keep the money and was unaware that it had been left in his house. The Commons decided once again to impeach him. 
Leeds immediately delivered a three-hour speech in his own defence. Reminding his audience of his ill treatment in 1678 he declared that the new charges were as baseless as the earlier ones and called for a quick trial. Articles were duly presented on 29 April but accused him only of betraying his trust as a privy councillor by receiving bribes. The following day Leeds entered a plea of not guilty, which seemed highly unlikely, but the key witness, Leeds's servant John Robart, had conveniently disappeared and no further action could be taken before the prorogation. In May he was nevertheless told to absent himself from the council, an order that rendered his position as lord president almost purely nominal. Although he continued to haunt the court his position must have appeared increasingly ridiculous. On his return from campaign William renewed his injunction against attending council, but in return the whigs agreed to call off any further investigation and the impeachment fell with the dissolution of parliament. 
His new semi-detached status allowed Leeds to create difficulties for the whigs in the session of 1695-6. When a 'Recoinage Bill' came from the Commons Leeds proposed an amendment which would have declared coin to be valued by weight and compensation paid for the shortfall. The whig-guided Commons refused this and Leeds withdrew his opposition. But that he had not changed his mind was clear later in the session when he opposed fixing the rate of guineas at 22's'., only to acquiesce once again when he suffered defeat. In the wake of the attempt in February 1696 to assassinate the king Leeds received a special summons to attend a cabinet council, but his main concern in parliament appears to have been to find a way to allow tories to escape the trap being set for them by the whig 'association', which bound subscribers to recognize William as 'rightful and lawful' king. Having failed to prevent its formulation entirely, Leeds proposed an alternative form of wording that recognized that William 'hath a right by law to the Crown and that no other person whatsoever hath any right to the same' ('House of Lords MSS', new ser., 2.205). Leeds opposed a similar bill coming from the Commons that made the association compulsory for all office-holders. He took a bigger step into opposition when he intervened on behalf of one of the alleged assassination conspirators, Sir John Fenwick, protesting against his attainder and pleading for a milder penalty. Even then William did not dismiss his titular lord president. In the following session (of 1697-8) Danby continued to provoke the whigs by acting as a manager in the dispute between the houses over Charles Duncombe, a financier friend, whose attainder was rejected in the upper house on Leeds's casting vote. Moreover, when a bill to establish a new East India Company came up from the Commons, he denounced it as against the liberty of the subject and an infringement of the right of sovereignty. 
As the tide began to turn against the whigs, Leeds pursued a vendetta against one of their leaders, the chancellor of the exchequer Charles Montagu, in the 1698-9 session. In part this was the result of pique when Montagu, not Leeds, secured the post of auditor of the exchequer; but it was also the residue of the duke's hostility to the whig's financial revolution. Leeds also exploited whig divisions over the standing army by opposing the retention of William's Dutch guards. It can scarcely have come as a surprise when, on 18 May 1699, he was finally dismissed as lord president and, subsequently, from his lord lieutenancies and governorship of Hull; the wonder was that he had held on to them for so long. Even then he may have lost his offices because the king believed him to be dying. After his recovery in the autumn of 1699 Leeds played a very irregular role in public life. In 1700 he was active in parliament about the Darien affair and the issue of royal grants, and in 1701 joined the tories in denouncing the partition treaties; but his distaste for impeachment proceedings was sufficiently strong to cause him to desert them when they went further and attacked the whig ministers. He was rewarded for his moderation when his own 1695 impeachment was finally dismissed along with those against the Junto. 
Although he had been courted for his support by the king in 1700 and 1701, it was the accession of Queen Anne in 1702 that brought Leeds back into favour at Whitehall. Although he accepted the post of privy councillor, he 'declined being put into any other public post' (Le Neve, 145), perhaps because he was too moderate for the high-churchmen who gained power but also because he was by now seventy. But defence of his family and the church, two of his abiding principles, could bring him out of retirement. In 1703 he sought, and failed, to obtain legal redress against Montagu (now -- ironically -- Lord Halifax), and supported the occasional conformity bills that were promoted in the first three sessions of Anne's reign, though not the attempt to tack the measure to supply. During one debate he rashly told Halifax that 'his family was raised by rebellion, but his own suffered by it' ('Beaufort MSS', 96), leading to the challenge of a duel between Halifax and Carmarthen (as Leeds's son and heir, Peregrine, now was) that was stopped only when the House of Lords intervened. In 1705 Leeds told the upper house that the greatest danger to the church came from the practice of occasional conformity, and entered his protest against the resolution that it was in a 'safe and flourishing condition' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 6.507). Consequently another potential duel between Halifax and Carmarthen had to be stopped by order of the Lords. But such vehemence was only a sign that once again the whigs were regaining influence. During 1705 most of Leeds's relatives lost their posts. 
Soon after the loss of his wife on 7 January 1704 Leeds appears to have contemplated settling down to writing his memoirs. Perhaps as an aid he also began to keep a diary. But family affairs, principally worries about his unstable and impecunious son Carmarthen, seem to have distracted him. In any case a further political shift in 1709-10, in the form of the Sacheverell affair, renewed his activity for the defence of the church. Regularly attending the trial, he signed repeated protests against the resolutions adopted by the whig-dominated Lords against the doctor. Allegedly weeping during Sacheverell's eloquent self-defence, Leeds voted for his acquittal. Leeds was himself prompted into speech, using the occasion to vindicate his own actions at the revolution, claiming he: 'never thought, that things would have gone so far, as to settle the Crown on the Prince of Orange, whom he had often heard say that he had no such thoughts himself. That they ought to distinguish between resistance and revolution; for vacancy or abdication was the thing they went upon, and therefore resistance was to be forgot; for had it not succeeded it had certainly been rebellion, since he knew of no other but hereditary right. (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 6.847)' Nevertheless, while the Sacheverell affair encouraged some into dallying with James Francis Edward Stuart, the Pretender, Leeds opened correspondence with Hanover. His attempt to represent the past in the way he wished to be remembered was also evident in the publication of 'Copies and Extracts of some Letters Written to and from the Earl of Danby' (1710), which contained a vindicatory introduction. Although calculated to 'shew how faithfully I acted to the best of my understanding for the interest of my countrey' in the 1670s (p. xiii), many of the letters were not accurately reprinted, containing many revisions and omissions in order to minimize his connections with the French negotiations. Leeds also republished, in book form, the collected pamphlets against Howard ('Memoirs Relating to the Impeachment of Thomas Earl of Danby', 1710). These publications prompted a revival of what one defender called printed 'calumnies' against him ('A Vindication of his Grace', 1711), including the accusation that he had only dared publish Ralph Montagu's letters once the latter died. 
Leeds himself died from convulsions on 26 July 1712 at Easton Neston, Northamptonshire, the seat of his daughter Lady Leominster, and was buried at Harthill, Yorkshire, with his ancestors. According to one account, he had lived the last twenty-five years 'without ever going once to stool, the excrementious parts of his food, after a due digestion in his stomach being discharg'd the same way it was taken in' (Le Neve, 145-6). His will expressly forbade that his body lie in state. The earl's third, unstable, surviving son, Peregrine, inherited the title but the estate was left to the first duke's grandson, also named Peregrine. Leeds had outlived most of his friends, contemporaries, and many of his close relatives. Few commentators, contemporary and modern, have been able to ignore the duke's flaws. He was proud, ambitious, and grasping from instinct as well as from the pressure of his own and his family's debts. He saw little wrong with bribery, whether it be designed to line his own pockets or those whom he sought to manage, so that he appeared to some as the epitome of a corrupt courtier. His capacity to misrepresent events and motives, including his own, was sometimes breathtaking. He was a stiff, formal politician, bombastic and domineering. Yet in some of these failings were also the keys to his success. His pride and ambition nurtured a remarkably resilient and persevering determination to be at the centre of affairs and to make political comebacks; such qualities also entailed a dedication to business that made him indispensable to more than one monarch. Indeed the longevity of his service to the crown must rank him alongside Walpole, who resembled him in many ways. Leeds's knowledge of the value of money attuned the treasurer in him and made him appreciate the power of a pension or office to buy favour. He was the first to recognize the power of the Treasury as the key to ministerial pre-eminence and hence, not coincidentally, his administration is found being referred to by contemporaries as a 'prime ministry' (Le Neve, 25). His domineering style dictated the need to create bodies of loyal supporters, while he appreciated that dominance in committee was as important as oratory on the floor of the house. Such skills at parliamentary management did much to pave the way for, and even create, party government. His own talent for misrepresentation gave him insights into the value of propaganda and the deception and intrigue demanded by partisan politics, and he skilfully used the language of moderation for party purposes. 
Accused of disloyalty to his friends and patrons there were nevertheless a number of ideological tenets, aside from an unshakeable commitment to securing prominence for his family, from which Leeds could not be shifted. The first and most important was loyalty to the Church of England. Throughout his career, and no matter what offence it caused, he resolutely defended the church against the perceived twin dangers of popery and dissent. In this view he represented a very powerful strain of opinion, which he did all he could to encourage and sustain. This passion for the established church was sufficient to overcome his otherwise habitual loyalty to the Stuarts and his belief in non-resistance in 1688. His agonizing after the revolution on both accounts was also entirely typical of the trauma that many moderate tories suffered. It was this, as much as his political skills, that perhaps gave his place in the post-revolutionary government such importance. The church in danger was his rallying cry at all the high points in his career: in the 1670s, in 1688, and in the early 1690s. The second antipathy which he held throughout his career was towards France. He was hostile to the ambitions of Louis XIV throughout the 1670s and hostile to the threat posed by France after the revolution. Louis recognized as much by fostering the impeachment proceedings in 1678-9. It is thus ironic that Danby was perceived to have presided over the growth of popery and Francophile arbitrary government. In part this reflected a characteristic of both his ministries: his power was always rather illusory. Lacking great personal charm and unable to strike warm political relationships with MPs or monarchs, he tended to preside over, rather than direct, affairs. This figureheading pragmatism had its value, especially to Charles II but also to William, yet it left Danby vulnerable to events. Both in the 1670s and the 1690s he seems to have lacked control of the situation; and it is no coincidence that in both decades his undeveloped sense of foreign affairs left him at a disadvantage. Danby lacked foresight. He was a remarkable, manipulative, and clever man; but he was not an imaginative one. It seems totally plausible, as he later claimed, that he had not foreseen William's coup for the crown. Then, as so often, Danby's pride and egotism obscured his perspicuity. Where he did have vision, in trying to persuade Charles to adopt a resolutely protestant, anti-French policy, he failed to discern that the complicity demanded by the king inevitably destroyed his own credibility. In part this lack of imagination was because Danby was a conviction politician whose policies lay rooted in the prejudices and assumptions of a significant section of the nation. In articulating their opinions Danby was a formidable force. 


@@@@@


doc= 20885


Osborne, Thomas (bap. 1704?, d. 1767), bookseller, was the son of the London bookseller Thomas Osborne (died 1744), who had established a bookselling business in Gray's Inn; he was probably the Thomas Osborne baptized in St Andrew, Holborn, London, on 13 April 1704 to Thomas and Brilliana Osborne. He was admitted as a freeman of the Stationers' Company by patrimony on 2 July 1728 and was made a liveryman four days later. In June 1738 he bought the lease from Mary Gooding of the ground chambers, 1 and 2 Page's Buildings, Field Court, Gray's Inn, and he continued at this location until his death. His father, whose will was proved on 7 March 1744, left his stock and copyright to Thomas, as well as property in London: a house in Fulwood's Rents where Thomas lived; the father also owned other houses and the ferry at Chelsea. 
Just what the working relationship was between father and son is not clear, but in 1729 the first of a long series of trade catalogues was issued, presumably a practice begun by the younger Osborne. In 1854 Thomas Thorpe, the bookseller, offered for sale a collection of Osborne's catalogues from 1729 to 1768 in fifty-three volumes octavo. Only a fraction of the numerous catalogues issued by Osborne have survived, but it is evident that he purchased the libraries of the most eminent persons of the time. 
The most important collection that Osborne purchased and then issued a catalogue for was the Harleian Library, the sale of which provides valuable insights into his business practices. Robert Harley, first earl of Oxford, chancellor of the exchequer, then lord treasurer, and head of the tory ministry under Queen Anne, and his son Edward Harley, the second earl, were among the greatest of English collectors of books and manuscripts. The Harleian books were sold after the death of the second earl in 1741 for $13,000 to Osborne, who engaged Samuel Johnson and William Oldys, literary secretary to the earl from 1738 to 1741, to prepare a catalogue of the books to attract possible purchasers. Proposals for printing the first two volumes of the catalogue by subscription, dated 1 November 1742, were written by Johnson and his 'Account of the Harleian Library' also prefaced the first volume of the catalogue, published with the second volume on 28 February 1743 to puff the library. The first two volumes of the catalogue were sold by subscription for 10's'., half at the time of subscribing and half on the delivery of the two volumes. Osborne apparently anticipated that his marketing strategy for the library would create controversy; Johnson's 'Account', while giving a broad overview of the collection, is in large measure an apology for selling the catalogue. The haste with which Osborne had forced Johnson and Oldys to compile the catalogue meant that it was poorly organized in places and that many of the books did not receive commentary. Osborne attempted to forestall criticism by having Johnson write a notice for the beginning of the second volume admitting the shortcomings and promising a better performance in the future, a promise that would not be kept. These arguments were not accepted by everyone, and when issuing the third and fourth volumes of the catalogue on 4 January 1744 Osborne found it necessary to turn to Johnson again for a preface with further justification, not only for the price asked for the catalogue but for the prices of the books themselves. By this time the clamour was so loud that Osborne was forced to announce in the preface that he would either credit the price of the catalogue against the purchase of any of the books, or else refund it. At the same time it was announced that the annotations in the third and fourth volumes had been greatly reduced. A fifth volume of the catalogue appeared on 8 April 1745 but was 'nothing more than a catalogue of Osborne's old stock' (Hawkins, 133). 
One reason for the reduced annotations in volumes 3 and 4 of the catalogue is that Johnson and Oldys were now involved in another scheme to help Osborne recoup his investment in the Harleian Library: selecting pamphlets of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, largely on political and religious subjects, and annotating them for the 'Harleian Miscellany', which appeared in eight quarto volumes (1744-6). Again, Osborne asked Johnson to assist him by writing the proposals for printing the work by subscription and contributing an introduction on the importance of small tracts and fugitive pieces to the first number published 24 March 1744. 
About this time Osborne and Johnson had a confrontation. Sir John Hawkins, who knew Johnson at the time, recounts that Osborne was a sharp businessman, determined to get all of the work he could out of his employees, and ignorant of what scholarship entails. Johnson was poring over one of the pamphlets to decide whether it should be reprinted in the 'Miscellany' when Osborne began to abuse him roughly for wasting time: 'Johnson's anger at so foul a charge was not so great as to make him forget that he had a weapon at hand: he seized a folio that lay near him, and with it felled his adversary to the ground, with some exclamation, which, as it is differently related, I will not venture to repeat. (Hawkins, 150)' The altercation made such an impression on Johnson that he told the story, with slight variations, to several people including James Boswell and Hester Lynch Thrale. Johnson also remembered Osborne in his life of Alexander Pope, as 'a man entirely destitute of shame, without sense of any disgrace but that of poverty'. The shafts of Pope's satire were directed in vain against Osborne as they were 'deadened by his impassive dullness' (Johnson, 187). Pope had complained that Osborne had pretended to sell the subscription copies of the 'Iliad' at half price when in fact he had cut down the common folio copies to the size of the subscription quartos. As a result, when a revised version of 'The Dunciad' appeared in 1743, Pope substituted Osborne's name for that of Samuel Chapman in the urinating contest with Edmund Curll in book 2. 
Osborne's name appears in numerous imprints. 'The British Librarian', by Oldys, was published from January to June 1737 by Osborne. He was also involved in the publication of such large works as Robert James's 'Medicinal Dictionary' (1743-5) and Richard Rolt's 'A New Dictionary of Trade and Commerce' (1756). Between March 1754 and November 1763 he was active as a member of the Stationers' Company's court of assistants. But Osborne is primarily remembered for his great success in selling libraries. A 'catalogist', Nichols says, is one who 'distributes their Books at fixed prices, for ready money'; he continues: 'Among these Catalogists stands foremost Tom Osborne, who filled one side of Gray's-inn with his lumber, and, without knowing the intrinsic value of a single book, contrived such arbitrary prices as raised him to a country house and dog-and-duck huntings. (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 3.625)' Osborne was short and thick in stature, and generally spoke in a domineering manner to inferiors. 'In the latter part of his life his manners were considerably softened, particularly to the young booksellers who had occasion to frequent his shop in pursuit of their orders. If they were so fortunate as to call whilst he was taking wine after dinner, they were regularly called into the little parlour in Gray's Inn to take a glass with him. 'Young man,' he would say, 'I have been in business more than forty years, and am now worth more than 40,000'l'. Attend to your business, and you will be as rich as I am.' (Timperley, 716)' However, to assess Osborne's character properly is difficult. His undoubted success as a bookseller provoked an adverse reaction from other members of the trade who were eager to see his power and influence diminished. Most of the negative comments that have survived can be traced to Pope and Johnson. To be singled out by Pope is no distinction as the list of his satiric victims is extensive, while Johnson, whose lack of social skills is well documented, is a strange source for Osborne's failures in this regard although Boswell, Hawkins, Nichols, Piozzi, and other early biographers, William Cooke and William Shaw, all took their information from him. But Osborne was the bookseller for the Revd A. M. Toplady, who described him as a respectable man; Dibdin calls him 'the most celebrated bookseller of his day', and Timperley 'a bookseller of great eminence' (Dibdin, 334; Timperley, 716). 
Osborne died on 21 August 1767, and was buried at St Mary's, Islington. His will was made on 8 July and proved on 26 August 1767. His estate was divided among his widow, Mary, his brother-in-law William Smith, and his nephew, William Toll. His stock was sold in 1768-9. The London booksellers John Osborne ('c'.1688-1734) of Lombard Street and then of The Ship, Paternoster Row, in partnership with Thomas Longman were apparently not related to the Thomas Osbornes; nor, apparently, were John Osborn (died 1745) and his son John Osborn ('c'.1714-1775) of St Saviour's Dock and then (from 1733) of the Golden Ball, Paternoster Row. 


@@@@@


doc= 20886


Osborn, William (1736-1808), man-midwife, was born in London, and received his medical education at St George's Hospital, London. He practised for some years as a surgeon, and was elected man-midwife to the lying-in hospital in Store Street, London. On 10 October 1777 he obtained the degree of MD from St Andrews University and was admitted a licentiate in midwifery of the Royal College of Physicians on 22 December 1783. Osborn was one of only eight 'accoucheurs' to acquire this title, which was discontinued in 1800. With Thomas Denman, Osborn set up a private school of midwifery, and they taught together from about 1770 to 1782. Following a rift with Denman, Osborn lectured alone, and then with John Clarke (1761-1815). Together Denman and Osborn were believed to have educated more than 1200 practitioners in midwifery. In 1783 Osborn published 'An essay on laborious parturition: in which the division of the symphysis pubis is particularly considered'. Sigault and other Frenchmen had advocated the use of this operation, and in England William Hunter (1718-1783) had expressed a favourable opinion on it. Osborn thought it useless and dangerous. In this volume Osborn advocated the use of the crochet in cases where the pelvis was abnormally small, citing the case he had attended of Elizabeth Sherwood, who was 3 feet 6 inches tall, and unable to stand erect without a crutch. She became pregnant at the age of twenty-seven and was in labour for four days. Many well-known London 'accoucheurs' were called to the labour by Osborn, who delivered her after a long and complicated embryotomy. Elizabeth Sherwood survived. In 1792 Osborn published 'Essays on the Practice of Midwifery, in Natural and Difficult Labours', which was an expansion of his former book. He was strongly opposed to caesarean section. Osborn advocated the use of forceps, but with prudence, and in general supported non-intervention in midwifery. His preference for the forceps over the vectis led him into controversy with Denman in the 1780s, when Denman announced his conversion from the forceps to the vectis. This began a public debate which continued up to the late nineteenth century, when the forceps finally displaced the vectis. Osborn developed his own modification of the obstetric forceps, which was depicted in his 'Essays on the Practice of Midwifery'. A second edition of this, which is believed to have been surreptitious, appeared in 1795. Osborn attained considerable wealth, and died at his residence, at Old Park, near Dover, on 15 August 1808. 


@@@@@


doc= 20887


Osburh (fl. 839), consort of AEthelwulf, king of the West Saxons, married AEthelwulf (d. 858), who was son of Ecgberht, king of Wessex ('r'. 802-39), while he was sub-king of Kent (825-39). The marriage probably occurred well before 839, for, on AEthelwulf's succession to Wessex, their eldest son became sub-king of Kent, while their second son was attesting charters from 'c'.840. Osburh's father, Oslac, according to Asser, the late ninth-century biographer of her youngest son, Alfred (d. 899), was: 'King AEthelwulf's famous butler,... a Goth by nation, for he was sprung from Goths and Jutes, namely from the seed of Stuf and Wihtgar, two brothers who received control over the Isle of Wight from their uncle King Cerdic and Cynric his son. ('Life of Alfred', chap. 2)' This story identified the roots of Osburh's family, her Scandinavian ancestors, and also their relationship to the Cerdicings. Osburh, as far as is known, was the mother of all AEthelwulf's offspring: a daughter, AEthelswith, and five sons: AEthelstan, who seems to have died 'c'.851, and AEthelbald (d. 860), AEthelberht (d. 865), AEthelred (d. 871), and Alfred, all four of whom were successively kings of Wessex. That Alfred bequeathed two of his three daughters (perhaps only a life-interest in) estates in the Isle of Wight may lend some colour to the story of Osburh's ancestral Wight-ish connections. 
Osburh is not mentioned in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'. No charter attestations of hers are known, though an 'Osric 'princeps'', perhaps her brother, attested from the 840s to 860. According to the contemporary Frankish annals of St Bertin, s.a. 856, it was 'not customary for the West Saxon king or his people to confer [on the king's wife] the title of queen'. In 856, when AEthelwulf married the Carolingian princess Judith, and broke with custom by naming her queen, Osburh may already have been dead, or else she was repudiated. 
Asser, apparently relying on Alfred's reminiscences, says '[Osburh was] an extremely pious woman, noble in character and by birth'. She is best known through Asser's story about the book of 'Saxon songs' ('carmina Saxonica') which 'she showed to Alfred and his brothers, saying: 'I shall give this book to whichever one of you can learn [that is, memorize] it the fastest''; and when Alfred: 'attracted by the beauty of the book's initial letter,... asked, 'Will you really give this book to the one of us who can understand it the soonest and recite it to you?', she smiled with pleasure and, reassuring him, said, 'Yes, I will'. ('Life of Alfred', chap. 23)' Asser's point was to highlight the special qualities of Osburh's youngest son, Alfred, who learned and recited the book first and presumably won the prize, and whose enthusiasm for 'Saxon songs', and for translations into the vernacular, was later to characterize his reign. The story finds a wider context in ninth-century manuscript evidence for the interest of high-status women in books, and for their role in educating their children. 


@@@@@


doc= 20888


Osgar (d. 984), abbot of Abingdon, was one of the clerks who left Dunstan's community at Glastonbury to go with AEthelwold when he was appointed abbot of Abingdon, 'c'.954. He was sent by AEthelwold to Fleury on the Loire to learn the Benedictine rule, and returned with a written account of it. When AEthelwold became bishop of Winchester in 963, he appointed Osgar his successor in the abbacy of Abingdon. Osgar was present at the expulsion of secular canons from Winchester, and made a speech on that occasion recorded by Wulfstan in his life of St AEthelwold. In a letter from Fleury, written partly in cipher, an abbot is blamed for not returning a copy of Florus's commentary on St Paul's epistles; the name 'Oscarus' fits the cipher, and the borrower is no doubt identical with the abbot of Abingdon. Osgar purchased and obtained large tracts of land for his monastery and his name is appended to a number of genuine charters of the years 967-74. He died at Abingdon in 984, having finished the buildings begun there by his mentor AEthelwold. 


@@@@@


doc= 20889


Osgodby, Adam (d. 1316), administrator, came from Osgodby, near Selby in Yorkshire. Although his early career remains obscure, he is known to have acted as attorney for Stephen Mauley in 1286 and 1291, and for William Acon and Walter Percehaye during that period. From 1295 to 1316 he was keeper of the rolls of chancery, and probably owed his place in government to Edward I's long-serving clerk and sometime chancellor, William Hamilton (died 1307). He was also closely associated with Robert Bardelby and the Airmyn brothers, especially William (died 1336). From 1307 Osgodby was keeper of the Domus Conversorum, a house for converted Jews situated in Chancery Lane, which was customarily used to deposit chancery records and became a natural residence for chancery clerks visiting London. From 1310, while Walter Reynolds (died 1327) was chancellor, Osgodby kept the household of the chancery, normally the chancellor's duty and right, and consequently received the usual yearly fee of $500. He was always the first named of those clerks temporarily having custody of the great seal, a task with which he was charged in 1302 (from 23 to 30 September and from 30 October), 1310 (from May to July), and 1311 (from 27 August to 28 September). In the five or so years before his death he was sometimes in charge of the seal for more lengthy periods, from December 1311 to before 5 October 1312; from 17 to 22 April and from 13 June to 16 July 1313; from 31 March until 26 September 1314; and on two occasions in 1315 (2 June and from 14 to 25 November). 
Osgodby probably also owed his early ecclesiastical advancement to Hamilton. He was a canon of York from 1289, and in 1293 he was installed as parson of Gargrave. In December 1300 he was granted free warren in all the demesne lands of his prebend of Ulfshelf in Yorkshire and in March 1303 he had wardship of the manor of Drax in the same county by demise of the executors of Edmund, earl of Cornwall (died 1300). He continued to hold Drax for at least another seven years, since the heir of Philip Paynell was still a minor. In May 1306 he was appointed with Robert Bardelby, a fellow canon and chancery employee, as a proctor for the archbishop of York to attend the king's council. In September 1310 he voted at the election of the new dean of York, Master William Pickering. In 1311 Osgodby was inducted to the church of Bubwith, Yorkshire, on the presentation of Lady Isabella de Vescy, although there was some dispute about her right in this. He also held the prebend of Burford in Shropshire. 
Osgodby was no stranger to litigation. An inquest held on 23 August 1304 found that he and his servants were hindered by Hugh Skilhare and others in the field of Winterburn, north of Gargrave, from taking tithes of a yearly value of 100's'., which they later recovered in court Christian. In June 1308, as a mark of the special affection for his clerk and for good service to his father, Edward II issued letters to the pope and cardinals 'in as good and gracious a form as possible' in order to benefit Osgodby's business in the papal court. Three years later, following a judgment pronounced against them in the court of York, the abbot and convent of Selby appealed to the court of Rome concerning their case against Adam Osgodby. Although the abbot secured a mandate preventing the sheriff from exercising Osgodby's writ of 'capias' pending the business of the appeal, the latter was able to have the appeal declared null. In March 1314, at Osgodby's instance, the abbot and convent of Sawley (within whose patronage the living of Gargrave lay) received absolution from an eight-year sentence of excommunication, no doubt benefiting from the former's influence at court. Osgodby himself served in a judicial capacity, holding assizes in York in 1314. He received a further assize commission in September 1315. 
Osgodby died in August 1316. His brother, Walter, succeeded to his estate, and Henry Cliffe (died 1334), another chancery clerk, was executor of his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 20890


Osgod Clapa (d. 1054), landowner and exile, whose byname means 'a coarse, rough person', is usually assumed to be a Dane who followed King Cnut to England. He may, however, have been a descendant of Osgod, Eadulf's son, kinsman of Theodred, bishop of London (died 951), for he had an estate at Pakenham, Suffolk, where Osgod, Eadulf's son, also held land. He attests charters of Cnut and Harthacnut from 1026 to 1042, often in association with Tovi the Proud, and in the early 1040s he witnessed the will of Thurstan, Lustwine's son, as a member of the shire-court of Norfolk. The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' describes him as a staller ('ASC', s.a. 1046, text D) and Hermann of Bury calls him 'maior domus', which suggests that he held some official position in the king's household. His office may have been connected with London, the home base of the royal fleet. He had an estate at Lambeth and in the 1030s attested a writ of Cnut (of dubious authenticity) in favour of St Paul's, signing at the head of the lay witnesses below the rank of earl ('AS chart.', S 992). He is also addressed in a writ of Edward for Westminster Abbey, which (if genuine) must be dated 1044-6 ('AS chart.', S 1121), after the bishop of London but before the sheriff of Middlesex. 
In 1042 Osgod's daughter Gytha married Tovi the Proud, at Lambeth, which may have been her marriage portion, for Tovi gave land there to his church at Waltham, Essex. Osgod attests charters of Edward the Confessor between 1042 and 1046, but in 1046 he was exiled, for unspecified reasons. He fled to Flanders, where by 1049 he had gathered a fleet of ships at Wulpe, near Sluys. King Edward took this act seriously enough to dispatch a fleet against him, but Osgod, leaving his wife in safety at Bruges, ravaged around the Naze in Essex. Returning with their plunder, all but two (or four) of the ships were destroyed in a storm. John of Worcester claims that Osgod sought refuge in Denmark, but the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' merely records that he died 'suddenly, as he was lying in bed' in 1054 ('ASC', s.a. 1054, text C); whether this implies that he had returned to England is a matter of opinion. No children other than Gytha are recorded. Osgod's lands were confiscated by the king on his exile, Pakenham being given by Edward to Bury St Edmunds ('AS chart.', S 1074). He is commemorated in the 'Liber vitae' of Thorney Abbey, and he may be the Osgod entered, with his wife, AEthelswyth, in the 'Liber vitae' of the New Minster at Winchester. At Bury St Edmunds he was remembered in the first instance as a despoiler, though he had a change of heart; Hermann of Bury has a vivid (though perhaps imaginary) description of him, wearing his golden arm-rings and carrying a gilded axe slung from his shoulder. 


@@@@@


doc= 20891


Osgoode, William (1754-1824), judge in Canada, was born in March 1754 in London, the only son of William Osgood (died 1767), a Leeds hosier who left an estate of $20,000. Perhaps because of his father's acquaintance with John Wesley, William was sent to the Methodist school at Kingswood, near Bath, from which he went to Christ Church, Oxford (BA, 1772; MA, 1777). He entered Lincoln's Inn in 1773 and was called to the bar in November 1779, the year in which he published 'Remarks on the Law of Descent', a response to William Blackstone's 'Commentaries on the Laws of England'. Instead of practising as a barrister, Osgoode built a reputation as an accomplished draftsman in the courts of equity. In 1791, when Quebec was divided into two provinces, he secured appointment as chief justice of Upper Canada, with the promise of the same position in the senior colony of Lower Canada on the first vacancy. As an industrious administrator with tory and now Anglican sympathies, Osgoode enjoyed cordial relations with a like-minded lieutenant-governor, John Graves Simcoe, and leading British officials. Both an executive councillor and, as speaker of the legislative council, a manager of government business, Osgoode sought to adapt English civil law to the circumstances of an infant frontier colony. A controversial 'Judicature Act' of 1794 scaled down the district courts of common pleas and created a central court of king's bench. He left largely unaltered English criminal law as introduced by the proclamation of 1763. 
In 1794 Osgoode migrated to Quebec, where his career was less harmonious. He exchanged a loyalist province for an uncongenial French Catholic community at a time when Britain was at war with revolutionary France. Potential or imagined threats to the fragile social order and the colony's security, whether from invasion or subversion, alarmed Osgoode and a beleaguered English-speaking minority. In this fevered atmosphere the authorities enacted security legislation, enforced by an intelligence service and the active prosecution of rioters. Habeas corpus was suspended, and an elastic definition of sedition and treason, going far beyond British precedent, covered conspiracies hatched in an overseas territory and aimed at overturning the sovereignty of an absent king. In a show trial in 1797 an American undercover agent for revolutionary France, David McLane, was convicted and executed for high treason, a verdict guaranteed through proceedings manipulated by Osgoode and his fellow judges. In Lower Canada the judiciary was politicized, Osgoode himself combining the roles of chief justice, councillor, principal adviser to the governor, and head of political security. 
The garrison mentality evinced by the ruling elite also strained French-British relations. Osgoode denounced the French Canadiens as ignorant, disloyal democrats. He found incomprehensible the earlier official endorsement of cultural toleration and argued that the security of British rule necessitated a vigorous policy of Anglicization. This stance exacerbated his fractious dealings with the experienced, masterful governor, Lord Dorchester, who had since the 1770s worked for ethnic accommodation. After a harmonious interlude in 1796-7, Osgoode also fell foul of Dorchester's successor, the irascible General Robert Prescott, by engineering opposition among councillors to the governor's regulations for accelerating settlement of the Eastern townships, adjacent to the American border, and curtailing land speculation. The governor accused his chief justice of being in league with speculators, a plausible charge since Osgoode acquired almost 12,000 acres. In 1799 Prescott was recalled following protests to London orchestrated by Osgoode. His bickering with Robert Shore Milnes, who arrived that year as lieutenant-governor, prompted him to resign in return for an $800 pension, and he left Quebec in 1801. In London, still concerned about Canadian affairs, Osgoode advised the Colonial Office in 1822 on the drafting of an abortive bill to reunite the Canadas. With an abiding interest in procedural reform, he served on two royal commissions on the courts of law which eventually led in 1832 to the 'Uniformity of Process Act'. He died, unmarried, at the Albany, London, on 17 January 1824. Osgoode Hall, first built in York (Toronto) in 1829-32 as headquarters of the Law Society of Upper Canada, and now a law school associated with York University, was named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 20892


O'Shanassy, Sir John (1818-1883), politician in Australia, was born at Ballinahow, near Thurles, co. Tipperary, Ireland, the son of John O'Shanassy, a surveyor, and his wife, Margaret Dwyer. After his father died in 1831 he left school and was apprenticed to a Tipperary draper and wine and spirits merchant. In 1839 he married Margaret McDonnell (died 1887) of Thurles, and in July of that year the couple sailed for New South Wales, encouraged by a relative who had previously gone to Sydney. Their vessel called at Melbourne in the new settlement at Port Phillip. O'Shanassy was persuaded not to travel further and bought a small property, Windriet, near Western Port. The venture failed and in 1845 he commenced a more successful career as a draper in Melbourne. In 1849 he was able to buy cheaply some crown land in inner North Melbourne, which soon became very valuable. 
An intelligent, outspoken man, with a deceptive facade of popular radicalism in these early years which belied his true conservatism, O'Shanassy quickly gained public prominence. From 1845 to 1851 he was president of the St Patrick's Society, founded in 1842 to 'preserve in this colony' the memory of Ireland. In 1846 he briefly held a seat on the Melbourne council, and in the late years of the decade he was involved in opposition to the transportation of convicts to Port Phillip and in the campaign for separation of Port Phillip from New South Wales. 
Upon separation in 1851 O'Shanassy was elected to the first Victoria legislative council and became effective leader of the opposition to the conservative official, nominee, and squatting members who dominated the council. In 1852 he was a member of the select committee on the goldfields, in 1853-4 of the committee which drew up the new Victoria constitution, and in November 1854 of another commission on goldfields. This last commission became more important following the Eureka rebellion of December 1854, and its major recommendations included the miners' right and provision for immediate miner representation on the legislative council. 
O'Shanassy's business activities widened and prospered. He promoted building societies and was chairman of the Colonial Bank of Australasia from its formation in 1855 until 1870. He built a mansion, Tara, on a 16 acre property in the then outer suburb of Camberwell. He was the leading lay Roman Catholic in the colony, and one of the first trustees of the public library. 
At the first elections under the new constitution in September 1856, O'Shanassy was elected to represent Kilmore, which he held until December 1865. He was a major figure in the unstable, faction-ridden early years of the Victoria parliament. He briefly held power from 11 March 1857 to 24 April 1857 and from 10 March 1858 to 27 October 1859, and more extensively and successfully in the second parliament, from 14 November 1861 to 27 June 1863. In these years he drifted towards more conservative positions on many issues, including free trade. He was greatly concerned to promote Catholic interests in matters such as state aid for religion and denominational education. His third government was notable for two pieces of legislation, the 1862 'Common Schools Act' and the 1862 'Crown Lands Act', which was promoted by his lands minister and fellow Catholic, Charles Gavan Duffy. 
Upon losing office for the third time O'Shanassy became part of the minority opposition to the McCulloch government, defending free trade and the powers of the legislative council during the early stage of the constitutional crises of the mid-1860s. He retired from parliament in December 1865 and left in May 1866 to travel to Europe, visiting Ireland and England, and Rome, where he was appointed a knight of the order of St Gregory for his services to Catholic education. He arrived back in Melbourne in July 1867. 
By now O'Shanassy had begun acquiring significant pastoral interests in New South Wales and Queensland and was largely allied with those who had previously been his political enemies. Significantly, he became a member of the legislative council, having been elected in May 1868 for Central Province, a seat he held until April 1874. He was now at odds with Duffy, whose government of 1871-2 he strongly opposed and whose defeat ironically paved the way for the 1872 'Education Act', which abolished state aid to church schools and introduced secular education to government schools, both anathema to O'Shanassy. 
After another visit to Europe in 1874, in 1875 O'Shanassy chaired a royal commission on the volunteer forces. He twice tried unsuccessfully to re-enter the assembly before being elected for Belfast in May 1877. In parliament he focused on the fight to reintroduce state aid, and with a small group of followers with whom he held the balance of power contributed to a new period of political instability from 1878 to 1882. He lost his seat at the elections of March 1883. 
O'Shanassy was created CMG in 1870 and KCMG in 1878. He died on 5 May 1883 at Camberwell, Victoria, survived by his wife, two of his three sons, and his three daughters. He was buried on 6 May at Hawthorn, Victoria. Ambitious and egocentric, he was none the less vigorous in promoting economic development and the interests of his church. 


@@@@@


doc= 20893


O'Shaughnessy, Arthur William Edgar (1844-1881), poet, was born at 46 Pembroke Square, London, on 14 March 1844, the son of Oscar William O'Shaughnessy, a painter of animal pictures who died of consumption in 1848, and his wife, Louisa Anne Deacon (1813-1896), a schoolteacher. Arthur and his younger brother, Oscar, grew up in Kensington, where the family lived together with Louisa's eldest sister, Caroline. The boys were educated privately. 
In June 1861 Arthur O'Shaughnessy was appointed a transcriber in the department of printed books in the library of the British Museum, and in August 1863 he was promoted to an assistantship in the zoological department. Both positions, it seems, were attained partly through the patronage of Edward Bulwer-Lytton, a Conservative MP. The transfer gave great offence to naturalists and was condemned by a resolution passed at a meeting of the Zoological Society. O'Shaughnessy knew very little about natural history; in 1870 he narrowly escaped being sacked for his consistently bad work, but Bulwer-Lytton's intervention saved him. Thereafter, he became such a good authority on herpetology (the study of reptiles) that he was made responsible for that section of the annual zoological record. His death in 1881 was deplored as a loss to science by Dr Albert Gunther, the head of the museum department to which O'Shaughnessy belonged. 
Also in 1870, O'Shaughnessy published, to acclaim, his 'Epic of Women and other Poems', illustrated by his friend J. T. Nettleship. 'Lays of France', which appeared two years later, was chiefly adapted from the poems of the twelfth-century poet Marie de France. His work was heavily influenced by French romanticism and, fluent in the language, he spent most of his holidays in Paris. 
In 1873 O'Shaughnessy's protector, Bulwer-Lytton, died. Finding him in tears at work, and remembering visits to Bulwer-Lytton by a very well-dressed woman who always wore a veil, O'Shaughnessy's friend Edmund Gosse, then a transcriber, leapt to the conclusion that Bulwer-Lytton was O'Shaughnessy's natural father. In fact, Bulwer-Lytton's interest in the young man arose from his relationship with O'Shaughnessy's aunt Laura, as, after his separation from Rosina Bulwer-Lytton, he and Laura were married in all but name. Nevertheless, the rumour was not laid to rest until after the deaths of all concerned. 
O'Shaughnessy married Eleanor Kyme Marston, daughter of the playwright John Westland Marston (1819-1890), on 26 June 1873. He published 'Music and Moonlight' (1874) to lukewarm reviews, and then he and his wife wrote a book of tales for children: 'Toyland' (1875). Their first child, Westland Kyme, was born 31 July 1874 but died two months later; a second son also died in infancy. On 8 February 1879 Eleanor herself died, of cirrhosis of the liver, and her husband deplored her death in an elegy of great beauty. He was working as the English correspondent of 'Le Livre', and planning to remarry, when, after a few days' illness, he died of a lung infection at his London home, 163 Golbourne Road, Notting Hill, on 30 January 1881. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery in London on 3 February. 
O'Shaughnessy's posthumously published poems, 'Songs of a Worker' (1881), were, apart from a few poems on sculpture, criticized as repetitious. His contemporaries tended to agree that his reputation suffered from a lack of editorial rigour in selection. In general, though, his musicality was praised, but not his intelligence or imagination. His most lasting poem, set to music by Edward Elgar, is probably the 'Ode' from 'Music and Moonlight', which begins: '
We are the music makers 

And we are the dreamers of dreams. 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 20894


O'Shaughnessy, William (1674-1744), army officer in the French service, son of Roger O'Shaughnessy (died 1690) and his wife, Helen, daughter of Conor MacDonogh O'Brien of Ballynee, co. Meath, was born in Gort, co. Galway, Ireland, and on the death of his father in July 1690 he became the head of the O'Shaughnessys of Gort. In 1689, aged fifteen, he became captain of foot and afterwards acting colonel in James II's army. He went to France early in 1690 with the regiment of the Irish brigade commanded by Daniel O'Brien, afterwards third Viscount Clare, in which he was appointed captain by Louis XIV on 10 July 1691. He served in Italy in 1692 and was present at the battle of Marsaglia, in Piedmont, in 1693. In 1696 he witnessed the close of the operations at the back of the Alps by the siege of Valenza, where he became commandant of the 3rd battalion of his regiment, and he was appointed to the army of the Meuse. 
When the 2nd and 3rd battalions of Clare were re-formed in 1698 O'Shaughnessy was appointed captain of the grenadiers of the battalion which was maintained from 1 April 1698. With his regiment, one of the most famous of the Irish brigade, he served in Germany in the campaigns of 1701-02; he was present at the reduction of Kehl and the first battle of Hochstedt in 1703, and at Blenheim the year after. In 1705 he served with the army of the Moselle. In 1706 he fought at Ramillies, and became major of Clare on 4 July, upon the death of Major John O Carroll, and lieutenant-colonel on 12 September. He served with his regiment in Flanders in 1707, at Oudenarde in 1708, at Malplaquet in 1709, and at the defence of the lines of Arleux, Denain, Douai, Bouchain, and Quesnoy in 1710-12. Subsequently he served in the campaigns in Germany, including the sieges of Landau and Freiberg. He became a brigadier-general on 3 April 1721 and was employed with the army of the Rhine in 1733 and in the campaigns of 1734-5, when he attained the rank of major-general ('marechal de camp') on 1 August 1734. He later served with the army in Flanders in 1742, and was in command at Cambray during the campaign of 1743. On 1 November of that year he was appointed to the command at Gravelines, where he died on 2 January 1744, aged seventy, the oldest Irish major-general in French service. 


@@@@@


doc= 20895


Brooke, Sir William O'Shaughnessy (1808-1889), doctor and promoter of telegraphy in India, was born William O'Shaughnessy at Limerick in October 1808, the son of Daniel S. O'Shaughnessy of Limerick and his wife, Sara, 'nee' Boswell. His uncle was dean of Ennis and his great-uncle Roman Catholic bishop of Killaloe. 
O'Shaughnessy graduated MD from Edinburgh University in 1829. In 1831, at the request of the Royal College of Surgeons, London, he made a study of blood samples from cholera patients in Newcastle upon Tyne, concluding that patients in the early stages of cholera should be given copious amounts of tepid water infused with neutral salts. In 1830 and 1831 he also published a series of reviews on the detection of poisons in 'The Lancet' and a translation of Lugol's 'Essay on the Effects of Iodine in Scrofulous Diseases'. It was probably around this time that he married his first wife, Isabella (1805/6-1834); they had at least one child. In August 1833 he joined the Bengal army as an assistant surgeon and shortly after arriving in India was appointed professor of chemistry and medicine at the Calcutta medical college. For a time he was also employed as first assistant in the government's opium factory at Bihar and as physician to Sir Charles Metcalfe. 
O'Shaughnessy was a creative and imaginative scientist. In 1837, when it was widely held that India's terrain and climate would defeat electric systems of communication, he laid 30 miles of wire at his own expense to prove that the telegraph would work there. He published his results in the journal of the Asiatic Society, but, at the time, was unable to arouse any official enthusiasm in his experiments. In 1841, in connection with his duties at the medical college, he published a 'Manual of Chemistry' designed to put the latest European practice and laboratory techniques within financial reach of Indian students. He followed this work with 'The Bengal Dispensatory' (1842) and 'The Bengal Pharmacopoeia' (1844), and by 1843 was sufficiently respected by his peers to be elected a fellow of the Royal Society. In the same year he obtained a position in the refinery of the Calcutta mint and while there devised a new, more economical means of parting and refining gold coin. Unhappily, however, the coveted job of assay master eluded him and by 1849 he was desperate for more lucrative employment. His first wife, Isabella, had died at Calcutta on 30 August 1834, but he had remarried in the following year; his new wife was Margaret, daughter of Francis O'Shaughnessy of Curragh, co. Clare, and by 1849 was father to a large and expensive family. 
Aware of Lord Dalhousie's keenness to establish the telegraph in India, O'Shaughnessy asked his principal patron, H. H. Wilson, to bring his 1837 experiments to the attention of the court of directors. Dalhousie leapt at the offer of O'Shaughnessy's experience and in March 1850 authorized him to proceed with an experimental line. In 1852 he succeeded in establishing communication between Calcutta and Diamond Harbour, 80 miles distant, whereupon Dalhousie sent him to London to win the court of directors' approval for an all-India network. Upon his return, Dalhousie appointed him superintendent of electric telegraphs. Work commenced in November 1853. In spite of the lack of trained staff (because of manpower shortages, O'Shaughnessy was forbidden from hiring covenanted civil servants or soldiers), the first telegram from Agra reached Calcutta, 800 miles away, on 24 March 1854. By the following February, Calcutta was linked to Agra, Bombay, Madras, and Attock on the north-west frontier, a remarkable technological feat involving the laying of over 3050 miles of wiring through jungles, across deserts, and over unbridged rivers. Soon after, O'Shaughnessy was to hear both Indians and Britons acknowledge the telegraph as a key factor in Britain's victory over the rebels of 1857. 
In 1856 O'Shaughnessy was knighted and in 1859 promoted to surgeon-major. He retired to England in 1861, in which year he assumed by royal licence the additional surname of Brooke. He died at 4 Clarence Parade, Southsea, Portsea, Southampton, on 8 January 1889 and was survived by his third wife, Julia Greenly, daughter of Captain John Sabine of the 23rd Royal Welch Fusiliers. 


@@@@@


doc= 20896


Oshere (fl. c.680-c.693), the alleged founder of the see of Worcester in 679, whose charters begin in 680 and reach into the 690s. He is possibly the Oshere whose death is lamented by his sister Ecgburh in a letter which St Boniface received 'c'.717; she is conceivably the abbess called Eadburh in Gloucester sources, the successor of Cyneburh and widow of Wulfhere, king of Mercia (died 675). 
By 709 Oshere's four sons, AEthelheard, AEthelweard, AEthelberht, and 


@@@@@


doc= 20897


Oscytel (d. 971), archbishop of York, was at least partly Danish by origin, and belonged to a powerful Anglo-Danish landowning family in the east midlands. His name is Anglo-Scandinavian; one of his two identifiable kinsmen, Abbot Thurcytel of Bedford, had a Danish name, while the other, Oswald, bishop of Worcester (961-92) and archbishop of York (971-92), was a nephew of Archbishop Oda of Canterbury (942-58), whose father, a Dane, had come to England in the 'micel here' (great army) of 865. Oscytel, Thurcytel, and Oswald all owned land in the east midlands and the fens, and Oda was also influential there. Oscytel owned land at Beeby, Leicestershire, which he granted on his deathbed to AEthelwold, bishop of Winchester, probably to endow Ely; AEthelwold later gave it to Oscytel's kinsman Thurcytel in exchange for land at Doddington and 'Waeremere'. It can be presumed that Oscytel, as has been argued in the case of his kinsman Oswald, owed his promotion to the episcopate to the backing of his powerful family network and not to the patronage of courtiers. In the middle of the tenth century the Wessex dynasty, still uninfluential in the east midlands, would have found it advantageous to establish good relations with a powerful local family of partly Danish origin. 
Oscytel's date of birth is not known, though it is unlikely to have been later than 'c'.920; likewise nothing is known of his education or his early career in the church, though an 'Oscetel circweard' (sacrist or treasurer), who may perhaps be identifiable with him, occurs in a witness list of 949; the church where he was a dignitary is not stated. By 951 Oscytel was bishop of Dorchester, a diocese corresponding to the early Anglo-Saxon see of Leicester, and probably, in Oscytel's day, extending over the newly formed shires of Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire, Bedfordshire, Cambridgeshire, Huntingdonshire, Northamptonshire, Leicestershire, and, almost certainly (though this has never before been acknowledged), Nottinghamshire; the see of Lindsey, later to be added to Dorchester, was a separate entity in Oscytel's lifetime. His predecessor, AEthelwald, occurs for the last time in 949, and the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' (texts B, C, s. a. 971) says that Oscytel had been bishop for twenty-two years by the time of his death in 971. This entry also states that he was made archbishop of York in the time of Eadred (died 955), which would be chronologically impossible as Archbishop Wulfstan of York did not die until 26 December 956, but which might be a garbled reference to his original consecration as bishop of Dorchester, which is mentioned immediately beforehand. 
Oscytel first occurs as bishop subscribing charters in 951, though he only did so frequently from 955. King Eadred, who died at the end of that year, bequeathed $400 to him and gave him a third share of 2000 gold mancuses to distribute within his diocese. During 956 and 957 Oscytel's name can be found in the subscription lists to the overwhelming majority of King Eadwig's charters, but from 958 he is to be found subscribing Edgar's. This change in allegiance followed Edgar's assumption of kingship in Mercia and Northumbria in 957, though probably not immediately. Both Eadwig and Edgar gave Oscytel estates in Nottinghamshire, Eadwig granting him Southwell in 956 and Edgar granting him Sutton in 958. Eadwig's charter, though dated 958, has the correct indiction for 956 and is subscribed by Edgar as Eadwig's brother, not as king. The text of the charter describes Oscytel as bishop, but he appears in the subscription list as archbishop: perhaps the date and the subscription list were altered at York subsequently. Edgar's charter is dated 958 and describes Oscytel as bishop. It is likely that both grants were made to Oscytel as bishop of Dorchester to strengthen his position in the extreme north of his diocese, and that it was only subsequently that Oscytel transferred them to the estates of the archbishopric of York -- a move which evidently led to Nottinghamshire becoming part of the archdiocese of York, a change in diocesan boundaries which is described nowhere in contemporary sources but which can easily be assumed to have happened as a result of Oscytel's pluralism. He may well have been responsible for establishing (or refounding on a larger scale) the church of Southwell as a powerful minster community, to provide him with a point from which he and later archbishops of York could spread their influence in Nottinghamshire. 
Oscytel became archbishop of York perhaps as late as the end of 958 or in 959, since he witnessed no genuine charters as archbishop earlier than 959. It has usually hitherto been assumed that he succeeded his predecessor Wulfstan immediately after the latter's death, but there may well have been a vacancy while Edgar tried to secure his political authority in the north. The Ramsey chronicle states that Oscytel went to Rome to collect his pallium, but no other source records this and the Ramsey chronicler may have assumed that he did so because his younger kinsman and eventual successor at York, Oswald, subsequently did. Oscytel probably retained control of the see of Dorchester even after his promotion to York, for the 'Liber Eliensis' refers to him simply as bishop when describing him bequeathing his land at Beeby to Bishop AEthelwold of Winchester. It also shows him acting as bishop of Dorchester in a dispute concerning stolen charters for Horningsea in Cambridgeshire which erupted in Edgar's reign, possibly after 959. Oscytel's pluralism was uncanonical, but politically expedient both for himself, since he must have wanted to maintain his ties with the area where his family was powerful, and for Edgar, who wanted to ensure that no archbishop of York would be tempted to follow Wulfstan's example in defying West Saxon claims to hegemony in the north. Oscytel was certainly loyal to Edgar and witnessed many of his charters. He was also loyal to his own family. In 958 when Oswald returned to England to join Oda's household, only to learn of the latter's death, Oscytel welcomed him and recommended him to his friends, especially Dunstan. Moreover, it is likely that he gave at least moral support to Oswald in his foundation of Ramsey Abbey, and just possibly to Thurcytel in his refoundation of Crowland. His bequest to AEthelwold, which was doubtless intended for the latter's abbey at Ely, suggests that irrespective of family considerations he was generally in favour of the new monastic establishments in the fens, all lying in his diocese of Dorchester. Oscytel died on 31 October 971 at Thame, a manor of the bishops of Dorchester, and his body was taken to Bedford for burial by his kinsman Thurcytel, who was abbot there. He was succeeded at York by Edwald, who, however, resigned shortly afterwards, leaving the coast clear for Oswald, while Leofwine, bishop of Lindsey, took over the diocese of Dorchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 20898


Oslac (fl. 963-975), magnate, is of unknown antecedents, but his name could be an Anglicized version of Old Norse Aslakr and it has been conjectured that he came from the eastern Danelaw; his son Thored was living in Cambridgeshire in the time of King Edgar. According to the chronicle attributed to John of Wallingford (a much later text of uncertain authority), the decision to divide Northumbria into two earldoms north and south of the River Tees was taken at a council held by King Edgar at York, on the death of Earl Osulf of Bamburgh. The reason given was the king's unwillingness to let the whole area come to be regarded as any one person's inheritance, 'lest this stir up discord due to the wishes of the Northumbrians to have their ancient liberties restored' (Vaughan, 54). The southern earldom, comprising the area from the Humber to the Tees (the old kingdom of Deira and the later county of York, with its three ridings) was given to Oslac. 
Oslac first witnessed as earl three royal charters issued in 963, all relating to the northern Danelaw. Initially he seems to have been of only local importance and he was not in regular attendance at King Edgar's court. The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' (text D) says he was appointed as earl in 966, but the date is almost certainly mistaken. Apart from a group of three doubtful Abingdon charters which claim to be dated 965, Oslac does not witness surviving royal diplomas again until 968, but from that year onwards he became much more prominent nationally and witnessed many of Edgar's charters. John of Wallingford says that together with AElfsige, bishop of Chester-le-Street, Oslac escorted Kenneth, king of the Scots, to King Edgar's court to receive the cession of Lothian. Roger of Wendover, however, names Earl Eadwulf of Bernicia in the place of Oslac when recording this event, the exact date of which is unknown. Wendover's account is to be preferred, but both earls may have been present on this historic occasion. From 971 until 975, only four ealdormen witness royal charters consistently: AElfhere of Mercia, AEthelwine of East Anglia, Brihtnoth of Essex, and Oslac of southern Northumbria. All must have held power over wide territories; between them they were entrusted with the distribution of King Edgar's fourth law code over the whole of England. An entry dated 975 in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' (text D) records that 'the famous earl' Oslac was banished from England. The B text of the chronicle (also in texts A and C) suggests that the banishment was due to the activity of the anti-monastic party after King Edgar's death. The entry concludes: 'The valiant man Oslac was driven from the country, over the tossing waves, the gannet's bath, the homeland of the whale; a grey-haired man, wise and skilled in speech, he was bereft of his lands' ('ASC', s.a. 975, texts A, B, C). 


@@@@@


doc= 20899


Osler, Edward (1798-1863), newspaper editor and writer, born at Falmouth, Cornwall, on 30 January 1798, was the eldest son of Edward Osler (died 1832) and his wife, Mary, daughter of Edward Paddy, master of a packet at Falmouth. She died in April 1864, aged ninety-one. Their son's early education was conducted by a Baptist minister, and as Osler was intended for the medical profession he was apprenticed to Carvosso, a surgeon at Falmouth, and trained at Guy's Hospital, subsequently qualifying in 1818 as MRCS. From about 1819 to 1825 he held the appointment of resident house surgeon at the Swansea Infirmary, and was also surgeon to the Swansea house of industry. At Swansea parish church, in February 1821, he married Jennette Powell, the daughter of a local architect. She died at Swansea about 1828, leaving a daughter and a son. During his residence in Swansea Osler became a great friend of Lewis Weston Dillwyn, and consequently enjoyed the advantage of a scientific library. Through his friend Osler was able to send two valuable papers on marine biology to the 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1826 and 1832. He was duly elected a fellow of the Linnean Society. 
Osler became a surgeon in the navy and visited the West Indies, writing during the passage and his term of duty there the poem 'The Voyage', published in 1830, as well as some papers on natural history. Although raised as a dissenter, Osler became a member of the Church of England, and on his return to England became associated with Prebendary William John Hall, editor of the 'Christian Remembrancer', in the production of 'Psalms and Hymns Adapted to the Services of the Church of England' (1836), generally known in its later issues as the 'Mitre Hymn-Book'. He contributed to this collection fifteen versions of the 'Psalms' and fifty hymns, some of both sections being adapted from previous authors. He also published various other works on ecclesiastical subjects, and these were consolidated in 'Church and King', published in periodical form in 1836-7. 
About this period in his life Osler was on the staff in London and Bath of the Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge, but was also taking a deep interest in secular matters. His most important publication, the 'Life of Admiral Viscount Exmouth', came out in 1835, and he drew up a small treatise, the 'Administration and improvement of the poor laws', which was published by the poor-law commission as an appendix to its report. 
In 1837 Osler married, at Gluvias, Cornwall, his second wife, Sarah Atkinson of Leeds, and a few years later, about 1841, he was called to Truro in Cornwall as editor of the 'Royal Cornwall Gazette', the leading Conservative journal in the county, and remained in that position until his death. Several articles contributed by him to its columns, such as the 'Packet question: Falmouth or Southampton' and 'History of the Cornwall Railway', were reissued in a separate form. Osler's second wife died at Truro on 31 January 1842, aged thirty-seven, leaving four children. His third wife was Charlotte Free, niece and adopted daughter of Captain Brilton of Stralton Place, Falmouth. Her death occurred at Truro on 19 January 1868; she left no children. Osler died at the Parade, Truro, on 7 March 1863, and was buried at Kenwyn. One of the smaller painted-glass windows in the chancel of that church was erected by his friends to his memory. He was survived by a son and two daughters from his second marriage, his other three children having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 20900


Osmund (fl. 765-770x72), who made grants of land at Ferring in 765, at Henfield in 770, and at Peppering near Amberley probably between 770 and 772 (S 48, 49, 44); all these places are within 20 miles of each other, and provide some indication of the areas which Osmund controlled. None of Osmund's charters is attested by another king. By contrast, a charter (S 50) in the name of a King 


@@@@@


doc= 20901


Osmund (d. 805x11), bishop of London, succeeded Bishop Heathoberht, who died in 801, and was probably consecrated by Archbishop AEthelheard on his return from Rome in 802 or 803. He attended the council of 'Clofesho' in October 803, where he subscribed acts concerning the rights of the sees of Worcester and Canterbury and an ordinance against the appointment of laymen as heads of monasteries, and was attended by an abbot, three priests, and one other. He was also present at a synod held at 'Acleah' in August 805. His successor, AEthelnoth, appears as bishop in 811. 


@@@@@


doc= 20902


Osmund (d. 1099), bishop of Salisbury, canonized in 1457, was the founder of a community of canons at the newly established see of Salisbury, and, after his death, came to be regarded as the founder also of the widely influential Salisbury liturgy, the use of Sarum. 
Almost nothing is known of Osmund's family, date of birth, place of origin, or education, although it is generally assumed that he was of continental birth and came to England after the conquest. An 'avunculus', Arestaldus, was included in the names listed for commemoration in the martyrology that John Leland saw at Salisbury on the eve of the Reformation. Fifteenth-century tradition claimed that Osmund was William I's nephew, the son of an otherwise unrecorded sister; she and her husband are named variously as either Isabella and Henry, count of Seez (Jones and Macray, 373), or Margaret and Lucillus (Oxford, Jesus College, MS 114, fol. 27'v'). No support for such claims can be found in earlier sources; the bull of canonization of 1 January 1457 refers in less specific terms to Osmund as 'stirpe regia, ac etiam ducali nobilissima ortus prosapia' ('Of royal lineage, and indeed born into the most noble ducal family)' Malden, 227). 
Before his elevation to the episcopate, Osmund was one of William I's chaplains, and from 1070 until 1078 was royal chancellor. His term as chancellor is important for the virtual abandonment of the use of the vernacular for royal writs, and the adoption of Latin as the usual language for royal executive and administrative instruments. Although relinquishing the post on becoming bishop of Salisbury in 1078, Osmund continued to be involved in royal administration during the reigns of both William I and William II. On 1 December 1088, for example, he summoned the disgraced William of St Calais, then awaiting permission to begin his exile, to attend the king's court that Christmas at London. He also allowed the scribal resources available to him as bishop of Salisbury to be drawn upon for secular administrative purposes: scribes who participated in the production of books for the community at Salisbury were also involved in copying geld accounts for the south-west, datable to 1086, and parts of the 'Exon Domesday', the draft return for the south-western circuit of the Domesday inquiry. Although no explicit evidence survives of Osmund's participation in the Domesday Survey, his previous experience as royal chancellor, and the known involvement of Salisbury scribes, make it highly probable that he too was involved, perhaps as a circuit commissioner. 
Osmund's bishopric of Salisbury comprised the recently united sees of Sherborne and Ramsbury (Dorset, Wiltshire, and Berkshire). In 1075 his predecessor, Hermann, had been granted permission to move the see to Old Sarum, an episcopal manor and the site of a royal castle close to the present city of Salisbury, but he had been able to do little more than initiate the building of a cathedral, before dying on 20 February 1078. Osmund, therefore, came to be viewed as the true founder of the cathedral and its chapter. He introduced a community of canons, probably in 1089, and, in his foundation charter of 1091, granted an endowment comprising a substantial proportion of the episcopal lands. The cathedral, built just outside the inner fortifications of the royal castle, was completed in 1092, and was dedicated on 5 April 1092. 
Rather less is known than used to be thought about the character of the community that Osmund established. The so-called 'Institutio Osmundi', purporting to date from 1091, which describes a secular cathedral chapter with a hierarchy of dignitaries and canons holding territorial prebends, and which appeared to establish a blueprint followed by other non-monastic cathedral chapters in England, has been demonstrated to have been a later compilation, begun in the mid-twelfth century and subsequently revised and elaborated. In his foundation charter, Osmund mentioned neither dignitaries nor prebends, but stated merely that he had made his grant to the canons 'illis viventibus canonice' ('to those living canonically'; Greenway, 98). Although neither here nor elsewhere did Osmund spell out what he meant by 'living canonically', the early community appears to have had a less hierarchical structure, and to have led a more fully common life, than became the norm for secular cathedral chapters, including Salisbury, during the twelfth century. Evidence of communal activity is provided by the large number of manuscript books produced at Salisbury during the late eleventh century, the work of numerous scribes, often working in close collaboration. Some of these scribes may well have been canons, since William of Malmesbury records that Osmund himself copied and even bound books for his community. It has also been suggested that the assignation of a prebend to the bishop in the mid-twelfth century (a practice in England unique to Salisbury), may have had its roots in Osmund's own regular participation in the ministry of the high altar in the cathedral, since the income of the prebend was derived from a portion of the oblations of the high altar ('Fasti Angl., 1066-1300', xxv). 
The content and appearance of the books produced at Salisbury in the late eleventh century lend weight to William of Malmesbury's claim that Osmund's canons were renowned for the fame of their learning, and that he was able to attract learned clerks from far and wide. The books comprise one of the first substantial collections of patristic texts to have been formed in England since the eighth century, and bear witness to a level of interest in biblical and theological scholarship comparable with that of the leading centres of learning on the continent. The styles of handwriting suggest that those who wrote the books had come to Salisbury from many different centres, both in England and on the continent, while the textual affiliations of some of the works copied suggest direct contact with religious houses not only in Normandy but elsewhere in northern France, the Low Countries, and even further afield. Osmund's personal influence may well have been instrumental in acquiring from the continent exemplars of texts then rare in England. 
William of Malmesbury drew attention to the fame not only of the Salisbury canons' intellectual prowess but also of their singing. Unfortunately the late-eleventh-century books which survive from Salisbury shed no light on the early history of the Salisbury liturgy with which Osmund has long been associated. By at least the mid-fourteenth century he had come to be regarded as the author of the Salisbury 'Ordinale' and 'Consuetudinarium' which summarize the procedural and liturgical custom of Salisbury, and which act as a general guide to the use of Sarum. But both texts were compiled a century after Osmund's death; an absence of contemporary evidence makes it very difficult to prove what part he may have played in laying the foundations for the customs that they describe. 
The details of Osmund's activities within his diocese are also very poorly recorded; his only surviving 'acta' are his episcopal profession to Archbishop Lanfranc and his foundation charter. He seems to have been in the forefront of efforts in England to exert episcopal authority more rigorously over the diocesan clergy and laity. Contemporary annotations in the late-eleventh-century Salisbury copy of the canon law compilation known as the 'Collectio Lanfranci' (Salisbury Cathedral, MS 78), reveal a deep concern for the proper conduct of diocesan bishops and for matters of clerical discipline, and may well reflect Osmund's own concerns. He was certainly known as a stern disciplinarian, dealing harshly with those who failed to meet the high standards that he set himself. He promoted the cult of his most illustrious predecessor as bishop of the region, St Aldhelm, by attending the retranslation of his remains at Malmesbury, and acquiring a relic of the saint's left arm. This activity, reported in some detail by William of Malmesbury in his life of Aldhelm, may have been the source for Ranulf Higden's claim that Osmund 'dictavit' a life of Aldhelm ('Polychronicon', 7.294). 
Osmund died in December 1099 after a long, lingering illness. His death was recorded by John of Worcester as Saturday 3 December, but the bull of canonization of 1457 gives 4 December, which was then assigned as his feast day. He was buried at Old Sarum. A new and more elaborate tomb was constructed in the second half of the twelfth century, which was relocated in 1226 to the newly completed lady chapel of the present Salisbury Cathedral. 
Osmund's contemporaries acknowledged his outstanding qualities of holiness and moral probity. Unlike some of his fellow bishops, especially those who had been promoted from the royal curia as he himself had been, Osmund was noted for his chastity, for his lack of greed or worldly ambition, and for not extorting heavy exactions from the monasteries within his diocese. Faricius, monk of Malmesbury and later abbot of Abingdon, both monasteries within the Salisbury diocese, referred to him as 'an orthodox bishop, a man of humility, worthy to be honoured and praised for his wisdom and holiness' ('Patrologia Latina', 89.84). His humility was also noted by Eadmer who recorded that Osmund was one of only two bishops who begged forgiveness of Anselm for their failure to take his part against William II at the Council of Rockingham in 1095. Apart from a reference to the accusation of parsimony which William of Malmesbury subsequently erased, the only criticism levelled against Osmund came from the pen of the hagiographer Goscelin, who had been a frequent associate of Osmund's predecessor, Bishop Hermann. He did not find the new incumbent so welcoming, but referred to Osmund bitterly as 'the king who knew not Joseph' ('Exodus' 1:8), and claimed that he was forced to leave by 'viperine envy and the barbarity of a step-father' (Goscelin, 'Liber confortatorius', 29, 82). It is not known what provoked this enmity. 
Osmund's reputation for holiness and for instituting the cathedral chapter and its customs grew steadily from the middle of the twelfth century onwards, gathering pace during the early thirteenth century, and culminating in the first petition for his canonization in 1228. The earliest datable miracle at the site of his tomb dates from between 1155 and 1165, about the time that the 'Institutio' associated with his name was first compiled, while the earliest surviving reference to him as 'saint' occurs in the treasurer's inventory of 1214. Although the commission ordered by Gregory IX on 30 May 1228 to inquire into Osmund's life and miracles came to nothing, Osmund's tomb continued to be venerated and, as the fame and influence of the cathedral and its customs spread throughout the province of Canterbury, so too was his name increasingly associated with the texts that set out the use of Sarum. Further unsuccessful petitions for his canonization were made during the episcopacies of Ralph Erghum (1375-88), Robert Hallum (1407-17), and John Chaundeler (1417-26). A final petition was submitted in 1452, which, after various delays, resulted in Calixtus III's bull of 1 January 1457 which formally proclaimed Osmund a saint. 


@@@@@


doc= 20903


Osred I (696x8-716), king of Northumbria, was the son of Aldfrith whose only known wife was Cuthburh, sister of Ine, king of the West Saxons. An inconsistency in Bede's statements makes it uncertain whether Aldfrith died in 704 or 705, but the latter is the more likely. The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' assigns Aldfrith's death to 14 December, after which (according to Stephen of Ripon's life of Bishop Wilfrid) an otherwise unknown king called Eadwulf reigned for two months. He was expelled following military operations around Bamburgh by a coalition involving Bishop Wilfrid, the princess-abbess of Whitby, AElfflaed, and the ealdorman Beorhtfrith. Osred then became king at the age of eight, and also Wilfrid's adopted son. This relationship did not result in Wilfrid's restoration to the see of York, however; at a synod held on the banks of the River Nidd in the first year of Osred's reign, Wilfrid was allowed to retain the churches of Ripon and Hexham and was apparently made bishop of the latter. Warfare with the Picts was continued in Osred's reign, for in 711 the ealdorman ('praefectus') Beorhtfrith defeated them between the rivers Avon and Carron in southern Scotland. Osred was killed in 716, but no reliable details of the killing are known, apart from a remark in the northern recension of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' that it took place 'south of the border' ('ASC', s.a. 716, text D), possibly the border with the Picts. William of Malmesbury wrote of a conspiracy, but this was probably conjecture. 
Writing while Osred was alive, Bede equated him with Josiah, the king of Judah responsible for purification of worship, but after the king's death he expressed the opinion that the standards of the church had declined since Aldfrith's time. Boniface, who shared this latter opinion, represented Osred as 'driven by the spirit of wantonness, fornicating, and in his frenzy debauching throughout the nunneries virgins consecrated to God' (Tangl, no. 73; 'English Historical Documents', 1, no. 177), while the author of the ninth-century Latin poem 'De abbatibus' accused him of killing his nobles or forcing them into monasteries. In the late eleventh century, Folcard associated him with a miracle worked by John of Beverley and described him as a man of religion and faith, but to the extent that this was based on any authentic tradition it may have been inspired by some otherwise unknown donation made by Osred to Beverley. It is possible that Osred's treatment of the church and his nobles derived from financial problems, for he failed to maintain Aldfrith's high quality silver coinage. His death ended the near monopoly of the Northumbrian kingship exercised by the descendants of AEthelfrith (died 'c'.616) since the time of Oswald (died 642), for Osred's successor was Cenred, son of Cuthwine, son of Leodwold, an alleged descendant of the founder of Bernicia, Ida, by a collateral line. No details are known of Cenred's reign, which lasted from 716 to 718. 


@@@@@


doc= 20904


Osred II (d. 792), king of Northumbria, was the son of King Alhred ['see under 'Oswulf] and his queen, Osgifu, and thus descended from Ida, founder in 547 of the Bernician dynasty of Northumbrian kings, by two collateral lines: that is via Ida's son Ocga on his mother's side, and by Ida's son Eadric on his father's side. In view of the fact that his father married in 768, Osred is unlikely to have been more than nineteen years old when he came to the throne, after the murder of AElfwald I, in 788. In 790 he was deposed, tonsured at York, and expelled, to be replaced by AEthelred I (died 796), who had himself been exiled in 779. According to the Northumbrian annals, Osred was on the Isle of Man in 792 when he relied on the proffered support of certain nobles to attempt to return to Northumbria. He was deserted by his soldiers, however, and captured by King AEthelred who had him killed at a place called 'Aynburg' on 14 September. He was buried in the church of the monastery of Tynemouth, Northumbria. 


@@@@@


doc= 20905


Osric (d. 634), king of Deira, was the son of AElfric and cousin to his predecessor Eadwine, who had ruled the whole kingdom of Northumbria. Osric became king of Deira, the southern part of Northumbria, in 633. As a member of the Deiran royal family he had been baptized by Paulinus 'c'.627 during the first attempt to convert Northumbria by Italian missionaries based in Kent; he later renounced Christianity. Under Eadwine the kingdom had expanded, but Eadwine was slain in battle against an alliance of British and Mercian forces in October 633 and Northumbria split back into its constituent parts of Deira and Bernicia. Since Eadwine's sons had been killed, expelled, or captured, Osric took control of Deira, the southern part, but the northern area went to a member of the Bernician dynasty who had been exiled during Eadwine's reign. This king, Eanfrith, was also a recent convert, but he had been baptized by the Irish church. Northumbria was therefore split between two rivals, both now supposedly Christian, yet remained under attack by the British and Mercian alliance that had destroyed Eadwine, the first Christian king. As a result both Osric and Eanfrith apostatized. Loyalty to the ruler appears to have been the initial impetus behind acceptance of Christianity by the pagan Anglo-Saxon aristocracy and people, rather than a change of faith. On this occasion the perception of the ruler's access to divine favour and of whether Christianity offered more certain rewards than paganism probably proved less powerful than the fear of retribution for abandoning ancestral ties with the old gods. Bede, however, described the kings' apostasy as a betrayal of the faith of their people. 
Osric was killed by the British king Cadwallon, himself a Christian, in the following summer, 634, after laying siege to his army in a fortified town; despite earlier claims, it has been shown that this is unlikely to have been York. As a result of their apostasy, Osric and Eanfrith, who was killed in the same year, were subsequently excluded from the Northumbrian king-lists and their regnal year assigned to Oswald (died 642), their Christian successor, even though Osric's son Oswine (d. 651), a model of Christian humility, later became king in Deira and Eanfrith was Oswald's brother. 


@@@@@


doc= 20906


Osric (d. 729), king of Northumbria, began his reign in 718. He therefore ruled for eleven years of Bede's life, but no information other than his accession and death is given in the 'Historia ecclesiastica'. There is no contemporary evidence for his paternity. Twelfth-century sources, including the history of the church of Durham attributed to Symeon of Durham and the 'Series regum Northymbrensium', claim that his father was Aldfrith (Oswiu's illegitimate Irish-born son), and therefore that he was brother to Osred I. Alternatively, it has been suggested that he was the son of Alchfrith (Oswiu's eldest son, who was subking in Deira but who fought against him). This theory has been extended to equating him with an Osric who is recorded as a king of the Hwicce between about 676 and 690 (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 4.23), but the suggestion that he ruled in this part of western Mercia thirty years before becoming king of Northumbria is based mainly on an equation of the two names and would mean that he became king for the second time at the age of sixty-five. The obscurity over Osric's background may conceal an irregularity in his birth, but he appears to have been the last of the old line of Northumbrian kings descended from Ida through AEthelfrith. A taint of illegitimacy may have opened the way for rival claimants to the throne. 
The suggestion that Osric was young enough to be a puppet of Wilfrid's faction at the Northumbrian court seems unlikely, since it has also been shown that he must have been aged between fourteen and twenty when he came to the throne, if he was a son of Aldfrith, and much older if a son of Alchfrith. He is said by Bede to have nominated his successor, Ceolwulf (died 764), although he was of a different lineage. William of Malmesbury in the twelfth century claimed that Osric and his predecessor, Cenred ('r'. 716-18), Ceolwulf's brother, were implicated in the death of Osred ('r'. 705/6-716), but if Osric was Aldfrith's son this would imply that he allied with a rival lineage to murder his own brother, and may strengthen the argument that his father was Alchfrith. 
Osric's name is recorded in an eighth-century calendar under 9 May, which accords with the date of his death as given by Bede ('contra' Plummer in 'Opera historica', 1.349), though other commentators have tried to link this entry with the apostate Osric (d. 634), whose name, Bede states, was excluded from the regnal lists. The entry reads 'Depositio Osrici regis'. Bede simply states that he died, but the entries in the A, B, and C texts of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' (under the year 731) claim that he was slain. 


@@@@@


doc= 20907


Oisin (supp. fl. 3rd-5th cent.), legendary hero, was the son of Fionn mac Cumhaill in the Fenian or Ossianic cycle of tales and lays that belongs to the Gaelic literary and oral traditions of Ireland and Scotland. He was assigned a floruit in the third century AD by medieval Irish scholars whose chronology of events connected with the pseudo-historical 'Fianna' (warrior or hunter bands) of Fionn mac Cumhaill was commonly accepted until the end of the nineteenth century. The name Oisin (earlier Ossene or Ossine) is a diminutive formed from the noun 'os' ('deer') and a verse source in the 'Book of Leinster', a twelfth-century manuscript, states that his mother, Blai Derg, conceived him when she was in the shape of a hind. References to such a conception are also found in later Irish literary and oral sources, as well as in Scottish Gaelic oral tradition. 
Although Oisin features in material dating from approximately the eighth century, it was not until the twelfth century that he appeared in his main role in Fenian literature, that of an aged survivor and eyewitness of the deeds of the 'Fianna'. According to the oldest version of 'Acallam na Senorach' ('The colloquy of the old men'), dating from about 1200, Oisin and Cailte, another member of the 'Fianna', survived the defeat and destruction of the 'Fianna' and lived until the introduction of Christianity to Ireland by Patrick some 150 years afterwards. Both of them met Patrick and regaled him and other ecclesiastical and temporal dignitaries with anecdotes, in prose and verse, about the exploits of Fionn and his warriors and their association with various places in Ireland. Cailte is given a more prominent role than Oisin in the earliest version of 'Acallam na Senorach', but in the later version, and in many of the Fenian lays composed from the thirteenth century on, Oisin is cast as the main narrator and repository of traditional lore regarding the 'Fianna' and the antiquities of Ireland. 
The early literary tradition fails to explain Oisin's remarkable longevity. Oral tradition on the other hand declares that he spent the time between the destruction of the 'Fianna' and the advent of Patrick in the mythical Land of Youth ('Tir na hOige' or 'Tir na nOg'). According to some versions of this legend his deer-mother enticed him thither, but the most popular version of the story has it that he was brought to this happy otherworld by a supernatural lover. He remained there until an overwhelming desire to visit his father and former colleagues in arms compelled him to leave the Land of Youth and return to Ireland. By accidentally touching the soil of Ireland he became old and blind and after his meeting with Patrick he functions as a link between the pagan Fenian past and the Christian present. The eighteenth-century 'Laoidh Oisin ar Thir na nOg' ('Oisin's lay about the Land of the Young'), attributed by some to the Clare poet and author Michael Comyn, names the woman who brings Oisin to Tir na nOg as Niamh Chinn Oir. This late literary version of Oisin's otherworld journey has, since its translation and appearance in print in 1859, appealed to a wide audience. William Butler Yeats utilized it in his long narrative poem 'The Wandering of Oisin', first published in 1889. 
Another important literary development associated with the name of Oisin occurred in the eighteenth century with the publication by James Macpherson of 'Fingal: an Ancient Epic Poem' (1762) and 'Temora' (1763), works allegedly translated from epic poems which Macpherson claimed had been composed by a blind third-century Caledonian poet called Ossian, a name based on the vernacular Scottish Gaelic form Oisean. The term Ossianic, used as an alternative appellation of the Fenian cycle, derives from Macpherson's Ossian. Samuel Johnson denounced Macpherson's works on Ossian as fraudulent and a celebrated literary quarrel ensued (for which see their articles). An important result of the controversy surrounding these publications was the awakening of scholarly interest in Fenian literature in general. 


@@@@@


doc= 20908


Ostler, William (d. 1614), actor, had a brief but notable career among the King's Men early in the seventeenth century. He first appears as a boy actor among the children of the Chapel Royal who performed Jonson's 'Poetaster' at the Blackfriars playhouse in 1601. He was probably also a chorister, since he is not one of the seven chapel boys mentioned in December 1601 as actors not musicians. He next appears on 11 April 1609 as the first of three players, all recently or still belonging to the Chapel Royal, who performed a hastily arranged entertainment (published by J. Knowles in Butler, 1999), written by Jonson, mounted by Inigo Jones, and played before the king and the royal family at the opening of the New Exchange in the Strand. He played a shopkeeper and was by this time an adult, for he had a servant, Giles Gary, who played the boy in the shop (the other actor was Nathan Field, who played the key keeper). Probably later in that year Ostler was one of the players from the Chapel Royal whom the King's Men took on as adults 'to strengthen the Kings service' when the King's Men began to use the Blackfriars playhouse as well as the Globe (TNA: PRO, LC 5/133, p. 50). 
Ostler soon became a principal member of the King's Men. He appears in the cast lists of six of the company's plays: Jonson's 'Alchemist' (1610) and 'Catiline' (1611); Beaumont and Fletcher's 'Captain' ('c'.1609-12), 'Bonduca' ('c'.1609-14), and 'Valentinian' ('c'.1610-14); and Webster's 'Duchess of Malfi' ('c'.1612-14). In this last play he played Antonio, a virtuous hero surrounded by corruption, the only part he is known to have played in a regular play. In celebrating a brawl in which Ostler came off badly, John Davies called him in 1611, perhaps ironically, 'the Roscius of these times' and 'Sole King of Actors' (Davies, epigram 205). Ostler acquired the lease of a share in the Blackfriars playhouse on 20 May 1611, and he bought one in the Globe on 20 February 1612, so that he held a seventh of one playhouse and a fourteenth of the other, both leases to expire in 1629. 
Ostler married Thomasin, daughter of the actor John Heminges, who was the company's treasurer, about 1611, when she would have been sixteen. The Ostlers' child, Beaumont (named presumably for the playwright), was baptized on 18 May 1612 at St Mary Aldermanbury, London, where Heminges lived and Thomasin had been baptized on 15 January 1595. Ostler died intestate, apparently in his twenties, on 16 December 1614, leaving to his widow (who became his administratrix six days later) only his two shares 'for her relief and maintenance' along with debts of 'a very great value' (TNA: PRO, KB 27/1454/1/m. 692). She gave the shares to her father in trust and in 1615 brought a famous lawsuit against him when he would not return them or give her the income from them. 


@@@@@


doc= 20909


Osthryth (d. 697), queen of the Mercians, consort of King AEthelred, was the daughter of Oswiu (611/12-670), king of Northumbria, and his second wife, Eanflaed. Her marriage appears to have taken place some time before 679, in which year her husband fought with her brother Ecgfrith, king of Northumbria since 670, near the River Trent. Another of her brothers, a youth named AElfwine, was killed in the battle; he is said to have been beloved in both kingdoms, which suggests that he had been frequenting his sister's court in Mercia as well as his brother's in Northumbria. Ecgfrith's desire to avenge AElfwine's death would have provoked further conflict between the two kingdoms, if Archbishop Theodore had not made peace. A sign of the subsequent co-operation between the Mercian and Northumbrian rulers is provided by the willingness of AEthelred (d. after 704) and Osthryth to expel Wilfrid from their kingdom, allegedly to please Ecgfrith. 
It seems to have been after the battle of the Trent that Osthryth carried out the pious action for which she is best remembered. She retrieved the remains of the body of her uncle, Oswald, who had been killed by the Mercian king Penda at the battle of 'Maserfelth' in 642 (his head and arms had already been taken to Northumbria), and arranged for them to be transported to the monastery at Bardney in the province of Lindsey (modern Lincolnshire), of which she and her husband were generous patrons. The Bardney monks were at first reluctant to receive the remains of the hated king who had once conquered their land, although they acknowledged Oswald's sanctity; a timely miracle changed their minds, and the relics were reverently washed and placed in a shrine. 
It has been speculated that Osthryth's promotion of her uncle's cult may have had a political motive. The veneration of Oswald was already developing into a dynastic cult in Northumbria, where his head was preserved at Lindisfarne and his arms at Bamburgh; perhaps the choice of Bardney as the resting-place for the other remains was intended to provide a focus for Northumbrian sympathies in Lindsey, which was a territory long disputed between Mercia and Northumbria. Whether for this or for some other reason, Osthryth does not seem to have been popular in her husband's kingdom: in 697 she was murdered by the Mercian nobles. She was probably buried at Bardney, where her husband AEthelred subsequently retired as a monk; a later list of saints' resting-places indicates that both of them were venerated there. AEthelred is known to have had one child, most likely (though not certainly) with Osthryth: this was Ceolred (d. 716), who became king of Mercia in 709. 


@@@@@


doc= 20910


O'Sullivan Beare, Donnell Cam, count of Bearehaven in the Spanish nobility (1560-1618), chieftain, was the son of Donnell, chief of the O'Sullivan Beare in co. Kerry, and Margaret O'Brien, daughter of the O'Brien of Thomond. In 1563 his father was killed by a McGillycuddy and was succeeded by Donnell's uncle Owen O'Sullivan Beare. Owen regarded his young nephew as a threat and banished Donnell to his mother's country, in Eyeries on the south side of the Kenmare River. He was educated in Waterford and learned to speak fluent English. When, in 1580, Owen was imprisoned in Limerick on suspicion of conspiring to rebel, he agreed to put Beare, in co. Cork, in Donnell's charge. In return, Donnell acknowledged Owen as his adopted father, a decision he subsequently regretted. During this confused period, as guardian of Beare, Donnell appears to have been in rebellion against the crown, probably on the advice of Owen's supporters. Certainly, in December 1581 he engaged and routed in battle at Carberry a raiding party composed mainly of Gaelic allies of the crown. 
Owen was probably released early in 1582, and he granted Donnell a portion of land within his lordship. However, this accommodation soon broke down and Donnell was expelled once more. Donnell then turned to the English law of primogeniture as a means of regaining his father's country, and from 1584 appeared regularly in London to plead his case. Owen and Donnell vied to prove their loyalty to the crown, and each accused the other of involvement in the Desmond rebellion of 1579-83. Neither was entirely innocent, but Owen had much the longer record of disloyalty. 
In May 1587 the case was heard before the lord deputy and privy council of Ireland, who recommended that Donnell receive a portion of Beare after Owen's death and be given a pension paid out of Owen's rents until then. However, Donnell, dissatisfied, appealed to the English privy council in London. When Donnell and Owen outlined their respective positions before the privy council in London in July 1591, it could not come to a decision because of a lack of reliable evidence and decided to send a commission to Beare to examine witnesses. Finally, on 5 June 1593 the privy council ruled that Beare be partitioned between Donnell, Owen, and Owen's brother Phillip. Crucially, although Owen was granted the bulk of the land, Donnell received the castle of Dunboy and its environs. Dunboy was probably the best harbour in south-west Ireland, enabling its possessor to levy tolls on Spanish and French fishermen who trawled the thriving fisheries off the coast of Cork and Kerry. The loss of these revenues undermined Owen's authority, and in 1594 Donnell was formally elected O'Sullivan Beare in his stead. 
Donnell's gains were soon jeopardized by the growing political instability in Munster, caused mainly by the success enjoyed by Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, in his rebellion against the government. For the next seven years O'Sullivan appeared outwardly loyal, and when Tyrone marched triumphantly into Munster in 1600 O'Sullivan was one of the few chieftains who ignored his summons. However, his real attitude towards the crown may well have been more ambiguous. He was close to another ostensibly loyalist Gaelic chieftain, Florence McCarthy Reagh, who was secretly encouraging Spanish intervention in Ireland on behalf of the rebels. It should also be noted that sources of O'Sullivan's later years show him to have been a very zealous Catholic. 
When the Spanish landed at Kinsale on 2 October 1601 O'Sullivan supported them enthusiastically and handed over Dunboy to a Spanish garrison. He led about 1000 men under Tyrone at the disastrous battle of Kinsale on 24 December 1601. Following the battle he attempted to submit to the government, but the English refused to pardon him. Before fleeing back to Ulster, Tyrone appointed O'Sullivan head of the rebel forces in Munster. O'Sullivan commanded about 2000 men and over the next year became the main symbol of continued Irish resistance. 
Meanwhile, in January 1602 the leader of the Spanish expedition agreed terms with the English, which included the handing over of Dunboy. O'Sullivan hastened back to Beare, and through subterfuge managed to seize Dunboy from its Spanish garrison. He immediately dispatched letters to the king of Spain, apologizing for his actions and appealing for further aid. Some help did eventually arrive from Spain, but not enough to make a difference. The sheer inaccessibility of Dunboy and its surrounds enabled O'Sullivan to engage in a protracted, but hopeless, rearguard action. The strategic importance of Dunboy prompted Sir George Carew, lord president of Munster, to devote all his resources to taking it. The castle fell in late June 1602 after a skilfully conducted siege by Carew. During the latter half of 1602 O'Sullivan's allies melted away, and by year's end he was effectively cornered in Bantry. In late December a royal force of about 2000 engaged the remnants of his forces at Glengariff. After a fierce battle the English made off with O'Sullivan's cattle, leaving him with no means to sustain his army. Starved of supplies, he decided to march out of Munster, hoping to link up with Tyrone. In the epic march that followed his forces suffered terribly from almost continuous attacks from English forces and from Irish eager to prove their loyalty. They enjoyed a brief respite on crossing the Shannon at Portland, co. Tipperary, but on reaching Aughrim, in co. Galway, were confronted by numerically superior forces commanded by Captain Henry Malby and Henry Burke. O'Sullivan roused his men into a desperate assault, which routed their surprised enemies. On 14 January 1603 he and thirty-four survivors reached the relative safety of Leitrim, having traversed 200 miles in fourteen days in the depths of winter. After resting, O'Sullivan entered Ulster only to discover that Tyrone had already surrendered. 
In June 1603 O'Sullivan accompanied Tyrone and Rory O'Donnell to London to speak with the newly crowned James I. However, he was refused a pardon. He returned to Ireland and, in spring 1605, sailed into La Corunna, Spain, with several hundred followers. There he helped found the Irish college at Santiago de Compostela in Galicia. Early in 1606 his men were shipped to Flanders, but he went to Madrid to pursue a career as a courtier. He was granted a pension, admitted to the prestigious Spanish order of Santiago in 1607, and created count of Bearehaven in 1617. Shortly before his death O'Sullivan was apparently involved in plans to initiate a rebellion in Munster. On 16 July 1618 O'Sullivan was killed by John Bathe outside Madrid, apparently after a dispute over money. The circumstances of his death are obscure and quite suspicious, given that Bathe was a spy for the English government. O'Sullivan had two sons with his wife, Elena, daughter of O'Sullivan Mor. 


@@@@@


doc= 20911


Sullivan, John William (b. c.1700, d. in or after 1760), Jacobite army officer, was born in co. Kerry; details of his parentage are unknown. He is said to have been descended from the O'Sullivans of Munster, but consistently spelled his name Sullivan. At the age of nine he was sent to France to study for the Catholic priesthood, but in 1721 he instead entered the French army under the patronage of Marshal Maillebois. Subsequently Sullivan served under Maillebois in Corsica, Italy, and on the Rhine, gaining considerable experience of irregular warfare and eventually becoming a captain on the general staff. On the strength of this useful experience the stoutly built professional soldier was offered a colonel's commission to act as military adviser to the Jacobite heir, Prince Charles Edward Stuart, in 1745. Shortly after the prince landed in Scotland, Sullivan's position was formalized by his appointment as adjutant-general and quartermaster-general in the Jacobite army. As such he was primarily responsible for drafting orders, and for drawing up the elaborate marching tables which enabled the prince's forces to move swiftly in dispersed columns and to evade the British army's attempts to intercept them. Unfortunately, however, he clashed from the first with Lord George Murray, one of the Jacobite lieutenant-generals, who afterwards accused him of incompetence and blamed him for much of what went wrong during the campaign. Sullivan's own account (not published until 1938) and a number of surviving regimental orderly books reveal the reverse to be the case. Sullivan was, in fact, a very capable and professional staff officer, but it cannot be denied that he went out of his way to be condescending towards Murray, whom he considered with good reason to be an impetuous amateur. 
At the outset of the campaign Sullivan was involved in an attempt to capture Ruthven barracks, near Kingussie -- successfully defended by another Irishman, Sergeant Terry Molloy, and just twelve men. He was rather more successful with his friend Donald Cameron of Lochiel in seizing Edinburgh by a 'coup de main' on 16 September 1745. He was present at the battle of Prestonpans, but after reaching Manchester he grew increasingly pessimistic about the invasion of England. He did not take part in the crucial council of war at Derby, when the decision was taken to return to Scotland, but wholeheartedly supported it, and in his narrative is critical of the prince's behaviour at this time. At both the battles of Falkirk on 17 January 1746 and Culloden on 16 April he was in effective command of the Jacobite army, since both lieutenant-generals present simply acted as brigade commanders and the prince was no more than a passive spectator. Having escaped to the continent after Culloden, Sullivan was knighted for his services by the Jacobite King James VIII and III and again served on the French staff at the battle of Lauffeldt on 21 June 1747. Despite being very close to Prince Charles during the Jacobite rising and having been largely instrumental in arranging his rescue, Sullivan became estranged from the prince shortly afterwards. This was due to persistent rumours that Sullivan had shared Charles's mistress, Clementine Walkinshaw (c.1720-1802), whom he had met at Falkirk in 1746. He was living in Cambrai in the summer of 1752. He is last heard of in 1760. 
The date of Sullivan's death is unknown, but he had married a Miss Fitzgerald and left a son, 


@@@@@


doc= 20912


O'Sullivan, Mortimer (1792/3-1859), Church of Ireland clergyman, was born at Clonmel, co. Tipperary, the second son of John O'Sullivan, a schoolmaster. He was educated with his elder brother, Samuel ['see below'], and his friend William Phelan at the Clonmel endowed school. The headmaster, Dr Richard Carey, a close friend of John O'Sullivan, was an earnest protestant, while the O'Sullivans were Roman Catholics. Carey was much revered by his pupils, and the realization that Catholic dogma pronounced him a reprobate first led Mortimer to begin the train of thought that led him to Anglicanism. He entered as a protestant scholar at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1813 (having first matriculated in 1811), and proceeded BA in 1816. He took his MA in 1832 and his BD and DD in 1837. 
After six or seven years at the university O'Sullivan returned to the south, and became second master of the Tipperary endowed school, and curate of the parish of Tipperary. He was subsequently the first master of the Royal School at Dungannon and also lived in Waterford for a time. He was chaplain of St Stephen's Chapel, Dublin, and on 20 December 1827 was collated to the prebend of St Audoen's in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin. This office he resigned on 24 August 1830 on being presented to the rectory of Killyman, co. Armagh, in succession to William Phelan. 
As a young man O'Sullivan became interested in the relations between the Catholic and protestant churches in Ireland. In 1824, in reply to Thomas Moore's 'Captain Rock', he wrote 'Captain Rock Detected'. Here O'Sullivan refuted the charges of financial rapacity that Moore levied against the Anglican clergy and attributed the current disturbed state of the south of Ireland to excessive rents, absentee landlords, and the demoralizing influence of the Roman Catholic clergy. O'Sullivan gave evidence before the parliamentary select committee on the state of Ireland in spring 1825 and (with William Phelan) subsequently published 'A Digest of Evidence on the State of Ireland in 1824-5' (1826). In 1834 he was sent with the Revd Charles Boyton as a deputation to England and Scotland from the Irish clergy to make known the condition of their church. O'Sullivan described with great eloquence and passion the insecurity of the Irish protestant clergy, in Liverpool on 22 November 1834, Exeter Hall, London, on 20 June and 11 July 1835, and also in many provincial towns. On 26 May 1835, when summoned to give evidence before the select committee on Orange lodges, O'Sullivan stated that the Orange societies were of importance in preserving the peace of Ulster. On his return to Ireland in October 1835 he engaged in a controversy with Dr Daniel Murray, the Roman Catholic archbishop of Dublin, who charged him with misreporting his words before the Lords' committee on the circulation of the 'Bible' among the laity. The correspondence was published. In September 1836 O'Sullivan was again in Glasgow, and on 27 May 1837 a further enthusiastic meeting was held in Exeter Hall. Full reports of all the meetings from mid-1835 onwards, with correspondence, were published by O'Sullivan and the Revd Robert M'Ghee in 'Romanism as it Rules in Ireland' (1840). In 1851 O'Sullivan was Donellan lecturer at Trinity College, taking as his theme 'The hour of the Redeemer', an examination of the redeeming and atoning work of Christ. O'Sullivan published numerous other sermons, tracts, and contributions to the debate on Roman Catholicism and the state of Ireland. In 1849 he became a prebendary of Armagh and in 1853 was made rector of Tandragee, co. Armagh. During the latter years of his life he resided in Lower Gloucester Street, Dublin, and officiated as chaplain to the earl of Carlisle, the lord lieutenant, and to the duke of Manchester. He died in Dublin on 30 April 1859, and was buried on 3 May in Chapelizod churchyard. 




@@@@@


doc= 20913


O'Sullivan Beare, Philip (b. c.1590, d. in or after 1634), historian and writer, was one of the seventeen children of Dermot O'Sullivan and his wife, Johanna MacSwiney. Born on Valentia Island off the Kerry coast in south-western Ireland, he belonged to the family that owned much of the remote peninsula. However, the O'Sullivans, headed by the O'Sullivan Beare, were under pressure from an English regime keen to advance alien systems of land tenure, inheritance, and agriculture, and from new planters established in the region. The Nine Years' War, ending in 1603, brought the defeat of the O'Sullivans and their allies. Many of those not killed in the warfare moved to continental Europe. Among the refugees were Philip O'Sullivan Beare, his parents, some of his siblings, and his kinsman O'Sullivan Beare. The young O'Sullivan arrived in Corunna in northern Spain in 1602, and immediately received the protection of the local governor, Carazena. Educated at Santiago de Compostela, he joined kinsmen who opposed the Jesuits' annexation of the college in 1613. Unlike others in the institution, he was not destined for the priesthood, and soon secured commissions in the army and then the navy. However, this service was not congenial to a young man with scholarly and polemical inclinations. A bellicosity, which would later animate his writings, also marked his behaviour. At Madrid in 1618, he engaged in a sword fight with another fugitive from Ireland, Sir John Bathe, suspected as a spy sent to report on the schemes of the refugee community in Spain. In the ensuing melee, Bathe killed the O'Sullivan Beare, whom Philip III of Spain had ennobled as conde de Birhaven. 
Philip O'Sullivan took sanctuary in the house of the French ambassador, but suffered no penalties. Thereafter his movements are obscure. The suggestion that he eventually returned to Ireland, to the Franciscan house of Kilcrea in co. Cork, is unsupported by any evidence. Nor is it known when he died. The last clear indication of his being alive is in 1634. 
O'Sullivan's writings reveal something of the attitudes of the dispossessed Irish Catholics who had been forced to move to continental Europe. They were intended to secure diplomatic and military backing from the Habsburgs for the Irish Catholic cause. In addition, they were informed by Spanish historical fashions, emphasizing a Manichaean struggle between heretics and the faithful. In 1621 he published at Lisbon 'Historiae catholicae Iberniae compendium'. This was a voluminous account of the tribulations of his own people, culminating in a detailed narrative of the campaigns and defeats in Munster in the 1580s and 1590s. Drawing on his intimate local knowledge and the recollections of his family, and written from the perspective of the defeated, it is a valuable corrective to the histories of the victors. In common with his later compositions, it extols Gaelic Ireland and seeks to rebut the contumely heaped on it by both the Old and New English conquerors. O'Sullivan was influenced by his mentor, Father Patrick Synott, and by two Jesuit historians, Michael Cantwell and Richard Conway. O'Sullivan's 'Historiae', first published during his life, was -- in part -- translated and republished in 1903. In addition, he drew on local traditions, mostly in the Irish language, to write saints' lives. That of St Mochna was included in Colgan's 'Acta'. Others were criticized by fellow clerics for their tone and inaccuracies. More substantial and with longer lasting impact was a life of St Patrick, 'Patritiana decas', published in Madrid in 1629. This contributed to the contested process by which Patrick was promoted by Catholics and protestants alike as the national saint of Ireland. 
As an exile, embittered by the loss of hereditary possessions, O'Sullivan inveighed against the apologists of and collaborators with the English and protestant order in Ireland. In his 'Zoilomastix' he sought to refute the calumnies against the Irish of both Giraldus Cambrensis and (more recently) of Stanihurst. His defence included much incidental detail of indigenous habits as well as attacks on those of the interloping English. Known only in manuscript in the seventeenth century, 'Zoilomastix' was judged by O'Sullivan's co-religionists to have been marred by its rhetorical extravagances. He also contributed through his 'Tenebriomastix' to the controversy associated with Thomas Dempster as to whether Ireland or Scotland was to be identified with Scotia. In 'Archicornigeromastix' he took on James Ussher, a foremost champion of protestantism in Ireland. O'Sullivan's offering suffered from the disadvantage that in Spain, where he was writing, Ussher's publications were banned and so known only by (hostile) report. However, O'Sullivan's compositions, despite their shortcomings, show how victims of the violent upheavals of the sixteenth century could construct a sympathetic record of what they had endured. 


@@@@@


doc= 20914


Samuel O'Sullivan (1790-1851), Church of Ireland clergyman, elder brother of Mortimer, was born at Clonmel on 13 September 1790, and educated with Mortimer at the Clonmel endowed school. He attended protestant services with his schoolmaster, and was powerfully attracted by the liturgy. When he obtained a scholarship at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1814 (having first matriculated in 1812), he was entered as a member of the Church of England. He graduated BA in 1818, MA in 1825, and BD and DD in 1837. He was an active member of the university historical society, and was awarded the medal for the best speaker in debates. He was ordained in 1818, serving initially as curate of St Catherine's, Dublin, and at the same time chaplain of the Marshalsea, Dublin. In 1827 he succeeded Dean Le Fanu as chaplain to the Royal Hibernian Military School in Phoenix Park, a position he held for the rest of his life. His time was chiefly devoted to literary pursuits. His first work, published in 1816, argued that the course of English history in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries manifestly displayed the agency of divine providence. It greatly impressed his contemporaries. He contributed to 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' and to 'Fraser's Magazine', and wrote extensively for the 'Dublin University Magazine'. Towards the end of his life, in 1850, he compiled and published a well-received explanation of the catechism of the Anglican church. He died at the Royal Hibernian Military School on 6 August 1851 and was buried on 9 August in the churchyard at Chapelizod, Dublin. His wife, a son, Henry R. M. O'Sullivan, and a daughter, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 20915


Thomas Herbert Sullivan (d. 1824), army officer, who was commissioned in the Franco-Irish regiment Walsh. In 1779 he served with a detachment of the regiment assigned as marines on board John Paul Jones's privateer 'Bon Homme Richard'. He took part in the famous fight with the 'Serapis' off Flamborough Head on 23 September 1779. Subsequently, however, he deserted to the British army and then transferred to the Dutch service, dying a major at The Hague in 1824. Thomas Sullivan's son John, employed in the American consular service, died in 1825. 


@@@@@


doc= 20916


Oswald (603/4-642), king of Northumbria, was the second son of AEthelfrith (d. c.616), king of Bernicia and later of the Northumbrians, and his wife, Acha, the daughter of AElla, king of Deira. 
Following AEthelfrith's death in battle against Acha's brother Eadwine, who thus became king of both regions of Northumbria, Oswald was exiled at the age of about thirteen with his six brothers, including Eanfrith and Oswiu (also Oslac, Oswudu, Oslaf, and Offa), and took refuge from his uncle in Scotland and Ireland. 
During his exile Oswald learned to speak Irish fluently and is recorded as fighting on behalf of his hosts in Ireland, together with other Bernician nobles. While, with the exception of Eadwine, all the rulers of Bernicia and Deira up to that point had been pagan, Oswald was converted to Christianity at this time, and was probably baptized at the Columban monastery of Iona on the west coast of Scotland, in the Irish colony of Dal Riata. Both Bede and Adomnan, in his life of St Columba, show that Oswald maintained strong ties with Iona after he became king. 
Oswald and his brothers were refugees for seventeen years, until King Eadwine, who had been converted to Christianity by a mission from Canterbury led by Paulinus, was overthrown in 633 by an alliance between the British king Cadwallon of Gwynedd and Penda of Mercia. Oswald's brother Eanfrith then became king in Bernicia for a year until he also was killed by Cadwallon; Osric of Deira, a cousin of Eadwine, was killed within the same year. One of Eadwine's sons had been slain along with his father, and another, Eadfrith, was taken hostage by Penda. Eadwine's widow, AEthelburh, and his remaining descendants fled with Bishop Paulinus to her brother's court in Kent. 
In 634 Oswald returned from exile and avenged his father and brother in battle with Cadwallon near Hadrian's Wall, at a place known to Bede as Heavenfield and in British sources as Cantscaul. Cadwallon was killed near a stream called the Denisesburn (probably the Rowley Water, near Hexham), and Oswald became ruler of Bernicia at the age of thirty. He later reported to Segene, abbot of Iona, that this victory had been achieved through divine help, and that he had been granted a vision of St Columba before the battle, although there were only twelve baptized Christians in his army. By the time that Bede wrote, almost a century later, Oswald was said to have set up a cross before the battle, which he held firm until his soldiers fixed it in position, and then prayed with them for God's aid. A wooden cross at Heavenfield later became a focus for pilgrimage and miracle stories, but this image of devotion to the cross may suggest that Bede wished to portray Oswald as another Constantine. 
Since most of the Deiran royal family had been killed or exiled, Oswald was able to take control of both kingdoms for eight years. Eadwine's son Eadfrith, who had been taken hostage by Penda, was murdered. This may have been at Oswald's instigation, since it brought Penda no political advantage. Eadwine's widow, AEthelburh, also felt her children and grandchildren threatened by Oswald and by her brother the king of Kent, again presumably at Oswald's instigation, and sent them abroad for protection. Oswald's influence can be shown to have later extended into several kingdoms south of the Humber, and he is the sixth king named in Bede's list of rulers who held sway ('imperium') in this area. He was hated as an alien conqueror in Lindsey, and he also ruled over Sussex. He stood godfather to Cynegils of Wessex at his baptism 'c'.635, and married his daughter. He and Cynegils are named as joint donors of Dorchester-on-Thames to Bishop Birinus as an episcopal seat. His overlordship is also said by Bede to have included the Picts and the Scots to the north, and an entry in the Irish annals suggests that Edinburgh, the centre of the kingdom of the Gododdin, fell to the Angles during his reign, in 638. 
Apart from Adomnan's version of what Oswald is supposed to have told the abbot of Iona about the battle of Heavenfield, and brief entries reporting his battles in the Irish and Welsh annals and in the 'Historia Brittonum', where he is nicknamed Lamnguin (Brightblade), all that is known of Oswald's life is derived from Bede, who was writing eighty-eight years after the king's death, when legends had already begun to accumulate. Oswald is one of the great heroes of Bede's 'Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum', but very little is reported there about his secular career. His wife, the daughter of Cynegils of Wessex, is not named, and it only emerges in later chapters that he had a son, Oethelwald, who became king of Deira in 651 and allied with his father's killer, Penda, against his uncle Oswiu. 
Bede's principal interest in Oswald is his role in the conversion of Northumbria, and the miracles associated with him after his death. Since Paulinus's mission had collapsed with the death of Eadwine and his subsequent retreat to Kent, Oswald sent to Iona for a bishop to convert his people. Following the failure of the first candidate, a second bishop, Aedan, was consecrated. Oswald donated to him the tidal island of Lindisfarne, which lay a short distance up the coast from the royal palace at Bamburgh, for his monastery and episcopal seat. Apart from Oswald's own background of exile among the Irish, it is probable that he did not wish to revive the Canterbury mission associated with the Deiran royal family, which was now in exile, though it is reported that he completed the church that Eadwine had started to build at York. 
Bede ascribes to Oswald the Christian virtues of faith, humility, charity, and concern to establish the church. He was willing to act as interpreter for Aedan, and stood godfather to his father-in-law, Cynegils. He is said to have prayed at length in a distinctive way, with his palms upward, and when he was killed in battle, he was remembered as having said a prayer for the souls of his army, though not his opponents. Alcuin later claimed that he built and richly endowed many churches. Bede's most famous story emphasizes his generosity to the poor. While Oswald was holding a feast on Easter day, at which Bishop Aedan was present, a servant, with the official duty of providing for the needy, told the king that there was a press of people outside demanding alms. Oswald immediately ordered that the food should be taken out to them, and that the silver dish being used at the meal should be broken up and distributed. Bishop Aedan thereupon blessed his right hand, saying 'may this hand never perish' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 3.6). 
Oswald was killed at the age of thirty-eight in battle against Penda of Mercia and his British allies on 5 August 642, at a place named by Bede as 'Maserfelth'. In British sources the site is variously given as 'Cocboi', 'Cocboy', or 'Cogwy'. This has been taken to be Oswestry in Shropshire, on the border between Mercia and Powys, since Reginald of Durham described the site in the twelfth century, although this identification has been disputed and other names, which place the battle in Lancashire or Lindsey, put forward. Oswald's body was ritually dismembered by the pagan Penda, and his head, arms, and hands displayed on stakes. A year later his brother and successor, Oswiu, came with an army and took these trophies back to Bernicia. Oswald's head was buried within the church at Lindisfarne, and his arms taken to St Peter's Church in the royal palace at Bamburgh. His right hand was found to be undecayed, in fulfilment of Bishop Aedan's prophecy, and was placed in a silver casket. Writing almost a hundred and fifty years later, Alcuin recorded that the hand was still supple, with nails that continued to grow. A chronicle entry in the 'Historia regum' under the year 774 later noted that the hand was still in the church at Bamburgh, wrapped in a pall and placed in a costly shrine. 
Although Bede does not claim that Oswald died a martyr's death, in the eighty-eight years between the battle and the time that Bede was writing, 'c'.730, various popular legends had grown up around the site of his death. Bede records three miracle stories associated with this place, showing how the cult of Oswald's sanctity developed: in the first of these a horse is cured of convulsions by rolling on the ground; the owner of the horse then recognizes that a holy person has died at this place; and a girl is therefore cured of paralysis by being brought to the spot in a cart. The place is distinguished by the greenness of the grass there and becomes famous as a source of cures, which are transmitted through dust taken from the spot, to the extent that a hole is dug to the height of a man. It is not implied that Oswald was buried here, only that his blood had soaked the ground. 
Parallel with this popular cult are three other miracle stories, which are associated with Hexham. Bede records that the monks undertook a pilgrimage each year, on the day before the anniversary of the king's death, to the wooden cross which Oswald had set up before the battle of Heavenfield in 634. (This cannot have taken place before the foundation of the monastery at Hexham by Wilfrid thirty years after Oswald's death, and may be an ecclesiastical takeover of a popular cult.) Splinters from the cross placed in water were said to have effected cures of both men and cattle, although Bede also gives the example of a Hexham monk cured of a fractured arm by moss taken from the wood of the cross. Bishop Acca of Hexham reported two more miracle stories to Bede, of a man in Ireland cured of the plague through drinking water flavoured with a splinter taken from the stake on which Oswald's head was displayed, and of the monastic community at Selsey in Sussex, again founded by Wilfrid, all but one of whom were spared from the plague by Oswald's intercession on the anniversary of his death, some forty years before, which the monks thereafter observed as a feast day. 
The remains of Oswald's body were retrieved about half a century after his death by his niece Osthryth, King Oswiu's daughter, after she married King AEthelred of Mercia and became queen, probably at some time between 675 and 679. It is not known what had happened to the body before this, after the head and arms had been cut off in 642. The bones were taken on a cart to the monastery of Bardney in Lindsey, but owing to the hostility of the monks, who remembered Oswald as an alien oppressor, these remained outside overnight under a tent. Bede records that a pillar of light above the tent was seen by both the local inhabitants and the monks, who therefore recognized Oswald's sanctity and allowed the body inside. The bones were then washed and enshrined within the church, beneath the king's gold and purple banner. Bede records two other miracles associated with Oswald's shrine here, in both of which a sick person was healed: one of a boy with an ague who spent a night by the shrine, the other of a monk from a neighbouring monastery who was cured by some dust which had absorbed the water used to wash Oswald's bones. 
Despite Queen Osthryth's murder by the Mercians in 697, Oswald's body remained at Bardney, and the shrine was later adorned by the Mercian king Offa ('r'. 757-96) with 'silver, gold, gems and much finery', as Alcuin records (Alcuin, 35). This surprising Mercian royal interest in Oswald's sanctity was subsequently continued in the tenth century by AEthelflaed, lady of the Mercians, and her husband, AEthelred, who retrieved Oswald's bones from Bardney, which was by that stage within the Danelaw, and removed them to the church of St Peter at Gloucester in 909. They were translated again after the Norman conquest to a new shrine in Gloucester by Thomas (II), archbishop of York. But in the twelfth-century life of Oswald by Reginald of Durham, it is claimed that the bones of the body at Bardney had been reduced to three, as a result of the eagerness of relic hunters, and the only items taken to Gloucester were the left arm and some hair. 
Reginald also records that the hand at Bamburgh had become neglected by the eleventh century, though this may be propaganda to justify the actions of a monk named Winegot, who stole the arm and took it to his own monastery at Peterborough in the time of Abbot Elsin (died 1055). It is said to have been saved from the Danes in 1070 by Prior AEthelwold, who hid the arm in his bed. It was subsequently recorded at Peterborough in 1140 by the chronicler Hugh Candidus, where it was inspected by the bishop of Lincoln and others, and said to be still intact, with both flesh and skin. 
Oswald's head appears to have remained in the church or cemetery at Lindisfarne for over two centuries, without being credited with any miracles, until the community of St Cuthbert was forced to leave the island in the face of Danish attacks, 'c'.875. Reginald of Durham gives an alternative story, which has the head removed to Bamburgh by Oswald's relatives after being revealed by a miraculous light, although it was later retrieved from there by guile. Symeon of Durham says that Oswald's head was taken from the island inside the reliquary coffin of St Cuthbert, and Reginald similarly says that it was placed there after its retrieval. A skull with a sword cut was identified as that of Oswald when the tomb of St Cuthbert at Durham Cathedral was opened in 1104 for the translation of his relics. Oswald's head was said to be the only other skull placed in the new shrine. When the tomb of Cuthbert was reopened by James Raine in 1827, a piece of skull in poor condition was identified as Oswald's. The tomb was opened again in 1899 by William Greenwell, and at that stage a detailed debate occurred about the medical condition of the skull. The evidence, subsequently reviewed by Richard Bailey, shows that a skull with a sword cut was identified and returned to the shrine, and this is almost certainly that of Oswald. As a result of this association, in post-conquest iconography St Cuthbert is usually shown carrying St Oswald's head. 
The growth of Oswald's cult in England can be followed in the increasing number of references in calendars and martyrologies, in various recastings of Bede's chapters on his life and miracles (in particular the extensive treatments in Alcuin's York poem in the late eighth century and AElfric's homily in the late tenth century), as well as in numerous post-conquest writings. In addition, a major cult developed on the continent, particularly in Germany, the Low Countries, Switzerland, Italy, and Scandinavia. The beginnings of this can be seen in Bede, where the Anglo-Saxon missionary Willibrord is said to have told Acca and Wilfrid that many miracles linked to Oswald's relics had occurred among the Frisians. Oswald's feast day was noted in the eighth-century calendar associated with Willibrord and several sites in Europe later claimed to hold relics of Oswald, including at least four possible heads and several arms. The development of the cult on the continent moves far away from the historical figure of Oswald, and cannot be reviewed here, but it has been the subject of much modern research. The standard image in later continental iconography shifts from St Oswald carrying a covered cup, based on Bede's story of his charity, to an image of the saint with a raven, which sometimes carries a ring, derived not from Bede but from a Middle High German romantic epic, the 'Munchener Oswald'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20917


Oswald (d. 992), archbishop of York, was one of the leaders of the English monastic reformation of the tenth century. His cult was developed at his principal monastic foundation, Ramsey, and at his cathedral at Worcester, where he was bishop from 961 to 992. What is known of his career derives chiefly from an anonymous life, written between 997 and 1002, which is attributed to Byrhtferth of Ramsey, and from charters that were preserved in the medieval archives of Worcester Cathedral. 
The names of Oswald's parents are unknown; but he was of Anglo-Danish extraction, a nephew of Archbishop Oda (941-58) and grandson of one of the settlers who had come to Britain in the 'great' army of Ivarr and Ubbe. Other kinsmen, Archbishop Oscytel of York and Abbot Thurcytel of Bedford, had Scandinavian names, but his own name is English and it is possible that his mother came from the south-west midlands where Oswald later had many kinsmen with English names. During boyhood Oswald was trained in sacred letters by his uncle, Archbishop Oda, and was believed in the twelfth century, both at Ramsey and Canterbury, to have also been tutored by the West Frankish scholar, Frithegod of Canterbury. Enriched with numerous gifts from his uncle, Oswald is purported by Byrhtferth to have purchased a 'monastery' in Winchester, where, however, the luxurious lifestyle of the married secular clerks perturbed the pious adolescent. He was therefore sent by Oda to the pre-eminent monastery ('arcisterium') of St Benedict at Fleury-sur-Loire, where the archbishop himself was said to have previously made his monastic profession and where the most perfect service of God in accord with Benedict's rule was believed to be observed. There, under Abbot Wulfhard (Wulfald), Oswald undertook for several years the full rigours of the monastic life, practising additional personal austerities; he also memorized monastic regulations and the office, so that he would be able to teach them in England. 
Archbishop Oda, towards the end of his life, sought permission from the diocesan bishop of Orleans and from the community at Fleury for Oswald's release from his obligation of stability in order that he might return to England. The archbishop may have wished to install his nephew at Ely, a site he had just acquired from King Eadwig, perhaps in the hope of re-establishing monastic life there. But any such plans were dashed, first by King Eadwig's loss of control in 957 of all territories north of the River Thames and then by Oda's death (2 June 958) before Oswald had reached Dover. Oswald therefore sought instead the patronage of a more distant kinsman, Oscytel, who had become archbishop of York two years previously. The story in the twelfth-century Ramsey 'Liber benefactorum' (in 'Chronicon abbatiae Rameseiensis', ed. W. D. Macray, Rolls Series, 1886) that Oswald, with his friend Germanus, then accompanied Oscytel to Rome to secure the pallium and that the two companions delayed at Fleury on the return journey should probably be accepted. Tenth-century English archbishops seem to have gone to Rome for their pall if they had been uncanonically translated to their metropolitan church from another see. Oscytel, who had been bishop of Dorchester before his elevation to York and who seems to have retained that see after his promotion, certainly fits that category. His journey, seemingly in late 958 or early 959, would have been the first time an archbishop of York had needed to go to Rome for that purpose. Oscytel's patronage of Oswald also led, according to Byrhtferth, to an introduction to 'Bishop Dunstan', presumably also in 958 or 959 when Dunstan was bishop of both Worcester and London. It is recounted that after his elevation to Canterbury, Dunstan persuaded King Edgar to appoint Oswald to the vacant see of Worcester; Oswald was commended to the king by the magnates of the region and 'elected and honourably consecrated by the bishops' (Byrhtferth of Ramsey, 1.420), events which may be placed early in the year 961, to judge from his attestation as bishop in the bulk of the extant charters of that year. 
The appointment of Oswald to the wealthy see of Worcester was part of a deliberate policy (with Dunstan's promotion to Canterbury and, in 963, AEthelwold's to Winchester) of putting reformed monks into the key positions in the English church in order that they might initiate the rapid adoption of ideas of monastic reform that had been current on the continent for a generation. Oswald therefore recalled from Fleury his friend Germanus, directing young clerks to be instructed by him in monastic customs; and he soon established him with twelve companions in the 'parochia' (minster) at Westbury-on-Trym where they are said to have remained for some four years. Byrhtferth portrays King Edgar's support for the new monasticism with a highly imaginative account of an Easter witan attended by all Edgar's bishops, and even by all the abbots and abbesses with their monks and nuns, in which Edgar, acknowledging the fame of St Benedict through Oswald's narration, ordered the construction of more than forty monasteries and was urged by AEthelwold to expel clerks from these houses. It is difficult to know whether any more credence should be given to the ensuing story that when Oswald sought a more secure foundation for his monks, the king offered him a choice of three possible sites: St Albans, Ely, or Benfleet. That may have been designed to gratify Ramsey's self-importance, but it may surely be accepted from Byrhtferth that it was the Anglo-Saxon nobleman, AEthelwine, a son of Ealdorman AEthelstan Half-King, who offered Oswald the fenland island site of Ramsey, where three men seeking the monastic habit had already gathered. 
Having accepted Ramsey, Oswald sent Eadnoth ('the elder') to oversee the construction of temporary accommodation there in the spring (some time between 965 and 969) and himself led the Westbury monks there on 29 August. The construction of the permanent buildings began in the following year and the monastery received handsome endowments from Oswald himself, from AEthelstan Mannessune (who was married to a kinswoman of Oswald), as well as from the founder, Ealdorman AEthelwine, and his brother, AElfwold. Oswald retained control over Ramsey throughout his lifetime and Byrhtferth claims that he visited every year, though he only describes two visits. The day-to-day direction of the Ramsey monks was exercised by a dean (successively Germanus, AEthelnoth, and Eadnoth 'the younger'). Oswald was believed to have consecrated the completed church there in 974. Byrhtferth also describes a great gathering at Ramsey on 8 November 991, when the ailing Oswald seems to have rededicated the church, which had had to be extensively rebuilt after the original central tower had split. After Oswald's death, the dean Eadnoth (the son of AEthelstan Mannessune and therefore a kinsman of Oswald) became the first abbot of Ramsey. 
After the transfer of the Westbury monks to Ramsey in the heart of the eastern Danelaw, where his paternal kin were based, Oswald turned to the revival of monasticism within his own diocese, first in his cathedral at Worcester and second at Winchcombe. Byrhtferth knew only of Ramsey's role in these events: namely that their dean, Germanus, had been appointed to head the house at Winchcombe and that the priest Wynsige (Wynsinus), who had been schooled at Ramsey, led a group of their choir monks to Worcester. Both the manner and the chronology of Oswald's introduction of monks to the cathedral community were the subject of conflicting interpretations in twelfth-century sources and have also occasioned controversy among modern historians. The best evidence is the series of nearly eighty leases issued by Oswald in the course of his pontificate to tenants of the church of Worcester, most of which are witnessed by members of the community. The leases show that the composition of Oswald's community (or at least of those senior enough to act as witnesses) changed gradually, but with influxes of new names in the 960s and 970s. They also show that the bulk of the community continued to be styled by their clerical grades (priest, deacon, or clerk) and that the style 'monk' was used occasionally, but irregularly, from the later 970s. There is a gap in the witnessed leases between 970 and 976, but from 977 to 985 the community is found headed by the priest Wynsige, who in one lease of the year 977 is styled 'monk' along with nine of the other twenty-six witnesses, though most of them revert to their clerical styles in subsequent leases. Nine of Oswald's leases were grants of properties to individual clerks, deacons, or priests of the church of Worcester, usually specifying their right to bequeath the land to two subsequent clerics; one such was the lease to the monk Wynsige of property which his father had previously held. There is no sign here, then, of the introduction of stricter rules of communal property following Oswald's reform. The leases also show that from the year 966 the church of Worcester was dedicated to St Mary, in addition to St Peter, and that in 983 Oswald had exceeded all expectation by completing the construction of the new church of St Mary. 
All this accords with the belief, current at Worcester in the second decade of the twelfth century and reported both by Eadmer and by William of Malmesbury, that Oswald had introduced monks gradually to his see 'with most holy guile' ('De gestis pontificum', 248) and had built the church of St Mary for them, immediately adjacent to the old cathedral church of St Peter, where the clerks continued to serve. On this interpretation, from 966 Oswald gradually built up a community of monks in the church of St Mary, who had an increasingly important role in the whole cathedral community; many of them proceeded beyond the minor clerical orders to be ordained as deacon and priest and may have had a full share of pastoral work alongside the clerks of St Peter's. 
An alternative interpretation of Oswald's reform was current at Worcester by the 1130s, namely that on Edgar's orders Oswald had expelled all those Worcester clerks who refused to abandon their wives and to become monks, and that he appointed Wynsige from Ramsey as dean of the new monastic cathedral community. Both in a rewritten annal of John of Worcester's chronicle and in the dubious record of Bishop Wulfstan's synod of 1092, the supposed expulsion of the clerks is attributed to the year 969, the date of one of Oswald's unwitnessed leases into which a note of the 'witness of Wynsige and all the monks of Worcester' had already been inserted by the early eleventh century. About the middle of the twelfth century, however, an elaborate forged charter of King Edgar, known by its first word 'Altitonantis', was produced which placed the supposed expulsion in 964 (the year of the expulsion of clerks from Winchester). The purpose of the expulsion myths in twelfth-century Worcester (as of similar fabrications at Canterbury) was to exalt the status of the monastic chapter in relation to secular clergy at a time when the bishop was no longer a monk and when there were fears that he might therefore attempt to secularize the chapter. 
The church of Worcester was already richly endowed before Oswald's day, and neither his reputation, nor that of the monks he introduced, seems to have led to any substantial new acquisitions of property. The practice of leasing estates to prominent laymen was also long established at Worcester but no previous (or later) Anglo-Saxon bishop seems to have taken so much care to record leases in writing. The properties which Oswald leased were smaller (mostly of 1, 2, or 3 hides) than the great ecclesiastical manors that had long been in the hands of his church. But together the leased estates amounted to almost a third of the 600 hides in the possession of the church of Worcester. They were often on peripheral, inferior land or in underdeveloped wooded country and they supported fewer peasant ploughteams, probably being more dependent upon hired labour. By contrast Oswald seems to have reserved the best arable land for the demesnes of his great estates and there is reason to think that these demesnes were already associated with nucleated settlements and open fields and perhaps too with production for the market in Worcester and in the other nascent towns in the region. 
Oswald's leases were normally granted for a period of three lives, after which the land was to revert to the church of Worcester; they thus respected the canons prohibiting the permanent alienation of any properties given to the church. The bulk of the lessees were lay nobles, that is local thegns (though one -- AElfwold -- was a king's thegn); but there were also a number of retainers ('cnihtas') and craftsmen. Some tenants were from families whose members had held lands from earlier bishops and in some instances Oswald can be seen granting a lease for three lives to the heir of the recipient of one of his earlier leases, thus extending the duration of the lease and virtually turning it into a hereditary holding. Almost a quarter of Worcester's leased estates were granted to members of Oswald's own family, to his brothers, Osulf and AEthelstan, and to a series of nephews, nieces, and more distant relatives. All Oswald's tenants were bound personally to the service of the bishop; many indeed received their leases in recognition of their 'faithful service'; others purchased them. 
The leases do not themselves specify what services the bishop might require from his tenants. But a tripartite chirograph ('indiculum') drawn up in the name of Oswald and addressed to King Edgar, of which the Worcester copy is preserved in Hemming's cartulary of the late eleventh century, purports to set down for the benefit of his successors in the see the terms which Oswald had agreed with his lessees. A great variety of obligations are specified as due from the tenants' estates: riding services, church-scot, toll, swine-scot and other church rights, lime burning and church building, erecting fencing for the bishop's hunt, and so forth. Much the most important, however, was the general demand for obedience to the bishop's commands: the tenants must both fulfil the service due to the bishop (as well as that due to the king) and be subject to the will of the bishop ('archiductor') if they wished to retain their benefices. It is impossible to prove the authenticity of such a unique document in the absence of any of the three original copies; its terms do not seem improbable, though the insistence upon obedience and on the revocability of tenures would certainly have been of interest in the generation after 1066, when the third lives of Oswald's leases were coming to an end and when a Norman aristocracy was establishing itself in the diocese. Viewing the 'indiculum' alongside the extant leases, we seem to see Oswald co-ordinating local notables and his own kinsmen into a network of 'fideles' established throughout the diocese to support the bishop of Worcester's seigneurial standing at both national and local levels and to provide the expertise necessary for running a great landed lordship. 
By the time of 'Domesday Book' the bulk of the estates of the church of Worcester had been organized into a judicial and administrative unit known as the 'triple hundred' of Oswaldslow, which took its name from Oswald. Indeed, in the forged 'Altitonantis' charter King Edgar is purported to have granted the monks of St Mary's a half-hundred of 'Cuthbergelaw' which he then formed into a whole hundred with estates already in their possession, to be held by their priest Wynsige and his successors; the charter goes on to claim to create or confirm two hundreds ('Wulfereslaw' and 'Winburgetreow') for Bishop Oswald, which were to form (along with the monks' hundred) a 'shipsoke' of three hundreds in the place to be called thenceforth Oswaldslow, in memory of the bishop. Within Oswaldslow the monks and the bishop were to enjoy a most extensive range of royal judicial rights and a comprehensive immunity excluding all royal officials. That was what the twelfth-century church of Worcester wished to be believed, but it is difficult to know whether any historical reality lies behind it. The judicial immunity excluding the king's agents is a feature of post-conquest rather than Anglo-Saxon law; and the definition of private hundreds from the estates of great ecclesiastical lords seems likewise to have been a product of the mid-eleventh century, rather than the mid-tenth. It remains equally uncertain whether the definition of shipsokes of 300 hides to raise ships' crews of sixty armed men was indeed the work of Edgar or rather of AEthelred the Unready a generation later; it seems very unlikely to have been a policy already established as early as 964. It may be concluded that Oswaldslow is more likely to have been an eleventh-century creation, given authority by its attribution to Worcester's great saint, rather than a personal achievement of Oswald himself. 
On the death of Archbishop Oscytel of York on 1 November 971, a certain Edwald of unknown origin was nominated to succeed him, but withdrew before his consecration, purportedly preferring a quieter life. The elevation of Oswald in his place suggests (as with the raising of Dunstan to Canterbury in 959 even though Bishop Byrhthelm had already been translated there) that the king was determined to have his own man in the see of York and to continue the policy begun under Oscytel of having the northern metropolitanate filled by a man from the eastern Danelaw but whose loyalties and interests were anchored by the tenure of a southern bishopric. Oswald's appointment to York seems (from his attestation of charters) to belong to the last days of 971 or the first half of 972. In the summer or autumn of 972 Edgar sent him on an embassy, with Abbot 'AEtherius' (perhaps AEthelgar of the New Minster, Winchester) and Wulfmaer, a king's thegn, to the court of the German emperor, Otto I, which returned, according to Byrhtferth, with even more notable gifts than those that they had taken. The German journey may have been designed to gain approval and expertise in relation to Edgar's long-delayed 'imperial' coronation at Bath on Whit Sunday in the following year, a ceremony where the two archbishops, Dunstan and Oswald, were to preside jointly and which is described at length by Byrhtferth with quotations from the second English coronation ordo. Oswald's German embassy may have been combined with his journey to Rome to obtain the pallium from Pope John XIII, which belongs to very much the same time. According to Byrhtferth, Oswald earned the praise of both God and men for the substantial payments of pennies which he made as alms at monasteries, and at villas, castles, country estates, and cities, before he returned with the pope's blessing. A generation later Archbishop Wulfstan of York (died 1023) was to take a much more critical view of the monetary payments that were expected in Rome in order to secure the pall. 
Very little is known of Oswald's management of his northern diocese and province. There has survived (from a Worcester manuscript) a copy of a declaration that he made listing the York properties that he or his predecessor, Oscytel, had recovered but which had been lost again in the unsettled conditions after Edgar's death and the succession of Earl Thored in 975; the endangered properties include over twenty vills dependent upon the great York estates of Otley, Ripon, and Sherburn in Elmet. This suggests that (as with the Worcester leases) Oswald was determined to ensure through written records that the property claims of his cathedral should not be forgotten but rather, as soon as political circumstances permitted, vigorously prosecuted. 
Oswald is not known to have introduced any reform to the clergy of his cathedral at York. But Byrhtferth claims that at the ruined monastery of Ripon, Oswald discovered a great hidden treasure, namely the bones of St Wilfrid along with the relics of five succeeding abbots (Tatberht, Botwine, Albert, Sicgred, and Wildegel); he goes on to assert that in the church with Wilfrid's pontifical seat, where hitherto 'deacons and sparrows' had dwelt, Oswald arranged for monks to serve God. Since what were held to be the relics of Wilfrid had already been taken from Ripon to Canterbury a generation earlier by Archbishop Oda and since nothing is known in any later source of this revival of monastic life at Ripon, it has been doubted whether Oswald really attempted to build a monastic community there around a revived cult of Ripon's founder and early abbots. But the fact that some relics of all six Ripon saints were later to be found in the high altar at Peterborough is most easily explained by the suggestion that Oswald and Ripon were indeed directly involved in the revival of their cult in the world of reformed monasticism. It may rather be that Ripon is simply one of the houses where the revived Benedictine life did not outlast the first generation of monastic reform. 
Byrhtferth's life of Oswald claims that seven monasteries had been constructed within the Mercian province of the Hwicce (that is, in the diocese of Worcester), under Oswald's control and with their heads appointed by King Edgar. To the already mentioned Worcester, Westbury, and Winchcombe, may readily be added Pershore (established under Abbot Foldbriht by 970) and Evesham (under Abbot Osweard from much the same time). If Byrhtferth's figure is accurate rather than symbolic, we may guess that the missing houses may have been at Deerhurst, where St AElfheah was said to have received his monastic training, and conceivably at Gloucester, whose history is very dark at this time. Whatever the true number, however, the early years of Oswald's pontificate had certainly seen a remarkable transfer of landed resources in the diocese into the hands of reformed monks. In that process there are likely to have been losers, both among the local nobles and among the secular clerks previously associated with minster churches. The tension thereby created in Hwiccan society was exacerbated by the succession dispute that arose following Edgar's death on 8 July 975, when the powerful Mercian ealdorman, AElfhere, supported the claims of AEthelred, the son of Edgar's third wife, AElfthryth, while Oswald, together with the leading reformers and with Ramsey's founder, Ealdorman AEthelwine, backed Edward, the child of the first marriage. In the ensuing struggle for power, land, and followers, that was only finally resolved by the murder of Edward the Martyr and the accession of AEthelred the Unready in 978, the lands of the new monasteries associated with the opposing faction were an obvious target. 
Byrhtferth describes these events in terms of a general expulsion of abbots and their monks and of the reintroduction of married clerks in their place. In particular he relates that Abbot Germanus and his monks were driven from Winchcombe by Ealdorman AElfhere of Mercia; late traditions and breaks in the succession of abbots indicate that similar (but more temporary) expulsions occurred at both Evesham and Pershore. Byrhtferth believed that AElfhere, 'the mad wind coming from the western territories', influenced others to follow his example of replacing monks by secular clerks (Byrhtferth of Ramsey, 1.443-6). Clearly Oswald's houses were particularly vulnerable since the bishop was known as one of Edward's leading supporters; Ramsey, however, lying within the ealdormanry of its founder, AEthelwine, was a safe refuge and the cathedral community at Worcester also seems to have survived intact. Whether the clerks of St Peter's and the monks of St Mary's were a sufficiently unified community to mean that there were at Worcester no ousted married clerks seeking to encourage the ealdorman to restore them by force, or whether Worcester's noble tenants were sufficiently influential to protect their lord's church from interference, are subjects for speculation. Most of the leases had originally been made with AElfhere's consent and licence and this continued to be the pattern throughout Edward's reign, so it may be that bishop and ealdorman collaborated at least to preserve the cathedral. Moreover, one of the Worcester lessees was a king's thegn, AElfwold, very possibly to be identified as the brother of Ealdorman AEthelwine, whom Byrhtferth singles out as the first man to resist the anti-monastic tide in Mercia. Oswald, it would seem, had provided his see with potent protectors. 
Like other English centres of monastic reform, Oswald's Worcester acquired books written on the continent and also developed its own distinctive version of the Carolingian minuscule script, which is first witnessed in the part of a charter of the year 961 which seems to have been written by Oswald himself. It is instructive, however, that (as at Canterbury) the new Anglo-Caroline script was practised at the same time, and even in the same volumes (for example, British Library, Royal MS 8 B.xi), as the traditional insular square minuscule. At Winchester, by contrast, AEthelwold's reform meant that from 964 for Latin texts only Caroline script was permitted. The coexistence of the two scripts at Worcester may reflect the collaboration of both monks of St Mary's and clerks of St Peter's in the production of books for the Worcester Library. Between 983 and 985 Oswald leased land at Bredicot to the priest Goding and Hemming's cartulary records that this grant was to enable him to serve as scribe and that he wrote many books for the monastery. His work for the community cannot be identified, but one Worcester scribe, Sistan, can be shown to have copied works by the Carolingian writers Smaragdus and Paschasius Radbertus for the Worcester Library at this time in the new script. 
Byrhtferth records Oswald's gift to Ramsey of a 'glorious pandect', that is, a complete 'Bible', which sadly has not survived. But a number of high-quality volumes with illuminated initials and scripts in various registers from Oswald's houses are extant. The so-called Winchcombe sacramentary seems to have been produced in that house, or by Winchcombe monks after their flight to Ramsey, as a gift to the mother house of Fleury (Orleans, Bibliotheque Municipale, MS 127, 105). A huge and magnificently written and illuminated psalter (British Library, Harley MS 2904), once attributed either to Winchester or to Ramsey, seems likely to have been made for Oswald's own use at York or Worcester. The scribe of this psalter also wrote a pontifical (Cambridge, Sidney Sussex College, MS 100, part 2) intended for a bishop to carry around with him; it was probably made for Oswald's own use, either at Worcester or in his northern diocese; its ordination and other ceremonies represent a fascinating mixture of English and continental liturgical practices, perhaps typical of Oswald's eclectic and compromising instincts. 
After the rededication of the monastic church at Ramsey in November 991 and the great banquet that followed, Oswald returned to Worcester in failing health. Byrhtferth tells that despite weakening further that winter, he resumed in February 992 his Lenten custom of washing the feet of twelve poor men each day, accompanied by the singing of 'Psalms 120-34'. After this task he passed away peacefully on 29 February, while singing the doxology. After being elaborately washed and laid out, the body was buried by the community next day within a mausoleum of wonderful workmanship which the community later claimed had been constructed by Oswald himself. 
A cult developed very rapidly. Byrhtferth describes miraculous signs that accompanied the funeral and the working of wonders at Oswald's tomb. Probably within two years of his death, his feast (28 February) had already been entered into the York metrical calendar that was being extended at Ramsey. Ten years after his death an elaborate translation was masterminded by his successor, Bishop Ealdwulf, who had the bones solemnly enshrined on the south side of the altar of the cathedral church of St Mary on 15 April 1002. A series of miraculous cures and events then effectively established his sanctity. His deposition and translation were treated as major feasts in local calendars and less prominently in some other English texts and at Fleury. He is invoked in four or five Anglo-Saxon litanies, including the portable prayer book (or 'portiforium') of St Wulfstan (Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 391) which also contains three hymns in his honour and a calendar that lists his second translation (8 October), occasioned by Wulfstan's rebuilding of the cathedral. Byrhtferth's life held the field for more than a century, but 'c'.1115 the Canterbury hagiographer and historian, Eadmer, wrote at the request of the Worcester community an account of the life and miracles of St Oswald, which clarified and updated Byrhtferth's account and recounted miracles associated with the two translations. Nothing of significance is added by the life written by the late twelfth-century prior, Senatus, nor by the later medieval abbreviated versions. 


@@@@@


doc= 20918


Oswald (fl. 1006-1042), Benedictine monk and scholar, was the nephew of St Oswald, archbishop of York. The earliest period of Oswald's life was spent as an oblate at Ramsey. According to the twelfth-century 'Liber benefactorum' of Ramsey, he was one of the four schoolboys who, in the time of Abbot Eadnoth (992-1006), cracked one of the monastery's bells by pulling frivolously and inexpertly on the bell-ropes; their teachers (one of whom was probably Byrhtferth of Ramsey) and the monks threatened them with severe punishment, but they were pardoned by Eadnoth. Oswald subsequently travelled to the continent, visiting St Omer, Arras, Corbie, St Denis in Paris, and then Lagny; he ended up studying at Fleury (as his uncle had done before him). His travels and accomplishments at Fleury were recorded in a poem by Constantine, a monk of Fleury who later became abbot of Micy (died 1021); although the poem is lost, it was composed in elegiacs and addressed to Bishop Oswald, and was seen in manuscript by John Leland (died 1552), who made a note of its content. Oswald subsequently returned to Ramsey, where he led a life of quiet study, becoming a man 'renowned for his erudition and piety', according to the 'Liber benefactorum' ('Chronicon abbatiae Rameseiensis', 159-60); the same source records that he turned down the offer of a bishopric, preferring to pursue his literary studies at Ramsey. On the occasion of a visit by Edward the Confessor ('r'. 1042-66) to Ramsey, Oswald successfully petitioned the king for a grant of estates at Wimbotsham and Downham Market, Norfolk; the original charter does not survive, but the grant is recorded in a document dated 1060 but forged in the twelfth century by Osbert of Clare ('AS chart.', S 1030). 
Oswald's scholarly activity resulted in a substantial corpus of writing, most of which has unfortunately perished. The 'Liber benefactorum' records that in the Ramsey library there was a volume of Oswald's poetry, which gave evidence of his 'multifarious learning and acute ingenuity', but this volume has not survived ('Chronicon abbatiae Rameseiensis', 160). Leland was familiar with two further works: a 'Liber sacrarum precationum' (said by Leland to be partly in verse, partly in prose), and a treatise 'De componendis epistolis' cast in the form of a letter. John Bale (died 1563) added to this list a work entitled 'De edendis carminibus'. All of these have apparently been lost. Leland records that he had seen two manuscripts of Oswald's writings, one at Glastonbury, the other at Ramsey; but they have perished. However, two brief poems have been identified as the work of Oswald: both are preserved in a mid-eleventh-century manuscript from Canterbury (now in Cambridge University Library, MS Gg.5.35), and both are in an elaborate metrical form known as 'versus retrogradi': that is to say, the metre is preserved whether they are read forwards or backwards. The first, consisting of twenty-one hexameters, begins 'Centum concito sic qui nouit condere versus' ('he who knows how to compose quickly a hundred lines in this manner'). It contains an indication of Oswald's authorship in line 9: 'istos texuit Oswoldus, qui est nescius artis' ('Oswald, who is ignorant of the art, composed these [lines]'). The second, in four elegiac distichs, begins '
Terrigene bene nunc laudent, ut condecet, almum 

vocibus excelsis sic sibi perplacitis. 
(Let earth-dwellers now duly praise the kindly God, as is fitting, with celestial voices pleasing to him.)' 



@@@@@


doc= 20919


Corda, Oswald (d. 1434), author and prior of the Charterhouse, Perth, was almost certainly born in Bavaria, though some sources state that he was English or Scottish. He may have studied at Paris before being admitted to the Charterhouse of Hortus Christi near Nordlingen in Bavaria 'c'.1405, and transferred to the Grande Chartreuse in May or June 1414. While at the mother house, possibly in 1410 but more probably in 1417, he completed his major work, the 'Opus pacis' (extracts from which are edited by Lehmann), on the correction of texts. His work circulated extensively, but not exclusively, within his own order: of ten extant manuscripts, two are Benedictine and eight are Carthusian. Between April 1424 and April or May 1429 he conducted a close correspondence (edited by Glorieux) with Jean Gerson (died 1429), chancellor of the University of Paris, in which Corda addressed to him many questions on practical and spiritual subjects and developed an already fruitful relationship between the 'doctor christianissimus' and Corda's own order. Corda may have translated some of Gerson's treatises from French into Latin, though other works have been attributed to him by mistake. He became vicar of the Grande Chartreuse, apparently between 1424 and 1427, and first prior of the Charterhouse of Vallis Virtutis at Perth in 1429. The circumstances of his appointment to the latter office are unknown, but it is likely that he was chosen by the authorities at the Grande Chartreuse, following their grant of permission for the foundation of the Perth Charterhouse in a letter of 19 August 1426. As prior, Corda advanced James I's new foundation, acquired a contemporary reputation for learning and sanctity, and, according to the acts of the Carthusian general chapter, died in office on 15 September 1434, though less official and less reliable sources give the year as 1437. 


@@@@@


doc= 20920


George Oswald (1735-1819). His wife, Mary, died on 6 December 1788 and was buried alongside the peacemaker in the Oswald vault at St Quivox parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 20921


Oswald, James (1715-1769), politician, eldest son of James Oswald, MP for Kirkcaldy (1702-7) and for Kirkcaldy burghs (1713-15), was born at Dunnikier, Dysart, Fife. His brother John later became bishop of Raphoe. He was educated at Kirkcaldy burgh school, where he became a good friend of one of his schoolfellows, Adam Smith. He entered the University of Edinburgh and was admitted as a student at Lincoln's Inn on 13 December 1733. After making a prolonged grand tour he was called to the Scottish bar in 1740. He did not practise, however, and on 2 June 1741 was returned to parliament for Kirkcaldy burghs, which he continued to represent until 1768 with the exception of the years from 1747 to 1754 during which he sat for Fife. On 19 January 1747 he married, in London, Elizabeth Reynardson ('nee' Townsend), daughter of a London brewer and MP for Westbury, Joseph Townsend, and widow of Abraham Reynardson. 
A strong whig, Oswald voted against the hiring of Hanoverian troops (10 December 1742). On the formation of the 'broad bottom' administration he received the office of Scottish commissioner of the navy (December 1744). His speeches, principally on economic and military matters, were always very able. He demonstrated his independence by supporting, on 28 October 1745, Hume Campbell's motion for an inquiry into the causes and progress of the Jacobite rising, the entire responsibility for which he laid at the door of the government, thus alienating Pitt the elder. He then ingratiated himself with the Leicester House party. Such tactics proved successful and he gained office: from December 1751 to December 1759 he sat on the Board of Trade, and from 22 December 1759 to 15 April 1763 on the Treasury board. On 4 May 1763 he was appointed joint vice-treasurer in Ireland, after having been sworn of the privy council on 20 April. He retired from parliament on grounds of ill health and was succeeded as MP by his son James Townsend Oswald. 
Oswald was an able and industrious public servant, and also a man of literary and philosophical tastes. He was a close friend and an amiable critic not only of Adam Smith, but also of David Hume, Henry Home, Lord Kames, and John Home, the author of 'Douglas'. He died in Hammersmith on 24 March 1769. 


@@@@@


doc= 20922


Oswald, John (c.1760-1793), journalist and poet, was born in Edinburgh, where his father, also John Oswald, a goldsmith of 'great learning', kept John's Coffee House. Nothing is known of his mother. John learned Latin and Greek as a youth, and later studied Arabic, French, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese. He was a goldsmith's apprentice, but joined the Royal Irish regiment in 1776 or 1777, serving from early 1781 as a lieutenant in India. Before embarking, he married his first wife, Louisa, in Deal. They had two sons. On the way to India, he duelled with Colonel Norman Macleod. Oswald was in Madras in the winter of 1782-3, but left India in 1783, returning by land to the Deal-Dover area. His wife having died, he married Bathesheba Fagge Owen ('bap'. 1759), a widow, on 1 June 1784 in Folkestone. They had one daughter, Jane, and an infant son. 
Oswald worked in Grub Street, London, on the 'Political Herald and Review' (1785-6), and published with James Ridgway the 'British Mercury' (1787), with prints by Gillray and Rowlandson. He reported parliamentary debates for the 'London Gazetteer' (1789-91), lectured and debated in London (Society of Free Debate at Coachmakers Hall, 1790), wrote poetry ('Euphrosyne: an Ode to Beauty', 1788, under the pseudonym Sylvester Otway), love poems for 'The World' (1790), and political pamphlets: 'Review of the Constitution of Great Britain' (1784), 'Ranae comicae evangelizantes' (1786), 'The Alarming Progress of French Politics' (1787), and 'The Cry of Nature' (1791). By now a friend of Tom Paine, John Horne Tooke, David Williams, James Mackintosh, and John and William Stone, Oswald was known as a revolutionary activist in England and France. His reputation may be sensed by his 'Constitution for the Universal Commonwealth' (1793), which was recommended to Burke, with the works of Paine, Sieyes, Barlow, and Mirabeau, in 1792. 
By May 1790 Oswald was resident in Paris. He watched the debates in the national assembly, where he presented an 'Ode to the Triumph of Freedom' on 4 September 1790. He met Thomas Cooper, Joel Barlow, Thomas Christie, Wolfe Tone, Lord Edward Fitzgerald, Brissot, Danton, Desmoulins, the Rolands, Theroigne de Mericourt, and Henry Redhead Yorke, with whom he argued between 1792 and 1793. Oswald collaborated with Bonneville as editor of a monthly journal, 'Chronique du Mois' (1791-3), of the Circle Social (founded in Paris in January 1790), which included Brissot, Condorcet, and Lanthenas among its authors. James Ridgway was its London bookseller (1791). Oswald also worked as secretary and reporter for a few months on the 'Universal Patriot' (edition of 3 May 1790), the English newspaper printed in Paris, London, and Calais, hoping to cover debates on both sides of the channel. Late in 1792 the British Club was formed by some British men and women who met in White's Hotel in Paris to celebrate successes of the French army and national assembly. Oswald officiated as secretary. He spoke in the Jacobin Club (22 August 1792, 30 September 1792, 4 February 1793), wrote its 'La tactique du peuple' ('c'.1792), and worked as its publisher and collaborating editor. He translated its 'Almanach des Pere Gerard' by Collot d'Herbois as 'The Spirit of the French Constitution: the Almanach of Goodman Gerard' with a subsidy from the London Corresponding Society. He was named an honorary French citizen on 25 September 1792 and commander in the French revolutionary army. As commandant of the Parisian pikemen Oswald left Paris on 26 March 1793 with his battalion to fight and die at Thouars in the battle of La Vendee on 14 September 1793. His two sons (aged fourteen and seventeen) served as drummer boys, and were wounded but not killed in this same battle. 
Oswald, a vegetarian and atheist, used the pseudonyms Ignotus (in the 'Political Herald', 1785-7), Sylvester Otway (London newspapers 1788-9), and H. K. He was of 'middle height... noble carriage, [had a] heroic and grave face, sober manners and [was] a bit stiff' (Lichtenberger, 483). 


@@@@@


doc= 20923


Oswald, Sir John (1771-1840), army officer, son of James Townsend Oswald, was born at Dunnikier, Kirkcaldy, Fife, on 2 October 1771. For some years (from about 1785) he was at the military school at Brienne, France, just after Napoleon had left. With Louis-Antoine Fauvelet de Bourrienne, Napoleon's school companion and future secretary, Oswald contracted a lifelong friendship, and some of his holidays were spent in Paris. He thus acquired a command of the French language, which proved of great service to him in his profession, and a sympathy with the French, which was uncommon at that time. However, abhorrence of revolutionary principles, intensified by the loss of personal friends whom he had known in Paris in his youth, gave bias to his political views. He was appointed a second lieutenant in the 23rd foot (Royal Welch Fusiliers) on 1 February 1788, and first lieutenant in the 7th foot (Royal Fusiliers) on 29 January 1789. In June 1790 he embarked to join the Royal Fusiliers at Gibraltar, was appointed captain of an independent company on 24 January 1791, and on 23 March of that year became a captain in the 35th foot. While brigade major to Major-General John Leland, he resigned when the grenadier company of the 35th, which he commanded, was ordered to the West Indies. He served with the 2nd provisional battalion of grenadiers at the capture of Martinique, St Lucia, and Guadeloupe in 1794, and was afterwards in garrison at Port-au-Prince on San Domingo until his company was drafted and the officers and sergeants sent home to recruit. He became major in the 35th on 1 September 1795, lieutenant-colonel of the regiment on 30 March 1797, and lieutenant-colonel in the army on 29 December 1798. 
Oswald commanded the 35th during the expedition to The Helder in the Netherlands in 1799, until severely wounded at Crabbenham, near Bergen aan Zee, on 19 September. In 1800 he embarked with the two battalions of his regiment among the troops dispatched under Major-General Richard Pigot, and landed with them at Minorca. He subsequently took part in the blockade of Valletta and capture of Malta, remaining there in command of the regiment until the peace of Amiens, when he went home on leave. On the renewal of the war he rejoined the regiment at Malta, and became brevet colonel on 30 October 1805. With the 35th he joined the troops under Lieutenant-General Sir James Craig in Sicily, was appointed commander at Melazzo, and commanded the advance of Major-General Sir John Stuart's force at the landing in Calabria in June of that year. He commanded the 3rd brigade of the army at the battle of Maida on 4 July 1806, and three days later marched with it into Lower Calabria, where he captured Scylla Castle after a siege of twenty days. On his return to Sicily he received the local rank of brigadier-general. In February 1807 he went with Major-General Alexander Mackenzie Fraser to Egypt, where the two battalions of the 35th were the first troops to land. He commanded the troops sent against Alexandria, and attacked and captured the western lines, taking many guns and driving the Turks within the walls. Alexandria capitulated two days later. Oswald was then sent to Rosetta, where he came under repeated attack for fifteen days before being withdrawn in the face of vastly superior enemy forces. He remained in Alexandria until the expedition returned to Sicily, where he was appointed commandant of Augusta. In June 1808 his local rank was extended to the Mediterranean generally, and in October he was appointed to command a large body of troops collected at Melazzo. In 1809 he led the reserve in the expedition to the coast of Italy, which ended in the capture of the islands of Ischia and Procida; of the latter he became commandant. He went back to Sicily in July 1809, and in September was sent to the Ionian Islands with an expeditionary force, which seized Zante (Zakynthos), Cephalonia, Ithaca, and Cerigo (Kithira). 
In March 1810, recognizing the danger to the captured islands from the neighbouring French garrison in Santa Maura (Levkas), Oswald collected 2000 troops and landed there on 23 March. He drove the enemy behind their lines, personally leading the troops that stormed the strongest of the entrenchments, and secured the enemy's capitulation after eight days. He then administered the civil and military government of the captured islands. By his tact and judgement he confirmed the prepossessions of the Greeks in favour of British rule, and he also established advantageous relations with the neighbouring Turkish pashas. On 11 February 1811 Oswald was appointed colonel of the 1st Greek light infantry, consisting mostly of Greek brigands, who made very good soldiers. He left the administration of the Ionian Islands -- which he nominally governed until 1815 -- to Richard Church and returned home to impress on the government their strategic importance. He was made a major-general on 4 June 1811 and appointed to command the western district. On 28 January 1812 he married Charlotte (died 1827), eldest daughter of the Revd Lord Charles Murray-Aynsley, son of John Murray, third duke of Atholl. James Townsend, their son, served as an army officer from 1839 to 1848. 
Oswald joined the staff of the Peninsular army on 22 October 1812, during the retreat from Burgos. He was present with Wellington during rearguard cavalry actions on 23-4 October, and on the 25th took command of the 5th division during the absence of Major-General James Leith. At the head of the division he had some sharp fighting at Villa Muriel and the passage of the River Carrion, and remained in charge of it until it went into winter quarters on the banks of the River Douro, though on one occasion during the withdrawal he incurred Wellington's displeasure for varying his line of march without authority. When the army took the field in May 1813, Oswald commanded the 5th division in its difficult march through the north of Portugal and the Spanish provinces of Zamora, Leon, and Palencia, as it drove the enemy back at Osma on 17 June, and, passing through a mountainous country previously considered impassable for troops with guns, joined Wellington at Vitoria on 20 June. He led the division at the battle of Vitoria on the 21st and the opening phase of the siege of San Sebastian. However, Leith resumed command of the division two days previous to the assault on San Sebastian on 31 August, Oswald reverting to a brigade until he was wounded on the 31st. 
The death of an elder brother, and the failing health of his father, to whose estates he had become heir, now resulted in Oswald's recall to England. He received the thanks of parliament for his services at Vitoria and San Sebastian, and a gold medal with two clasps for Maida, Vitoria, and San Sebastian. He was made KCB on 4 June 1815. On the disbanding of the Greek light infantry he became colonel-commandant of one of the batteries of the rifle brigade, and on 9 October 1819 appointed colonel of the 35th, a post he retained until his death in 1840. He became a lieutenant-general on 12 August 1819 and a general on 10 January 1837, and was made GCB in 1824 and GCMG in 1838. In politics he was a staunch conservative and once, in the days before the first 'Reform Act', unsuccessfully contested the county of Fife. In October 1829 he married Emily Jane, daughter of Lord Henry Murray and cousin of his first wife, Charlotte; she survived him. 
In person Oswald was a tall, handsome, powerful man, over 6 feet in height, who used his weapons well in hand-to-hand combat, notably in the attack on Scylla Castle in 1806. He had strong literary tastes, was a good and ready public speaker, and was popular in society. Oswald died at his seat, Dunnikier, Kirkcaldy, Fife, on 8 June 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 20924


Oswald, Richard (1705?-1784), merchant and diplomat, was born, probably in 1705, in Dunnet, Caithness, Scotland, the second of the four children of George Oswald (1664-1726), the Presbyterian minister of Dunnet, and his wife, Margaret (died 1747), of Pennyland, Caithness, the daughter of Richard Murray of Scotscalder, Caithness, and his wife, Jean Smythe. The suggestion in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' that Richard Oswald was the unsuccessful candidate for the Thurso schoolmastership can be discarded on the grounds that, since the search took place in 1711, he would have been at most eleven years old when applying for the position. He left Caithness at the age of twenty after his father's death and apprenticed himself to his older cousins Richard (1687-1763) and Alexander Oswald (1694-1766), who had built a successful trade in Glasgow in tobacco, sugar, and wine. During the 1730s he travelled through southern North America and the Caribbean as their factor, distributing supplies to planters, collecting crops in payment, and dunning tardy debtors. He returned to Glasgow in 1741 and became a junior partner in his cousins' firm. 
Assisted by several thousand pounds of prize profits reaped during the War of the Austrian Succession, Oswald moved to London in early 1746 and, from a counting-house at 17 Philpot Lane, commenced an ambitious shipping and merchandising operation. At first tobacco played an important role in his business, but he soon branched out into horses, slaves, and sugar. He undergirded his capital-intensive tobacco and slave adventures with a marriage on 12 November 1750, at St Martin-in-the-Fields to Mary Ramsay (1719-1788), the daughter of a wealthy Jamaica merchant, Alexander Ramsay (died 1738), and his wife, Jean Ferguson, and a partnership with two fellow Scots who had moved to London in the 1740s, John Mill (1710-1771) and Robert Scott (died 1771). With the support this cohort provided, Oswald began to exploit opportunities in two additional areas -- government contracting and land speculation. Contracting came first, helped by the support of a cousin, James Oswald of Dunnikier, who sat on the Treasury board. Richard Oswald supplied summer encampments in southern England with bread, forage, straw, wood, and wagons in 1756, 1757, and 1758. In 1758 he agreed to supply the troops in Germany with bread. Over the course of the Seven Years' War he executed three separate contracts and held two separate commissions with the commissariat; in all, he cleared over $125,000. The end of the war in 1763 ushered in a new era of enterprise for Oswald, a period of large-scale land acquisition and development -- activities which meshed neatly with ongoing slaving and shipping businesses. In the Caribbean he acquired title to four plantations, totalling 1566 acres. In North America, after false starts in Nova Scotia and South Carolina, he obtained 30,000 acres in East Florida near the confluence of the Halifax and Timoka rivers. His greatest investment occurred closer to home, however: between 1764 and 1784 he acquired and 'improved' roughly 7000 acres on the banks of the River Ayr in Ayrshire (the Auchincruive estate) and about the same amount in Kirkcudbrightshire and Dumfriesshire (the Cavens estate). 
Oswald's global interests were sorely tested by the American War of Independence. During these years he curtailed his operations overseas. In 1780 he sold land he owned in Virginia, and the following year he began to withdraw from Florida. At the same time he stepped up his involvement in politics, which until then had been largely advisory. He wrote memoranda on military strategy, drawing on years of experience in and with the colonies, and submitted them to friends in Whitehall. In December 1781 he provided bail to release his old correspondent and friend Henry Laurens, who had previously used Oswald's counting-house as his own office whenever he was in London and who had been imprisoned in the Tower since September 1780. In March 1782 the marquess of Rockingham, on the advice of the earl of Shelburne, made Oswald his emissary in Paris to ascertain the American position on peace. There is no evidence to support the 'Dictionary of National Biography''s claim that Adam Smith had introduced Shelburne to Oswald, or that Smith's ideas became Oswald's own; the Oswald and Shelburne circles had overlapped for decades, and Oswald's thoughts on protected and free trade were more nuanced and self-serving than Smith's. Between April and June Oswald shuttled between London and Paris. His work was frustrated by the presence and conflicting claims of competing representatives appointed by Shelburne's rivals in the ministry. When Rockingham died in early July, Shelburne, who succeeded Rockingham as chief minister, removed the others and, in a commission dated 25 July 1782, appointed Oswald sole British representative charged with crafting an American peace. From the beginning to the end of the negotiations Oswald adhered to the belief that America's commercial dependence on Britain was the critical issue, and that political dependence meant comparatively little. These beliefs withstood the assistance provided by Henry Strachey and Alleyne Fitzherbert, who had been sent by Shelburne in the autumn to make sure Oswald did not give away too much. Oswald was too highly regarded by the Americans to consider his replacement. Five months after his appointment Oswald gave Shelburne a testament of these beliefs in the form of the preliminary articles of peace. This agreement, the first of the settlements to come out of Paris, raised a storm of protest at home and eventually brought down the Shelburne administration and, with it, the peacemaker. The preliminary articles proved more lasting than did the objections to it, however, and Oswald's terms were accepted without revision as the final treaty of Paris in September 1783. 
After returning to London Oswald retreated to the comfort of his family and friends, dividing his days between his new town house, 9 Great George Street, and his mansion on the banks of the River Ayr designed and decorated by James Adam. When in London he entertained the American negotiators on their return to the United States. He occasionally dabbled in trade, although he passed the management of the firm on to his nephews John (1747-1808) and Alexander Anderson (1756-1832). He died in his bedroom at Auchincruive at 6 a.m. on 6 November 1784, and was buried in the High Church, Glasgow. With no legitimate children (he had fathered two illegitimate sons in the 1740s, but they had predeceased him), his substantial estate passed to his nephew 
Oswald's nephew George Oswald of Scotstoun, near Glasgow, was born on 30 July 1735 in Dunnet, Caithness, one of the eight children of his elder brother, the Revd James Oswald (1703-1793), Presbyterian minister of Dunnet and (after 1750) Methven, Perthshire, and in 1765 moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, and his first wife, Elizabeth, the daughter of James Murray and his wife, Margaret Sinclair. George Oswald first worked for his father's cousins, Richard and Alexander Oswald, and in the late 1760s he established his own tobacco-trading firm on Virginia Street under the name of Oswald, Dennistoun & Co. He also served as a partner in Glasgow's Ship Bank. In January 1764 he married Margaret (1747-1791), the daughter of David Smythe of Methven; they had four sons and five or six daughters. He acquired the small estates of Scotstoun and Balshagray, near Glasgow, in 1766, after the deaths of Richard and Alexander Oswald, and in 1784 he inherited the estate of Auchincruive on the death of his uncle Richard. In 1797 he was elected the rector of Glasgow University. He died on 6 October 1819, and was succeeded by his son Richard Alexander Oswald (1771-1841). 


@@@@@


doc= 20925


Oswell, (William) Cotton (1818-1893), explorer and hunter, was born at Leytonstone, Essex, on 27 April 1818, the elder son of William Oswell (1782-1822) and his wife, Amelia (died 1848), the daughter of Joseph Cotton, deputy master of Trinity House and grandson of Dr Nathaniel Cotton. From 1833 to 1835 he was at Rugby School, under the headmastership of Thomas Arnold. He proceeded to East India College, Haileybury, where he was placed second among the students of his year. Having obtained an appointment through his uncle John Cotton, one of the East India Company's directors, in 1837 he went to Madras where, during his ten years' residence, he won celebrity as an elephant-catcher. 
After serving as assistant to the principal collector of revenue at Arcot and as head assistant at Coimbatore, Oswell was ordered to South Africa for his health. There he spent two years in hunting and became acquainted with the missionary David Livingstone. When in 1849 Livingstone determined to investigate the truth of rumours as to a great lake in the Kalahari, Oswell and his friend Mungo Murray returned to South Africa from England in order to take part in the exploration, Oswell undertaking to defray the whole expense of the guides. The result was the discovery by Europeans of Lake Ngami, and the important practical demonstration that the Kalahari could be crossed by oxen and wagons. Livingstone freely acknowledged his indebtedness to the companionship of Oswell, who looked after the wagons and supplied the party with food, thus enabling the work of surveying, of making scientific collections, and of studying the African people to be carried on without anxiety or preoccupation. The kuabaoba, or straight-horned rhinoceros, was named Oswellii after Oswell, who also received the medal of the Societe de Geographie de Paris for his share in the journey. He again accompanied Livingstone in 1851, on an expedition to meet the Kololo paramount chief Sebituane. On that occasion they first sighted the Zambezi River. 
Recalled from a life of adventure by family matters, Oswell returned to England in 1853. On the outbreak of the Crimean War he went to the front as the guest of some of his Indian friends, and rendered good service in the trenches, in the hospitals, and as the bearer of secret service money for Lord Raglan. He afterwards travelled through North and South America, and in 1860 married Agnes Frances (died 1908), fourth daughter of Francis Rivaz; they settled at Groombridge in Kent. In his lifetime he was more celebrated as a gentleman sportsman than as an African explorer. His collection of hunting trophies was renowned as a private museum and, at the end of his life, he contributed chapters to C. P. Wolley's anthology 'Big Game Shooting' (1894). To the regret of his contemporaries, Oswell published no accounts of his expeditions with Livingstone. His modesty, gentlemanly demeanour, and physical prowess were much admired. He died at his home, Hillside, Groombridge, on 1 May 1893, survived by his wife, three sons, and two daughters, and was buried at Groombridge. 
After his death, much of his most important correspondence was published by his eldest son, Edward Oswell, together with a foreword by his friend Francis Galton, the propagandist of eugenics. Among these letters are some from Livingstone which credit Oswell with the initial conception of introducing European colonization and commerce to central Africa as an antidote to the slave trade. 


@@@@@


doc= 20926


Oswen, John (fl. 1548-1553), printer, was active first at Ipswich, and afterwards at Worcester. He was one of only two printers known to have worked at Ipswich in the sixteenth century; the earlier, Anthony Scoloker, probably began work in 1547 and had moved his press to London by June 1548. Nine works printed at Ipswich by John Oswen survive, five of them dated 1548 and the others undated. A further two books, also from 1548, were listed as Oswen's by Andrew Maunsell in his 1595 'Catalogue of English Printed Books', but no copies of either these or of a third, seen by William Herbert and described in his revision of Joseph Ames's 'Typographical Antiquities' (1785-90, 3.1458), appear to survive. All twelve books were works by protestant reformers, including English translations of tracts by John Calvin, Christopher Hegendorff, Antoine Marcort, Philip Melanchthon, and Joannes Oecolampadius. Two Ipswich 'gospellers', Peter Moone and John Ramsey, provided the texts for two books of crude anti-papist verse, and the Henry Reiginalde named as translator of one Latin work was very likely Henry Reynolds of nearby Belstead. 
Oswen's final Ipswich book may well have been Reiginalde's translation of Hegendorff's 'Domestical Sermons' (1548), which ends with the promise that 'The rest of the sermons shalbe printed shortlye'. The continuation, dated 'the last daye of February 1549', in fact appeared at Worcester, where the printer had relocated by the turn of the year. Oswen is specifically named as 'of Worcester' in a patent of 6 January 1549 (2 Edward VI), the text of which he prefixed to his first Worcester book, Henry Hart's 'Consultory for All Christians', dated 30 January 1549. Oswen's privilege authorized him to print and sell, within the principality of Wales and the marches, both service and prayer books and 'al maner of bokes conteinyng any storye or exposition of Gods holy scripture'. He consequently issued at Worcester two editions of the 'Book of Common Prayer', dated 24 May 1549 (quarto) and 30 July 1549 (folio); these were followed on 1 September by a psalter, on 8 October by an edition of the homilies, and on 12 January 1550 by a 'New Testament', all in quarto. At the same time he continued with his programme of publishing English versions of tracts by such continental reformers as Heinrich Bullinger, Matteo Gribaldi, Jean Veron, and Ulrich Zwingli, alongside similar native works by Thomas Lever and Bishop John Hooper. In addition to the nineteen books surviving from Oswen's Worcester years a further three works of 1549-50, now lost, were assigned to his press by Maunsell or Herbert. 
While at Worcester, Oswen apparently had an agent at Shrewsbury, for the colophons of several books indicate that they were 'also to sell' there. Both at Ipswich and at Worcester his printing was distinguished by the use of lively woodcut border pieces and initials; a number of these, as well as some of his types, were later used by the London printer John Tisdale. Oswen was made a freeman of the city of Worcester in 1553, but only two of his books with that year date survive, an edition of the statutes and Hooper's homily 'to be read in the tyme of pestylence', dated 18 May at the end of the text. This was probably Oswen's last book: no further record of him is known, and it is very likely that he left England following the accession of Mary in July 1553. With the closure of his press Worcester was without a printer until 1709; printing did not recommence at Ipswich until 1720. 


@@@@@


doc= 20927


Oswine (d. 651), king of Deira, was the last independent ruler of Deira, the southern part of Northumbria. His father was the apostate Osric (d. 634), but Oswine is portrayed by Bede as a model of royal submission to the authority of the church. Following his father's overthrow in 634 he is said to have been taken to Wessex. His rival Oswiu (d. 670), who became king of Bernicia in 642, appears to have been unable to establish his authority over Deira, despite marrying Eanflaed, a member of the Deiran royal family and Oswine's second cousin. Oswine became king in Deira two years later (644 deduced from Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 3.14; 643 in the E text of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'). His attractive personality and appearance are described in unusual detail by Bede, who notes that his bounty attracted followers from other kingdoms. Despite his rule in the southern part of Northumbria, he appears to have accepted the authority of the Irish mission based in Bernicia. 
Bede's principal story about Oswine concerns his complaint about Aedan's misuse of a gift he had given him, the bishop's reproof, and Oswine's acceptance of that criticism. This level of humility was inappropriate for an Anglo-Saxon ruler, and despite Bede's praise of his ability to attract a retinue, when Oswiu finally moved against him, Oswine was forced to dissolve an outnumbered army and was murdered in the company of a single follower, through the treachery of one of his thegns. The murder took place on 20 August 651, at a place called 'Ingetlingum'. As Bede says that the army was dissolved near Catterick, this has been taken to be Gilling West, north Yorkshire; the alternative identification, as Collingham, west Yorkshire, is based on a speculation by Daniel Haigh (died 1879). Oswiu was induced by his wife, Eanflaed, to compensate for the murder by founding a monastery at Gilling, where another blood relative, Trumhere, became first abbot. Oswine was omitted from Alcuin's poem on the rulers and saints of York, but evidence for a growing cult is suggested by his inclusion in the eighth-century calendar of Willibrord, although on 19 rather than 20 August. 
Bede does not directly state that Oswine's body was buried at the newly founded monastery. His cult was revived four centuries later when it was claimed that his body had been discovered on 11 March 1065 at Tynemouth, a former Bernician monastic site near Newcastle, after he had appeared in a vision to the priest there, named AEdmund. This claim is complicated by several factors. A later king of Northumbria, Osred (died 792), is the only royal burial recorded at Tynemouth and the names may have been confused. Also, Tynemouth monastery was initially claimed by Durham, but later given to St Albans by the earl of Northumberland in 1090 following a dispute. The account of Oswine's rediscovery in 1065 appears in a life written about the year 1111 in the interests of St Albans (edited by J. Raine in 1839); but a rival account from early twelfth-century Durham claims that his bones were exposed by AElfred Westou, a priest of Durham, and that in 1075 these were granted, together with the church at Tynemouth, to the Jarrow monks who subsequently formed the community at Durham (Symeon of Durham, 'Opera', 1.88, 124-5). 
The St Albans life of St Oswine (BL, Cotton MS Julius A.x) was composed by an anonymous monk of St Albans, later prior of Wymondham, a year after the translation of Oswine's body to a new shrine in the newly completed church of St Mary at Tynemouth, which took place on 20 August 1110, the anniversary of his death. It includes a copious list of miracles ascribed to Oswine's intervention, with subsequent additions. The offices for his festival are given in a fourteenth-century abridgement of this life by John of Tynemouth (BL, Cotton MS Tiberius E.i; Oxford, Corpus Christi College, 134 edited by C. Horstmann in 1901). A now badly damaged psalter fragment bearing the inscription 'Liber Oswini Deiorum regis' ('the book of Oswine, king of the Deirans'; BL, Cotton MS Galba A.v) is certainly much later, probably dating from the revival of his cult in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Oswine's shrine was broken up at the Reformation in 1539. 


@@@@@


doc= 20928


Oswulf (d. 759), king of Northumbria, was the son of Eadberht (d. 768) and descendant of the founder of the Bernician royal house, Ida, via his son Ocga. He succeeded to the throne on his father's abdication in 758, only to be killed by his household ('familia') on 24 July 759 at a place called 'Methil Wongtun', which has not been identified but may be identical with 'Medilwong', referred to in the anonymous life of St Cuthbert. His successor, 
The next king, 
The Northumbrians then accepted as king 
Following a short reign by Osred II, AEthelred I was restored to the throne in 789, and enjoyed a second reign. In 792 he married AElfflaed, daughter of King Offa of Mercia, at Catterick. He appears to have been a ruthless ruler: in 790 he captured, tonsured, and then exiled the former king Osred II; in the same year he made an unsuccessful attempt to execute the nobleman and future king Eardwulf; in 791 he persuaded the sons of the former king AElfwald I to leave their sanctuary in St Peter's, York, under false promises and had them drowned; and in 792 he had Osred killed after his abortive attempt to return from exile. In 796, however, AEthelred was himself murdered, at Corbridge according to one source, by two ealdormen. Although AEthelred had enjoyed the support of Charlemagne, who sent him gifts, he was severely criticized by Alcuin for luxurious living and immorality. 


@@@@@


doc= 20929


Osulf, earl of Bamburgh (d. 1067), magnate, was the son of Eadulf, earl of Bamburgh (died 1041), the younger son of Earl Uhtred (d. 1016). Eadulf succeeded his brother Ealdred as earl in 1038 but was himself killed in 1041 by Earl Siward who then assumed control of the whole earldom of Northumbria from the Humber to the Tweed. In 1065 Morcar, successor to Tostig in the earldom, appointed Osulf, described as a young man, to rule that portion of his territory which lay to the north of the Tyne, thus revitalizing the comital power of the house of Bamburgh. Following the Norman conquest, Morcar was deposed and imprisoned and Tostig's former deputy, Copsi, was given Osulf's earldom. Early in February 1067 Copsi ventured north and drove Osulf into hiding while he attempted to secure his position as earl. Osulf took to the woods and mountains of the region suffering want and hunger but managing to gather together allies who had shared a similar fate. Some of his supporters were, according to William of Poitiers, disaffected members of Copsi's entourage who wanted their lord to oppose the Conqueror. Osulf's opposition to Copsi may also have been fuelled by the suspicion that Copsi may have been implicated in the deaths of Osulf's uncle Gospatric and other members and allies of the house of Bamburgh murdered at the behest of Tostig in the early 1060s. Five weeks after his appointment to the earldom, on 12 March 1067, Copsi was attacked by Osulf and his men as he feasted at the ancient comital manor of Newburn. Copsi escaped to the local church but when it was set on fire he was forced out of the burning building; as he emerged Osulf decapitated him. Osulf seems to have regained control of the earldom of Bamburgh and remained unthreatened by any other expeditions sanctioned by William the Conqueror. However, in the autumn of 1067, Osulf was run through by the spear of a bandit whom he had intercepted whether by chance or design. He was succeeded as earl by his kinsman Gospatric who purchased the office from the king. 


@@@@@


doc= 20930


Oswiu (611/12-670), king of Northumbria, permanently united the rival kingdoms of Bernicia and Deira into Northumbria over the course of his twenty-eight year reign, which culminated in the Synod of Whitby. Bede describes him as the seventh overlord who held the 'imperium' south of the Humber. He was a younger son of King AEthelfrith of Bernicia. 
Following his father's death in battle about 616 against Eadwine of Deira, who became king of both regions, Oswiu was exiled at the age of five and taken to Scotland and Ireland together with his brothers, including Eanfrith and Oswald, who became kings before him, and perhaps four others, named as Oslac, Oswudu, Oslaf, and Offa in text E of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'. A sister, AEbbe, later became abbess of Coldingham. 
Doubts have been raised whether AEthelfrith's queen, Acha, who was a member of the Deiran royal family and King Eadwine's sister, was really Oswiu's mother, since with the approval of Bishop Aedan Oswiu subsequently married Eadwine's daughter, Eanflaed, who would have been his first cousin. A late source, the 'Vita Oswini', describes him as a bastard. This may help to explain his difficulties in assuming control of Deira, despite the success of his brother Oswald in ruling both kingdoms. 
Oswiu had probably been in exile for seventeen years, from the age of five until he was about twenty-one, when in 633 his brother Eanfrith regained the kingship of Bernicia for a year before his death at the hands of the British king Cadwallon, who had overthrown Eadwine. The subsequent victory of his brother Oswald over Cadwallon at the battle of Heavenfield in 634 gave Oswald control of both kingdoms. During this time Oswiu became a fluent Irish speaker and he and Oswald were baptized as Christians, either in Ireland or on Iona (the island of the monastery of St Columba off the west coast of Scotland), and this was to mould his religious outlook until the Synod of Whitby in 664. At this same period exiled Bernician princes, including Oswald, are recorded as fighting on behalf of their Irish hosts, and it is likely that Oswiu was among them. Subsequently he is one of the few English kings whose deeds are noted in the Irish annals. 
Probably during his period of exile in Ireland (although this may have occurred later) Oswiu fathered a child, Aldfrith (who was to become king of Northumbria in 686), apparently through a relationship with a princess of the Ui Neill dynasty, named as Fin in later genealogies. By Bede's standards this child was illegitimate, but Irish law required only that the father acknowledge the child. Aldfrith was later famed as a scholar in Irish sources, but was not apparently welcome in England until he became king, possibly because of the resentment of Oswiu's subsequent male offspring. 
Oswiu seems to have legally married twice, although this is not apparent from Bede. In the 'Historia Brittonum' he is said to have married Rhiainfellt, daughter of Rhwyth, the son of Rhun. Elsewhere in the same source Rhun is described as a son of Urien of Rheged. Rheged was a British kingdom, apparently in the area of Carlisle, and it is likely that Oswiu married a princess of this kingdom as part of his brother King Oswald's expansionist policy before his death in 642. Two of Oswiu's known children, his son Alchfrith and his daughter Alhflaed, were of marriageable age in the early 650s, and Alchfrith fought beside him in 655. They therefore cannot have been the children of King Eadwine's daughter Eanflaed ('b'. 626), also mentioned in the 'Historia Brittonum', whom Oswiu married, probably between 643 and 645, after he had become king. Rhiainfellt appears to be the first queen commemorated in the 'Liber vitae' of Lindisfarne and Durham, although the identification of her name has been doubted. 
Oswiu became king in 642, at the age of about thirty, after Oswald was slain by the armies of Penda of Mercia in alliance with the British, at a place recorded by Bede as 'Maserfelth'; this has been identified as possibly Oswestry in what is now Shropshire. Oswald's body was ritually dismembered by the pagan Penda and the head and arms were displayed on stakes. A year after his brother's overthrow King Oswiu came with an army and retrieved the undecayed limbs, which he took back to Bernicia. The head was buried in the cemetery at Lindisfarne and an arm and hand enshrined in the chapel of the royal palace at Bamburgh. Through dying in battle fighting a pagan king, Oswald had received a martyr's death and his brother's actions laid the basis for his subsequent cult and sanctification. 
The first thirteen years of Oswiu's reign were dominated by the struggle with Penda, who continually attacked Bernicia, and is once recorded by Bede as ravaging right up to the walls of Bamburgh. Initially, Oswiu's position appears to have been greatly weakened, and he seems to have been driven back into his heartland of Bernicia. He was apparently unable to assert his authority over the extensive area in southern England which Oswald had ruled, and Deira returned to the control of Eadwine's dynasty through a cousin, Oswine (d. 651), who is recorded by Bede as an attractive and popular king, and a friend of Aedan of Lindisfarne, who acted as bishop for both kingdoms despite the split. 
The obstacle presented by Oswine to the revival of his fortunes was the first occasion on which Oswiu's capacity for ruthless political directness became apparent. He sent to Kent for Eadwine's daughter, Eanflaed, and married her. Four children were subsequently born to this union, and the eldest son, Ecgfrith, eventually succeeded to both kingdoms in 670. But the marriage does not seem to have increased Oswiu's personal support in Deira, so in 651 he raised an army against Oswine, who dispersed his own troops and went into hiding; he was subsequently murdered at Oswiu's instigation. This hard-headed approach did not win the support of his wife, who persuaded him to found a monastery at Gilling in recompense for the death of her kinsman, nor of the Deiran nobility, who were still not prepared to accept him as king, nor of Bede, who admired Oswine's humility. Oswine was replaced as king of Deira by Oswald's son Oethelwald, possibly at Oswiu's instigation, but Oethelwald was soon following an independent line, hostile to his uncle, in co-operation with Penda. 
Oswiu seems to have attempted to deal initially with Penda by promoting family ties with the Mercian royal dynasty, and by trying to detach Penda's subordinates from his sphere of influence by persuading them to accept Christianity, while Penda himself remained pagan. Most successfully, he persuaded Penda's son Peada to become Christian as the price of marrying his daughter Alhflaed; similarly, Oswiu's own son Alchfrith married Penda's daughter Cyneburh. Oswiu also persuaded Sigeberht (the Good), king of the East Saxons and a personal friend, to become Christian. Both Peada and Sigeberht were persuaded to accept baptism in Oswiu's territory, near Hexham, from his own bishop, Finan of Lindisfarne, in 653, and Oswiu himself probably stood godfather. 
It is likely that Penda took these as provocative acts and attacked Bernicia as a result. Oswiu was driven to the north of his territories; probably at Stirling he was forced to pay a huge tribute to Penda and his British allies, recorded in British sources as the 'Restitution of Iudeu'. Oswiu was also forced to let his son Ecgfrith, who was then aged ten, be taken hostage to Penda's court. Despite this humiliating compromise, a subsequent offer of tribute was refused by Penda, who was determined to destroy Bernicia, according to Bede. Oswiu, who was now about forty-three, and his son Alchfrith were forced to give battle in the face of daunting odds. In addition to thirty legions thirty times his strength ranged against him (an appropriately biblical number), his nephew Oethelwald of Deira had allied with Penda. In desperation Oswiu therefore pledged twelve estates to the church, and also his one-year-old daughter AElfflaed, in a request for divine aid against the pagan. 
Bede records that battle was joined near the River 'Uinuaed' ('Winwaed') on 15 November 655. This has not been identified but appears to have been in the area of 'Loidis' where the campaign was concluded. This is assumed to be Leeds, in the southern part of Deira, although earlier commentators suggested a site in southern Scotland. In the 'Historia Brittonum' the site is named as 'in campo Gai'. Despite his superiority of numbers, some of Penda's allies, including Oethelwald, appear to have deserted him, and he and much of his army were slaughtered or drowned in the swollen river. Oswiu beheaded him, probably in revenge for the mutilation of his brother. The earliest manuscript of Bede's 'Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum' is unclear at one point, but John Prestwich showed that it is probably Penda himself, rather than the East Anglian king AEthelhere, who is described as the author of the war. 
In fulfilment of his vow before the battle, Oswiu did indeed give twelve estates for the founding of monasteries, six in Bernicia and six in Deira, one of which was used for the founding of Hartlepool, where his infant daughter AElfflaed was sent initially, in fulfilment of his other pledge, into the care of Abbess Hild, a Deiran princess and cousin of the queen. Another was at Whitby, where Hild and AElfflaed subsequently moved and where Oswiu himself was eventually buried. But Bede seems to contrast wryly the twelve estates promised before the battle with the twelve little estates actually given (Mayr-Harting, 99), although James Campbell has argued that Bede's word, 'possessiunculis', is a technical term meaning a single settlement rather than being deliberately dismissive (Campbell, 'Essays', 96, 112). 
Bede, however, is rather grudging in his treatment of this victory and Oswiu in general; but later authors such as Alcuin recognized it as a major turning point in the triumph of Christianity among the Anglo-Saxons. Oswiu had secured his southern frontier, Bernicia and Deira were now free from pagan attack, and Mercia was under Northumbrian control for three years and became Christian, despite the subsequent revolt of the Mercian nobles who installed Penda's son Wulfhere as king. During this period Oswiu ruled the northern part of Mercia directly, and placed his son-in-law Peada in charge of the southern part until he was apparently assassinated through the machinations of his wife, Oswiu's daughter Alhflaed. This high-handed treatment, reminiscent of the murder of Oswine, may have provoked the revolt which re-established Mercian independence in 658. Although this period of Northumbrian power south of the Humber was fairly brief, it allowed Bede to recognize Oswiu as successor to the overlordship enjoyed by Oswald and five previous kings, in a famous passage later reused in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' under the year 829, where the term 'bretwalda' first appears. 
Oswiu does not seem to have attempted to reimpose control over Mercia after Wulfhere became king, but instead turned his attention to the northern border of his kingdom, in the area which is now Scotland. Shortly before Oswiu's victory at the River 'Winwaed', Talorcan, son of his brother Eanfrith and a Pictish princess, had become king of the Picts, possibly at Oswiu's instigation. Talorcan died in 657, but Bede notes in two places that Oswiu subjected the Picts to Northumbrian domination and forced them to pay tribute, and it is probable that Oswiu took the offensive in the early 660s following his nephew's death. Oswiu may at this point have been acting in alliance with the Irish in western Scotland, among whom he was brought up, although with the death of his former patron it appears that he made these people tributary as well. It has been claimed that for this brief period in the late 650s Oswiu had wider power in Britain than any king until James I. 
Oswiu had been supported at the battle of the River 'Winwaed' by his son Alchfrith. Oswiu installed him as sub-king, apparently in Deira in succession to his traitorous nephew Oethelwald, who is not heard of again. In the early 660s, however, Alchfrith began following a different ecclesiastical policy to his father, who remained a supporter of the Columban church based at Lindisfarne and Iona. Having initially given Ripon to Irish monks, he ejected these in favour of the Roman party spearheaded by Wilfrid. Deiran separatism was associated with the Canterbury-backed mission of Paulinus which had introduced Christianity during Eadwine's reign. Oswiu's wife Eanflaed, Eadwine's daughter, had been baptized by Paulinus and brought up in Kent, and retained a circle of ecclesiastical advisers who followed the practices of the Roman church. At this period, therefore, owing to the attacks of those such as Wilfrid who wished to see the English church brought more closely in line with orthodox practice and papal authority, the Columban mission was being marginalized and its influence in England diminished. 
Oswiu was therefore faced with behaviour by his son and co-ruler which increasingly challenged his authority, and by the rise of a centralizing movement which threatened to exclude him from influence in Deira, and in most other English kingdoms, as well as forgoing the spiritual and material support of the papacy as the heirs of St Peter. Bede famously claimed that there was a split in the royal household over the date of Easter, with Oswiu's court following Columban practice and thus celebrating Easter early, while the queen and her supporters were still fasting in Lent; but this absurd situation had already happened fourteen times in the twenty-two years of the marriage of Oswiu and Eanflaed, and it is clear that it was the increasing political pressure on Oswiu that required the situation to be resolved. 
A synod of the Northumbrian church was therefore convened at Whitby in 664, possibly instigated by Alchfrith and supposedly under the joint authority of both kings, but Oswiu chaired the debate and made the final decision. Despite his personal affection for the spokesman of the Columban party, Colman, bishop of Lindisfarne, Oswiu accepted the Roman method for calculating Easter. In doing so he outmanoeuvred his son, for his acceptance was based on the supremacy of St Peter over St Columba, rather than on the patronizing arguments for the dismissal of the Columban case put forward by Alchfrith's champion, Wilfrid. Wilfrid's biographer, unlike Bede, records that Oswiu smiled when he made his choice. 
The fruits of this decision can be seen in a letter of 667 from Pope Vitalian in Rome in response to a letter sent by Oswiu, apparently acting in concert with the king of Kent, to propose a new archbishop of Canterbury. Up to this point the church and rulers of Northumbria do not seem to have recognized the authority of Canterbury, nor felt themselves able to influence such appointments. The pope addresses him as 'King of the Saxons', praises him, welcomes his embrace of orthodoxy, and prays for the extension of his rule throughout Britain, as well as sending a generous selection of relics to him and his queen and promising to send a bishop as he had requested. This letter must have been an extremely gratifying reward for Oswiu's new position. 
The downside of this acceptance of Rome's authority emerged with the appointment of Theodore of Tarsus as the new archbishop of Canterbury. Following the Synod of Whitby and Colman's departure to Ireland, Oswiu had appointed Tuda as bishop of Lindisfarne for Bernicia and had allowed Alchfrith to install Wilfrid at York, apparently as a separate bishop for Deira. But Tuda died of the plague and Wilfrid went abroad for consecration. In his absence Oswiu appointed Ceadda (Chad) to be bishop of both kingdoms, with his see at York. This seems to have been prompted by a final rebellion by Alchfrith against his father, who had denied him permission to go to Rome with Benedict Biscop, possibly fearing the opportunity for undue influence with the pope. Alchfrith is not heard of again, and it is probable that Wilfrid stayed away so as not to be caught up in his downfall. Oswiu, however, who was now at last unchallenged ruler of the united kingdom of Northumbria, unwisely allowed Ceadda to be consecrated to Wilfrid's see by the bishop of the West Saxons and two unorthodox British bishops. As a result Archbishop Theodore, when he arrived in Northumbria in 669, deposed Ceadda and reinstated Wilfrid as bishop of the whole kingdom, including the conquered territories to the north. 
Surprisingly, as with the Mercian revolt of 658, Oswiu seems to have been prepared to accept this humiliation, and to accept Wilfrid too, since Bede records that he offered Wilfrid a considerable gift to escort him to Rome. Oswiu was now aged fifty-eight and ill, and this was probably intended to be his final pilgrimage, perhaps in response to Pope Vitalian's letter. Wilfrid, however, refused and Oswiu died on 15 February 670, to be succeeded as king of all Northumbria by his son Ecgfrith. He was buried in St Peter's Church at Whitby, which had become the mausoleum of the Deiran royal family, and where his daughter AElfflaed would later succeed Hild as abbess. This was a fitting end to his struggle to amalgamate the two kingdoms and by the time that Alcuin wrote, at the end of the next century, he was acclaimed as one of the heroes of the church of York. 
Oswiu was the father of at least seven children, with three different women. As shown above, the rebellious Alchfrith and Peada's murderous wife, Alhflaed, were probably both children of the British princess Rhiainfellt. Eanflaed, the Deiran princess whom he married at the beginning of his reign when she was about eighteen, had two sons, Ecgfrith, who eventually succeeded to both kingdoms following his father's death in 670, and AElfwine, who was killed fighting the Mercians in 679. Oswiu and Eanflaed also had two daughters, AElfflaed, who was dedicated by her father to the church before the battle of the 'Winwaed' and became joint abbess of Whitby in 680 together with her mother, and Osthryth, who after her father's death married King AEthelred of Mercia and promoted the cult of her uncle Oswald. Aldfrith, Oswiu's son with the Irish princess Fin, attained the Northumbrian throne after his half-brother Ecgfrith was killed in 686, despite his illegitimacy, partly through the efforts of his half-sister AElfflaed. Oswiu's dynasty thus controlled the Northumbrian throne until the beginning of the next century. 


@@@@@


doc= 20931


Osgyth (fl. late 7th cent.), abbess of Chich, is an extreme illustration of the problems of elucidating the lives of the first generation of princess-saints from late hagiographies. In two twelfth-century lives, themselves known only from later and fragmentary versions, two distinct bodies of tradition, one apparently derived from Aylesbury, and the other from Chich, Essex, were conflated and confused with legends of St Modwenna of Burton and St Eadgyth of Polesworth. Furthermore, it remains uncertain whether the Aylesbury and Chich legends genuinely referred to one woman, or to different though near-contemporary women of the same name. 
The essentials of the twelfth-century narrative are as follows. Osgyth was the daughter of a King 'Fredeswald' and his wife, Wilburh, daughter of Penda and sister of Wulfhere, king of the Mercians. She was born in her father's palace at Quarrendon, Buckinghamshire, and was brought up at Aylesbury in the nunnery of her aunt St Eadgyth. On a journey to visit another aunt, St Eadburh, at Adderbury, she drowned in the Cherwell, but was revived by the prayers of Eadburh and Eadgyth. Despite her wish to remain a virgin, her parents married her to King Sigehere of the East Saxons ['see under 'East Saxons, kings of the], but she was miraculously saved from consummating the marriage. Sigehere accepted the inevitable and gave Osgyth the vill of Chich, where she took the veil, gathered a community of nuns, and built a church and monastic buildings. She was kidnapped by pirates, who beheaded her after she refused to worship idols. In one version her parents collected the body for burial at Aylesbury; in the other it was buried at Chich, taken to Aylesbury for safe keeping for forty-six years, but then returned. 
Both the Buckinghamshire and the Essex stories are consistent with known late seventh-century conditions. 'Fredeswald' can probably be identified with Frithuwald, the Mercian sub-king who endowed Chertsey Minster in 672-4 and whose kingdom may have extended from the lower Thames northwards across the Chilterns. Other daughters of Penda were abbesses, and Eadgyth may be the saint of that name later venerated at Bicester: the Buckinghamshire tradition embodied genuine memories of early local saints. Aylesbury can be identified archaeologically as an eighth-century religious site. There are also indications, both written and archaeological, that Chich was an Anglo-Saxon minster. 
But were there two Osgyths, or merely one? Essex was within the Mercian ambit, and a marriage alliance between an East Saxon king and a niece of the Mercian overlord Wulfhere is wholly plausible; the chronology also fits well. The main difficulty is that there were two feast days (3 June at Aylesbury, 7 October at Chich) and two corpses. The saint's relics are located at Chich in the earlier part of the Old English list of resting places, but the later version in the 'Domesday Breviate' has Osgyth entries for both Chich and Aylesbury. Furthermore, in 1501-2 the vicar of Aylesbury tried unsuccessfully to elevate a corpse of St Osgyth buried in his church. The story of the temporary removal of the relics from Chich to Aylesbury reads as an uneasy attempt to reconcile two distinct cults. The available evidence does not admit a confident solution. 


@@@@@


doc= 20932


O Tuathail, Adam Dubh (d. 1328), reputed heretic, was a son of Walter Duff O'Toole. His place of origin and residence are unknown but the stronghold of the O'Tooles was in the Wicklow Mountains, south of Dublin. He was tried before an ecclesiastical court in Dublin in 1327 on charges of denying the incarnation and the doctrine of the Trinity, impugning the virtue of the Blessed Virgin, denying the resurrection of the dead, holding the scriptures to be fictitious, and accusing the apostolic see of falsehood. These errors he was said to have compounded by relapse and blasphemy before his spiritual judge. He was found guilty and pronounced a heretic, and was passed to the secular authorities for punishment. On 11 April 1328 he was publicly burnt at Hoggen Green, a common and public meeting-place to the east of the city walls of Dublin. Nothing is known of his early life but there is an isolated reference on an Irish patent roll which may refer to him. In 1303 a Brother Adam O'Toole was appointed to act for the abbot of the Cistercian house of Dunbrody in the latter's absence. 


@@@@@


doc= 20933


O'Toole, Bryan (d. 1825), army officer, was appointed cornet in a regiment of hussars raised by Friedrich, Baron Hompesch, in 1792, and served with it, under the duke of Brunswick, in the first campaign of that year in Champagne, including the taking of Verdun and the attack on Thionville. He was present at the battle of Jemappes, and later, under the prince of Conde, at Neerwinden, at the blockades of Conde and Maubeuge, and the battle of Charleroi. He then joined the British army under the duke of York, and commanded a squadron of Hompesch at Boxtel and Nijmegen, and in the winter retreat of 1794-5 from the Waal to Bremen. On his arrival in England he was appointed captain-lieutenant in one of the regiments of the Irish brigade, then in British pay, and on 25 March 1796 was made captain in the Hompesch hussars, with which he went to the West Indies. Baron Hompesch had two units in British pay (hussars and rifles). O'Toole served with the Hompesch hussars in San Domingo, and returned home with the remnants of the corps in 1797. 
O'Toole was appointed to a troop in a new corps, Hompesch's mounted riflemen, with which he served in Ireland in 1798, and was present at Vinegar Hill and Ballynahinch. He was placed on half pay when the corps was disbanded in 1802. He was appointed captain in the 39th foot in 1803, and began a series of assignments in southern Europe. He was aide-de-camp to Major-General Broderick in the expedition to Naples in 1805, and to Sir Galbraith Lowry Cole in the expedition to Calabria and at the battle of Maida in 1806. After receiving the rank of brevet major in 1808, he commanded a light battalion at the capture of Ischia in 1809, and commanded the Calabrian Free Corps, in British pay, during Murat's threatened invasion of Sicily in 1810. He resigned his command to accompany the 39th to the Peninsula as captain, and was appointed major in the 2nd Portuguese cacadores, which he commanded at Ciudad Rodrigo, Badajoz, Salamanca, Madrid, and the siege of and retreat from Burgos. On 21 June 1813 he was appointed lieutenant-colonel, and received command of the 7th cacadores in Sir Lowry Cole's division, which took part in the battle of Vitoria, the blockade of Pampeluna, and the battles in the Pyrenees. During his Peninsular service O'Toole lost the use of one arm. He was placed on half pay of the Portuguese officers in 1816. He was made CB on 4 June 1815, and had the gold cross for Ciudad Rodrigo, Salamanca, Vitoria, and the Pyrenees. He died at Fairford, co. Wexford, on 27 February 1825. 


@@@@@


doc= 20934


Laurence (c.1128-1180), archbishop of Dublin, was probably born about 1128, the son of Muirchertach Ua Tuathail, king of Ui Muiredaig (in north Leinster). According to the compilation known as the 'Ban-Shenchus' ('Lore of women'), his mother was the daughter of Cerball Mac Bric; but according to his early thirteenth-century hagiographical life his mother was Derbail, daughter of Ua Brain (almost certainly of the north Leinster dynasty of Ui Faelain). The same source states that Laurence served as a hostage for his father at an early age with Diarmait Mac Murchada, overking of Leinster, who mistreated him (bearing in mind, however, that this king is accorded a consistently hostile depiction throughout the life). 
Laurence became a monk at the important north Leinster monastery of Glendalough and in 1153 succeeded to the office of abbot. According to the life he was then aged twenty-five, though in saying this the author may have been conditioned by requirements of canon law. His succession to the abbacy may be presumed to have had the approval of Diarmait Mac Murchada as provincial king of Leinster, and this is further suggested by the fact that around that time Mac Murchada married Laurence's half-sister, Mor. Laurence declined to accept promotion to the bishopric of Glendalough when it became vacant in 1157, according to his life because he had not reached the canonical age of thirty. Another possible reason is that most of the lands of Glendalough were still attached to the abbacy rather than to the cathedral church, and that acceptance of the episcopal office may not have been viewed as advancement. More ambitious motives for Laurence's refusal may be suggested by the fact that in 1162 he was prepared to accept elevation to the more prestigious archbishopric of Dublin. At the Synod of Kells of 1152, the papal legate, Cardinal Giovanni Paparo, had intended that after the death of its incumbent the diocese of Glendalough should be united to the diocese of Dublin. However, when Glendalough did fall vacant in 1157, its incorporation into Dublin was not effected, for reasons unknown. 
Laurence's succession to Dublin in 1162 was almost certainly approved at the Synod of Clane held in that year, presided over by Gilla Crist (Christianus) Ua Connairche, bishop of Lismore and papal legate, and Gilla Meic Liac (Gelasius), archbishop of Armagh. He was consecrated as archbishop by Archbishop Gilla Meic Liac in his capacity as primate, assisted by Joseph, bishop of Ferns, and Malachias Ua Brain, bishop of Kildare. The participation of these two bishops, who were associates of Diarmait Mac Murchada, suggests the latter's consent to the promotion. It may also be significant that between 1160 and 1162, as abbot of Glendalough, Laurence had witnessed Mac Murchada's charter to St Mary's Abbey, Ferns, and between 1162 and 1165, as archbishop, attested his charters to Killenny and All Hallows. However, a disputed succession to the abbacy of Glendalough followed Laurence's promotion to Dublin, with his nephew (known only by his Latin name of Thomas) eventually succeeding him. This appointment is presented in the partisan life as a victory for canonical procedures, and as emphatically made on the grounds of personal merit (although there is other evidence to suggest that Thomas fathered at least one son), and in the face of an attempted intrusion by Diarmait Mac Murchada of another candidate. In 1167 Laurence attended the large assembly of clergy and laity convened by Ruaidri Ua Conchobair, king of Connacht and claimant to the high-kingship, which suggests that he was prepared to acknowledge Ua Conchobair as high-king. 
Following the beginnings of Anglo-Norman intervention in Ireland, Laurence negotiated on behalf of the city of Dublin before it was taken by force by Diarmait Mac Murchada and his Anglo-Norman allies in 1170. It would be rash, however, to draw firm conclusions about Laurence's political allegiance from his role as mediator, since throughout the twelfth century Irish churchmen had been very actively engaged as peace negotiators. In 1171 Laurence is depicted by Gerald of Wales as acting in consort with Ruaidri Ua Conchobair in seeking to raise mercenaries for the siege of Dublin, held by Richard fitz Gilbert, earl of Pembroke and lord of Striguil (known as Strongbow), and as acting with Ua Conchobair in sending letters to Godred, king of Man; Gerald attributes Laurence's motives to 'zeal for his own people' (Giraldus Cambrensis, 78-9). Laurence attended the Council of Cashel convened by Henry II, 1171-2, and in 1172 Pope Alexander III named him in letters exhorting the Irish bishops to aid Henry in ruling Ireland. The pipe roll of 1172/3 records payment of his passage to Ireland in the company of William fitz Aldelin, indicating that he had visited England and had made representations to Henry. 
In October 1175 Laurence witnessed the treaty concluded at Windsor between Henry II and Ruaidri Ua Conchobair, which delimited Leinster, Meath, and a portion of Munster as an Angevin sphere of influence, and conceded to Ua Conchobair overlordship of the remainder of Ireland, provided that he acknowledged Henry as his superior, maintained loyalty to him, and paid tribute. While in England, according to his life, Laurence survived an assassination attempt at Canterbury, made by a madman who sought to draw comparisons between him and the martyred Thomas Becket. He travelled back to Ireland in the company of Augustinus Ua Selbaig, bishop-elect of Waterford, to whose appointment Henry had assented at Windsor. The city of Waterford had been reserved by Henry as royal demesne and Laurence was clearly prepared to allow such a right of assent to the king. He presided at the burial of Strongbow in Holy Trinity Cathedral, Dublin, in April 1176. An original charter with seal attached, issued by him between 1176 and 1178, confirming a grant of Killester (in north Dublin) to William Brun, constitutes the earliest surviving original charter of an Irish bishop. 
Shortly after Christmas 1178, Laurence set out to attend the Third Lateran Council, due to be held in the following year, travelling via the court of Henry II to seek his permission to be present, and swearing an oath that he would do nothing to diminish the king's rights at the council. He secured a privilege of protection from Pope Alexander III, dated 20 April 1179, confirming him and his successor in their rights in the see of Dublin and its churches, and in its five suffragan bishoprics; he may also be considered responsible for procuring a privilege of protection, dated 13 May 1179, for Malchus, bishop of Glendalough. The pope also appointed Laurence 'legatus natus' (his resident legate) in Ireland, to replace Gilla Crist Ua Connairche. On his return to Ireland, in his capacity as papal legate, Laurence convened a synod at Clonfert in 1179. An account of the synod survives only in a garbled seventeenth-century English translation of the annals of Clonmacnoise, which indicates, however, that he sought to proclaim the decrees of the Lateran Council. The location of the synod (at which is recorded the attendance of the clergy of Connacht, as well as that of Echthigern Mac Maelchiarain (Eugenius), bishop of Meath, and Maelisu Ua Cerbaill, bishop of Louth, or Airgialla, both suffragan bishops of Armagh) suggests that it was intended to serve for the sphere of influence which had been allocated to Ruaidri Ua Conchobair by the treaty of Windsor. Laurence's life has an account of his charitable activities during the severe winter of 1179, including the sending of a shipload of distressed Irish to England, where he arranged that they should receive aid from friendly benefactors. Early in 1180 he installed Tommaltach Ua Conchobair, bishop of Elphin and nephew of Ruaidri Ua Conchobair, in the see of Armagh. The translation of a Connacht bishop to the primatial see of Armagh was unprecedented and suggests a close association with Ua Conchobair. 
According to Roger of Howden, soon after the feast of the Purification (2 February), in 1180 Laurence was at Henry II's court, accompanied by a son of Ruaidri Ua Conchobair; the latter was to be a pledge of Ua Conchobair's good faith in his undertaking to pay tribute owing to Henry, possibly on the basis of the treaty of Windsor, although there is no consensus among historians that the treaty was still in operation at that date. Notwithstanding the reference to tribute made by Howden (who was aware of the terms of the treaty of Windsor, the text of which he transcribed), it is also possible that Henry had objected to the appointment of Tommaltach to Armagh. Inconclusive negotiations between Laurence and Henry took place; Henry left for Normandy on 15 April 1180, and Laurence, who had been forbidden to return to Ireland before peace had been concluded, was obliged to remain in England. Late in October or early in November, Laurence crossed from Dover to Wissant near Boulogne. He was at Eu on 10 November, already suffering from a fever. On 11 November he sent a cleric named David, tutor of Ua Conchobair's son, to Henry's court, where the youth was handed over as a hostage. On 13 November David returned with news that peace had been concluded with Henry. Laurence died at Eu on 14 November 1180 and his burial there was presided over by the Roman subdeacon and papal legate, Alexis, who may have been involved in breaking the impasse in negotiations between Laurence and Henry. 
By 20 May 1191, when Pope Celestine replied to a petition for Laurence's canonization from Archbishop Walter of Rouen, by saying that the time was not opportune, a book of Laurence's miracles, compiled by Bishop Maelisu Ua Cerbaill, had already reached Eu. In 1206 Hugues, abbot of Eu, petitioning Innocent III for canonization, stated that this was the fifth such attempt made by the canons of Eu; in 1214 Abbot Guido petitioned again. Laurence was eventually canonized by Pope Honorius III on 11 December 1225, testimonies in support of his canonization having been provided by: the archbishop of Rouen; the abbot of Eu; John Cumin, Laurence's successor in the archbishopric of Dublin; Echdonn (Eugenius), archbishop of Armagh; Ailbe (Albinus), bishop of Ferns; and Marianus (Ua Briain), bishop of Cork. His relics were translated by Theobald, archbishop of Rouen, on 6 May 1226. It has been suggested that the earliest extant version of his life may have been compiled by Henry of London, archbishop of Dublin from 1213 to 1228. Soon after Laurence's canonization, a life, focusing chiefly on his miracles, was written by a canon of Eu, possibly Jean Halgrinus of Abbeville, later archbishop of Besancon. 
Gerald of Wales twice attributes to common report the view that Laurence was a man of excessive partiality for his own people; he also asserts that Laurence incurred the displeasure of Henry II in securing privileges at the Lateran Council of 1179, to which the king objected, although he does not specify any details. Gerald was mistaken in suggesting that Laurence was prevented from returning to Ireland after the council. However, he was also prepared to describe Laurence 'as a good and just man' (Giraldus Cambrensis, 196-7), and recounts a miracle relating to his final days when he refused to rest at Abbeville because, with prophetic insight of his impending death, he wished to reach the basilica dedicated to the Blessed Virgin at Eu; this miracle is also recounted in the life. The saint's feast is celebrated on 14 November and the feast of the translation of his relics on 10 May; he has a place in the painted calendar of saints canonized in the thirteenth century in the basilica of the Four Crowned Martyrs at Rome. As in the case of St Malachy of Armagh, the circumstance of Laurence's death and burial on the continent ensured his canonization; he and Malachy remained the only formally canonized Irish saints until the canonization of Oliver Plunket in 1976. Laurence's reputation as an ecclesiastical reformer also rests chiefly on the dossier compiled for his canonization. Nevertheless, his promotion of church reform, which receives important emphasis in his life, is demonstrated by his introduction of Augustinian canons of the Arrouaisian filiation into Holy Trinity Cathedral, Dublin, a step which had been taken no later than 1176-7. 


@@@@@


doc= 20935


Otter, William (1768-1840), bishop of Chichester, born on 23 October 1768 at Cuckney, Nottinghamshire, was the fourth son of the seven children of Edward Otter (1724-1785), vicar of Cuckney, and also of the Derbyshire parishes of Bolsover, Scarcliffe, and Upper Langwith. His mother was Dorothy (died 1772), daughter of John Wright of North Anston, Yorkshire. He went up to Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1785, where he was Rustat scholar, graduating BA as fourth wrangler in 1790. Otter was tutored by William Frend and, like his brother Edward (1764-1837), a fellow of the college, supported Frend in his dispute with the college in 1793. In that year Otter proceeded MA, and later, in 1836, BD and DD. In 1791 he was ordained to the curacy of Helston, Cornwall, where he was also master of the grammar school. Otter returned to Jesus College as a fellow in 1796, remaining until 1804, and for a time served as a committee member of the Cambridge Volunteers. 
As an undergraduate Otter befriended Edward Daniel Clarke (of whom he published a 'Life' in 1824) and Thomas Robert Malthus. Together with John Marten Cripps, they travelled to the continent in 1799. Otter alone accompanied Malthus onwards from Lake Vanern as he gathered supporting evidence for his 'Essay on Population' in Sweden, Norway, Finland, and Russia, while Otter occupied himself with botanizing (he was later a fellow of the Linnean Society). Otter's memoir of Malthus, prefixed to the second edition of 'The Principles of Political Economy' (1836), sought to create a more receptive climate for Malthus's works by highlighting his personal qualities, and remains an important source for Malthus's life. 
Otter resigned his fellowship on his marriage in 1804 to Nancy Sadleir (died 1860), daughter of William Bruere of Leatherhead, former secretary to the government and member of the supreme court of Calcutta. The couple had three sons and five daughters: among them William Bruere became archdeacon of Chichester after his father's death; his eldest daughter, Sophia, married Malthus's son, Henry; his second daughter, Caroline, married John (later the first Lord) Romilly; the fourth, Maria, married Lord Justice Sir William Milbourne James; and the fifth, Emily, married Edward Strutt, the first Lord Belper. Shortly before his own marriage Otter was presented by Bruere to the rectory of Colmworth, Bedfordshire. He resigned this living along with that of Sturmer, Essex, which he had held for only one year, on his appointment as rector of Chetwynd, Shropshire, in 1811, to which he added the vicarage of Kinlet in 1814. Otter supplemented his income through tutoring, numbering among his pupils sons of Sir Samuel Romilly, Sir John St Aubin, and Sir Roger Newdigate; in 1822 he moved his family to Oxford and acted as private tutor to the third Lord Ongley. In 1825 Otter acquired a third benefice, the vicarage of St Mark's, Kennington, through the patronage of George D'Oyly, the husband of his wife's sister. 
Possibly through his association with D'Oyly, Otter was chosen as first principal of King's College, London (after John Lonsdale declined the post), in June 1831, and resigned Kennington on his appointment; his whig connections helped prevent the college appearing too partisan. He was simultaneously appointed divinity lecturer, delivering weekly sermons and Monday discourses on theology throughout his tenure. Since the principal was excluded from the governing council, Otter's authority over the college was limited. While he won the confidence of his staff and safely saw the college through its first years, he did not develop any particular affection for the institution, having little contact with it after his resignation in 1836, and instead joining the senate of the University of London from that year. 
Otter resigned from King's College and his Shropshire parishes when he was chosen by Lord Melbourne for the bishopric of Chichester: 'exactly the place for me', he observed to Samuel Butler (BL, Add. MS 34590, fols. 309-10). He was consecrated at Lambeth on 2 October 1836. Although Otter was already in indifferent health when appointed, he was an active and reforming diocesan. His most notable innovation was the diocesan association established in January 1838, intended to support the provision of church accommodation and to both augment endowments and fund the stipends of additional clergy. By December the association had raised $2732 for accommodation and $2085 for additional clergy, with another $1120 subscribed for special purposes. In 1839 the association absorbed a diocesan board of education founded earlier in the year, while the ruridecanal system was reinvigorated in order to provide support, with Otter encouraging his deans to revive the ruridecanal chapters. The training school for masters in parochial schools which began modest operations at Otter's initiative in 1840 provided the focus for a memorial subscription proposed by Julius Hare, which in 1849-50 bore fruit in the building of Bishop Otter College, Chichester. 
Otter's commitment and lack of partisanship won him the affection and co-operation of both clergy and laity. He worked closely with the earl of Chichester and especially with the duke of Richmond. Most strikingly he took an interest in the careers of both Julius Hare and Henry Manning. In 1840 Otter appointed Hare archdeacon of Lewes, dismissing Hare's reservations regarding the liturgy and creed with the observation that 'my opinions on these points are just the same as your own' (N. M. Distall, 'Guessing at Truth', 1979, 138-9). Otter acknowledged Manning's promise in appointing him rural dean and secretary of the diocesan association, although he deplored his more controversial publications as liable to alienate evangelicals in the diocese, warning that 'the peace of the Church is of much more advantage than any advance even to a good cause, which can only be obtained at the expense of peace' (E. S. Purcell, 'Life of Cardinal Manning', 1895, 7.136). Otter's success in allaying doctrinal tensions in the diocese is apparent from the absence of controversy associated with the foundation at Chichester in 1838 of a theological college with the Tractarian Charles Marriott as principal, for which Otter shared responsibility with Manning and the dean of Chichester, George Chandler. 
A tall, thin man, 'of very mild and amiable manners' (W. Sussex RO, Goodwood MS 1576), Otter was a liberal in theology and a moderate whig in politics; at times, however, both as a diocesan reformer and, at the end of his life, in his defence of cathedral institutions against the proposed reforms of the ecclesiastical commissioners, he stood comfortably alongside decided high-churchmen. Otter's first publications appeared in 1812, vindicating the British and Foreign Bible Society from the strictures of Herbert Marsh. After this date his writings mostly concerned pastoralia, notably the posthumously published 'Pastoral Addresses', which he had delivered while bishop. He advised his clergy to maintain their studies and reflect on their reading (his own favourite author was Robert Leighton, archbishop of Glasgow 1611-1684), and called on them to revive the practice of catechism as part of a wider stress on making Christian instruction more demanding in the light of the spread of education. Otter frequently referred to the works of his friend Malthus, and emphasized their implications for devising approaches to the problem of pauperism -- in 1818 he described the provident society established in his own parish, and later welcomed the new poor law. Otter placed most stress on the importance of popular education in bringing the poor to an understanding of their own condition. He looked for close co-operation between the National Society and the government, and in 1839 took a more moderate position than most of his episcopal colleagues on the government plan for tighter control of the distribution of public subsidies for education. He was one of three bishops who did not support Archbishop Howley's resolution on the subject in parliament on 5 July 1839, although he remained opposed to many features of the government scheme as it developed. Otter died at Broadstairs, Kent, on 20 August 1840, and was buried in the retrochoir of Chichester Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 20936


Otterburn, Nicholas (c.1400-1462), administrator, is of unknown parentage, but was probably related to the other Otterburns active in fifteenth-century Scotland and was certainly uncle of Master John Otterburn, his likely successor as official of St Andrews within Lothian. Master Nicholas, who was of the diocese of Glasgow, was a student at St Andrews University 'c'.1415-1419 and retained links with the arts faculty there in 1429-30. He matriculated at Louvain University in 1431. In due course he was licensed in canon law and graduated MA and bachelor in civil law. He was provided to his first benefice (the vicarage of Mearns, Glasgow diocese) in 1422, retaining it until at least 1436. He litigated for various other benefices, and obtained a canonry and prebend of Glasgow by 1442 and the vicarage of Edinburgh by 1455, both possibly held until his death. He was official of St Andrews within Lothian by 1441 until 'c'.1458. In 1449 he became secretary to James II. It is not known who brought him into the administration, though the chancellor, William, Lord Crichton, Bishop Kennedy of St Andrews, and Bishop Turnbull of Glasgow are all possibilities. He remained in office until 1452 and was clerk of the rolls and register of Scotland from 1454 to 1460. In part because of his official posts he witnessed a number of crown charters and served on the king's council and in parliament in judicial matters. He was an ambassador to England and France several times, most notably in 1448-9, when he and two others travelled to Burgundy to arrange the marriage of James II to Mary, daughter of Arnold, duke of Gueldres. Otterburn is stated to have written 'Epithalamium Jacobi II', presumably to mark the occasion of the marriage. He died on 31 January 1462. 


@@@@@


doc= 20937


Otterbourne, Thomas (fl. 1420), historian, has often been confused with his older namesake, Thomas Otterbourne (fl. c.1340-1346). He was the author of a chronicle which was edited and printed by Thomas Hearne in 1732. Hearne discussed the evidence for the existence of a chronicler called Otterbourne, and cited the opinion of Thomas Tanner (died 1735) that there were two chroniclers of this name. Tanner was almost certainly correct, but very little is known about the life of the second Thomas Otterbourne. He may be tentatively identified with the Thomas Otterbourne who was presented to the living of Haddiscoe, Norfolk, on 30 October 1383 and became rector of Chingford, Essex, in 1393. The family of Ros of Helmsley were the patrons of the living of Chingford, and this perhaps strengthens the assumption that, like his namesake, he was a native of north-east England. If so, he was perhaps the Thomas Otterbourne of Yorkshire who acted as a mainpernor for a number of different people several times between 1379 and 1382. 
Otterbourne's chronicle exists in a fifteenth-century manuscript, BL, Harley MS 3643; a transcript (which differs only in a few details from the fifteenth-century manuscript) was made in the sixteenth century: this survives as BL, Cotton MS Vitellius F.ix. Hearne's edition was based on this latter manuscript, which was damaged in the fire of 1731. John Stow, working in the later sixteenth century, translated the sections of the chronicle that cover the Anglo-Saxon period and the years from 1400 to 1420: his translation survives as BL, Harley MS 6223, folios 122'r'-141'r'. 
Although the chronicle starts with the legendary history of Britain, it provides detailed information only for the years from 1377 to 1420, when it ends. Even here, it is largely dependent on a manuscript of Thomas Walsingham's chronicle. V. H. Galbraith noted that nine-tenths of Otterbourne's text for the reigns of Henry IV (from 1406) and Henry V consists of 'word for word extracts' from Walsingham, and his account of Richard II's reign and the early years of Henry IV's is also substantially derived from Walsingham. Virtually all the rest of Otterbourne's material for Henry V's life and reign, including the story of the dauphin's gift of tennis balls to Henry, comes from the 'Liber metricus' of Thomas Elmham. A few passages in the later part of his chronicle appear to be derived from other sources. His account of how Robert de Vere, duke of Ireland, met his death in 1392 seems to be independent of Walsingham, and his description of the siege of Berwick by Henry IV during the uprising of 1405 has a few details that do not derive from any known source. This may be further evidence for the author's north-eastern origins, though most of his coverage of northern affairs from 1377 onwards is derived from Walsingham. 
Otterbourne can be regarded as an independent source for only a very small number of the events he describes, and he himself freely acknowledges his debt to others. In the introduction to his chronicle, he says that his work consists of extracts transcribed from other chronicles, for the benefit of those 'who do not possess many chronicles or cannot read those they have' (Hearne, 3). He explicitly acknowledges his dependence on Geoffrey of Monmouth, Bede, William of Malmesbury, Henry of Huntingdon, Roger of Howden, and 'Cestrensis polichronicon' (Ranulf Higden), but he does not admit to any borrowing from Walsingham. Although his chronicle survives while that of his namesake has been preserved only as a shadow behind the Lanercost chronicle, there can be little doubt that the first Thomas Otterbourne was a historian of much more significance than the second. 


