@@@@@


doc= 20938


Otterburn, Sir Adam (d. 1548), lawyer and diplomat, was possibly descended from the family which produced such notable legal figures in the fifteenth century as Nicholas Otterburn, clerk register, and John Otterburn, official of Lothian. Nothing certain is known of his parents, although it is possible that Marion Brown, the widow of Thomas Otterburn, in whose favour he resigned lands in 1515, was his mother, and Thomas his father. His sister may have been the Janet Otterburn who married John Laing in 1528, though Otterburn had a daughter of the same name. He was married twice -- first to Janet Rhynd and then, before 1525, to Euphame Mowbray. With his second wife he had three sons: John, Robert, and Thomas. He also had three daughters: Margaret, Janet, and another whose name is unknown. 
Having graduated MA, probably at a foreign university, Otterburn appeared in 1503 on the same witness list as James Henryson, king's advocate. Their relationship was a close one and in later years Otterburn maintained links with Henryson's widow and family. He was first nominated to appear as a procurator before the lords of council in 1505 and appeared regularly thereafter. Over the period 1504 to 1514 he was the fourth most popular procurator before the lords in terms of nominations by litigants. In 1514 he was constituted as procurator by more litigants than any other man of law, and his standing as a lawyer was such that in 1509 he acted on behalf of the king during the temporary absence of Henryson; in 1512 he succeeded Henryson as burgh clerk of Edinburgh, a post which he retained until about 1525. 
On 5 January 1517 Otterburn was appointed a lord of council and thereafter was regularly on the council sederunt. He was also one of those appointed to act as receiver of Queen Margaret's rents in December 1518. In May 1523 he was authorized, in the absence of the justice-clerk, to subscribe all judicial deliverances in criminal cases provided he did so along with one of the regents. Despite becoming a member of the council, Otterburn -- as was common practice -- maintained his activity as an advocate both before the lords of council and in sheriff courts. He was also constituted one of the sheriffs-depute of Stirling by Lord Erskine in 1524. 
As a burgess and common clerk of Edinburgh, Otterburn was heavily involved in burgh affairs. This was recognized on 27 November 1521 when he was promoted from ordinary burgess and admitted as honorary burgess and guild brother. In February 1518 the burgh community had vigorously supported his protest at an attempt by the provost, the first earl of Arran, to usurp his right of appointing a deputy clerk -- a stand for burgh independence that ended with triumphant shouts of 'Otterburn, Otterburn'. Otterburn was himself provost of the burgh in 1521-2, 1528-32, 1543-4, and 1547-8, and also fulfilled the office occasionally at other times when the serving provost was absent, particularly during 1535-6. As provost he was active in 1530 during an outbreak of plague in the burgh, imposing sanitary regulations. Otterburn also acted on the burgh's behalf in legal matters before the lords of council, before and after the foundation of the college of justice in 1532. He devoted some of his assets to engaging in trade, and appears to have imported cloth and other products. 
Appointment as king's advocate in 1524 as successor to James Wishart, though boosting his precedence in the council sederunt, did not end Otterburn's career as an advocate working for private clients. There is evidence that he continued to acquire significant client income as well as his annual fee from the king. For instance, in 1527 the earl of Cassillis acknowledged that he was 300 merks in debt to Otterburn, while in July 1533, following arbitration, it was agreed between Otterburn and Andrew Murray of Blackbarony that the latter should pay Otterburn 200 merks over five years in return for counsel and labour concerning Murray's lands and leases during that period. Otterburn also enjoyed a considerable career as a diplomat from January 1521, when he was a member of a commission sent to meet Lord Dacre, the English warden of the marches, to discuss measures against border raids. Other border commissions followed in August 1525, late 1528 (leading to the treaty of Berwick), 1533, and 1534 and Otterburn also attended days of truce. His early political stance was that of a supporter of the eighteenth earl of Angus, and he argued that the election of Archibald Douglas of Kilspindie as provost of Edinburgh in 1519 was conform to law and that to remove him would damage the burgh's privileges. The antagonism between Arran and the burgh was reversed by a compromise reached in January 1521 and from this time Otterburn modified his position somewhat in regard to Arran's enemy, Angus. In the following January the duke of Albany laid siege to Angus's castle at Tantallon and Otterburn's farm at Auldhame was damaged, though he subsequently received compensation from the exchequer. 
Otterburn had frequent contact with the English ambassador Thomas Magnus, particularly in regard to the possible marriage of James V to Princess Mary Tudor. In letters of November 1524 Magnus described him as 'very favourable and foreward in our causes', and as 'one of the wisest men in Edinburgh, well lerned and of good experience and practise' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 4.232, 236). Otterburn was sent to London in 1533 by the king bearing a letter of credence to Henry VIII describing James's 'singular traist and confidence' in him as a man who had 'aye bene a sollistar of peace and concord to be betuix Us and our Realmes' (ibid., 664); while in England Otterburn was knighted, probably by Henry VIII. He returned to Scotland in May 1535 but was back in London the next year from March until June, discussing a proposed meeting between King James and King Henry. During this period, as in other periods of absence from the realm, Otterburn's role as king's advocate was taken up by interim substitutes appointed on a temporary basis. 
Otterburn's first appearance in parliament, as representative of Edinburgh, came in 1523 when he was also elected one of the lords auditor of causes. He subsequently appeared on a regular basis as a commissioner to parliament for the burgh of Edinburgh, sometimes being appointed one of the lords of the articles. Service to crown, burgh, and private clients allowed Otterburn to build up considerable landed estates. By 1518 he held Auldhame, near Tantallon, of the archbishop of St Andrews. In 1527 he purchased the lands of Redhall in Edinburghshire from William, master of Glencairn. Two years later, as a reward for his services as ambassador, he was granted the lands of Orchardfield, near Kirknewton, Edinburghshire. Prior to 1536 he apprised (obtained infeftment in, as secured creditor, following failure to repay a debt) the lands of Dirleton. 
In 1538, because of his reported ability as a poet, Otterburn was involved in writing the speech in French which welcomed Mary of Guise to Edinburgh (though neither this speech nor any of his poetry has survived). Then in September of that year he was suddenly dismissed from office for communicating with the exiled earl of Angus. In the words of the English ambassador Sir Ralph Sadler, he was 'suspected to be over good an Englishe man' (Inglis, 68-9). He had not been in favour of the forfeiture of Angus in 1528 and he was rumoured to have been in contact with the exiled earl while he was in London in 1536. Warded in Dumbarton Castle for four months, he was released and exiled to Fife during the king's pleasure and fined $2000 before regaining his liberty towards the end of 1539. The Edinburgh burgess Nicol Cairncross gave caution for payment of $1000 of the fine to the treasurer, James Kirkcaldy of Grange. This fine led to financial difficulties that troubled Otterburn for the rest of his life. Despite his frequent contact with England, he did not favour the reformed religion and enjoyed close contacts with Cardinal David Beaton. 
Otterburn was politically rehabilitated to some extent because of his skill in diplomacy. In 1542 he was sent to London, but the circumstances of this mission are unclear. On 16 February 1543 he resumed his place as a lord of session. He strongly opposed the proposal that the infant Queen Mary should marry Prince Edward of England, and the issue appears to have caused a shift in his view of foreign policy towards a closer understanding with France. Sir Ralph Sadler later attributed the remark to Otterburn that 'if your lad were a las, and our las were a lad, would you then be so earnest in the mateir?' (Clifford, 3, 326). During 1543 Otterburn was re-elected provost of Edinburgh, and English reports firmly portray him as a supporter of the pro-French Cardinal Beaton. However, he was again dismissed as provost following the successful attack on Edinburgh by the earl of Hertford in May 1544. He may have been imprisoned towards the end of the year for his continuing association with the Douglases, who were declared guilty of treason by Governor Arran, but after a reconciliation in the following February Otterburn was again sitting as a lord of session in April 1545. 
Following Beaton's murder on 29 May 1546 Otterburn was part of an embassy sent to England in August to discuss an offer by Henry to include Scotland in the recent treaty of Campe. He did not return until August 1547. In July 1548 he was attacked in Edinburgh by John Muir of Annestoun and John Murray of Annestounheid; 'sore hurt on the head', he died there on 6 July ('CSP Scot.', '1509-89', 90). The motive is unknown but may have related to his pro-French political position. 


@@@@@


doc= 20939


Otthen, Hippocrates (d. 1611), physician, was related to the noble family of Otthens in Alsace, but was educated and became doctor of medicine at the University of Montpellier, France. He came to England with his father, the emperor's physician, who had been summoned by Elizabeth I. Pressed into the service of the earl of Leicester, 'who desired him to pertain unto him' (Stow, 4.113), he continued in the latter's service for many years, both at home and in the Low Countries. He was admitted a licentiate of the College of Physicians on 4 July 1589, being described as 'vir doctus et practicator bonus' ('a learned man and good practitioner'). On the death of Leicester he entered the service of the earl of Essex, and, by Elizabeth's command, attended him in the wars of France and the expedition to Cadiz. After his return to England he was ordered by Elizabeth to attend Lord Mountjoy, later earl of Devonshire, in Ireland. He subsequently accompanied, in the same capacity of physician, the earl of Hertford, the English ambassador to the archduke of Austria. The rest of his life was spent in private practice. 
On either 16 March 1605 or 12 June 1609 Otthen was incorporated DM at Oxford. He married Dorothy, a daughter of Roger Drew of Densworth in Sussex, and spent his last years with her 'in great bliss and happiness' (Stow, 4.113). He died on 13 November 1611 and was buried in the church of St Clement Danes, London, where a monument, with inscription, was erected to his memory on the south side of the chancel. After his death his wife married Sir Stephen Thornhurst of Kent, and died on 12 June 1620, aged fifty-five. She was buried in Canterbury Cathedral, where a monument was erected to her memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 20940


Ottley, Sir Francis (1600/01-1649), politician, was the eldest son of Thomas Ottley of Pitchford, Shropshire, and Mary, daughter of Roger Gifford (d. 1597), physician. He entered Shrewsbury School at the age of ten, matriculated from Lincoln College, Oxford, on 4 December 1618 aged seventeen (but took no degree), and in November 1619 entered the Inner Temple as a student. In 1621 he married Lucy, widow of Thomas Pope and daughter of Thomas Edwards, sheriff of Shropshire (1621). 
Ottley was active in local affairs, and on the outbreak of the civil war became one of the leading royalists in Shropshire. He was a signatory of the loyal declaration of the grand jury sitting at the assizes at Shrewsbury on 8 August 1642 and was in touch with Sir Edward Hyde. On 10 September, the king wrote from Nottingham authorizing him to raise a force of 200 foot and to secure Shrewsbury for the royal interest; a few days later he was appointed captain of the troop. Ottley was knighted at Shrewsbury on 21 September 1642. He lobbied hard for the governorship of the town, and showed his loyalty on 2 January 1643 by issuing an order compelling the inhabitants to sign a declaration against parliament. But three days later, Hyde wrote that though the king had 'a very just sense of your merit', he: 'hath had of late ill luck in making governors of cities and towns: and though he hath always chosen loved and popular men for those places; yet private differences have so far grown, that he hath been in danger of losing the corporation. However, he resolves there shall be no other governor but you... (Owen and Blakeway, 1.432)' Ottley was confirmed in the position before the end of the month. 
On Ottley's initiative the manufacture of muskets commenced in the town, but he seems to have had a difficult time. In July local inhabitants were found to be plotting to betray Shrewsbury to the enemy. Ottley received a letter from Oxford informing him that: 'There is a complaint here, that your press is idle, and doth the king no service; that the Parliament diurnals and pamphlets are in every body's hands, but no country work on the king's side to antidote their poison. If it shall please you to have an eye on the press, and to see our diurnals reprinted there, you wuld do the king and his cause good service, and Secretary Nichols shall thank you. (Owen and Blakeway, 1.437-8)' On 25 January 1644 Prince Rupert wrote to Ottley criticizing his failure to place the suspected traitors on trial 'so that the punishment may go to some, the example and terror to all' (Webb, 381); he himself was planning to make the town his headquarters, and demanded immediate arrangements be made for the secure housing of troops and military equipment. Rupert was convinced that Ottley was loath to court unpopularity with parliamentarian sympathizers in Shrewsbury. Late in 1644 he was removed from his position of governor, succeeded by Sir Michael Ernley, and was named instead as sheriff (though the parliamentarians claimed legitimacy for their own appointment, Thomas Mytton). 
Ottley was not in Shrewsbury when it was surprised on 22 February 1645 because he had been captured the previous day, at a meeting with other commissioners of array at Apley, home of Sir William Whitmore, near Bridgnorth. He was one of four signatories of the articles of capitulation at the surrender of Bridgnorth Castle on 26 April 1646. By the terms of surrender, the occupants (who included Lady Ottley and her children) were allowed to return to their homes with horses and arms, but were then to choose between exile and peace. Ottley chose peace. On 16 June 1646 he petitioned to compound for delinquency, and on 25 June 1649 the fine was fixed at $1200. Ottley died in London a few weeks later, on 11 September 1649. He had carefully preserved the papers generated by his role in the civil war, and they are of great value in understanding the course of events in Shropshire and the neighbouring counties. His widow was granted administration of his estates. Their eldest son, Richard Ottley (1626-1670), who had been a captain in the royalist army, was knighted on 21 June 1660, was a gentleman of the privy chamber to Charles II, and sat as MP for Shropshire from 1661 until his death on 10 August 1670. 


@@@@@


doc= 20941


Ottley, William Young (1771-1836), writer on art and collector, was born near Thatcham, Berkshire, on 6 August 1771, the son of a plantation owner, Richard Ottley. He was educated at a school near Richmond, Yorkshire, where he was a pupil of George Cuitt the elder before going on to Winchester College. He entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1787, studying briefly under John Brown (1749-1787), whose studio contents he purchased the same year. Brown's estate included 219 drawings, which formed the basis of Ottley's collection of old master drawings, prints, and paintings. Ottley added to his collection during a ten-year period of study and travel in Italy (1791-9), taking advantage, after the French invasion of 1796, of the desire of many prominent collectors to sell their family treasures before they were looted. He acquired pictures from the Aldobrandini, Colonna, Borghese, and Corsini families, for example Botticelli's 'Mystic Nativity' (1500?) and Raphael's 'Dream of Scipio' ('c'.1504; 'Vision of a Knight') both now in the National Gallery, London. The bulk of his collection of Italian old master drawings was sold in 1823 to Sir Thomas Lawrence for $8000. Among the highlights, which formed the core of Lawrence's magnificent drawings collection, were splendid groups of drawings by Michelangelo and Raphael assembled by and later stolen from the French painter Jean-Baptiste Wicar (1762-1834), superintendent of official French depredations. Ottley bought the stolen drawings from the Florentine painter Antonio Fedi (to whom they had been given by the thieves, a father and son Pampaloni), but the precise timing of their acquisition and Ottley's possible role in the theft remain open to suspicion (Scheller). Although Lawrence's collection was later largely dispersed (a cause of national regret), most of the drawings by Michelangelo and Raphael were acquired by national subscription for the University of Oxford and are now in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. 
On his return to London in 1799 Ottley established himself as a writer, connoisseur, and 'marchand-amateur'. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and, as a leading arbiter of taste, he advised others on the purchase of works of art. He married some time before 1802. His well-known art publications began with 'The Italian School of Design' (1808), a series of facsimile prints engraved (often by himself) after drawings in his own collection. The second and third parts of this ambitious project -- intended to provide 'a chronological sequence of the designs of the most eminent artists of Italy' (unpaginated 'Advertisement' to 'The Italian School of Design') -- were published in 1813 and 1823 (when the whole work was issued in one volume). In 1816 he published 'An Inquiry into the Origin and Early History of Engraving on Copper and Wood' (2 vols.), the companion to which, 'An Inquiry into the Invention of Printing', was published posthumously in 1863. In 1826-8 he published two volumes of facsimile engravings after rare incunabula and early prints. His projected monumental dictionary of engravers, the 'Notices of Engravers and their Works', was abandoned after the publication in 1831 of the first volume (covering 'A-Baldung'). Among the collectors he advised was Granville Leveson-Gower, first marquess of Stafford, most of whose picture gallery he had recorded in four folio volumes of engravings (1818). Two other works devoted mainly to paintings appeared in 1826: 'A Descriptive Catalogue of the Pictures in the National Gallery', commissioned by Lawrence, and 'A series of plates engraved after the paintings and sculptures of the most eminent masters of the early Florentine school', which prompted a reassessment of thirteenth- to fifteenth-century Italian painting. 
In 1833 Ottley became keeper of prints and drawings at the British Museum, a post that he accepted apparently for financial reasons, since the act abolishing slavery had reduced his income from the family's West Indies plantation. Although one of the best connoisseurs of his day, he was already in poor health and died in London on 26 May 1836 without having made much of a mark on the collection. He began a new catalogue, but his time at the museum was clouded by rows with the director and trustees about his working conditions. His own remarkable art collection was the subject of a number of private sales and public auctions in London, for which he did much of the research for the catalogues when alive. 


@@@@@


doc= 20942


Otway, Caesar (1780-1842), religious journalist and writer on Ireland, was born in co. Tipperary, the son of Loftus Otway, a merchant. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 6 December 1796, aged sixteen, and graduated BA in 1801. After being ordained he was successively curate of a number of country parishes. In 1836 he was appointed to the assistant chaplaincy of Leeson Street Magdalen Chapel, Dublin, where he became one of the leading evangelical preachers. He was twice married, first to Frances, daughter of the Very Revd James Hastings, dean of Achonry, and second to Elizabeth, daughter of W. Digges La Touche of Sans Souci. Elizabeth and Caesar Otway had two sons and two daughters. 
In 1825 Otway and Joseph Henderson Singer, later bishop of Meath, launched the 'Christian Examiner', the first Irish religious magazine to promote the cause of the established church. It was through Otway's encouragement that William Carleton began his literary career by writing for the periodical. Otway was an enthusiastic antiquary and an admirer of Irish scenery, and published 'A Tour in Connaught' (1839) and 'Sketches in Erris and Tyrawley' (1841). He co-operated with the landscape painter and antiquary George Petrie in the first volume of the 'Dublin Penny Journal', for which he wrote under the pseudonym Terence O'Toole and was also a contributor to the 'Dublin University Magazine'. Ill health prevented him from writing his projected history of Ireland, and from editing the works of Sir James Ware. He died in Dublin on 16 March 1842. 


@@@@@


doc= 20943


Otway, Sir Robert Waller, first baronet (1770-1846), naval officer, the second son of Cooke Otway of Castle Otway, co. Tipperary, and Elizabeth, daughter of Samuel Waller of Lisbrian, co. Tipperary, was born in Ireland on 26 April 1770. His father intended him for an army career, but he entered the navy as a midshipman in April 1784 on the 'Elizabeth', guardship at Portsmouth, with Captain Robert Kingsmill. Between 1785 and 1789 he served twice in the Mediterranean, in the 'Phaeton' and then the 'Trusty', before going in the 'Blonde' to the West Indies, where, and off the coast of Africa, he remained in different ships until promoted into the brig 'Falcon' as lieutenant on 8 August 1793. In December he was appointed to the 'Impregnable' (98 guns), bearing the flag of Rear-Admiral Benjamin Caldwell. When the 'Impregnable's' fore-topsail-yard was badly damaged in the battle of 1 June 1794, Otway, accompanied by a midshipman, went aloft and secured it so that the ship remained under control, for which Caldwell publicly thanked him. Caldwell took Otway as his first lieutenant in the 'Majestic' when appointed commander-in-chief in the West Indies, and in the following January he promoted him to the command of the sloop 'Thorn' (confirmed by the Admiralty 7 August 1795). 
In April Otway captured 'La Belle Creole', a large schooner sent from Guadeloupe by Victor Hugues (who had been sent to capture Guadeloupe by the French Jacobin government). The schooner was sent to burn St Pierre, Martinique, whose royalist inhabitants gratefully presented Otway with a gold-hilted sword valued at 200 guineas. In May the 'Thorn' (16 guns, 80 men) captured the sloop 'Courrier National' (18 guns, 119 men) after a thirty-five minute action in which Otway and five of his crew were wounded (James, 1.321). He afterwards rendered important assistance against the insurgents in St Vincent and Grenada, and on 30 October 1795 was posted by Sir John Laforey, the new commander-in-chief, to the frigate 'Mermaid'. In her, and afterwards in the 'Ceres' and the 'Trent', he had an exceptionally adventurous and successful career. He played an important part in the capture of Grenada in 1796. In July 1799 he narrowly escaped capture in a daring raid into La Guayra, on the coast of Venezuela, in pursuit of the frigate 'Hermione'. In his six years in the West Indies he was said to have captured or destroyed 200 enemy privateers or merchantmen. The 'Trent', in 1799 and 1800, 'is supposed to have made as many captures as ever fell to the lot of one vessel in the same space of time' (Brenton, 2.448). He earned his success, which made him rich, by intelligent ship management. Admiral Sir Thomas Ussher, a lieutenant on the 'Trent', declared that no captain was more attentive to the comfort of his officers and men and that there was so much method in his manner of carrying on the service that, though in a constant state of activity, they had as much leisure as any other ship's company. Without unnecessary display of polished bolts or nail heads, the 'Trent' was the most perfect man-of-war on the station, ready to go into action in five minutes. Every rope and spar was kept in place and the decks clear. Otway inspected each gun after exercise and ensured it was ready and clear of encumbrance. Ussher added that Otway always accompanied his boats on dangerous raids but hid this in his reports where he gave the credit to his officers. 
In November 1800 the 'Trent' returned to England with the flag of Sir Hyde Parker, who took Otway as his flag captain in the 'Royal George', and, in February 1801, in the 'London', when Parker took command of the fleet sent to break the armed neutrality of the Baltic powers. It is said, apparently on Otway's authority, that it was at his suggestion that the fleet advanced against Copenhagen through the Sound (between Zealand and Sweden) instead of by the Great Belt (between Zealand and Funen). During the battle which followed, when the commander-in-chief determined to hoist the celebrated signal to 'discontinue the action', Otway, opposing the signal, obtained permission to go to Admiral Nelson to ascertain his situation. He was sent home with dispatches, and, returning in August, was appointed to the 'Edgar', serving in the Baltic, the channel, and the West Indies, returning in July 1802. In late 1801 he married Clementina Holloway (died 20 Oct 1851), eldest daughter and coheir of Admiral John Holloway: they had five sons and six daughters. His two eldest sons, both commanders in the navy, predeceased him. 
Ill health and a severe domestic calamity prevented Otway from joining the 'Culloden' at the resumption of hostilities in 1803, but during 1804-5 he commanded the 'Montagu', under Charles Cornwallis, off Brest, engaging the 'Alexandre' in the dash at the French fleet on 22 August 1805. In the spring of 1806 he was part of Sir Richard Strachan's command in pursuit of the French squadron under Willaumez. In 1807 he was sent to the Mediterranean, where he served on the coast of Calabria, and in 1808 on the coast of Catalonia in co-operation with the Spanish patriots. After bringing the 'Malta' to England, he returned in May 1809, commanding the 'Ajax', and then the 'Cumberland', in the blockade of Toulon and the French coast. In December 1811 his health failed and he was compelled to invalid. In May 1813 he returned to the 'Ajax', in the channel and the Bay of Biscay. In autumn he co-operated with the army in the siege of San Sebastian, and early in 1814 he convoyed a fleet of transports to Quebec, afterwards assisting in equipping the flotilla on Lake Champlain. 
On 4 June 1814 Otway was promoted rear-admiral, and from 1818 to 1821 was commander-in-chief at Leith, Scotland. On 8 June 1826 he was made a KCB and appointed commander-in-chief in South America, where his watchfulness and tact at a time of political turmoil led the Brazilian government to award him its order of the Southern Cross. He returned to England in 1829. On 22 July 1830 he was promoted vice-admiral and on 15 September 1831 was created baronet. Groom of the bedchamber to both William IV and Victoria, he was promoted admiral on 23 November 1841 and was made a GCB on 8 May 1845. He died suddenly on 12 May 1846; his third son, George Graham Otway, succeeded him as second baronet, and his fourth son, Sir Arthur John Otway, as third baronet. 
Ralfe's comment that '[Otway] is one of the fortunate few who have no enemies, no detractors, none who will admit a hint or insinuation to his disparagement' was backed by successive commanders. 'There is not an officer in his Majesty's navy of greater zeal and promise', wrote St Vincent, recalling particularly how well Otway preserved the 'Montagu's' masts and spars in the Bay of Biscay in 1806, and Cornwallis declared that 'there is no officer whose services I should have preferred either as a captain or as admiral' (Ralfe, 4.19-20, 24). 


@@@@@


doc= 20944


Otway, Thomas (1652-1685), playwright and poet, was born on 3 March 1652 at Milland, Sussex, the only son of Humphrey Otway (1611-1671), curate of St George's, Trotton, and rector of nearby All Hallows, Woolbeding. Otway's mother may have been Elizabeth Otway, widow of Humphrey, who died in 1703 and named her daughter Susanna as her legatee. However, as Otway refers to both his parents in the past tense, and to himself as an 'onely' child in his semi-autobiographical poem 'The Poet's Complaint of his Muse' (1680) it is possible that he was the son of a previous wife. If so, no records have yet been found of her existence. 
In the 'Poet's Complaint' Otway states that his parents gave him a 'generous Education, high'. Whatever other schools or tutors this may refer to, Otway spent a year at Winchester College in 1668 which coincided with the longer residence there of Anthony Cary, fifth Viscount Falkland (1656-1694). Whether or not Otway developed a close friendship with the aristocrat four years his junior during his brief passage though Winchester, he certainly did his best to cultivate the acquaintance later. His play 'Caius Marius' (1679) is dedicated to Falkland and alludes to 'having had the honour to be near You, and bred under the same Discipline with You' ('Works', 1.435). Falkland provided the prologue to Otway's play 'The Souldiers Fortune' (1681), but there are no other signs of Falkland's patronage or friendship. 
On leaving Winchester Otway was admitted as a commoner of Christ Church, Oxford, on 12 May 1669 ('Works', 1.8). In 'The Poet's Complaint' Otway states that he was a happy and talented student but that the idyllic period was terminated by the news of his 'good 'Senander''s' death. The term Senander is a Latin-Greek coinage for old man, and the lines must refer to the death of his father who was buried at Woolbeding on 9 February 1671 (ibid., 1.4). Without his father's financial support, Otway was unable to remain at Oxford and he left without a degree in 1671. 
According to John Downes, bookkeeper for the Duke's Playhouse, Aphra Behn gave Otway the part of the king in her play 'The Forc'd Marriage, or, The Jealous Bridegroom'. However, 'the full House put him to such a Sweat and Tremendous Agony' that he was 'dash't and spoiled as an actor' (Downes, 34). Since the first performance of 'The Forc'd Marriage' was in December 1670, when presumably Otway was still at Oxford, he must have appeared in a revival. Downes's anecdote notwithstanding, there are references to Otway appearing on stage by Anthony Wood and Charles Gildon, as well as in the satire 'A Session of the Poets', about 1677 (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.781; Gildon, 107). Probably Otway maintained himself as an actor during the early 1670s, learning in a very practical way the craft of writing plays. In 1675 his first play, 'Alcibiades', was performed by the Duke's Company at the Dorset Garden playhouse, probably in late September (and published that year). 

'Alcibiades', dedicated to Charles Sackville, earl of Middlesex, is a very competent work, following the fashion for rhymed plays and providing opportunities for the spectacular stage effects for which the Dorset Garden playhouse was particularly well equipped. The plot is loosely based on Plutarch's life of Alcibiades, and charts Alcibiades's banishment from Athens and alliance with Sparta, where he becomes the object of the lustful infatuation of the Spartan queen, Deidamia. Otway points out in the preface to his next play that Alcibiades 'was none of that squeamish Gentleman I make him' and would not have 'boggl'd' at an affair ('Works', 1.173). His Alcibiades, however, is a model if weak hero. The play contains such standard Restoration tragic materials as attempted rape, regicide, murder, and suicide, and concludes in a general bloodbath. It was brilliantly cast with Thomas Betterton as Alcibiades; Mary Lee, who had played the fierce and lustful Empress of Morocco in Elkanah Settle's 1673 play of that name, took the role of Queen of Sparta. Elizabeth Barry, who was to create many of Otway's subsequent heroines, played the minor role of Draxilla. 'Alcibiades' is a strong first play, and introduces many of the themes, character types, and plot structures that dominate Otway's writing: loss of place and coherence; male friendship; tyrannical and unnatural fathers; orphans; vacillating heroes; and open-ended conclusions. All Otway's plays were written for and first performed by the Duke's Company, and organized around the strengths of that company. 
Otway's next play, 'Don Carlos, Prince of Spain', opened the following year on 9 June (and was published the same year). The play was dedicated to the duke of York, and the preface acknowledges the poet's 'unspeakable Obligations' to John Wilmot, earl of Rochester, who made it 'his business to establish it in the good opinion of the 'King', and his 'Royal Highness'' ('Works', 1.174). Briefly, at least, Otway was enjoying noble patronage and royal favour. The play contains echoes of John Dryden's 'Tyrannick Love' (1669) and 'Aureng-Zebe' (1675) as well as of Shakespeare's 'Othello' and 'Hamlet'. The main source, however, was the historical novella 'Don Carlos' by Cesar Vischard, l'abbe de St Real, which had been published in France in 1672 and 'englished' by 'H. I.' in 1674. Otway condensed the action from many months to about twenty-four hours to create an intense tragedy of sexual rivalry between father and son, both of whom love the king's new wife, who was formerly engaged to the son. In the king's illegitimate brother, Don John of Austria, Otway created a cheerful libertine whose carefree sexuality provides a counterpoint to the frustrated sexual and political desires experienced by the triangle of father, son, and wife. Fashionably libertine and sexually charged, 'Don Carlos' was a great success. John Downes noted that 'all Parts being admirably Acted, it lasted successively ten days; it got more Money than any preceding Modern Tragedy' (Downes, 36). The roles of King Philip, Don Carlos, and Elizabeth, were taken by Betterton, William Smith, and Mary Lee respectively. Elizabeth Barry did not appear in 'Don Carlos', but took leading roles in Otway's next productions, 'Titus and Berenice' and 'The Cheats of Scapin', a short tragedy and comic companion piece performed together probably in December 1676. 
This two-play form of entertainment was an innovation, and one that anticipated the eighteenth-century custom of accompanying a tragic work with a comic 'afterpiece'. Both plays had contemporary French sources: 'Titus and Berenice' is a pared down version of Racine's 'Berenice' and 'Cheats' is based on Moliere's 'Les fourberies de Scapin'. When printed in 1677 the plays were dedicated to Rochester. Clearly working very rapidly to build on the success of 'Don Carlos', Otway also trumped two playwrights from the rival King's Company. John Crowne was working on a ten-act version of 'Berenice', and Edward Ravenscroft was writing a 'commedia dell'arte' form of 'Les fourberies', works which were performed in 1677. 
As with 'Don Carlos', 'Titus and Berenice' dramatizes the parting of true lovers. Titus had just become emperor of Rome and by law and custom is debarred from marrying a foreign monarch -- Berenice, queen of Palestine. Titus must decide between his conflicting desires for rule and glory and love and happiness: '
Should I to follow Love, from Glory fly, 

Forsake my Throne, in every Vassel's eye, 

How mean and despicable must I prove. 
(II. 110-12; 'Works', 1.273)' Unlike Racine's more resolved hero, Titus's eventual decision to repudiate Berenice is not treated as the triumph of duty over desire but rather as a sacrifice that distorts Titus's character. Alone and unhappy, he decides to 'make the world's as wretched as I am' (III. 479). Betterton and Barry took the leading roles and Barry appeared again in 'Cheats' as Lucia, one of a quartet of lovers who have married without their fathers' permission. Above all, 'Cheats' provided a vehicle for the Duke's Company's great comedian Anthony Leigh in the role of the contriving servant and scamp Scapin who undertakes a variety of disguises and plays a range of tricks in order to aid the lovers and cheat their greedy fathers. 'Titus and Berenice' was Otway's last verse tragedy, and 'Cheats' his last good-natured comedy. Serious drama was moving away from the courtly heroic verse toward blank verse and prose dramas that were bloodthirsty and less than chivalric. In comedy the trend of the 1670s was for harsh and witty sex dramas, with each dramatist vying to produce more shocking on-stage effects. These trends suited Otway's themes and preoccupations and he was to produce his finest dramas in the next eight years. There may also have been personal reasons for the increasingly savage and cynical nature of his dramatic output. 
With a good debut in 1675 and three plays staged successfully in 1676, Otway was at the start of an outstanding career. Nevertheless, he had no plays performed in 1677 although he was probably working that year on his savage comedy 'Friendship in Fashion', performed in April 1678. His disillusionment with the theatre is shown in the prologue as he advises parents to 'breed' their sons to 'wholesome Law, or give `em Trades' since poets '
by Critiques are worse treated here, 

Than on the Bank-side Butchers do a Bear. 
(ll. 20, 25-26; 'Works', 1.335)' The prologue also alludes to efforts that have been made to 'wrong him with his Friends', perhaps the earl of Middlesex and Dorset to whom the printed work is dedicated in an epistle which expresses concern lest something in the play has offended him. Otway, a staunch tory, was satirized in the anonymous 'A Session of the Poets' (1680), which he believed to have been by Elkanah Settle (a whig). Pamphlets published in 1682 and 1683 describe Otway as challenging Settle to a duel and Thomas Shadwell's satire 'The Tory-Poets' (1682) mocks allegations that 'S -- le's a Coward, 'cause fool Ot -- y fought him'. That Otway deeply resented the attack on him in 'A Session' is clear, since he refers angrily to the satire in 'The Poet's Complaint' (stanza 8). Personal satire was commonplace among Restoration writers, and unfortunately Otway seems to have been both thin-skinned and bellicose. These traits may have encouraged his attempt to change his career and join the army. 
There is also a tradition that Otway was in love with Elizabeth Barry, who gave birth to a daughter by Rochester in December 1677, and that he enlisted because of a broken heart. The evidence for a relationship between Otway and Barry is based on a series of love letters, alternately amorous, plangent, and angry, attributed to him in 'Familiar letters: written by the... earl of Rochester, and several other persons of honour and quality', first published in 1697. The validity of the letters is dubious: like many of the 'histories' of the time, familiar letters were a semi-fictional form of literature, and their editors, in this case the unscrupulous Thomas Brown, did not always correctly attribute or transcribe such materials. The letters, first published twelve years after Otway's early death in 1685, bear no superscription and are not given out as addressed to Barry until 1713, a year after her demise. William Oldys's manuscript notes in 1727 to Gerard Langbaine's 'An Account of the English Dramatic Poets' (1691) refer to Elizabeth Barry's scorn for Otway's love. But there were no references to an amorous relationship during the lifetime of either the poet or the actress, which, given the frankness with which Elizabeth Barry's life and the lives of other actresses were treated, suggests there is little foundation for this particular romantic accretion -- though a strong and productive professional relationship did clearly exist. 
Whatever the reason, in February 1678 Otway obtained a commission as ensign in a foot regiment raised by the duke of Monmouth as part of Charles II's brief attempt to intervene in the hostilities between France and the Netherlands. The regiment was sent to Flanders in July, and in November 1678 Otway had obtained a lieutenancy ('Works', 1.23). By early 1679 the forces were withdrawn and the troops disbanded. Otway refers wryly to his soldiering in the epilogue to 'Caius Marius': 'needs the Fool would be a Man at Arms' (l. 10). Although never more than a lieutenant, Otway seems subsequently to have promoted himself, and continued martial pursuits. A duel is described in a letter of June 1679 from John Verney to Sir Ralph Verney, this time with a more considerable opponent, John Churchill, later duke of Marlborough. Verney reports that 'Churchill, for beating an orange wench in the Duke's playhouse, was challenged by Capt. Otway (the poet), and both were wounded, but Churchill most' (ibid., 1.25). 
In the prologue to 'Friendship in Fashion' (which probably opened in April 1678, and was published that year), Otway untruthfully assures the 'Ladies' that the play has no 'Bawdy in't' (l. 7). In fact, the ironically titled play is a cruel and witty comedy, depicting betrayals in friendship and love as a set of remarkably unpleasant characters meet to cuckold, ridicule, and betray each other. The language of commerce dominates the sexual transactions and an insistent and degrading animal imagery is used to describe the characters. The play does not seem to have been particularly successful, but remains one of the most intelligent, if cynical and cold, plays of the period. 
Otway's next play, 'The History and Fall of Caius Marius', performed in the autumn of 1679 (published 1680), is a political tragedy responding to a period of tense political and religious crisis brought about by Titus Oates's allegations of a popish plot to murder the king and impose Roman Catholicism on England. Otway freely adapted Plutarch's description of the life of Caius Marius and combined it with elements of Shakespeare's 'Romeo and Juliet' to dramatize the contest for the war consulship of Rome between Metellus and Caius Marius. Caius Marius jun., son of Caius Marius, and Lavinia, daughter of Metellus, enact the Romeo and Juliet roles with variations that include Lavinia awakening before her husband's death, allowing the two lovers to commiserate briefly. Meanwhile, much of the play displays the corrupt electioneering efforts carried out by the two factions, and their confrontations, which lead to exile and violence. Caius Marius, ambitious and unscrupulous, who courts the 'plebs' may well be a portrait of the earl of Shaftesbury, leader of the whig faction. However, Metellus, leader of the patricians, is little better. Anti-whig though the play may be, neither faction displays any signs of political morality or responsibility. In Metellus and Caius Marius, Otway created two violent and cruel fathers who destroy their biological and political families. 'Caius Marius' held the stage into the eighteenth century and performances of 'Romeo and Juliet' often incorporated the revival of Juliet in the family vault. 
1680 was a productive year for Otway and represents a high point in his career. 'The Poet's Complaint of his Muse' was published and two new plays were performed, 'The Orphan' in the spring, and 'The Souldiers Fortune' in the summer. Otway seems to have gained the patronage of Nell Gwyn. The anonymous satire 'An Essay of Scandall' (date not known) describes him as tutor to her son Charles Beauclerk and hopes, unkindly, that Otway will make him '
(if that's possible to be) 

A viler Poet, and more dull then he. 
(Harley MSS 6913, 6914, 7319)' Other evidence of a connection between Otway and Gwyn is his signature as witness to a power of attorney granted by Nell Gwyn to one James Frazier to receive her pension, dated 1 June 1680 ('Works', 1.33). In the autumn of that year Otway received an MA degree from Cambridge. The reasons for this conferral are unclear. J. C. Ghosh speculates that he may have falsified his status at Oxford (ibid., 1.26). It is also possible that the degree represented an honour granted to a writer whose works satirized whigs and who was increasingly associated with the court and tory politics. Otway's loyalty to the Yorks is indicated by the final stanzas of 'The Poet's Complaint', which describe their exile, and by his dedication of 'The Orphan' to the duchess of York. 

'The Orphan' is a domestic tragedy set in a country estate in Bohemia. The play's main source is 'The History of Brandon' in 'The English Adventures', published in 1675 by a 'Person of Honour', probably Roger Boyle, earl of Orrery, and there are also 'borrowings' from Dryden and Nathaniel Lee. Twin brothers and close friends, Castalio and Polydore have fallen in love with the beautiful orphan Monimia who is their father's ward. Their father, Acasto, yet another of Otway's powerful and quixotic patriarchs, has set his face against their marrying. Castalio secretly weds Monimia, but on their wedding night, Polydore, who does not realize they are married, manages to substitute himself for his brother. The truth gradually emerges the following day: Polydore and Monimia are horrified, and kill themselves. Elizabeth Barry achieved lasting fame in the role of Monimia, in which, according to John Downes, 'she forc'd Tears from the Eyes of her Auditory' and gained the 'Name of Famous Mrs. Barry' (Downes, 38). Despite its idyllic setting, 'The Orphan' is an anti-pastoral drama in which all the elements of the traditional pastoral, freedom from care, innocence, trust, closeness to nature, and simplicity of lifestyle are evoked, only to be cancelled. 

'The Souldiers Fortune' is a fast-paced cuckolding comedy based on the efforts of two disbanded and poverty-stricken soldiers to find themselves sex and money. Barry played Beaugard's lost love Clarinda, Betterton took the role of the hero Beaugard, and in the pimp Sir Jolly Jumble and the elderly merchant Sir Davy Dunce the company's comic actors Anthony Leigh and James Noakes were given roles brilliantly suited to their abilities to portray lechery and perversity. The play concludes with Beaugard able to blackmail Sir Davy Dunce, who tried to have him murdered, into acquiescing to his liaison with his wife. Otway's position in the world of Restoration theatre without consistent and powerful patronage surely encouraged his cynical outsider's view of society and his characteristic refusal to provide a conventional conclusion. 

'The Souldiers Fortune', for example, was dedicated not to any great courtier but to his bookseller, Richard Bentley. Bentley, Otway perhaps unwisely remarks, pays 'honestly for the Copy' while 'a Person of higher Rank and Order' knowing he does not deserve the obsequious praise lavished in a dedication 'is very unwilling to part with ready Money for' it ('Works', 2.91). Otway seems never to have secured consistent patronage. Otway's next play, 'Venice Preserv'd' (1682), was dedicated to the duchess of Portsmouth, Charles II's powerful French mistress. However, whether she was pleased with a play featuring a foreign courtesan is open to question -- Otway did not dedicate any further works to her. His last play, 'The Atheist' (1683), was dedicated to Lord Elande, who died shortly thereafter. A mixture of tactlessness and bad luck marks Otway's relations with the nobility whose support was so essential for those seeking to make their career as writers. 

'Venice Preserv'd', Otway's most famous play, was first staged in February 1682. It is a play about plots, a topical subject, and captures brilliantly a mood of civil discontent, suspicion, and betrayal. The main source is Saint-Real's pseudo-history 'A Conspiracy of the Spaniards Against the State of Venice' published in France in 1674 and translated in 1675. The hero, Jaffeir, has eloped with Belvidera, daughter of the senator Priuli, and as the play opens Priuli refuses to help the poverty-stricken family and curses the couple and their son. Jaffeir is induced to join a conspiracy against the state of Venice by his friend Pierre, an ideologue, a soldier, and a man who has lost his mistress, Aquilina, to the senator Antonio. Jaffeir offers his wife, Belvidera, to the conspirators as a pledge for his fidelity. However, after the conspirator Renault has tried to rape Belvidera, Jaffeir acquiesces to her insistence that they inform the Venetian senate of the conspiracy. In return for the information, the senate agrees to spare the lives of the conspirators but immediately breaks its word, only sparing Jaffeir and condemning the rest to death by torture. As Pierre awaits public execution, at his request Jaffeir stabs him and then stabs himself. Comic and outrageously perverse scenes between Aquilina and Antonio provided a major element in the play's immediate popularity and subsequent notoriety. The characters of Antonio and Renault may have been intended as a composite satiric portrait of the earl of Shaftesbury. Contemporaries certainly regarded the play as a triumphant tory work. There were performances on 21 April and 31 May 1682, each provided with new prologues and epilogues by Dryden and Otway, to celebrate the return of the duke and duchess of York from exile in Scotland. Modern scholars, however, have pointed out that neither the conspirators, nor the senators are admirable, and that neither group obviously represents either whigs or tories. 
Despite the success of 'Venice Preserv'd', Otway's own success waned. After 1682, when the two London theatre companies, the King's and Duke's, united, there was less demand for new plays and he was lucky to get another play staged. Otway revived the leading characters of 'The Souldiers Fortune' in his last play, 'The Atheist, or, The Second Part of the Souldiers Fortune' (probably first acted no later than July 1683, and published 1684). The atheist of the title, Daredevil, is a satiric portrait of a freethinker, who in reality is both religious and deeply superstitious and 'never feels so much as an Ague-fit, but he's afraid of being damn'd' (I. 339-42; 'Works', 2.308). The libertinism that was admired in 'Don Carlos' is now depicted as foolish. Irreverent, farcical, and outrageous, 'The Atheist' is nevertheless the most socially mature of Otway's comedies. 
In the thin years that followed the performance of 'The Atheist', Otway contributed verses to friends' works and composed the elegy 'Windsor Castle, in a Monument to our Late Sovereign K. Charles II of Ever Blessed Memory' (1685). According to Wood, shortly before his death he was engaged in composing a congratulatory poem on the accession of James II (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.782). He was also credited with translating from French 'The History of the Triumvirates', published in 1686, though J. C. Ghosh does not include it in his definitive edition of the collected works. Otway appears to have been working on another play, since an advertisement in 'The Observator' on 27 November and 4 December 1686 offers a reward from Betterton and Smith for 'Four Acts of a Play' written by Otway before his death. 
Most accounts agree that Otway died in Tower Hill on 14 April 1685, probably in extreme poverty. Theophilus Cibber paints a pathetic picture of Otway choking to death on a roll bought with money he had begged (T. Cibber, 'Lives of the Poets of Great Britain', 2 vols., 1753, 2.334). Other accounts have Otway dying after pursuing the murderer of a friend ('Works', 1.31; Ham, 214-15). John Dennis simply states that Otway died in an 'Alehouse... in Adversity unpitied, and dy'd unlamented' (J. Dennis, 'Remarks upon Mr. Pope's Translation of Homer', 1717, 5-6). Otway was buried at St Clement Danes on 16 April 1685 -- aged thirty-three. 
Despite the occasional hostile lampoon, Otway was well thought of by his contemporaries. In 'The Play-House', 'A Satyr Writt in the Year 1685' (1689), for example, Robert Gould asserts that: '
Thy 'Orphan' and 'Venetian' piece Sublime 

Shall ever stand, and dare the Teeth of 'Time'. 

' Gerard Langbaine described 'The Orphan' as 'a very moving tragedy' (G. Langbaine, 'An Account of the English Dramatick Poets', 1691, 398) and in less generous vein the 'Tory-Poets' asserted that 'he never writes a Verse but when he's drunk'. By Otway's own account in the 'Poet's Complaint', he was inclined to debauchery and his verse epistle to his friend Richard Duke (1684) extols the joys of 'a generous Bottle, and a Lovesome She' (1.63). According to the tract 'Les soupirs de la Grande Britaigne' (1713), Otway died $400 in debt to his vintner. The anonymous 'Satyr upon Poets' (1703) also states that he used to borrow money from 'kind Banker Betterton' ('Poems on Affairs of State', 1703, 2.142). 

'The Orphan' and 'Venice Preserv'd' were regularly performed throughout the eighteenth century and into the nineteenth, providing leading roles for the great actors of those ages. 'Caius Marius' was performed into the eighteenth century and 'The Cheats of Scapin' was regularly performed as an afterpiece. However, Otway's other comedies were rapidly considered 'loose and prophane' ('A Comparison between the Two Stages', 1702, 58), and increasingly he was admired above all for 'The Orphan' and 'Venice Preserv'd'. Oliver Goldsmith famously stated that Otway was 'next to Shakespeare, the greatest genius England has produced in tragedy' ('Bee', 8, 24 Nov 1759). However, the scenes between Aquilina and Antonio were rapidly excised from productions and publications of 'Venice Preserv'd'. In his life of Otway, Samuel Johnson regretted the 'dispicable scenes of vile comedy' in 'Venice Preserv'd', but noted its popularity with the public and remarked that the 'striking passages are in every mouth' (Johnson, 'Lives of the English Poets', 1.444). The basic plot event of 'The Orphan', Monimia's 'rape' by her brother-in-law, came to be regarded as both improbable and indecent, and the play's popularity had waned by the nineteenth century. The comedies largely forgotten, and 'Venice Preserv'd' bowdlerized, from the later eighteenth century onwards Otway came to be admired for pathos and tender depictions of friendship and love. By the mid-nineteenth century, however, the sensuality of his plays, even when cut, increasingly rendered them unacceptable for the stage. 
Interest in Otway revived in the twentieth century with editions of his works by Montague Summer and J. C. Ghosh and productions of 'Venice Preserv'd' and 'The Orphan' at the Old Vic. These editions were reprinted in the 1960s and helped to stimulate new approaches to Otway. By this time the savagery, cynicism, and obscenity of Otway's works no longer disqualified them from serious attention and admiration; indeed, his harsh satires on political motives and frank treatment of sexual relations suited modern tastes. Late twentieth-century productions of 'Venice Preserv'd', 'The Orphan', and 'The Atheist' have all demonstrated their strength and dramatic viability. Otway is currently regarded as a major Restoration dramatist, with 'Venice Preserv'd' generally assessed as the best political tragedy of that period. 


@@@@@


doc= 20945


Otway, Thomas (1616-1693), Church of Ireland bishop of Ossory, was born at Alderbury, Wiltshire, on 1 November 1616, the son of George Otway, Church of England clergyman. He was educated at Winchester College, and was admitted a sizar of Christ's College, Cambridge, his father's old college, on 13 June 1632, 'aged 15'. He graduated BA in 1636 and MA in 1639, afterwards taking the degree of DD at Trinity College, Dublin. He subsequently became chaplain to Sir Ralph Hopton, and an active civil war royalist. He was taken prisoner during the war and banished to the West Indies, where he remained until the Restoration. On his return to England, he was at once marked out for preferment. He was rector of St Botolph, Billingsgate (June 1663-June 1664), and of Etchingham, Sussex (June 1664-1670). He never married. 
In 1670 Otway became chaplain to John, first Baron Berkeley of Stratton, who took Otway with him to Ireland when he was made lord lieutenant. Lord Berkeley procured Otway's promotion to the see of Killala by patent dated 16 November in the same year. He was consecrated in Christ Church, Dublin, on 29 January 1671. As bishop of Killala he encountered opposition from Presbyterians and tories. He was translated to the see of Ossory by patent dated 7 February 1680, in spite of the objections raised against him on the grounds that he had executed a tory in his own house without legal warrant. He received 'in commendam' the archdeaconry of Armagh and a rectory attached to it. In February 1686 the earl of Clarendon advocated his promotion to the see of Cashel, but his advice was not acted upon; no Church of Ireland episcopal vacancies were filled during James II's reign. 
In May 1689 Otway sat in James II's Irish parliament, one of four Church of Ireland bishops in the House of Lords. After the battle of the Boyne, William ordered his suspension (21 July 1690) for his refusal to pray for the new monarchy. Otway, however, succeeded in laying the blame on the dean and chapter, and the suspension was never enforced; but shortly afterwards he declared that he had seen no sufficient justification for the late revolution, that James II was still lawful king, and no power of pope or people could dethrone him, and, recalling the persecutions he had suffered under Cromwell, professed his readiness, in spite of his advanced age, to undergo the same again. However, by November 1690 he could tell Bishop Anthony Dopping of Meath that he had resolved 'on a cheerful obedience to the present powers' (McGuire, 148). In October 1692 he sat in William's House of Lords, and was still in possession of his see when he died on 6 March 1693. He was buried in his cathedral church of St Canice, Kilkenny, near the west door, and over his grave was erected a marble stone with an inscription to his memory. 
By his will, dated 8 December 1692, besides his legacy to Christ's College, Cambridge, and numerous other benefactions, Otway bequeathed $200 to Trinity College, Dublin, and a like sum to build a library in the churchyard of St Canice, Kilkenny, of which his own books were to form the nucleus. The library was incorporated during Anne's reign. 


@@@@@


doc= 20946


Oudart, Nicholas (d. 1681), government official, was born at Mechelen, Brabant, in the Low Countries and styled himself 'Sieur de Rixtel au Pays de Kempen en Brabant' in later life. He moved to England as 'a little page' in the household of Sir Henry Wotton, who subsequently sponsored his education. Created MA at Oxford on 13 August 1636 and incorporated MA at Cambridge in 1639, Oudart studied medicine. He was licensed to practise medicine from St Catharine's College, Cambridge, in 1639, and took the degree of MB at Oxford on 31 January 1643. By September 1640 he was serving as secretary to Sir William Boswell, the English ambassador at The Hague, and two years later was in the employ of Sir Edward Nicholas, then acting secretary of state. He continued to serve Nicholas after the secretary left England for France in 1646, writing newsletters in invisible lemon-juice ink. 
Oudart was first recorded as a member of Charles I's entourage in August 1647, although he had probably been with the king as a writing clerk before this, and compounded with parliament for a fine of $22. He remained with the confined king, handling correspondence, including a letter from Charles in early 1648 urging his son, the duke of York, to attempt escape which so incensed the House of Lords as to produce speculation that Oudart might have been executed had he not fled to the Netherlands. He took notes of the treaty negotiations in the Isle of Wight. Charles I may, however, have lost trust in him and Nicholas seems to have believed he was involved in betraying the king's escape plans. 
By June 1649 Oudart was secretary to Charles I's daughter, Mary of Orange, the princess royal, in the Netherlands, and his services were lent to her brother, Charles II, whom Oudart accompanied to Scotland in 1650. Moving between the Orange court and the royalist exiles around Henrietta Maria, he earned the animosity of Sir Edward Hyde and of Nicholas, who was suspicious of his involvement with Nicholas's rival, Robert Long. In 1655 Oudart married 'a handsome gentlewoman', Eva Tortarolis, daughter of John Tortarolis of Leiden, who was rumoured to have a portion of $10,000. The marriage produced three daughters: Barbara, who married William Foster; Amelia Isabella, married to Bartholomew van Sittert; and Dorothy, who was unmarried at the time of her father's death. A member of the princess of Orange's council, Oudart remained in her employ until her death in 1661, was named an executor of her estate, and served her son William as Latin secretary and a member of his council. He was characterized by a contemporary as one who 'gettes his desires' through 'obsequious eye service' rather than 'sufficiency or integrity' ('Nicholas Papers', 3.100), although the princess considered him honest and loyal. 
Oudart sought rewards at the Restoration, but was granted only a reversion to a signet clerkship and admitted gentleman of the privy chamber on 18 November 1662. From at least January 1663 he was connected with the wine licence office, but lost money there. For years he shuttled to the Netherlands, settling the estate of the princess of Orange, undertaking minor diplomatic duties, and keeping an eye on his wife's property. In the summer of 1665 he was arrested there in retaliation for the English imprisonment of a member of the Dutch embassy in London and although an exchange was made in January 1666 he later claimed to have been racked and kept in prison after his counterpart's release. A warrant authorizing $500 compensation was issued in February 1666 but the incident marked the end of Oudart's position with William of Orange and led to the loss of his wife's Dutch estates. He was granted a patent as secretary for the Latin tongue on 19 July 1666, with a salary of $80. From 1667 he was a fellow of the Royal Society and an acquaintance of Samuel Pepys and of John Evelyn, who petitioned for the office of Latin secretary in 1670 when he heard Oudart was 'irrecoverably sick' (TNA: PRO, SP 29/273/106). 
In 1675 Oudart petitioned Charles II for the lease of a crown estate on the grounds that he had served the crown since his youth, 'being a great sufferer, and being now with his family reduced to very great straits' ('CSP dom.', '1675-6', 468). The following year he was once again in the Netherlands trying to regain estates there and in 1678 unsuccessfully petitioned to assume his reversion to a signet clerkship. In 1680 he requested permission to sell the office of Latin secretary, being too infirm to carry out its duties and badly needing money. He died in Little Dean's Yard, Westminster, and was buried in the west cloister of Westminster Abbey on 21 December 1681. His will, dated 5 March 1672, was proved on 13 July 1682 by his widow, Eva. She subsequently petitioned the crown for payment of moneys owed him, she and her family having gone to live off the charity of friends and relatives in the Netherlands. A manuscript copy of 'Eikon basilike', said to be in Oudart's hand, was used for Royston's printed edition, while a number of Oudart's papers came into the possession of the antiquary Francis Peck who printed some of them in his 'Desiderata curiosa'. 


@@@@@


doc= 20947


Oudney, Walter (1790-1824), naval surgeon and traveller in Africa, was born in December 1790 to humble parents, in Edinburgh. With some medical knowledge he became a surgeon's mate on a man-of-war, was appointed assistant surgeon and then surgeon in 1810, and was stationed in the East Indies. When peace was declared he returned on half pay to Edinburgh to join his mother and sisters. He attended classes at the university, graduated MD on 1 August 1817, and set up in private practice. 
The course of the Niger was one of the most contentious questions of African geography and, after attempts to solve it by exploration from west Africa had failed, it was proposed that it be approached from Tripoli, where the British consul-general Hanmer Warrington had established cordial relations with the ruling Turkish pasha, Yusuf Karamanli. After Joseph Ritchie's attempt using the new route in 1818 had ended in disaster, and when his companion George Francis Lyon had refused to make a second attempt, the Foreign Office was looking for suitable replacements. James Robinson Scott, a former lecturer in botany at the University of Edinburgh, recommended Oudney, whom he considered an accomplished surgeon and botanist. Oudney had become a member of the Wernerian Society and had studied chemistry and natural history, hoping to become a lecturer in botany at Edinburgh University, but he expressed himself keen to go to Africa. In 1821 he learnt that he had been appointed leader of the expedition with Hugh Clapperton, a naval officer on half pay, also from Edinburgh, who was appointed assistant at Oudney's request. 
Oudney and Clapperton arrived in Tripoli in October 1821, to be joined by Dixon Denham, who had volunteered to join the expedition and had managed to get himself appointed its leader over both Oudney, the original leader, and Clapperton, his senior in service rank. Oudney, who had volunteered for a scientific expedition, found himself appointed permanent vice-consul at Bornu, and was charged with exerting a diplomatic presence to increase British standing; however, he also helped to open up new areas to trade, and to further exploration and the collection of natural historical specimens. The party was acrimonious and divided, though its relations with the hosts and guides were good. On 7 April 1822 it arrived in Murzuq in Fezzan, where it was delayed after finding that no preparations had been made for the expedition; Oudney and Clapperton explored the neighbourhood, and finally in November 1822, with the assurance of a military escort, the group set off southwards across the desert. Denham apparently despised his companions for their humble backgrounds. Oudney found himself required by Denham to investigate unfounded allegations about Clapperton's sexual behaviour. In February they reached Kuka (later Kukawa), the capital of Bornu, on Lake Chad. Here they were detained by the ruler Sheik Muhammad el Kanemi, who was afraid for their safety. Eventually Oudney and Clapperton left for Kano on 14 December 1823. In the extremely cold weather Oudney, who had been in poor health since arriving at Kuka, caught pneumonia; he died at Katagum in the Sudan on 12 January 1824 and was buried there. 
Oudney was said to have been of middle height and slightly built, pale and grave. He was enterprising and determined, and was sympathetic to Africans. The account of the expedition was published by Denham in 1826 and, with Oudney dead and Clapperton in Africa, he was able to appropriate to himself most of the credit for the expedition which had very considerably advanced the state of geographical knowledge of the area as well as establishing cordial relations between the local rulers and Britain, and promising new avenues for trade. The Niger question, however, remained unsolved: Oudney's own (erroneous) theory was that it must terminate in the lakes of Nupe (which he called Nyffe). Some of Oudney's mineralogical notes and some geographical information are included in Denham's 'Narrative' and some hundreds of his natural history specimens were brought back. None the less his part in the expedition was circumscribed by chronic illness and curtailed by his early death, and he is little remembered. 


@@@@@


doc= 20948


Euddogwy (supp. fl. late 6th cent.), holy man and supposed bishop, was founder of the church of Llandogo in Monmouthshire, but by the twelfth century he had been appropriated by the expanding see of Llandaff and erroneously turned into its third bishop. Euddogwy (from Old Welsh Oudocui), or in the Latin form Oudoceus, is one of the most problematic of the Welsh saints, and may largely be the product of the ecclesiastical propaganda underlying the 'Book of Llandaff', compiled under Bishop Urban in the twelfth century and intended to provide the episcopal church with a demonstrable early history. The only extant account of the life and deeds of St Euddogwy is the brief 'Vita sancti Oudocei' found in the 'Book of Llandaff'; it is very derivative in content. It states that the saint's parents were Budig, son of Cybrdan of Cornwall, and Anawfedd, daughter of Ensig of Dyfed and sister of St Teilo (supposedly second bishop of Llandaff). Budig had allegedly promised his sons as disciples to Teilo, and so, following the end of the 'yellow pestilence' (presumably meant to be that which raged in Britain during the 550s), Teilo travelled to Cornwall and brought the young Euddogwy back with him to Llandaff, where he was eventually to succeed Teilo as bishop. 
G. H. Doble argued convincingly that the author of this life simply created a series of fictional early bishops of Llandaff by extracting their names, including a 'Eudoce episcopus', from a list of witnesses to charters appended to the life of St Cadog in BL, Cotton MS Vespasian A.xiv. Furthermore, while much of the life of Euddogwy is concerned with confirming the territorial extent and ecclesiastical privileges of the church of Llandaff, towards its conclusion it shifts rather awkwardly to describe the deeds of Euddogwy as a hermit dwelling on the banks of the Wye, where he founds the church of Llandogo (called Lann Einniaun) in what is now Monmouthshire. The author explains this sudden shift by claiming that Euddogwy had resigned the episcopacy of Llandaff before departing for the Wye, even though elsewhere he claims that Euddogwy would die while still performing his episcopal duties. The feast day is given as 2 July. The patron of Llandogo is probably a very minor Monmouthshire saint, with no connection whatsoever to Llandaff, whom the author of the life has attempted to identify with his subject on account of their onomastic similarity. The Euddogwy of Llandogo has left very little trace of a cult, except for the notice in a document from the end of the twelfth century of a 'Fons Sancti Eudaci' ('Fountain of St Eudacus') located in the parish of Dixton, near Monmouth. It seems likely, therefore, that St Euddogwy, bishop of Llandaff, was created wholesale during the composition of his life, partly from the name form Eudoce occurring in another twelfth-century life, and partly from Euddogwy, a local Monmouthshire saint of little consequence, in order to furnish the episcopal church of Llandaff with a suitable early bishop. Consequently, any treatment of him as a historical figure is to be suspected. 


@@@@@


doc= 20949


Oughton, Sir (James) Adolphus Dickenson (bap. 1719, d. 1780), army officer and antiquary, was baptized at St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, on 27 October 1719, the illegitimate son of Colonel 
Oughton was promoted colonel and appointed first major of the Coldstream Guards in 1715, the year in which he was elected member of parliament for Coventry. In 1717 he was appointed regimental lieutenant-colonel of the Coldstream. He continued to support the ministry following the breach between George I and his son that year, and resigned from the prince's household in December; in 1718 he received a secret service payment of $500 from the government, and on 27 August he was created a baronet. Re-elected for Coventry in 1722 (after fighting a duel with William, third Baron Craven, brother of his opponent Fulwar Craven), Oughton remained a prominent ministerialist and senior army officer, serving in Ireland between 1729 and 1733. His ambition to be governor of Minorca may have been thwarted by his ambivalence on the excise question, where the militant opposition of his Coventry constituents to the 'Excise Bill' led him to abstain rather than vote with Walpole's government. He was none the less appointed colonel of the 8th dragoons in 1733, and was again elected for Coventry in 1734. He became a brigadier-general in 1735, but died at Bishop's Tachbrook on 4 September 1736. He was a freemason and had something of a reputation as a rake. 
The young Dickenson grew up on his father's estate at Bishop's Tachbrook, and attended Coventry grammar school from 1725 until 1729, after which he went to Charterhouse School until 1735, where he excelled in the classics. His place at Charterhouse was secured for him through the influence of Frederick, prince of Wales, a friend of his father and fellow freemason. Initially destined for an exhibition at Christ Church, Oxford, he instead attended Trinity College, Dublin, in 1736 and 1737. His father's death in 1736 removed his sole source of financial support, necessitated his departure from Trinity, and prompted him to seek a military career. In 1737 he was commissioned cornet in the 8th dragoons, of which his father had been colonel and which was then stationed in Ireland; he purchased a lieutenancy in 1741, the year he started to use his father's surname. Two of his abiding interests began while he was a subaltern: he became a freemason in London in 1737 and developed a passion for antiquities while serving in Ireland in the late 1730s. 
The army's enlargement in 1742 provided Oughton with his captaincy, in the 37th regiment of foot, and that year he went to Flanders with his regiment, taking the opportunity to visit Rhineland cities, record antiquities, and collect medals. After returning to Britain in 1746 for the suppression of the Jacobite rising, he saw action at the battle of Falkirk and fought as a major of brigade at Culloden, being elected secretary of the Cumberland Society, which was formed in Inverness in April 1746. He experienced his third battle, Laffeldt, in 1747 as the 37th's major and was promoted, without purchase, to the regiment's lieutenant-colonelcy in 1749. Commanding the regiment on Minorca between 1749 and 1754 he acted as the island's provincial grand master mason and indulged his fondness for travel, visiting Algiers and spending several months in Italy in 1752 -- during which visit he acted as witness at Sir William Chambers's marriage in Rome and took copious notes on the Arsenale in Venice. 
Stationed in Scotland in 1754 and 1755, Oughton met and in the latter year married the widowed mother of Hew Whitefoord Dalrymple (1750-1830), Mary Dalrymple, 'nee' Ross (died 1793). He also joined Edinburgh's Select Society and Revolution Society before returning to England in 1756 and taking the 1st battalion of his regiment to Flanders in 1758. On his return to Britain in 1759, following his command of the 37th at the battle of Minden, Oughton was rewarded with the colonelcy of the 55th regiment of foot; he was also left $1000 in the will of General James Wolfe. He settled in Bolton Street, Piccadilly, for the next eight years and, while militarily unemployed in London, Oughton was elected to its Society of Arts in 1762 and its Society of Antiquaries in 1767. At a time when many Britons were equivocal about the Hanoverian dynasty Oughton lost no opportunity to proclaim his allegiance to the protestant succession: among his other societal memberships were those of the Blew and Orange Society and the Antigallican Society. In 1762 he was promoted from the colonelcy of the 55th to that of the 31st regiment of foot. As colonel of the 31st he had and exercised such opportunities for patronage within his regiment that he became well known in the army not only for ensuring that officers were promoted within his regiment but also for supporting and sponsoring officers of slender means but great potential. 
Oughton returned to Scotland in 1767 with the rank of major-general to fill the post of deputy to the commander-in-chief, north Britain, John Campbell, marquess of Lorne (later fifth duke of Argyll). His final promotion, to the rank of lieutenant-general, came in 1770 and he succeeded Lorne as commander-in-chief in 1778, having been created KB in 1773 and appointed to the sinecure post of lieutenant-governor of Antigua in 1772. The majority of his final thirteen years of life in Scotland were ones of uxorious tranquillity. With the nation at peace until 1775 Oughton was largely free to follow his own interests and he passed the time in learning Gaelic, in tours of inspection, in socializing in Edinburgh, and in active freemasonry, being elected grand master of the Scottish grand lodge in 1769 and 1770 and to the masonic royal order of Scotland in 1769. During his time in Scotland Oughton met both James Boswell and Samuel Johnson: Johnson's description of Oughton as 'a very extraordinary man; a man of boundless curiosity and unwearied diligence' (Boswell, 567) remains the best description of this remarkable military paragon. As the war in America intensified after 1778 so Oughton's workload increased. This undoubtedly affected his health and probably contributed to his early death, which occurred in Bath on 14 April 1780. He was buried in Bath Abbey two days later and a memorial tablet was erected in Westminster Abbey in 1781. 


@@@@@


doc= 20950


Oughtred, William (bap. 1575, d. 1660), mathematician, was the son of Benjamin Oughtred (died 1618), a writing-master and 'registrar' at Eton College, and was baptized there on 5 March 1575 (reputedly the day of his birth). After attending the school as a king's scholar and being taught arithmetic by his father, he went on to King's College, Cambridge, in 1592; he became a fellow there in 1595, graduating BA in 1596 and proceeding MA in 1600. He later said that it was during this period that he began to study mathematics intensively, and 'by inciting, assisting and instructing others, brought many in to the love and study of those Arts, not only in our own, but in some other Colledges also' (Oughtred, sig. [A4]'v'). His first known mathematical writings and instrument designs date from this period, although they appeared in print much later. 
Having been ordained priest in 1603, Oughtred left the university in 1605 to become vicar of Shalford, in Surrey; he was rector of nearby Albury from 1610 until his death. The move to Shalford enabled him to marry Christsgift Caryll, baptized at Godalming, Surrey, on 21 April 1588, as a daughter of William Caryll or Carell and his wife, Doryty. The Carylls lived at Tangley in the parish of Wonersh (not far from Shalford), and Christsgift's marriage to Oughtred took place there on 20 February 1606. Oughtred also built up links with other local families, teaching mathematics to the son of Sir Francis Aungier and Latin to a member of the household of George Duncombe. This did not mean that his horizons narrowed; he mentions having met Edmund Gunter through the good offices of 'my honoured friend, Master Henry Briggs', while on a visit to London in 1618. About 1620 Oughtred first encountered one Captain Marmaduke Neilson or Nelson, who proposed an astronomical method of finding longitude at sea; Neilson seemed to admit that he was wrong, but was to reappear in the early 1630s making similar claims, with the backing of Lord Falkland. Oughtred was then consulted about the matter by Peter Heylin, and appointed to a commission consisting of several learned men set up to reconsider it in May 1636. 
Meanwhile Oughtred was introduced to Thomas Howard, second earl of Arundel (1586-1646), as he described in 1633: 'About five yeares since, the Earle of Arundell my most honourable Lord in a time of his private retiring to his house... at West Horsley, foure small miles from me... hearing of me... was pleased to send for me: and afterward at London to appoint mee a chamber in his owne house [Arundel House, in the Strand]. (Oughtred, sig. B'v')' There are hints that Oughtred hoped for more concrete benefits from the relationship, perhaps in terms of church preferments, but he was disappointed. His sole acquisition was the Heathfield prebend at Chichester Cathedral, bestowed upon him by Bishop Henry King, who lived in Surrey during the civil war period and was a cousin of George Duncombe; King allowed his son John to become one of Oughtred's pupils. The grant was made in or after 1644, so can only have been a purely nominal honour; it may have been intended as a compensation for Oughtred following his complaint, in 1647, that John King had seduced one of his daughters (Crum, 20). 
In return for the earl's patronage Oughtred taught his second surviving son, William (later Viscount Stafford). It was for this pupil, he said, that he compiled his 'Arithmeticae in numeris et speciebus institutio: quae... totius mathematicae quasi clavis est' (1631). In this he took algebraic methods from continental sources, especially Viete, and presented them in a concise form through the intensive use of symbols, some of which were invented by himself; the resulting volume was relatively small and inexpensive, in marked contrast to the rival work of Thomas Harriot (posthumous, also 1631). In presenting a copy to Peter Heylin, Oughtred described it as: 'but a mole-hyll, easily stept over. Some thinke it hard; it is indeed new to this our age; but either this, or els some such like, familiar to the ancients... and indeed analytice is the true way of invention... it is not hard: it is the way of nature, which is most plaine and easie, and free from anfractuous ambiguities, in all her workes. (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D.353, fol. 96)' An English edition of the 'Clavis', translated by Dr Robert Wood, appeared in 1647 as 'The Key of the Mathematics New Forged and Filed', with a preface in which Oughtred thanked Thomas Wharton, Jonas Moore, and others for helping to see the volume through the press. A number of his shorter mathematical writings were appended to the second and third Latin editions, which appeared under the title 'Clavis mathematica(e)' in 1648 and 1652 respectively. The latter of these was produced in Oxford by a group including John Wallis (1616-1703), Seth Ward (1617-1689), and the young Christopher Wren (1632-1723). It reflects the unique status Oughtred had by then attained as a figurehead for contemporary English mathematicians. 
Oughtred's position in the Howard household allowed him to make contact with other members of the mathematical community in London, including various instrument makers. He had a close relationship with Elias Allen, whose workshop by St Clement Danes was only a short distance down the Strand from Arundel House, and he was later in contact with Allen's apprentice and successor Ralph Greatorex. Allen was responsible for realizing various instrument designs for Oughtred -- some devised during his time in Cambridge and some soon after his first encounter with logarithms. The latter instruments included the 'circles of proportion' -- the earliest form of slide-rule -- which allowed problems of multiplication and division to be reduced to addition and subtraction by the use of logarithms. Oughtred was persuaded by one of his pupils, William Forster, to publish an account of this device, despite his consistent wariness about promoting the use of instruments. He believed that their availability often kept people from studying the theoretical aspects of mathematics. 'The Circles of Proportion and the Horizontal Instrument... Invented, and the Uses of Both Written in Latine by Mr W.O.', Forster's translation, was published in 1632. The second instrument of the title, placed on the back of the circles of proportion, was a tool for demonstrating astronomical principles and for laying out sundials on any kind of plane. It was later adapted to make a garden sundial, of which Oughtred published an account in 'The Description and Use of the Double Horizontall Dyall' (1636). The circles of proportion and especially the horizontal instrument involved Oughtred (and Forster) in a bitter dispute with Oughtred's former pupil Richard Delamain, who had also published accounts of both instruments as his own invention. Oughtred retaliated in a piece usually found bound with 'The Circles of Proportion': 'To the English gentrie... the just apologie of Wil: Oughtred, against the slaunderous insimulations of Richard Delamain' [1633]. In this he made a scathing attack on those mathematical teachers who were more interested in the use of instruments than the study of mathematical theory, calling them 'doers of tricks' and 'Jugglers'. Here and elsewhere he defended the unity of mathematics, deploring the 'superficiall scumme and froth of Instrumentall tricks and practices' that emerged when practice was not based upon sound theoretical understanding. 
Other instruments Oughtred developed included a straight slide-rule (described in the preface to 'The Circles of Proportion' and in a letter to Elias Allen), a gauging rod (described in 'The New Artificial Gauging Line', 1633), and another sundial, which was to become one of the most popular of its type in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. This last instrument had already been available from Allen's workshop for about twenty years when an account of it was published in 'The description of the generall horologicall ring', appended to a new edition of 'The Description and Use of the Double Horizontall Dyall' (1652). 
Forster was one of the many men who went to Oughtred in London or at Albury to benefit from his tuition and from access to his unparalleled mathematical library. The list of his disciples includes many eminent contemporary mathematicians and scholars -- Seth Ward, Christopher Wren, Laurence Rooke, and Jonas Moore being only the best known of them -- though it is now difficult to be sure which were genuinely his pupils and which were simply admiring colleagues. Many of them made use of the 'Clavis' as a teaching text: Ward is said to have employed the work in his university teaching at Cambridge in the early 1640s, and Rooke to have lectured upon it at Gresham College in the 1650s. The Savilian professor John Wallis also paid homage to Oughtred and produced another edition of the 'Clavis' in 1667. 
Other works by Oughtred are 'The Solution of All Sphaerical Triangles by the Planisphere' (1651, ed. Christopher Brookes); 'Trigonometria' (1657, Englished by Richard Stokes as 'Trigonometrie'); and the posthumous 'Opuscula mathematica' (1677) containing various previously unpublished short treatises. He is also credited, probably incorrectly, with an English translation (in 1633) of Jean Leurechon's 'Recreations mathematiques' of 1629. The 'planisphere' mentioned in the first of these works was yet another of Oughtred's inventions, devised about 1610 along with an instrument 'giving the Prosthaphaereses of the Plannets according to the Theory of Copernicus' (W. Oughtred, 'The Solution of All Sphaerical Triangles by the Planisphere'). Both instruments had astrological uses. Oughtred's interest in astronomy was inseparably bound up with belief in astrology; Aubrey reports that he was also deeply committed to the study of alchemy. The impression his neighbours gained of these activities may have reinforced the threat to his tenure of the Albury living when, in 1646, he was brought before a sequestration committee for his loyalty to the royalist cause. The parliamentarian astrologer William Lilly claimed credit for organizing his defence; Aubrey believed that the Surrey landowner Sir Richard Onslow was primarily responsible for its successful outcome and that this was why the 1647 'Key of the Mathematics' was dedicated to Onslow and his son. 
Oughtred and his wife had thirteen children, according to Aubrey, or twelve according to a note of names and dates preserved by Ashmole: William, Henry (twice), Benjamin, Simon, Margaret, Judith, Edward, Elizabeth, Anne, George, and John. Benjamin and John became watchmakers. The family connection with the instrument-making trade was further strengthened by the marriage of one of the daughters to Christopher Brookes, an apprentice of Elias Allen and the editor of Oughtred's treatise on spherical triangles. Oughtred died on 13 June 1660, probably at Albury, where he was buried on 15 June; Aubrey writes that he expired with joy on hearing of the king's restoration. The administration of his estate was granted to his son, Henry, on 24 July 1661. While some of his books were dispersed, others, with some of his papers, eventually reached the hands of the mathematician William Jones: the books were merged with other contents of a private library during the nineteenth century, and cannot now be separately identified. 


@@@@@


doc= 20951


Ould, Sir Fielding (c.1710-1789), man-midwife, was born at Galway, Ireland, one of two children of Captain Ould (1689- 'c'.1715) of the Royal regiment of Welch fusiliers and Lettice Shawe, the daughter of the Revd Fielding Shawe, canon of Tagh Saxon. His father, who fought at the battles of the Boyne and Aughrim, was later assassinated in London, and Fielding and his brother, Abraham, were raised in Galway. Beginning about 1729 Ould spent five years as a dissector in the department of anatomy in Trinity College, Dublin, and attended courses in botany, chemistry, and natural philosophy, but left without a degree. He then studied in Paris under Gregoire the elder, the first Frenchman to give private lessons in midwifery. It was there that Ould made his greatest contribution to obstetrics when he was first to observe that in normal labour the foetal head entered the maternal pelvis in the lateral position and then rotated, prior to delivery. Ould married Gracia Walker in 1733, and they had several children. She was related by marriage to the Chamberlen family, who had introduced the obstetric forceps to midwifery practice in the previous century. 
On his return to Dublin in 1736 or 1737 Ould resided at 21 Frederick Street South and developed a large midwifery practice in Golden Lane. He was granted a licence in midwifery by the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland, on 16 August 1738, as he was found to be 'singularly well qualified' in the art of obstetrics. Four years later his famous book, 'A Treatise of Midwifery, in Three Parts', was published. Dedicated to the fellows of the College of Physicians, it also carried their imprimatur. Ould recommended the use of opiates in prolonged labour. He may have possessed a pair of obstetric forceps, and he wrote that 'The best adapted instrument is the large forceps, which is in general use all over Europe'. He described episiotomy and cautioned against premature extraction of the placenta. He opposed the use of caesarean section, which he argued would necessarily destroy the mother. His sound judgement and moral courage are evidenced by the fact that he advised professional consultation in difficult obstetric cases. His textbook was one of the first important works on obstetrics in English, and contained many new and important observations, including his original studies on the mechanism of normal labour. His caring attitude is evident throughout the book, as is his commitment to improve the quality of care for women in childbirth. 
Ould was appointed assistant master of the Dublin Lying-in Hospital in 1745. In 1753 he received the degree of BA, 'speciali gratia' from Trinity College, and three years later applied to Trinity and the College of Physicians to be examined for a bachelor's degree in medicine. The College of Physicians refused as it was contrary to their by-laws, which stated that 'no man... shall have a licence to practise midwifery and physic together'. Trinity, however, conferred an honorary degree in medicine on Ould in 1761, causing the indignant physicians to dissolve their links with the university. Some twenty-four years later they relented and Ould was admitted as a licentiate in medicine of the College of Physicians on 3 October 1785. 
In 1759 Ould became master of the lying-in hospital after the untimely death of its founder, Bartholomew Mosse, and devoted himself to lowering maternal mortality and improving patients' welfare and facilities. He proceeded with the building of a place of entertainment and fund-raising, known as the Round Rooms, thus giving rise to the hospital's alternative and soon-to-be-adopted name -- The Rotunda. This, the first maternity hospital in Ireland and Great Britain, provided excellent facilities and developed a worldwide reputation for patient care, teaching, and clinical research. In May 1760 Ould was knighted by John Russell, the duke of Bedford and lord lieutenant of Ireland. A Dublin wit wrote the following epigram: '
Sir Fielding Ould is made a Knight, 

He should have been a lord by right; 

For then each lady's prayer would be, 

O Lord, Good Lord, deliver me! 
(Brody, 234-40)' During his professional career, which extended from 1736 to 1788, Ould was obstetrician not only to the destitute but also to the nobility, and he attended the countess of Wellesley at the birth of Arthur, duke of Wellington. He enhanced the reputation of the Dublin School of Midwifery and became acknowledged as one of Ireland's foremost obstetricians. Ould died at his home, 21 Frederick Street South, Dublin, of apoplexy on 29 November 1789 and was buried in the nearby St Ann's churchyard, Dawson Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 20952


Oulton, Walley Chamberlain (fl. 1783-1820), playwright and theatre historian, was born in Dublin, the son of Walley Oulton ('b'. 'c'.1737) and his wife, Catherine, the daughter of Dr Chamberlen Walker, who himself came from the Chamberlen family of physicians who had invented obstetrical forceps. His great-grandfather, also named Walley Oulton, had settled in Dublin early in the eighteenth century, and set up as a glover in Nicholas Street. It is said that Walley Chamberlain Oulton lost his father during infancy, and on his mother's remarriage was left in the care of his grandfather Dr Walker, from whom he received a classical education. Other sources, however, state that he was educated privately in Dublin under Dr Ball. In any event, his first play, 'The Haunted Castle', was performed at the Capel Street theatre in December 1783, and was quickly followed by several other pieces. According to Stephen Jones, 'intoxicated with this success, he neglected his studies, and came to London' (Baker), where he married Ann Elizabeth Churchill on 5 November 1787 at St Luke's, Chelsea. They had at least two daughters and two sons, John Oulton and Thomas Walker Oulton, the latter of whom was baptized on 23 May 1796. 
In London Oulton was soon embroiled in controversy. His burletta 'Hobson's Choice' was staged in 1787 by John Palmer at the Royalty Theatre in Wellclose Square. Palmer's enterprise was opposed by the powerful lobby of supporters of London's patent theatres, and Oulton's light-hearted satire of the prevailing theatrical conditions (his subtitle was 'Thespis in Distress') gave disproportionate offence. Believing himself 'persona non grata' at Drury Lane and Covent Garden, Oulton concealed his authorship of his next play, 'As it should be', which was performed under the Colman management at the Haymarket in June 1789. The younger Colman continued to support Oulton after the deception was discovered, and it was at the Haymarket that many of his plays were first performed. As a dramatist he was modestly content to gratify popular taste in a career that lasted until 1817. He was not, however, prolific (twenty-five known pieces in thirty-four years), and it may have been financial considerations that drew him into acting. His first recorded appearance was as Pierre in Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd' at the Richmond Theatre on 18 September 1792, but he may have acted for Palmer at the Royalty as early as 1787 or 1788, as several of the Royalty playbills for those seasons are missing. 
A minor playwright and a forgotten actor, Oulton was also a journalist and an industrious historian of the English theatre. The 'Busy Body', which he published three times a week during the first two months of 1787, was his attempt to establish himself as a periodical essayist in the tradition of Addison and Steele. Its twenty-five issues were collected for publication in book form in 1789. He also entered into controversy in 1795, with two pseudonymous pamphlets attacking the self-proclaimed prophet Richard Brothers and his disciple Nathaniel Halhed. Oulton's ill-judged defence of the authenticity of 'Vortigern', Samuel Ireland's Shakespeare forgery, appeared anonymously in 1796. The protection of anonymity did not last long, and Oulton shared the embarrassment of a gullible public, redeeming himself somewhat by the publication, also in 1796, of his two-volume updating of Benjamin Victor's 'History of the Theatres of London'. It is as a theatre historian that he is best known, and his last major work, published in 1818, was a further updating of this 'History' to 1817 in three volumes. His 'Authentic memoirs of the green room (for 1799) containing the lives of all the performers of the theatres-royal' is not entirely reliable, but it was successful enough to merit expansion to two volumes in 1800 and to run to six further editions between 1801 and 1816. Oulton also edited, for publication in 1801, 'Barker's Continuation of Egerton's Theatrical Remembrances, Baker's Biographia dramatica, etc.', which had further editions in 1803 and 1814. His journeyman work included a shoddy edition of Shakespeare's poems (1804), anthologies of the writings of Kotzebue (1800) and Anna Seward (1813), a translation of Gessner's 'Death of Abel' (1811), an English gazetteer (1805), and (his last known publication) a 'Picture of Margate and its Vicinity' (1820). Nothing is known of Oulton after 1820, and no details of his private life have been preserved. Even in the memoirs of men who knew him, like George Colman the younger and James Boaden, his name is scarcely mentioned. 


@@@@@


doc= 20953


Ouseley, Sir Frederick Arthur Gore, second baronet (1825-1889), church musician, was born on 12 August 1825 in Grosvenor Square, London, the fourth and youngest surviving child of Sir Gore Ouseley, first baronet (1770-1844), orientalist and diplomatist, and his wife, Harriet Georgina, daughter of John Whitelocke (1757-1833). From the age of three he displayed remarkable musical gifts and he soon began to compose. However, he received no disciplined training in music, and after private education proceeded to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1843. He inherited his father's title in 1844 and took his BA degree in 1846. 
Ouseley then prepared himself for ordination in the Church of England. At the same time he worked towards the degree of BMus (1850), for which he composed as his 'exercise' a sacred cantata. It was unprecedented for anyone of his class to take this degree, then anomalous in status and poorly esteemed. He later wrote that, together with ordination, this was part of his purpose 'to do something to raise the music of the Sanctuary'. Of high-church tendencies, he was also among the first and eventually the most influential of those who, following John Jebb, held that the services of the 'Book of Common Prayer' should properly be sung wherever possible, not only in cathedrals. Ouseley was made deacon in 1849 and became curate in the parish of St Paul's, Knightsbridge, London. He was personally insulted during the No Popery riots evoked by the so-called ritualism of its daughter church of St Barnabas, Pimlico. Disturbed by apparent signs of Erastianism in the Church of England, he resigned at the end of 1850. Eventually, after extensive travels in Europe, he decided that his vocation as clergyman lay in a country parish. 
However, Ouseley was insistent on daily choral services. To meet this exceptional requirement he built at his own expense the parish church of St Michael just outside Tenbury, Worcestershire, together with adjoining buildings to accommodate a miniature foundation, St Michael's College, for the personnel required for the choral services and the education of the choristers. The church was consecrated in 1856, and, having taken priest's orders in 1855, Ouseley became incumbent of the parish and warden of the college, where he remained until his death. To the college, which he intended to 'form a model for the choral service of the Church in these realms', he devoted the whole of his means. 
Meanwhile, in 1854 Ouseley had taken the degree of DMus, and when the following year the Oxford chair of music fell vacant he was appointed, only eight days after the death of Sir Henry Rowley Bishop. As he was unknown to the profession of music and without scholarly achievement behind him, this alacrity may be explained by the fact that he was the only DMus who, as an MA, was a member of convocation. The post, involving only part-time duties, was compatible with his work at Tenbury. In 1886 he became also a canon of Hereford Cathedral, having held the titular dignity of precentor from 1855, and it was at Hereford during a period of canonical residence that he died, unmarried and suddenly, on 6 April 1889. He was buried on 11 April at St Michael's Church, Tenbury. 
As a composer, though an able contrapuntist, Ouseley lacked gifts of significant invention. Of two oratories, 'The Martyrdom of St Polycarp' (DMus, 1854) is a mild essay after Mendelssohn, whereas 'Hagar' (Hereford festival, 1873) is lifeless. His small secular output is unimportant. In church music his ideals lay in the past. From more than seventy-five anthems, large and small, some with orchestra, few have justified survival like the short, austere 'O Saviour of the world' and the bigger, livelier 'It came even to pass'. His thirteen services include two for double choir, of which one has orchestral accompaniment, but have nothing to say at the end of the twentieth century. His essential contribution to church music lies in the valuable influence exerted through St Michael's College on standards in both parish churches and cathedrals. 
In scholarship, only Ouseley's edition of 'The Sacred Compositions of Orlando Gibbons' (1873) requires mention. But as professor he improved the status of Oxford music degrees by introducing examinations in addition to the requirement of an original composition, and by providing that candidates must pass responsions, the preliminary examination for the BA degree. Though his syllabus was narrow and university residence was not required, these reforms (in step with Cambridge) proved the first stage towards establishing music as a university discipline. He also amassed a celebrated private library of antiquarian music and musical literature amounting to about 3500 volumes, including important manuscripts and many treatises, some rare. This passed to St Michael's College, upon the closure of which in 1985 its great substance became the property of the Bodleian Library, Oxford. 
Reputedly short-tempered, Ouseley was nevertheless held in affection by former pupils and was not above a frolic. At leisure, he enjoyed singing Spanish and Italian national songs to his improvised guitar accompaniment. 


@@@@@


doc= 20954


Ouseley, Gideon (1762-1839), Methodist preacher, was the eldest son of John Ouseley ('b'. 'c'.1735) of Kilticoghly, co. Galway, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Francis Surridge, of Fairyhill, co. Galway. He was born at Dunmore, co. Galway, the residence of his great-uncle William Ouseley, on 24 February 1762. Sir Ralph Ouseley was his younger brother. 
Ouseley was the son of a freethinking, anti-clerical father and a pious mother who introduced him to the family collection of Anglican and puritan literature. Despite his father's anti-clericalism he was bound for a career in the Church of Ireland and was tutored by the local Catholic priest, Father Keane, who had been educated in Europe. Ouseley, having failed to win a place at Trinity College, Dublin, studied with his cousins Sir Gore Ouseley and Sir William Ouseley under a private tutor, one Dr Robinson. His father inherited a farm in co. Roscommon, to where the family moved in 1781. Shortly after, he married Miss Harriet Wills (1762-1853) of Wills Grove, in 1783. They had no children. The marriage resulted in a small estate being settled on him by her father. However, the estate subsequently had to be surrendered, probably unnecessarily, after a lawsuit. Ouseley then entered a phase of dissolute living, which was dramatically brought to an end by a drunken shooting accident in which he lost an eye and very nearly his life. During his convalescence his wife read to him Edward Young's gloomy 'Night Thoughts', which, in conjunction with his near-death experience, resulted in a lasting preoccupation with death and eternity. 
Ouseley's first experience of evangelical religion was in April 1791, at the meetings conducted in a local inn by Methodist quartermaster Robinet, attached to the Royal Irish Dragoons and stationed in Dunmore barracks. Thus began a long and psychologically painful conversion during which Ouseley encountered other Methodist itinerants and joined a local Methodist society. He soon decided to become an itinerant preacher but his work was undertaken as a freelance evangelist because of his suspicion of ecclesiastical institutions and their clergy. In 1797 he and his wife settled in the town of Sligo, and opened a girls' school. However, in 1799 he was invited by the Irish Methodist conference to be part of a team of Irish-speaking evangelists with a specific mission to the Irish Catholic poor in the wake of the rebellion of the United Irishmen. 
Ouseley sang and preached, mostly in Irish, to large gatherings of people at county assizes, fairs, market days, funerals, and wakes, in prisons, and outside church services. His early reports for Dr Coke, the director of the Irish mission, capture the flavour of these occasions: 'On Monday we came to Baillieborough. The market people were assembled when we came into the street. We did not alight, but prepared to attack the devil's kingdom which still remained strong in the town. The Methodists wished us out of the street, when they saw the manner of our proceedings, riding on our horses, with our umbrellas over our heads, the day being wet, but a young girl was so alarmed that she feared the day of judgement was at hand. (Ouseley MSS, CR/6/3/F/10)' Ouseley was not only characterized by his evangelical zeal but also by his anti-Catholicism, which predated his evangelical conversion and was part of a wider anti-clericalism. He drew a distinction between priests and the ordinary people, whom he regarded as victims of priestly tyranny and insupportable financial burdens. However, his anti-Catholicism underwent several phases of development and therefore by 1807 Ouseley was much more willing to engage in public controversies against Catholics. The thrust of his attacks also changed. Whereas earlier he had been more concerned with the social consequences of Catholic errors, after 1807 he unleashed a prolific pamphlet attack on Catholic dogma which continued until his death. 
During the 1820s Ouseley, apart from his continuing commitment to preaching, spent much of the decade publishing his own highly individualistic solutions to Ireland's miseries. His remedies were for more responsible landlordism, a more equitable and rational assessment of tithes, the state payment of Catholic priests, and an electoral register based on minimum educational standards to ensure that landlords would have to provide schools for those over whom they exerted economic and political influence. He died in Dublin on 14 May 1839 and was buried at Mount Jerome cemetery, Harold's Cross, Dublin. There is a memorial church to him in Mountmellick, Queen's county, the town in which he preached his last sermon. At the heart of Ouseley's personality and work were a sincere religious faith and a genuine compassion for his country and countrymen. He was one of Ireland's most influential figures in the early nineteenth-century post-rebellion era. 


@@@@@


doc= 20955


Ouseley, Sir Gore, first baronet (1770-1844), diplomatist, second son of Captain Ralph Ouseley (died 1804) of Limerick, whose family had originated in Shropshire, and his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Holland, also of Limerick, was born on 24 June 1770 at Limerick. He was educated at home with his brother, William Ouseley, and his cousin Gideon Ouseley, under a tutor, Dr Robinson. His father, to whom he was attached, took an active interest in the boys' education. Ouseley was an assiduous pupil, also possessed of athletic ability. 
In 1787 Ouseley left for India, where he busied himself in commercial affairs. By 1792 he had settled at 'Bygonbarree' in the Dacca province of Bengal where, along the banks of the River Brahmaputra, he established a factory producing baftas (fine cloths) which were sold more cheaply than elsewhere in the province. He lived a relatively solitary existence and spent his leisure time studying Persian, Bengalese Hindi, Arabic, and Sanskrit. He became an elegant speaker and writer of Persian. In addition to his linguistic and literary pursuits he concerned himself deeply with music, an accomplishment he passed on to his son the composer Frederick Arthur Gore Ouseley, and improved his skill at drawing. He made the acquaintance of the eminent orientalist Sir William James in 1794. 
In the first years of the next century a move to Lucknow resulted in Ouseley's acquiring more insight into and experience of public and political service through his friendship with and attachment to Nawab Shuja ud-Daula, wazir of Oudh, as his major commandant and confidant. Anglo-French rivalry in India increased as a result of Napoleon's invasion of Egypt in mid-1798 when Marquess Wellesley took counter-measures to defend the British position, including a policy of subsidiary treaties with local princes. Within this strategic context, Ouseley earned Wellesley's approval for his well-judged attempts to cultivate good relations between the state of Oudh and the British power. This resulted crucially in Wellesley's later furthering of Ouseley's career. Ouseley returned to England in 1805. On 12 April 1806 he married Harriet Georgina, daughter of John Whitelocke, army officer. They had two sons, Wellesley Abbas Ouseley and Frederick Arthur Gore Ouseley, and three daughters, Mary Jane, Eliza Shirin, who died an infant, and Alexandrina Perceval. Ouseley was created baronet on 3 October 1808. In 1809, on the recommendation of Wellesley as secretary of state for foreign affairs, he was nominated 'mehmendar', guide and host to Mirza Abul Hasan, the Persian ambassador to Britain. 
In 1810, following the British missions to Persia of John Malcolm and Harford Jones, Ouseley was appointed ambassador-extraordinary to the court of Fath Ali Shah. Accompanying Mirza Abul Hasan, Ouseley left England in July 1810 and reached Bombay before landing at Bushehr on 1 March 1811. He passed through Shiraz and Esfahan, and reached Tehran on 9 November where a treaty was signed on 14 March 1812. It had been preceded by many disagreements over etiquette and substance, but in spite of difficulties and misunderstandings Wellesley was pleased and entirely approved of Ouseley's conduct. Fath Ali Shah was no less enthusiastic and commended Ouseley to the prince regent. Ouseley received the decoration of the Lion and Sun. Because of some objections in London the treaty was not finally ratified until some further revisions had been negotiated by Meorier and Elis, the British plenipotentiaries, on 25 November 1814. There was further reciprocal respect when Ouseley met Abbas Muza, the prince royal, in Tabriz in 1812. Ouseley was instructed to use his good offices to mediate in the Perso-Russian hostilities. This culminated in the treaty of Gulistan on 13 October 1813. Ouseley left Tehran for Russia in mid-1814. He received the gratitude of the tsar, Alexander I, for his role and was honoured with the grand cordon of the order of St Alexander Nevsky. 
Ouseley was sworn of the privy council on 10 October 1820. He enjoyed the favour of the prince regent, assisted at his coronation in 1820, and was made knight grand cross of the Royal Guelphic Order in 1831. Granted a pension of $2000 a year, he retired from public life, though he was appointed high sheriff of Buckinghamshire in 1835. Thereafter he devoted himself to family affairs and his literary and antiquarian interests. He was one of those responsible for the founding of the Royal Asiatic Society in London in 1823 and was associated with the formation of the oriental translation committee, of which he was elected chairman. He became president of the Society for the Publication of Oriental Texts, formed in 1842. In later life he suffered from ill health. He died of intestinal problems at his country residence, Hall Barn Park, Beaconsfield, which he had purchased in 1832, on 18 November 1844; he was survived by his wife. The place of his burial is unknown but his wife erected a monument to him in Hertingfordbury church. 
Ouseley was a loyal, capable, and devoted practical public servant. He was also a notable oriental scholar at a time when that subject was in its infancy and he did much to encourage its emergence through his complementary literary and archaeological interests. It was not just his linguistic skill that was remarkable: his cultural sympathy was noticeable. He was attentive to those in his service and concerned for their welfare. Conciliatory and respectful, he was prepared to stand on his dignity when the occasion demanded it. Of middle stature, he was neat and trim in appearance. His spiritual integrity and moral behaviour were accompanied by a deep respect for the Anglican church and regular religious observances. His concern both for religion and for oriental scholarship was demonstrated by the assistance he gave, while at Shiraz, to Henry Martyn, missionary and first translator of the 'New Testament' into Persian. 


@@@@@


doc= 20956


Ouseley, Sir Ralph (1772-1842), army officer in the Portuguese service, was born at Kilticoghly, co. Galway, the second son of John Ouseley and his wife, Anne, daughter of Francis Surridge of Fairyhill, co. Galway. He was the younger brother of Gideon Ouseley. On 25 November 1794 he was appointed lieutenant in the Leicester fencible infantry, one of many regiments of home-service regulars called 'fencibles'. He served gallantly with the forces in Ireland in 1798, commanded a detachment at the defeat of Lake's troops at Castlebar, and helped to force the surrender of the French at Ballinamuck. Ouseley was appointed to the 38th foot in March 1801. He commanded the grenadier company during Robert Emmet's insurrection in Dublin in 1803. For a year he was often detached to guard the powder mills near Rathcool. In 1804 Ouseley joined the 76th to go to India, and in succession was transferred to a company in the Royal African Corps in March 1805, the 82nd in August, and the staff of the army depot, Isle of Wight, in March 1807. In September 1809 he exchanged to the 63rd foot. 
Ouseley then began a more continuous tenure by entering the Portuguese service under Marshal Beresford as major in the 18th infantry, with which he served during the campaigns of 1810-12. He became lieutenant-colonel of the regiment after the capture of Badajoz, and commanded it in the Pyrenees in 1813, where he distinguished himself in action against a superior force near Pampeluna on 30 July 1813. He was then transferred to the 8th Portuguese, and commanded that regiment in a night attack on the height in front of Urda. In this action, his modest force of 500 men drove off a French force of 3000. Philippart highlighted this event, but Napier merely stated that the French were on this occasion dislodged from the heights by two Portuguese brigades. Ouseley was carried from the field with a bayonet wound in the breast and a musket ball through the abdomen, which was extracted from the back. He received the Peninsular gold medal for the Pyrenees. 
Ouseley attained the rank of major, the highest he held in the British service, on 25 November 1813, and was placed on half pay on 25 October 1814. He then went to Rio de Janeiro, where the king of Portugal renewed his Portuguese rank of lieutenant-colonel, and made him a knight of the order of the Tower and Sword. In 1817 he raised and organized at Rio de Janeiro the 1st regiment. He commanded it in the capture of Pernambuco and was made a knight of San Bento d'Avis. In October 1817 he was promoted colonel and placed on the staff. In 1818 he was sent from Rio to England with dispatches, which he had the acuity to rescue when the vessel was taken by pirates. 
Ouseley retired from the British service in 1825. He attained the rank of major-general in the army of Portugal. He died at Lisbon on 3 May 1842, aged seventy. An autopsy showed that the musket ball which passed through his body at Urda caused a lesion of the intestines, which after an interval of nearly thirty years contributed to his death. Ouseley's foreign knighthood was not recognized in British army lists. 


@@@@@


doc= 20957


Ouseley, Sir William (1767-1842), orientalist, was born in Monmouthshire, the eldest son of Ralph Ouseley, army officer, and his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Holland of Limerick. Sir Gore Ouseley, diplomatist, was his brother. Ouseley was educated privately until 1787, when he went to Paris to study. The following year he became a cornet in the 8th regiment of dragoons. After serving in the 1794 campaign under the duke of York, he sold out and went to Leiden to resume the oriental, and especially Persian, studies which had already fascinated him during his time in Paris. 
In 1795 Ouseley published 'Persian miscellanies: an essay to facilitate the reading of Persian manuscripts... with engraved specimens', a treatise on the various styles of Persian handwriting, enriched with many illustrations of manuscripts, and numerous notes showing considerable research. On his return to England in 1796 Ouseley was gazetted major in Lord Ayr's regiment of dragoons stationed at Carlisle, and there he married, on 6 March 1796, Julia, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel John Irving. They had three daughters and six sons, including Sir William Gore Ouseley (1797-1866), diplomatist and writer. Soon afterwards Ouseley took up residence at Crickhowell, Brecknockshire, where he remained until at least about 1820. In 1801 he wrote to the earl of Chichester dwelling on his ambition to become an envoy to some eastern court, and asking the earl to use his influence in procuring a government subsidy and approval for a proposed journey to Persia. 
In 1797 Ouseley received the honorary degree of LLD at Trinity College, Dublin, and that of PhD from the University of Rostock. He was knighted in 1800. The Persian journey did not take place until 1810, when Sir William accompanied his brother, Sir Gore Ouseley, as private secretary, on his mission to the shah of Persia. By way of preparation for his eastern observations, he had lived some months in 1810 in the house of the Persian envoy, Mirza Abul Hasan, in London, where he learned to speak Persian. In July of that year they started from Portsmouth on HMS 'Lion' for India and Persia, from where William Ouseley returned to Britain with the new treaty in July 1812. He published his account as 'Travels in Various Countries of the East, More Particularly Persia' (3 vols., 1819-23), whose title-page states that the author was an honorary fellow of the royal societies of Edinburgh, Gottingen, and Amsterdam, and a member of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. His valuable collection of Persian manuscripts was offered for sale, and the catalogue, written by himself and printed in 1831, contains notices of 724 manuscripts. Ouseley died at Boulogne in September 1842. 
Besides the works already mentioned Ouseley published numerous other books on oriental subjects, notably his 'Oriental Collections' (3 vols., 1797-9). He translated several works from Persian, including an 'Epitome of the ancient history of Persia, extracted from the Jehan Ara' of Ahmad al-Kazwini, the author of the 'Nigaristan' (1799). He also edited volumes by J. L. Burckhardt and contributed extensively to the 'Transactions' of the Royal Society of Literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 20958


Ouseley, Sir William Gore (1797-1866), diplomatist and author, born in London on 26 July 1797, was the eldest son of Sir William Ouseley (1767-1842), orientalist, and his wife, Julia Irving; Sir Gore Ouseley, bt, also an orientalist, was his uncle. He entered the diplomatic service when very young, and in November 1817 was attached to the British embassy at Stockholm. After serving at other European courts he became, in November 1825, paid attache at Washington, DC. He remained there for seven years, and in 1832 published 'Remarks on the statistics and political institutions of the United States, with some observations on the ecclesiastical system of America, her sources of revenue...'. The book, an edition of which was issued at Philadelphia during the same year under the auspices of Washington Irving, gave a highly favourable picture of American institutions. It was somewhat severely criticized by William Jacob in the 'Quarterly Review' for December 1832, but was quoted with approval in Lord Brougham's 'Political Philosophy' (1849, pt 3, 340). 
In June 1832 Ouseley went to Rio de Janeiro as secretary of legation. He served as charge d'affaires in Brazil in 1833 and again in 1836 and 1838-41. On 13 December 1844 he was sent to Buenos Aires as minister to the Argentine confederation, from where he was dispatched, in January 1846, on a special mission to Montevideo (see TNA: PRO, FO 6/114). In conjunction with M. Deffaudis, the representative of France, he secured the evacuation of Uruguay by the Argentine troops and the withdrawal of their fleet from the capital, which was occupied by English and French troops. 
Some time after his return to England, in 1850, Ouseley published 'Notes on the Slave Trade, with Remarks on the Measures Adopted for its Suppression'. It was directed against the proposals recently made in parliament by William Hutt for withdrawing the squadron employed on the west coast of Africa in checking the slave trade. 
On 29 June 1852 Ouseley was created KCB. He was made DCL by Oxford University on 20 June 1855. On 30 October 1857 he was dispatched on a special mission to Central America. He afterwards travelled in the United States, and returned to England in 1860. He retired on a pension of $1000, but continued to take much interest in South American affairs, being chairman of the Falkland Islands' Company and other companies at his death. 
Ouseley, besides speaking several modern languages, was a good classical scholar. In addition to the works mentioned, and some contributions to periodicals, he published 'A description of views in South America, from original drawings made in Brazil, the River Plate, the Parana...' (1852). The drawings were selected for publication by Queen Victoria. He married, in 1829, Maria, daughter of M. Van Ness, governor of Vermont. She died on 18 January 1881, having borne two sons and a daughter. The elder son, William Charles, was attached to Sir Charles Hotham's mission to the River Plate in 1852, and died in Paraguay in 1858. The other son, a lieutenant in the navy, died during the Baltic operations in the same year. The daughter, Frances, married J. T. Fitzmaurice RN, fifth son of the earl of Orkney. Ouseley died from an abscess of the prostate at his London home, 31 Albemarle Street, on 6 March 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 20959


Outram, Benjamin (bap. 1764, d. 1805), civil engineer and ironmaster, was born at Alfreton, Derbyshire, where he was baptized on 1 April 1764, the eldest son of Joseph Outram (1732-1811), a local freeholder, and his second wife, Elizabeth. His father practised as a land agent and served as a turnpike trustee and enclosure commissioner; the tradition that he also had an ironworks at Ripley is unfounded. While he was still very young, Benjamin (who was probably named after an uncle who died in 1741, rather than the American Benjamin Franklin, as sometimes claimed) attracted the attention of Francis Beresford, a local attorney and a member of a leading west Derbyshire gentry family, who appears to have helped with his education and training. Outram became a land surveyor and both he and his father were early promoters of the Cromford Canal, authorized in 1789, which ran from the Erewash Canal at Langley Mill to Cromford and Pinxton, passing within a few miles of the Outrams' home at Alfreton. 
While the canal was being built, a freehold estate of about 200 acres became available along its route at Butterley, between Alfreton and Ripley, which in 1790 Beresford bought in his own name and Outram's. Here Outram established an ironworks and within a few years the business had expanded to include a limestone quarry and limekilns, with collieries and ironstone pits spread over a wide area around Butterley Hall. In 1792 Beresford and Outram were joined by John Wright, a Nottingham banker who married Beresford's eldest daughter, and William Jessop (1745-1814), principal engineer of the Cromford Canal, of which Outram was resident engineer, and the four men together established Benjamin Outram & Co., with a nominal capital of $6000. Outram took up residence at Butterley Hall and was the only partner active in the management of the company, in which he was assisted by a younger brother, Joseph. 
In addition, Outram built up a considerable civil engineering practice following his success with the Cromford Canal, completed in 1793. In Derbyshire he was responsible for the Derby and Nutbrook canals in the south-east of the county and the much more ambitious Peak Forest Canal in the north-west; further afield he was engineer to the Huddersfield Canal. He also reported on several schemes which did not go ahead. 
More important than his canal work was Outram's contribution to the development of railways. Cast-iron rails had begun to replace wooden track after their first use at Coalbrookdale in 1767, and in 1787-8 a new type of L-section rail, with a flat tread and vertical inside flange, in place of rails designed to take wagons with flanged wheels, was introduced underground at Sheffield and on the surface at Wingerworth ironworks, near Chesterfield. Outram took up the idea of plate rails, as they became known, improved their design, and became the leading promoter of their use in many parts of the country, especially the east midlands and south Wales. In some cases he acted as engineer for canal companies seeking to build tram road branches; elsewhere he merely supplied rails made at Butterley ironworks, which thus became one of the country's main producers of castings of this sort outside south Wales. On the other hand, the notion that the words 'tram' or 'tram road' are derived from Outram's name has long been dismissed as untenable. 
In 1800 Outram married Margaret (1778-1863), daughter of the Scottish political economist and writer James Anderson (1739-1808), with whom he had five children: Francis, Anna, James Outram, Margaret, and Elizabeth. Shortly afterwards he gave up most of his engineering commitments to devote more time to managing the works at Butterley, which by this date already employed more than 500 men. On 22 May 1805, however, while on a visit to London, Outram died after only a few days' illness, apparently from a stroke (his wife uses the phrase 'brain fever'). His sudden death, without leaving a will, led to the discovery of considerable confusion in his affairs and his dealings with the Butterley Company, as the business became known in 1807. Only in 1815, after four years of chancery litigation, was the partnership reconstructed and Mrs Outram released from obligations incurred by her husband. She returned to her native Aberdeen in 1810 with her children, of whom the second son, James Outram (1803-1863), was made a baronet in 1858 for his part in suppressing the Indian mutiny. She never remarried. 
Evidence from the extensive surviving records of the Butterley Company confirms the view of Benjamin Outram -- suggested by the letters and journals of his wife -- that he was a man of great vigour and spirit, characteristics shared by his father, Joseph, with whom he did not get on. Mrs Outram wrote: 'My husband like many other men of great talent and comprehensive and generous mind, was hasty in his temper, feeling his own superiority over others. Accustomed to command, he had little toleration for stupidity and slowness, and none for meanness or littleness of any kind. (Outram, 101)' A temperament of this sort enabled Outram to create the largest coal, iron, and engineering business in the east midlands in barely fifteen years, while at the same time transforming the way in which railways were built. It also led to a situation in which his wife and family, far from benefiting from his success as both ironmaster and engineer, were reduced to near poverty when the rashness of some of his actions became clear after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 20960


Outram, Sir Benjamin Fonseca (1774-1856), surgeon and naval officer, son of Captain William Outram, was born in Kilham, near Bridlington, Yorkshire, and baptized at Gravesend, Kent. He was apprenticed to a Mr Coleman and later to Mr William Harvis, surgeon-apothecaries of Gravesend. He joined the Royal Navy as a surgeon's mate in 1794, serving in the frigate 'Isis'. Promoted to the rank of surgeon in 1796, he served in the 'Harpy', 'La Nymphe', and 'Boadicea', where his medical competence and clinical acumen won high praise from Dr Thomas Trotter, physician of the fleet. He was surgeon in the 'Superb' in her celebrated action off Algeciras, when Sir James Saumarez routed the French and Spanish fleets on 12 July 1801, and his presence of mind prevented an explosion on board. He received war medals and clasps for his services under Sir Richard Goodwin Keats during the war. The brief peace enabled him to undertake further surgical training at Guy's Hospital, London, and on the renewal of hostilities he served in the hospital ship 'Matilda', the frigate 'Euryalus', and the yachts 'Royal Charlotte' and 'Royal Sovereign'. During this period he studied intermittently in Edinburgh, where he graduated doctor of medicine on 24 June 1809, after presenting his inaugural thesis, 'De febre continua'. He was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, London, on 16 April 1810, and practised as a physician in London, where he lived more than forty years, from 1832 in Hanover Square. He also acted as physician to the Welbeck Street Dispensary. On 18 May 1811 he married Ann Scales, widow of Captain Richard Corne RN, with whom he travelled extensively, and they spent several years on the continent. She died suddenly at Clifton, near Bristol, in 1852. 
On 3 May 1838 Outram was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, but was not the author of the geological paper published in its 'Transactions' (1796), with which his name is associated in the list of fellows. He also became one of the earliest members of the Royal Geographical Society, where he proved a faithful friend and a kind and congenial colleague, contributing actively to its meetings. 
In 1841 Outram became inspector of fleets and hospitals. He was made a knight bachelor and companion of the bath on 17 September 1850, and was admitted a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians on 9 July 1852. 
On 10 October 1855 Outram married Sally, the daughter of Joseph Outram, a near relative of General Sir James Outram. He contracted cholera while travelling to a scientific meeting and died on 18 February 1856 while convalescing at Brighton. He was buried with his first wife at Clifton. 
A man of considerable affluence, Outram was an able clinician with wide scientific interests, and a generous philanthropist. His uncle Captain Sir Thomas Outram left him a small estate in Kilham. 
Outram left legacies to his friends, $4000 to his domestics and $100 each to the Fistula Hospital, the Institution for the Widows of Medical Men of London, the Naval School for Boys at New Cross, the Naval Benevolent Institution, and the Distressed Governesses' Society. 
Outram published a pamphlet, 'Suggestions to Naval Surgeons Previous to, during, and after a Battle', and 'An account of the action in the Straits of the Mediterranean on the night of the 12th of July 1801', published in 'The Times' and used by T. S. Hughes in his continuation of Hume and Smollett's 'History of England' (1857). 


@@@@@


doc= 20961


Outram, George (1805-1856), journalist, was born on 25 March 1805 at Clyde ironworks, Glasgow, second son of Joseph Outram (1771-1830), manager of the ironworks and later shipowner, and Elizabeth, daughter of George Knox of Craigleith. His uncle was the engineer Benjamin Outram (bap. 1764, d. 1805). About 1807 Joseph Outram moved to Leith, where George attended the high school. He proceeded to the University of Edinburgh, and in 1827 he became a member of the Faculty of Advocates, but after ten years of a legal career he readily accepted the post of editor at the 'Glasgow Herald'. Outram's attitude towards the law is reflected in the witty, satirical tones of 'Legal Lyrics and Metrical Illustrations of the Scotch Form of Process', initially printed for private circulation among friends and colleagues (1851), and ultimately reprinted several times after his death, reaching a wider readership in spite of its heavy dependence on Scottish dialect. 'Legal Lyrics' was initially printed under the pseudonym Quizdom Rumfunidos. The work was published posthumously by Blackwoods under Outram's own name in 1874 as 'Lyrics Legal and Miscellaneous', introduced by Henry Glassford Bell. A new edition in 1887 was edited by J. H. Stoddard, a later editor of the 'Glasgow Herald'. Additional pieces were added, and corrections made. A final edition appeared in 1916, published by Foulis Press. The best known of Outram's poems, 'The Annuity', was in the public domain far earlier, as it was anonymously published in the 'Illustrated London Magazine' in December 1854. Outram also worked with John Wilson on his Christopher North articles, 'Dies boreales', in 'Blackwood's Magazine' in the 1840s and early 1850s. 
As a lawyer, Outram lived and worked in Edinburgh, where he was a member of the Edinburgh Angling Club. In Edinburgh he met his wife, Frances McRobbie, daughter of William McRobbie of Smallwood, Jamaica. They were married in Edinburgh on 28 November 1837. A few months after accepting the editorship of the 'Glasgow Herald' in May 1837 (at $400 a year), Outram was offered a partnership in the business to which he gave his name, holding four of the twenty-eight shares, worth a nominal $100 each. He settled in Glasgow, where his family grew to four sons and one daughter. The daughter died in infancy, and the last of the sons died in 1887. 
As an editor Outram was moderate in tone and conservative by nature, but moved to indignant support of causes he favoured, such as Scottish nationalism. He was a member of the National Association for the Vindication of Scottish Rights Movement, using his newspaper to advocate its cause, incidentally managing some gibes at 'The Scotsman' (an Edinburgh publication) for its apparent lack of patriotism. Outram was also responsible for reversing the 'Herald''s anti-cornlaw policy. Under Outram's benign and stable editorship the circulation of the paper almost doubled to 4500 copies per issue. 
Outram died on 16 September 1856, of liver disease, at Rosemore, on the Holy Loch, and was buried in Warriston cemetery, Edinburgh. He was survived by his wife. His name was perpetuated in the publishing firm of Outram (George) & Co. 


@@@@@


doc= 20962


Outram, Sir James, first baronet (1803-1863), army officer in the East India Company, second son of Benjamin Outram (bap. 1764, d. 1805), civil engineer and ironmaster, of Butterley Hall, Derbyshire, and his wife, Margaret (1778-1863), daughter of Dr James Anderson of Mounie, Aberdeenshire, was born at Butterley Hall on 29 January 1803. Mrs Outram, who by the sudden death of her husband was left in very straitened circumstances, was a woman of great self-reliance and independence. With her young family she resided for three years at Worksop, then for two years at Barnby Moor, and in 1810 moved to Aberdeen. 
From 1814 Outram was educated in Aberdeen first at Udny School, then at Mr Esson's school, and finally (in 1818) at Marischal College. In 1819 he received a direct Indian cadetship, sailed for India in May, and arrived in Bombay on 15 August. He was temporarily posted to the 4th native infantry, with rank as ensign from 2 May 1819, and then was gazetted a lieutenant in the 1st grenadier native infantry, but was shortly afterwards transferred to the 12th regiment and became acting-adjutant in July 1820. 
In November 1822 Outram arranged with his brother, Francis, a second lieutenant in the Bombay Engineers, that they should put by out of their pay as subalterns an allowance for their mother. At Rajkot, where his regiment was quartered, he became an enthusiastic sportsman; and his shikar-book for the seasons of 1822-3 and 1823-4 shows a record of seventy-four wild boars, four nilgai, two hyenas, and two wolves. In April 1824 he moved with his regiment to Malegaon in Khandesh. 
For the next fourteen years Outram was engaged in a little-known, but vital, aspect of the establishment of British rule in western India: the subjugation of petty chieftains and tribal peoples in the region known as Khandesh and in the interior of Gujarat. The official reports speak of 'tribal rebellions', 'outrages' against the British, the lawlessness of marauding bands of tribal peoples, and the refusal of some of the chiefs to accept the new British order. While the contests were unequal, pitting poorly armed and undisciplined groups against the armies of the East India Company, the petty chiefs and the tribal leaders fought tenaciously. 
Towards the end of 1824 Outram took part in an expedition against Kittur, a princely state which had lapsed to the British on the death without heirs of the ruler, but had resisted the British government and repulsed a small force sent to take possession. Outram's brother, Francis, served in the same expedition. Kittur was besieged, and surrendered on 5 December 1824. In March 1825 Outram was sent to seize the hill fort of Malair between Surat and Malegaon, when an insurrection broke out in the western districts of Khandesh. The garrison fled, the leader and many of his adherents were cut down, and the rest escaped to the hills completely disorganized. In recognition of his services and merit he was placed, on 22 April 1825, under the collector and political agent in Khandesh. 
The province of Khandesh became British territory in 1818, after the defeat of the Marathas. At that time the Bhils, a people driven out of Mewar and Jodhpur and subsisting mainly on plunder, formed an eighth part of the whole population of the area. The Bhil agency was established in 1825 under the collector of Khandesh, with three agents: one in the north-west, one in the south, and Outram in the north-east. To the last was entrusted the duty of raising a Bhil light infantry corps, under native commissioned and non-commissioned officers of line regiments. He proceeded to Jatgaon, and led the detachment of his own regiment stationed there to dislodge some Bhils from the mountain fastnesses. Supported by reinforcements from Malegaon, the operation ended in the occupation of the Bhil lands. Outram commenced the formation of his corps by enlisting his captives who brought in their relatives. He also succeeded in gaining the confidence of the chief men by living unguarded among them, and persuaded five to join his corps. By July 1826 300 Bhils who were enrolled in his corps had become efficient soldiers. By 1828 the corps numbered 600 men. In 1829 Francis Outram killed himself in a fit of depression. 
In 1830 the Bombay government decided to invade and subdue the Dang country, a tract of tangled forest on the west of Khandesh inhabited by marauding Bhils. Outram, after a fortnight's campaign, overran the country and subdued it, returning with the principal chiefs as his prisoners. In 1831 Outram was sent to investigate uprisings in the districts of Yawal and Sauda, and to apprehend the offenders. He captured 469 suspected persons and, after inquiry, 158 were committed for trial. In 1833, the Bhils of the Barwani territory in the Satpura Mountains north of Khandesh having risen in rebellion, Outram, who had been promoted captain on 7 October 1832, took the field against them and struck a decisive blow, capturing the rebel chief Hatnia. During his residence in Khandesh Outram was always able to indulge his passion for hunting, and during the ten years from 1825 to 1834 he killed 191 tigers, 25 bears, 12 buffaloes, and 15 leopards. 
Early in 1835 Outram accompanied the British resident at Indore through Malwa and Nimar; then the government sent him to survey the neighbouring province of Gujarat, where, in the Mahi Kantha district, opposition to British rule had developed. Outram's report expressed his conviction that Mahi Kantha would not be peaceful until the unruly clans which occupied it had been subdued and the chiefs punished for opposition to British arms. Outram went on leave to Bombay in December, to be married to his cousin, Margaret Clementina (died 12 July 1911), daughter of James Anderson of Bridgend, Brechin, Forfarshire. A fortnight after his wedding he returned to Mahi Kantha as political agent, with the general direction of affairs civil and military. Outram succeeded in Mahi Kantha but with the use of such violence that the governor of Bombay, Sir Robert Grant, and the court of directors reproved him, but complimented his military genius, energy, and sound judgement. 
Outram's wife was invalided home, and in October 1838, when a British force was ordered to assemble for service in Afghanistan, Outram at once volunteered, and was appointed extra aide-de-camp to Sir John Keane. He was dispatched on a special mission to Cutch, to arrange for land and water transport for the expedition. Outram was associated with Lieutenant Eastwick (afterwards a director of the East India Company), the assistant resident, in a mission to the court of Hyderabad, to conclude a detailed treaty with the amir. The envoys, however, met with such unmistakable signs of hostility that they were compelled to return without effecting their object. Outram was sent on missions to Shah Shuja, the claimant to the Afghan throne, and General MacNaghten in February and March 1839. He took part at Kandahar in the installation of Shah Shuja. He left that city with the advanced column on 27 June, to attack Ghazni, which fell on 23 July. Outram was appointed to command an expedition for the capture of Dost Muhammad Khan, the deposed ruler who had fled towards Bamian and escaped beyond the Oxus. 
On 21 August Outram was placed under the British envoy at Kabul, MacNaghten, to conduct an expedition into disturbed districts lying between Kabul and Kandahar. The object of the expedition was to defeat the Ghilzai people, to arrest four chiefs, to punish the inhabitants of the village of Maruf, who had destroyed a caravan 'en route' for India, and to reduce the fort of Haji Khan. He attacked and demolished Haji Khan, and finally arrived at Quetta on 31 October, having accomplished his mission. 
Outram accompanied General Willshire as aide-de-camp in November to the siege of Kalat. He was deputed to take a copy of the general's dispatch to the governor of Bombay by the direct route to Sonmiani Bundar, to find out whether the route would be practical for troops. Disguised as an Afghan, he started on this perilous journey through an enemy's country, accompanied by a private servant and two Saiyids of Shal as guides. After many adventures and hairbreadth escapes he reached Sonmiani on 23 November, having subsisted during the whole journey on dates and water. From Sonmiani he went by water to Karachi and Bombay. For his services at Kalat, Outram was promoted brevet major on 13 November 1839, while Shah Shuja bestowed on him the second-class order of the Durrani empire. 
At the end of 1839 Lord Auckland appointed Outram political agent in Lower Sind, in succession to Colonel Pottinger. He arrived at Hyderabad on 24 February. The main features of his work in 1840 were the reduction of taxes on inland produce brought to the British camp at Karachi, the relief of the Indus traffic from excessive tolls, and the negotiations with Mir Sher Muhammad of Mirpur, whereby quasi-amicable relations were established. In 1841 he negotiated a satisfactory treaty with Mir Sher Muhammad. Soon afterwards Mir Nur Muhammad, the amir of Hyderabad, summoned Outram to his deathbed, and confided his brother, Mir Nasir Khan, and his youngest son, Mir Husain Ali, to Outram's protection. Outram regarded this as a sacred charge and the boy as an adopted son. 
On 18 August 1841 Outram left Hyderabad for Quetta, having been appointed political agent in Upper Sind in addition to his charge of Lower Sind. He arrived at Quetta on 2 September, and the young Nasir, khan of Kalat, met him in durbar. On 6 October the khan was installed by Outram at Kalat, after signing the ratification to a treaty with the Indian government. At the end of November Outram heard that the British army, which had occupied Kabul, was under siege, and his energies were taxed to the utmost to support the failing prestige of the government. 
In February 1842 Lord Ellenborough succeeded Lord Auckland as governor-general. Outram did his best to impress on the new governor-general the inadvisability of retiring from Afghanistan without first reasserting British power at Kabul. On 28 March 1842 General England was defeated at Haikalzai, in the Pishin valley. The general officially laid the blame upon Outram's assistant, Lieutenant Hammersley, for want of proper acquaintance with the disposition and movements of the enemy. Outram could not acquiesce in the censure, and his bold advocacy of Hammersley's cause brought him under the displeasure of Lord Ellenborough, who invested General William Nott with the chief political as well as military control in Kandahar and Sind, thus subordinating Outram to him as a political officer. 
On 1 June Outram left Sukkur for Quetta, to assist General Nott in his preparations for an advance on Kabul. In October he accompanied General England in the withdrawal of his force to India through the dangerous part of the Bolan Pass. He then pushed on alone to Sukkur to report to Sir Charles James Napier, who in August had taken over the command of the troops in Sind and Baluchistan, with entire control over the political agents and civil officers. Outram was remanded to his regiment, and the political establishment dissolved. At a public dinner given to Outram at Sukkur, on 5 November 1842, Napier proposed his health in the following terms: 'Gentlemen, I give you the 'Bayard of India', sans peur et sans reproche, Major James Outram of the Bombay army', and the epithet has since become permanently linked with his name. 
Outram applied for furlough for two years, and was to have sailed on 2 January 1843, when, on the application of Napier, he was appointed a commissioner for the arrangement of the details of a revised treaty with the amirs of Sind. He arrived at Sukkur on 3 January. This was the beginning of an association between the two men that ended in extraordinary bitterness, carried on through memoranda, books, and speeches. While part of the rancour on Outram's part may have been due to the loss of his independent position in Sind, and being brought under Napier's control, there were fundamental policy differences between them over the place of the Indian rulers, such as the amirs, in the new order. Napier believed the amirs were relics of oppressive feudalism that should be abolished, whereas Outram believed that before the British entered Sind, the people there were as happy as those under any government in Asia. When the governor-general ordered an even more rigorous treaty to be signed by the amirs, Outram became convinced that Napier would use it to goad the amirs into war, which would give him the opportunity to annex the whole of Sind. Knowing how the amirs' undisciplined, ill-armed tribesmen would be slaughtered by Napier's army, Outram wrote to him protesting that his policies were harsh and tyrannical, and that every life lost in consequence would be murder. Outram was no longer the Bayard of India; in correspondence Napier referred to him as 'son of a bitch'. 
Outram accompanied Napier in his march across the desert to Imamgarh to destroy the amirs' great fort. After the fort was demolished Outram went to Khairpur to meet the chiefs of Upper Sind and the vakils of the amirs of Lower Sind, and on 8 February he arrived at Hyderabad. What happened at Hyderabad at this time was central to the dispute between Outram and Napier. Outram had asked for one more chance to negotiate the new treaty before attacking them, and Napier had agreed. According to Napier's version, while Outram was at the residency, he and his force of 100 men were attacked by 8000 men under Mir Shahdad Khan, one of the leading amirs, and after gallantly defending the residency, they escaped by boat up the River Indus under heavy fire. Napier then began the war in earnest against the amirs. Outram's version of events is very different. He said that the amirs had signed the treaty, and that he had written this to the governor-general, but that Napier had not sent the letter, not wanting to miss the excuse for attacking the amirs. While Outram's account seems plausible, Napier's was more heroic, and it became the accepted version. 
On 16 February Outram joined Napier at Matiari, 16 miles above Hyderabad. Napier at once sent Outram off at his own request to burn the Miani and neighbouring forests ('shikargahs'), in which it was expected the enemy would collect, and from which it would be difficult to dislodge them. He was employed on this duty while Napier was fighting the battle of Miani, where, as Outram had predicted, Napier's well-trained troops slaughtered 6000 of the amirs' followers. On 18 February the amirs of Hyderabad, Mirs Hasan Khan, Shahdad, and Husain Ali Khan, surrendered. The two former were detained as prisoners, but the latter was released at Outram's request out of respect for the memory of his late father, Mir Nur Muhammad. 
Outram's functions as commissioner having ceased on the outbreak of hostilities, he left on 20 February for Bombay, carrying dispatches. In April he was presented at Bombay with a sword of honour of the value of 300 guineas and a costly piece of plate. For his services in the Sind War he was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel on 4 July 1843, and made a CB. Outram's share of the prize money amounted to $3000, but he declined to take the money for himself, and distributed it among charitable institutions in India. 
Outram returned to England in May 1843 with his mind filled with the unfortunate condition of the amirs and people of Sind, and during his furlough was engaged in making representations on their behalf. He was also engaged in the great controversy on the annexation of Sind, and the difference of opinion between Napier and himself led to a serious rupture. The contest proved a long and costly one for Outram. For years the uncongenial paper warfare dragged on, and was the source of misrepresentations, misunderstandings, and aspersions on both sides. 
News of upheaval at Lahore and the murder of the Maharaja Sher Singh was received in London in November, and Outram returned to India in December, armed with a letter from Wellington to the commander-in-chief in India. When Outram arrived at Sir Hugh Gough's camp at Fatehpur, Lord Ellenborough, who was there, refused, as a supporter of Napier, to grant him a personal interview, and objected to his joining Gough, but gave him the minor political charge of Minar in central India. There was not sufficient work to occupy him in Minar; he was worried with the Sind controversy, and in September he resigned his appointment, intending to return home. An outbreak, however, in the southern Maratha country between Bombay and Goa led Outram to offer his services. He was sent on special duty and on 13 October 1844 he was present at the capture of Samangarh. The rebellion spreading, he was attached to Major-General Delamotte's staff as head of the intelligence department. During the campaign he distinguished himself at the storming and capture of the forts of Pawangarh and Panala. Outram returned to Bombay in December, and was at once ordered to take part in the suppression of disturbances in Savantvadi, south of the country he had just left. 
In May 1845 Outram was appointed resident at Satara, and he took up his appointment on 26 May; in May 1847 he was transferred to the British residency at Baroda, the highest position under the Bombay government. On 21 February 1848 he became a regimental major. Ill health compelled him in November to go for a change of air to Egypt and Syria, and he occupied himself there by writing an exhaustive memoir on Egypt for the East India Company, for which he received the thanks of government. Outram returned to his post at Baroda in May 1850. Here he set himself to work to put down 'khatpat' or corruption. He sent in charges against Narsu Pant, head native agent at the residency, and in a full report, dated 31 October 1851, for submission to the court of directors, he dealt with the 'khatpat' case without respect of persons. His report was considered by the Bombay government to be disrespectful both to itself and to the ruler of Baroda. The result was that Outram was removed from the office of resident at Baroda. He returned to England in March 1852. While the court of directors upheld the Bombay government, it expressed a hope that on Outram's return to India a suitable opportunity would be found of employing him. 
In July 1853, having been promoted regimental lieutenant-colonel in the preceding month, Outram returned to India, arriving at Calcutta on 12 September. While at Calcutta, at the request of the governor-general, he wrote 'Memorandum on the invasion of India from the westward', which argued that the Indus River should be the western frontier of British India. The court of directors had written to the governor-general to find employment for Outram under the supreme government, and the transfer, towards the end of the year, of Baroda from the Bombay government to the government of India enabled Lord Dalhousie to reinstate Outram as resident there. Outram arrived at Baroda on 19 March 1854, and, after holding the office for a month, was appointed political agent and commanded at Aden. He embarked at Bombay in June, but the change to Aden in the hot season affected his health. In November Lord Dalhousie appointed him to the residency of Oudh, and he made his official entry into Lucknow on 5 December. 
Outram was instructed to prepare at once a report on the condition of the country, and to state whether the improvement demanded by Lord Hardinge seven years previously had in any degree been effected. In March 1855 he submitted his report, which represented the condition of Oudh as deplorable, and reluctantly recommended annexation as the only remedy. Annexation took place in February 1856, but with harsher terms for the ruler than Outram had recommended. Outram was promoted major-general on 28 November 1854, and was made KCB in February 1856. Ill health compelled him to return home in May. 
On 13 November Outram was summoned to India House and informed that he had been appointed to the command of the army for the Anglo-Persian War. Outram was given the local rank of lieutenant-general, and invested with diplomatic powers. He left England at once, and landed at Bombay on 22 December 1856. He left Bombay on 15 January 1857, and arrived at Bushehr on 27 January. The Persian commander-in-chief was at Borazjan, and was collecting a large force there. Outram determined to attack this position and, after a march of 46 miles in forty-one hours, in cold, wet, and stormy weather, the camp was reached, and found to have been hastily abandoned on Outram's approach. Outram commenced his return march on the night of 7 February to Bushehr, carrying with him large stores of provision. On the march, at daybreak on 8 February, they were attacked at Khushab by some 6000 Persians, with a few guns. After a smart action, in which 700 Persians were killed and two guns captured, the Persian force fled. 
It was not until 26 March that operations were commenced against the Persian stronghold, Muhammarah. The Persians abandoned their position and fled, leaving sixteen guns and all their baggage stores and ammunition behind them. Peace had already been concluded at Baghdad, and the war was at an end. Outram was sent to Baghdad in May to arrange the formation of a mission to see that the evacuation of Herat fortress and district was duly carried out by the Persians. He returned to Bombay on 26 June 1857. For his services Outram was made GCB. 
Meanwhile the Indian mutiny had broken out, and Outram's son, who was stationed at Aligarh, and his wife had a narrow escape. Outram reached Calcutta on 31 July, and on 8 August was given command of two divisions of the Bengal army occupying the country from Calcutta to Cawnpore inclusive, while he was also made chief commissioner of Oudh in succession to Sir Henry Montgomery Lawrence, killed in the defence of Lucknow. He took with him Robert Napier as his military secretary and chief of staff, and arrived at Dinapore on 19 August. On 1 September he was at Allahabad, and on 15 September he reached Cawnpore. 
Outram had already telegraphed from Benares to Havelock that he would shortly join him at Cawnpore with reinforcements, but that he would leave to Havelock the glory of the relief of Lucknow, accompanying him only in his civil capacity as commissioner, and placing his military services at Havelock's disposal as a volunteer. On 28 September Sir Colin Campbell confirmed Outram's temporary transfer of command by a general order, in which he called attention to the disinterested sacrifice made by Outram in favour of Havelock. On 19 September 1857 the force crossed the river and marched out of Cawnpore. On 23 September, in the action of the Alambagh, Outram, at the head of the volunteer and native cavalry, pursued the flying enemy to the Charbagh Bridge. On 25 September Havelock's force, after severe fighting, in which Outram received a flesh wound in the arm, won their way to the residency. 
Outram resumed his military command by a general order on 26 September. He found that he had simply reinforced a beleaguered garrison, and was himself effectually besieged until November, when Sir Colin Campbell, the commander-in-chief, came to the rescue. On 12 November Outram, on his side, blew in the outer wall of the garden of the palace of Farid Bakhsh, and opened his batteries on the insurgent defences in front. The buildings were soon in his possession; but he was still half a mile from the most advanced post of Sir Colin Campbell's force, and the way was under the enemy's fire. Outram, however, determined to meet Sir Colin Campbell without delay and, with Havelock and seven others, set out. Four were struck down, but Outram, Havelock, and their surviving companions reached the Moti Mahal unhurt. After a short conference they made their way back. Sir Colin entrusted the withdrawal of the garrison and the evacuation of the residency to Outram. 
After the evacuation of the residency Campbell left Outram with a field force at the Alambagh position to hold the city of Lucknow until Campbell had placed his convoy in safety and disposed of the Gwalior mutineers. For three months Outram's division, consisting of about 5000 men and 25 guns, kept in check 120,000 organized troops with more than 130 guns. The leader of the rebels at Lucknow was the famous Maulvi known as Ahmad Shah. He made determined efforts to sever Outram's communications, and continually harassed his outposts. From the end of December 1857 and through January and February 1858 sharp engagements were fought, in which Outram's troops were successful. The last and most desperate attack was made by the rebels on 25 February, and it was not until dawn the next day that they were completely routed and fell back on Lucknow. 
On 1 March 1858 Campbell returned to take Lucknow. Outram was placed in command of a large force of picked troops on the north side of the Gumti River, and, crossing the river on 6 March, he pitched his camp near the Fyzabad Road. On 9 March he made his attack, seizing the Chakar Kothi, or yellow house, the key of the enemy's position in that quarter, and, driving the rebels to the river, threw up batteries on its bank to keep down the enemy's fire. The 'kaisarbagh' fell to Sir Colin Campbell on the morning of 14 March. On 16 March Outram, having recrossed the Gumti, advanced through the Chattar Manzil and carried the residency. On the morning of 19 March Outram attacked the Musabagh, held by 5000 men and thirteen guns, and carried it, capturing twelve guns. So ended the capture of Lucknow. 
Outram was appointed military member of the governor-general's council, and, handing over the charge of Oudh to Robert Montgomery, left Lucknow on 4 April and joined Lord Canning at Allahabad. Many important matters, such as the reorganization of the Indian army, were under consideration during Outram's tenure of office, and he left many wise and carefully prepared minutes recording his views. A baronetcy was conferred upon him by the queen, and the House of Commons voted him an annuity of $1000, to be continued to his immediate successor. On 16 July Outram was promoted lieutenant-general. In October the City of London conferred upon him its freedom and presented him with a sword of honour. 
In July 1860 Outram's health gave way. He resigned his seat in the council of the viceroy, and, after a public entertainment at Calcutta, left India for good. An equestrian statue of him by J. H. Foley RA was erected on the Maidan in Calcutta by public subscription. On the institution of the Order of the Star of India in 1861 Outram was one of the first to be made a knight companion. In June 1862 he received an honorary DCL from Oxford University. In July a deputation headed by the duke of Argyll presented him with silver plate at his house, 10 Queen's Gate Gardens, South Kensington. He died at Pau in the south of France on 11 March 1863, his only child, Francis Boyd Outram (1836-1912), inheriting the title. His wife survived him. He was given a public funeral and was buried on 25 March in Westminster Abbey. The grave is near the centre of the nave, marked by a marble slab bearing the words 'The Bayard of India'. A statue by Noble was erected on the Thames Embankment. 
Contemporary accounts suggest that Outram was kind-hearted and modest, but very stubborn and unwilling to change his mind once it was made up. Like his great opponent, Sir Charles Napier, he enjoyed fighting and the command of men, but, unlike him, was deeply attached to the traditional Indian leaders. He quickly saw and rewarded merit in young officers, and he seemed to have a genuine concern for the welfare of his soldiers. He spent much on books for regimental libraries in India, and he established at Dum-Dum a soldiers' club known as the Outram Institute. 
Outram's publications included, in addition to his reports and minutes officially printed: 'Rough Notes of the Campaign in Sinde and Afghanistan in 1838-9' (privately printed, 1840); 'The Conquest of Scinde: a Commentary' (1846); and 'Lieutenant-General Sir James Outram's Persian Campaign in 1857' (privately printed, 1860). 


@@@@@


doc= 20963


Ouvry, Frederic (1814-1881), antiquary and lawyer, born on 20 October 1814 at 6 Abingdon Street, Westminster, was the third son of Peter Aime Ouvry, under-secretary at the Ordnance office, and Sarah Amelia Delamain, and was nephew of John Payne Collier. He was descended from James Ouvry, a Huguenot refugee from the neighbourhood of Dieppe who arrived in England in 1683 and settled in Spitalfields. 
Ouvry served five-year articles with George Hildyard King, was then admitted a solicitor in 1835, and joined the firm of Hildyard and King at 13 Tokenhouse Yard in the City of London. He became a partner in Farrer & Co. at 66 Lincoln's Inn Fields in 1855. His most famous client was his friend Charles Dickens, who instructed him to act on several occasions, including the drafting of the novelist's formal deed of separation from his wife, Catherine, in 1858. Ouvry was depicted as Mr Undery in 'The Haunted House' in 'All the Year Round' (1859). Another client, Coutts & Co., bankers, presented him in 1869 with a portrait bust by Marshall Wood. Ouvry was also solicitor to the fifth duke of Newcastle and worked with W. E. Gladstone after the duke's death to administer Newcastle's complex estate. He was honorary solicitor to the Royal Institute of British Architects from 1862 and made an honorary fellow in 1877. He was also solicitor to the Royal Literary Fund from 1864 and treasurer from 1877. He achieved the highest office in his profession in 1871 as president of the Incorporated Law Society. The Ouvry family had a long association with the Weavers' Company; Frederic was upper bailiff in 1878, and presented the company with the badge worn by later upper bailiffs. 
On 24 February 1848 Ouvry was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London, and from 1854 to 1874 he filled the office of treasurer. On his resignation he was made vice-president, and on 4 January 1876 he was unanimously elected president. He retired in 1878. He presented the society with many valuable books, and a portrait of William Oldys. He contributed two papers to 'Archaeologia' (1853-5), but his tastes and collections were mostly concerned with literary history. He had a fine library of manuscripts, autograph letters, and printed books, including the first four folios of Shakespeare. A catalogue of his collection of old ballads, compiled by T. W. Newton, was issued in 1887. He frequently printed facsimiles of rare publications of which only one copy was known; the first was 'The Cobler of Canterburie' (1862). 
Ouvry married Emily Anna (Minnie) Procter on 28 September 1854, and lived at Riverside, Maidenhead, Berkshire, and 12 Queen Anne Street, Cavendish Square, London. They had no children. He died suddenly at his town house on 26 June 1881, and was buried at Acton. His library was sold in April 1882 for $6169 2's'., and some items were acquired by the British Museum Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 20964


Overall, John (bap. 1561, d. 1619), bishop of Norwich, was born at Hadleigh, Suffolk, and baptized there on 2 March 1561, the younger son of George Overall, who died that July. He was educated at the local grammar school in Hadleigh, where John Boys, son of the rector of West Stow, Suffolk, was one of his contemporaries. John Still, then Lady Margaret professor of divinity at Cambridge, and parish priest from 1571, took an interest in their education. Owing to his patronage and direction both applied to St John's College, Cambridge, when in 1575 he became master. When Still moved to become master of Trinity College, Overall followed him and on 18 April 1578 was admitted as a scholar, alongside Anthony Maxey. He graduated BA in 1579 and became a minor fellow on 2 October 1581. He proceeded MA the following year and on 30 March became a major fellow. Overall received other college preferments while Still was master and at the start of the academic year in 1586 he was made praelector Graecus: by October 1588 he was praelector mathematicus. He became seneschal on 17 December 1589 and junior dean on 14 October 1591; that year he was also ordained priest at Lincoln. He was briefly, in 1591-2, vicar of Trumpington, a college living just outside Cambridge. In 1592 Sir Thomas Heneage, on behalf of Elizabeth I, presented him to the vicarage of Epping, Essex. 
In December 1595 Overall was appointed regius professor of divinity at the death of William Whitaker. He was popular with his pupils and although his election had the queen's support, it was the result of a vote of younger university men against the deterministic doctrines of Whitaker. Overall had publicly acquitted himself at a disputation with Anthony Wotton before the earl of Essex and his election may have been a snub for Archbishop John Whitgift, who had adopted the Calvinistic Lambeth articles with Whitaker's support. Overall, with Lancelot Andrewes, Samuel Harsnett, and others, had rejected these articles in support of Peter Baro, the Lady Margaret professor of divinity, when on 12 January 1596 he attacked them from the pulpit. This opposition cost Baro his chair, as he failed to be re-elected in 1596 and was succeeded by Thomas Playfere, but the style of Cambridge theology did not become monochrome. Overall was not as radical as Baro but in 1599 he clashed with the authorities when he maintained that the perseverance of a truly justified man was conditional upon repentance. There followed a year-long campaign against Overall which ultimately had little effect. In the summer of 1600 even his objection to Richard Neile's teaching on private confession was censured. None the less, he retained his chair until he resigned it in 1607. 
As one of the chaplains-in-ordinary to the queen Overall was appointed by Whitgift in 1598 to preach before her on the third Wednesday of Lent, 15 March, in place of Bishop Godfrey Goldsbrough of Gloucester. Shortly afterwards, at Easter, his theological position was further endorsed in Cambridge when he was appointed master of St Catharine's College, with the support of Whitgift. Thereafter he was occasionally chosen to give Lenten sermons before the queen, but he was not happy in the pulpit. It was reckoned that years of classical lecturing in Latin had made it 'troublesome to him to speak English in a continued oration' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 61). John Manningham, a Magdalene graduate who would have heard Professor Overall in Cambridge, later complained that he 'discoursed verry scholastically' when he preached a Whitehall sermon at the dead queen's court on 6 April 1603 (BL, Harley MS 5353, fol. 120'v'). 
In 1602 Overall was made rector of Algarkirk, Lincoln; he held the living for three years. With the support of Sir Fulke Greville he was nominated dean of St Paul's Cathedral in May the same year, in succession to the nonagenarian Elizabethan dean, Alexander Nowell. At his election on 29 May Bishop John Bancroft collated him to the prebend of Tottenhale in that cathedral. On 6 June Lawrence Barker, vicar of St Botolph, Aldersgate, and a former colleague at Trinity, spoke at Paul's Cross of the 'gravity & learning and life' (BL, Harley MS 5353, fol. 25'v') of the new dean. The deanery itself became a haven for scholars like Scultetus who shared the house with him. Overall himself, according to the radical preacher Thomas Scott, emerged as something of a zealous ritualist. In 1603 he became rector of Clothall in Hertfordshire (which he held until 1615). He staffed that parish with a curate as he did also Therfield, his other Hertfordshire benefice from 1605, which he surrendered in 1614 to a Hadleigh contemporary, Bishop Still's nephew, William Alabaster, when he converted back to the Church of England. 
At the Hampton Court conference Overall spoke on 16 January 1604 of predestination, using much material from his Cambridge disputes of the 1590s. In particular he questioned double predestination by considering those who lapsed, such as those who though previously considered justified had then committed adultery. Although his 'Sententia ecclesiae Anglicanae praedestionibus' were not printed in his lifetime they circulated widely in manuscript and informed George Carleton's theological reading at the Synod of Dort. They were published several times from 1631. As a result of the conference Overall found himself responsible for adding a substantial section to the catechism, on the sacraments. This amplified catechism remained at the heart of Anglican teaching and praxis until the 1970s. When the controversial Edmund Reeve wrote 'The Communion Book[e] Catechisme Expounded' in 1635 for his parishioners of Hayes, Middlesex, he paid tribute to both Overall and John Buckeridge for their work on the sacraments. Writing to Bishop Wright of Lichfield, Reeve claimed that Overall, 'that most greatly learned Divine', was the 'first instrument which God used for to instruct me in the Catholicke faith' (Reeve, sig. B3). Overall was also invited to join the Westminster team of ten biblical revisers under Lancelot Andrewes who worked to translate the first books of the 'Old Testament', up to '2 Kings' inclusive, for the 1611 Authorized Version. 
On 16 April 1604 at Mitcham, Surrey, Overall married Anne, daughter of Edward Orwell of Christ Church, Greyfriars Newgate, London, registrar of the court of arches, who came from a Lancashire family. Perhaps the Anne baptized at Christ Church on 11 May 1583, she was, according to John Aubrey, 'the greatest Beautie of her time in England' ('Brief Lives', 226). Although she committed adultery with the notorious womanizer Richard Sackville, third earl of Dorset, and with Sir John Selby of Yorkshire, she was not subject to ecclesiastical censure. Her marriage to Overall was childless. 
Following Thomas Ravis's promotion to the bishopric of Gloucester, in March 1605 Overall succeeded him as prolocutor of the lower house of the convocation of Canterbury. As such he worked closely with Archbishop Richard Bancroft. In the following year convocation produced canons in response to the outrage felt at the Gunpowder Plot and the need to circumscribe the actions of Catholics who upheld political resistance to tyrants. Although three books of canons were provided only the first passed both houses of convocation in both provinces, and James VI and I resisted their publication since he believed that the twenty-eighth canon, which spoke of 'bordering kings' who 'through ambition and malice' invade their neighbours, reduced his own title to kingship to being merely 'de facto'. The remaining books of canons, ascribed to Overall, were not published until 1690, when Archbishop William Sancroft used them in an attempt to justify the position of the nonjurors although Anglican defenders of the 1688 revolution had seized upon the same objected phrases to countenance William III's illegal act. 
Largely through the support of Sir Fulke Greville, whose family home was Warwick Castle, Overall became bishop of Coventry and Lichfield; he was elected on 14 March 1614 and consecrated on 3 April following. He spent most of his time in London, and seems only to have visited the diocese occasionally, first in 1614 and then during the royal progress south after James I's only visit to the Scottish kingdom in the summer of 1617 when the king arranged to meet his bishop at Coventry. The absence of his register makes it impossible to judge his role as a governor in the diocese but he maintained theological interests in his correspondence with the likes of Vossius and Grotius on the continent and provided for the clergy of his diocese by ordaining in the capital. Much of his time was spent working alongside Lancelot Andrewes and John Buckeridge in the court of high commission. He was involved in the deprivation and censure of four ministers (between December 1614 and May 1617), and in examining Catholic priests in January 1618. Having avoided preaching at court between 1603 and 1615, he took a regular turn on the third Sunday in Lent in 1616, 1617, and 1618. 
Following a 'conge d'elire' dated 9 May 1618, on 21 May the dean and chapter of Norwich elected Overall as bishop, but this was not confirmed until the end of the summer, when he moved to Norwich Palace. His further preferment is something of a surprise, and cannot have been much to the liking of the primate: in November 1617 Archbishop Abbot wrote to Sir Dudley Carleton that he feared that Overall 'maketh no bones... to deliver doubtfull thinges for true and fained thinges for certaine' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/105/95, fol. 9'v'). Indeed, Overall was one of the remonstrants' proposed delegates to the Synod of Dort. However, he did not long survive his translation to his home diocese, as he died on 12 May 1619. He was buried in the south choir aisle of the cathedral. The monument above his tomb was put up in 1669 at the expense of his former secretary and amanuensis, John Cosin. 
Overall's most enduring legacy, beyond his contribution to the revised catechism of the Church of England, was his visitation articles of 1619. At Lichfield the triennial visitations of 1614 and 1617 had been the excuse that took him to his diocese; although those articles do not seem to exist, presentments to his visitation suggest that he was concerned to encourage the appropriate provision of communion plate across his diocese. He did not live long enough to make a visitation of the Norwich diocese in person but his articles formed the antecedents of at least twenty other sets issued in the 1620s and 1630s, including those of Harsnett (1620) and of Andrewes (1625). Bishop Richard Neile at Durham even absorbed Overall's article about private confession, their old duelling ground. Their shape in part derived from those of John Jegon (1611). Within them Overall went well beyond the 1571 requirement on preachers not to treat of subjects not agreeable to scripture, making the churchwardens responsible for ensuring conformity in the pulpit. In insisting upon conformity he was more successful, even in a short space of time, across the diocese than had been his predecessor. 


@@@@@


doc= 20965


Overall, William Henry (1829-1888), librarian, son of William Henry Overall, a messenger who died before 1857, and Rosetta Davey, was born on 18 January 1829 at St John's Wood, St Marylebone, Middlesex. Educated at a private school, he entered the office of the town clerk at Guildhall in 1847 as a messenger, and attended the metropolitan evening classes for young men at Crosby Hall, Bishopsgate (later City of London College). On 20 April 1851 he married Mary Anne Elizabeth Bailey; they had fourteen children. Overall purchased his freedom of the City in January 1857 and in March was appointed to the new post of sub-librarian of the corporation library. The library then consisted of a few straggling apartments in the front of the Guildhall, and the corporation was heavily criticized for the poor facilities. 
In 1865, on the death of William Turner Alchin, Overall received the appointment of librarian, and superintended the removal of the collections to a spacious new building in Basinghall Street, opened in 1872. The following year the public was admitted for reference and use increased dramatically. In 1874 a museum opened in the basement and Overall, as curator, rapidly expanded the collections with notable acquisitions, especially of Roman remains found in the City. His knowledge of the historical topography of the City of London and its suburbs was extensive and accurate, and the ready help which he afforded in his official position to all enquirers made his services widely appreciated. The library committee (2 July 1888) acknowledged 'his devotion to his duties, and urbanity of manner' (Library Committee Minutes, Corporation of London Records Office). He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London in May 1868, and was for many years a member of the councils of the Library Association and the London and Middlesex Archaeological Society. 
Overall's first publication was the 'Catalogue of Sculpture... Belonging to the Corporation' (1867-8), and he subsequently compiled several other catalogues of special collections. In 1877 he was presented with the honorary freedom and livery of the Clockmakers' Company, of whose library and museum of clocks and watches, deposited in the Guildhall Library, he prepared a printed catalogue in 1875, which was followed in 1881 by his 'History' of the company. His particular scholarly interest was the City in the early modern period. Among other publications he edited, in 1874, a facsimile of the sixteenth-century map of London attributed to Agas, and with his cousin, H. C. Overall, he compiled an index to the 'Remembrancia' series of records (1579-1664) in the corporation archives. This work was the outcome of a joint examination of the corporation records and an elaborate report on their nature and condition. 
Overall lived at 27 Queen Margaret's Grove, Mildmay Park, before 1872, and at 24 Grosvenor Road, Highbury 'c'.1872-1885. He died at his home, Shaxted, 1 Crouch Hall Road, Crouch End, Hornsey, London, on 28 June 1888 after a long illness and was buried in St Pancras cemetery, Finchley, on 3 July. He was survived by his wife and nine of their children. 


@@@@@


doc= 20966


Overbury, Sir Thomas (bap. 1581, d. 1613), courtier and author, was born at the manor house in Compton Scorfen (Compton Scorpion), near Ilmington, Warwickshire, and baptized on 18 June 1581 at Barton on the Heath. He was the third of the ten children of Sir Nicholas Overbury ('c'.1549-1643), judge and MP, and his wife, Mary ('c'.1565-1617), daughter of Giles Palmer of Compton Scorfen and his wife, Muriella. 
The Overbury family had not been substantial landowners until Nicholas Overbury in 1598 bought the manor of Bourton on the Hill from John Palmer, to whom he was already related by marriage. However, the family finances made it possible for Thomas Overbury to go up as a gentleman commoner to Queen's College, Oxford, in 1595. In 1598 he entered the Middle Temple, London, his father's inn. There he became a friend of John Manningham, who recorded some of Overbury's sayings in his diary: some were witticisms, but also included were such remarks as: 'He would not have the bishops to have anie temporalities, or temporall jurisdicion, but live upon tithes, and nothing but preach' and 'Sir Rob. Cecile followed the E of Ess[ex's] death not with a good mynde' ('Diary of John Manningham', 236). The combination of verbal creativity, moderate puritanism, and a degree of sympathy for the second earl of Essex adumbrate later achievements and attitudes of Overbury's. So does the first reference to him in print, in a highly complimentary epigram in the 'Affaniae' (1601) of his Oxford contemporary Charles Fitz-Geffrey, a collection in which many of the other epigrams are addressed either to wits or to godly protestants. Fitz-Geffrey was not Overbury's only literary friend: Overbury knew Ben Jonson well enough to gossip about him to Manningham as early as 1603, and Jonson later wrote an epigram complimenting Overbury on raising the moral tone of the court. They subsequently became enemies; Jonson claimed many years later and somewhat implausibly, in conversation with Drummond of Hawthornden, that this was because Overbury had tried to use him as a go-between in an attempted adulterous relationship with the countess of Rutland ('Ben Jonson', 1.138). 
During Overbury's time at the Middle Temple, in his father's words: 'hee and John Guilby, his father's chiefe clerke, were sent (upon a voyage of pleasure) to Edinburgh, with 60 li between them. There Thom: met with Sir Wm. Cornwallis, one who knew him in Queene's colledge at Oxford. Sir Wm. commended him to diverse, & among the rest to Robin Carr, then page to the earle of Dunbarre: so they two came along to England together, & were great friends. (Oldisworth, fol. 92'v')' This journey was made around 1601, and thereafter Overbury returned to the Middle Temple for at least two years. A letter of Overbury's to Carr in 1613 refers to their 'love' as of nine years' standing ('Memorials of Affairs of State', 3.479), which suggests that after their first meeting in Edinburgh their friendship was renewed and became more intimate in 1604, presumably on Carr's arrival in England. When his friend came to the personal notice of the king, Overbury benefited. In 1606 he received a gift of silver from the king of Denmark on a visit of the latter to the English court; on 29 September 1607 he was given a lease on a saltworks in Worcestershire which had come into the king's hands after the attainder of Robert Winter; and on 19 June 1608 he was knighted. 
Overbury's relationship with Robert Carr (subsequently Viscount Rochester and earl of Somerset) was the most significant of his life. It has often been seen, perhaps simplistically, as one in which Carr depended on Overbury's superior intelligence. Certainly Carr, as the king's favourite, had a great deal of business to transact, and he needed to delegate some of it. Once Carr had become the king's unofficial secretary, incoming letters of state were routinely read and abstracted by Overbury, and outgoing dispatches were apparently drafted by him. Overbury was helpful in other ways: he could deal with Carr's suitors; he could handle business with which Carr and the king did not want to be openly associated; he could help acquire works of art for Carr's collection. He was both Carr's personal assistant and his bosom friend: in Sir Roger Wilbraham's description, his 'bedfellow, minion, and inward councillor' ('Journal' in 'Camden Miscellany', 10.116). What matters in this description is its emphasis on intimacy. The relationship may or may not have included sex; it was certainly emotionally charged. Carr's relationship with other associates such as Sir Robert Killigrew did not carry the same charge. 
Being the favourite of the king's favourite brought Overbury his knighthood; it also brought him influence. According to Nicholas Overbury: '[Francis Bacon] used... to stoope & crouch to Sir Tho: Overbury, in hope of Somerset's favour to bee Master of the court of wards: for which place, hee offered much; and Sir Thomas his father might once have had 1000 li. if he would have spoken effectually to his sonne. (Oldisworth, fol. 93'v')' Overbury was granted the reversion of the treasurership of the chamber, a position valued in 1613 at $2000. His family also received benefits: at the end of 1609, his brothers Giles and Walter were given a life grant of the office of registering assurances on ships or goods in the royal exchange. 
Overbury was not, however, interested simply in office and patronage. Hugh Broughton claimed to have heard from him that the king would give $500 per year to fund the exposition of the 'New Testament' in Hebrew and on Talmudic principles ('Petition to the King to Hasten Allowance for Ebrew Institution of Ebrewes', 1610?, 1v). James is not very likely to have made this promise; what is likelier is that Overbury had made an encouraging response when Broughton mentioned the project to him. It should have appealed to a man of the godly sympathies recorded by Manningham. These were of a piece with Overbury's political opposition to the pro-Spanish international interests of the Howard family. In 1613 Viscount Fenton wrote: 'all theis that Overberrye drew to him and about my Lord of Rotchester are lyke to make a pairtye to [i.e. opposed to] the Howards... Southehamptoun and Pembrouke are joyned in that syde, and thaye stand mutche to have Nevell Secreterrye. Thaye have vith them sume of the moste discontented nobill men of the younger sort, and all the Parlement mutineers. ('Mar and Kellie MSS', 51)' Overbury's alliance with men like Sir Henry Neville and the earl of Southampton placed him in a group self-identified as patriotic and protestant, several of whom had been at least marginally involved in the Essex rebellion. 
Overbury was not an entirely satisfactory ally, on account of his arrogance. This was commented on by many contemporaries, one of whom subsequently remarked that it was 'a great question who was the proudest, Sir Walter [Ralegh], or Sir Thomas Overbury, but the difference that was, was judged on Sir Thomas' side' ('Brief Lives', 2.182). In May of 1611: 'Rochester and his dear Overbury, walking in the garden at Greenwich whither the queen's window openeth, she broke into a sudden and contemptible laughing at them. 'So', saith she, 'they did at her', which belief carried her so far that she went to the king with tears in her eyes and complained. ('Downshire MSS', 3.83)' This account suggests that the quarrel may have been partly of the queen's making, but Overbury had overstepped the mark by laughing at her, and he was banished from court until November. On this occasion his own conceited self-confidence led him into a battle with a person stronger than himself, which damaged his political influence. 
The intimacy between Robert Carr and Frances Howard, then countess of Essex, had at first been abetted by Overbury, who was to claim to Carr that 'you fell in love with that woman, as soone as you had wonne her by my letters' (BL, MS Cotton Titus B.vii, fol. 483'v'). As it progressed, and especially as it became apparent that there was a possibility of a nullification of Frances Howard's marriage to the earl of Essex which would leave her free to marry Carr, Overbury became opposed to the relationship. Any marriage would expose his patron to influence other than his own, and an alliance with the Howards would expose him to an influence which Overbury had always detested. He made his feelings on the subject clear. A number of people now wanted to see Overbury moved away from court. The queen had never been fully reconciled to him since the quarrel of 1611. The king was aware of him as a troublemaker. Carr and Frances Howard both found Overbury standing in the way of their relationship. Overbury's enmity to the Howards was well known, and Henry Howard, earl of Northampton, was particularly interested in an alliance with Carr, to be cemented by his marriage to Howard's great-niece Frances. So, Overbury was offered an ambassadorship, which would have been a nominal promotion for him but which would have broken his daily personal influence in Carr's life. It is not certain where the post would have been; contemporary rumour suggested Paris, Brussels, or Moscow. He refused it, however, even when it had been made clear to him that the king wanted him to accept. He did this with Carr's encouragement, and Carr knew what the result would be. In the afternoon of 21 April 1613, Overbury evidently supposed that he had won the argument, remarking, as he discussed his future prospects with Sir Henry Wotton, that they had never looked better. That evening he was arrested, and taken to the Tower of London, 'Forasmuch,' in the words of the warrant for his imprisonment, 'as his Matie hath conceaved a greate displeasure against [him] for a matter of high contempt' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/72/119). 
Overbury remained in the Tower for more than four months. He was kept a close prisoner, permitted no communication with the outside world; when Sir Robert Killigrew, returning from a visit to Sir Walter Ralegh, spoke briefly through a window to Overbury, he was himself imprisoned briefly. The object of the imprisonment was clearly to keep Overbury well out of the way while the Essex marriage was annulled and the Carr-Howard marriage was arranged. Overbury threatened, in a letter written to Carr from the Tower, that he would disclose 'the story betwixt you and me from the first hour to this day', so that 'whether I die or live, your shame shall never die' (BL, MS Cotton Titus B.vii, fol. 483'v'); but while he was a close prisoner, he could not be as damagingly indiscreet as he threatened here. It was not in any powerful person's interests to agitate for his release, nor in the king's to order it. Overbury hoped in vain that Carr would help him. By 4 June a correspondent of William Trumbull remarked that '[n]ot a man enquires after him' ('Downshire MSS', 4.125). 
Even before his imprisonment Overbury had experienced some illness, and he had mentioned this as an excuse for refusing an ambassadorship (the reply had been, prophetically, that a foreign posting might actually be rather good for his health). By the middle of May he was described by Henry Wotton as 'much damaged in his health by close imprisonment' ('Life and Letters', 2.23). He became feverish, and could not eat; he suffered nausea and vomiting; he was permanently thirsty; and his urine smelt unusually foul. Wotton's assumption that Overbury's uncertain health had been worsened by imprisonment is certainly plausible. The decline may, moreover, have been accelerated by any or all of three factors. First, Overbury was dosing himself with emetics, apparently concocted by Killigrew and sent him by Carr. Second, he was receiving professional medical treatment from Theodore Turquet de Mayerne and others, which may have led to iatrogenic illness; it has been suggested that the painful, stinking ulcer present on Overbury's back in his last days may have been the gangrenous result of an incision made under Mayerne's direction to drain harmful humours from the body. Third, Frances Howard was probably making attempts, the likelihood of which will be discussed below, to have him poisoned. Overbury died in the Tower, unattended, after prolonged physical and mental suffering, early on 15 September 1613. He was buried that evening in the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula, the haste of his interment being explained by the foulness of his corpse. 
Two years later it was rumoured that Overbury had been poisoned. The evidence is problematic, because it largely consists of confessions made under fear of torture or as part of a series of show trials. The case for the prosecution was that Frances Howard had been anxious to have Overbury murdered, and had even tried to bribe Sir David Wood, a servant of the queen who had been angered by Overbury's handling of some patronage business, to assassinate him before his imprisonment. Thereafter she had allegedly had Sir Gervase Elwes substituted for Sir William Waad as lieutenant of the Tower of London in May 1613 so that her agents would have easier access to Overbury; she had allegedly employed her dependants Richard Weston, Anne Turner, and James Franklin to obtain poisons and introduce them into food sent to Overbury; and, after Overbury proved resistant to these poisons, she had allegedly instructed Weston to commission an apothecary's boy to give Overbury a fatally toxic enema. The plot seems pointlessly elaborate: for instance, Franklin confessed to having obtained seven different poisons, 'that is to say, aqua fortis, Mercury water, white arsenick, pouder of diamonds, lapis Cosmatis, great spiders and Cantarides' for Frances Howard (TNA: PRO, SP 14/83/38). As Edward Coke handled it in the trials, the elaboration developed, and he hinted at a widespread conspiracy to poison, of which Henry, prince of Wales, had been one victim and Overbury another. 
The likeliest reading of the evidence is that Frances Howard probably did attempt to incapacitate Overbury by poison, though not necessarily to kill him, still less to employ five different persons to subject him to repeated large doses of a variety of poisons. Robert Carr probably did not know of this until after the fact, and Overbury's death cannot be ascribed with any certainty to poison. Be that as it may, Elwes, Weston, Turner, and Franklin were all executed for it, and Carr and Howard (the earl and countess of Somerset as they had then become) were spared execution but imprisoned and disgraced. Sir Nicholas Overbury believed of the earl of Northampton that he: 'knew, there was nothing to bee gotten of the king without the helpe of Somerset; and therfore hee flattered Somerset, and plotted the poysoning of Overbury. Hee had doubtlesse suffered, if hee had not dyed betweene the Murther & the Discovery of it. (Oldisworth, fol. 93'v')' The murder trials certainly brought down the promising Carr-Howard alliance for which Northampton had worked hard. 
The only poem which can certainly be ascribed to Overbury is 'A Wife', comprising forty-seven verses in the same metre as Shakespeare's 'Venus and Adonis'. It discusses the origins and benefits of marriage, and the qualities of the ideal wife, with particular regard to her usefulness and subservience to her husband. John Owen praised it in an epigram published before November 1612, which was to be translated by Joshua Sylvester. Jonson's complimentary poem to Carr on the occasion of his marriage expresses the hope that Carr's wife would 'Out-bee that 'Wife', in worth, thy freind did make' ('Ben Jonson', 8.384). Sir Nicholas Overbury's claim that his son's poem was written to persuade Carr to choose a better wife than Frances Howard is at once made doubtful by this reference of Jonson's, and is unlikely on other grounds too: 'A Wife' is expressed in very general terms, and its tone is reflective rather than didactic. The poem was not printed in Overbury's lifetime. It was, however, circulated in manuscript, and a copy came into the hands of the publisher Lawrence Lisle late in 1613. Lisle published it as an anonymous duodecimo early in the next year. It sold well enough to justify a second edition, published as 'A wife now the widdow of Sir Thomas Overburye... whereunto are added many witty characters... written by himselfe and other learned gentlemen his friends'. The so-called 'characters' were short prose descriptions of imaginary persons, imitating Joseph Hall's 'Characters of Virtues and Vices' of 1608. 
The prose descriptions were not by Overbury. The first three, one of which describes a good woman and the other two bad women, had a limited manuscript circulation as an appendix to 'A Wife'; in one of the manuscripts, their anonymous author claims that his purpose was to make Overbury's material more intelligible. Lisle evidently obtained a manuscript of the poem in which these characters were present, and commissioned more, from one or more unknown authors, passing them off disingenuously as by Overbury and his learned friends. The collection was a great success, and Lisle issued a series of progressively augmented editions. In 1615, as the murder trials began, new editions of the collection contained topical poems on the alleged poisoning by William Browne, Richard Corbett, and others. By 1622 an eleventh edition had appeared, with eighty-two characters occupying most of its pages. Some of these were by John Webster; others have been ascribed, less certainly, to Thomas Dekker and John Ford; and one of them was later printed with the juvenilia of John Donne, though it is not very likely to be his. 
A number of other works have been ascribed to Overbury, none with certainty. The first of these, a report of the arraignment of Sir Walter Ralegh in 1603, was published as Overbury's in 1648. It is perfectly possible that in 1603 Overbury, with his background in the inns of court, witnessed the arraignment and took notes upon it which eventually came to a publisher's hands, and it is equally possible that his name was added as a publisher's ploy to a report made by an anonymous or unimportant writer. In 1609 Overbury travelled on the continent, and the unspectacular 'Observations in his Travailes... in 1609', of which at least twelve manuscript copies are extant, appear to be notes of his on the Low Countries and France made at that time. Lisle entered the work in the Stationers' Register in 1616, but it was not published until 1626. Anthony Wood noted that '[t]his goes under his name, but doubted by some, whether he wrote it' (Wood, 2.135). A translation of Ovid's 'Remedium amoris' is associated with 'A Wife' in some manuscripts, and was published as by Overbury in 1620. Finally, a collection of the table talk of King James, identified in manuscript as 'Crumms fal'n from King James's table... taken by Sr. Thomas Overbury' (BL, MS Harleian 7582, fol. 42) cannot, on internal evidence, be earlier than 1622. 
Interest in Overbury was particularly vigorous at two points in the seventeenth century: the years 1615-16, and the early 1650s. The most substantial writings from the earlier period are manuscript reports of the murder trials, which are sometimes associated with reports of the Essex annulment case. A great number of short pieces, mostly in verse, were circulated in manuscript at the same time; these tended to vilify Frances Howard and, to a lesser extent, Robert Carr. Some more or less ephemeral printed texts also circulated, such as the anonymous 'The Bloody Downfall of Adultery, Murder, Ambition', the poem 'Sir T. Overburies Vision', by Richard Niccols, and the broadside poem 'The Poysoned Knights Complaint', by Samuel Rowlands. John Ford's 'Sir Thomas Overburyes Ghost', entered by Lisle in the Stationers' Register in 1615, is no longer extant. One or two accounts of the trials were published in Dutch. Prints of Weston, Elwes, the Somersets, and Overbury himself were also sold at the time. Those of Overbury depict a man with a long, thin face and large, dark, slightly sunken eyes. His features are regular, but he is not strikingly handsome. He has bushy and slightly receding hair, and a closely trimmed beard and moustache. In one image, by Renold Elstrack, he wears a thoughtful, melancholy expression, and is writing a poem on his own death. 
Writings on Overbury from the period just after the execution of Charles I either present his death as an example of the depravity of the Stuart court, or answer such representations. In the first category, which tends to set Overbury up as a martyr to the evil schemes of Frances Howard, are the accounts of Sir Anthony Weldon, Arthur Wilson, Francis Osborne, and Sir Edward Peyton; in the second are those of Sir William Sanderson and Godfrey Goodman. Since the seventeenth century Overbury has generally been seen as the sad poet of Elstrack's print, betrayed by his friend, victim of the deadly designs of a corrupt monarch (according to Andrew Amos and Edward Rimbault) or of a beautiful murderess. Several semi-popular books have treated his death as a sensational murder story. He has, as the supposed author of the 'characters' printed with 'A Wife', been overestimated as a prose writer, and even praised for his wide knowledge of human nature. The latter judgement is almost the reverse of the truth: Overbury's friendship with Carr might have been the foundation for a career at least as comfortable as Sir Robert Killigrew's, but his arrogance and indiscretion in dealing with other people led eventually to his imprisonment and death. John Chamberlain wrote, when he heard that Overbury had died, that 'he was a very unfortunat man, for nobody almost pities him, and his very frends speake but indifferently of him' ('The Letters of John Chamberlain', ed. N. E. McClure, 1939, 1.478). 
His nephew 
In 1671 Overbury wrote a brief argument for liberty of worship, 'Queries proposed to the serious consideration of those who... persecute... upon the account of religion', which was circulated locally in manuscript and was attacked in print by Overbury's near neighbour George Vernon of Bourton on the Water in 1677. Overbury replied to Vernon, also in print, in 'Ratiocinium vernaculum' in 1678. Anthony Wood remembered him as 'a favourer of Protestant dissenters' (Wood, 2.136). Another locally circulated tract of Overbury's, on the prospects for a new parliament, was denounced to the king as a 'scurvy libel' in 1676 ('CSP dom.', '1659-84', 18.56). In 1679 he sold the manor of Bruton to Lord Brooke, and in 1680 he sold that of Bourton on the Hill for $3050 to Alexander Popham, the son-in-law of Sir Edward Harley, who helped with the purchase. Overbury died at Admington, near Quinton, Gloucestershire (now part of Warwickshire), on 28 February 1684, and was buried at Quinton on 6 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 20967


Sir Thomas Overbury (b. in or before 1627, d. 1684), landowner and author, was the eldest of the eight children of Sir Giles Overbury (1590-1653), landowner, who was a brother of Sir Thomas Overbury the courtier, and his wife, Anne (1603-1660), daughter of Sir John Shirley of Ifield, Sussex. Thomas Overbury inherited the manors of Bruton and Bourton on the Hill on his father's death. He and his wife, Hester Leach (died 1686), had one daughter, Mary, who married William Whitelocke, a son of Bulstrode Whitelocke. In 1659 Overbury was suspected of collecting weapons to furnish a rising to restore the Stuart monarchy; in 1660 he was knighted. In 1676 his account of a supposed murder in his part of the country was published. This described the disappearance of William Harrison, steward to Viscountess Campden, in 1660; the claim by Harrison's servant John Perry that he, his mother, and his brother had conspired to murder Harrison; and the execution of all three Perrys. It then printed the claim made by Harrison on his reappearance that he had been kidnapped, taken to the coast, and put on board a ship which was then captured by Turks, by whom he was enslaved for a while, until on his master's death he returned to England. The story is, as Overbury pointed out, a puzzling one, and the book ran to three editions. 


@@@@@


doc= 20968


Overend, Marmaduke (d. 1790), organist and composer, was organist of Isleworth, Middlesex, from 1760 until his death. He studied with William Boyce, and corresponded with him until Boyce's death in 1779, about ancient Greek musical doctrines and the mathematical calculation of musical intervals. Following Boyce's death, Overend purchased his manuscript treatise on music. Based on it, he published 'A Brief Account of, and Introduction to, Eight Lectures in the Science of Music' (1781), containing a method of finding musical ratios; it does not appear that the lectures were ever delivered. He also wrote music, much of which remained in manuscript. His published music includes an 'Epithalamium' on the marriage of George III and Queen Charlotte (1761), 'Twelve Sonatas' for two violins and cello (1762), and 'A Hunting Cantata' ('c'.1780). Overend was buried at Isleworth on 25 June 1790, describing himself in his will as 'Student in Music'. His library was sold in 1791, when his manuscripts and that of Boyce were acquired by J. W. Callcott. They were eventually purchased by the Bodleian Library in 1972. 


@@@@@


doc= 20969


Overton, Charles (1805-1889), Church of England clergyman and author, the sixth son of John Overton (1763-1838), rector of St Crux and St Margaret, York, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Stodart (died 1827), was born in York. He was expected to become a civil engineer, and so not sent to university, but in 1829 he was ordained a deacon by the archbishop of York, Vernon Harcourt. He was for a short time assistant curate of Christ Church, Harrogate, but in the year of his ordination became curate of Romaldkirk, Yorkshire. In the same year he married Amelia Charlesworth, who died in 1885. They had four sons and three daughters. In 1837 J. B. Sumner, bishop of Chester, presented him to the vicarage of Clapham, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, and in 1841 to that of Cottingham, near Hull, where he spent the rest of his life. 
Like his father Overton was a firmly convinced evangelical, but was not narrowly partisan and could sympathize with good men who belonged to other schools of thought. He was an able preacher and an active pastor in his large and scattered parish, then encompassing Skidby and Newland, which later became separate parishes. Chiefly through his own exertions funds were raised to enable the parish church to be restored and parsonages and schools to be built. 
Overton wrote both in prose and in verse. His first poem, entitled 'Ecclesia Anglicana' (1833), was written at Romaldkirk to celebrate the restoration of York Minster after its partial destruction by the arsonist and religious fanatic Jonathan Martin (1782-1838). A later edition appeared in 1853. It was good-humouredly satirized by Tom Moore, who began his parody: '
Sweet singer of Romaldkirk, thou who art reckoned, 

By critics episcopal, David the Second, 

If thus, as a curate, so lofty your flight, 

Only think in a Rectory how you would write! 

' Probably the best-known of his other works was 'Cottage Lectures, or, 'The Pilgrim's Progress' Practically Explained' (1847-8). He died on 31 March 1889 at Cottingham, where he was buried in the churchyard six days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 20970


Overton, Constantine (b. 1626/7, d. in or after 1695), Quaker activist, was the son of Rowland Overton of Shrewsbury, carpenter. When his father became a freeman of Shrewsbury in 1639 Constantine was twelve, the youngest of four children: two sisters, Katherine and Eleanor, and a brother, Humphrey, three years his senior. Constantine became a shoemaker and was admitted freeman of Shrewsbury in 1653; a trade-token which he issued ten years later bore the arms of his occupation. The hearth tax roll of 1672 records him as living in Welsh Ward within the Walls, paying on four hearths. He married twice. His first wife, Jane, the mother of Samuel, who was baptized in January 1651, died the following year and was buried in St Chad's, Shrewsbury, on 20 November 1652. With his second wife, also called Jane, he had two daughters, Sarah ('bap'. 1654) and Jane, born on 14 September 1656. 
Constantine Overton was one of the first to join the Quaker movement in Shropshire, and he frequently appears as a witness to marriages in the Shrewsbury Quaker marriages from the very first entry in August 1656. In April 1657, while in Shrewsbury gaol, his name heads the list of those Quakers whose names were attached to 'The Priest's Wickednesse and Cruelty, Laid Open, and Made Manifest', which describes how he and other Quakers were attacked by people from the church in neighbouring Cressedge. The Quakers were later sent to gaol, fined for keeping their hats on in court, and imprisoned for a further three months. 
Overton was to suffer further in the Quaker cause following the Restoration. In 1662 he and his brother, Humphrey, were imprisoned for non-payment of tithes. On 26 February 1663 Constantine was seized at a meeting at Shrewsbury and sent to prison; and on 24 March 1663 he was disfranchised as freeman of Shrewsbury for refusing to take the proffered oaths and for holding meetings in his house. He suffered further when he, Humphrey, and their two servants were committed to gaol for keeping their shops open on Christmas day. In May 1670 the mayor and local officers took down the names of all those present at a Quaker meeting, sending four to prison and fining the rest -- Constantine, Humphrey, and Thomas Overton (whose exact relationship to the brothers is uncertain) being the heaviest sufferers. Constantine was heavily fined again, and he was to incur additional loss for the offence of keeping his shop open on Christmas day. 
It would seem probable that Constantine Overton was an important Friend in his locality, for the minutes of the London yearly meeting for 1672 list Constant Overton as the recipient of five books for the county of Shropshire. There is no record of the date of his death or burial: he is last known to have been alive in 1695 when he was recorded as living in the Stone ward, Shrewsbury (Shrops. RRC, 3365/275, Marriage Duty Act returns). 


@@@@@


doc= 20971


John Overton (1639/40-1713) was the son of Thomas Overton of Covent Garden, tailor. He was apprenticed to Thomas Gould for eight years on 30 June 1655 and made free of the Stationers' Company on 4 July 1663. When London's leading printseller, Peter Stent, died of the plague in 1665, Overton took over his shop: the White Horse, near Pye Corner. This burned down in the great fire of 1666, but by 1669 Overton was established at the White Horse on Snow Hill, opposite St Sepulchre's Church. He built up the most powerful wholesale printselling business in London by publishing widely saleable prints and buying up and republishing successful plates, such as John Speed's maps. He sold maps, topographical views, portraits, and sets of months or stories from scripture for display. Phrases in his will suggest that he married three times. If so, his 'second wife' was a daughter of Benjamin Dunn, and his 'last wife', married in 1677, was Sarah Garrett, sister to a John Garrett ('fl'. 'c'.1665-1722) who was probably the printseller who had a shop in the Royal Exchange. He had seven children, Thomas, Henry ['see below'], Philip ['see below'], James, Anne, Margaret, and Sarah. The eldest, Thomas, had emigrated to America and had not been heard of since 1700. John Overton died in March 1713, and was buried in the church of St Sepulchre on 31 March. He named his second son, Henry, as his executor but left the lease of his house and shop to his unmarried daughter Sarah. Both his portrait (the print of which gives his age as sixty-eight in 1708) and his will give an impression of a stern patriarch but he took great care that all his children should get a share of the small fortune that he had amassed. 
The business of printselling was altogether more lucrative for the next generation. 


@@@@@


doc= 20972


Overton, John (1763-1838), Church of England clergyman and evangelical apologist, was born at Monk Fryston in Yorkshire, where his father, George Overton, was a small landed proprietor. He belonged to an ancient Yorkshire family which early in the fourteenth century settled at Easington Hall in Holderness, and which included Major-General Robert Overton, though the estates were sold to the Milner family at the end of the seventeenth century. 
Overton was educated at the village school at Monk Fryston, and in 1786 matriculated at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1790 and MA in 1803. Overton was well thought of at Magdalene, which was just beginning to become established as an evangelical stronghold, and worked hard for exams, although he fell ill just before finals and took a pass degree. After ordination he became assistant curate to William Richardson, vicar of St Michael-le-Belfry in York and one of the leaders of the evangelical party in the north of England. He remained with Richardson until 1802, when he was appointed, through the influence of William Wilberforce, to the chancellor's livings of St Crux and St Margaret's in York. Like most early evangelicals he was a strong tory in politics and a great admirer of Pitt, and he took an active part in promoting the election of Wilberforce for the county of York. 
In 1792 Overton married Elizabeth, 'nee' Stodart (died 1827), of Reeth in the Yorkshire dales, whose father was agent to the lairds of Arkendale. They had four daughters and eight sons, four of whom -- John, William, Thomas, and Charles Overton -- became clergymen, two others becoming lawyers, and two doctors. 
It was Overton's 'The true churchmen ascertained, or, An apology for those of the regular clergy of the establishment who are sometimes called evangelical ministers' (1801) which brought him to public notice. In this work he tried to prove from an examination of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' and the 'Book of Common Prayer' that the evangelicals were the true churchmen and their opponents the real dissenters from the Church of England. This provoked a vigorous response from several churchmen, particularly Charles Daubeny -- one of those criticized by Overton -- in his 'Vindiciae ecclesiae Anglicanae' (1803). Even the recently established evangelical periodical, the 'Christian Observer', had reservations about Overton's book, to which he replied in 'Four Letters to the Editor of the Christian Observer' (1805). However, prominent evangelicals such as Charles Simeon welcomed 'The True Churchmen Ascertained' as an able and manly defence of their position. Overton also published a few other works, mostly sermons, but none of these sparked controversy. He died at York on 17 July 1838, and was buried in a vault alongside his wife in the chancel of St Crux. 


@@@@@


doc= 20973


Overton, John (1762/3-1838), theological writer, was born at Tetford in Lincolnshire, the son of a cottager. He was appointed an excise officer thanks to the influence of the rector, the Revd Mr Emmeris, in whose home he lived, and Thomas Cholmondeley (later Lord Delamere). This gave him the opportunity to pursue his interest in astronomy. Overton built the telescopes he was to use in his observations. Combining his immense knowledge of biblical writings with his expertise in astronomy he began, from 1812, to formulate anti-deistic arguments, aiming to demonstrate the compatibility of biblical chronology and genealogies with Newtonian laws of science and knowledge of the universe. 
Having installed a printing press at his house in Crayford, Kent, in 1816, Overton published his first work, 'The genealogy of Christ elucidated by sacred history... with a new system of sacred chronology and the true meaning of the weeks in Daniel' (2 vols., 1817). This he wrote as 'an antidote to the venomous pen' of the ideologue Comte C.-F. C. de Volney. By demonstrating the harmony of the laws of the universe with the biblical accounts 'rightly understood', Overton aimed not only to counter Volney's denial of the scientific basis of biblical accounts, but to establish the authenticity of the biblical record on the basis of its accuracy in matters astronomical. In this and other works he defends the 'Bible' as a work of science, proved through the accuracy of its chronology and genealogies. This thesis was advanced, too, in 'The books of Genesis and Daniel (in connection with modern astronomy) defended against Count Volney and Dr. Francis' (1820), supplemented by 'The Sonship of Christ' which was written against J. S. Gorton and the Revd J. H. Evans. The conclusions of these two works were afterwards summarized in a pamphlet, 'A View of Sacred History and its Chronology in Connexion with Modern Astronomy' (1827). Other pamphlets by Overton include 'The Chronology of the Apocalypse Investigated and Defended' (1822), and 'The Apocalyptic Whore of Babylon Considered not the Pope of Rome' (1830), reflecting his interest in the correct interpretation of prophetic writings. He was a contributor to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', on the subjects of astronomy and biblical history, for forty years. 
Overton founded two Sunday schools, at Foot's Cray and Paul's Cray, Kent. He moved to Rose Cottage, King's Road, Chelsea, London, in 1827 and died there on 1 December 1838, aged seventy-five. He left a widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 20974


Overton, Richard (fl. 1640-1663), Leveller and pamphleteer, is of uncertain background and origins. 
There are two conflicting accounts of Overton's early life, both largely conjectural. In Amsterdam there exists a signed Latin confession of faith made by Overton on his conversion to General Baptism, and it was once generally assumed that this was made at the same time as other General Baptist confessions in the same archive, about 1615. If so, this would give him a probable date of birth some time before 1600. The relatively greater emphasis than other Levellers in his writings on such rural grievances as enclosure may indicate that he had rural origins, possibly in Lincolnshire, a county in which the surname Overton was common and which was the original centre of General Baptism in England. By the time he made his confession he was living in the Dutch republic, and he returned to England some time prior to 1640. On the basis of his later printing activities and the existence of a printer called Henry Overton, it has also been widely assumed that Overton was a professional printer. This reconstruction of Overton's early life is doubtful. There is evidence that Overton's confession of faith may date from as late as 1643, and there is no known connection between Richard and Henry Overton; both the quality of works printed by Richard and his habitual use of other professional printers suggest that his own printing activities were undertaken on an amateur basis, as a by-product of his political activities. 
A Richard Overton matriculated as a sizar from Queens' College, Cambridge, at Easter 1631, and this may have been the future Leveller; if so, this may indicate a date of birth about 1614 or slightly before. Overton's works do suggest a relatively high level of educational attainment, showing a competent command of Latin, traces of classical culture, and some knowledge of medicine, the law, formal rhetoric, astronomy, astrology, and alchemy. 
Some conjectures have been made about Overton's life on the basis of works attributed to him, but these are made uncertain by the difficulty of establishing his 'oeuvre'. About 150 pamphlets and journalistic writings have been attributed to Overton, although only about a sixth were signed or subsequently acknowledged by him. In many cases there is clear evidence against Overton's authorship; conversely, there is evidence that he was the author of some later anonymous pamphlets generally attributed to John Lilburne or William Walwyn. A reference to himself in the anonymous 'Old Newes Newly Revived' (June 1641) as 'the little Levite that writ 'Lambeth Faire'' (sig. A2'v') implies that Overton had been a clergyman, and a passage in 'The Curates Conference' (April 1641), attributed to Overton on stylistic grounds, suggests that he left university to become a curate, and that he subsequently accompanied the English army during the bishops' wars in the capacity of a chaplain; a question asked by the earl of Essex in 1646 implied that Overton had at some time been a soldier, but whether during the bishops' wars or the early years of the civil war is not known. Some of Overton's early works take dialogue form and include stage directions, and he may have been involved in writing and performing anti-Laudian satirical playlets between 1640 and 1642. 
Overton's first signed pamphlets were 'Articles of High Treason Exhibited Against Cheap-Side Crosse' (January 1642) and 'New Lambeth Fayre' (March 1642), an expanded version of the anonymous 'Lambeth Faire' (June 1641). Strong stylistic evidence and internal references suggest that he was also the author of other pamphlets at this time, beginning with 'Vox Borealis' (October 1640), claiming to be printed by Margery Mar-Prelate. The pseudonym had already been used by the author of several presbyterian pamphlets in 1588-9, two of which were twice reprinted in 1641-3, possibly by Overton; his use of this pseudonym foreshadows the Martin Mar-Priest persona he was later to adopt. 
The works written by and attributed to Overton in 1640-42 are all primarily anti-Laudian and anti-Catholic satires, attacking church courts, the high commission, the 'etcetera oath', pluralism, the 'Book of Sports', surplices, bowing at the name of Jesus, and wedding rings. They are written from the point of view of a puritan within the Church of England: he criticizes the tithe system, not because tithes were wrong in themselves, but because the income they generated was used to support lazy parsons rather than industrious curates; and his criticism of episcopacy was aimed more at the conduct of particular bishops than the office itself. He also occasionally satirized separatists, suggesting that Overton had not yet converted to General Baptism. The early pamphlets often raise such secular grievances as ship money and monopolies, and they already display Overton's marked hostility to lawyers, but there is little in them that foreshadows his later radicalism. The king is not attacked as such, but is represented as being misled by his evil councillors, especially William Laud and Thomas Wentworth, first earl of Strafford. These early works are frequently written either in verse or as dialogues. Overton depended heavily on punning, employed a good deal of coarse humour, and had a tendency to use violent language, features which were to remain characteristic of his style throughout his later career. They contain no indication of the theoretical sophistication that he was later to achieve, and nothing in the way of a positive programme other than a call for triennial parliaments. 
Overton seems to have ceased writing between April 1642 and January 1644. It has been suggested that he may have married his wife, 
Overton had resumed his writing career by January 1644 when he published his treatise 'Mans Mortalitie', the first edition of which was printed by himself; a second edition correcting the copious printer's errors was published shortly afterwards. The treatise argued in favour of the mortalist heresy known as thnetopsychism: Adam had originally been created to be immortal, but after the fall both his soul and body became subject to death; both, however, would be miraculously reconstituted at the last judgment. Although some historians have taken 'Mans Mortalitie' to be evidence of Overton's secularism and rationalism, thnetopsychism was widespread in General Baptist circles; this, together with the anti-separatism of his earlier works, makes it probable that Overton's conversion to General Baptism occurred about 1642-3. Thnetopsychism was a doctrine which tended to be accompanied by the belief that the kingdom of God would be established on earth rather than in heaven, and it involved strong millenarian tendencies. 'Mans Mortalitie', together with Milton's 'Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce', was condemned by the Commons on 26 August 1644, and it subsequently attracted much criticism from presbyterian writers. Throughout his life thnetopsychism remained an important concern of Overton's. He was present at a General Baptist meeting in London discussing the topic in January 1646; the lord mayor ordered the meeting to be broken up, but at Overton's instigation the participants succeeded in debating both mortalism and the right of civil authorities to interfere in matters of conscience for a further five hours. Overton published a revised edition of 'Mans Mortalitie' ('Man Wholly Mortal') in 1655; unsold copies of this edition were reissued with a new title-page in 1675. 
The debate on mortalism in 1646 took place in Thomas Lambe's General Baptist congregation in Bell Alley, Coleman Street, and Overton was a member of this church at least as early as January 1644. According to Overton the church was frequently harassed by presbyterian mobs, ranging from throwing stones in the street to firing musket-shots into the congregation. The London General Baptists included a number of other future Levellers, including Nicholas Tew. Overton was mentioned in connection with Tew after the latter's arrest for operating an illegal press on 17 January 1644. Tew's press was also used for printing works by Lilburne and possibly Walwyn, suggesting that the future Leveller leaders may already have been in close contact. 
In April 1645 Overton published 'The Araignment of Mr Persecution' under the pseudonym Martin Mar-Priest. This was the first of a series of satirical attacks on the presbyterians: 'A Sacred Decretall' (May), 'Martin's Eccho' (June), 'The Nativity of Sir John Presbyter' (July), 'The Ordinance of Tythes Dismounted' (December), and 'Divine Observations upon the London Ministers Letter' (January 1646). Overton evidently regarded these tracts as the source of his celebrity, since he continued to refer to himself as 'little Martin' in several of his later Leveller pamphlets published under his own name. Richard Baxter recorded that the Mar-Priest tracts were 'abundantly dispersed' in the army ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', ed. M. Sylvester, 1696, 53) and their popularity is witnessed by the appearance of several imitations, published mostly under the pseudonym of Sir John Presbyter; these latter tracts, however, appear to be the work of a royalist satirist. 
The Mar-Priest tracts are primarily concerned with arguing for complete freedom of conscience and a rigorous separation of church and state. They also mount a vigorous attack on the system of tithes, an issue raised to prominence by an ordinance of November 1644 which attempted to enforce their payment. Overton argued that the clergy should either work for a living or be supported by voluntary contributions; tithes themselves might continue to be collected, but they should be used to create a system of poor relief. The Mar-Priest tracts repeatedly contrast the Independents and Baptists in the army, whom he believed primarily responsible for parliamentarian victories, with the presbyterians in parliament and the City, who are represented rather paradoxically as war profiteers who were eager to capitulate to the king. In 'Martin's Eccho' Overton became the first of the future Levellers to raise the issue of the soldiers' arrears of pay, foreshadowing the attempt to forge a Leveller-agitator alliance in 1647. The Mar-Priest tracts mark an important stage in Overton's intellectual development. They are still primarily concerned with issues affecting Overton and his fellow sectaries, but they also introduce the basic elements of his later political theory. He repudiated any notion of rule by divine right, and he asserted that all legitimate political authority is held as a 'trust' from the people. Overton, however, did not as yet give an elaborate exposition of his political theory or detail any of the practical constitutional arrangements that would be necessary to ensure that political authorities would not betray the people's trust. 
Overton may have developed a more secular political outlook by September 1645, if he was the author of 'Englands Miserie and Remedy'. There is, however, no firm evidence for Overton's authorship of this pamphlet, but it is possible that he was the author of 'Englands Birth-Right Justifed' (1645), a pamphlet often attributed to John Lilburne. This tract is of some historical importance, since it gives for the first time a fairly full statement of what became the Leveller programme. The author calls for the abolition of tithes, monopolies, and the excise; all taxation should be by way of 'subsidy' (a tax on wealth). Arbitrary imprisonment is to be abolished, no one is to be forced to testify against themselves, and all laws should be written in English. Lawyers and anyone holding a paid state office were to be excluded from parliament, and parliament itself should meet and if necessary be elected on an annual basis. 
Overton was probably the author of a number of anonymous pamphlets published early in 1646, beginning with 'The Last Warning to All the Inhabitants of London', a call for democratic reform of the City government. The pamphlet warns against compromise with the king, condemns the presbyterians' intolerance, and shows traces of the anti-Scottish sentiments which were prominent in Overton's later works. It was condemned by the Commons on 22 March; the printer William Larner was arrested and a number of pamphlets were seized, including 'The Afflicted Christian Justified' and 'Divine Light', which show traces of Overton's style. More doubtful attributions to Overton at this time include 'The Interest of England Maintained' and 'A Pearle in a Dunghill' (otherwise ascribed to Henry Marten and William Walwyn respectively). 
Overton was almost certainly sole or part author of 'A Remonstrance of many Thousand Citizens' (1646), which is widely regarded as the founding manifesto of the Levellers. The 'Remonstrance' attacks the presbyterian-dominated Commons for merely attempting to substitute their own tyranny for that of the king; more significantly, it marks a shift to republicanism in attacking kingship as such rather than Charles I's conduct of the office. Nevertheless, Overton does not seem to have been a republican on principle, and in his later works he veered from expressions of qualified support for monarchy to outright republicanism in accordance with the exigencies of the current situation. The 'Remonstrance' also expounded what was to become a favourite theme in subsequent Leveller propaganda: the theory of the Norman yoke (that the English had enjoyed full constitutional liberty before the Norman conquest, and that William the Conqueror and all his successors were tyrannical usurpers). The programme suggested in the 'Remonstrance' is simply an expanded version of that offered in 'Englands Birth-Right Justified'; its underlying political theory is substantially the same as that of the Mar-Priest tracts, but developed at greater length. 
In July 1646 Overton published 'An Alarum to the House of Lords', which was condemned by the House of Commons on 4 August. He was subsequently arrested at his Southwark home in a dawn raid on 11 August, while his wife was recovering from having given birth to their youngest child. Overton attempted to escape but was captured by a party of musketeers waiting outside and robbed of his money before being led away. A number of manuscripts were seized, including that of 'The Last Warning', 'A propheticall warning and sounding of the trumpet', and a treatise on baptism and the Lord's supper; if this last was the work of Overton himself, it clearly suggests that despite his politicization he continued to be interested in purely theological issues. After his arrest Overton was taken before a committee of the House of Lords chaired by the earl of Essex, refusing to answer any questions on the basis that no one should be forced to testify against themselves. As a consequence he was committed to Newgate for contempt. 
While in Newgate, Overton may have written 'Liberty Vindicated Against Slavery' (a pamphlet usually attributed to Lilburne, despite his own disclaimer). This tract calls for comprehensive prison reform, a theme which was prominent in Overton's other writings. Gaolers should be forbidden to charge fees from their prisoners, and were instead to be paid a salary by the state; prisoners were no longer to be expected to maintain themselves, but were to be provided with food and bedding at the state's expense. Imprisonment for debt was to be abolished, and prisons themselves were to be institutions purely for the remand of prisoners awaiting trial. 
In September 1646 Overton published the first of his signed Leveller tracts, 'A Defiance Against All Arbitrary Usurpations', calling for the removal of all tyrants, whether 'Royall, Lordly or Clericall'. This was followed in October by 'An Arrow Against All Tyrants', a pamphlet which completed Overton's contribution to political theory. It restated his theory of political trusteeship, but it also developed one of the earliest statements of what has been called the theory of 'possessive individualism', a theory which was later to be expounded by John Locke and which became central to eighteenth-century political thought. Overton argued that everyone possesses a 'self-propriety' or right of property in their own person. This self-propriety was inalienable and it formed the basis of all other political rights. 
On 3 November 1646 Overton appealed to a Commons' committee for protecting the liberties of the subject, chaired by the republican Henry Marten. The committee found him guilty of nothing, but nevertheless recommitted him to Newgate. Overton refused to co-operate, and his gaolers were forced to carry him, beating him along the way. His copy of Coke's 'Institutes' was confiscated, and he was put in leg-irons. 
Overton may have collaborated with Henry Marten on 'Vox plebis' (1646), and later that month he published 'An Unhappy Game of Scotch and English', a savage attack on the Scottish presbyterians which the Commons condemned to be burned on 30 November. He was also the probable author of 'Regall Tyrannie Discovered', published in January 1647 (often attributed to Lilburne, despite his own disclaimer), the first Leveller pamphlet to call for the execution of the king. The Lords condemned this pamphlet as treasonous, ordering the arrest of anyone involved in its publication. On 6 January officers of the Stationers' Company raided Overton's house where they discovered his wife and his brother Thomas stitching copies of the offending pamphlet. Mary and Thomas were arrested and taken before the Lords where they refused to answer interrogatories. As a result Thomas and Mary, accompanied by her six-month-old baby, were consigned on the same day to Maiden Lane prison; Mary's three older children were left in the care of Overton's sister and brother-in-law. On the following day a second raid was mounted in search of Overton's sister and her husband, but both escaped. Overton condemned the treatment of his family in 'The Commoners Complaint' (1647), describing how on 7 January the Lords ordered his wife, a 'poore little harmlesse innocent woman' with a 'tender Babe on her breast' (p. 18), to 'be cast into the most infamous Goale of 'Bride-well', that common Centre and receptacle of bauds, whores, and strumpets' (p. 17). When Mary refused to obey the order she was 'drag'd... headlong upon the stones in all the dirt and mire of the streetes, with the poore Infant still crying and mourning in her Armes... and all the way as they went, utterly to defame and render her infamous... the fellowes which dragged... her on two Cudgels, calling her 'Strumpet' and vild ['sic'] 'Whore'... a sufficient matter to blast her reputation for ever... and this is the honour that their Lordships are pleased to conferre on the free Commoners wives who stand for their Freedoms and Liberties. ('Commoners Complaint', 1647, 19-20)' In March Overton drew up 'The Humble Appeale and Petition of Mary Overton' on his wife's behalf, a pamphlet which was more an attack on the Lords and Commons than an appeal for clemency. Mary herself petitioned the Lords privately in April, by which time her infant child had died. 
In February Overton and Lilburne collaborated on 'The Out-Cryes of the Oppressed Commons', arguing that arbitrary government had dissolved the social contract and returned the people to a state of nature, enabling them legitimately to draw up a new constitution. The Commons' refusal to hear petitions was condemned, and the right of petitioning was to be a prominent concern of Overton's subsequent writings; as presbyterian critics were to note, Overton and other Levellers tended to reduce parliament's proper role to that of ratifying mass petitions, provided they had been openly and fully debated. 
In March 1647 the Levellers began their major petitioning campaign with the circulation of the large petition; a number of Levellers were subsequently arrested. In April Overton published 'A New Found Stratagem', which vigorously defended the right of petitioning parliament. This pamphlet was primarily addressed to the army, and its distribution among the soldiery led to the arrest of two officers. 'A New Found Stratagem' voiced the grievances that were coalescing in the agitator movement; the presbyterian plan to disband the New Model Army should be abandoned and the soldiers should receive their arrears of pay. It also made the first tentative appeal to the army to become the arbiter of revolution. 
Overton renewed his call for the army to intervene in the affairs of the nation in 'An Appeale from the Degenerate Representative Body' (1647), which explicitly called for the House of Commons to be purged of its 'putrified and corrupt members'. Apart from attempting to forge closer links between the Levellers and the New Model's agitator organization, this pamphlet also demonstrates the flexibility of Overton's political strategy, since it contains a remarkable passage calling on the nation to rise up and free the king from his parliamentary captors. It also develops Overton's theory of law, the legitimacy of which derives from its conformity with 'common equity and right reason' rather than on the legislative body that enacts it. Overton's appeal to reason has been widely misinterpreted as evidence of his rationalism; his concept of reason, like that of other General Baptists, in fact has mystical overtones, virtually identifying it with the spirit of God working in the human soul. 
At the end of the 'Appeale' Overton appended 'Certain articles for the good of the common wealth', in effect a first draft of the series of constitutions proposed by the Levellers between November 1647 and May 1649. Legislative authority was to reside in a single elected chamber, members of which were to be supervised by county commissioners throughout their term of office. The law was to be administered in monthly or twice-monthly hundredal courts, the officers of which were to be elected. All laws were to be written in English and there was to be full equality before the law. Prisons were to be reformed along the lines already suggested in 'Liberty Vindicated Against Slavery', but with specific recommendations for alternatives to the purely punitive function of prisons. A first offence of theft was to be punished by forced labour, with thieves compensating their victims; a second offence would result in branding, and a sentence of 'perpetual servitude' was to be imposed on anyone offending for a third time. Overton also makes a number of economic and social recommendations, including the throwing open of enclosures, a rural grievance which attracted little attention among the Levellers. Monopolies were to be abolished and there was to be complete freedom of trade. There were to be no tithes and glebe lands were to be used to finance 'hospitals' (for the poor rather than the sick). A system of schools should be established throughout the country to ensure basic literacy for all 'the free men of England'. 
Overton was released from prison on 16 September 1647, and from early November he and Lilburne were reported to be involved in a series of City meetings with army agitators at The Mouth in Aldersgate Street and the Windmill Tavern in Coleman Street. He also accompanied Lilburne to Ware in Hertfordshire on 15 November, in the vicinity of the Leveller-inspired mutiny at Corkbush Field. After the failure of the mutiny there is no certain information about Overton until April 1648, when the agitators were renewing their efforts to gain control of the army; on 18 April Overton consulted the astrologer William Lilly, asking for advice on whether or not to support the agitators. 
Overton may have contributed to the Leveller petition of 18 January 1648 and may have written 'The Mournfull Cryes of Many Thousand Poore Tradesmen' (1648), both of which express the lively sympathy for the poor which can be found in his other writings. Throughout 1648 there is an apparent decline in his literary output. This may reflect disillusionment on his part, or he may have been devoting his energies to committee work for the Leveller organization, which was acquiring a more formal structure at this time. The Levellers also established their own newspaper, 'The Moderate', in July 1648, and several of the paper's leaders between October 1648 and April 1649 have been attributed to Overton. These leaders are more radical than contemporary writings by other Leveller leaders, but are consistent with Overton's known opinions. Whereas Lilburne opposed the trial and execution of the king, for example, Overton and the editor of 'The Moderate' supported it as necessary for securing English liberties. 'The Moderate''s editorials at this time are also characterized by an emphasis on the economic grievances of the people. 
On 14 December 1648 Overton was at Whitehall during the debate between army grandees, Levellers, and City Independents concerning the settlement of the nation through a Leveller-inspired constitution, the 'Agreement of the People'. The specific question on that day was what power, if any, the representative should have over religious matters. Overton and Lilburne withdrew after the first session, having been under the impression that the content of the 'Agreement', including a clause denying the magistrate any power in the religious sphere, had been agreed at earlier discussions. Although their Leveller colleagues Walwyn and John Wildman chose to attend the debate on 18 December, the discussions at Whitehall ended in failure for the Levellers. On 28 December Lilburne and Overton were among a Leveller deputation that delivered a petition to General Fairfax, protesting at the officers' alteration of the 'Agreement', published the same day as 'A Plea for Common Right and Freedom'. 
While Oliver Cromwell and his allies were overthrowing the monarchy in January 1649 the Levellers as a whole remained puzzlingly quiescent, but on 3 March Overton published a 'Humble Petition' in which he commended the purging of parliament and execution of the king, while at the same time condemning the new council of state. Following the court martial of five troopers for organizing a petition critical of the new military regime, Overton mounted a more vigorous attack in 'The Hunting of the Foxes' (March), warning that Cromwell was simply aspiring to replace the old monarchy with 'a new regality'. 
On 24 March 1649 Lilburne published 'The Second Part of Englands New-Chaines Discovered', and the Rump Parliament declared its supposed authors to be guilty of high treason; as a consequence, Lilburne, Overton, Walwyn, and Thomas Prince were arrested on 28 March. The prisoners were taken before the council of state and, after refusing to answer any questions, dispatched to the Tower. In April Lilburne, Overton, and Prince recounted the story of their arrest and interrogation in 'The Picture of the Councel of State'. In his contribution Overton states that an unfinished manuscript of a treatise called 'Gods word confirmed by his works' was seized; his account of this text suggests that it was a fairly typical specimen of natural theology, attempting to prove the truth of Christian revelation on the basis of natural phenomena. 
All four Leveller prisoners subscribed a 'Manifestation' on 14 April (probably written by Walwyn), calling for a third and final 'Agreement of the People'; this was duly published on 1 May, again subscribed by all four men. A month later Overton and Lilburne published a joint protest against the execution of a parliamentarian soldier, Robert Lockyer, for his part in a small London mutiny on 24 April. 
In May 1649 another Leveller-inspired mutiny broke out at Salisbury, and was ultimately suppressed at Burford. Among the leaders of the mutiny was Henry Denne, who had been associated with Overton throughout his career as a General Baptist and Leveller. Denne earned a reprieve by issuing a denunciation of the Levellers, prompting Overton to condemn him bitterly in 'Overton's Defiance of the Act of Pardon'; he also defended himself from accusations by the Levellers based at the Whalebone Tavern that he had ceased to be politically active. The Whalebone Tavern Levellers were offended by certain remarks in this pamphlet, especially a reference to seizing the bull of Bashan (Cromwell) by his genitals. In his last signed pamphlet, 'The Baiting of the Great Bull of Bashan' (1649), Overton defended his sense of humour and condemned the Whalebone Tavern Levellers for their own cowardice and apathy. 
Overton and the other Leveller leaders were released from the Tower on 8 November 1649, following Lilburne's acquittal on charges of treason. A condition for their release was that they should take the oath of engagement to the new regime; according to a royalist satirist Overton agreed to take the engagement, adding the promise to be as faithful to his oath as the present council of state had been to the solemn league and covenant (i.e., not at all). 
Various Leveller petitions of 1650-51 have been attributed to Overton, as has 'Vox plebis' (1653), an attack on the Rump, but there is no firm evidence for these attributions. He was present at Lilburne's trial in June-August 1653. He tried unsuccessfully to secure a lawyer for Lilburne, delivered a letter to one of the judges and was part of a deputation presenting a petition to parliament on Lilburne's behalf. 
In December 1653 Overton was paid $20 by Cromwell's secretary of state, John Thurloe. This may have been in connection with Edward Sexby's mission to the Huguenots in Bordeaux, but the evidence also suggests that Overton was by this time acting as a double agent. On 6 September 1654 Overton again offered his services to Thurloe in connection with a conspiracy against the government. Shortly afterwards a plot led by Wildman and Sexby was discovered; Sexby fled to Amsterdam, where he was joined by Overton in February 1655. While in Holland, Overton and Sexby entered into a conspiracy with Sir Marmaduke Langdale and other exiled royalists. The plot collapsed in November, apparently because of Sexby's republicanism; Langdale reported that Overton himself was more favourable to the king's cause. 
Overton subsequently returned to England and lodged with Colonel William Wetton in Bedford Street, London, in 1655. It was at this time that he published the revised version of his mortalist treatise, 'Man Wholly Mortal'. He may have taken part in the republican campaign for the good old cause in 1659, but none of the pamphlets attributed to him at that time belongs unquestionably in his 'oeuvre'. He was, however, imprisoned for some unspecified offence in 1659, and the restored Rump ordered an investigation of his committal on 30 December. In 1662 Overton was living in Kennington, but he had moved by the time that a new warrant for his arrest was issued on 22 October 1663. It is not known why this warrant was issued, but the simultaneous order for the arrest of the radical publisher Elizabeth Calvert suggests that it may have been on account of subversive publications; alternatively, it may simply have been as part of the general crack-down on known radicals following the Derwentside plot. No other direct evidence on Overton's life exists, but unsold copies of 'Man Wholly Mortal' were reissued with a new title-page in 1674. No more is heard of Mary Overton by name after 1647, but in a letter of 13 September 1655 Overton mentioned his intention of going to Rotterdam to meet his wife. 
Overton played a decisive role in the Leveller's history although on occasions he was as much an embarrassment as an asset; both opponents and some fellow-Levellers criticized the vulgarity of his humour, and there were rumours that he led a sexually dissolute life. Accounts of the Levellers have concentrated on Lilburne's role and tended to neglect that of Overton, but it was Overton who may have been primarily responsible for publishing their first full and coherent programmes. He was also significant in giving greater emphasis than his fellow-Levellers to social and economic policy in his programmatic statements. He was particularly concerned with the abolition of imprisonment for debt, the reform of the poor relief system, and the establishment of a national education system. He was also one of the few Levellers to address such rural grievances as enclosure, calling for a redistribution of land. Overton is rightly regarded as the Levellers' principal theoretician, since his writings contain the fullest and most coherent exploration of the philosophical basis of the Leveller programme. Overton also seems to have played a leading role in devising the Levellers' strategy of attempting to make the army an instrument for implementing the Leveller programme between 1647 and 1649. 


@@@@@


doc= 20975


Overton, Robert (1608/9-1678/9), parliamentarian army officer, was the son and heir of John Overton and Joan Snawsell, daughter of Robert Snawsell of Bilton and his wife, Anne Waters. John Overton of Easington was a landed gentleman in south-east Yorkshire, where Overtons had lived for generations. During the second civil war royalists imprisoned John Overton for twenty-two weeks and seized his personal estate. Nevertheless his will, proved in 1654, indicates that he retained substantial possessions and his numerous bequests included daughter, daughter-in-law, and many grandchildren. 
Robert Overton matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1627 and was admitted at Gray's Inn in 1631. In June 1632 he married Ann Gardiner (1615/16-1665), daughter of Jeremy Gardiner of Stratford Bow, Middlesex. Overton's manuscript volume, 'Gospell observations', illuminates his enduring devotion to his wife and reveals that in 1665 four daughters and three sons, including Benjamin Overton, were living. Ann Overton was a strong woman, deeply religious, ambitious, and protective. In a 1647 letter to Lord Fairfax she asked that Robert be advanced to colonel. On her deathbed, eighteen years later, she expressed contentment that Robert, 'soe tender a spirit', could not witness her suffering (Princeton University Library, MS C O 199, Overton MS, 87). 
In the first civil war Overton served with the northern army under Ferdinando, Lord Fairfax, and his son, Sir Thomas. Both Fairfaxes thought well of Overton, whose courage and skill were demonstrated during the 1643 defence of Hull where he acquitted himself 'with much honour and gallantry' (E. Ludlow, 'The Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow', ed. C. H. Firth, 2 vols., 1894, 1.65). John Milton adds that at Marston Moor, on 2 July 1644, leaders of the left wing, 'looking behind them in flight, beheld you making a stand... repelling the attacks of the enemy amid dense slaughter' ('Complete Prose Works', 4, pt 1, 676). In August 1645 Sir Thomas Fairfax was appointed governor of Pontefract and named Overton his deputy. Within weeks of assuming his post Overton conquered Sandal Castle. In the summer of 1647 Fairfax secured Overton a commission as colonel of foot in the New Model Army, and during the political debates of the army's general council Overton was appointed to committees at Reading and Putney. By March 1648 he was in Hull as Fairfax's deputy governor. Prominent townsmen and officials who were close to his predecessor considered Overton a radical and asked that he be replaced. No specific charges were cited, and he held the post intermittently until 1660. During the second war Overton remained with the garrison in Hull. One of his royalist prisoners in 1648-9 recalled him as 'a great Independent... ane enemie to monarchie, whatever name it had... a schollar, bot a little pedantic', who treated his prisoners with notable 'civilitie' (J. Turner, 'Memoirs of his Own Life and Times', 1829, 16.78-9). 
Before the defeat of the king Overton made only one known comment about his revolutionary objective. On 11 February 1648, in a letter to Fairfax's secretary, Overton expresses pleasure that the king's servants have been removed and suggests that 'it would prove a happy privation if the Father would please to dispossess him of three transitory kingdoms to infeoff him in an eternal one' ('Memorials of the Civil War', 2.10-11). There is no reason to infer that the comment was a covert plea for regicide. Neither is there any indication that Overton opposed the execution of the king eleven months later, when he remained in Hull instead of serving as a commissioner at the trial, apparently believing that it was more important to be with his garrison at a critical time. 
Overton was apprehensive about the impending settlement of the state. Three weeks before the king's execution he addressed a letter to Fairfax that accompanied an eloquent 'Declaration' from the officers of the garrison. Letter and 'Declaration' are distinguished by the compelling style and vivid metaphors that are found throughout Overton's writings. After a preliminary address to Fairfax that recalls the council of officers' November 'Remonstrance' -- 'with every tittle whereof we totally comply' -- the 'Declaration' reviews grievances, notes the promises of the previous six years, and condemns the 'corrupted party' in the Commons ('The Declaration of the Officers of the Garrison of Hull', 1 March 1649, 4, 15); Overton's letter is dated 9 January. The final six pages delineate a settlement similar to proposals in the 'Remonstrance': a speedy end to the present parliament; a succession of free biennial parliaments with an equitable distribution of seats; future kings elected by the people's representatives and having no negative voice; a 'universal and mutual Agreement,... enacted and decreed, 'in perpetuum'', that asserts that the power of parliament is 'inferior only to that of the people' (ibid., 16). Overton's letter reflects his belief that there is little likelihood that the 'corrupt Commons' will effect these reforms. He asks that, 'in this last act of our Age', Fairfax lead the army, resolved 'rather to perish with your honest officers and souldiers, then otherwise to enjoy the Genius of a temporall happinesse'. It is Overton's only known proposal for violent action to accomplish 'remonstrated principle' (ibid., 2-3). 
Five months later, in a letter appended to his regiment's 'Remonstrance' denying any association with Leveller uprisings, Overton deplores 'divisions and distractions' that would have 'destroyed us' but for the goodness of God. Overton pledges obedience to parliament and the army, 'yet ever with such due Reservations as tended to the keeping sacred and inviolable my particular and private Trust, which... I purpose never to part withall' ('The Humble Remonstrance... of Col. Overton's Regiment... with Colonel Overton's Letter to the General', 5 June 1649, 6, 7). 
In the summer of 1650 Overton joined Cromwell's campaign in Scotland. He led his brigade in the battle at Dunbar on 3 September, and after the occupation of Edinburgh Cromwell departed, leaving Overton as governor. In July 1651 Overton led his troops across the Firth of Forth and when Perth surrendered he became governor there. He was with Lieutenant-General Monck when Dundee surrendered and in November was governor of Aberdeen. In February 1652, after marching north, Overton established a garrison in the Orkneys before returning to Fife as sheriff. By June he was in the west, and in December he was advanced to major-general and commander of all the forces in western Scotland. Overton evinced military and administrative skills throughout his thirty months in Scotland where 'Scots of the West and North' described him as 'a most humane foe,... a merciful conqueror' (Milton, 'Complete Prose Works', 4, pt, 1, 676). 
When Overton returned to Yorkshire in February 1653 he possessed considerable property. He had recently succeeded to his father's Easington estate; in 1652 parliament had voted him $400 p.a. in Scottish lands; in 1651 he had paid over $7000 for the confiscated crown fee farm rent of the manor of Holderness. He resumed his post as governor of Hull, and when Cromwell forcibly dismissed the Rump Parliament, Overton and the garrison responded with a pamphlet consisting of two letters to Cromwell that were devoid of the apocalyptic prophecies that marked many addresses of the time. The second letter offered 'free and hearty Concurrence' with the dissolution, rejected any 'meddling with State matters', and urged Cromwell to employ 'religion, reason, and resolution' in settling the state ('More Hearts and Hands Appearing for the Work', 7 June 1653, 3, 5, 6). 
The collapse of Barebone's Parliament in December was followed by the establishment of the protectorate. Again Overton was apprehensive. Cromwell had approved of Overton during the first civil war and in Scotland, and in the spring of 1654 Overton met him before returning to Scotland. Overton assured the protector that he would serve him loyally unless 'I perceived his lordship did only design the setting up of himself, and not the good of these nations'. Should the latter occur, Overton promised Cromwell that 'I could not set one foot before another to serve him'. Cromwell replied: 'Thou wert a knave, if thou wouldst' (Thurloe, 3.110). Overton repeated his pledge to Monck when he arrived in Scotland. 
In December officers in Overton's Aberdeen headquarters sent letters announcing a meeting in Edinburgh to consider whether the army had been faithful to its duty 'to assert the freedomes of the people in the priviledges of parliament' (Thurloe, 3.29-30). Overton's involvement in the plan was not clear, but, in addition to the doubts he had admitted to Cromwell, before leaving London Overton had met with John Wildman who was conspiring with dissident colonels to attack the foundations of the protectorate. More immediately, Overton had not informed Monck of political dissension among his officers. He was sent to London and committed to the Tower. No hard evidence of his participation in any conspiracy was ever advanced, but he was held for more than four years without trial, charge, or, after his transfer to Jersey, right of habeas corpus. It is not unlikely that respect for Overton's ability and fear of his appeal as an opposition leader played a major role in his imprisonment. 
In February 1659 Commonwealthsmen in Richard Cromwell's parliament responded to a petition from Overton's sister by demanding his appearance for a hearing. On 16 March Overton addressed the house, asserting that he hoped that he had 'not done anything contrary to what I at first engaged, and fought for'. He was released the same day ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 4.150-61). Seven weeks later the protectorate fell, and in June the re-empowered Rump restored all Overton's commands and named a committee to review indemnity. 
Overton supported the returned republic as the best available expedient, but as the Rump's weaknesses became increasingly apparent he again envisioned government by godly men. His name is among the twenty signatures to 'An Essay toward Settlement', a broadsheet petition published by 19 September 1659. The petition includes demands for liberty of conscience and no state church, reform of the ministry and the law in accordance with scripture, and government by 'men of courage, fearing God, and hating Covetousness'. Although twelve signers, including Overton, have been termed Fifth Monarchy Men (B. Capp, 'The Fifth Monarchy Men', 1972, 126), the appeal does not include millenarian predictions and reflects the aspirations of the many revolutionaries who believed in the efficacy of rule by godly men. In October Overton and his officers refused to support an address to parliament in which the council of officers demanded that, except for disbandment, no officer or soldier be dismissed except by court martial. The house cashiered the nine officers who promoted the address and named Overton one of the seven commissioners in charge of the army. The next day troops of the cashiered officers closed the house and took over the government. 
Monck, who also had rejected the cashiered officers' address, responded to the lock-out by declaring for parliament and preparing to march south. He asked Overton and other commanders for support, and although no direct reply from Overton to Monck has been found, in early November Overton published an impassioned appeal for a peaceful settlement in accordance with God's purpose. 'The Humble and Healing Advice... to Charles Lord Fleetwood and General Monck' contends that the Lord has been forced to 'overturn and overturn' governments because none has conformed with 'what we professe'. Fleetwood and Monck are urged to come together; 'otherwise... another overturne will suddenly overtake you'. Should this occur, Overton will endeavour to secure the peace of Hull and support the settlement that has the most 'superscription of Christ upon it' ('The Humble and Healing Advice', n.d., 2, 6). 
On 1 January 1660, six days after the Rump returned, Monck's forces crossed the Tweed, and within a fortnight Monck and Overton agreed that they stood together against those who would 'bring in the Common Enimie' ('Clarke Papers', 4.244-7). Monck's readmission of the excluded members of the house on 21 February assured the return of the 'Enimie'. Reports soon reached Monck about Overton's dissemination among Yorkshire troops of an incendiary letter expressing hope that soldiers would concur in defence of the 'Good Old Cause against... a King and Single Person' (Baker, 753). Monck named a new governor of Hull and ordered Overton to London. Overton recognized defeat and reached London on 18 March. 
Overton was not excluded from the restored monarch's act of pardon, but more than half of his remaining years were passed in prison. In December 1660 he was among those seized to forestall a 'damnable Plot' ('Mercurius Publicus', 13-20 Dec 1660, 810-11) which, if it existed, was never disclosed. Overton was moved from the Tower to Chepstow in November 1661 and at some point thereafter he gained his freedom, for in May 1663 he was again arrested on suspicion of seditious practices; as before he was not tried, and in January 1664 he was again sent to Jersey. He was confined on the island until his release to his brother-in-law, Thomas Gardiner, in December 1671. 
Overton spent the last years of his life with his daughter, Anne Broughton, and her husband in Seaton, Rutland. The will that Overton signed on 23 June 1678, which was proved on 29 January 1679, states that he had been well attended during 'my long sickness' (TNA: PRO, PROB/11/359, sig. 8). He was buried in New Church Yard, Moorfields in London. His apostate son and heir, John, who succeeded to the Easington property, is not mentioned in the will, and except for books, manuscripts, and other effects, Overton's personal estate was divided between two other sons. No figures are given, but if he retained the property he had in 1653, he left a substantial estate. 
The manuscripts that Overton bequeathed to two daughters included a 360-page volume, 'Gospell observations & religious manifestations, &c', that is primarily prose and poetic tributes to his wife, who died in 1665. The first section of the manuscript, except for the last entry, consists of prose maxims that may have been written before Ann Overton's death. Among them are segments that clarify Overton's political convictions and religious tolerance. A deeply religious Independent, Overton believed that no profession of piety should be despised. He questions 'incongruetyes & contradictions' of the Fifth Monarchy Men but finds their essential creed 'comfortable', as he approves aspects of the papists, protestants, puritans, and Quakers (Princeton University Library, MS C O 199, Overton MS, 42). The political segment highlights Overton's persistent realism. However disappointed with successive revolutionary governments, he served them as existent obstacles to monarchy. In custody after the king's Restoration, he advised potential rebels to submit to any expedient power. There is no evidence that he had abandoned his vision; he may have concluded that a moral state governed by godly men is the province of the Lord. 
Throughout the interregnum Overton's commitment to his 'particular and private Trust' ('The Declaration of the Officers of the Garrison of Hull', Overton's letter, 1649) diminished the intensity of his support for existing polities, which aroused concern among authorities aware of his abilities and always fearful of effective opposition. Royalists approached Overton, Levellers claimed him, and after 1660 he was imprisoned amid rumours of anti-monarchical plots. In fact, while Overton sympathized with Leveller views of justice, he was a political individualist, true to his vision of an ideal state. No hard evidence involved him in the plans of any radical activists. A proficient soldier and administrator, Overton was also a learned man who inspired respect and affection. For many years he was close to Milton, linked 'with a more than fraternal harmony, by reason of the likeness of our tastes and the sweetness of your disposition' ('Complete Prose Works', 4, pt 1, 676). Overton's gentle spirit and enduring faith protected him from bitterness as he retained confidence in the belief he professed when first imprisoned. Quoting St Peter, ''There are given to us exceeding great and pretious promises'', Overton concludes: 'If in patience we possess our spirits, we shall inherit the promises' (Thurloe, 3.112). 


@@@@@


doc= 20976


Overton, William (1524/5?-1609), bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, is said by Wood to have been born in London and to have been elected a demy of Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1539, aged fifteen. He is reported elsewhere to have been first educated at Glastonbury Abbey. If the identification is correct Overton had migrated to Christ Church by 1547, when he graduated BA. He became a fellow of Magdalen in 1551, and proceeded MA on 8 July 1553, BTh on 16 February 1566, and DTh two days later. In 1552 he contributed verses to the volume commemorating the second and third dukes of Suffolk, both recently dead in their teens. There is no record of his ordination, but he was preferred in 1553 to the rectory of Balcombe, Sussex, and the vicarage of Eccleshall, Staffordshire, suggesting that he absented himself from Oxford at this time. In 1555 he was made rector of Swinnerton, Staffordshire. He does not appear to have gone into exile under Mary, though no doubt he kept a low profile, but following the accession of Elizabeth he acquired a number of prestigious livings. On 13 November 1559 he was presented by the crown to the canonry of the second prebend in Winchester Cathedral, and the rectories of Upham, Nursling, and Exton, all in Hampshire, and that of Cotton, Suffolk, soon followed. On 14 July 1561 he was collated to the prebend of Hova Villa in Chichester Cathedral. 
The signs are that Overton was quick to cultivate the patronage of Lord Robert Dudley, from 1564 earl of Leicester. When Queen Elizabeth visited Oxford with Dudley in 1564 Overton took a large part in her reception, and participated in disputations held before her. On 22 May 1571 he declared to Leicester that he was his 'owne chapleyne, or at least wise the Queen's Majestie's chapleyn by your only meanes put and preferred unto her' (De Lisle and Dudley papers, Baskerville transcript, 1.237). Presumably Leicester's favour not only helped Overton to become treasurer of Chichester (6 May 1567) and prebendary of Yatesbury in Salisbury Cathedral (24 May 1570), but also enabled him to build upon his existing connections with the diocese of Coventry and Lichfield, where he became rector of Stoke-on-Trent and of Hanbury. 
Overton earned himself an unsavoury reputation in some quarters, partly thanks to his ambitions for himself and his family. He married twice, on both occasions forging alliances useful for an ecclesiastical career. His first wife, whom he married about 1566, was Margaret (died 1601), daughter of William Barlow, bishop of Chichester, a connection which brought him increasing prominence in that diocese, both as treasurer and vicar-general. When Barlow died on 13 August 1568 Overton immediately wrote to Sir William Cecil recommending William Day, provost of Eton and another of the late bishop's sons-in-law, as Barlow's successor, as one 'noted among all for learning and piety' (BL, Add. MS 6346, fol. 45). Richard Curteys, however, was consecrated to the see on 21 May 1570. Overton then became the focus for an anti-Curteys faction within the cathedral chapter which threatened to wreck the new bishop's hopes of reform. Curteys sought to bypass Overton's opposition by packing the cathedral chapter, and a conflict developed which reached a crisis in July 1573 when the bishop's faction held an extraordinary chapter meeting and conducted business in the absence of a quorum. Overton's faction succeeded in forcing Curteys to promulgate new statutes preventing such abuses, but the victory was more apparent than real. 
Overton was consecrated bishop of Coventry and Lichfield on 18 September 1580, presumably at the instigation of Leicester. He received a bad press from twentieth-century historians for grovelling to the queen, blaming the economic plight of the diocese on Thomas Bentham, his predecessor, and depleting the resources of an already impoverished see through an extravagant lifestyle. It is certainly true that he made several long leases to the crown and demised the manor of Lichfield to Elizabeth in perpetuity, while like many Elizabethan bishops he was said to have felled excessive amounts of timber on the episcopal estates. More damningly his letters suggest that he was prepared to do whatever his patron Leicester might require: 'I am your chapleyn of olde; I have been alwaies servisable at your commandment; I have been plyable to your letters and suytes; I have ben and am in case both able and ready to do you honor if you will use me. (De Lisle and Dudley papers, Baskerville transcript, 1.237)' It may have been distaste for Overton's evident dependence on Leicester which led Cecil (now Baron Burghley) to denounce him in Elizabeth's presence for ordaining unworthy men to the priesthood for personal gain. 
That charge remains unproven. It would have been impossible to staff the underfunded livings of Coventry and Lichfield without ordaining non-graduates, and there is no particular evidence to suggest that Overton was indiscriminate or irresponsible in this respect. He is, moreover, credited with being genial, hospitable (an element in the episcopal equation which weighed heavily with Elizabeth), and good to the poor. There is also evidence that he kept his episcopal residences in good repair. The jibes of Martin Marprelate that he was ignorant and unlearned are in direct contravention of the known facts of Overton's university career and his frequent appearances in the pulpit. They also fly in the face of his known preference for radical preachers of whom Marprelate must have approved. He granted preaching licences to Arthur Hildersham and William Bradshaw, lent his support to clerical exercises in Burton upon Trent and Southam, and allowed preachers like William Axton of Moreton Corbett to continue their activities despite their nonconformity. 
Overton also appointed the reforming civil lawyer John Becon as chancellor of Lichfield and was prepared to defend his activities to Archbishop Whitgift and others who criticized them. Becon's 'Certain advertisements' of 1584 would have associated the bishop, the chancellor, and certain selected preachers in examining ordinands and presentees to livings, and introduced an element of parish approval in the case of the latter, thus accommodating criticism of an authoritarian system in which the diocesan merely rubber-stamped presentations by ecclesiastical patrons. But Becon seems to have played little part in running the diocese and quarrelled with Overton at an early stage. By October 1583 the bishop had appointed Zachary Babington to be Becon's coadjutor as chancellor, so initiating a running battle between the two men which ended before Star Chamber, the privy council, and the archbishop of Canterbury. Matters were resolved only by Becon's death in 1587. 
The fact nevertheless remains that with regard to the revenues of his see Overton appears to have been quarrelsome, aggressive, litigious, and possibly downright dishonest. He failed in his attempts to resume rights to property by legal process against Lord Paget and the city of Lichfield, among others. If that strategy had long-term beneficial consequences for the see it had immediate consequences for himself. He estimated that in the first year of his episcopate litigation had cost him $740 and appearances before most of the major courts of the land. Perhaps more significantly it has been suggested that his tactics alienated his principal patron, Leicester, prevented his further promotion, and led to his humiliation in his own diocese. His dealings with the exchequer over his first fruits for the bishopric and annual taxes thereafter are complex to the point of incomprehensibility. 
Little else can be said of Overton's twenty-nine years as bishop except that in 1600 he made a personal visitation of his diocese. If in the last analysis contemporary accounts of his corruption, venality, and nepotism seem well founded -- some of his grants to his son Plasted were rejected by the Lichfield chapter -- he might nevertheless also be seen as a forward-looking entrepreneur who seized opportunities to supplement the revenues of his diocese. He was responsible for bringing glass-making to Staffordshire, having as a canon of Chichester become acquainted with several leading Huguenot glass-making families. They apparently followed him to Buckholt, near Salisbury, when he became a canon there in 1570, and then to Eccleshall, after his appointment to Coventry and Lichfield. He fuelled their furnaces with timber from his own estates and the industry proved highly profitable locally. 
Margaret Overton died in 1601 and (although by then seventy-six) the bishop soon remarried. His second wife was Mary, daughter of Edmund and Elizabeth Bradocke of Adbaston Hall, a few miles west of Eccleshall. Mary was related to the earls of Shrewsbury through her maternal grandmother, Dorothy Talbot, and Overton was not slow to make use of the connection. He designed an elaborate, highly coloured tomb for himself in Holy Trinity Church, Eccleshall, near his country palace, bearing his effigy and with a Latin epitaph stating that he had erected it for himself in 1603 'in the hope of resurrection' (monument). Overton died on 9 April 1609 and was duly buried at Eccleshall. Nothing is known of the life of his widow or of any surviving children. 


@@@@@


doc= 20977


Owain ab Edwin (d. 1105), ruler in Wales, was the son of Edwin ap Gronw (a descendant of Owain ap Hywel Dda, according to some late genealogies) of Tegeingl, a north-eastern cantref between the Dee and the Clwyd, and Iwerydd, daughter of Cynfyn ap Gwerystan. His father is thought to be the Edwinus who held lands in Tegeingl and south-west Cheshire, both before 1066 and at the time of the 'Domesday' survey, and was probably the most important Welshman at this time in Tegeingl. To this position Owain probably succeeded about 1090. 
In 1098, Hugh d'Avranches, earl of Chester, and Hugh de Montgomery, earl of Shrewsbury, were aided by Owain and his brother Uchdryd in their invasion of Anglesey. Following the resulting flight of Gruffudd ap Cynan and Cadwgan ap Bleddyn to Ireland, it is possible that Owain's position was strengthened. Indeed, when the men of Gwynedd rose against the Normans later in the same year, it was Owain who led the revolt against his erstwhile lord the earl of Chester. However, Gruffudd and Cadwgan returned from Ireland in 1099 and made peace with the Normans, receiving back parts of their former territories. Owain, who was probably no longer of use to the Normans, disappears from the picture, though his brother Uchdryd was still active in 1118. Owain died in 1105, after a long illness. His wife was Morwyl ferch Ednywain Bendew. Some of his sons founded families of note in Tegeingl, but were all themselves killed in inter-dynastic or intra-familial strife: Llywarch in 1118, Gronw, Rhirid, and Meilyr in 1125 by their nephew Cadwallon ap Gruffudd ap Cynan, and Cynwrig in 1139 by Madog ap Maredudd of Powys. Owain's daughter Angharad was the wife of Gruffudd ap Cynan. 


@@@@@


doc= 20978


Sir Owain ap Cadwgan (d. 1116), son of Cadwgan ap Bleddyn and an unidentified mother, destroyed Gerald of Windsor's castle at Cenarth Bychan after Christmas 1109 (or 1108) and abducted Gerald's wife, Nest (b. before 1092, d. c.1130), daughter of Rhys ap Tewdwr, with whom Owain subsequently had two sons. The immediate result of this action was the expulsion of Owain and his father from their lands and the flight of the former to Ireland, whence he returned in 1110 to Powys and raided Norman lands in alliance with his cousin, Madog ap Rhiryd, until they were expelled from Powys by their uncle, Iorwerth ap Bleddyn. Owain fled to Ireland again later that year after Henry I had confiscated Ceredigion from his father in reprisal for Owain's killing of the Flemish leader, William of Brabant, but was allowed to return and hold the greater part of Powys after the deaths of Iorwerth and Cadwgan in 1111. Two years later Owain blinded Madog ap Rhiryd and granted the latter's portion of Powys to Maredudd ap Bleddyn. Henry I's Welsh campaign of 1114 was directed partly against Owain, who was forced to submit to the king and accompanied him to Normandy, whence he returned, having been knighted, the following year. Owain's turbulent life ended in 1116, when he fell victim near Carmarthen to the vengeance of the Flemings of Rhos and Gerald of Windsor while campaigning at the king's behest against Gruffudd ap Rhys of Deheubarth (died 1137). 


@@@@@


doc= 20979


Owain Gwynedd (d. 1170), king of Gwynedd, was the second son of Gruffudd ap Cynan, king of Gwynedd (d. 1137), and his wife, Angharad. 
Before his father's death in 1137 Owain had already gained considerable military experience, contributing to the expansion of Gwynedd in the 1120s and 1130s. He is first mentioned together with his elder brother, Cadwallon, as leading an expedition against Meirionydd in 1124. In 1136 Owain, together with his younger brother, Cadwaladr ['see below'], led two campaigns against the Normans in Ceredigion, on the second of which they were joined by Gruffudd ap Rhys (died 1137) of Deheubarth. Since Cadwallon had been killed in 1132 in the commote of Nanheudwy, leading an attack on Powys, Owain was the eldest surviving son of Gruffudd ap Cynan on the latter's death in 1137 and succeeded to the kingdom of Gwynedd, which he ruled until his own death in 1170. In 1138 he completed the conquest of Ceredigion, which was divided between his eldest son, Hywel ab Owain, and Cadwaladr. Owain sought to continue the alliance between his dynasty and that of Deheubarth, cemented earlier by the marriage of his sister, Gwenllian, to Gruffudd ap Rhys, by arranging the betrothal of his daughter to Anarawd, Gruffudd's son and successor. However, Anarawd was murdered by Cadwaladr's men in 1143, prompting Owain to dispossess his brother of his lands, although the brothers were reconciled the following year after Cadwaladr obtained military assistance from Ireland. By 1149 Owain had resumed the policy of expansion to the north-east that had been a hallmark of the later years of his father's reign, for in that year he occupied the commote of Ial, building a castle at Tomen y Rhodwydd. His control of Ial, together with Tegeingl and Ystrad Alun, was reinforced the following year by his defeat, at Coleshill, of Madog ap Maredudd, king of Powys, and forces supplied by Ranulf (II), earl of Chester. Two events in 1152 underlined Owain's determination to maintain the territorial integrity of the kingdom of Gwynedd and to protect the interests of his branch of the royal dynasty: his brother Cadwaladr was driven from Anglesey, his last remaining lands in the kingdom, while Owain's nephew, Cunedda, son of the king's deceased elder brother, Cadwallon, was blinded and castrated. 
Owain's ambitions were checked, however, by Henry II's first campaign against Gwynedd in the summer of 1157. Although Henry suffered military reverses, particularly in the seaborne attack on Anglesey, his show of force was sufficient to persuade Owain to submit and give homage to the king, surrender his conquests in Tegeingl (where Henry built castles at Rhuddlan and Basingwerk), and restore Cadwaladr to his lands. Later in the year Owain also lost control of Ial, following the destruction of his castle at Tomen y Rhodwydd by Madog ap Maredudd's brother, Iorwerth Goch. These setbacks proved to be only temporary, however, for the opportunity for further expansion presented itself on the death of Madog ap Maredudd in 1160. Owain seems immediately to have occupied the Powys commotes of Edeirnion and Cyfeiliog and in 1162 he led a punitive raid against Hywel ab Ieuaf, ruler of Arwystli. True, Owain continued to be circumspect in his dealings with Henry II. Thus after Einion Clud, ruler of Elfael, had been handed over to the king of Gwynedd following his capture by his brother, Cadwallon ap Madog of Maelienydd, in 1160, Owain gave his prisoner into the custody of Henry, and on 1 July 1163 he gave homage to the English king at Woodstock following the latter's second Welsh campaign. However, by 1165 Owain was at the head of a Welsh alliance including the rulers of Powys and Rhys ap Gruffudd, ruler of Deheubarth, which successfully defied Henry, whose third campaign in Wales in that year was a disaster, coming to grief in August in the rain and mud of the Berwyn Mountains. Indeed from 1165 Owain was the undisputed leader of native Wales, a supremacy placarded in his adoption of the new titles, prince of Wales ('Waliarum princeps') or prince of the Welsh ('princeps Wallensium'), which replaced the title king of Wales ('rex Walliae' or 'Walliarum rex') used from possibly as early as 1140. He sought to strengthen his position by offering fealty to Louis VII, king of France, whom he urged to make war on Henry II following the latter's ill-fated Welsh campaign of 1165. In Wales, Owain resumed his expansion in the north-east, capturing Basingwerk Castle in 1166 and securing the whole of Tegeingl the following year after taking, together with Rhys ap Gruffudd, the castles of Rhuddlan (after a siege of three months) and Prestatyn. The fragility of the unity achieved by the Welsh leaders in 1165 was illustrated by another campaign in 1167 in which Owain and Cadwaladr joined Rhys in attacking the Powysian ruler Owain Cyfeiliog and capturing his castle of Tafolwern. Yet the prince of Gwynedd clearly realized that Henry II remained the greatest potential threat to his territorial gains, for Owain was doubtless one of the 'kings of Wales' who sent messengers to Louis VII in 1168 to forge a military alliance against Henry, thereby continuing the diplomatic contacts with the Capetian king established earlier in the 1160s. 
Owain's power in the last five years of his reign is also demonstrated by his successful defiance of Archbishop Thomas Becket and Pope Alexander III with regard to the vacant bishopric of Bangor and his own marriage. Owain was later praised by Gerald of Wales for his respect for churches, and it is very likely that he patronized rebuilding work at Penmon and possibly at other churches in Gwynedd. But he also demanded, and to a great extent obtained, the loyalty of the churchmen in his kingdom. However, at his consecration at Worcester in January 1140 Meurig, or Maurice, bishop of Bangor, had given fealty to King Stephen, despite having been prohibited from so doing by Simeon, archdeacon of Bangor; this probably explains why Owain protested to Bernard, bishop of St David's, that Meurig had been unlawfully intruded into the see. Yet although he was exiled for some years at the beginning of his episcopate, and again for a period in the 1150s (prompting an appeal on his behalf by Archbishop Theobald of Canterbury to the pope), Meurig remained bishop until his death on 12 August 1161. Owain was determined that any successor should not do fealty to the king of England, and exploited Becket's exile from November 1164 by requesting permission, probably in the autumn of 1165, for his own candidate to be consecrated by another bishop and also by asserting that obedience would be given to Canterbury as a favour rather than as of right. Becket refused to countenance these proposals but the candidate, Arthur of Bardsey, may nevertheless have been sent to Ireland for consecration. Although Becket enlisted papal support in his efforts to ensure the election of a bishop acceptable to him, the bishopric remained vacant (unless held by Arthur of Bardsey, who was recognized by neither archbishop nor pope) until 1177. Attempts to resolve the dispute through the mediation of Louis VII came to nothing. Indeed, by 'c'.1169 archbishop and pope had intensified their opposition to Owain by attacking his marriage to Cristin, or Christina, ferch Gronw ab Owain ab Edwin -- which had already attracted criticism from Archbishop Theobald in the mid-1150s -- on the grounds that she was the prince's cousin and thus related within the prohibited degrees of consanguinity. However, here too Owain defied his ecclesiastical opponents by refusing to separate from his wife and, although as a result of this he was excommunicated by Becket, the king of Gwynedd was nevertheless given an honourable burial in Bangor Cathedral. Gerald of Wales reports how he and Archbishop Baldwin ordered the body to be exhumed and buried in unconsecrated ground on their visit to Bangor while preaching the crusade in Wales in 1188, but it is extremely doubtful whether their instructions were heeded. 
It seems that Owain had married Cristin by 'c'.1140, for her son Dafydd was old enough to fight Henry II in 1157. Owain and Cristin had three sons and a daughter, but Owain had numerous other children with possibly as many as eight other partners, to judge by a late fifteenth-century genealogical tract. These included Iorwerth Drwyndwn, to whose mother, Gwladus ferch Llywarch ap Trahaearn, Owain appears to have been married before his marriage to Cristin, for Gerald of Wales believed Iorwerth to be Owain's only legitimate son. However, it is very likely that many of Owain's other children were the result of extramarital unions, including his eldest son, Hywel, said in the genealogical source referred to above to have been the son of an Irish woman, Ffynod (or Pyfog). Two other sons died in their father's lifetime, namely Rhun in 1146 and Llywelyn in 1165. 
Owain himself died in November 1170, probably on the 23rd, and was described (retrospectively) by the author of the Welsh chronicle 'Brut y tywysogyon' as 'a man of great renown and of infinite prudence and nobility, the bulwark and strength of Wales, unconquered from his youth' ('Brut: Hergest', 151). Although Gerald of Wales condemned Owain for his incestuous marriage, he praised him for his justice, wisdom, and moderation as a ruler; Gerald also refers, as do some charters issued in favour of Haughmond Abbey, to the prince as Owain Magnus -- 'the Great' or, perhaps, 'the Elder'. (The appellation, like Owain Gwynedd, may have served to distinguish Owain from his younger contemporary and namesake, Owain ap Gruffudd ap Maredudd of Powys, known as Owain Cyfeiliog.) The most fulsome praises of Owain Gwynedd occur in the poems to him by the court poets Gwalchmai ap Meilyr -- for whom the prince was 'the fairest of the kings of Britain and the most royal' (Gruffydd, 1/8, ll.59-60) -- and Cynddelw Brydydd Mawr: both of these emphasized that Owain possessed in abundance the military virtues deemed essential to any successful Welsh ruler of this period, and proclaimed that he was an eminently worthy successor to earlier kings of Gwynedd such as Maelgwn and Rhodri Mawr. There can be no doubt that Owain considerably strengthened his kingdom, not only preserving its territorial integrity but expanding it to embrace all of north Wales from the Dee to the Dyfi, thereby paving the way for the achievements of his grandson, Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. Although details are sparse, he may well also have undertaken important territorial reorganization and commenced the policy of endowing favoured freemen with estates in order to secure their support. However, while he seems to have contained the ambitions of his sons during his lifetime, he failed to ensure a smooth unitary succession: shortly after his death his eldest son, Hywel ab Owain Gwynedd, who may have been his chosen heir, was killed by his half-brothers Dafydd and Rhodri at the battle of Pentraeth in Anglesey. There followed almost three decades of struggle for the control of Gwynedd among Owain's sons and grandsons, a struggle finally resolved with the ascendancy of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. 




@@@@@


doc= 20980


Madog ap Maredudd (d. 1160), king of Powys, was the son of Maredudd ap Bleddyn ap Cynfyn (died 1132) and (according to genealogical sources from the later fifteenth century onwards) Hunydd, daughter of Einudd ap Gwenllian. 
Madog succeeded his father as sole ruler of Powys on the latter's death in 1132 and sought to strengthen the kingdom not only by maintaining control over the sons of his elder brother, Gruffudd (died 1128), as well as over his own younger brother, Iorwerth Goch, but also by defending its northern limits from the ambitions of the dynasty of Gwynedd and by expanding it eastwards, especially at the expense of the Normans in Shropshire. Madog married Susanna, daughter of Gruffudd ap Cynan. In 1132, shortly before Madog's accession, Cadwallon ap Gruffudd ap Cynan was killed in the commote of Nanheudwy when he led an attack on Powys. Thereafter no further hostilities from Gwynedd are recorded until 1149, when Madog's brother-in-law, Owain Gwynedd (died 1170), occupied the commote of Ial and built a castle at Tomen y Rhodwydd. Towards the end of the same year Madog revealed his own capacity for territorial expansion with the capture and refortification of the Norman castle of Oswestry, while he sought to neutralize any threat to his authority from his nephews, Owain Cyfeiliog (d. 1197) and Meurig, sons of his brother Gruffudd ap Maredudd, by granting them the commote of Cyfeiliog (which had formed part of the kingdom of Powys since their father had occupied it in 1116). By 1151 Madog had also established his overlordship in Arwystli in central Wales, for the only surviving charter in his name, issued no later than that year (in which he is styled 'king of the Powysians'), records that he granted land belonging to the region's ruler, Hywel ab Ieuaf, to St Michael's Church at Trefeglwys. 
Although a force from Powys had ravaged Maelor Saesneg in 1146 until it was heavily defeated by Robert of Mold, steward of the earldom of Chester, on 3 September of that year, the renewed threat from Gwynedd in 1149 prompted Madog to ally himself with Ranulf (II), earl of Chester, whose lands were likewise the object of Owain Gwynedd's ambitions. However, a joint campaign against Owain by the king of Powys and the earl ended in victory for their adversary at Coleshill in Tegeingl in 1150, allowing the ruler of Gwynedd to maintain his possession of Ial. This set-back did not halt Madog's plans for territorial consolidation and expansion, for two years later his son, Llywelyn, killed Stephen fitz Baldwin, constable of Montgomery Castle, and the military campaigns in Shropshire and Maelienydd celebrated by the court poets Gwalchmai ap Meilyr and Cynddelw Brydydd Mawr ('fl'. 1155-1195) may also have taken place in the 1150s. In 1156 Madog built a castle near Cymer in the commote of Caereinion: the precise location of this fortification is unknown although it may have been situated at Castle Caereinion, about 4 miles west of Welshpool. The Welsh chronicle 'Brut y tywysogyon' also records under the same year that Madog's nephew, Meurig ap Gruffudd, escaped from prison. This event almost certainly inspired the composition of the poem 'Hirlas Owain' -- ascribed, probably incorrectly, to Meurig's brother, Owain Cyfeiliog -- which describes an expedition by Owain's retinue to free his brother from captivity in the district of Maelor. Who was responsible for the imprisonment of Meurig and where precisely he was imprisoned are uncertain, although it has been suggested that he was held at the castle of Wrexham, which belonged to the earldom of Chester by 1160-61. Significantly, Owain's court appears to have been situated at Welshpool by the time of this expedition, suggesting that his authority was not confined to Cyfeiliog, which had shown itself to be vulnerable to external attack when it was ravaged in 1153 by Rhys ap Gruffudd (died 1197) of Deheubarth. 
Madog's territorial expansion owed much to the opportunities created by the weakness of the English crown and marcher lords in Shropshire during the reign of Stephen. However, after Henry II's accession to the English throne in 1154 these opportunities were severely curtailed. The following year William fitz Alan, a marcher magnate who had formerly supported the Empress Matilda, was restored to his Shropshire lands and appointed sheriff of the county, and probably soon recovered Oswestry. The ruler of Powys responded pragmatically to the changed situation by forming an alliance with Henry II in 1157. Madog may have already given support to the Angevins in 1141, for Orderic Vitalis reports that two brothers, 'Mariadoth' and 'Kaladrius', fought on the Angevin side against Stephen at the battle of Lincoln in February of that year: it has been assumed that the names refer to Cadwaladr ap Gruffudd ap Cynan and his brother-in-law Madog ap Maredudd (the former is not known to have had a brother called Maredudd). What is clear is that Madog, together with his brother Iorwerth Goch and Hywel ab Ieuaf, ruler of Arwystli, joined in Henry II's successful campaign against Owain Gwynedd in the summer of 1157; the king's Welsh allies also received payments from the English exchequer in that year. 
In the aftermath of Henry's campaign Iorwerth Goch captured and destroyed the castle of Tomen y Rhodwydd, thereby depriving Owain Gwynedd of his authority in Ial. How far Madog benefited directly from this action is unclear. The medieval Welsh prose tale, 'The dream of Rhonabwy', composed possibly as late as the early fourteenth century, claims that relations between Madog and his brother were strained, since Iorwerth held no lands in Powys during Madog's reign and refused an offer to serve as his brother's 'penteulu' ('chief of the military retinue'). If true, this stands in contrast to Madog's treatment of the sons of his elder brother, Gruffudd, to whom he granted the territory of Cyfeiliog and one of whom, Owain, also possessed a court at Welshpool (although whether as a result of a grant by Madog is not known). His lack of lands in Powys could explain Iorwerth's readiness to accept the estate of Sutton near Wenlock and other Shropshire manors in serjeanty from Henry II in 1157 for performing services as Henry's latimer or interpreter. Nevertheless, in that year Iorwerth clearly co-operated with Madog, if only on the basis of common support for Henry II's campaign against Owain Gwynedd, and it is likely that his capture of Tomen y Rhodwydd met with the approval of his brother even if the expedition was undertaken independently of him and, perhaps, resulted in Iorwerth's subsequently holding Ial under Madog's overlordship. 
No further events are recorded of Madog's reign until his death in 1160, which, according to the poet Gwalchmai, took place 'at the beginning of Lent' (Gruffydd, vol. 1, no.7, line 136), and therefore about 9 February. The version of 'Brut y tywysogyon' in NL Wales, Peniarth MS 20, states that Madog died at Winchester, but the accuracy of this report has been questioned. All versions of the chronicle agree, however, that Madog was buried at the church of Meifod, Powys, a pre-Norman foundation, 'where his burial-place was' ('Brut: Peniarth MS 20', 61), a statement which may be compared with Cynddelw's description of Meifod as 'the burial-place of kings' (Gruffydd, vol. 3, no. 3, line 48). Shortly afterwards Madog's son, Llywelyn, was killed. Described in 'Brut y tywysogyon' as the one 'in whom lay the hope of all Powys' ('Brut: Peniarth MS 20', 62), he was quite possibly his father's designated successor to the whole of the kingdom, and his death marked the end of unitary rule in Powys, which was divided between Madog's three remaining sons Elise, Gruffudd Maelor (died 1191), and Owain Fychan (died 1187), his brother Iorwerth Goch, and his nephew Owain Cyfeiliog (died 1197). 
Late medieval genealogists claimed that Madog's wife, Susanna, was the mother of two of the king's sons, Elise and Gruffudd Maelor, and she may well also have been the mother of Owain Fychan. Madog also had at least two other sons, Llywelyn (died 1160) and Owain Brogyntyn ['see below'], as well as two daughters, Gwenllian, who married Rhys ap Gruffudd of Deheubarth, and Marared, wife of Iorwerth Drwyndwn ab Owain and mother of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (d. 1240) of Gwynedd. The genealogists, however, name as many as nine sons and four daughters altogether, and identify two extra-marital partners as mothers of three of the former together with a fourth partner, Arianwen, daughter of Moriddig Warwyn. 
According to the court poets Gwalchmai and Cynddelw, Madog excelled in his bravery, generosity, and appreciation of fine poetry. Gwalchmai emphasized the king's success in expanding Powys to encompass a territory extending 'from the summit of Plynlimon to the gates of Chester' (Gruffydd vol. 1, no. 7, line 73) and from Bangor Is-coed to the borders of Meirionnydd. Cynddelw was likewise fulsome in his praise of the victorious campaigns led by Madog and his band of warriors and also celebrated the feasts, drink, and warhorses he bestowed on poets at his court. Of the king's relations with the church very little is known: Madog authorized a grant of land to the native monastery of St Michael at Trefeglwys by 1151, and may well have made donations to his burial place of Meifod, at which a new church was consecrated to the Virgin Mary in 1156. There is no evidence, however, that he patronized any of the reformed religious orders of continental origin. The church of Meifod lay near Mathrafal, which was believed by the thirteenth century to be the chief court of the princes of Powys, and which is mentioned as the site of one of Madog's battles in a poem by Cynddelw; it is therefore possible, but by no means certain, that Mathrafal was the king's principal centre of authority. According to the 'Dream of Rhonabwy', Madog ruled all of Powys 'from Pulford [just south of Chester] to Gwafan in the uppermost part of Arwystli' ('Breudwyt Ronabwy', 1), and modern scholars are agreed that he was one of the most powerful native rulers of twelfth-century Wales whose greatest achievement was the expansion and consolidation of his ancestral kingdom. However, this achievement barely outlasted his own lifetime and his failure to ensure a unitary succession meant that Madog was also the last Welsh ruler whose authority encompassed the whole of Powys. 

Owain Brogyntyn (fl. 1160-1215), referred to in contemporary sources as 'Oenus de Porchinton' (or various spellings thereof), was an illegitimate son of Madog ap Maredudd who took his name from Porkington, a village near Oswestry which by the sixteenth century was known in Welsh as Brogyntyn. Later genealogical sources state that Owain's mother was a daughter of the Black Reeve of Rug in Edeirnion. After the death of his father and half-brother, Llywelyn, in 1160 Owain inherited lands and authority in Dinmael, Edeirnion, and Penllyn. From 1160 to 1169 he received regular and substantial payments from the English exchequer, indicating that he maintained the 'rapprochement' with Henry II begun by his father and other kinsmen in 1157. Owain was a benefactor of three Cistercian monasteries. From his lordship in Penllyn he granted lands, pasture rights, and Tegid (Bala) Lake to Basingwerk Abbey; in addition, he granted lands to Valle Crucis Abbey in 1207 and made two sales of land to Strata Marcella Abbey. Owain had five sons, Gruffudd, Bleddyn, Iorwerth, Cadwgan, and Hywel, and later genealogical sources also name a daughter, Efa. The identity of their mother is uncertain: the genealogists identify her as either Sioned, daughter of Hywel ap Madog ab Idnerth, or Marared, daughter of Einion ap Seisyll of Mathafarn. Owain probably died between 1215, when he witnessed a charter in favour of Strata Marcella, and 1218, when his son, Bleddyn, submitted to Henry III. The suggestion that the inscribed graveslab at Valle Crucis Abbey bearing the name of Owain ap Madog is that of Owain Brogyntyn cannot be accepted, since the style of the stone dates it to the late thirteenth century. In the later middle ages Owain's descendants continued to exercise rights of lordship in Dinmael and Edeirnion, which they held after the Edwardian conquest by the tenure known as 'pennaeth' or Welsh barony. 


@@@@@


doc= 20981


Owain Cyfeiliog (d. 1197), ruler in Wales, was the son of Gruffudd ap Maredudd (brother of Madog ap Maredudd, prince of Powys) and, according to later genealogies, Gwerful ferch Gwrgenau, said to have been a descendant of the historically shadowy ruler of Rhwng Gwy a Hafren, Elystan Glodrydd. In 1149 Owain and his brother Meurig received from their uncle Madog, then ruling over Powys, the commote of Cyfeiliog, a region including most of the middle valley of the Dyfi in western Powys. Owain's identification with Cyfeiliog accounts for his ordinary descriptive name, which distinguished him from his rival, Owain ap Gruffudd, called Owain Gwynedd. His hold on Cyfeiliog was, however, tenuous: in 1153 Rhys ap Gruffudd of south Wales wasted the commote, and by 1162 it was held by Owain Gwynedd. 
Madog ap Maredudd's death in 1160 was followed by that of his son Llywelyn immediately afterwards. Owain now became the dominant figure in a fragmented Powys, establishing himself as the ruler of the southern part of the principality with his chief seat at Welshpool. Owain probably inclined towards Madog's general policy of alliance with the English against his dangerous neighbour and rival, Owain Gwynedd. In the summer of 1165, however, he joined Owain Gwynedd, Rhys ap Gruffudd, and other Welsh princes in the united resistance to Henry II's invasion of Wales. After advancing into the Berwyn Mountains, Henry had to withdraw, beaten by the elements and lack of food as much as by the enemy, and he never ventured on another Welsh campaign. The unity of the Welsh princes was, however, short-lived. In 1166 Owain and his cousin Owain Fychan expelled their uncle Iorwerth Goch from his land of Mochnant. In the division of spoils Owain Cyfeiliog obtained the western part of the territory (Mochnant Uwch Rhaeadr). In 1167 Owain himself had to face a joint attack on southern Powys by Owain Gwynedd and Rhys ap Gruffudd. Their forces took possession of Caereinion and the castle of Tafolwern, causing Owain to flee to England. He now fell back on marcher support, soon reappearing in company with a 'French' (Anglo-Norman) army. He won back the lands he had lost and destroyed the new castle which his enemies had built at Caereinion. War continued between Owain Cyfeiliog and Rhys. In 1171 Rhys again invaded Powys, forcing Owain to surrender seven hostages for his good behaviour. 
Despite Owain's opposition to Henry II in 1165, payments to him recorded in the pipe rolls testify to the generally cordial relations between them. This is confirmed by Gerald of Wales, who described Henry and the Welsh prince dining together at Shrewsbury; on this occasion Owain found the means of covertly rebuking the king for his habit of keeping benefices long vacant in order to enjoy the custody of their temporalities. In May 1177 Owain attended the great council at Oxford, at which Henry made his son John lord of Ireland. Together with other Welsh princes he took an oath of fealty to Henry as his overlord. 
Owain Cyfeiliog probably married twice, first certainly to Gwenllian, daughter of Owain Gwynedd, and second perhaps to Gwenllian, daughter of Ednywain, claimed by later genealogies to be of the line of Gollwyn ap Tangno. As Owain grew older his sons, Gwenwynwyn and Cadwallon, probably assumed his military role. According to the Welsh chronicles they were responsible for the murder of their kinsman Owain Fychan in 1187, though Gerald of Wales ascribes the crime to their father. In 1188 Owain Cyfeiliog was the only Welsh prince who did not go out with his people to meet Archbishop Baldwin during his crusading tour of Wales. For this negligence he was excommunicated. Earlier, in 1170, Owain had founded the Cistercian monastery of Strata Marcella (Ystrad Marchell) near Welshpool. Having taken the monastic habit in old age, he died there in 1197; he was buried near the high altar, and lauded in a Latin epitaph as 'ecclesiae cultor' (a reverencer of the church). Gwenwynwyn, who succeeded to his father's dominions, completed the endowment of Strata Marcella. 
Gerald of Wales includes Owain Cyfeiliog with Owain Gwynedd and Maredudd ap Gruffudd ap Rhys of south Wales as the three Welshmen who, in his days, were conspicuous for their justice, prudence, and moderation as rulers. The lavish hospitality of Owain's court -- 'Where there was drinking without want, without refusal' -- was celebrated by the poet Cynddelw Brydydd Mawr. Cynddelw's poetry also testifies to Owain's raids against Anglo-Norman lands in the Shropshire marches, among them the territories of the Corbet lords of Caus, an aspect of his career which is ignored by the chronicles. The poet's evidence is complemented by the portrayal of Owain in the thirteenth-century Anglo-French romance 'Fouke le Fitz Waryn' (the Fitzwarines held land of the Corbets at Alberbury). Here he features as 'un chevaler hardy e fer' (a bold and fierce knight) who grievously wounds Fouke le Fitz Waryn. 
Owain, whom Gerald of Wales praised for the readiness of his tongue, is renowned in Welsh literary history as a poet. Two poems, the lengthy 'Hirlas Owain', which is definitely ascribed to Owain in the 'Red Book of Hergest', and the shorter ''Englynion' on the circuit of Wales' have been regarded as his work. The 'Hirlas' is an unusual poem, which, in dramatic style, depicts a feast in Owain's court following a raid in Maelor in north-east Wales to free his brother Meurig from prison, an event which the Welsh chronicles show to have taken place in 1156. Owain praises his brave warriors, calling upon his cup-bearer to bring the long blue ('hirlas') drinking-horn filled with mead to each hero in turn. Recent stylistic analysis of this and the other poem, however, implies that their true author was Cynddelw Brydydd Mawr, Owain's court poet, and that the prince's role was that of a persona in the poems rather than their creator. 


@@@@@


doc= 20982


Owain, Gutun (fl. c.1451-1498), poet, was the son of Huw ab Owain, of gentry stock. His mother's name is unknown, but some sources claim that she was a sister of Sion ap Rhisiart, abbot of Valle Crucis. Gutun was a native of the then Welsh-speaking north Shropshire borderland, being associated with the adjoining parishes of Llandudlyst (Dudleston) and Llanfarthin (St Martin's), where he held land in the township of Ifton. 
Gutun Owain's bardic teacher was the renowned Dafydd ab Edmwnd from the neighbouring parish of Hanmer in Maelor Saesneg, winner of the chair awarded to the premier poet at the Carmarthen eisteddfod held under the patronage of Gruffudd ap Nicolas, 'c'.1451. Gutun attended the eisteddfod as a young bardic pupil in the company of his teacher. As well as competitions for bards and musicians, metrical practices were discussed at Carmarthen, and Dafydd ab Edmwnd imposed his authority in introducing significant changes relating to the twenty-four bardic metres and the metrical ornamentation of 'cynghanedd'. It was Gutun Owain's copies of the bardic grammar, a handbook used in bardic schools, which first incorporated these changes and provided the exemplar for later versions of that work. On the death of Dafydd ab Edmwnd some four decades later, Gutun composed a poignant elegy for his old teacher, celebrating his renown as a poet and recalling his triumph at Carmarthen. 
Gutun Owain was one of the ablest practitioners of Welsh poetry during the late fifteenth century. More than sixty poems by him are extant, consisting in the main of eulogies and elegies to noble patrons, poems soliciting gifts, and love poems. A high proportion of his surviving work is addressed to patrons within a 15 mile radius of his home, in Maelor Gymraeg (Bromfield), Maelor Saesneg, Chirkland, and the commote of Ial, though a few poems show that he occasionally sought patronage further afield in north Wales. His two most important patrons, both abbots of the Cistercian abbey of Valle Crucis near Llangollen, were his probable kinsman Sion ap Rhisiart (abbot until 'c'.1480) and his successor Dafydd ab Ieuan ab Iorwerth ('c'.1480-1503). Gutun's poems addressed to the two abbots vividly evoke their generous provision of wine and food on feast days, extol their restoration of the once neglected monastic buildings, and express his aesthetic appreciation of religious worship at the abbey. The poet also frequented the abbey of Basingwerk near Holywell, composing a poem in praise of Abbot Thomas Pennant and writing a portion of the 'Black Book of Basingwerk' (NL Wales, MS 7006D). 
Gutun's eulogies to lay patrons evoke the interests and concerns of the minor nobility of late fifteenth-century Wales, their pride in their ancestry, their joy in feasting, their martial prowess, and their enlightened support of the native culture. His elegies, though conventional to a large degree, are well wrought and quietly effective. Less original and robust than that of his contemporary Guto'r Glyn (for whom he composed an elegy), Gutun's muse was refined, fastidious, and meditative. His obvious delight in mellifluence and musicality, a characteristic particularly apparent in his 'awdlau' (odes), may reflect the influence of his teacher Dafydd ab Edmwnd. As a poet he excels in these majestic, metrically complex 'awdlau' and in his poems of solicitation on behalf of patrons, remarkable for their imaginative and vivid descriptions of gifts such as horses, hounds, and shields. In examples of the latter, barking hounds feature as 'harmonious, heavenly musicians' and as 'bells of Durham cathedral', and the rivet heads on a buckler are described as 'powdered like the stars on the Milky Way'. 
Gutun Owain was familiar with all branches of traditional bardic learning. An expert genealogist, following the accession of Henry Tudor he assisted the commission appointed by the king -- which included Abbot Dafydd ab Ieuan ab Iorwerth -- to enquire into the Tudors' descent 'from the ancient British kings'. Sixteenth-century genealogists frequently cited his manuscripts as sources. His activity as a scribe is exemplified in his nine surviving autograph manuscripts. They contain copies of chronicles and bruts (the most important being his texts of 'Brut Tysilio' and 'Brenhinedd y Saesson', with a continuation to 1461, in the 'Black Book of Basingwerk'), a bardic grammar, genealogies, a heraldic treatise, religious texts (including the Welsh life of St Martin), a 'Description of the island of Britain' (a translation of the first book of Ranulf Higden's 'Polychronicon'), and miscellaneous lore (some of it of a pseudo-scientific nature). 
Gutun Owain's latest datable surviving poem was composed in 1498. He may not have lived to witness the elevation of his patron, Abbot Dafydd ab Ieuan ab Iorwerth, to the see of St Asaph in 1500. According to traditional manuscript lists of the burial places of Welsh poets he was buried at St Martin's. 


@@@@@


doc= 20983


Owen of Wales (d. 1378), mercenary, was the last direct heir of the dynasty of Gwynedd. He was a prominent figure in the Hundred Years' War and became a symbol of continued Welsh resistance to English rule. 
Owen was the son of Thomas ap Rhodri ap Gruffudd 
(Sir Thomas Retherik; died 1363)
and his wife, Cecilia. Thomas's father Rhodri was the youngest son of Gruffudd ap Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (died 1244) and therefore the brother of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, prince of Wales. In 1272 Rhodri had quitclaimed all his hereditary right to lands in north Wales and elsewhere to Llywelyn for 1000 marks, but the money was never paid in full. Rhodri served in Edward I's army in the Welsh wars of 1276-7 and 1282 and acquired lands in Cheshire, Gloucestershire, and Surrey; he was dead by 1315. When Thomas died in 1363 Owen was out of the country; he returned two years later to claim his inheritance, but he appears to have gone abroad again in 1366 and after the renewal of Anglo-French hostilities in 1369 he went over to the French side and all his lands were declared forfeit. 
Nothing is known of Owen's career before 1365, nor is it known why he joined the French. It is likely that he became aware of his descent and his claims at a time of increasing tension and restlessness in Wales; it may be significant that both he and his father used the arms of the princes of Gwynedd on their seals. According to Froissart he had in his youth been in the service of the French crown, had fought on the French side at Poitiers in 1356, and after the treaty of Bretigny in 1360 had served in Lombardy, but there is no evidence to confirm this. Froissart also describes him as the son of a prince of Wales put to death by Edward III, which indicates that the French were aware that he had some kind of dynastic claim. By 1369 Charles V of France was certainly ready to support his bid to recover his patrimony as a means of carrying the war to British soil. A fleet sailed from Harfleur under Owen's command just before Christmas, only to be driven back by winter storms in the English Channel; the authorities in Wales had been alerted and defensive preparations ordered. 
In 1370 Owen was serving under Bertrand du Guesclin during Sir Robert Knolles's 'chevauchee' in Maine and Anjou and was briefly in charge of the castle of Saumur on the Loire; the following summer he and his company were employed by the town of Metz in Lorraine and at the end of 1371 he was in northern Burgundy. But Charles V was still interested in a landing in Wales and on 10 May 1372 Owen issued a proclamation in which he declared his claim to the country 'which... is and should be mine by right' (Paris, Archives Nationales, JJc27, fol. 55), and in which he acknowledged the support he had had from the French in men, ships, and money. The second invasion fleet, probably with between 600 and 800 men, sailed from Harfleur at the beginning of June. On the way it attacked Guernsey where the garrison, apparently warned that Owen was on the way, had been reinforced. The raid, remembered in island tradition as 'la descente des Aragousais', was commemorated in a ballad; most of the content is entirely unhistorical but it and Froissart agree that the attack was a failure and it is difficult to understand why, when the expedition had a clear objective, the attack on Guernsey should have been undertaken at all. In fact Owen never reached Wales; while in Guernsey he appears to have been ordered to abandon the venture and to proceed to Castile to seek ships to blockade La Rochelle. The order may have been precipitated by the news that a large English fleet under the command of John Hastings, earl of Pembroke (died 1375), had sailed from Southampton with money and reinforcements for the army in Guyenne. By the time Owen reached Santander the fleet had been destroyed by the Castilians off La Rochelle and it was then, according to Froissart, that Pembroke, brought ashore in chains, was challenged by him. He now sought Castilian assistance for a further expedition to Wales, but none was forthcoming. 
Owen now set out for La Rochelle with a combined Franco-Castilian fleet. In late August he defeated the Anglo-Gascon force which had just raised the French siege of Soubise at the mouth of the Charente, taking prisoner one of the leading Gascon captains, the Captal de Buch (died 1377), and the seneschal of Poitou, Sir Thomas Percy (died 1403); Percy was captured by a Welsh chaplain from Owen's company, Hywel Flint. Soubise surrendered and this was followed on 8 September 1372 by the fall of La Rochelle. 
Charles V was planning a further expedition to Wales in 1373, this time with Castilian assistance, but nothing came of it because of the projected invasion of Brittany by John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, and his great 'chevauchee' through France. For the greater part of the year Owen was serving in Poitou and Saintonge as town after town fell to the French; for a time he was captain of the castle of Broue in Saintonge and was also captain of Soubise, being retained with his company in the service of the king. He may subsequently have campaigned in northern France and according to one source he was involved in the siege of St Sauveur-le-Vicomte in the Cotentin, which fell on 3 July 1375. 
Two days earlier a year's truce had been agreed at Bruges, but Owen and his company were not unemployed for long; on 14 October he was recruited by Enguerrand (VII) de Coucy (died 1397) to join his invasion of Austria, which Coucy claimed through his mother; the contract, in which he agreed to provide 400 men, survives in the Swiss State Archives. The Austrian expedition was a complete fiasco; the army had to pass through Switzerland and it met fierce Swiss resistance. On 27 December 1375 Owen and his men were attacked by the men of Bern at Fraubrunnen to the north of the city and they suffered a crushing defeat; even Owen's contract with Coucy was left behind in the rout. The Bernese were so proud of their victory over a distinguished mercenary captain that a ballad, the 'Bear Song', was composed to commemorate it. 
In 1376 Owen was back in the king of France's service and for the next two years he was fighting in the south-west of France. In 1378 the duke of Anjou ordered him to take a force of 500 men and besiege Mortagne on the Gironde estuary. During the siege a squire called John Lamb, who claimed to be a Welshman, appeared on the scene and Owen accepted him into his service. But Lamb was an English agent and one morning, when Owen had risen early and was surveying the castle, he killed him with a dagger. For this Lamb was subsequently paid the sum of $20. Owen was buried in the church of St Leger near Mortagne, but no trace remains of his tomb; the church was demolished in 1884. There is no record of his having married or had children, although the Guernsey ballad does refer to a wife called Eleanor whom he had supposedly married in Maine; this part of the ballad, however, bears little relation to historical fact. 
Owen of Wales was a great deal more than an exiled pretender pursuing a forlorn hope. After he joined the French he commanded a free company, most of the members of which were Welshmen who had defected to him from the English forces. When his men were mustered at Limoges on 8 August 1376 at least 85 of the 100 members of the company were Welsh, which shows that there were Welsh soldiers in France who knew who he was and what he represented. He also had supporters in Wales; in 1370 an Anglesey man was accused of being a supporter of Owain Lawgoch, 'traitor and enemy of the lord prince' ('Record of Caernarvon', 133), and in 1372 and 1374 Rhys ap Roppert, one of the leading men in Flintshire, a former sheriff of the county and a member of the leading lineage in north Wales, was accused of sending him money and receiving treasonable letters from him. Two of Rhys's sons were in French service, one of them probably being Owen's lieutenant Ieuan Wyn, known as the Poursuivant d'Amour, who inherited his company on his death. There are other references in the Flintshire judicial records to local men who were in France with Owen. Two poems to him also survive, one of them by one of the leading poets of the time, Gruffydd ap Maredudd ap Dafydd. 
The second half of the fourteenth century in Wales was a time of restlessness and discontent when the leaders of the native community, who felt that they were no longer treated with due respect, were becoming increasingly disillusioned with the house of Plantagenet. In these circumstances the presence in France of the rightful heir of the house of Gwynedd who was also a distinguished soldier could not but be significant, although there is no evidence that Owen ever visited Wales or was even able to speak the language. The authorities were well aware of the attraction he exerted and a plan for a Franco-Castilian invasion of England in 1377, involving a renegade English knight, Sir John Minsterworth, may have led to the decision to have him eliminated. 
Owen's supporters in Wales were able to draw on a long tradition of prophetic poetry which looked forward to the coming of a new leader who would drive out the English and restore the ancient glory of the Britons. Much of this poetry is obscure and allusive, but some of it undoubtedly refers to him. His charisma did not die with him; there grew up a body of stories about a great hero, Owain Lawgoch, asleep in a cave awaiting the call to rise and redeem his people, but it was not until the end of the nineteenth century that this Owain was identified conclusively as Owain ap Thomas ap Rhodri, although the Flintshire sources already mentioned do actually describe him by both names. The epithet attached to his name is not easily explained. The term 'llawgoch' ('red hand') was normally applied to a murderer, but it could also have referred to a birthmark or to a scar. Several fifteenth-century poets refer to him as Owain Frych (Owain the Freckled), which may suggest that his nickname derived from the fact that his hand was heavily freckled. The Guernsey ballad describes his right hand as having been severed by a blow from a halberd during the raid of 1372, but this is probably an onomastic reference; he was certainly known as Owain Lawgoch in 1370. 
There can be no doubt that Owen of Wales was perceived as a serious threat to English rule in Wales. In life an eminent captain, he was to many in Wales the Mab Darogan or 'Son of Prophecy'; after his death he joined the ranks of the 'sleeping heroes', those charismatic leaders whose death it was hard to accept. The charisma existed in France as well; in the seventeenth century the family of de Galle in Dauphine claimed incorrectly to be descended from him. But Owen of Wales or Owain ap Thomas ap Rhodri was a significant figure in the context of Welsh political attitudes in the late fourteenth century and his activities and the support they elicited helped to pave the way for the revolt of Owain Glyn Dwr. 


@@@@@


doc= 20984


Owen, Alice (1547-1613), philanthropist, was the third child of Thomas Wilkes, a rich landowner of Islington. Nothing is known of her childhood apart from the story of her narrow escape from death on the archery fields of Islington; this first appeared in Stow's 'Survey of London' and was subsequently embellished several times. She was playing with some other children when a stray arrow pierced her hat, providentially missing her head. Stow says that the almshouses and the school which she later founded were a thank-offering for her survival. In 1570 Alice Wilkes married Henry Robinson (died 1585), a member of the Brewers' Company, with whom she had six sons and five daughters. Her second husband was William Elkin (1523-1593), an alderman of the City of London, with whom she had one daughter who was baptized in 1587. Thomas Owen (d. 1598), a judge of the court of common pleas, became her third husband in 1594 or 1595. Alice Owen was left sizeable sums of money in her husbands' wills. 
Stow lists benefactions that Alice Owen made in her lifetime to a number of institutions, including $200 to Oxford University (in fact $100) and $60 to Christ's Hospital. The latter was recorded in 1598. However, the most significant of her charitable activities were focused on the foundation of her almshouses for ten poor women, and her free school for thirty boys from Islington and Clerkenwell. She opened discussions with the governors of Christ's Hospital in February 1607 on her proposals, but her plans changed. Having purchased 11 acres of ground where her accident took place (known as Hermitage Fields) and property in Charterhouse Closes in 1609, she reached an agreement with the Brewers' Company, which became trustees for the almshouses, using the income from the property to fund expenses. In 1610 Alice obtained a royal patent to erect a chapel and a house for a master to 'read to the widows and teach the sons and daughters of the poor' (Dare, 19), and permission to buy lands to support this foundation. 
Alice Owen drew up detailed rules for the conduct of both the school and the almshouses in 1613. The schoolmaster was to be single, of good conduct, and able to teach grammar, writing, and arithmetic to prepare his pupils for apprenticeships or other honest employment. He was to be paid $5 quarterly, live rent free, and be supplied with fuel for heating, an arrangement which compares favourably with other foundations of the period. The master also had responsibilities in the almshouses where he had to read prayers to the almswomen twice a day and take any disciplinary measures necessary. The widows admitted to the almshouses were to be given money, seacoal, a new gown every two years, and additional small benefits. Strict rules of conduct had to be adhered to, and if an almswoman married she had to leave. 
At the time of Alice Owen's death the purchase of the property to fund the school had not yet been made and it was left to her executor, her son-in-law Robert Rich, to buy 40 acres at Orsett in Essex in 1617. The account books of the foundation for the first half of the seventeenth century show that the balance was often negative, which gave rise to a rather tart comment in one Brewers' Company file that the company had to find the difference. This was only partly due to an underestimate on Alice Owen's part: an allowance of $1 10's'. for an annual inspection dinner for the Brewers' Company was by the 1630s being overspent regularly by as much as $10 while the London rents remained fixed. 
In addition to her charitable bequests Alice Owen's will made generous provision for her daughters, godchildren, and grandchildren. Her servants were given money and her 'worser' clothes. There were also new benefactions including $8 to poor prisoners, $20 for a stock of coals and wood for the poor of the parish of St Michael Bassishaw, and $60 for sixty poor women. She died on 26 November 1613 and was buried in St Mary's, Islington, where a magnificent tomb was erected with an effigy of her reading a book, with smaller figures of her children and grandchildren in relief. The church was pulled down in 1742 and her body reinterred in the crypt. It was removed to Finchley cemetery in 1903 when further work was undertaken on the church. After its uncertain financial start Alice Owen's foundation became profitable. A substantial rebuilding of both the school and the almshouses was carried out in 1841 on a new site in Owen Street, Islington. This was rapidly followed by a review of the school in 1865 under the Taunton commission which investigated endowed grammar schools. A scheme was finally approved in 1878 which allowed for the demolition of the almshouses and their replacement by pensions for the occupants, the construction of a new boys' school, and the opening of a school for girls. Between 1971 and 1976 the move to the present site in Potters Bar was completed, the two schools having amalgamated as Dame Alice Owen's School in 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 20985


Owen, Aneurin (1792-1851), historian, was born in London on 23 July 1792, the eldest child and only son of William Owen (1759-1835) ['see 'Pughe, William Owen] and his wife, Sarah Elizabeth Harper (1771-1816). In 1806 his father took the additional name of Pughe on inheriting some property at Nantglyn, Denbighshire, to which the family moved about 1800 from London. Around 1807 Owen briefly attended Friars School, Bangor, but he was mainly educated by his father, whose own interests in Welsh history and literature were reflected in the lessons he gave his son. Owen also spent some time on the Harwood estate in Norfolk, learning estate management and agriculture. 
Aneurin Owen settled at Tan-y-gyrt, near Nantglyn, and in 1820 married Jane Lloyd of Nantglyn, daughter of William Lloyd, in Liverpool. His activities were mainly literary until the passing of the 'Tithe Commutation Act' in 1836, when he was appointed one of the assistant tithe commissioners for England and Wales. Subsequently he was made an assistant poor-law commissioner, but he resigned when the heavy duties of this post damaged his health. When the work of tithe commutation grew less urgent, he was appointed, under the 'Enclosures Act' of 1845, a commissioner for the enclosure of commonable lands. 
When the government resolved in 1822 to publish a uniform edition of ancient British historians, the Welsh part of the work was entrusted to John Humphreys Parry. On Parry's death in 1825 his duties, following some active lobbying by William Owen Pughe, who was friendly with Henry Petrie, were transferred to Owen, who thus became the adviser of the record office upon all Welsh matters. His work fell into two parts: the publication of the ancient Welsh laws and the gathering of material for an edition of the chronicle of the princes. The two tasks were carried on concurrently during the period 1830-40; libraries and private collections in Wales and in England were visited, manuscripts copied, and collations made, and in 1841 the 'Record' edition of the laws appeared in two forms, a large folio and two quarto volumes under the title 'Ancient Laws and Institutes of Wales'. It was remarkable not only for the care and accuracy with which the manuscripts were reproduced and the texts translated, but also for establishing a distinction between the three versions (which Owen termed 'Venedotian', 'Dimetian', and 'Gwentian') of native Welsh law. His nomenclature has been revised but the threefold categorization of versions is still valid. The edition of the chronicle of the princes ('Brut y tywysogion', a continuation of Geoffrey of Monmouth's 'Historia regum Britanniae' but, unlike it, based on contemporary evidence) did not appear in Owen's lifetime. A small section of the chronicle which took the narrative up to 1066 was edited by him for the 'Monumenta historica Britannica' (1848), but the bulk of his material remained unpublished, and was handed over to the Record Office on his death in 1851. A complaint appeared in 'Archaeologia Cambrensis' in 1859 that Owen's papers were carelessly kept, and access to them had been granted to readers who were using them without acknowledgement; and in 1860, when the 'Rolls Series' edition of 'Brut y tywysogion' appeared, under the editorship of the Revd John Williams ab Ithel, the reviewer in 'Archaeologia Cambrensis' (3rd ser., 7, 1861, 93-103) asserted that the text, the translation, and all that was valuable in the preface were the work of Owen, who was nevertheless unmentioned in the book. In 1863 Owen's transcript and translation of the so-called 'Gwentian brut' (a spurious version of the chronicle), with the introduction he had prepared for the 'Monumenta' and a letter on the Welsh chronicles to Henry Petrie, were printed as an extra volume by the Cambrian Archaeological Association. 
Owen was an accurate and well-informed palaeographer. His 'Catalogue of Welsh Manuscripts, etc., in North Wales', which was awarded the prize at the Cymmrodorion eisteddfod at Welshpool in 1824, was published in the 'Transactions of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion' in 1843. Though not fluent in Welsh until early adulthood, Owen became one of the best Welsh scholars of his day and an intelligent historical critic, whose work was compared by a contemporary critic with that of Edward Lhwyd. Though Owen proved himself a scholar in his own right with none of his father's eccentricities, there is little doubt that he owed much not only to his father's support and contacts with gentry, scholars, and civil servants in London, Oxford, and Wales, but also to his practical assistance in transcribing, interpreting, and translating medieval Welsh texts and in the planning of 'Ancient Laws'. Without William Owen Pughe's tuition and collaboration from about 1826 it is unlikely that Aneurin Owen could have accomplished so much. 
Owen took a keen interest in the Welsh cultural movements of his day and particularly in the eisteddfod; he was one of a committee of five appointed at the Abergavenny eisteddfod of 1838 to consider the reform of Welsh orthography, and in 1832 won a silver medal at the Beaumaris eisteddfod for the best Welsh essay on 'Agriculture'. The essay was published in the 'Transactions' of the eisteddfod in 1839 and also in a separate volume. Owen died on 17 July 1851 at Tros-y-parc, near Denbigh. 


@@@@@


doc= 20986


Cadwallader Owen (c.1562-1617), Church of England clergyman, who came from Maentwrog, Merioneth, and who matriculated from Jesus College, Oxford, on 24 November 1581, graduated BA in 1583, and proceeded MA in 1589. In 1585 Cadwallader was elected a fellow of Oriel College, and he proceeded BD in 1603, but he must have resigned by 1606, before his marriage to Blanche, daughter of John Roberts, the younger brother of Lewis Anwyl of Parc, Merioneth. In 1608 Owen became rector of Llanbrynmair in the same county, and two years later he also became the sinecure rector there. He was known as a great debater and used the name 'Sic doces'. He is also supposed to have written several works, but nothing is known of them. He died in 1617 and was buried on 6 April at Llanbrynmair. 


@@@@@


doc= 20987


Owen, Charles (d. 1746), Presbyterian minister and nonconformist tutor, was the third son of John Owen, of Bryn, Aber-nant parish, Carmarthenshire, and younger brother of James Owen (1654-1706). His parents were 'inviolably firm' to the Church of England (C. Owen, 2), but the nine children who reached adulthood all became nonconformists and the three sons nonconformist ministers. Owen was educated for the nonconformist ministry at the academy at Bishop's Hall, Bethnal Green, London, conducted by Thomas Brand with the assistance of John Ker. In October 1690 he was one of eleven students who sent an adulatory address in Latin to Richard Baxter, saluting him as a promoter and pattern of piety. He was supported by a grant of $20 from the Presbyterian Fund in 1691, probably for his last year of study. He was recorded about this time in the Common Fund Survey as willing to settle in Denbighshire if a maintenance might be had. He assisted his brother at Wrexham, who gave oversight to the Presbyterian congregation there. As a result he received a grant of $6 a year in 1695 and 1696 from the Presbyterian Fund. In August 1696 the Cheshire classis approved of his preaching at Warrington on trial and the congregation unanimously chose him in succession to Peter Aspinwall, who had died in June 1696. He prepared students for the ministry, though because the numbers were small and he was not supported by the Presbyterian Fund, he may have taught them privately. He quit teaching temporarily as a result of the 'Schism Act' in 1714. Job Orton was a student for a year in 1733, but the names of only a handful of other students are known. 
Owen was a vigorous though controversial defender of dissent and of the Hanoverian succession. He published anonymously a violent funeral sermon on the death of Queen Anne, 'Ahabs Evil' (1714). His 'Plain Dealing, or, Separation without Schism' (1715; 12th edn, 1727), in which he attacked the high-church zealots and defended dissenters and the 'moderate and genuine sons of the Church of England' (C. Owen, 'Plain Dealing', 2nd edn, 1715, 3), was even more notorious. He was answered by 'Plain Dealing Proved to be Plain Lying' (1715), and replied in turn with a 'Vindication of Plain Dealing, from the Base and Malicious Aspersions of Two Country Curates' (1716), a particularly rancorous work. The work was presented to the grand jury as reflecting scandalously on the Church of England and its clergy and a bill found against him. He obtained a 'nolle prosequi' but suffered heavy costs. The Presbyterian Fund made him a special grant of $25 in January 1716. 
Owen's most important works were in defence of dissent. In his 'Donatus redivivus' (1714), reprinted in 1716 as 'Rebaptization Condemned', he attacked the Church of England's practice of rebaptizing dissenters who conformed, provoking several replies. His 'Amazon Disarm'd' (1714) was in answer to Jane Chorlton's reply to 'Donatus redivius'. He also had an active part in the major high-church controversy over the validity of Presbyterian ordination, publishing first 'Validity of the Dissenting Ministry' (1716), edited from the works of his brother, and then his own 'The Dissenting Ministry Still Valid in Answer to some Scurrilous Reflections' (1717). His 'Plain Reasons' (1715; 23rd edn, 1736) defended dissenters from the charge of schism. In connection with the campaign for the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts' he published 'Dissenters Claim of Right to a Capacity for Civil Offices' (1717). His 'Jure Divino Woe' (1717) attacked the Jacobite rebels and 'Alarm to the Protestant Princes and People' (1728) condemned the cruel behaviour of continental Catholics. In contrast, 'Danger of Church and State from Foreigners' (1750) was an open-minded plea to fellow Britons to recognize the contribution of foreigners. He also wrote a number of devotional works -- 'Hymns Sacred to the Lord's Table' (1712), 'The Wonders of Redeeming Love' (1723), a work on redemption, and 'Religious Gratitude' (1731), all of which disclose a warm evangelicalism. He attacked the charismatic excesses of the French prophets and their English followers in 'Scene of Delusions Opened' (1712). His remarkable 'Essay on Serpents' (1742), dedicated to Sir Hans Sloane, reveals an extraordinary depth of knowledge and reading. He received a DD from Edinburgh University with Isaac Watts in 1728. He published a number of funeral sermons, including one for Gilbert Burnet, bishop of Salisbury, whom he compared with Samuel. 
Owen maintained a successful and popular ministry at Warrington for nearly fifty years. A meeting-house was built in 1703 which was replaced by a new building the year he died. According to the 'Evans List' (1715-17) Owen had the largest and most important congregation in that part of Lancashire with 713 hearers and 82 county voters. He was a member of both the Cheshire and the Warrington classes, and acted as moderator for both on many occasions. He was married but nothing about his wife is known. He died in Warrington on 17 February 1746 and was buried in his meeting-house in Cairo Street, Warrington. His nephew, Josiah Owen, preached his funeral sermon. His son John (died 1775) was nonconformist minister at Wharton, Lancashire. 


@@@@@


doc= 20988


Owen, Corbet (1645/6-1671), Latin poet, was born at Hinton in Shropshire, the son of William Owen, a clergyman of Pontesbury, and his wife, Anna. He was baptized on 5 May 1646 at Pontesbury, Shropshire. He was educated at a private school in Shrewsbury, run by a royalist parson called Scofield. Owen suffered badly from scrofula, or 'the king's evil', and had to use crutches. He was sent to France to be touched by the exiled Charles II; it is not recorded whether the hand of indigent majesty alleviated his symptoms. In May 1658 he went to Westminster School (king's scholar, 1659). Westminster was a leading centre of Latin versification, at which Owen showed great facility: 'it was usual with him to speak forty or fifty smooth and elegant verses extempore, in little more than half an hour' ('DNB'). He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 3 July 1663, aged seventeen, and was elected a student (the equivalent of a fellowship elsewhere) in 1664. He studied philosophy well, and may also have spent some time in Lincoln's Inn; later he also studied medicine. He graduated BA on 21 May 1667 and MA on 23 March 1670. Owen gained a reputation, according to Wood, as 'the most forward person of his age in the university for polite learning' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.924). 
The chief production of Corbet Owen's brief literary career was a long Latin ode, in irregular stanzas (but with each line following a recognized metrical pattern), recited at the opening of the Sheldonian Theatre, Oxford, on 9 July 1669. This poem achieved some celebrity, and was reprinted in various editions of the popular collections of British Latin known as 'Musae Anglicanae' (for example 'Musarum Anglicanarum analecta', 1721, 1.89; also 1741). These anthologies began in 1692 (Joseph Addison edited an expanded version in 1699), and Owen's ode was prominent among the university pieces thus preserved and presented to a wider public. Samuel Johnson knew it, and felt that it showed the pernicious influence of Abraham Cowley's 'Pindarick' style. In fact Owen was writing in a Renaissance tradition of irregular Latin verse; a number of continental and domestic models exist, from the mid-sixteenth century onwards. Readers of university commemorative collections would have been familiar with the technique, which, while it might irritate purists, did allow for playful or rhetorical variations. Cowley certainly helped to popularize the pseudo-Pindaric genre in the vernacular: 'Cowley was probably responsible for Corbett's unclassical performance, but Owen might very easily have done the same thing if Cowley had never lived' (Bradner, 110). 
Owen's 'Carmen Pindaricum' has twenty-four irregular stanzas (twenty-eight pages). He celebrates Wren's design of the Sheldonian as a triumph of the modern over the Gothic; enemies will be envious. Owen praises Sheldon for allowing the university's printing press to use the new building. Dr Fell (Owen's own head of house) is second only to Sheldon. He alludes wittily, in stanza 24, to the dangers of his irregular form: Horace has warned ('Odes', iv.2) that Icarus's watery fate awaits imitators of Pindar, and 'obsedere vias 'latrones Grammaticastri'' ('bandit-scholars have infested the roads'). Critics use procrustean beds: '
Heu docti nimium versus torquere misellos, 

Nunc 'tensos' immane pedes producere gaudent, 

Nunc 'sauciatis' amputare syllabis. 
(Alas, the over-learned rejoice to torture poor verses, now to stretch out feet, now to amputate, leaving wounded syllables.)' So Owen anticipates and mocks Dr Johnson's criticism. 
Owen also wrote an English Pindaric ode, in twenty-one stanzas, 'Upon the Intolerable Heat in the Latter End of May and the Beginning of June, 1665', which is the last, and only signed, poem in John Bulteel's 'New Collection of Poems and Songs' (1674). It starts vigorously: '
Fire, fire, fire, fire, the Bells all backwards ring: 

Haste, haste, to every Well and Spring. 

' But death stalks the countryside and city, in the form of the plague, while the brave fleet faces the Dutch. Owen ends by considering his own verse: '
This onely my Pindaricks do desire, 

Not for to save my house, but my own self from fire. 


'Pindar's' bright Poetick flame 

Surviv'd his ashes, blown by Fame. 

' Corbet Owen's flame, alas, did not have the chance to burn quite so brightly. He died about 18 January 1671, and was buried at Condover in Shropshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 20989


Owen, David (d. 1623), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born on the Isle of Anglesey. Rector of Yardley Hastings, Northamptonshire, from 3 November 1598, and vicar of neighbouring Preston Deanery from the same year, it was not until early 1599 that he graduated BA from St Catharine's College, Cambridge. He then became a fellow of Clare College, but his tenure may have been brief since on 17 June 1600, at All Saints', Northampton, he married Elizabeth Knight (died 1617) of Geyding. He returned to Cambridge and proceeded MA from Clare in 1602 and BD in 1609, having been incorporated MA from Oxford on 14 June 1608. The possibility of some period of residence in the university is suggested by the fact that his two children, Mary and John, were baptized there respectively on 10 July 1608 and 31 March 1611; the latter was buried at Yardley Hastings on 6 July 1611. 
At some point in the first decade of the seventeenth century Owen became part of a proto-Arminian grouping within the diocese of Peterborough, and served under Thomas Dove (bishop from 1601) and John Buckeridge (archdeacon from 1604) as a church court official. Closely identified with Dove's vigorous drive against nonconformity, Owen presented his own curate, Thomas Randleson, for preaching false doctrine, on the ground that Randleson had asserted that 'though baptism was necessary yet it was not necessary unto salvation, that they were popish preachers that taught that children were not ordinarily saved without baptism' (Fielding, 97). 
On 1 May 1610 Owen completed a manuscript tract, 'The power of princes and the dutie of subjectes according to the scripture and the judgement of the auncient fathers for an antidote against the poyson of the late and lewde doctrine of papistes & puritanes' (BL, Royal MS 18 B v). At first sight this appears to be a standard contribution to the continuing debates over the oath of allegiance. Owen claimed to attack both the puritan church polity that had grown up at Geneva since 1536 and the Jesuits, whom he dated to 1537 at Rome. He roundly disputed the three presuppositions of Robert Bellarmine and the Romanists: that the pope had absolute power over all; that although the pope had no absolute power over kings directly, yet he had supreme authority to dispose of the temporalities of all Christians; and that the pope could excommunicate kings. However, the context of the tract suggests that there was more to it than met the eye. Owen was chaplain to John Ramsay, Viscount Haddington. In 1609-10 court voices (including that of Bishop Lancelot Andrewes) were raised against the manner in which the king and his agent, Haddington, had quashed the Gowrie conspiracy of 1600. Topical in its implicit endorsement of the king's right to sanction extreme measures against Roman Catholic conspirators, it is likely Owen's piece was read at court. Published later in 1610, as 'Herod and Pilate Reconciled', at Cambridge, the printed version follows the manuscript text with a few minor corrections. These are in the concluding chapter, 'Puritan-Jesuitisme', which lists the 'generall consent of the principall Puritans and Jesuits against Kings, from the year 1536 untill the year 1602' (pp. 47-53), among them John Knox, George Buchanan, Theodore Beza, Thomas Cartwright, Robert Rollock, and William Bucanus. The work retained its topicality, being republished in 1642, 1643, 1652, and 1663. A Dutch translation was published in 1660 by Johann Utenbogaert. 
On 14 January 1614, in succession to Robert Catelin, 'a key figure in the local puritan campaign' (Fielding, 97), and presumably in a move to rein in the town's notorious nonconformity, Owen became vicar of All Saints', Northampton. He resigned in 1616, having in the meantime retained Yardley Hastings, where his wife was buried on 20 May 1617. Within the next three years he married another Elizabeth, whose other name is unknown; a daughter, Jane, was baptized on 13 May 1620. In 1618 he obtained his DD degree (incorporated at Oxford in July) from Cambridge; while there he is credited with having informed on Ralph Brownrigg for discussing, in his private rooms at Pembroke College, whether kings might be deposed for breaking fundamental laws. On 19 April 1619 he took part in a disputation in the Cambridge divinity schools in which he denounced the teachings on 'Romans' 13 of the Heidelberg-based David Pareus, and defended the divine right of kings. 
In July 1621 Owen sent to his patron, newly created earl of Holdernesse, a belated response to a papist tract of 1619, 'God and the king, against God and the king'. Yielding to the persuasion of friends he had produced a 'plain and full answer' over a six-week period; 'Detectio calumniarum, sophismatum, et impostuarum anonymi papistae' (BL, Royal MS 10 B xiii, fol. 2'r') was never published, presumably because events elsewhere came to overshadow it. As a result of the furore caused at Oxford and at court by a university sermon of 14 April 1622, in which one John Knight had not only offered a thorough defence of Pareus and his sanction of resistance by an inferior magistrate to his sovereign in matters of religion, but also specifically instanced the interference of James I in supporting the French Huguenots, an Oxford disputation was staged on 25 June to denounce Pareus and uphold royal authority. On 12 August the 'Directions to preachers' were issued, and later that month Owen's 1619 Latin disputation was rushed into print. Published as 'Anti-Pareus, sive, Determinatio de jure regio' and dedicated on 31 August to the king, it attacked both papists and 'disciplinarians' for controverting royal authority. Conventionally, Owen saw the king as father of his country, and he conceded that 'subjects ought not to obey in those cases where the Prince commands against God' (Sommerville, 34), but he spelt out more explicitly than many the extent to which royal power was subject to no human authority. The volume concluded by quoting '1 Peter' 2: 17, 'Fear God, honour the king', in Welsh. 
On 2 October 1622 Owen gained the vicarage of St Sepulchre, Northampton, but he died on 23 July 1623, and was buried at Yardley Hastings church on 25 July. His will, dated 21 July, divided his property between his wife and daughters, and was proved by his widow on 29 July. Twenty years later Robert Mossom, then an army chaplain and later bishop of Derry, published in York a translation of 'Anti-Pareus' as a means of rallying royalists to the flag and of cautioning those who would offer resistance to the crown. In the preface to 'Anti-Pareus, or, A Treatise in the Defence of the Royall Right of Kings' (1643) he saluted Owen as a 'man of so much piety as to write nothing but what his conscience told him was the Truth; and of so much Learning as to maintaine the Truth he writ' (p. A3*). 


@@@@@


doc= 20990


Owen, David (1711/12-1741), harper, was the son of Owen Humphreys and his wife, Gwen Roberts of Isallt Fawr, Llanfihangel-y-Pennant, Caernarvonshire, a member of a family that was traditionally believed to be descended from the physicians of Myddfai. He was born at a farmhouse called Y Garreg Wen, at Ynyscynhaearn, near Porthmadog, Caernarvonshire. There he died in August 1741, and was buried in the churchyard of Ynyscynhaearn, where in 1840 a monument with a Welsh inscription and the figure of a harp was erected by subscription over his grave. 
Owen is said to have been a competent harper. Tradition attributes to him the authorship of the well-known air which, in all Welsh collections of national songs, bears his own name of Dafydd y Garreg Wen as its title, though it is known in Scotland by the name of 'July Jott'. Some account for this by saying that it was sent by Dafydd to a cousin of his (or, according to others, a brother named Rhys), who was then a gardener at Roslin Castle in Scotland, where the air soon became popular under a new name; but others, who accept its Scottish origin, assert that it was simply a favourite one of Dafydd's. 
According to the Welsh tradition, Dafydd when on his deathbed had fallen in a trance and was believed to be dead, but, suddenly reviving, told his mother that he had just heard one of the sweetest songs of heaven, which, on his harp being handed him, he then played; but as the last note was dying away Dafydd, too, died. The air was subsequently preserved from memory by his mother, who was herself a harper and poet. Sir Walter Scott wrote words for the air, entitled 'The Dying Bard'. Scott adds that the bard 'requested that the air might be performed at his funeral', and his instructions were carried out. At least two other airs are ascribed to Dafydd: namely, 'Codiad yr ehedydd' ('Rising of the Lark') and 'Difyrrwch gwyr Cricieth' ('The Delight of the Men of Cricieth'), which is also known as 'Roslin Castle' in Scotland, where tradition says it was popularized by Dafydd's cousin. Evan Evans (Ieuan Glan Geirionydd) wrote words (in Welsh) for this air. The tunes of 'Dafydd y Garreg Wen' and 'Codiad yr ehedydd' were first published in 'Musical and Poetical Relicks of the Welsh Bards' (1784), by Edward Jones (Bardd y Brenin). Their English and Welsh words in Henry Brinley Richards's 'Songs of Wales' (1873, 58, 79) are by John Oxenford and J. Ceiriog Hughes respectively. 


@@@@@


doc= 20991


Owen, David (bap. 1784, d. 1841), poet, was the son of Owen Dafydd and Catherine, his second wife, who lived on the farm of Y Gaerwen, in the parish of Llanystumdwy, Caernarvonshire. He was baptized in that parish on 18 June 1784, and was educated in local schools and, unusually, in a boarding-school at Bangor Is-coed, Flintshire, together with Owen, his younger brother. Owen Owen later established himself as a shopkeeper in Pwllheli and became a man of some importance in the life of the town. David Owen returned to Y Gaerwen and managed the farm himself after the death of his father in 1816. 
David Owen mastered the rules of 'cerdd dafod', the strict metres of Welsh poetry, at an early age. The commote of Eifionydd was noted for its rich poetic inheritance, and the ancient tradition of bardic teacher and disciple was still alive. His older friend and neighbour Robert Williams (Robert ap Gwilym Ddu), the best contemporary poet, was his main bardic instructor. He benefited, too, from a long acquaintance with David Thomas (Dafydd Ddu Eryri), the influential mentor of the nearby Arfon group of versifiers. Dewi soon became known to the Welsh public as a cantankerous competitor in the reformed eisteddfodau held in the early years of the nineteenth century under the auspices of the Gwyneddigion Society of London, whose leaders required that the main competition should be a prize for the 'awdl', a long poem in selected strict metres, with competitors using a pseudonym. Dewi's eisteddfod career was marked throughout by bitter controversy. He was declared second best in 1803. In 1805 the prize was first awarded to Bardd Cwsg (Hugh Maurice), a nephew of Owain Myfyr, the authoritative leader of the Gwyneddigion, who refused to reveal his name, and Dewi was then awarded the prize by default. In the Tremadog eisteddfod of 1811 he won a silver cup offered for the best poem on agriculture, but it was withheld owing to a conspiracy among influential members of the Gwyneddigion Society. The quarrel between the poet and the society finally came to a head in 1819. In the Denbigh eisteddfod of that year the society's medal was offered for the best poem on charity ('elusengarwch'); no announcement was made at the eisteddfod itself, but some three weeks later the Revd Edward Hughes of Bodfari was declared the winner, despite an inferior composition. 
These disappointments so mortified Dewi that, after several fierce onslaughts in verse and prose upon his foes, he gave up competition and wrote nothing of importance from 1823 until his death, apart from his well-known 'Stanzas to the Menai Bridge' (1832). 
From 1827 on David Owen spent much of his time in Pwllheli to be with his brother, whose health was deteriorating. On Owen Owen's death in 1837 he returned to Y Gaerwen. By this time the poet was known as a man of considerable means and miserly character. Towards the end of his life he suffered from a deep religious depression; always attracted to the Baptist denomination, he did not officially join it until the year before his death. David Owen never married and died at Y Gaerwen on 17 January 1841. He was buried five days later in Llangybi churchyard. A collection of his main works appeared in 1842, and a final supplement was published in 1869. 
During his lifetime Dewi Wyn was much admired by Romantic critics as a poet of soaring imagination and sublimity. His faults were not ignored, but his genius was held to transcend those weaknesses often enumerated by modern critics: vacuous verbosity, repetitiveness, incoherent imagery, and an urge to exhaust every possible aspect of the poem's subject at interminable length. Dewi Wyn, more than any other poet of the time, was responsible for making the long poem as discursive essay an unfortunate fashion which survived into the early years of the twentieth century. Paradoxically, he regarded his most popular poem, the 'awdl' on charity, as an attempt at the epic genre. His early work suggests that he might have become a poet of importance, but like many others he fell a victim to the demands of eisteddfod competition. 


@@@@@


doc= 20992


Owen, David (1795-1866), journalist and writer, was born in late 1795 at Llanpumpsaint, near Carmarthen, and baptized on 25 December 1795, the son of David Benjamin Owen, a shoemaker and an Anglican parish clerk, and Rachel Owen, a Baptist. He was educated locally, and at Carmarthen grammar school, where he learned Greek and Latin. As a youth he took an interest in magic and the 'black arts', which he satirized in later life. While serving a medical apprenticeship with Dr John Thomas, at Aberdyar, near Llanybydder, he was introduced to Baptism by the doctor's brother, the Revd Timothy Thomas, and shortly thereafter joined the Baptist church. Deciding upon a career in the ministry, he spent a year at the Baptist college, Bristol. He was then for three years a schoolmaster and lay preacher at Gilfach, near Aber, Caernarvonshire, before taking charge of the Baptist churches of Tal-y-graig, Galltraeth, Tyndonnen, and Rhoshirwaun on the Llyn peninsula, Caernarvonshire. There he was ordained, and settled in Llangian. In 1820 he married Anne, daughter of Thomas Jones, a farmer from Rhandir and a deacon of the Independent church. 
Supplementing his income by teaching and dispensing medical advice, Owen also began to write. He made an explosive impact on literature in Wales when his article 'The poverty of the Welsh language' was published in 'Seren Gomer' in 1824 under the signature Brutus, Lleyn (Brutus from Llyn). In it he accused the Welsh of being intellectually a 'nation of thieves', wholly dependent on English literary culture. The article stimulated a lively public debate, eliciting responses from, among others, Walter Davies 
(Gwallter Mechain; 1761-1849)
, Thomas Price 
(Carnhuanawc; 1787-1848)
, and Joseph Harris 
(Gomer; 1773-1825)
. He continued to play the same provocative role in Welsh religious and cultural criticism for the remainder of his life. 
Owen's relations with nonconformity also became strained at this time. For reasons not entirely clear, he informed Dr Lant Carpenter of the Unitarian Association at Bristol that his congregation in Llyn was leaning towards Unitarianism, and appealed for Unitarian funds. Carpenter found no evidence to support Owen's claim and refused financial support: shortly thereafter, he was expelled from the Baptist church. Partly thanks to his father-in-law's connections, he was accepted into the Independent church of Capel Newydd. He moved to Tyddyn Sweep, Maenaddwyn, near Llannerch-y-medd, Anglesey, and from there to Bontnewydd, near Caernarfon, where he preached and kept school. 
Owen was not a popular preacher in either place, and from January 1828 he abandoned the pulpit for journalism, becoming editor of 'Lleuad yr Oes', a general, non-denominational monthly journal published by Samuel Thomas in Aberystwyth. During this period, when he lived in Llanbadarn Fawr, he wrote a pamphlet attacking child baptism (1828), which was answered by Benjamin Jones (Llanrwst) in 1831, and a ferocious attack on Catholicism, 'Cwymp babilon fawr' (1829). In 1830, facing bankruptcy, Samuel Thomas sold the title to Jeffrey Jones of Llandovery. Owen remained its editor, and moved to Pentre-ty-gwyn. Following the death of Jones in 1830, a successor, 'Yr Efangylydd', was launched in 1831 by another Llandovery printer, the Anglican William Rees, and a group of Independent ministers. Under Owen's editorship, the journal became increasingly conservative in both politics and theology, and the Independent contributors sought to dismiss him. Backed by the Anglican printer, Owen retained his post for a time, but the Independents withdrew their support and thus brought the journal to an end in May 1835. 
In August 1835 the Independents launched their own radical, anti-tory and anti-Anglican magazine 'Y Diwygiwr', in Llanelli, under the editorship of David Rees 
(y Cynhyrfwr; 1801-1869)
, while a month earlier Owen, now returned to the Anglican church, had begun to edit for William Rees a new monthly Anglican periodical, 'Yr Haul'. The two journals, led by two strong editors, defined much of Welsh religious, political, and cultural life in the period between their launch and Owen's death in 1866. In 'Yr Haul', Owen satirized and vilified nonconformity in general and Independent presbyterianism (or 'Great Independia') in particular. He was the author, under the pseudonym Bleddyn, of biographies of the leading Welsh religious figures Christmas Evans (1840), John Elias (1844), John Edwards (1849), and Thomas Williams (1861). He also published bitingly satirical pamphlets, such as 'Papuryn achlysurol: drych y brad, yn cynnwys yr asyn quadrupedaidd a'r asyn bipedaidd... gan rigdum funnidos' (1843), though his most enduring creations were 'Bugeiliaid Eppynt', serialized in 'Yr Haul', 1835-66, and 'Wil Brydydd y Coed; Cofiant Siencyn bach y llwywr; a chofiant Dai Hunandyb', serialized in that journal from September 1863 to December 1865 (the latter was published posthumously in Carmarthen in 1876). A selection of his articles and poems from 'Yr Haul' was published in 'Brutusiana, sef casgliad detholedig o'i gyfansoddiadau' (1855), which included strong attacks on slavery (p. 237) and a passionate defence of Welsh patriotism (pp. 328-35). 
As early as 1824 Joseph Harris had recognized in Owen a brilliant 'advocatus diaboli', and it was said in 1883 that 'Brutus was the first Welsh writer who made politics popular'. He received a pension from the civil list in 1858. He died of gout, in great pain, on 16 January 1866, leaving a widow and several children. He was buried on 19 January 1866 in Llywel church. 


@@@@@


doc= 20993


Owen, Edward (1728/9-1807), Church of England clergyman and translator, was the third son of David Owen of Llangurig, Montgomeryshire. He matriculated at Jesus College, Oxford, on 22 March 1746, aged seventeen, graduating BA on 1 December 1749 and MA on 1 June 1752. He was appointed headmaster of the grammar school at Warrington on 4 June 1757, incumbent of Sankey Chapel in 1763, and rector of Warrington on 14 September 1767, an office he retained until his death. He was a strong supporter of the established church, and in 1790 preached a sermon voicing his opposition to any increase in the privileges granted to dissenters. He supervised extensive repairs to both church and school, and both as master and clergyman he acquired a high local reputation. Among his pupils were George Tierney, president of the Board of Control; Dr John Wright, fellow of Brasenose College, Oxford; John Almon, Dr Thomas Barnes, and John Fitchett. He was president of the Warrington Library, which was established in 1760, and took a prominent part in the promotion of the literary and social interests of the town. 
Owen published textbooks dealing with Latin grammar and metre, but his chief work was his translation of Juvenal's 'Satires', 'cleared of all the most exceptionable passages', which was published in 1785 together with Thomas Brewster's translation of Persius. A further edition, now including Owen's own translation of Persius, appeared in 1786. The translation was aimed at fellow teachers and their pupils, and he observes in the preface that 'there are but few masters, who wish not to see the beauties of the manly Juvenal separated from his impurities'. Owen aimed to surpass Juvenal's earlier translators in 'ease and spirit, (not excepting the great and masculine but slovenly Dryden himself)', but his bowdlerised version was not a great success. 
Owen's high opinion of himself was singled out for satire by Thomas Seddon in his 'Characteristic Strictures' (1779) where he lampoons the vicar of Warrington as the epitome of self-consequence. However Gilbert Wakefield had a better opinion of Owen, whom he describes as 'a man of most elegant learning, unimpeachable veracity, and peculiar benevolence of heart' (Wakefield, 161). Owen died unmarried in April 1807, and was buried in the chancel of Warrington parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 20994


Owen, Sir Edward Campbell Rich (1771-1849), naval officer, was born at Campobello, Nova Scotia, on 19 February 1771, the first illegitimate son of Captain William Owen RN (1737-1778) and his housekeeper, Sarah Haslam of Manchester. He was the elder brother of Captain William Owen RN, and first cousin of David Owen, senior wrangler at Cambridge in 1777. His father, who was of Welsh origin, had been granted a share of Passamaquoddy, bay of Fundy, where he established the settlement of Campobello. 
Owen was entered on the books of the 'Enterprize' in the Mediterranean when he was barely four years old, and in 1780-82 he was similarly entered on the books of ships in the West Indies. His actual entry into the navy seems to have been in 1786, on board the guardship 'Culloden' at Plymouth. He afterwards served on the home, Mediterranean, North American, and West Indian stations; and on 6 November 1793 was promoted lieutenant of the 'Fortunee'. Afterwards, on the home station, in the summer of 1796, he was acting captain of the 'Impregnable' with Rear-Admiral Sir Thomas Rich, his godfather, and of the 'Queen Charlotte' with Sir John Colpoys; and on 19 September was promoted commander. 
In May 1797 Owen had charge of a division of gun-brigs at the Nore, under the command of Sir Erasmus Gower. On 23 April 1798 he was posted to the 'Northumberland', from which he was moved to the 'Irresistible', in the Medway. In 1801 he commanded the 'Nemesis' in the North Sea and off Dunkirk or Boulogne. In May 1802 he was appointed to the 'Immortalite', in which, on the renewal of the war, he served on the coast of France, capturing or destroying many gunboats or privateers, more especially on 20 July 1804, when, in conjunction with four brigs and a northerly gale, he ensured the destruction of many gunboats and several hundred soldiers between Boulogne and Etaples. In October 1806 he was moved to the 'Clyde' and ordered to hoist a broad pennant, and successfully attacked the town and port of Boulogne with Congreve rockets. In 1809 he was attached to the Walcheren expedition. He afterwards commanded the 'Inconstant' in the North Sea, and in 1813 the 'Cornwall'. In 1814 he commanded the yacht 'Dorset', and on 2 January 1815 was nominated KCB. In 1816 he was appointed to the yacht 'Royal Sovereign', which he commanded for the next six years; and from 1822 to 1825 was commander-in-chief in the West Indies, with a broad pennant in the 'Gloucester'. 
From 1826 to 1829 Owen was MP for Sandwich, Kent. He opposed Catholic emancipation and defended naval punishments. On 27 May 1825 he was promoted rear-admiral; in 1827 he was surveyor-general of the ordnance; from March to September 1828 he was a member of the council of the lord high admiral; and from December 1828 to 1832 was commander-in-chief in the East Indies, vacating his parliamentary seat in March 1829. He married, first, on 16 December 1802, Elizabeth (1782-1824), daughter of John Cannon of Deal, Kent; and second, on 28 February 1829, Selina, daughter of Captain John Baker Hay RN: they had no children. 
On his return from the West Indies, Owen was nominated a GCH on 24 October 1832. In 1834 he accepted a seat on the Board of Ordnance in Peel's brief ministry, and contested Sandwich in the Conservative interest, but was defeated. He became a vice-admiral on 10 January 1837, and from 1841 to 1845 was commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, with his flag in the 'Queen' and afterwards in the 'Formidable'. Owen took his wife with him aboard the flagship (a practice the government wanted to end): this caused some concern during the 1844 Morocco crisis, particularly as it was widely believed that she was insane. Distinctly unfavourable comparisons were made with Owen's far younger French counterpart, the Prince de Joinville. Owen presided over the Mediterranean command at a low ebb: Anglo-French entente had reduced the size of the fleet, while his age and infirmity ensured that it was little troubled by activity. Yet in the Morocco crisis Owen displayed good sense and diplomatic skills, earning the praise of the Admiralty. 
Owen was nominated a GCB on 8 May 1845 and became admiral on 11 December 1846. He died at his residence, Windlesham House, near Bagshot, Surrey, on 8 October 1849 and was buried in Windlesham churchyard. An able officer, politically conservative and much favoured by William IV, Owen demonstrated real ability in the channel between 1802 and 1809, and later at the Ordnance board, on the lord high admiral's council, and in command afloat. 


@@@@@


doc= 20995


Owen, Edward Pryce (1788-1863), artist and etcher, born on 3 March 1788, was the only son of Hugh Owen (1760-1827), curate of Berwick, Shropshire, and his wife, Harriet, 'nee' Jeffreys. He was educated from 1806 at St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1810 and MA in 1816. He was ordained deacon at Lichfield in 1811, and priest in 1812, and from 1811 to 1817 was curate of St Julian's, Shrewsbury. After officiating for some time at Park Street Chapel, Grosvenor Square, London, he became vicar of Wellington and rector of Eyton upon the Wildmoors, Shropshire, which livings he held from 27 February 1823 until 1840. During this period he produced a number of impressive topographical and genre etchings, for which he acquired considerable skill under the tutelage of his father, a noted topographer. He contributed several plates to 'The History of Shrewsbury' (1825), by his father and John Brickdale Blakeway, and he published 'Etchings of Ancient Buildings in Shrewsbury' (1820-21). Owen produced three further volumes of etchings in 1826, 1842, and 1855, all privately printed. On 6 December 1825 he married Mary Darby, the only daughter of Samuel Darby of Colebrookdale, with whom he had two children, Hugh and Mary, and who survived him. He first took up oil painting at the age of fifty, and he completed several hundred landscapes, many taken from the numerous sketches he produced during his tours of France and Belgium, and (in 1840) of Italy, the Levant, Germany, and Switzerland. He exhibited three paintings at the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists between 1837 and 1840 -- a landscape, an interior, and 'A Welsh Cottage'. He also exhibited eight works at the British Institution, including 'The Prodigal'. Owen lived for many years at Cheltenham, and in the latter part of his life at Betws Hall, Monmouthshire. He died at Cheltenham on 15 July 1863 and was buried at St James's, Cheltenham. 


@@@@@


doc= 20996


Owen, Ellis (1789-1868), antiquary and Welsh-language poet, was born on 31 March 1789 in the parish of Ynyscynhaearn, Caernarvonshire, the son of Owen Ellis, farmer, and Ann Thomas, his wife, of Cefnymeysydd in the same parish. He went to school at Penmorfa, and was afterwards sent to Shrewsbury; on returning home he settled at Cefnymeysydd, and on his father's death took charge of the farm. He spent the rest of his life at Cefnymeysydd as a prosperous farmer of much local influence, holding several minor offices, such as churchwarden, inspector of weights and measures for the county, and secretary of the Bible Society for the Tremadoc district. He was chiefly remarkable as a writer of 'englynion' (stanzas), as a local antiquary and genealogist, and as the friend and tutor of the young poets of the district. The Literary Society of Cefnymeysydd (Cymdeithas Lenyddol Cefnymeysydd), the precursor of many a society of the kind in Wales, met fortnightly at his house and under his presidency for eleven years (1846-57). Four days before his death at Cefnymeysydd on 27 January 1868, Owen had been elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He was buried at Ynyscynhaearn on 31 January 1868. His poetical and prose writings were collected by Robert Isaac Jones (Alltud Eifion), and published, with a biographical notice, under the title 'Cell meudwy' ('The Hermit's Cell') in 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 20997


Owen, Sir Francis Philip Cunliffe- (1828-1894), museum director and exhibition organizer, born on 8 June 1828, was third son of Captain Charles Cunliffe-Owen RN and Mary (died 1841), only daughter of Sir Henry Blosset, formerly chief justice of Bengal. He entered the navy at the age of twelve but, owing to ill health, abandoned the profession after five years' service in the Mediterranean and the West Indies. In 1854 he married Jenny (died 1894), daughter of Baron Fritz von Reitzenstein, of the Royal Prussian horse guards. They had six daughters and two sons, one of whom, Sir Hugo von Reitzenstein Cunliffe-Owen, became a successful tobacco entrepreneur. Also in 1854, the influence of an elder brother, Henry Charles Cunliffe-Owen, obtained him a post in the recently established Department of Science and Art. The department's secretary, Henry Cole, appointed him as one of the superintendents of the British section of the Universal Exhibition held at Paris in 1855, a task for which Owen's excellent knowledge of French proved to be a great advantage. The collaboration between the two men blossomed into an extremely successful partnership in the promotion of international exhibitions, and their combined efforts helped shape the course of these events during the latter half of the nineteenth century. 
Owen's successful administration in Paris in 1855 led to his appointment in 1857 as deputy general superintendent of the newly established South Kensington Museum, and he was promoted to the post of assistant director in 1860, subordinate to Cole, who served as director. In 1862 the second great London Exhibition was held, and Owen acted as director of the foreign sections. Soon afterwards, in 1864, he was elected a member of the Society of Arts, which was instrumental in promoting Cole's initiatives in the fields of education and exhibition. For the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1867, Owen was again made second in command to Cole, as assistant executive commissioner. His years of labouring under Cole were rewarded when he was appointed secretary of the royal commission appointed to represent Britain at the Vienna International Exhibition in 1873, answering directly to the prince of Wales. In the same year Cole retired from both the posts he held at South Kensington, and one of them, the directorship of the museum, was conferred upon Owen. 
The next international event was the Centennial Exhibition held at Philadelphia in 1876. Owen was appointed executive commissioner for Great Britain and visited America for the purpose of making the preliminary arrangements. After he resigned, the post was filled by Herbert Sandford. In 1878 Owen was once again made secretary of the royal commission to the Universal Exhibition of that year in Paris. At the close of the exhibition he was made a KCMG and CIE, having been appointed CB after Vienna. Among his many foreign decorations was that of grand officer in the French Legion d'honneur. In 1879 he was also appointed to the council of the Society of Arts. 
Owen subsequently turned his great experience in organizing exhibitions to account in Britain. Taking up the somewhat unpromising scheme for a fisheries exhibition in 1883, he succeeded in transforming it into a great public success and a fashionable amusement. This was followed up by the International Health Exhibition in 1884, the Inventions and Music Exhibition in 1885, and, finally, the Indian and Colonial Exhibition of 1886. Owen controlled to a very great extent the administration of all these 1880s exhibitions, relying on the active support of the prince of Wales and the co-operation of the duke of Buckingham and Sir Frederick Bramwell. Although Owen was made a KCB after the Indian and Colonial Exhibition, he did not receive the direction of the Imperial Institute, which was founded in 1887 as a development of that event. 
After some years of failing health owing to heart disease, Owen retired from his post at the South Kensington Museum in 1893. As a museum director, he was considered nothing more nor less than a capable administrator, who possessed little expert knowledge of his own and was sometimes criticized for not valuing it enough in others. He was clearly best suited to the work of organizing exhibitions and seems to have been happiest when engaged in that capacity. He died at 13 Kirkley-cliff, Lowestoft, Suffolk, on 23 March 1894. 


@@@@@


doc= 20998


Owen, George (c.1499-1558), physician, was born about 1499 in the diocese of Worcester, and was educated at Oxford. He became probationer fellow of Merton College in 1519 and graduated MA in 1521. He was keeper of the Bourgchier chest in 1520-21, the Chichele and Audley chest also in 1521, and the Danvers chest from 1522 to 1524. At Merton he was first bursar 1524-5 and third bursar 1525-6. He seems to have been destined for the church, but on marrying Lettice, a widow from Suffolk, he took up medicine, having first attempted to trade as a white baker in Oxford without becoming a freeman of the city. He took his BM in 1525 and his DM in 1528. In 1525 Owen received a licence to practise medicine, and at first worked in Oxford, but soon after his graduation he was appointed physician to Henry VIII, and frequently visited the court. He, together with John Chambre and William Butts, attended the birth of Prince Edward in 1537, and he was a signatory to the letter to the council announcing the serious condition of the child's mother, Jane Seymour. The statement that he performed a caesarean section upon her is untrue. Through 1537 and 1538 he was often summoned to prescribe for the prince. The king proved a generous patron, and during the dissolution of the monasteries made him many grants of lands and houses in Oxford and its neighbourhood, to which Owen added by extensive purchases. In 1537 he was given New Hall and St Alban Hall in Oxford with a fee of $100 (these buildings were subsequently sold to Merton College) and he was allowed to purchase the manor of Yarnton, Oxfordshire. In March 1540 he acquired Godstow Abbey for $558 and in 1541 he bought Walton and Wolvercote manors and the site of Rewley Abbey, which he soon passed on to Christ Church, for $1174. In 1546, together with Dr John Bridges, he acquired Cumnor Place for $1300. Godstow Abbey became Owen's main home. He was one of the subscribing witnesses to the will of Henry VIII, who left him a legacy of $100. 
Edward VI kept Owen as royal physician, and treated him with as much generosity as his father. From 1547 he was seemingly able to use the duchy of Lancaster's money as his own, having been appointed a receiver-general on 30 September that year. In 1550 he bought the rectory and chapel of St Giles', Oxford, and on 4 February 1553 Edward gave him, jointly with Henry Martin of Oxford, Durham College, which they sold a year later to Sir Thomas Pope for the site of his projected Trinity College. He received a grant of arms from Edward, and, on 25 October 1552, a royal grant of land of the value of $20 a year. These acquisitions made Owen the greatest landowner to the north-west of Oxford, and brought him into conflict with Sir John Williams over rights in Wytham Woods, and with the city over Port meadow. Fortunately his eldest son, Richard, married Mary, daughter of Sir Leonard Chamberlain, Mary's leading supporter, after Williams, in the area. 
Meanwhile Owen was taking a prominent place in his profession, and was held in esteem by the public. John Leland addressed an encomium 'Ad D. Audoenum medicum regium', and, according to his friend Thomas Caius, he and Queen Katherine Parr joined in inducing Caius to translate into English Erasmus's paraphrase of 'St Mark's gospel'. He was admitted a fellow of the College of Physicians on 25 June 1545; an elect in 1552, in place of John Chambre, deceased; and on 2 October 1553 was elected president, an office to which he was reappointed the following year. 
Owen was present at the death of Edward VI, being the last person to speak to him, but this did not mark the end of his royal connection: he was nominated royal physician on Mary's accession, and in the first year of the new reign he was instrumental in obtaining an act for the confirmation and enlargement of the powers of the College of Physicians. Two years later, when a difference arose between the College of Physicians and the University of Oxford concerning the admission by the latter of Simon Ludford and David Laughton to the degree of bachelor of medicine, Cardinal Pole, then chancellor of the university, directed that body to consult Owen and Dr Thomas Huys, the queen's physicians, 'de instituendis rationibus quibus Oxoniensis academia in admittendis medicis niteretur'. Owen and his colleague suggested an agreement which the chancellor approved and ratified. 
Owen remained until his death on friendly terms with Queen Mary. In 1554 he testified that Princess Elizabeth was well enough to answer the queen's summons after Wyatt's rebellion, and, in the spring of 1555, Mary sent him to Woodstock to report on Elizabeth's health. At the new year of 1556 he presented the queen with 'two pottles of preserves' (Madden, 254). Owen was made a JP in Oxfordshire in 1547 and was a commissioner of relief in 1550. In 1558 he was returned to parliament for Oxfordshire. He married twice, the second time to Mary. He died of an epidemic intermittent fever on 18 October 1558, and was buried on 24 October in London at St Stephen Walbrook. He was the author of a treatise named 'A Meet Diet for the New Ague, Set Forth by Mr. Dr. Owen', published in 1558. 
Owen left a son, William, and two daughters, Lettice and Elizabeth, beside the aforementioned Richard, all from his first marriage. William, the second son, and his wife, Anne, daughter of John Rawley of Billesby, Northamptonshire, were living at Cumnor Place when Amy Robsart, wife of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, met her mysterious death there in 1560. William Owen sold Cumnor to Anthony Forster in 1572, and in the same year was elected MP for Oxford. He seems to have retained his father's property at Godstow, and lived there. 
John Owen, described in 1615 as a Roman Catholic, of Godstow, was Richard Owen's grandson, and great-grandson of George Owen. He achieved some notoriety in 1615 by being charged with using the treasonable expression that it was lawful to kill the king, since he was excommunicate. The jury brought in a verdict of guilty, and sentence of death was passed, but, after remaining in prison in the king's bench for three years, Owen was pardoned on 24 July 1618, at the request of the Spanish ambassador, on condition of his leaving the country within twenty days. 


@@@@@


doc= 20999


Owen, George (1552-1613), antiquary, was born at Henllys, Nevern, near Newport, Pembrokeshire. He was the son of the lawyer William Owen (c.1488-1574) and Elizabeth ('c'.1520-1603), daughter of Sir George Herbert of Swansea and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Thomas Berkeley, and niece of William Herbert, first earl of Pembroke of the second creation. Nothing is known of his early education although it is likely that he received tuition in the law and estate management from his father. On 4 October 1571 William Owen settled the barony of Cemais on George, with the castle of Newport and the advowson of six churches; George's father had acquired the barony from Lord Audley. George Owen was married the same year to Elizabeth (died 1606), daughter and coheir of William Philipps of Picton Castle and his wife, Janet, daughter of Thomas Perrot of Haroldston and sister of Sir John Perrot. Philipps and Perrot were the two most powerful figures in Pembrokeshire, but much at enmity, and it was at a fracas between the two adversarial factions that occurred at Haverfordwest on 9 February 1572 that Owen made his first recorded public appearance. A retaliatory assault had been proposed upon Owen's pro-Perrott neighbour, and, although the latter (Thomas ab Owen of Pentre Ifan) prudently stayed at home, Owen's men were arrested, which was regarded as a calculated rebuff to the young lord of Cemais. He was admitted at Barnard's Inn on 5 August 1573 but there is no record of the duration of his stay there. 
With his wife, Elizabeth, Owen had eleven children, four of whom died in infancy. She died in 1606 and, not long afterwards, he married his mistress, Anne or Ankred (died 1634), daughter of William Obiled, a Carmarthen tucker, with whom he had already had seven illegitimate children. Deeply conscious of his position as lord of Cemais, Owen spent much time in litigation over claims to the seigneurial rights pertaining to the former marcher lordship, which had been neglected by the Audleys, who had their main baronial estate at Heleigh in Staffordshire. In his efforts to reinstate feudal rights he discomfited his tenants, who were indisposed to pay lapsed rents or perform outdated services; and in 1606, as none of the burgesses was prepared to collect the rents and dues, he was unable to exercise his right to appoint the mayor of Newport. He was also unpopular with his gentry neighbours, who reported him to the privy council charged with forgery and counterfeiting deeds, and he was arrested while sitting in his own court at Newport on 27 November 1579. His house was searched, but no incriminating evidence was found. These and other charges having failed, he was accused of adultery before the ecclesiastical commissioners, which he could not well deny. In his endeavour to prove that the lordship of Cemais had come to his father by descent rather than by purchase, Owen, although he was the leading genealogist in west Wales and had produced the first armorial in Wales, extended his pedigree and gave a misleading account of his coat of arms. 
Owen's main interest lay in the land, and his desire to improve agriculture and methods of husbandry led him to investigate and describe the basic geological features of Pembrokeshire. The soil needed lime, he contended, and to enable farmers to find it, he traced the outcrops of limestone and discovered that they ran in close parallel with the veins of anthracite coal that was required to fire the limekilns. His description of clay marl, which he championed as a fertiliser in his unpublished 'Treatise of marle' (NL Wales, Bronwydd MS 3, fols. 218-22), enabled it to be recognized as glacial till, though he subscribed to the common belief that it was the deposit of Noah's flood. His contribution to geological study was later acknowledged when he was dubbed 'the patriarch of English geologists' ('EdinR', 73, 1841, 3). His condemnation of the exposure of unschooled young men and boys to the elements while herding cattle gave him reason to recommend enclosure and to establish a school at Felindre Farchog, near Henllys, for their education. 
Owen's interest in cartography became apparent in his claim that Saxton's map of Pembrokeshire (1579) gave an exaggerated view of the county and led to an unfair demand for men for the musters. He carried out a survey and produced a map of the county in 1602, bordered by lists of hundreds, baronies, towns, castles, forests, and other features, and emblazoned with the arms of the leading county families. When Camden published maps of the counties in the 1607 edition of his 'Britannia', most of them by Saxton and Norden, he invited Owen to provide the map for Pembrokeshire. 
Owen took his public duties and responsibilities seriously. He was placed on the commission of the peace about 1584 and, in 1587, when Henry, earl of Pembroke, was made lieutenant of Wales, he appointed Owen and Thomas Perrot his deputy lieutenants in the county of Pembroke. He served two terms as sheriff of the county, in 1587, and again in 1602, when he had the unpleasant duty of arranging the execution of two brothers, kinsmen of his first wife, who had killed a cousin in a brawl. He was one of the commissioners appointed to survey and value the estate of his lifelong enemy, Sir John Perrot, who had died attainted in the Tower of London in 1592. He was made deputy vice-admiral of the counties of Pembroke and Cardigan in 1598. The vulnerability of Milford Haven in the event of invasion by the Spaniards caused him concern and he conducted a survey with a view to providing coastal defence. In November 1595 the earl of Pembroke wrote to 'my very good cozen George Owen, esquier' stating that he had 'long expected' to receive from him a map of the Haven that he could show to the queen. Owen sent him the map, which has since been lost, together with 'a pamphelett conteigninge the description of Mylford havon' (Owen, 'Description of Penbrokshire', ed. H. Owen, pt 2, 531-2), and he made proposals for its defence. 
Owen was fortunate in having lived at a time when there was an awakening of interest in Welsh antiquities and although he resided in a remote part of Wales, he had a well-stocked library at Henllys. He gathered around him a coterie of antiquaries, including George Owen Harry and George William Griffith, and maintained contact with others such as the poet-genealogist Lewys Dwnn, and with William Camden whom he visited at the College of Arms while pursuing his researches in London. He employed three permanent scriveners. 
Owen's most important work, 'The Description of Penbrokshire', was begun in December 1602, soon after the appearance of Richard Carew's 'Survey of Cornwall', and it was completed on 18 May 1603. He then proceeded to write a 'Second Booke', giving a detailed history parish by parish, but only a fragment survives, which was published by B. G. Charles in the 'National Library of Wales Journal'. Although Owen was a prolific writer, none of his work appeared in print during his lifetime, nor did any until Richard Fenton published a section of the 'First booke' containing an account of the ancient game of knappan in 'The Cambrian Register for the Year 1795' (1796). In the 'Register' for the following year, Fenton produced the remainder of the work as 'A history of Pembrokeshire, from a manuscript of George Owen, esq., of Henllys, lord of Kemes, with additions and abbreviations by John Lewis, esq., of Manarnawan'. It was indifferently edited and John Lewis's observations were so 'very largely interlarded with personal invective and private anecdotes' that they had to be expurgated. After Fenton's death in 1821 the manuscript passed to his son who sold it to Sir Thomas Phillipps and, by 1892, it was in the hands of the marquess of Bute from whose descendant it was acquired by the National Library of Wales (NL Wales, MS 13212). A later version of the manuscript was purchased from the bookseller Thomas Osborne by William Oldys in December 1738 for Edward Harley, earl of Oxford, at whose death in 1753 it was among his collection bought by parliament and placed in the British Museum (Harley MS 6250). It is now in the British Library. 
George Owen's 'Description of Penbrokshire' first appeared in book form in 1892 when it was published by the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion as number 1 in its 'Cymmrodorion Record Series'. The society published three further volumes under the same title. The second volume (1897) contained collections of papers relating to Pembrokeshire and to the barony of Cemais in particular, together with 'A cataloge and genelogie of the lordes of the baronye of Kemes seethence the conquests', accounts of suits in Star Chamber, the inquisitions post mortem of William Owen and George Owen, and 'The description of Milford Haven'. Part 3 (1906) comprised 'The dialogue of the government of Wales', which took place between Barthol, a German civil lawyer, and Demetus, recognizable as the author; 'Cruell lawes against Welshmen... made by Henrie the ffourth' following the failure of his attempts to quell the rebellion of Owain Glyn Dwr, laws that the author considered to be malicious; and 'A treatise of lordshipps marchers in Wales', and 'The description of Wales', which listed the lordships, towns, and features of each of the counties of south Wales. The editor stated that part 4 would include the remainder of the Welsh counties, 'The fragmentes of Wales' (1606-11), containing a collection of notes on the marcher lordships and the principality of Wales, and 'The treatise of marle', but he did not live to complete the work and the volume did not appear until 1936. 'The Description of Penbrokshire' was next published in 1994. A facsimile edition of Owen's commonplace book, 'The Taylors Cussion', was published in 1906, containing inventories of livestock, lists of high office-holders, 'aides-memoire' and mnemonic verses, and passing thoughts. 
Owen displayed the traditional Welsh hospitality towards the itinerant Welsh bards who came to Henllys and sang his praise during his lifetime but, strangely, no elegies survive. At his death, the main part of his collection of manuscripts passed to his neighbour and assistant, George William Griffith of Penybenglog, though some went to his natural son, George Owen, York herald, and, after passing through many hands, they were gathered together by Edward Protheroe and acquired in 1828 by the College of Arms, where they remain as the Protheroe collection. 
Although a protestant and an anti-papist and patron of six churches, Owen made little reference to religion, except that he upheld the sanctity of the sabbath and welcomed the translation of the 'Bible' into Welsh. No likeness of him exists. It is known that he was lame as the result of an infirmity suffered in his right leg when he was four years of age and, from middle age onward, he suffered from the gout in both legs; but this did not prevent his travelling long distances in pursuit of his researches, when he had to be lifted on to his horse and to his bed. His personal character is veiled behind his insistent efforts to establish himself as a feudal lord. He died on 26 August 1613 at Haverfordwest; his body was taken to Henllys and was buried at Nevern church, where a brass plaque commemorates him. 
Owen left no will, and the disposal of his estate by his only legitimate son, Alban Owen (1580-1656), led to disputes, many of them arising from an insistence on maintaining the manorial customs as his father had done. He followed his father also in his public duties as justice of the peace, deputy lieutenant, and twice as sheriff of the county of Pembroke. During the civil war he was nominated by parliament to put the militia ordinance into execution in Pembrokeshire, but he was a royalist and signed royalist declarations which led to the sequestration of his estate. A collection of the arms of the London City companies with Alban Owen's signature attached is preserved in the Phillipps Library at Cheltenham (MS 13140, no. 106). 
Among Owen's natural children with Anne Obiled were George Owen (c.1598-1665), York herald and Evan Owen (1599-1662), who matriculated from Jesus College, Oxford, in 1622 and proceeded BA the same day, MA on 21 June 1625, BTh on 31 August 1636, and DTh on 12 April 1643. Evan was appointed to the rectories of Newport (17 February 1623), Llanychlwydog (14 July 1626), and Walwyn's Castle (22 May 1638), and was installed chancellor of St David's on 8 May 1645. He died on 30 December 1662 and was buried at Llawhaden church where a mural tablet was placed to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 21000


Owen, George (c.1598-1665), herald, was born at Henllys, Nevern, near Newport, Pembrokeshire, the son of George Owen (1552-1613) of Henllys and his second wife, Anne or Ankred Obiled (died.1634), 'gott before mariage and in the life time of his firste wife' (London). Nothing is known about his early life or education, except that he appears to have inherited an interest in genealogy from his father. He was nominated Rouge Croix pursuivant on 28 February 1625 in the place of John Bradshaw, and appointed Windsor herald, but he was not confirmed in the office, despite an order sent by the earl marshal to the officers of arms, until 26 July 1626. He was promoted York herald by signet issued in December 1633 and by patent dated 3 January following, and created the next day. Owen may have been admitted to Gray's Inn on 4 August 1633, but he does not appear to have been called to the bar. He married Rebecca, daughter of Sir Thomas Dayrell of Livingstone Dayrell, near Buckingham. The couple had two sons, both of whom died young, and a daughter. 
In the course of his work Owen compiled, among other unpublished works, pedigrees of Worcestershire families (1634) and a short tract dated 1638 'touching the precedence of a baronet's daughter' (BL, Add. MSS 19816, fols. 100-124, and 14410, fol. 35). He also contributed to the 1641 'Golden Grove' pedigree roll, 19 feet long and 'splendidly illuminated and fully emblazoned in the most sumptuous manner', containing the pedigree of the Vaughans, earls of Carbery (College of Arms, London). In 1639 Owen and William le Neve, Clarenceux king of arms, were attached to the staff of the earl of Arundel and Surrey, earl marshal, commander of the expedition against the Scottish covenanters. In 1640 he was sent into Wales on the king's service. When the civil war broke out he was described as a commander in the royalist army and he was with the king at Oxford on 12 April 1643, when the university conferred on him the honorary degree of doctor of laws, and at Gloucester in August. 
Some time after February 1645, when Clarenceux, with the king's permission, appointed Owen his deputy during his absence abroad, he deserted the king. His petition to be admitted York herald under parliament was granted on 13 August 1646. He attended the funeral of the earl of Essex on 22 October that year, and was probably in attendance at the installation of Oliver Cromwell as lord protector on 26 June 1657. In October 1657 he was nominated Clarenceux but did not find favour with the Garter king of arms, Sir Edward Bysshe. He was said to have been 'peculiarly busy in promoting the cause of Parliament' (London) for which, it was claimed, he was rewarded in February 1659 by being made Norroy king of arms. He assisted at the lying-in-state and funeral of Oliver Cromwell and was probably at the installation of Richard Cromwell as protector. 
At the Restoration, Owen was allowed to resume his appointment as York herald. He walked in the procession at the coronation and on reaching Westminster Hall frustrated an attempt by the royal footmen to seize the canopy that had been carried over the king by the barons of the Cinque ports. At the banquet he proclaimed the champion's challenge. His last appearance seems to have been at the funeral of Archbishop Juxon of Canterbury at Oxford on 9 July 1663. Owen then resigned, and his son-in-law, John Wingfield, succeeded him as York herald. He retired to Pembrokeshire where he died on 23 May 1665. 


@@@@@


doc= 21001


Owen, Goronwy (1723-1769), poet, was born on 1 January 1723 in the parish of Llanfair Mathafarn Eithaf, Anglesey, the fifth son of Owen or Owain Gronw ('b'. 1690), a labourer, and Jane Parry (died 1741). He received very little primary education but is known to have attended a school at Llanallgo, near his home, 'c'.1733-1734, probably run by an itinerant or local schoolmaster. A strong tradition exists that Owen was educated between 1734 and 1737 at Pwllheli, in the Llyn peninsula, but conclusive proof is lacking. Between 1737 and 1741, however, he was a pupil at Friars School, Bangor, where he received a rigorous education in Greek and Latin. Born into a poor family, he was probably aided in his education by an unknown benefactor, possibly Edward Wynne of Bodewryd, possibly the influential Morris family of Pentre-eiriannell in the neighbouring parish of Llanfihangel Tre'r-beirdd. He entered Jesus College, Oxford, on 3 June 1742 but left after a week, probably because he was unable to support himself financially. 
Owen had expressed his ambition to pursue an ecclesiastical career in a series of 'englynion' written before entering Oxford, and he was admitted to priest's orders in 1747, after working as an usher at the Pwllheli school (1742-4) which he was supposed to have attended as a pupil, and Denbigh grammar school (1745). After a brief provisional curacy at the parish church of Llanfair Mathafarn Eithaf he obtained a curacy near Oswestry, and then at Oswestry itself in 1746. Owen married Elinor or Elin Hughes (1717-1757/8), seventh child of Owen Hughes, a merchant and an alderman of Oswestry, and his wife, Margaret, on 21 August 1747. They had four children: Robert ('b'. 1749), Gronwy or Gronw ('b'. 1751), Elin ('b'. 1753), and Owen ('b'. 1757). In 1748 Owen was arrested for debt and trespass, and was taken to Shrewsbury gaol. Debts and financial difficulties were to plague him for years to come. 
Released from gaol through the benevolence of a local draper, Owen left Oswestry in September 1748 and moved to Donnington, near Shrewsbury, after procuring the curacy at Uppington which also involved running the school at Donnington. It was at Donnington that his interest in poetry was revived. He began to write once more, after neglecting his craft since he was usher at Pwllheli. Two factors were responsible for this renewed interest. John Douglas, his vicar at Uppington, who had written a pamphlet in 1751 to vindicate John Milton of the charge of plagiarism brought against him by William Lauder, introduced Owen to Milton's poetry. At Donnington, Owen also re-established contact and began correspondence with the three Morris brothers of Pentre-eiriannell, Richard, Lewis, and William, antiquaries, scholars, and men of letters, who encouraged him to write. It was Douglas, however, who was responsible for stimulating Owen's ambition to write an epic in Welsh, thus emulating Milton's great contribution to English literature with his epic masterpieces, 'Paradise Lost' and 'Paradise Regained'. 
Unhappy with his lot at Donnington, and after a dispute with one of his parishioners, Owen accepted a curacy at Walton, near Liverpool, in 1753. Ill health, overwork, and the death of his daughter Elin in April 1755 prompted him to leave Walton unexpectedly and with no future prospects. Owen's gradual decline towards alcoholism probably began at Walton. 
Owen removed himself and his family to London hoping that Richard Morris would employ him as secretary and translator of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion, a cultural society for the protection and enhancement of the Welsh language founded by Richard Morris himself, and also secure an ecclesiastical position for him. Richard Morris, however, was unable to employ Goronwy. A curacy at Northolt, Middlesex, in 1755 rescued Owen and his family from starvation and deprivation. He eventually became an active member of the Society of Cymmrodorion, but he quarrelled with some of the society's most prominent members, and with Lewis Morris himself. He was also often in debt during his Northolt period. 
Goronwy was offered a teaching post at the College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia, in 1757. He set sail for America in December 1757 on a convict ship. Both his wife and his youngest child, Owen, died during the passage, probably of gaol fever. He married Anne Clayton, housekeeper of the college, widow of James Clayton and sister of Thomas Dawson, president of the college, in 1758, a few months after arriving at the college, but she died within a year of the marriage. Her death disrupted his newly found security, and he soon reverted to his old ways. He was involved in an affray in 1760, when he and another professor of the college, Jacob Rowe, led their students in a drunken revolt against the youths of Williamsburg. Both Owen and Rowe were summoned to appear before the board of the college for causing public disruption, and were also charged with drunkenness and swearing within college bounds. Rowe was dismissed; Owen was forced to resign. Thomas Jefferson had enrolled at the college when Owen was one of the masters there, and was probably one of his students. 
Owen left Williamsburg and took up the living of St Andrews, Brunswick county. In 1763 he married Jean or Iona or Janey Simmons, with whom he had four children: John Lloyd ('b'. 1763), Gronow ('b'. 1765), Robert Brown ('b'. 1767), and Jane ('b'. 'c'.1768). He also acquired a tobacco plantation of some 400 acres. Robert was by then the only surviving child of his first family. Owen was often in trouble with the vestrymen of his parish for debt and drunkenness. He died in 1769 at Blandford, Brunswick county, Virginia, and was buried on his own plantation near Dolphin in Brunswick county. 
Owen's poetry first appeared in an anthology entitled 'Diddanwch teuluaidd' (1763), edited by Huw Jones, and published with the approval and the assistance of the Cymmrodorion Society. Owen, much influenced by the poetry and literary principles of the Augustan period, wrote a highly polished, sophisticated verse, classical in outlook and intellectual in tone. He did much to widen the scope of Welsh poetry thematically. Several popular editions of his work appeared in the nineteenth century and at the beginning of the twentieth century. The most complete and the most popular, in spite of numerous factual and textual errors, was 'The Poetical Works of the Rev. Goronwy Owen with his Life and Correspondence', edited by Robert Jones, published in two volumes in 1876. Owen was an enormous influence on Welsh poetry throughout the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 21002


Owen, Griffith (c.1647-1717), Quaker preacher and colonial official, was the son of Robert Owen (1628-1685/6) of Dolsereau, near Dongelly, Merioneth, and his wife, Jane Vaughan (died 1685/6). Nothing is known of his early years but he appears to have been granted a bishop's licence on 16 May 1674 to practise medicine. On 23 October 1678 he married Sarah (died 1702), daughter of William Barnes. They had four sons and seven daughters. Owen seems to have resided in Prescot, Lancashire, and was a member of the Knowsley meeting and Hardshaw monthly meeting. In 1680 and 1681 he was distrained for a refusal to pay tithes, and in 1681 was convicted at the Lancashire assizes, presumably under the penal laws. In May 1681 he was one of a group of Welsh Quakers who met William Penn to consider the proposed creation of a Welsh barony in Pennsylvania; on 13 March 1684 the Welsh Company received a grant of 40,000 acres, of which Owen purchased 500 acres. On 27 May 1684 he received a certificate of removal from Hardshaw monthly meeting, and emigrated to Pennsylvania, together with his parents and siblings. He arrived in Philadelphia on 17 September 1684, and by 13 November he was attending the Radnor monthly meeting. He originally settled in the Welsh tract, before moving to Merion, and then into Philadelphia itself. 
Owen quickly made an impact in Pennsylvania, serving as a member of the colonial assembly in 1686-9, during which time he was a noted defender of the rights of Welsh tract proprietors. He was a member of the provincial council in 1690-92. From 1692 he was at the forefront of attempts to rebut the charges of the apostate George Keith, and in 1695 he chaired the committee that produced and published in Pennsylvania 'Our Ancient Testimony Renewed'. With the arrival of a new governor in 1693 he seems to have eschewed politics, declining appointment as a JP, and embarking on several religious tours encompassing Maryland and Virginia in 1694. In 1695-7 he visited England in the company of Thomas Janney, visiting London, and leaving the latter at Chester for a journey into Wales. Having returned to Philadelphia by 1699 he was instrumental in combating an outbreak of the 'Barbados distemper' which threatened to decimate the colony. 
In 1700 Owen was elected to the provincial council, and when the elected council was dissolved he was appointed by Penn to its successor, serving until his death. In September 1701 he helped form the meeting of the ministers of Philadelphia, which became the meeting of ministers and elders. He attended regularly the Philadelphia yearly meeting, often acting as chairman. Just prior to Penn's departure from the colony, in October 1701, he served as a councillor and as one of four commissioners of property. Owen was normally reluctant to become heavily involved politically, but he did help to defend Penn's interests in the colony. 
Owen's wife died on 22 December 1702, and he married again on 30 November 1704. His second wife was Sarah (1664-1733), daughter of John Songhurst, who originated from Sussex, and the widow of Zachariah Whitpaine and Charles Saunders (died 1699), a colonial agent of the New Pennsylvania Company, whom she had married in Philadelphia on 8 February 1698. Owen continued to attend council meetings regularly between 1701 and 1705, but rarely thereafter until he returned from a visit to New England in 1709. In March 1711 he took part in negotiations with the American Indians at Conestoga. He died in Philadelphia on 18 August 1717, three sons acting as executors. Two of his sons practised medicine, and a daughter, Rebecca, served in the Quaker ministry. 


@@@@@


doc= 21003


Owen, Henry (1716-1795), Church of England clergyman and biblical scholar, was born at the home of his father, William Owen, gentleman, at the foot of Cadair Idris, near Dolgellau, Merioneth. Nothing is known of his mother. He was educated at Ruthin School, Denbighshire, and entered Jesus College, Oxford, on 10 April 1736, and graduated BA (1739), MA (1743), MB (1746), and MD (1753). He was ordained deacon and priest in 1746, and practised medicine for three years while a curate in Gloucestershire before giving it up because 'neither his feelings nor his health would suffer him to continue the profession' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 2.433). He served as curate to Sir Ralph Thoresby in Stoke Newington, Middlesex, both before, and then simultaneously upon, his presentation to the vicarage of Terling, Essex, in 1752, the gift of Sir Matthew Featherstonehaugh, whose chaplain he had been. He resigned Terling in 1760, when presented to the London rectory of St Olave, Hart Street, by the trustees of Sir Andrew Pickard. He married, on 3 September 1760, Mary (died 1804), daughter of Robert Butts, bishop of Norwich. Shortly after he became chaplain to Shute Barrington, then bishop of Llandaff, who presented him to the vicarage of Edmonton, Middlesex, in 1775, which he held by a special dispensation along with St Olave's. 
Though he began his literary career with a mathematical treatise, 'Harmonica trigonometrica' (1748), and was elected to a fellowship of the Royal Society, Owen's principal publications were in the field of biblical criticism, to which he had devoted himself even when preparing for his MD. His 'Observations on the Four Gospels' (1764) was a rather conservative account of the dating and nature of the gospels; more detailed and critical observations were left for 'An Enquiry into the Present State of the Septuagint Version of the Old Testament' (1769), in which he was critical of the corruptions made to the texts by Jewish and Christian commentators, and called for a collation of all these variations in order to secure a reliable version that would meet the challenge otherwise made to its authority by critics of Christianity. He met the criticisms made of his approach by a Jewish scholar, Raphael Baruch, in his 'Supplement to critica sacra' (1775), and produced an edition of the Cottonian manuscript of 'Genesis' as edited by Grabe, 'Collatio codicis Geneseos cum editione Romana', in 1778. He continued this work, which he saw as a parallel to that of Benjamin Kennicott on the 'Old Testament', in 'A Brief Account, Historical and Critical, of the Septuagint Version of the Old Testament' (1787). He also edited two works by friends as acts of piety: an edition of Xenophon's 'Memorabilia' (1785), which had been left unfinished by Edward Edwards of Jesus College, Oxford, and a new, corrected edition of an antiquarian work on Anglesey by Henry Rowlands, 'Mona antiqua restaurata' (1766), with notes by Lewis Morris, which Owen dedicated to Richard Fitzwilliam, sixth Viscount Fitzwilliam of Merrion. 
Owen was preoccupied with defending Christianity against its enemies on the basis of two of the most favoured grounds for such apologetic in eighteenth-century England: the proofs of miracles and of prophecy, both of which drew on his biblical researches. He first defended the miracles recorded in the 'Old' and 'New' testaments as the rational superintendence of events overseen by the 'correcting hand of Providence' in 'The Intent and Propriety of the Scripture-Miracles Considered and Explained' (1755; p. 71); he developed these arguments as Boyle lecturer, from 1769 to 1771, and published his lectures in 1773 under the same title as his earlier treatise. He was particularly concerned to refute David Hume, whose style he especially hated, denouncing 'our fastidious author... the mere arrogance of an insulting sarcarsm... this contemptuous adversary... the sophistry of his reasonings' (H. Owen, 'The Intent and Propriety of the Scripture-Miracles', 1773, 53). Owen's appeal was to testimony and history; he was indebted for his more philosophical arguments to Joseph Butler's 'Analogy'. His defence of prophecy was also firmly historical in character, and appeared in 1789, with an impressive list of subscribers that included both archbishops and many heads of houses in Oxford and Cambridge, as 'The Modes of Quotation used by the Evangelical Writers Explained and Vindicated'. Admitting that his argument might already appear old-fashioned, Owen made a detailed examination of the relationship between the prophecies of the 'Old Testament' as these were fulfilled in the 'New Testament', thereby satisfying himself that he had undone the chief objection to the Christian religion made by its enemies. In the same treatise he made certain of his moderate position by insisting that 'as I always disliked polemical divinity; so I am now especially too old to dispute about religion; and I live only for the hope it inspires' (H. Owen, 'The Modes of Quotation', v). This position was also apparent in a work that he had written for the instruction of non-university-educated clergy, 'Directions for young students in divinity, with regard to those attainments, which are necessary to qualify them for holy orders' (1766), a work that also demonstrated why he had given up medicine for the church in his claim that: 'it is as far superior to all other professions, as the soul is superior to the body. For other professions relate only to the concerns of the body for the short term of its mental state: whereas this is employed in promoting the welfare and happines of the soul through the endless ages of eternity. (p. 2)' He was close to the pious printer William Bowyer, who brought out many of his works, as did Bowyer's associate John Nichols, who praised Owen warmly in both his 'Literary Anecdotes' and his 'Literary Illustrations'. 
Owen died on 14 October 1795 at his vicarage in Edmonton, Middlesex, where he was also buried; he was survived by his wife, who died at Bromley College on 18 June 1804, his son, Henry Butts Owen, to whom he had resigned the living of St Olave's in April 1794, and five daughters. Owen's life was dedicated to scholarship rather than to gaining preferment, as Nichols observed: 'Dr. Owen had, through his long and useful life, no other preferment... but he had a truly great and pious frame of mind' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 2.435). It was in order to provide for his five daughters that his son brought out an edition of Owen's sermons in 1797, noting that it was not worldly prosperity that his father had sought, as he had dedicated his life instead 'to the interests of sacred learning, and the advancement of Christian virtue' (H. Owen, 'Sixteen Sermons on Various Subjects', 1797, vi). A subscription list that covers some forty-six pages and contains the names of many divines and fellows of colleges is testimony to Owen's reputation for learning; the cultivation of Christian virtue was central to the message contained in the sermons, the last of which was a notably admonitory piece originally preached on a fast day during the war with revolutionary America. 


@@@@@


doc= 21004


Owen, Henry Charles Cunliffe- (1821-1867), army officer, son of Captain Charles Cunliffe-Owen RN, from the ancient family of Cunliffe of Wycoller, and his wife, Mary (died 3 May 1841), daughter of Sir Henry Blosset, kt, chief justice of Bengal, was born at Lausanne, Switzerland, on 16 October 1821. Sir Francis Philip Cunliffe-Owen (1828-1894) was his brother. He was educated privately and at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, obtaining a commission as second-lieutenant, Royal Engineers, on 19 March 1839. After the usual Chatham course, he went to Devonport. In January 1841 he was sent to Mauritius. On 30 September he was promoted lieutenant. In January 1845 he was ordered to the Cape of Good Hope, where he took part in the campaign against the rebel Boers and in the Cape Frontier War of 1846-7, and was thanked for his services in general orders. On 28 October 1847 he was promoted second-captain. He returned to England in April 1848 and was stationed at Devonport, then at Chatham, until, in November 1850, he was permitted to accept an appointment under the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851 as computer of space for the United Kingdom, and later as superintendent of the foreign departments, and finally, after the exhibition was opened, as its general superintendent. Cunliffe-Owen's courtesy, firmness, and business habits won him most favourable opinions. When the exhibition closed Cunliffe-Owen was appointed inspector of art schools in the department of practical art, then under the Board of Trade, with offices at Marlborough House. He was elected an associate member of the Institution of Civil Engineers on 3 February 1852. 
On the outbreak of the Crimean War, Cunliffe-Owen resigned his civil appointment, and in January 1855 he joined the army before Sevastopol. Severely wounded by a musket ball, he lost his leg and was invalided home. He was mentioned in dispatches, made a CB (February 1856), given a pension of $100 per annum, appointed officer of the Legion d'honneur, and received the Mejidiye (5th class). On 17 July 1855 he was promoted brevet major. 
In October 1855 Cunliffe-Owen was appointed assistant inspector-general of fortifications at the War Office, and in April 1856 deputy inspector-general of fortifications under Sir John Fox Burgoyne. The latter post he held until August 1860, when he was appointed commanding royal engineer of the western district. He had been promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel on 6 June 1856, and on 22 November 1861 he was promoted brevet colonel. On 1 April 1862 he became a regimental lieutenant-colonel. During his command in the western district were begun the important land and sea fortifications for the defence of Devonport, converting the place into a first-class fortress, as well as the defences of the Severn at Breandown and at Steep and Flat Holmes, which were also in his district. The Plymouth defences absorbed most of Cunliffe-Owen's time and attention, and it was while inspecting some of these works that he caught a chill, from the effects of which he died. 
Cunliffe-Owen married in 1855, in London, Agnes, daughter of Lewis Cubitt; they had a son, Edward, born on 1 January 1857. His widow married, in 1872, the Revd Henry Edward Willington. Cunliffe-Owen was a good man: popular, charming, a pleasant companion, a hard worker, and devoted to his profession. He was a high-churchman, a friend of Pusey, and one of the founders of the English Church Union (1860). He contributed on fortification to the 'Professional Papers of the Corps of Royal Engineers'. Cunliffe-Owen died at his home, 3 Leigham Terrace, Plymouth, on 7 March 1867, and was buried in Plymouth cemetery. A memorial window was placed in St James's Church, Plymouth. 


@@@@@


doc= 21005


Owen, Hugh (1615-1686), Jesuit, was born in Bodeon in Anglesey in June 1615, the son of Hugh Owen ('c'.1575-1642) of Gwernynog, Llanfflewyn, in Anglesey, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Bulkeley of Groesfechan. He was educated in the Brecknockshire-Monmouthshire area, and converted to Catholicism at the age of eleven, in 1626. He later studied humanities at the college at St Omer before being admitted a student at the English College, Rome, on 25 December 1636. On 16 March 1641 he was ordained a priest in the church of St John Lateran, left Rome on 28 September 1643, and laboured as a secular priest in Wales for five years. In 1648 he entered the Society of Jesus at Watten, and returned to the mission in south Wales in 1650. In 1655 he was recorded by the society as serving in the college of St Francis Xavier at Cwm, parish of Llanrothal, Herefordshire, a district which covered north and south Wales, Herefordshire, Gloucestershire, and Somerset. 
In 1666 responsibility for north Wales was devolved to the residence of St Winifred, based on Holywell in Flintshire, and Owen was subsequently stationed there. Holywell was the location of a secular mission known as the 'Cross Keys' and a Jesuit mission called 'The Star', of which he was in charge. The adoption of these veiled place names enabled priests to attend to the needs of pilgrims who visited St Winifred's Well and offered them protection during periods of acute persecution. Holywell had been a great pilgrimage centre from the fifteenth century despite protestant attempts to 'de-Christianize' such places. 'For Catholics and Protestants alike, Holywell retained an extraordinary attraction, and from the accounts of cures there it appeared to retain its extraordinary powers'. The Jesuits had an enormous part in affording continuity to the small Catholic community around Holywell from the establishment of the residence there in 1670. Their presence and the tradition of miraculous cures helped it flourish as 'a centre of Catholic devotion in an area otherwise barren of Catholicism' (Champ, 154-5, 156). 
Owen is said to have been the author of a report, in Welsh, dated 6 July 1668, of the miraculous cure of Roger Whetstone, a lame and aged Quaker from Bromsgrove, who drank the water at St Winifred's Well and may well have been given protection by the priest. Owen is also recorded as the author of 'Maint pechod marwol' (1668) on the grievousness of mortal sin, especially heresy, apparently incorporated in his 'Allwdd neu agoriad paradwys i'r Cymry', published at Liege in 1670, and perhaps drawing on a book of prayers in English, the 'Key to Heaven'. He also edited a translation of Thomas a Kempis into Welsh undertaken by his father, also a convert, published in 1684 as 'Dilyniad Christ, a elwir yn Gyffredin Thomas a Kempis', and of a catechism in Welsh. There is no evidence to suggest that the Popish Plot of 1679 ever endangered his life, although his alias of John Hughes may well have allowed him to avoid such suffering. He died at The Star on 28 December 1686 and is said to have had 'a great character for sanctity' (Gillow, 'Lit. biog. hist.', 2.223). 


@@@@@


doc= 21006


Owen, Hugh (1639/40-1700), Independent minister, was the son of Humphrey Owen and his wife, Susan. Humphrey Owen was the grandson of John Lewis Owen, MP for Merioneth in 1572. Hugh matriculated from Jesus College, Oxford, on 21 July 1660. According to Calamy he was 'a candidate for the ministry' in August 1662, and 'about that time he removed from Oxford to London. But not long after he fixed in his native country' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.710). For some years, it seems, Owen acted as an itinerant preacher chiefly in Merioneth, travelling also into Caernarvonshire and Montgomeryshire. By 1669 or 1670 he had married Martha, whose background is unknown; they had three daughters and a son, John. 
On 22 May 1672 Owen was licensed as a congregational teacher at his house in Llanegryn, Merioneth. In July that year he was issued with licences, no doubt for preaching, in Bodwenni, Cynfal, Erwgoyel, Llanegryn, and Peniarth, also in the county. Owen was ordained as a minister in the Independent church centred upon Wrexham about 1675, the year in which Henry Maurice, pastor of the Brecknockshire Independents, wrote an account of the state of the Welsh congregations which seems to indicate that the gathering of a properly constituted church within Merioneth was a recent event: 'The few professing people that were heretofore in this county were joined either to Wrexham Church, or to Vasavour Powell's, that met in Montgomeryshire... but since the change most of them turned Quakers, and so continue. Yet of their elders, one Mr Hugh Owen, of Bronclydwr... is settled in that county, and being ordained a teaching elder of Wrexham church, is sent to those parts to exercise his ministry; so that, of late... they are about gathering them into church order.' Of this order, Maurice could give no details but he thought the people concerned were 'of an independent judgement' (Underhill, 515). 
Owen's grandson, Hugh Farmer, claimed that during a period of imprisonment in Powis Castle in the reign of James II, Owen was treated well by Lord Powis (William Herbert, first earl and marquess of Powis), a Catholic who 'on hearing him pray, said to his priest, 'Surely this is a good Christian', and on his discharge, engaged him to come to Powis castle every Christmas' ('Nonconformist's Memorial', 3.493). Owen succeeded Henry Williams about 1685 as minister of a mixed congregation of Independents and Baptists at Ysgafell, near Newtown, Montgomeryshire, and continued its open communion tradition. From 1690 until 1696 the Common Fund of Independents and Presbyterians granted him $8 a year, reduced in 1695 to $4; in April 1696 the Congregational fund board allocated $10 to the congregational churches of north Wales, and in June they earmarked an 'additional' $3 for Hugh Owen, who was in the later part of his ministry assisted for some time by James Owen, later of Oswestry and Shrewsbury. Owen died on 15 March 1700 in his sixty-first year and was buried in the churchyard at Llanegryn. He was survived by his wife, and left property valued at $187 11's'. He bequeathed 'all my books, whether, Hebrew, Greek or Latine' to his son, John, who succeeded to his father's ministry but who died shortly afterwards, on 27 June 1700 at the age of thirty (will, NL Wales, B/1700/75). 


@@@@@


doc= 21007


Owen, Hugh (1760-1827), Church of England clergyman and antiquary, born in Shrewsbury and baptized on 14 June 1761, was the only son of Pryce Owen MD (died 1786), a physician of Shrewsbury, and his wife, Bridget, only daughter of John Whitfield, also of Shrewsbury. He was educated at Shrewsbury School and in 1779 matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1783, and proceeded MA in 1807. He was ordained deacon in 1784 and priest in 1785. He was perpetual curate at Berwick, Shropshire (1791-1800), and in 1791 was presented by the earl of Tankerville to the vicarage of St Julian, Shrewsbury; in 1803 he was collated by Bishop Douglas to the prebend of Gillingham Minor in the cathedral of Salisbury; and in 1819 he was presented by the dean and chapter of Exeter to part of the vicarage of Bampton, Oxfordshire. He was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and mayor of Shrewsbury in 1819. 
Owen was collated by Bishop Cornwallis on 27 December 1821 to the archdeaconry of Shropshire, and on 30 March 1822 to the prebend of Bishopshill in the church of Lichfield. In 1826 he became minister of the royal peculiar of St Mary's, Shrewsbury, and he then resigned the church of St Julian, though he continued to be portionist of the vicarage of Bampton. He lived latterly at Betws Hall, Montgomeryshire, having in or before 1788 married Harriet, daughter of Edward Jeffries of Shrewsbury. Their only son was Edward Pryce Owen (1788-1863). They also had a daughter. 
Owen is chiefly remembered as an antiquary, though he was never so well known as his collaborator, John Brickdale Blakeway (1765-1826). His principal work, published with Blakeway, was 'A History of Shrewsbury' (2 vols., 1825). Owen had already published, anonymously, 'Some Account of the Ancient and Present State of Shrewsbury' (2 vols., 1808-10), which contained abundant ecclesiastical information. A second edition, much altered, was prepared by Owen but never published. To Britton's 'Architectural Antiquities' (vol. 4) he contributed, with Blakeway, descriptions of Wenlock Abbey, and of Ludlow and Stokesay castles. Owen died at Shrewsbury on 23 December 1827. 


@@@@@


doc= 21008


Owen, Hugh (1784-1861), army officer, was born at Denbigh on 23 May 1784, and educated at the grammar school at Audlem, Cheshire ('c'.1795-1800). Through the influence of Sir Corbet Corbet, bt, of Adderley, a kinsman of Sir Stapleton Cotton, Owen was appointed captain in the Shropshire Volunteers on 24 November 1803. In December 1805, with the aid of a recruiting party of the 16th light dragoons stationed at Market Drayton, Owen raised thirty men, which entitled him to a cornetcy in the regiment, which was then commanded by Sir Stapleton Cotton. He became lieutenant on 9 July 1807, and embarked for Portugal in 1809. Speaking French, Spanish, and Portuguese fluently, he was frequently employed in outpost duties and scouting, and commanded the skirmishers of the cavalry brigade at Talavera. In 1810 he was appointed captain of cavalry in the Portuguese army, under Marshal Beresford, and was aide-de-camp to Sir Henry Fane, in command of the rear-guard of General Hill's division in the retreat to Torres Vedras. He was afterwards brigade major to Sir Loftus Otway, commanding a brigade of the 1st, 4th, 7th, and 10th regiments of Portuguese cavalry, and then aide-de-camp and brigade major to Sir Benjamin D'Urban, commanding a brigade of the 1st, 6th, 11th, and 12th Portuguese cavalry. At the battle of Vitoria on 21 June 1813, when leading the brigade into action (in the temporary absence of General D'Urban, who had been sent on to reconnoitre), his name was noted by Wellington, who next morning directed him to apply for a troop in the 18th light dragoons, to which he was duly gazetted on 22 July 1813, subsequently receiving Portuguese rank as major and lieutenant-colonel. 
At the peace Owen returned with the Portuguese army to Portugal, in 1815 was ordered to organize the 6th regiment of cavalry, which in the subsequent civil wars, as 'os dragones de Chaves', became famous for its high discipline and superior capability. Choosing to remain in the Portuguese army, Owen, after obtaining a majority in the 7th hussars, sold out of the British service on 4 September 1817. In 1820 he accompanied Lord Beresford to Brazil, and was sent home to Lisbon with dispatches and the brevet rank of colonel in the 4th cavalry. On arrival he found that the king's government had been superseded, and Lord Beresford and all other foreign officers summarily dismissed. Owen retired into private life, and lived on his estate at Villa Nova de Paraisa, near Porto. During the subsequent civil wars Dom Pedro offered to appoint Owen his personal aide-de-camp, with the rank of general, but not having the permission of his own sovereign, Owen declined. 
Owen was a knight commander of San Bento d'Aviz and knight of the Tower and Sword, and had the Peninsular gold cross. Sir John Rennie, who met him in Porto in 1855, described him as over 6 feet in height, with a determined countenance. Owen published 'The Civil War in Portugal and the Siege of Oporto' (1836), an English translation of his Portuguese work. He died at Garratt's Hall, Banstead, Surrey, on 16 December 1861, aged seventy-seven. 


@@@@@


doc= 21009


Owen, Sir Hugh (1804-1881), campaigner for education in Wales, was born on 14 January 1804 at Y Foel, Llangeinwen, Anglesey, the eldest of the four children of Owen Owen ('c'.1780- 'c'.1860), farmer, and his wife, Mary (1780-1862), daughter of Owen Jones, a Calvinistic Methodist leader of Llangeinwen. From 1812 he was educated for about nine years at a notable private school at Caernarfon kept by Revd Evan Richardson. In 1825 he left for London where he was employed as a clerk by W. Bulkeley Hughes, a barrister, and then by R. Vaughan Williams, a solicitor. He married in 1829 Ann Wade (died 1881). In 1836 he applied for a clerkship in the poor-law commission at Somerset House and his knowledge of law so impressed the secretary, Edwin Chadwick, that he was at once appointed. In 1853 he became chief clerk, a position he retained upon the reorganization of the commission, thereafter named the Local Government Board. He was in effect the permanent secretary, representing the department at all parliamentary committees relating to the poor law, including the inquiry into the Andover workhouse scandal (1846). It is said that in preparing the 'Reform Bill' of 1867 Disraeli placed great reliance upon two men at Gwydyr House, the office of the poor-law board, one a Catholic, the secretary of the Statistical Society, and Hugh Owen, the nonconformist. Mrs Disraeli dubbed them her husband's 'guardian angels' (B. L. Davies, 'An assessment', 630). 
Both before and after his retirement in November 1872 Owen attended to a wide variety of good causes, for example, the King's Cross Cabmen's Club, the London Fever Hospital, the London Welsh Charitable Aid Society, the National Thrift Society, and the National Temperance League. He was elected a member of the London school board, for Finsbury, in 1872. In 1873 he was influential in reviving the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion, extinct since 1843. In 1880 his plea to place the eisteddfod of Wales upon a more secure foundation led to the formation of the National Eisteddfod Association. Within Wales he introduced measures for the education of deaf mutes (1847). Indeed, the creation of educational opportunities for his compatriots was his passion and it is upon these achievements that his reputation mainly rests. 
Nonconformists far outnumbered Anglicans in Wales, as Owen decisively demonstrated in a census which he himself conducted (December 1846), yet, apart from Sunday schools, educational provision for their children was far inferior. Anglicans, through the National Society (1811), had established new elementary schools; the old grammar schools were firmly in their hands and they had founded St David's College, Lampeter, in 1827. The Church of England had also taken advantage of the first government grant in 1833 to be employed through the British and Foreign School Society (BFSS) and the National Society to build schools in England and Wales. In 1839 Owen was secretary to a committee for establishing British Schools at south Islington and Pentonville, near where he lived in London. In 1843 he addressed a 'Letter to the Welsh People', widely published, pressing them to establish day schools and giving clear, simple instructions in Welsh as to the most effective way of proceeding. British Schools, free from denominational affiliations, were, he said, the solution in Wales. The British Society responded to Owen's request for an agent and upon his recommendation a well-known Calvinistic Methodist minister, the Revd John Phillips, was appointed to organize schools in north Wales. In 1846 Owen became the first secretary of the Cambrian Education Society, founded as virtually the Welsh branch of the British Society. In south Wales the voluntaryist convictions of the dissenters were an obstacle, for they opposed state aid. Nevertheless, Owen succeeded in persuading the British Society to appoint in 1853 an influential Baptist minister, William Roberts (Nefydd), as its agent in the south. Gradually, in the 1850s and 1860s, the voluntaryist spirit waned and British Schools increased rapidly, in no small measure due to the unswerving support of Owen who, in 1855, was elected a member of the committee of the BFSS. When the 'Education Act' of 1870 created a system of elementary schools which Owen had so long struggled to provide, agents of the BFSS withdrew from Wales. 
It was imperative to train suitable teachers. The Borough Road College in London was a partial answer in the early days, but when the Anglican church opened two training colleges for men in Wales, Owen determined that Welsh nonconformists should not be further disadvantaged. That the Normal College, as it became known, should have been located at Bangor, and not in a populous area of south Wales, may appear strange until it is recalled that the voluntaryists in the south had failed to establish such a college, whereas the Methodists of the north were fervent supporters. Owen's dynamism in collecting funds and in organizing the campaign led to the opening of the college in 1858. Its students contributed richly to the teaching profession in Wales (and beyond). Owen was later engaged, though less actively, in establishing a college for schoolmistresses at Swansea. 
The absence of a university in Wales caused deep concern. In 1854 Owen addressed a private meeting of prominent Welshmen in London upon the desirability of founding colleges in Wales similar to the Queen's colleges in Ireland. However, the outbreak of the Crimean War, followed by the Indian mutiny, discouraged direct financial appeals to the government. Constructive action was thus deferred until 1863 when Owen invited Thomas Nicholas, a zealot for university education in Wales, to address the social science section of the Swansea eisteddfod and later a meeting in London. Nicholas was appointed secretary and Owen one of the honorary secretaries of what may now be realistically termed the university movement. Solid financial support was, however, not forthcoming, but by good fortune the organizing committee was able in 1867 to purchase the bankrupt Castle Hotel, Aberystwyth, at a fraction of its original cost. Successive appeals to Disraeli and Gladstone for state aid failed. Nevertheless, it was resolved to open the university college in October 1872. Foreseeing the challenges which lay ahead, Owen retired from the Local Government Board. He soon concluded that a systematic house-to-house canvass and organized chapel collections were to be the basis of his mission. Thus the trim figure of Hugh Owen with his black travelling bag, waiting patiently on railway platforms or alighting from a cab, became familiar throughout Wales. In this sense he took upon himself the guise of a servant. The last Sunday in October in 1875, 1876, and 1877 was known as Sul y Brifysgol ('university Sunday'), an effective method of reaching ordinary people. In 1880 he analysed the various amounts the college had received, 100,000 miscellaneous sums being below half a crown. He spoke with authority, for he had counted every penny. 
The college's finances remained parlous. A change of government in 1880 enabled Lord Aberdare to remind Gladstone that in the election campaign every candidate in Wales had pledged himself to press for the repair of the defective condition of Welsh intermediate and higher education. Owen had a large share in drafting Aberdare's letter, which ranks in importance with his own letter to the Welsh people in 1843. In July 1880 the Aberdare committee, as it is generally known, was appointed. Both the papers which Owen submitted to the committee and his oral testimony were valuable. For years he had wished to see a federal university in Wales patterned upon London University, with the power to grant degrees vested in an examining board appointed by the crown. The Prince of Wales' University, as he termed it, would consist of two colleges called the Prince of Wales' College. The university would examine any candidates who presented themselves. 
The Aberdare report (1881) did not fully reflect Owen's views, though it recommended that there should be two university colleges in Wales, one in Glamorgan and one in north Wales. There should be a preliminary grant of $4000 to each college. A future University of Wales was to be a federal university, as Owen had hoped, but not the metropolitan model for which he had persistently canvassed. Degrees were to be awarded only to those who had pursued a formal course of instruction at one of the affiliated colleges. The University of Wales was to be a federal teaching university, as came to pass in 1893. In the meantime the Welsh colleges had received state grants a few years before their English counterparts, though never the substantial sums distributed to the universities of Scotland and Ireland. 
The zest for higher education had led to the neglect of intermediate schools. Owen recognized that it was necessary to attend to the 'missing link'. In 1879 he was largely instrumental in forming the North Wales Scholarship Association, which enabled talented pupils to proceed beyond the elementary stage. The 'Welsh Intermediate Act' of 1889, which gave Wales in time a network of state-aided secondary schools well in advance of England, owed much to the recommendation of the Aberdare committee, itself influenced by Owen's careful examination of the Irish precedent in 1878 when the government granted $30,000 for intermediate education. Having travelled to Ireland to examine the question for himself, in a second submission to the committee he outlined a system of intermediate education more appropriate for the needs of Wales. 
Owen died before several of his plans bore fruit. He was not without critics. A few denounced him bitterly, mainly, it appears, because of a ruthless streak not uncommon in determined men unwilling to be thwarted by the inadequacy of others. Although he was generally respected and admired, lesser figures have been more warmly regarded in Wales. Nor was he endowed with the gift of tongues in a land which prized, and perhaps unduly prized, the arts of eloquence. Today he is sometimes seen as a philistine who saw no reason to allow his native language and culture a place in his educational schemes. The content of education did not deeply concern him. In sum, 'he was not an educator but an organizer of education' (Williams, 77). 
It would, however, be wrong to judge Owen out of his own time. The Welsh language was not then in peril, whereas the failure to master English was an impediment to a successful career in the professions within Britain and in its overseas empire. After the 'Forster Act' of 1870 he and many others believed that there was ample provision for the working class. The prime need was to create an educated middle class in Wales, and in his evidence to the Aberdare committee he reiterated that this was the purpose of the Aberystwyth college, which, nevertheless, after his days reached down the social scale so that by 1893 it was proper to speak of 'the people's university'. False pride did not deter him from undertaking endless laborious tasks, apparently at his own charge (he left only a modest estate). Like one of his countrymen, the first of the royal Tudors, what he minded he compassed. Towards the end of his days Owen remarked 'I shall never rest until the Welsh Educational Appliances are perfected.' The three tiers of education in Wales, elementary, intermediate, and higher, owed more to him than to any other single person. 
Owen was never entangled in denominational disputes. Born a Calvinistic Methodist, he became a Congregationalist after marriage; at one time he attended a Baptist church. For Roman Catholics, Cardinal Manning among them, he had respect and affection. The most familiar likeness is a photograph of him in old age. The jaw and lips are resolute, the nose firm in outline, the eyes gentle, yet shrewd, his hair silvery grey. Contemporaries recalled 'a beautiful face' (W. E. Davies, 2.136). Rather belatedly he was knighted, at Gladstone's recommendation, in August 1881. On 20 November 1881 he died of acute bronchitis in Menton, France. He was buried on 26 November 1881 in Abney Park cemetery, London. Of his eight children the eldest son was Sir Hugh Owen (1835-1916), permanent secretary to the Local Government Board. 
Two buildings in the University of Wales are named after him at Aberystwyth and at the former Normal College, Bangor -- as was the first intermediate school under the 1889 act at Caernarfon (1894). There is a bust of him by William Davies at the Royal Institution, Swansea, and a statue in bronze by Milo Griffith, erected by public subscription, at Caernarfon. His true memorial is more enduring than bronze. 


@@@@@


doc= 21010


Owen, Humphrey (1701/2-1768), librarian and college head, was the son of Humphrey Owen, gentleman, of Meifod, Montgomeryshire. The date and place of his birth are not known, but upon matriculation at Oxford University on 17 November 1718 his age was given as sixteen. He had entered Jesus College as a batteler two days previously. He graduated BA in 1722, MA in 1725, BD in 1733, and DD in 1763. He was admitted as a scholar of his college on 23 December 1723 and was elected a fellow on 22 June 1726. He fulfilled the office of senior bursar from 1732 to 1736 conscientiously -- the college archives contain both rough and fair copies of his accounts. He was ordained on 5 March 1732, and in 1744 became rector of Tredington (second portion), Worcestershire, a Jesus College living. After having held it for a year he forfeited his college fellowship which was declared void on 8 November 1745. He retained the living until 1763 when, on 11 May, he was elected principal of Jesus College and was, as a consequence, presented to the rectory of Rotherfield Peppard, Oxfordshire, which was annexed to the post. For some time during the early 1760s he was also curate-in-charge of Kingston Bagpuize, Berkshire, fulfilling the duties during 1762-3 by appointing a deputy. He never married and remained as principal of his college until his death in 1768, in which year the statute forbidding principals to marry was repealed. 
On 10 November 1747 Owen was unanimously elected to the post of Bodley's librarian, and held it until his death, although for at least two years after his election to the principalship of Jesus College his duties at the Bodleian were performed by his successor, John Price, one of the many members of his college whom Owen appointed successively to the post of sub-librarian. From 1756 until his death he was also a delegate of Oxford University Press, a position in which he was also succeeded by Price. 
As librarian Owen was active in improving the facilities at the Bodleian which had begun to look dated alongside the new library at Christ Church, the Codrington at All Souls, and the Radcliffe Camera. He removed the Arundel marbles from the top floor of the Old Schools quadrangle (the picture gallery) to the old moral philosophy school on the ground floor, and oversaw the wainscoting and redecoration of the gallery with fine plasterwork. Fortunately he stopped short of putting a stucco ceiling in Duke Humfrey's Library as advocated by Thomas Warton, writing as 'Thomas Hearne junior' in 'Jackson's Oxford Journal' on 29 November 1766. He did, however, unchain the folio volumes in Duke Humfrey's Library, replace the benches with comfortable chairs, and play a large part in the reconstruction of Selden End and the installation of the vaulted ceiling in the Convocation House below it. 
Owen was also a conscientious worker on the library's collections, being responsible, among many other undertakings, for the numbering of the Tanner manuscripts which had come to the library in 1735 and were much in demand by scholars. His period in office also saw many more major acquisitions made by the Bodleian. The Clarendon and the Carte papers began to arrive at this time and the peak was reached in 1755 with the acquisition of the Ballard, Furney, and St Amand collections together with the Rawlinson bequest -- the largest collection of manuscripts ever received from one donor. Owen had been corresponding with Richard Rawlinson for many years to ensure that the manuscripts joined Rawlinson's printed books in Oxford, and was responsible for devising the classification scheme for them, although they were not finally fully sorted and catalogued until 1893. 
Owen shared the enthusiasms, especially on the numismatic front, of Rawlinson, Browne Willis, Francis Wise, William Stukeley, and other leading antiquaries, and correspondence surviving at the Bodleian shows that he also shared Rawlinson's Jacobite interests. He died in Jesus College on 26 March 1768, and 'Jackson's Oxford Journal' on 2 April noted the respect in which he was held for his 'extensive learning, simplicity of manners, generosity, and constant integrity'. He was buried in the chapel of Jesus College, although the small gravestone noted by John Gutch in 1786 is no longer visible. 


@@@@@


doc= 21011


Owen, Jacob (1778-1870), architect, was born on 28 July 1778 in Llanfihangel, Montgomeryshire, the son of Jacob Owen, civil engineer, and his wife, Margaret Ellis. After being educated at a school in Monmouth, he was apprenticed to William Underhill of Tipton, Staffordshire, a canal engineer, whose daughter Mary (1781-1858) he married in 1798. They had seventeen children, thirteen of whom survived childhood. He joined the Royal Engineers' department of the Board of Ordnance in 1805 and was promoted to full clerk of works in the following year. Most of his career in the Ordnance was spent in Portsmouth. In 1831 his commanding officer there, Colonel John Fox Burgoyne, was appointed chairman of the newly established commissioners of public works in Ireland. Owen joined him in Dublin in June 1832 as engineer and architect to the new board of works (as it was commonly known), a post which he was to hold until his retirement in 1856, at the age of seventy-seven. In Portsmouth he was assisted in his official duties by his brother John (died 1867) and in private practice by his son Thomas Ellis Owen (1804-1862), who had trained as an architect in London. Thomas became a member of Portsmouth corporation in 1831 and served as mayor in 1847-8 and again in 1862; he was instrumental in the development of Southsea as a watering-place, designing terraces and villas as well as a church, St Jude's (1850-51). He also designed the French protestant church of St Martin's-le-Grand, London (1842-3; dem. 1888). 
Some of Jacob's other sons remained in England, including Jeremiah (1802-1850), who became a metallurgist to the Admiralty and store receiver at Woolwich Dockyard, and Joseph Butterworth (1809-1872), who was the rector of St Jude's, Chelsea. Other sons joined their father in the board of works, where critics perceived a dynasty in the making: William Henshaw Owen ('b'. 1813) was the board's engineer in Limerick; Henry ('b'. 1815) was his father's pupil and assistant before becoming in 1841 surveyor for Queen's county; while James Higgins Owen ('b'. 1822), who was made a clerk of works in 1849, succeeded his father as architect to the board in 1856. One of Jacob Owen's pupils, Charles Lanyon, who received a county surveyorship in 1835, married his daughter Elizabeth Helen in 1837. The board's senior clerk of works, Frederick Villiers Clarendon, married Owen's granddaughter Margaret Jane Slacke in 1853. 
Most of Owen's public commissions were in Dublin, where he erected extensions and new buildings at the Four Courts (1833-40), added wings to the vice-regal lodge (1842-54), and extended the record buildings at the King's Inns (1848-9). His earliest work at Dublin Castle was a block of castellated stables (1833); he subsequently remodelled the state apartments and other buildings there. He was also concerned with monitoring the construction of the new government prisons on the separate system, including Belfast (designed by Charles Lanyon, 1842-6) and Mountjoy (offered to Owen, but designed by Joshua Jebb, 1847-50). In the late 1840s Owen oversaw a number of major projects for which consultant architects had been appointed, including the three Queen's Colleges (at Belfast, Galway, and Cork), seven new district lunatic asylums, and extensions to Maynooth College (by A. W. N. Pugin). Almost all were neo-Gothic, as was his own criminal lunatic asylum at Dundrum, near Dublin (1847-50). Although eclectic, Owen's penchant was for the Greek revival style. 
Owen also carried out private commissions, including work for other departments such as the Dublin Metropolitan Police and the board of national education (for whom he adapted Tyrone House in Dublin and designed the adjacent training college and model schools, 1834-42). In 1839 he won an architectural competition for a parish church (St Patrick's) at Dalkey, co. Dublin (built 1840-43). After some years of prevarication, the Treasury compelled him to relinquish his private practice (in return for an increase in allowances) in 1846. His retirement from the public service ten years later coincided with an impending expansion of the architectural activities of the board of works, with countrywide building programmes for the police, coastguard, Post Office, and education department. These were to be overseen by his son James, who died in office in 1891. James was aided from 1863 by his assistant architect Enoch Trevor Owen (1832/3-1881) -- possibly a son of Jeremiah -- who joined the board of works as a drawing clerk in 1860. 
Owen was short (about 5 feet 3 inches), burly, and balding, with a florid complexion. His brusque manner, family favouritism, and dominance of Irish public works architecture brought him enemies. While there were several allegations of impropriety, none was proven, though it was conceded privately by one commissioner, Thomas Aiskew Larcom, that conflicts of interest had arisen in his examination of his own pupils as candidates for county surveyorships. He was an investor in his son's developments in Southsea, where he moved from Dublin in 1867 with his second wife, Elizabeth Donnet Fry, widow of Captain John Fry. In 1864 he was a founder, with his son James, of the Irish Civil Service Building Society. He was an early fellow and vice-president (1849-67) of the Royal Institute of the Architects of Ireland. 
Owen died at Tipton, Staffordshire, on 29 October 1870, and was buried in Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin. His second wife predeceased him by five months. 


@@@@@


doc= 21012


Owen, James (1654-1706), nonconformist minister, was born on 1 November 1654 at the farmhouse of Bryn in the parish of Aber-nant, Carmarthenshire, the second son of John Owen. His grandfather had served in the royalist forces during the civil war and his parents were strongly attached to episcopacy but their nine children all became nonconformists. His brother David (died 1710) was a protestant dissenting minister in Henllan, Carmarthenshire. His younger brother, Charles Owen, was minister to the protestant dissenters in Warrington, Lancashire, for fifty years until his death in 1746. 
After passing through a county school Owen was allegedly grounded in the classics at Carmarthen Castle by James Picton, a Quaker, before progressing to Carmarthen grammar school. About 1670 he took a course of philosophy under Samuel Jones (1628-1697) of Brynllywarch, near Bridgend, Glamorgan, and presumably received instruction in languages as he was an accomplished linguist in later life, with knowledge of Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Arabic, Syriac, Saxon, and French. His first deep religious convictions had been received about 1668 from a nonconformist preacher. He looked forward to the ministry but was undecided about conforming. After acting as a tutor he spent some time with his godfather, the clergyman James Howell, who did his best to remove his scruples. Howell was the nephew of James Howell (1594?-1666), also from Aber-nant, the author of 'Epistolae Ho-elianae'. However, Owen decided for nonconformity and placed himself with Stephen Hughes (died 1688), ejected from Meidrim, Carmarthenshire, and afterwards congregational minister at Swansea, who had a great reputation for training preachers. Owen's preaching attracted the notice of the ecclesiastical courts and on the advice of Henry Maurice (died 1682) of Merthyr Tudful, Glamorgan, he moved to north Wales, where he settled at Bodfel, near Pwllheli, Caernarvonshire. After nine months' work there his position became unsafe. Travelling by night he made his way to Hugh Owen (died 1699) at Bronclydwr, Merioneth, and then preached as his assistant for some time. 
In November 1676 Owen became chaplain to Mrs Baker of Sweeny, just south of Oswestry, Shropshire, and at about the same time took charge of the nonconformist congregation founded at Oswestry by Roland Nevet (died 1675) the ejected vicar. He was set apart for the ministry in October 1677. On 17 November 1679 he married Sarah George (died 1692); they had seven children, two of whom survived him. From Oswestry he conducted a north Wales mission, having a monthly lecture at Ruthin, Denbighshire. In 1681 William Lloyd (1627-1717), then the bishop of St Asaph, challenged Owen to a public debate on ordination, demanding an account of 'by what right he exercised the ministry, not having episcopal ordination' (Henry, 'Life of Philip Henry', 153) -- 'The Grand Question propos'd and discuss'd was Whether Ordination by Such Diocesans as have uninterrupted Succession of Canonical Ordination down from the Apostles, be so necessary that Churches and Ministry are null without it?' (C. Owen, 31). The defence of presbyterian ordination was to become the cause for which Owen would subsequently enter into print and engage in controversy. 
After the 1689 'Toleration Act', Owen removed his Ruthin lecture to Denbigh, and set up others at Llanfyllin, Montgomeryshire, and Wrexham, Denbighshire. He had great difficulty in getting his meeting-places licensed and was often disturbed. In 1690 he started an academy for training students for the ministry at Oswestry. He was supported from London by the Common Fund with $8 in 1690 for Oswestry, reduced to $5 in 1695 and continued until 1699. He educated his younger brother Charles, whose 'Some Account of the Life of... James Owen' is an invaluable account of life in the academy. After the death of Sarah in 1692 Owen married in 1693 his second wife, Jane (died 1699), widow of Alderman R. Edwards of Oswestry. 
About 1696 Owen seems to have begun an association with the Lancashire provincial assembly and Cheshire classis. The Cheshire classis had been due to receive a sermon from Philip Henry in August 1696 but this was cut short by Henry's death. On 11 August 1696 Owen preached in Henry's stead to the thirty assembled ministers. During the sitting of the classis the protestant dissenters of Warrington sent representatives to obtain a minister. The classis recommended Charles Owen, who was ministering in Wrexham. The Wrexham congregation agreed 'adhaering there to Mr James Owen as their fixed Pastor, and looking upon his brother Mr Charles but as his assistant' (Gordon, 21-2). Charles Owen first attended the general meeting of ministers in Lancashire at Bolton on 13 April 1697 and at the next general meeting in Warrington on 10 August 1697 James and John Owen 'Out of Wales' were in attendance. In 1696 and again in 1699 James Owen was invited as assistant to John Chorlton at Cross Street Chapel, Manchester. He declined and early in 1700 he became minister of High Street Chapel, Shrewsbury, as co-pastor with Francis Tallents. After the death of Jane in 1699, on 12 August 1700 he married his third wife, Elizabeth, daughter of John Wynne, of Coparleni, Flintshire, and widow of John Hough of Chester. He continued his academy at Shrewsbury and kept up his lecturing in north Wales. 
The year 1696 seems to have been a pivotal point in Owen's career. He was drawn closer to the ministerial assemblies in Lancashire and Cheshire while his publications drew him deeper into religio-political controversy, particularly with Thomas Gipps, the rector of Bury, Lancashire. The two developments are not disconnected, with John Chorlton of Manchester playing a critical role in promoting Owen as a champion of dissent against the high Anglican party in Manchester. 
In the late 1680s and early 1690s Owen published works in Welsh, including a translation of the assembly's shorter catechism, and entered into controversy with the Baptist Benjamin Keach over infant baptism. In 1694 he went into print with 'A Plea for Scripture Ordination', his defence of ordination by presbyters which contained a preface by Daniel Williams. He was answered by Gipps with 'Tentamen novum' (1696) which defends Timothy and Titus as diocesan rulers. Owen replied to this with 'Tutamen evangelicum' (1697) in which he maintained that Gipps's arguments would unchurch all the continental Reformed churches that lacked bishops, churches that were explicitly recognized in the articles of the Church of England. Gipps responded with 'A Sermon Against Corrupting the Word' (1697) in which he accused the dissenters of substituting 'ye for we, in 'Acts' 6:3 in the year 1638' in support of the popular election of ministers (C. Owen, 106). Owen replied with 'Remarks on a Sermon' (1697), a work in which Gipps perceived the hand of Chorlton assisting Owen. This bitter exchange rumbled on until 1699 with Gipps going into print a further four times on the subject and Owen twice. 
Having antagonized the Manchester high Anglicans, Owen achieved national attention with the publication of his defence of occasional conformity entitled 'Moderation a Virtue' (1703). In it he argued that 'Jesus Christ, the author of our Holy Religion, was also an Occasional Conformist; a Dissenter from the imposed ceremonies of the Elders: Preach'd in private Houses, and separate Congregations' (C. Owen, 108). Against a background of repeated attempts between 1702 and 1704 to pass laws against occasional conformity, its effect was incendiary and did nothing to quell high Anglican fears of the 'Church in Danger'. Daniel Defoe engaged with Owen's arguments in his 'The Sincerity of the Dissenters Vindicated' (1703) and 'The Dissenters Answer' (1704) and Owen was attacked by William Hogden and Charles Leslie in 1704. He provided a further anonymous defence in 1704 with 'Moderation Still a Virtue', in which he also defended ordination by presbyters, vindicated the dissenting academies and condemned Henry Sacheverell. He published other works against organ worship (1700) and the practice of consecrating buildings (1706) and published a translation of the Huguenot John Delme's 'Method of Good Preaching' (1701). The account of the Welsh ejected ministers in Edmund Calamy's 'Account' is by Owen. But the strain of spending a decade defending the dissenting interest proved too much. For thirty years he had suffered from gallstones and he died of the disorder on 8 April 1706. His funeral sermon was preached by Matthew Henry and he was buried at St Chad's, Shrewsbury on 11 April. His portrait is prefixed to the biography by his brother Charles, who brought out many of his works posthumously. 


@@@@@


doc= 21013


Owen, John (1563/4-1622?), Latin poet, was born at Plas-du, Llanarmon, Caernarvonshire, the third son of Thomas Owen of Plas-du (eldest son of Owen ap Gruffydd), and his wife, Jane Morris. John's uncle Hugh Owen was a leading recusant, involved in numerous treasonous plots, including support for the Spanish Armada. Thomas had some sympathy for his brother; he was himself indicted for recusancy in 1578, but thereafter conformed. 
Owen was admitted a scholar at Winchester College at the age of thirteen, under Thomas Bilson, in 1577. Most of the figures he later addressed as friends in his works were from Winchester. Christopher Johnson, a distinguished Latin poet, had been headmaster shortly before Owen's time, and the school had established a thriving tradition of spoken and written Latin. Owen's verse first came to public notice while he was still at school, among poems celebrating the triumphant return of Drake in 1580; it was pinned to the mainmast of the 'Golden Hind', and was recorded and translated by Camden ('Audoeni epigrammatum', 2.39). 
Owen proceeded to New College, Oxford, where he became a probationer fellow in 1582, and full fellow in 1584. The fellowships were restricted in subject, and Owen was obliged to study civil law to fill a vacancy as legist. He took the degree of BCL on 2 May 1590. His later sharpness against lawyers suggests that he resented the experience. Owen did, though, retain a patriotic fondness for Oxford: so, to illustrate the phrase 'hysteron-proteron' ('reverse order') -- 'a presposterous way of speaking' -- he writes, 'Exempli causa, Cant'brigia Oxonium' ('for example Cambridge before Oxford'; 'Audoeni epigrammatum', 6.3). 
Owen was the Joannes Oenus who contributed to the volume issued by New College in 1587 to commemorate Philip Sidney: 'Peplus, illustrissimi viri D. Philippi Sidnaei supremis honoribus dicatus'. He wrote 64 lines, in eight separate elegiac poems: 6, 4, 20, 8, 2, 10, 2, and 12 lines respectively. In his later epigrams he was to avoid such prolixity: a poem of 20 lines is remarkably long by his standards. Owen's contribution is not dissimilar to others in that book: it was conventional to provide multiple poems for such collections (sometimes of varying length and metre, but most commonly in Latin elegiacs). 
Owen left Oxford in 1591, and commenced his career as a schoolmaster. He first taught at a school in Trelleck, Monmouthshire. About 1594 or 1595 he was appointed headmaster of King Henry VIII's School at Warwick; this may have been on Bilson's recommendation. One of Owen's more distinguished pupils was Sir Thomas Puckering (1592-1636); another was John Ley (1583-1662), later subdean of Chester, a puritan divine, appointed president of Sion College in 1645. In a lawsuit of 1613 the headmaster (perhaps still Owen) was described as 'sufficiently painful and diligent' (Leach, 132). 
At some point Owen seems to have moved to London and made a career as a professional poet, relying on the uncertain support of a number of patrons. His first three books of epigrams were printed in London by Simon Waterson in 1606. They were an immediate success at home and abroad, with two more editions of book 1 in 1607, as well as a fourth book; two further sets of three books followed in 1612, making a total of ten books. They were 'greedily bought, and taken into the hands of all ingenious scholars' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.321). 
Owen was writing within a tradition of British epigram collections: for example, Sir John Davies's at the end of Christopher Marlowe's Ovid translations (before 1598), as well as John Davies of Hereford's 'Scourge of Folly' ('c'.1612). Owen's New College friend Thomas Bastard produced 'Chrestoleros' in seven books (1598). We also find Edward Guilpin's collection, 'Skialetheia' (1598); John Weever's (1599); John Heath's 'Two Centuries of Epigrams' (1610); and Sir John Harington's (1613). All these date from the period when Owen was composing and publishing; several of their authors also studied at Winchester. Ben Jonson set epigrams at the start of the lyric part of his poetry, arranged over the years 1612-14. John Reinolds (or Reynolds) was another New College contemporary, with ambitious plans for the Latin epigram; James Martin (or Aretius) was also active in Oxford. 
The tradition of Welsh Latin writing might also have inspired Owen; it included accomplished humanists such as Sion Dafydd Rhys. Sir John Stradling (1563-1627) was of very similar age to Owen, and was a contemporary at Oxford. Four books of Stradling's Latin epigrams appeared in 1607, just as Owen was achieving notoriety, and Stradling praises the pleasure given by reading and rereading Owen. Owen himself is often conscious of his Welshness -- a well-known epigram puns on Welsh, Hebrew, and Greek words ('Audoeni epigrammatum', 9.67); he believes in British union, but rebukes a fellow countryman who has denied his origins. It has plausibly been suggested that his Latin style is influenced by the Welsh alliterative technique of 'cynghanedd', though much of his word play is a natural feature of the neo-Latin epigram. Puns and anagrams were loved in the Renaissance: an artful example is 'De fide. Anatramma quincuplex' ('On faith: fivefold anagram'): '
Recta fides certa est, arcet mala schismata, non est 

Sicut Creta fides, fictilis; arte caret. 
(True faith is sure, it wards off evil schisms, is not false (like that of Crete), it lacks art. ibid., 6.12)' Some of his attacks on Roman Catholicism pleased Owen's mostly protestant audience, but infuriated the recusant portion of his own family, most notoriously an epigram of 1612 on papal simony that questioned whether St Peter was at Rome -- though Simon undoubtedly was ('Audoeni epigrammatum', 5.8). Other anti-papal poems appeared earlier. Owen was placed on the 'Index librorum prohibitorum' (list of books prohibited to Catholics), and, according to Wood, his uncle 'dashed his name out from his last will and testament; which was the chief reason, that he ever after lived in a poor condition' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.321). Wood discusses his appeal to readers: 'an ingenious liberty of joking... was, and is now with some, especially foreigners, not a little pleasing and delightful. But that which I must farther note of him is, that being always troubled with the disease that attends poets (indigence) he was received into the patronage of his country-man and kinsman, John Williams, bishop of Lincoln and lord-keeper of the great-seal. (ibid., 2.320)' The loss of his inheritance was doubtless a shock, but Wood probably over-simplifies. It is far from certain that Owen's condition remained 'poor', though he may never have been as comfortable, or as sure of continuing patronage, as he would have wished. 
A study of Owen's network of friends and patrons suggests that Owen was much involved in the London literary scene. The dedications of individual books indicate some of his chief patrons (at least those he wished to thank, or curry favour with, most publicly): the Neville sisters, daughters of the earl of Dorset; Lady Arabella Stuart; Henry, prince of Wales (in whose lifetime he received a pension); Charles, duke of York; Sir Edward Noel; Sir William Sidley (or Sedley); and Sir Roger Owen -- the last he calls his 'Three Maecenases'. The learned Jane Owen of Oxford wrote a congratulatory poem to him, and received one in return. 
Owen never married, and probably died in 1622, in London. He was buried in St Paul's Cathedral. John Williams placed a memorial brass there to him, with his effigy and six lines of Latin verse. 
Camden links Owen's name with Sidney, Spenser, Daniel, Holland, Ben Jonson, Campion, Drayton, Chapman, Marston, Shakespeare, 'and other most pregnant wits of these our times whom succeeding ages may justly admire' (Poole-Wilson, 242). Ben Jonson disapproved, perhaps moved by professional jealousy at what he saw as Owen's undeserved success in London literary circles: 'Owen is a pure Pedantique Schoolmaster sweeping his living from the Posteriors of little children, and hath no thinge good in him, his Epigrammes being bare narration' ('Ben Jonson', ed. C. H. Herford and P. Simpson, repr., 1965, 1.138). Archbishop William Sancroft left his commonplace book, containing hundreds of Latin epigrams, to Emmanuel College, Cambridge (MS 105): two-thirds of them are copied from Owen (compared to a few by neo-Latinists, or his contemporary James Alban Gibbes). 
Within a century of his death Owen's work had been published throughout Europe, and had been translated not only into English -- including a translation by Robert Hayman (1628) prepared in 'Bristols-Hope in Britaniola, anciently called New-found-land' -- but also into German, French, Spanish, and Danish. It was Owen, not Shakespeare, whom seventeenth-century Europeans knew and admired. Continental editions of Owen outnumber the English by a ratio of over three to one. Poole-Wilson has identified forty-five continental editions of Owen's Latin text before 1800. Nine appeared by 1622, the first at Amberg in 1608; Owen's book dedicated to Arabella Stuart was published at Die, in France, in 1613. There were at least thirty-seven separate editions in the seventeenth century, at least twelve of them published at Amsterdam (starting in 1624), from the distinguished presses of Jansson, Blaeu, Elzevier, and Hack. 
Owen's influence in Germany was particularly strong; Heine's schoolmaster read little else. Bernhard Nicaeus translated 623 epigrams into German (both Low and High), published as 'Rosarium, dat is, Rosen-Garten' (1638 and 1641); Valentin Lober produced another version (1651, 1653, and 1661), and so did J. P. Titz, along with a school of Owen's German imitators. More surprisingly, perhaps, was Owen's popularity in staunchly Catholic Spain, generally hostile to British literary culture. Francisco de la Torre cooked up a rare translation in two volumes, 'Agudezas de Ivan Oven' (1674, 1682): the survival of two distinct issues from 1674 may indicate that it was immediately pirated. Erich Herlov put him into Danish: 'Den berommelige engelske poetis Johannes Oveni... tre forste bogger' (1726). Ludwig Holberg observed that copies of Owen were in everyone's hands early in the eighteenth century, and were not infrequently used as school textbooks (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.320). 
Le Brun's French version of Owen was published in Paris (1709), and reprinted as 'Les epigrammes d'Owen traduites en vers Francois' (1719), with Latin and French on facing pages. Owen satisfied the French sense of wit throughout the eighteenth century: there was a call for Owen's works both in the 'ancien regime' (where they fit a world of cutting sarcasm and 'liaisons dangereuses'), and in the heat of the revolution, when Renouard's scholarly edition of 1794 was published. 
Modern scholarship has often been unkind, and Owen's epigrams are summarily dismissed. More recently, however, with rising interest in neo-Latin, scholars have begun to take him seriously again, and have attempted to set him fairly in context. 


@@@@@


doc= 21014


Owen, John (bap. 1580, d. 1651), bishop of St Asaph, was baptized at Burton Latimer, Northamptonshire, on 8 November 1580, the eldest son of Owen Owen (1543/4-1593), rector there and a descendant of the Owens of Bodsilin, Aber, Caernarvonshire, and his second wife, Jane, daughter of Robert Griffith of Caernarfon. He graduated BA from Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1597 and subsequently became a fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge. He proceeded MA in 1600 and DD in 1618; he was also incorporated MA at Oxford on 16 July 1600, but remained at Cambridge for some years and appeared as 'taxor' there in 1608. He succeeded to the rectory of Burton Latimer, Northamptonshire, in 1608 and was appointed chaplain to Prince Charles. He became rector of Carlton in 1609 and Cottingham in 1620, both in Northamptonshire. His first wife, Sarah Hodilow (died 1621) of Cambridgeshire, mother of his son Robert and of his daughter, who eventually married Dr William Griffith, chancellor of Bangor and St Asaph, was buried at Burton Latimer in February 1621. His second wife was Elizabeth Gray and his third Elizabeth Wyn (died 1651), daughter of Robert Wyn of Conwy. 
Owen was elected bishop of St Asaph on 18 August 1629, apparently as a compromise candidate, consecrated at Croydon on 20 September, instituted on 23 September, and had his temporalities restored on 26 September. He had earlier, on 15 September, received a grant to hold 'in commendam' the archdeaconry of St Asaph and other benefices in the dioceses of St Asaph and Bangor to a value not exceeding $150 per annum; he subsequently held six rectories along with his bishopric. Owen was held in much esteem in his own diocese, where he claimed to be connected by descent with every family of quality, and 'cywyddau' (praise-poems) were addressed to him by Huw Machno (1635) and Sion Cain (two, in 1641). Owen's episcopate was given an encouraging start when in 1630 Robert Llwyd, vicar of Chirk, dedicated to him his book, 'Llwybr hyffordd i'r nefoedd' (a translation of Dent's 'Plain Pathway to Heaven'), where he commented enthusiastically on the zeal and ability of many of the diocesan clergy. 
Owen was himself active in the pastoral work of his diocese. In a return on St Asaph dispatched to Archbishop Laud in 1633 he reported all was well, except for the number and boldness of Roman Catholic recusants, especially those focused on St Winifred's well. He made provision for Welsh sermons to be preached in parish churches on the first Sunday of every month, to be funded by those who received the tithes of the parish. He superintended improvements to his cathedral, including the building of a new organ in 1635, and in that year was much exercised about the repair of Wrexham church, one of the glories of his diocese. Two sets of visitation articles issued by Owen in 1637 and 1642 are extant; those for 1637 are the earliest surviving printed articles for any Welsh diocese. In his diocesan reports to Laud of 1633, 1634, 1635, 1637, and 1638, he claimed to have carried out the king's instructions and to have found his clergy orderly and conformable. His most serious worries were the growth in the number of recusants and the persistence of 'superstition and profaneness' ('Works of... Laud', 5.329). In 1639 he reported the discovery of an 'unlawful conventicle' (ibid., 369) within his diocese at Llanyblodwel in Shropshire, but there was no mention of the activities of Walter Cradock and other puritans in the Wrexham area. 
Owen wrote a Welsh treatise on the ten commandments and petitioned the king in 1641 to authorize its printing and command every church and chapel in Wales to obtain a copy, but nothing further was heard of it in the developing political crisis. On 30 December 1641 he was one of eleven bishops who petitioned against the growth of mob violence against their order at Westminster. He was impeached of high treason and imprisoned (possibly twice) in the Tower. His bishopric was sequestered on 6 April 1642, when he was allowed $500 per annum in composition. He also lost his sinecure rectories and his episcopal palace was sacked. Owen's third wife, Elizabeth, was buried on 22 July 1651. He died three months later, on 15 October 1651, at Aberkinsey in Rhuddlan; he was buried under the bishop's throne at St Asaph Cathedral. A brass plate was installed in his memory by Lord Harlech in 1907. 


@@@@@


doc= 21015


Owen, Sir John (1600-1666), royalist army officer, was the eldest son of John Owen (died 1613) of Clenennau, Caernarvonshire (who was himself the fourth son of Robert Owen of Bodsilin in the same county), who had made a fortune as secretary to the Elizabethan politician Sir Francis Walsingham. The elder John married Elin Maurice ('b'. 1578), heir to the Maurice estates in Caernarvonshire and Shropshire, which included Clenennau. Outliving two husbands, she became the senior member of the family on the death of her grandfather, Sir William Maurice, in 1622. When the younger John Owen inherited Clenennau on her death in 1626, he became one of the richest gentlemen in Caernarvonshire. 
The paucity of local records in that part of Wales means that the dates of birth and death for John Owen are known only from his memorial in Penmorfa church (Caernarvonshire). Likewise, nothing is known of his youth and early manhood, save that he served as high sheriff of Caernarvonshire in 1630-31 and of Merioneth the following year, and at some stage married Janet, daughter of Griffith Vaughan of Corsygedol, Merioneth. Letters suggest that it was a deeply affectionate union, and it produced several children. It is likely that the young Owen had some military experience, for otherwise it is hard to see why he should have been singled out in September 1642 to command the foot regiment to be raised in north-west Wales for the king's service at the outbreak of the civil war. The poverty of the region made the preparation of the unit slow work, and it did not join the royal army until the end of the year. 
Thereafter the regiment joined all of that army's campaigns, and Owen led it with distinction, being wounded in the face at the storming of Bristol in July 1643 and serving as governor of Reading throughout the following winter. The regiment was eventually taken prisoner with most of the royal infantry at Naseby, but by then Owen had long been detached from it for more exalted duties. These commenced in the autumn of 1644, when a parliamentarian invasion of north-east Wales placed the whole principality under pressure. There was need for a tough and loyal soldier to secure the hinterland, and Owen was chosen for the job. On 10 December he was commissioned governor of Conwy and promoted to the rank of major-general with overall responsibility for forces in the three counties of north-west Wales; seven days later he was knighted to increase his social standing. On taking up his command, he set to work at once to bring in money to pay the local soldiery, and led a body of them to help repel an enemy thrust into Denbighshire in March 1645. 
For the rest of that year Owen was as much concerned with local royalists as with parliamentarians, and in particular with John Williams, archbishop of York, who resided at Conwy Castle and had paid to repair it. Owen, a born zealot, felt an instinctual suspicion of Williams, an interfering and flexible politician, and tension between the two culminated when the former seized the castle on 14 May. Owen managed to repulse parliamentarian incursions into the region until April 1646, when a full-scale invasion began under Thomas Mytton, and Conwy was blockaded. On 8 August Mytton stormed the town, using information provided by Williams, but Owen hung on to the castle even after the king himself had given permission to surrender. He did not give up until 9 November, making it one of the last three royalist fortresses to capitulate. 
Sir John now lived quietly on his estates, paying fines totalling $4842 to a victorious parliament in 1647 and refusing an invitation that year from the exiled royalist general Prince Rupert to serve under him in the French army. Instead he joined the widespread royalist uprising of 1648, commanding the division of it in north-west Wales. Upon 3 June, following risings in the south of the country, Owen attacked Caernarfon with 240 supporters, driving Mytton's small garrison inside the walls and capturing the parliamentarian high sheriff, William Lloyd, who died of his wounds. Immediately he had to face a counter-attack by the troops occupying north-east Wales, led by colonels Carter and Twistleton. He met them at Llandygai on 5 June, and though his men routed the main body of their enemies, they broke in turn against the reserve. Owen himself was wounded, dragged from his horse, and made prisoner. 
Despite an attempt to rescue him from Denbigh Castle, Owen was escorted to that of Windsor, and charged with treason by the parliament on 26 July. In November both houses voted to banish him, but in the harsher climate following Pride's Purge he was sent for trial with other royalist leaders. On 6 March 1649 he was sentenced to beheading, a large part of the feeling against him being owed to the belief that Lloyd's death had been caused by ill treatment in Owen's hands. Sir John appealed to the purged parliament for his life, and on 8 March it voted a reprieve by 28 voices to 23, Henry Ireton and Edmond Chaloner being especially prominent in his defence. Owen sent fulsome letters of gratitude and was subsequently pardoned, although $1000 more had been exacted from his estate to compensate Lloyd's family. 
After this it is hardly surprising that Owen retired into private life again for ten years, a period broken by spells of imprisonment in 1655 and 1658 as the protectorate put prominent royalists in preventive detention during times of political tension. In 1659, however, he joined Booth's rising, and attempted to raise north-west Wales again in support of that rising. He failed, and went into hiding when Booth was defeated, while his estates were seized again. He was saved this time by the fall of the republic, and the restoration of the monarchy. In November 1660 he turned the tables by petitioning the Convention Parliament for compensation for his sufferings and for punishment of those who had inflicted them. Neither request was met, but Charles II rewarded him for his many services with appointment to the office of vice-admiral for north Wales in January 1661. Owen held this throughout the uneventful remainder of his life; he died in 1666 at Clenennau and was interred at Penmorfa church. 
Owen's political sympathies are hardly a matter of surprise, as north-west Wales was a solidly royalist region at the opening of the civil war, but his fidelity to them was most unusual. It is another mark of his conscientious and rigorous nature that he saved his working papers and correspondence from the war period, which today provide the single most important body of source material for events in this part of Wales during these years. 


@@@@@


doc= 21016


Owen, John (1616-1683), theologian and Independent minister, was born at Stadham (Stadhampton), Oxfordshire, the second son of Henry Owen, vicar of Stadham, and grandson of Griffith Owen of Talhenbont, Llanegryn, Merioneth. His mother was probably Hester Owen, who married the minister John Hartcliffe following Henry's death. Owen described his father as 'a non-conformist all his daies' (J. Owen, 'A Review of the True Nature of Schisme', 1657, 38). 
With his older brother William, Owen entered the grammar school of Edward Sylvester in Oxford about 1626, and in 1628 became a student at Queen's College, Oxford, whence he matriculated on 4 November 1631. At Queen's he was tutored in logic and philosophy by Thomas Barlow, the future bishop of Lincoln, and in music by Thomas Wilson. After graduating BA on 11 June 1632 he proceeded MA on 27 April 1635, and shortly thereafter was ordained deacon by John Bancroft, bishop of Oxford. 
Owen left Oxford in 1637 to become chaplain to Sir William Dormer of Ascott, near Wing, Buckinghamshire, and shortly thereafter accepted a similar position with John Lord Lovelace of Hurley, Berkshire. When civil war erupted in 1642 Lovelace supported the royalists, but Owen moved to London, where a sermon on 'Matthew' 8: 26 by an unidentified preacher at St Mary Aldermanbury had a profound impact on him. 
On 2 March 1643 the committee on printing in the House of Commons ordered the publication of Owen's first book, 'Theomachia... or, A Display of Arminianism' (1643), which was dedicated to the committee on religion in the House of Lords. In this work he refuted the Arminians by examining the doctrines of predestination, original sin, irresistible grace, and the extent of the atonement, as well as attacking the 'idol' of free will. Offered the living of the parish church at Shepway, Kent, by Sir Edward Scott, Owen declined, preferring to accept the sequestrated rectory of Fordham, Essex, from parliament in July 1643. Shortly thereafter he married Mary Rooke (died 1676), possibly the daughter of William Rooke, a Coggeshall clothier. Their first child, John, was baptized on 20 December 1644; ten other children followed, of whom all but one died in infancy or childhood. 
By 1644 Owen had adopted presbyterian views, as the preface to his second book, 'The Duty of Pastors and People' (1644), indicates. Although chary of congregational polity, he had ministered to his flock in their homes as well as in the parish church since 1643. The importance he attached to nurturing his congregants is reflected in 'The Principles of the Doctrine of Christ' (1645), which contains a short catechism for children and a longer one for adults that expounds on the answers in the brief version. Nominated by Sir Peter Wentworth, MP for Tamworth, and by Scott's stepson, Thomas Westrow, MP for Hythe, Owen preached a fast sermon on 'Acts' 16: 9 to the Commons on 29 April 1646. Published as 'A Vision of Unchangeable Free Mercy' (1646), it included a section entitled 'A short defensative' about polity and toleration in which he advocated liberty for the godly to gather as congregations of visible saints, with the right to celebrate communion at least monthly. He envisioned such congregations as existing alongside parish churches governed according to presbyterian polity; his ecclesiology was thus in transition, a result of his having read John Cotton's 'The Keyes of the Kingdom of Heaven' (1644). Owen's evolving views on polity may explain why the patron of Fordham, Sir John Lucas, opted not to present him to the living following the death of the sequestrated incumbent, John Alsop. On 18 August 1646 the House of Lords ordered that Owen be inducted as vicar of Coggeshall, Essex, on the recommendation of Robert Rich, earl of Warwick; he had been ministering there since May. He not only served the parish church but founded a gathered congregation. His embrace of congregational polity was complete by 1648, as reflected in his exposition of it in 'Eshcol: a Cluster of the Fruit of Canaan' (1648). He argued that separating from false, unwarranted ways of worship was required by the precept to avoid the sins of others -- a position he defended in a meeting of ministers at Colchester on 31 March 1648. 
Troubled by the spread of Arminianism, including its espousal by Thomas Moore, a Lincolnshire sectary, in 'The universality of Gods free-grace' (1646), Owen wrote a major rebuttal, 'Salus electorum, sanguis Jesu' (1648), dedicated to Warwick. In this erudite attack on the doctrine of universal atonement he expounded the necessity of Christ's satisfaction in redeeming the elect. His insistence that faith was procured by Christ's death and was irresistibly bestowed on the elect prompted various ministers to suspect him of antinomianism, including the belief that justification preceded faith. Richard Baxter responded in a lengthy appendix to 'Aphorismes of Justification' (1649), insisting that faith was not the only condition for justification, and John Horne criticized Owen in 'Thura aneogmene' (1650). Owen replied to Baxter in 'Of the Death of Christ' (1650), accusing his protagonist of misrepresenting his views; 'Salus electorum', he averred, had been written to accommodate 'vulgar capacities' rather than adhere to scholastic precision ('Works', 10.435). Moreover, he insisted that he did not embrace the antinomian doctrine that justification preceded believing. 
In summer 1648 Owen accepted an invitation to minister to the parliamentary troops besieging Colchester, on which occasion he met Henry Ireton and other senior army officers. Following Colchester's surrender he preached two sermons on 'Habakkuk' 3: 1-9, one at Colchester and the other at Romford. Published as 'Eben-ezer: a Memoriall' (1648), they held out the promise that God always had instruments to destroy his enemies and deliver his church from oppression. Owen came to view the execution of Charles I as an example of such judgment, and in his sermon to the Commons on the day after the regicide he stressed that subjects, because of 'their retained sovereignty', were accountable for their sovereign's misrule and were therefore empowered to impose restraints. The destruction of a king was justified if he commanded 'unrighteous things' ('Works', 8.136). Published as 'A Sermon Preached... January 31' (1649) it included an epistle to the Commons affirming Owen's belief in the imminent establishment of the millennium, although he never suggested precise dates. Appended to the sermon was a brief for toleration, though he acknowledged the state's right to punish heretics and schismatics who disrupted the peace or employed violence to thwart the gospel's progress. He preached before the Commons again on 19 April, reiterating his apocalyptic message that 'in these latter days, as antichristian tyranny draws to its period' Christ would 'shake and translate the political heights, governments, and strength of the nations' in preparation for the inauguration of his kingdom (ibid., 8.260); this sermon was published as 'Ouranon ourania' (1649). Again he preached before the Commons, this time on 7 June, a service of thanksgiving to mark the Levellers' defeat at Burford. Dismissing them as poor creatures who had 'dashed themselves against the rock' he spoke of the imminent Irish expedition, which he saw in the context of Christ's battle 'with all the world' for their abuse of the divine ordinances (ibid., 9.215). Entitled 'Human Power Defeated' this sermon was published posthumously in 1721. On 8 June the Commons asked the committee for Oxford to consider appointing Owen head of a college. 
After hearing Owen preach to the Commons, Oliver Cromwell met him at Thomas Fairfax's house and sought his services as chaplain for the Irish expeditionary force; the house approved the appointment on 2 July 1649 and provided a stipend of $100 p.a. He went to Ireland in August, but was not at the siege of Drogheda, having remained in Dublin to preach, and to examine the statutes of Trinity College for possible revision. On 8 March 1650, by which time he had left Ireland, the council of state made him a trustee to administer the property of the archbishop, dean, and chapter of Dublin for the support of Trinity College. 
Owen preached to the Rump Parliament on 28 February 1650, a day of humiliation. Published as 'The Stedfastness of Promises' (1650) the sermon exhorted MPs to stand firm in the face of the hydra of Catholics, prelatists, and Scottish covenanters that threatened the gospel, the propagation of which in Ireland must be supported. On 8 March the council appointed him to preach to it every Sunday afternoon during the coming year, in return for which he received lodgings at Whitehall and a stipend. Two months later the council sought his assistance to advise a committee about the appointment of ministers for regiments lacking them. On 28 June he left for Scotland with Cromwell's forces, preaching 'en route' at Newcastle and Berwick. In the latter sermon, preached in part on 21 July, completed at Edinburgh in November, and published as 'The Branch of the Lord' (1650), he expounded the qualities of the gospel church. By late August he had returned to London, but in the aftermath of the battle of Dunbar the council, heeding Cromwell's request, ordered him back to Scotland. While there he helped persuade Alexander Jaffray, provost of Aberdeen, that the Scots had erred in supporting the Stuarts. 
Following his return to London early in 1651 Owen was appointed dean of Christ Church, Oxford, on 18 March. The previous incumbent, Edward Reynolds, had refused to take the engagement, and Joseph Caryl, who had accompanied Owen to Scotland as a chaplain, declined the post. However, Caryl succeeded Owen as a preacher to the council of state on 23 June. Within two years the new dean was complaining that his academic duties intruded on his studies and professing that he had forgotten 'the portion of polite learning' that he once had ('Works', 10.492-3). In addition to his responsibilities at Oxford he was asked in July 1651 to review the statutes of Trinity College, Dublin. At the service of thanksgiving on 24 October 1651 for Cromwell's victory at Worcester, Owen exhorted the Rump to consider 'the constant 'appearing of God' against every party that, under any colour or pretence whatever, have lifted up themselves for the reinforcement of things as in former days' (ibid., 8.336). The theme of this sermon, published as 'The Advantage of the Kingdome of Christ' (1651), was God's shaking of worldly realms. Four days later parliament ordered Owen and Thomas Goodwin to preach at Oxford, and for the next five years they alternately delivered sermons from the pulpit of St Mary's. On 6 February 1652 Owen preached the funeral sermon for Henry Ireton in Westminster Abbey, likening him to Daniel in his wisdom, love for his people, and righteous administration; dedicated to Henry Cromwell the sermon was published as 'The Labouring Saints Dismission to Rest' (1652). 
On 10 February 1652 Owen and other ministers submitted a petition to parliament condemning the Racovian catechism and calling for the more effective propagation of the gospel. The Rump responded by appointing two committees, one of which, with Owen as a member, examined the catechism, laying the foundation for its condemnation and burning. In consultation with select ministers, including Owen, the other committee produced a report whose expanded version was published in March as 'The Humble Proposals', with Owen's name heading the list of authors. It called for a university trained clergy, the introduction of examiners and ejectors to remove unfit ministers, the retention of tithing, and the suppression of astrology. Owen and his fellow Independents wanted to add sixteen doctrinal principles that no one could legally attack in print or sermons, and these were appended to an edition of the proposals published in December (but dated 1653). The Rump had made modest progress in dealing with the proposals when Cromwell dismissed it in April 1653. 
In the meantime Owen's responsibilities continued to expand. On 29 July 1652 he and eight other ministers were asked to advise Charles Fleetwood and his colleagues about the provision of clergy for Ireland; on 15 June Cromwell named him to Oxford's board of visitors; and on 26 September he became vice-chancellor of the university following Cromwell's nomination. When Cromwell put the chancellorship in commission on 16 October, Owen served as first commissioner. He was also appointed by the council of state to the committee responsible for licensing translations of the 'Bible'. With eleven other Independent ministers he wrote a letter to parliament, printed in Henry Whitfield's 'Strengthe out of Weaknesse' (1652), endorsing missionary activity among North American Indians. Once more he was invited to preach to parliament, this time on 13 October 1652, a day of humiliation. Published as 'Christs Kingdom and the Magistrate's Power' (1652) his sermon reflected his concern about the need to expedite the propagation of the gospel and the role of magistrates in this endeavour. In the same year he published 'The Primer', complete with a short catechism, 'Bible' passages, and prayers; printed with parliamentary authorization it may have been intended as an official alternative to the old 'Primer and Catechisme'. 
Owen reportedly proposed names for the nominated assembly, and he and Walter Cradock preached to it on 25 August 1653. On 2 September he supported Oxford's petition to the assembly to maintain the universities and support godly ministers. His name was on a list of ministers the assembly formulated to eject and settle clergy throughout the country, but nothing came of this. When Cromwell convened a conference of prominent presbyterian, Independent, and Baptist ministers in late October to promote unity Owen participated. There is no evidence that he was troubled by the dissolution of the nominated assembly on 12 December. Eleven days later he was created doctor of divinity; his diploma noted that he was 'in disputando strenuus & acutus' ('rigorous and sharp in discussion'; Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 2.179), some indication of which is suggested in his 1653 treatise, 'Diatriba de divina justitia'. The need for this work grew out of public disputations at Oxford in which Owen, castigating the Socinians, asserted that God's justice made the punishment of sin essential; without Christ's atonement, by which Owen meant the rendering of satisfaction for sin, God could not forgive sinners. When his espousal of this doctrine in Oxford disputations prompted criticism from 'many very respectable theologians' ('Works', 10.486), he defended his views in 'Diatriba', which included a refutation of the tenets of William Twisse, Samuel Rutherford, and the Socinian Johannes Crellius. Owen was in turn attacked by Thomas Gilbert in 'Vindiciae supremi Dei dominii' (1655) and briefly by Baxter in 'The Unreasonableness of Infidelity' (1655). 
By 1654 Owen had completed a lengthy polemical work, 'The Doctrine of the Saints' Perseverance' (1654), which he had begun in 1651 in response to John Goodwin's 'Apolutrosis apolutroseos' (1651). On 7 January 1652 Robert Abbott, minister of St Augustine's, London, reported to Baxter that he had told Owen 'it was expected he should doe something to satisfy the Church' about Goodwin's work, and Owen replied that he had already begun a critique ('Correspondence of Richard Baxter' 1.73). The result was a prodigious defence of the doctrine of 'the certain, infallible continuance of the love and favour of God unto the end towards his, those whom he hath once freely accepted in Jesus Christ' ('Works', 11.120). He grounded this doctrine on God's immutable nature, the absolute purpose of God in saving the elect, the covenant of grace, and God's faithfulness in keeping his promises. In the lengthy preface Owen attacked Henry Hammond's argument, in 'Dissertationes quatuor' (1651), for the authenticity of the seven Ignatian epistles, which provided evidence for the early development of episcopacy. Hammond had directed his disquisition against the Huguenot David Blondel and various English puritans, and Owen came to their defence in his preface, only to be refuted by Hammond in 'An Answer to the Animadversions' (1654). 
In addition to engaging in scholarly debate Owen was active on other fronts. In the aftermath of the failed nominated assembly, on 9 January 1654 he, Thomas Goodwin, Philip Nye, and Sidrach Simpson sent a letter to the Independent churches denouncing the Fifth Monarchists because their views 'cut the sinews of all Magistracy' and endangered England's peace (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 81, 16'r'-17'v'). This did not dissuade the Fifth Monarchist John Tillinghast from quoting Owen in an epistle dedicatory to Cromwell in 'Generation Work' (1654). Owen and Goodwin were among a group of ministers that met with Cromwell on 28 February, probably to discuss a religious settlement. Several days later the council asked Owen to refute 'A Twofold Catechism' (1654) by the Socinian John Biddle, which led to the publication of 'Vindiciae evangelicae' (1655), another expansive tome, the focus of which was an exposition of the atonement and justification by imputed grace, with commentary as well on the covenant between God the father and his son. In Owen's judgement Biddle's theology was 'a composure of rotten posts and dead men's bones' ('Works', 12.84), but he also lashed out against the 'middle way' championed by Moise Amyraut. In an appendix to 'Vindiciae evangelicae' Owen responded to the critique of his treatise 'Of the Death of Christ' by Baxter in 'Rich: Baxter's Confession of his Faith' (1655), and the latter thereupon replied to Owen in 'Certain Disputations of Right to Sacraments' (1657). 
Owen advised Cromwell on the establishment of the commission for the approbation of public preachers in March 1654, and on the 20th was named a trier. On 28 August he and his brother William were appointed assistants to the Oxford commission for the ejection of ignorant and scandalous clergy and schoolmasters. Judging from his intervention with the Berkshire commission on behalf of Edward Pococke, who had been accused of reading the 'Book of Common Prayer' in his parsonage at Childrey, he probably undertook these duties in a spirit of moderation. This is also suggested by his connivance at John Fell's use of the 'Book of Common Prayer' in services in the Oxford home of Dr Thomas Willis, although he opposed the awarding of an MA degree to Robert South in 1657 because the latter insisted on using the 'Book of Common Prayer' in Christ Church. Owen was elected to represent the university in the first protectoral parliament, but as a minister he was disqualified by the 'Clerical Disabilities Act' of 1642; Anthony Wood's assertion that he renounced his ordination in an attempt to claim his seat is implausible. Although he could not sit in parliament he advised a parliamentary committee on the fundamentals of religion -- in practice, the limits of orthodoxy. The resulting document, 'The Principles of Faith', derived from the proposals of 1652, was, according to Baxter, largely the work of Owen, 'the great doer of all that worded the Articles' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1, pt 2, 198). He was also a signatory of a letter from ministers and university professors to evangelical churches on the continent endorsing John Durie's efforts to organize an evangelical protestant alliance. When Cromwell wanted to forward his religious agenda he consulted with Owen, Stephen Marshall, and three others on 31 October 1654. Owen's loyalty to the regime was manifest in March 1655 when he raised a troop to defend the university during the Penruddock uprising, and he offered to form another in Berkshire. In December he sat on a committee that discussed Menasseh ben Israel's proposal to readmit Jews to England, and the same month Major-General James Berry suggested to the secretary of state, John Thurloe, that Owen could propose means to supply ministers for Anglesey. 
Early in 1656 Owen experienced assorted tribulations, including a raging fever that claimed the lives of two of his sons and made others in his household ill. Rumours circulated in April that he was troubled by John Wilkins's marriage to Cromwell's sister, fearing this would undermine his influence with the lord protector. Moreover his stipend was two years in arrears, prompting the council to decree in August that he should be paid the $200 he was owed and $100 p.a. out of undervalued delinquents' estates. During the spring he had been apprehended at Whitehall Gate, probably because of a private debt, though he was quickly released and the men responsible for his arrest were themselves apprehended. 
As vice-chancellor Owen endeavoured to reform Oxford, in part by making traditional academic dress optional, but convocation rejected his plan in April 1656. He dressed in fashionable clothing, had long hair, and wore Spanish leather boots and a cocked hat. Although he enjoyed some support among Oxford visitors they refused to reduce convocation's powers, nor was he able to reform the traditional festivities and ceremonies at the end of the academic year. Unlike his friend John Wilkins he displayed little interest in curricular reform, especially the new science, although Ralph Josselin heard reports that Owen had attempted to suppress the study of philosophy and had 'become a great scorne' ('Diary of Ralph Josselin', 374). While John Locke was at Christ Church from 1656 to 1660 he was influenced by Owen. During his Oxford years Owen may have ministered to a gathered congregation, but there is no evidence to support George Vernon's later accusation that one met in Christ Church. 
In addition to his academic duties Owen continued to serve the Cromwellian regime. With Caryl and Peter Sterry he advised the council in June 1656 on which books and manuscripts in the library of the late James Ussher should be purchased by the state, and on 17 September he preached at the opening of parliament ('God's Work in Founding Zion', 1656). He returned to preach a fast sermon on 30 October, published as 'God's Presence with a People' (1656). Meanwhile, on 16 October he was appointed to a committee to advise the council on augmenting clerical stipends. He was with Cromwell when George Fox met him to discuss the suffering of Quakers, and in the aftermath of James Nayler's symbolic re-enactment of Jesus' entry into Jerusalem on Palm Sunday Sir John Reynolds wanted Owen, Caryl, or Nye to converse with Nayler in the hope that 'some good may be wrought upon him' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 1.79-80). Owen encountered Quakers at St Mary's, where they justified wearing their hats during prayer because he declined to remove his own while reciting the Lord's prayer. In 1657 he advised Cromwell how to reconcile the Scottish resolutioners and the remonstrants, who had the support of the English presbyterians and Independents respectively. 
Amid these activities Owen continued to write. A devotional work on sanctification, 'Of the Mortification of Sinne in Believers' (1656), reached a third edition in 1668. In 'Vindiciae evangelicae' he had found an affinity between the teachings of Hugo Grotius and the Socinians, whereupon Hammond had come to Grotius's defence, most recently in 'A Second Defence of... Hugo Grotius' (1655). To this Owen responded in 'A Review of the Annotations of Hugo Grotius' (1656). In the following year he prepared some meditations for the press that had been composed about 1650; published as 'Of Communion with God' (1657) they explored the believer's fellowship with each member of the Trinity. He remained firmly opposed to Arminianism; his letter endorsing George Kendall's attack on Arminian tenets in 'Fur praedestinatus' (1651) was printed in Kendall's 'Fur pro tribunali' (1657). Owen incited another controversy when he published 'Of Schisme' (1657), in which he argued that protestants were not guilty of schism for leaving the Catholic church, nor were Independents who organized gathered congregations in accord with Christ's command, opting 'to reform themselves, by reducing the practice of worship to its original institution' ('Works', 13.199). To this work Daniel Cawdrey retorted in 'Independencie a Great Schism' (1657), accusing Owen and his colleagues of opening the door to all heresies and blasphemies by insisting on toleration for themselves; 'Causeless Separation from a true Church', he insisted, 'is Schism' (p. 64). At the urging of the Independent minister John Beverley, Owen replied in 'A Review of the True Nature of Schisme' (1657 [1658]), in which he acknowledged the influence of Cotton's 'Keyes' on him. When Cawdrey continued his attack in 'Independency Further Proved to be a Schism' (1658) Owen responded to his criticism of Cotton in 'A Defence of Mr John Cotton' (1658). Giles Firmin joined the fray with a critique of Owen in 'Of Schism' (1658). 
The offer of the crown to Cromwell on 23 February 1657 troubled Owen and may explain his angry departure from London in early March. Yet on the 19th of that month the journalist Marchamont Nedham jokingly told Cromwell 'that 'vox populi' said Mr. Nye should be Archbishop of Canterbury, and Dr. Owen of York' ('CSP dom.', '1656-7', 318). Siding with the military officers opposed to monarchy Owen acceded to the request of colonels Thomas Pride and John Desborough to draft a petition to Cromwell in May urging him to reject the crown. Although a proposal for Owen to preach a fast sermon to the Commons on 27 February 1657 had sparked a two-hour debate, his supporters, led by Colonel John Jones and Dennis Bond, persuaded parliament to settle the estate of Donadea and other lands in co. Kildare on him to provide his stipend of $100 p.a., hitherto paid by the exchequer. 
After Cromwell resigned the chancellorship of Oxford in July 1657 and was replaced by his son Richard, Owen suggested his own replacement as vice-chancellor; John Conant, rector of Exeter College, succeeded him on 9 October. Shortly before this Owen and Goodwin had ceased their afternoon lectures at St Mary's, although Owen remained dean of Christ Church. Cognizant of his concern about the plight of persecuted protestants, on 4 November the council appointed him to a committee dealing with those in Piedmont, Poland, and Bohemia. A correspondent of Joseph Williamson reported in December that he was giving 'opposition' lectures at St Peter's-in-the-East, Oxford, but these were almost certainly not critical of the Cromwellian regime, judging from the innocuous content of his book 'Of Temptation' (1658), the substance of which had been delivered from an Oxford pulpit. He followed this work with a substantive defence of the 'Bible' as the word of God, 'Of the Divine Originall' (1659), completed in September. Appended to this were 'Pro sacris scripturis', which denounced the Quaker belief in continuing revelation, and 'A Vindication of the Purity and Integrity of the Hebrew and Greek Texts', which criticized Brian Walton's edition of the 'Biblia polyglotta' on the grounds that its inclusion of variant readings would strengthen the Catholic claim that the 'Vulgate' was the only authoritative text. He also contended that the vowel points in the Hebrew text were as old as the letters and thus part of inspired scripture. Both appendices provoked replies: Walton defended himself in 'The Considerator Considered' (1659), and Samuel Fisher denounced Owen (and others) in 'Rusticus ad academicos' (1660). 
Owen was not with Cromwell at the latter's death in September 1658, though he attended the state funeral. Shortly thereafter he played a major role at the Savoy conference, helping to draft 'A Declaration of the Faith and Order', which was presented to Richard Cromwell on 14 October. In Baxter's judgement Owen and Nye prevented old wounds from healing by insisting on more fundamentals in the declaration than he deemed necessary. Owen's ties to the military were again evident when parliament designated 4 February 1659 a day of humiliation and debated the order in which four ministers -- Owen and the presbyterians Reynolds, Thomas Manton, and Edmund Calamy -- would preach; John Lambert wanted Owen to be first, whereas the civilian republican Arthur Hesilrige thought he should be last; a compromise let him preach third. In his sermon 'The Glory and Interest of Nations' (1659) he registered no objection to unbelievers serving as magistrates, but he expected little good from them. By mid-March he had gathered a congregation whose members included such prominent officers as Fleetwood, Desborough, William Sydenham, James Berry, William Goffe, and possibly Lambert, and they would soon be meeting in Wallingford House. It was there that the grandees, with Owen participating, decided to force Cromwell to dissolve parliament on 22 April. Arriving late Manton thought he heard Owen call for Cromwell's removal, yet as late as 3 May Owen supported the retention of a titular protector. 
In the face of growing support for the Rump Parliament's recall Owen urged the grandees to summon it, and he produced a list (obtained from Edmund Ludlow) of about 160 MPs who had served at Westminster since Pride's Purge. On 8 May, one day after the Rump was reconvened, he preached to its members. As the situation deteriorated following the Rump's demand for Cromwell's resignation on 24 May Owen tried to rally Independent churches, but the key congregation at Yarmouth refused to become involved. When Sir George Booth and his royalist supporters rebelled, the council on 15 August ordered Owen to raise a troop of horse to defend Oxford University. The unsettled times prompted leading Independents, including Owen, and presbyterians to engage in discussions in September aimed at unity, but they had little success. On 24 September the council commissioned him and Thankful Owen to preach at Whitehall on Sundays until 1 December. There was presumably a moment of levity in September when Owen was duped by a London merchant claiming to be an Eastern Orthodox patriarch, but the Baptist John Tombes was in earnest the following month when he sought the assistance of Owen and others to prevent toleration for Catholics; whether Owen saw him is unknown. 
In late October copies of George Monck's 'Declaration of the Officers of the Army in Scotland' reached Owen and his colleagues. Alarmed by Monck's threat to intervene militarily to restore the Rump, which had been ousted anew by the army on the 13th, Owen (whose name heads the list) and eighteen others wrote to Monck on the 31st, announcing the dispatch of a delegation to convey their concerns. When Monck replied, insisting on the restoration of parliamentary government, Owen wrote on 19 November, warning that a civil war between the armies would destroy the good old cause and 'the sober godly in both Nations' ('Correspondence', 106-8). In a letter to Owen, William Greenhill, and William Hooke dated 23 November, Monck professed hope for a peaceful resolution. Six days later he wrote to Owen insisting that England must be liberated from military rule and pressing him to urge Fleetwood to restore the Rump. On 13 December Owen and thirteen others wrote to Monck arguing that the crucial issue was not whether parliament should convene but the threat to their lives if their cause should be overthrown. Despair set in when Owen, Desborough, and Sydenham learned on the 22nd that the troops dispatched to besiege Portsmouth had changed sides. As Monck's forces began their slow march toward London, Owen and Nye were reportedly attempting to raise $100,000 to support troops committed to toleration for protestants. As Baxter assessed the events of 1659, in a passage excised from his published autobiography by its editor, he bitterly condemned Owen for doing the 'mainework' in toppling Cromwell; Owen's 'parts, & confidence, & busybodiness, & interest in those men did give him the opportunity to do his exploits' (Nuttall, 'Journal of Ecclesiastical History', 6.78). 
On 13 March 1660 parliament deprived Owen of the deanery of Christ Church and restored Reynolds. About this time Owen moved his family to Stadham, where he lived quietly, notwithstanding attempts to implicate him in spurious conspiracies in April and November. The efforts of the earl of Clarendon and Roger Boyle, Lord Broghill, to persuade him to conform were unsuccessful. In the crackdown on suspected dissidents following Thomas Venner's Fifth Monarchist rebellion in January 1661, troops seized six or seven cases of pistols from his house, where he was hosting two former Oxford colleagues, Thankful Owen and Francis Johnson. Much of his time was now devoted to writing. In 'Theologoumena pantodapa', published at Oxford in 1661 and reprinted at Bremen (1684) and Franeker (1700), he surveyed the history of theology throughout biblical times and argued that it was most accurately expounded by Calvinists. His views on set prayers, particularly the implications for the Lord's prayer, had been criticized by Thomas Long in 'An Exercitation Concerning the... Lords Prayer' (1658) and Meric Casaubon in 'A Vindication of the Lord's Prayer' (1660), and Owen took up this and related issues in 'A Discourse Concerning Liturgies' (1662). Composed while deliberations for the 'Act of Uniformity' were underway this work repudiated liturgies as neither apostolic nor in accord with the practice of Christian churches during the first three centuries AD. In 1662 he also rebutted the work of the Franciscan John Vincent Canes, whose 'Fiat lux' (1661) proclaimed the benefits of Catholicism as a faith of truth and moderation in contrast to the destructive zeal of protestant sects. Owen's anonymously published critique, 'Animadversions on... Fiat lux' (1662), condemned key Catholic beliefs and practices while denouncing Canes as a modern day Celsus, the Platonist critic of apostolic Christianity. Canes replied in 'An Epistle' (1663), prompting Owen to compose 'A vindication of the 'Animadversions'' (1664), a more detailed critique of Catholicism in which he charged the Catholic church with idolatry, apostasy, heresy, and schism. Canes defended himself in 'Diaphanta' (1665; reprinted in 'Three Letters', 1671), which Owen ignored. 
After the ejection of nonconforming ministers in August 1662 Owen hoped 'that God who hath now hid his face, will repent him of the evill' ('Correspondence', 130). By 1663 he had settled in London near Moorgate, although he continued to spend time at his Stadham home. He met often with Thomas Goodwin and Henry Jessey, and was probably involved with the declaration submitted to the king on 27 February 1663 calling for liberty of conscience and affirming the theology embodied in the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', though differing on certain matters of discipline and polity. The delegation that presented the paper to Charles also denounced the recent Tong plot and Fifth Monarchist principles. In August and October 1663 Owen was invited to become the minister of the congregational church in Boston, Massachusetts; he considered the offer, and as late as June 1666 the people of Boston thought that he might accept, though ultimately he resolved to stay in England. 
Owen enjoyed limited protection, thanks to such friends as Philip, Lord Wharton, Arthur Annesley, earl of Anglesey, and reportedly Aubrey de Vere, earl of Oxford. With other Independent ministers he participated in a lecture at the house of the alderman Henry Ashurst. He went to Oxford in January 1664 in the hope of persuading Thomas Gilbert to become president of Harvard College, and the following month he thought he was near death because of a severe 'fluxe' (Bodl. Oxf., Rawlinson MS, 53). Although he was indicted at Oxford on 27 February 1665 for holding conventicles at Stadham he was not incarcerated. He persuaded Barlow, now provost of Queen's College, Oxford, to seek assurances from Clarendon that he would henceforth be exempt from such prosecution, but they were not forthcoming. From 1664 onwards Owen's wife and children lived primarily at Stoke Newington, where his daughter Judith died in May 1664 and his son Matthew in April 1665. Their hosts were Charles Fleetwood and his new wife, Mary, widow of Sir Edward Hartopp. Here Owen gathered a small congregation that included various former Cromwellian military officers -- Fleetwood, Desborough, Berry, Lieutenant-Colonel Jeffrey Ellaston, and Captain Griffith Lloyd -- as well as Bridget Bendish, daughter of Henry Ireton and granddaughter of Cromwell; William Steele, former lord chancellor of Ireland; Samuel Lee, former dean of Wadham College, Oxford; Sir John Hartopp; and Anglesey's wife and daughter. Owen's circle of friends also came to embrace the fifth or sixth Baron Willoughby of Parham, Sir Trevor Roper, Sir William Morice, and Richard Hampden. Owen and his wife were occasional guests of the Whartons at Woburn, and they stayed for a time at Theobalds, Hertfordshire, with Sir Edward Abney's wife (Caryl's daughter) and preached in their London house. 
Owen played a major role in the debate over freedom of conscience that began in 1667 in anticipation of the expiry of the 'Conventicle Act'. Published anonymously Owen's powerfully argued tract, 'Indulgence and Toleration Considered' (1667), proclaimed that 'God hath not Warranted or Authorized any man to 'inforce' [people] to 'Act contrary to their Light', and that perswasion of his Mind and Will which he hath given them in their own Consciences' (p. 17). Physical compulsion in religion was not practised by the apostolic church, inculcated hypocritical compliance, was abhorrent to the English, and historically failed to extirpate the views that it was designed to eradicate. Owen's companion tract, 'A Peace-Offering' (1667), also published anonymously, complained bitterly that conformists were ignoring the doctrinal orthodoxy of dissenters and instead insisting on 'a Precise and Determinate Judgement and Practise in things of very 'Little' Concernment' (p. 13). Dissenters, he asserted, had no desire to impose civil or ecclesiastical polity on the nation, and the indulgence they sought was not conducive to sedition as their opponents alleged. He was in turn attacked by Richard Perrinchief in 'Indulgence not Justified' (1668). 
The tracts by Owen along with others by John Humfrey and John Corbet set the stage for the king and parliament to consider indulgence and comprehension in 1668. Wilkins, now bishop of Chester, prepared proposals for comprehension that eventually led to a bill written by Sir Matthew Hale, whereas Owen drafted a bill that would provide liberty of worship for dissenters whose theology was orthodox. Owen's draft included provisions for the registration of ministers and their congregants, the exclusion of nonconformists from public office, and the payment of 'public dues' to parishes. Supporters of Gilbert Sheldon, archbishop of Canterbury, defeated both measures. With justification Baxter blamed the prelates for the defeat of comprehension, but Manton held Owen responsible for having advocated a different proposal. Accompanied by the presbyterian Samuel Annesley, Owen thereupon called on Manton to defend the benefits of indulgence. 
In the meantime Baxter was encouraged by Owen's new catechism, 'A Brief Instruction' (1667). Its defence of congregational polity elicited a critique by Benjamin Camfield, 'A Serious Examination' (1668), but Baxter found reason for hope in Owen's perceived rejection of two congregational principles, namely, that the entire gathered church as a society has the authority to admit or excommunicate members, and that the congregation bestows this power at ordination to church officers. Overestimating Owen's flexibility Baxter drafted a statement of religious fundamentals (later published as part two of 'Church Concord', 1691) and asked Owen to evaluate it. The latter found it too lengthy, preferring that it be limited to key points relevant to the union of presbyterians and Independents. Owen thought that Baxter was not firm enough in rejecting Socinianism, and he also disapproved of Baxter's stress on the magistrate's authority to repress errors and heresy. Fifteen months after discussions between the two men had begun, an exasperated Baxter requested the return of his papers, and Owen complied, remarking only that 'I am still a well-wisher to those Mathematicks' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', pt 3, 69). Although nothing came of these proceedings the reputation of the two men was probably never higher during the Restoration era, for Barlow observed in January 1669 that Owen had kissed the king's hand, adding that he had heard reports that Owen or Baxter would receive the next vacant bishopric. This would have pleased Barlow, who thought that such an appointment might ensure the continuance of episcopacy and the church's patrimony, although he acknowledged that some people would have preferred the termination of episcopacy rather than the elevation of either man to a bishopric. 
Owen continued to write at a prodigious pace. 'The Nature... of Indwelling Sin' (1668), 'A Practical Exposition upon Psalm CXXX' (1668), and 'A Brief Declaration... of the Doctrine of the Trinity' (1669) were intended for godly readers, whereas his massive study of 'Hebrews', published in four folio volumes between 1668 and 1684, was composed primarily for biblical scholars and ministers; this is especially evident in the first volume, which explores questions of authorship and language. ('A Brief Declaration' elicited a response from the Quaker George Whitehead, 'The Divinity of Christ', 1669.) Other works reflected Owen's interest in polemics. Chief among these at this point in his career was 'Truth and Innocence Vindicated' (1669), composed after Baxter had declined his request to answer the attack on nonconformists by Samuel Parker in 'A Discourse of Ecclesiastical Politie' (1669). Castigating Parker's profuse use of abusive language as an unacceptable means of debate Owen rebutted his core charge that nonconformists were subversives. Baxter praised Owen's reply, adding that this work enhanced his stature among dissenters, but Parker ridiculed Owen's use of Latin phrases as 'superannuated Pedantry' and dismissed his book as 'nothing but Cavil and vulgar Talk' (S. Parker, 'A Defence and Continuation', 1671, A3'r', 3). When Owen defended Sunday as the Christian sabbath in 'Exercitations Concerning... a Day of Sacred Rest' (1671), he was attacked by the sabbatarian William Saller in 'An Examination of a Late Book' (1671). In a lengthy preface to Theophilus Gale's 'The True Idea of Jansenisme' (1669), Owen asserted that Augustine's doctrine of grace had been taught by some Catholics in every age of church history. Another brief work, 'The State of the Kingdom' (perhaps published only posthumously) was part of an unsuccessful endeavour by nonconformists to prevent passage of a new 'Conventicle Act' in March 1670. 
Despite the heavy writing schedule Owen performed numerous ministerial functions. Beginning in 1669 he participated in a combination lectureship at Hackney with presbyterians and other Independents, and he also preached at White's Alley, Moorfields. With eleven others he and Goodwin wrote to the governor of Massachusetts on 25 March 1669 protesting against recent legislation against Baptists, arguing that they should be free as long as they refrained from disturbing the peace. Owen's influence extended well beyond London, for in May 1669 he and George Griffith sought to resolve a dispute involving elders in the Independent church at Hitchin, Hertfordshire, and two years later he participated in the ordination of Matthew Meade at Stepney and recommended Thomas Hardcastle for the pastorship of the open membership congregation at Broadmead, Bristol. When the ministers and magistrates of Massachusetts sought advice on raising money and recruiting students and a president for Harvard College they wrote to Owen and others in August 1671, and he and his colleagues responded in February. The presbyterian Henry Oasland remarked to Baxter about this time that Owen 'hugely riseth in the esteeme... of this Country' ('Correspondence of Richard Baxter' 2.86), but he also had his critics, such as the conformist George Vernon, author of a vitriolic attack, 'A Letter to a Friend' (1670). To Vernon, Owen was the former darling of Cromwell, a purveyor of falsehood and uncharitableness, and 'a Trumpet to sound an Alarum to Sedition and Rebellion' (p. 14). Owen briefly responded in 'Reflections on a Slanderous Libel' (1670), and a friend anonymously came to his defence in 'An Expostulatory Letter' (1671). 
When the new 'Conventicle Act' came into effect in May 1670 Owen resolved to continue his meetings and suffer the consequences, but he also reiterated the case for religious freedom for nonconformists in 'An Account of the Grounds and Reasons' (1670?), a broadside, and protested against their unjust treatment in 'The Present Distresses' (1671?) and 'A Word of Advice' (1671?). Charles II consulted him about a possible declaration of indulgence in August and September 1671, and following its proclamation he and three other congregationalists thanked the king on 28 March 1672. Although Owen apparently did not obtain a licence for himself he assisted others to procure them. The leathersellers gave him permission to use their hall if it were licensed, but there is no record that a licence was issued. Following Caryl's death in 1673 his congregation merged with that of Owen, who ministered to them at Leadenhall Street, where he was assisted by Isaac Loeffs (1673-82), Robert Ferguson (1674- 'c'.1679), and David Clarkson (1682-3; sole pastor, 1683-6). Against the background of the indulgence Owen published an eirenic work, 'A Discourse Concerning Evangelical Love' (1672), recognizing the Church of England as a genuine body of Christ, but insisting anew that separation from it was not schism. 
Although Owen did not shun polemics they were beginning to take their toll. About 1672 he complained to John Eliot that he had 'a dry and barren spirit' and that 'there is scarce any one alive in the world who hath more 'reproaches' cast upon him than I have' ('Correspondence', 154). This may explain why, in 1673, he reneged on a promise to write an epistle to John Bunyan's 'Differences in Judgment about Water-Baptism'. As the Parker controversy raged he read the proofs of Andrew Marvell's 'The Rehearsal Transpros'd', but he was satirized and denounced as a dangerous rebel by Parker's defender, Richard Leigh, in 'The Transproser Rehears'd' (1673). When the latitudinarian William Sherlock criticized Owen's older work, 'Of Communion with God', in 'A Discourse Concerning... Jesus Christ' (1673), the latter responded in 'A Vindication of some Passages' (1674), attributing Sherlock's errors to ignorance or prejudice; Sherlock countered in 'A Defence and Continuation' (1675), castigating Owen as an antinomian. Owen was also criticized by the Wiltshire rector Thomas Hotchkis, who commended his zeal but accused him of dishonouring the Church of England while abetting Catholicism ('A Discourse Concerning the Imputation', 1675). 
To some extent Owen must have been frustrated by the perceived need to engage in polemic, for his fundamental interests lay elsewhere. In 1674 he published the first of what would eventually be a massive five-volume work on the Holy Spirit. In 'Pneumatologia' he ex`lored the nature of the Holy Spirit as part of the triune deity, its dispensations in the 'Old' and 'New Testaments', and its regenerative work. The second volume, 'The Reason of Faith' (1677), explained the basis for believing that the 'Bible' was God's word, and the third, 'Synesis pneumatike' (1678), discussed God's mind as revealed in scripture. 'A Discourse of the Work of the Holy Spirit' (1682) explored its role in prayer, and the final volume, 'Two Discourses' (1693), expounded the Holy Spirit as comforter and source of spiritual gifts. 'Pneumatologia' elicited a critique from William Clagett, a royal chaplain, in 'A Discourse Concerning the Operations' (1678), but Humfrey came to Owen's defence in 'Peaceable Disquisitions' (1678). Chiding Owen's critics, including Parker, for their contemptuous treatment of him, Humfrey complained that an entire generation of men was ready to attack almost anything Owen wrote, hoping to 'render that worthy person quite useless to the Church' (p. 1). 
If this was the goal of Owen's critics they failed. During summer and autumn 1674 he advised congregational churches in Lancashire, Cheshire, and Yorkshire about whether to admit Oliver Heywood's presbyterian church to their association. About this time he began participating in the morning exercises against popery in Southwark (several of these sermons were published), and he was also involved in the merchants' lectures at Pinners' Hall. While convalescing at Tunbridge Wells, Kent, in 1674, he explained his position on toleration to James, duke of York, and shortly thereafter had an audience in London with the king, who gave him a thousand guineas to aid suffering dissenters. Although an informer reported in February 1676 that his meeting was dangerous he was left alone, probably because he now enjoyed the support of the duke of Buckingham as well as Anglesey and Wharton. According to John Asty, Owen's early biographer, he was later arrested by two informers and discharged by Sir Edmund Godfrey. In June 1677 he obtained an order from Heneage, Lord Finch, the chancellor, directing Bishop Barlow to release Bunyan from Bedford gaol, and the same year he reputedly recommended that Bunyan publish 'The Pilgrim's Progress' with his own printer, Nathaniel Ponder. 
Following the death of Owen's wife in 1676 he married (by licence dated 21 June 1677) Dorothy, the wealthy widow of Thomas D'Oyley of Chiselhampton, Oxfordshire, and daughter of a Mr Michel of Kingston Russell, Dorset. They lived at Kensington and later at Ealing. 
Owen was described by Hooke as 'valetudinarious and crazy, often down' in early August 1677 ('Mather Papers', 8.584). His depressed mood may have been triggered by his dismay at the perceived spread of Arminianism and Socinianism, a concern that led him to write 'The Nature of Apostasy' (1676). With its exposition of imputed grace 'The Doctrine of Justification' (1677) was a natural sequel. Doctrinal concerns also prompted him to compose 'Christologia' (1677), a treatise on the person of Christ, including the hypostatical union of the divine and human in one person. 
As reflected in some of his unpublished sermons (DWL, MS L6/3, 4), the spectre of persecution disturbed Owen by early 1678, when informers were again watching his meetings. During late spring or early summer 1679 he worked with Baxter and four other ministers to organize petitions calling for a new parliament. Against the background of the alleged Popish Plot he wrote 'The Church of Rome No Safe Guide' (1679), arguing that Catholicism destroyed Christianity's simplicity, glory, and power. This was a time, he told his congregation in December 1679, of great trials and dangers, a belief shared by the ministers with whom he associated. In these circumstances it seemed propitious to call for unity among protestants, but in such a manner, as he asserted in 'Some Considerations about Union' (1680), that outward compulsion would not be employed. Disturbed by Edward Stillingfleet's 'The Mischief of Separation' (1680), which accused nonconformists of schism, he countered in 'A Brief Vindication' (1680) that unity of faith and obedience bound conformists and dissenters. This sparked replies from Stillingfleet, 'The Unreasonableness of Separation' (1681), and S. R., 'An Impartial Vindication' (1680). Owen responded to the former in 'An Enquiry' (1681), clearly angered by Stillingfleet's contention that nonconformists promoted the Catholic threat. Owen was in turn answered by William Sherlock in 'A Discourse about Church-Unity' (1681) and William Saywell in 'Evangelical and Catholick Unity' (1682). 
Meanwhile, in July 1680 the secretary of state, Jenkins, had summoned Owen, Baxter, and four other ministers to request their support in return for a declaration against Catholicism. That autumn Owen and others reviewed a proposal drafted by London merchants and revised by Bristol clergy for an accord between presbyterians and congregationalists. It may have provided the inspiration for Owen's exposition of ecclesiastical polity in 'The True Nature of a Gospel Church' (1689), completed shortly thereafter. In a sermon preached in December 1680 while the second Exclusion Parliament was in session, 'Seasonable Words for English Protestants' (1690), he denounced those who impeded the work of godly ministers as well as Church of England clergy who tried to monopolize the ministry. Subpoenaed for violating the 'Five-Mile Act' and recusancy in November 1681 Owen and twenty-one other ministers faced anticipated fines of $9680. As the plight of dissenters worsened he may have been aware that the earl of Shaftesbury and his confidants had considered using force to compel Charles to bar James's succession after the House of Lords rejected an exclusion bill in November 1680. In 'An Humble Testimony' (1681) he worried that some men were proposing desperate means to resolve the crisis, for 'the Conflict of their 'Counsels' and 'Designs' encreaseth our Danger, and is like to prove our Ruine' (A3'r'). 
The threat of persecution did not stop Owen from preaching. His unpublished sermons from this period reflect his sense of divine judgment on the nation, but exhort the godly to 'wait quietly and patiently for what will bee the End of Gods Judgments' (DWL, MS L6/3, 10 Feb 1682). Informers reported that he did not mention the king in his prayers, but not until November 1682 was he again prosecuted, this time for having violated the 'Corporation' and Elizabethan 'Conventicle Acts'. The threat of Catholicism coupled with persecution led Owen to espouse a doctrine of active resistance in 1682. Like Calvin he endorsed the right to take up arms to defend religion as long as the leaders of resistance 'had a legal Right and Power to protect themselves and their subjects' ('Brief and Impartial Account', 1682, 12). On 19 April 1683 a grand jury presented him for preaching to conventicles. Following the disclosure of the Rye House plot, he was arrested, examined at Whitehall on 27 June, and released. Although the government lacked sufficient evidence to prosecute him he apparently was aware that the duke of Monmouth and his associates had been planning an uprising to force Charles to exclude James from the succession, for Monmouth confessed to the king that Owen, Matthew Meade, and George Griffith knew about the conspiracy. This was confirmed by the Scottish conspirator William Carstares and the plotter Richard Goodenough. Moreover, the rebels' paymaster, Francis Charlton, had met Ferguson, who was associated with both the Monmouth cabal and the Rye House plotters, at Owen's house. Although Owen was not prosecuted for his alleged knowledge of the Monmouth conspiracy, on 21 July the Oxford convocation ordered that his January 1649 sermon be burned. 
Owen continued to write during his final years. 'Phronema tou pneumatos' (1681) captured the essence of nonconformist spiritual experience, 'A Letter Concerning... Excommunications' (1683) denounced the use of excommunication as a tool to enforce conformity, and 'Meditations and Discourses on the Glory of Christ' (1684), the testimony of a dying man, reflected on Christ as mediator. Of his last works the most controversial was 'An Answer unto Two Questions' (1720), which included twelve arguments against the participation of dissenters in the worship of the established church. Framed in consultation with four other congregationalists the arguments circulated in manuscript, provoking an attack by Baxter in 'Catholick Communion Defended' (1684). Owen was by then dead, but he was defended by the anonymous authors of 'A Vindication of... John Owen' (1684) and 'Bellarminus junior enervatus' (1684), to which Baxter replied in 'Catholick Communion doubly Defended' (1684). 
Owen's health was failing in January 1683, when he was diagnosed as having a kidney stone too large to expel. With death imminent he wrote to Fleetwood on 22 August, observing that he was 'leaving the Ship of the Church in a Storme' (DWL, MS L6/1, no. 11). Following his death at his home in Ealing on 24 August 1683 he was buried in Bunhill Fields on 4 September, with numerous nobles and gentry in attendance. He had no surviving children or grandchildren. In his will, dated 23 March 1683, he bequeathed funds to his sometime assistants Clarkson (who preached his funeral sermon), Ferguson, and Loeffs, and to his fellow congregationalist John Collins. He owned property at Stadham and Souldern, Oxfordshire, and Eaton, Berkshire. Auctioned on 26 May 1684 ('Bibliotheca Oweniana', 1684), his library of nearly 2800 items included Latin and Greek manuscripts, the patristics, church history, poetry, geography, and philology as well as a rich collection of theological and pious works. 
As early as the 1650s Owen had a substantial reputation as reflected not only by his sermons to parliament, his close association with Cromwell, and his vice-chancellorship, but also by the dedication to him of books by Lewis du Moulin ('Oratio auspicalis', 1652) and the mathematician John Wallis ('Johanni Wallisii... elenchus geometriae Hobbianae', 1655). During his career he contributed numerous epistles of his own to the works of other authors. On a visit to England in 1656 the Swiss protestant Johann Zollikofer befriended him. Although Anthony Wood thought Owen 'spent most of his time in continual agitation to carry on the cause, to promote his own interest, and gain the applause of the people', he acknowledged that Owen was regarded as the head of the Independents in 1658 (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.113, 633). He was also the butt of satire: it was possibly Thomas Ireland who in 1654 likened Owen as an orator to 'an 'Ass' mumbling a thistle' (T. Ireland, 'Momus elencticus', 1654, 2), and about 1660 an anonymous satirist claimed that he could 'scarce visit a Tavern, or Country Alehouse, but forth comes some of the Learned Works of 'John Owen'... as if [he] were cut out to entertain all sorts of Guests' ('Correspondence', 117). A survey of nonconformists about 1672 depicted him as still a leading Independent, and Roger Williams addressed the epistle of 'George Fox Digg'd Out' (1676) to Owen and Baxter. Among his admirers the Newcastle congregationalist Ambrose Barnes referred to him as England's Calvin, and the presbyterian John Humfrey lauded him as a scholar and gentleman. By the 1680s his works were read by students at Charles Morton's nonconformist academy, and the wealthy merchant Samuel Moyer entrusted Owen and Collins with money to distribute to the indigent. Some of his critics likewise testified to his stature; the secretary of state, Jenkins, deemed him 'the Bell-weather of Independents' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/341, p. 158), Saywell described him as 'the great Advocate for the Independents' ('Evangelical and Catholick Unity', 1682, A3'v'), John Fell, bishop of Oxford, thought he was a remarkable man, and one of Jenkins's correspondents referred to 'the late famous Dr Owen' (TNA: PRO, SP 29/437/65). In the 1690s opponents of the antinomians such as Daniel Williams and William Lorimer referred more often for support to Owen than Baxter. 
The verdict of modern readers has been mixed. While acknowledging Owen's intellect Samuel Taylor Coleridge thought that his treatment of Baxter during their abortive exploration of presbyterian-congregationalist unity reflected 'a very chilling want of open-heartedness' as well as resentment of Baxter ('Works', 1.347). In 1946 Geoffrey Nuttall thought that Owen had perhaps received excessive attention, and his style has justifiably been described as ponderous and comprehensive. Yet he was indisputably the leading proponent of high Calvinism in England in the late seventeenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 21017


Owen, John (1766-1822), missionary society administrator, was son of Richard Owen, a jeweller, of Old Street, London. He entered St Paul's School on 18 October 1777, from where he proceeded in 1784, as Sykes exhibitioner, to Magdalene College, Cambridge (admitted a sizar 10 May). He migrated to Corpus Christi College and was admitted a scholar on the old foundation on 17 November 1784; he graduated BA in 1788, became a fellow on 11 April 1789, and proceeded MA in 1791. 
In the spring of 1791 Owen went to the continent, at first as tutor to a young gentleman. In September 1792 he left Geneva for the south of France, and arrived in Lyons to find it in the hands of a revolutionary mob. He with difficulty escaped to Switzerland. Owen published an account of his adventures in 'Travels into Different Parts of Europe, in the Years 1791 and 1792' (2 vols., 1796). On 1 September 1794 he married Charlotte Green of Cambridge and settled there. On 11 March and 5 August 1794 Owen preached two assize sermons in the university church of St Mary, which were published that year. In 1794 he also published 'The retrospect, or, Reflections on the State of Religion and Politics in France and Great Britain'. He was ordained on 21 June 1795 and was made curate of Fulham by Beilby Porteus, bishop of London, who also made him rector of Paglesham, Essex, in 1808. Owen held the curacy until 1813, being made minister of Park Chapel, Chelsea, in 1815. 
Owen published in 1804, writing as Theophilus Christian, esq., 'The Fashionable World Displayed', which went through several editions. In that year began his connection with the British and Foreign Bible Society, his chief claim to fame. From 23 April 1804 -- a few weeks after its foundation -- until his death he was its principal secretary, although unpaid. He was successful in persuading Bishop Porteus to allow an association between the society and the Church of England: a link vital to the society's success. At the request of some of its members Owen wrote 'The History of the Origin and First Ten Years of the British and Foreign Bible Society' (2 vols., 1816), still a valuable work. 
After an illness in 1817, Owen went abroad in August 1818. He helped to establish a branch 'Bible' society in Paris, and inspected the progress of the 'Turkish New Testament', then in course of preparation for the society by Professor Kieffer. He visited Pastor Oberlin and the branches established at Zurich, St Gallen, Constance, and other Swiss towns. He returned to England in December and published 'Brief Extracts from Letters on the Object and Connexions of the British and Foreign Bible Society' (1819) and worked on the third volume of his history, published in 1820. He also wrote 'Two Letters on the Subject of the French Bible' (1822). This was in reply to a charge of Socinianism brought against that translation and symptomatic of more general criticisms of the society's translations. 
Owen had a reputation for being prickly and short-tempered. He died at Ramsgate on 26 September 1822, and was buried at Fulham. His wife and several children survived him. One of his daughters married the eldest son of William Wilberforce. 


@@@@@


doc= 21018


Owen, John (1821-1883), composer, was born in Crane Street, Chester, on 14 November 1821. Both his parents were natives of Llanfachraeth, Merioneth, but had settled in Chester shortly before his birth; his father was the captain of a small vessel. Owen was initially apprenticed to a firm of cutlers, Messrs Powell and Edwards, but in 1844, having shown considerable aptitude for music, he gave up business and became a professional musician. He was subsequently organist of, in succession, Lady Huntingdon's chapel, St Paul's, Broughton, St Bridget's, St Mary's, and the Welsh church (all in Chester), and at the same time gave tuition in music. 
It was, however, in connection with the eisteddfod that Owen attracted the attention of his fellow countrymen. His success in winning the prize for the best anthem at the Rhuddlan eisteddfod in 1851 with 'Deborah a Barac' was the first of a series of victories which gave 'Owain Alaw' a recognized place among Welsh musicians. He devoted himself energetically to composition, and during the next few years wrote a large number of glees, songs, and anthems, published in various Welsh musical magazines of the time. His only attempts at more ambitious works were the cantatas 'Tywysog Cymru' (1862), the first Welsh secular cantata, and 'Gwyl Gwalia' (1866); the oratorio 'Jeremiah' (1878) has been called his 'greatest work' ('DWB'). In 1860 he edited the first number of 'Gems of Welsh Melody', a collection of Welsh airs, published in four numbers in Ruthin. 'The Welsh Harp: a Selection of Welsh National Songs' appeared in 1871, and Owen also made arrangements of songs by celebrated composers, including Mendelssohn and Weber. His fluent and melodious style of composition made him one of the most popular of Welsh musicians, and he was also much in demand as a conductor and adjudicator. 
In 1842 he married a Miss Williams of Chester, and their son, William Henry, was born in 1845; he was an organist in Dublin before being killed in a railway accident at Abergele on 20 August 1868. Some of his anthems were published in Welsh by his father. John Owen died in Chester during the night of 29/30 January 1883, and was buried there in the old cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 21019


Owen, Josiah (1710/11-1755), Presbyterian minister, was the grandson of John Owen of Aber-nant, Carmarthenshire. He was a nephew of James Owen (1654-1706), dissenting minister of Shrewsbury, and of Charles Owen (d. 1746), dissenting minister of Warrington. He is said to have been the son of their eldest brother, David Owen, dissenting minister of Henllan, Carmarthenshire, who died on 7 October 1710, aged fifty-nine. He may have been a posthumous son, but has probably been confused with David Owen's son Jeremiah, who was educated by James Owen, succeeded his father at Henllan, and after various pastorates in England died in America. 
Josiah was educated by his uncle Charles Owen at Warrington, and then at Carmarthen from 1725 to 1730. His first ministerial settlement was at Bridgnorth, Shropshire. As minister there he received a grant from the Presbyterian Fund Board between March 1733 and December 1739. He then ministered for short periods at Stone and possibly Walsall in Staffordshire. About this time he is supposed to have entered into a controversy with the bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, Richard Smalbroke, publishing anonymously 'Remarks on two charges: deliver'd by the Lord Bishop of L -- d and C -- y, to the clergy of his diocese' (1738). This was answered by Smalbroke in print in the same year. Described as 'young Mr. Owen of Warrington' by the diarist Richard Kay of Bury, Owen gave a sermon to the Bury protestant dissenters on 2 September 1739. He soon became minister of Blackwater Street Chapel, Rochdale, Lancashire, the earliest evidence of his settlement there being Richard Kay's diary entry concerning a conversation with 'the Revnd. Mr Owen from Rochdale' on 18 October 1739 (Kay, 29). 
Owen frequently preached at Bury as well as Rochdale and, in the tradition of his uncle Charles Owen, assiduously supported the Hanoverian cause. His sermons warned of French, Catholic, and absolutist threats to England's liberties. He preached at Bury Chapel on 30 November 1740 from 'Amos' 3: 6, 'God is blowing his Trumpet in the City, is threatening England and all Europe with War and Famine'. He gave a thanksgiving sermon at Bury Chapel on 24 July 1743 for 'the late Victory our Forces have had over the French Army at Dettingen in Germany' (Kay, 39, 65), and this sermon appeared in print in 1753. A staunch whig, he celebrated the 'glorious revolution', publishing 'National gratitude just tribute for national deliverances; exemplified in the discovery of the Powder Plot and accession of the prince of Orange to the throne, a sermon preach'd to a society of protestant dissenters at Rochdale, Nov. 5, 1742' (1742), and is known to have preached another 5 November sermon in 1744. His ministry was successful, and his chapel was enlarged in 1743. By March 1745 he was preaching the weekly lecture at Bolton, where 'he is lately chose Lecturer there instead of Mr Abraham Dawson from Rivington who has lately conformed' (ibid., 94). About 1750 he is said to have prevailed with the provincial meeting of the associated ministers of Lancashire 'to discontinue the customary questions respecting the internal state of congregations' ('DNB'). 
Owen is chiefly remembered for his attacks on Jacobite and nonjuring principles; these led to harsh exchanges with Thomas Deacon and John Byrom. Owen had already controverted with Thomas Cattell, the chaplain of the Rochdale corporation, a Jacobite club at which Byrom is known to have been present. Tensions were high in the area in November 1745 when Prince Charles Edward Stuart was marching south, and many Presbyterians in Manchester and the surrounding area made themselves scarce during the brief Jacobite interlude. Owen was known to be lodging with Richard Kay at Baldingstone, Bury, when the news came through on 4 January 1746 that Carlisle had surrendered to the duke of Cumberland. In October 1746 Manchester officially celebrated the Jacobite defeat, and Owen assumed the role of 'faithful Monitor' of the Jacobites in Manchester. 
An anonymous letter by Owen from Manchester, dated 6 October 1746, was published in the 'Whitehall Evening Post' for 11 October 1746. In it he claims 'Jacobite, non-juring, and even popish principles are now making a greater progress here than ever', and he ridicules Deacon for doffing his hat to the severed heads of the rebels on the Manchester exchange, one of whom was Deacon's son, Thomas ('Letter from Manchester', 579). Owen preached a thanksgiving sermon, subsequently published as 'All is well, or, The defeat of the late rebellion... a sermon preached at Rochdale on Oct. 9th, being the day appointed for a public thanksgiving' (1746). Byrom responded to Owen's letter with a piece in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' ridiculing Owen as Don Quixote tilting at 'innocent fulling-mills, chimeras of his own distempered brain' (ibid.). Owen attacked Byrom again as a promoter of 'the good old cause of popery and slavery' and accused the Manchester nonjurors of worshipping the 'rebel skull divinities fix'd up at the Exchange' in the same way the Catholic church venerated saints, as martyrs (Philopatriae, 688, 690). Byrom replied, charging Owen with 'false reasoning, partiality, bitterness, and fury' ('Reply to Philopatriae's answer', 76-7). 
Owen raised the stakes by directing at Byrom 'Jacobite and non-juring principles, freely examined, in a letter to the master-tool of the faction at Manchester, with remarks on... a Christian catechism & said to be wrote by Dr. D -- c -- n' (1747). In this he admits to being the author of the 'Gentleman's Magazine' letters. In its preface Owen says his Rochdale thanksgiving sermon and his letter to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', together with Nichol's sermon, provoked Byrom to produce his 'Epistle to a Friend', which contains the lines 'Leave to the low-bred O -- ns of the Age Sense to belie, and Loyalty to rage'. Owen retorted in the preface: 'The Master-Tool was ordered to his Post, from whence he has since been preaching up Politeness with Dunghill-Breeding, and under Pretence of advocating for the true Catholic Church... been labouring to introduce the Worship of Dunghill Gods'. Owen attacked Byrom 'for his love of scribbling verses... for his devotion to mysticism and Jacob Behmen; and above all, for his personal dealings in former days with the Pretender at Avignon' ('Poems of John Byrom', 1.2, 360). Byrom subsequently brought out a broadside against Owen entitled 'Sir Lowbred O -- n, or, The Hottentot Knight'. Intended to be sung in the taverns to the tune of the 'Abbot of Canterbury', Byrom ensured that the debate remained in the gutter with couplets like '
That Son of a --, and that Son of a --, 

Would never have struck me -- so quite to the Core. 
(ibid., 358-77)' Deacon then sought to vindicate himself in print. A letter written from Manchester on 18 April 1748 was first printed in the 'Chester Courant' (26 April 1748) and subsequently as 'Dr Deacon's vindication of himself' in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (18, 1748, 206-7). Owen demonstrated his rebarbative powers in 'Dr. Deacon, try'd before his own tribunal, or, An examination of the several facts deny'd by him in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for May last; by those very rules laid down in his catechism for the conviction of offenders, in a letter to the said gentleman' (1748). 
With Byrom's move to London in early 1748, however, much of the fire went out of the exchange. On 7 April 1748 Byrom could comment on Owen's latest attack as follows: 'thank... friend O -- n for his care of my fame and reputation; I am hardly at leisure to mind him, or perhaps I might thank him myself' (Hancox, 201). Owen was debilitated by a severe illness early in 1750, and the last mention of him in Kay's diary is in May 1750. His ministry at Rochdale closed on 14 June 1752. He became the minister of the Presbyterian congregation at Ellenthorpe, Aldborough parish, near Boroughbridge, Yorkshire, where he died in 1755, aged forty-four. His will records 'I always bore my living testimony (to my great temporal loss in favour of virtue and national devotion) against the wild Phrenzy of superstition'. He was buried at Aldborough on 1 October 1755, and had asked for a company of poor men to be paid to bury him on the north side of the parish church without any form of ceremony. 


@@@@@


doc= 21020


Owen, Lewis (1522?-1555), member of parliament and administrator, of Plas-yn-dre, Dolgellau, Merioneth, was the son of Owen ap Hywel ap Llywelyn, of Llwyn, and claimed descent from Gwrgan ab Ithel, prince of Powys. 
Owen was a representative of the new class of officials drawn from the ranks of the local gentry who after the 'Acts of Union' of 1536-43 replaced absentee sinecurists in positions of authority in the shires of the northern principality. In the reign of Henry VIII he was deputy chamberlain of north Wales and baron (justice) of the exchequer at Caernarfon. His rapid advancement was eased by his marriage to Margaret, daughter of John Puleston, constable of Caernarfon Castle and the first burgess of parliament to be returned for the town after the enfranchisement of Wales in 1536. He first served as deputy to Puleston as sheriff of Merioneth between 1534 and 1540, and in 1545-6 and 1550 he was sheriff in his own right. He was an usher of the chamber by 1550, a post he may have owed to the patronage of either Edward Seymour, who as Baron Beauchamp held the chamberlainship of north Wales, or John Dudley as president of the council in the marches and chamberlain of the household. He was returned as knight of the shire for Merioneth to four of the five parliaments between 1547 and 1554. 
Early in Edward VI's reign Owen acquired leases to extensive crown lands and former monastic property in Merioneth. Lands leased jointly with the Nannau family at Dolgellau, Trawsfynydd, and Nannau were later to be a bone of contention between the two families. He was twice married and his progeny was prolific: several of the later gentry families of the county, including those of Peniarth, Hengwrt, and even Nannau, were to trace their descent from 'Baron' Owen and his first wife. 
In 1536 Rowland Lee had cited the instability of Merioneth and Cardiganshire ('for though they are shire ground they are as ill as the worst part of Wales') as an argument against the extension of the shire system into the marches and the appointment of Welshmen as justices of the peace. Sir John Wynn of Gwydir in his 'History of the Gwydir Family' lists Mawddwy among the most notorious of the marcher lordships which acted as sanctuaries for criminals who until the 'Acts of Union' were retained by the lords as 'very precious jewels' (Wynn, 'The History of the Gwydir Family', ed. J. G. Jones, 1990, 39-40). Owen's zeal in implementing the new legislation incurred the wrath of the inhabitants, including the settled lesser landowners who resisted the changes. On 12 October 1555 he was ambushed and assassinated by a band of 'brigands' in a mountain pass, Dugoed Mawddwy. The lordship of Mawddwy had been attached to Merioneth in the act of 1536 and had remained a haunt of thieves after the Union settlement. Owen's death was an act of revenge for the relentless campaign which he and his ally John Wyn ap Meredydd of Gwydir, the 'custos' for Merioneth, had waged against the outlaws, eighty of whom had been hanged. Owen was on his way home to Dolgellau from Welshpool after attending the Michaelmas great sessions for Montgomeryshire, where he had arranged a marriage between his son and the daughter of Richard Mytton, lord of Mawddwy. 
Of the records of the subsequent trials of the perpetrators, only the indictments of the accessories to the crime, who were tried at the great sessions held at Bala as late as September 1558, have been preserved. The accused are described as yeomen, not outlaws: the first named in the indictment, Gruffydd Wyn ap Dafydd, was a substantial landowner who held former monastic lands in Brithdir, and was therefore one of Lewis's neighbours. The episode testifies to the tensions among the landowners of the shire, not all of whom had benefited from the uniform introduction of English common law or the new opportunities for holding offices under the crown. They were competitors in the market for land released by the formal abolition of Welsh tenures and the dissolution of the monasteries. 
The herald bard Gruffudd Hiraethog, the most distinguished of five poets who composed elegies to 'Baron' Owen, depicted him as a martyr to the cause of the rule of law imposed as a consequence of the 'Acts of Union' ('Gwaith Gruffudd Hiraethog', ed. D. J. Bowen, 1990, 226-8). It is difficult to disentangle the actual events from the accretions of folklore, and the later accounts of the activities of the 'Gwylliaid Cochion' (the red-haired brigands) written by the antiquary Robert Vaughan (died 1667), who was descended from Owen, and by Thomas Pennant in 'A Tour in Wales' (1778-81) are not entirely free from these embellishments. 
The theory that the yeomanry of Mawddwy were direct descendants of landowners who had resisted incursions on their terrain by the representatives of English law and order since the rebellion of Owain Glyndwr remains highly speculative. 


@@@@@


doc= 21021


Owen, Lewis (1571/2-1633?), religious controversialist and spy, born in Merioneth, was probably the eldest son of Gruffydd Owen, the fourth son of Lewis Owen (1522?-1555) of Caernarfon, a baron of the exchequer. On 4 December 1590 he matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, at the age of eighteen, but later left the university without graduating. Anthony Wood learned that he had 'some petty employment bestowed on him about that time', which from his later writings seems to have been that of an observer in Spanish territories during the Anglo-Spanish war. Wood speculated mistakenly that Owen entered the Jesuit order at Valladolid and remained as 'a curious observer among them for some time' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.545). However, he was never a registered student at the college of St Alban in Valladolid, and his name does not appear in the catalogues of the members of the Society of Jesus. He must be distinguished from the Lewis Owen who served in 1596 at Whitehall as 'Her Majesty's servant in the Privy Larder' ('CSP dom.', '1595-7', 185) and as a lawyer, was granted a wardship in 1604, and in 1607 with others was awarded a grant in fee-farm of a tithe in Alton, Staffordshire. 
Owen was in London by 1605 when he published 'A Key of the Spanish Tongue, or, A Plaine and Easie Introduction...' that was dedicated to three friends from Merioneth: Sir Roger Owen, Sir Thomas Myddleton, and John Lloyd of the Inner Temple. He called it 'a little pamphlet', written 'at some vacant houres in the kingdome of Castile', that taught pronunciation and grammar, and provided a list of frequent phrases and four sample dialogues in English and Spanish for practice. Owen's travels also gave him skills in French, for in 1609 he published a translation of a tract by the protestant Morton Eudes, entitled 'Catholique Traditions: a Treatise of the Beliefs of Christians...'. In his dedication to Prince Henry, Owen praised his 'learned father', King James, who ended divisions 'which the overscruple of some and the too much libertie of others had brought into the church of England'. Eudes described six different Christian churches: the Eastern (or Orthodox), the Nestorian, the Coptic, the Armenian, the Latin (or Catholic), and the protestant, and then gave each church's theological position on forty-four current controversies, such as the authority of the apostle Peter and the signs of a 'true church'. Eudes gave a brief summary of the teaching of each side, and then his 'Annotation' offered the wiser teaching, which for him was rarely that of the Latin church. 
After he had arranged a second printing of this book, Owen recalled later that 'In the yeare 1610 I was sent by... a privy counceller in this land to Rome to learne... what the Earle of Tyrone did intend to do' (Owen, 'Running Register', 41). In May 1614 he informed Sir Ralph Winwood, secretary of state, of his return to London, 'sick and poor after spending many years abroad for his country's service', and of his readiness for new tasks when he reached Brussels ('CSP dom.', '1611-18', 236). Little is known about his itinerary in Winwood's service after 1615, but from the contents of his writings after 1625 it is clear that Owen's religious viewpoint had changed from that of the moderate Anglican in 1609 to that of the crusading puritan who was determined to reveal to the English the menace of Catholic religious orders. His major work, 'The Unmasking of All Popish Monks, Friers and Jesuits', printed in 1628 and dedicated to Sir John Lloyd, who had been a patron for his Spanish grammar, highlighted the role of religious orders in propping up 'the tottering kingdom' of the 'Romish Anti-Christ'. He identified numerous foundations by name and then reviewed their growth and current activities on the continent. He had scurrilous anecdotes in abundance and factual errors in several instances, as well as blanket condemnations, such as that monks and nuns only sought 'the pompe, pride and glory of the world' (p. 152). He reported meeting a fellow Welshman, 'Master Floyd', who was dismissed by the Jesuits 'because he was not wicked enough' (p. 129). He warned that in London there were 'cunning Jebusites' who 'paid the gold of the King of Spaine' to 'his pensioners that lurke about the court of England' (p. 159), regardless of the Anglo-Spanish war. He was certain that Jesuits were 'the cause of all these wars, bloodshed, commotions, Dearth, Famine, Persecutions' in Europe (p. 122). 
Owen's near paranoia about the Jesuits required a second book, which in its first printing of 1626 was entitled 'The running register,... a true relation of the English colledges, seminaries and cloysters...'. On page 56 of this 'Register' he advised those who wished to learn more about life in a Jesuit college to read his recent book 'The Unmasking', which implied that it had been completed in manuscript first. The 'Register' began with a 47-page essay, 'Ignatius his progresse', which was a disparaging commentary on Pedro de Ribadeneyra's biography of Loyola printed in 1604. There followed his listing of the locations of all 'the colleges or religious houses in Europe' of the Jesuits, but he warned that they were 'so insatiable in their covetousnesse that were they never so riche yet they thinke they have never enough' (p. 58). In 1629 the 'Register' was reprinted in its entirety under a new title: 'Speculum Jesuiticum, or, The Jesuites looking glasse, wherein they may behold Ignatius (their patron), his progresse, their owne pilgrimage, etc. by L.O.' This was dedicated to Sir Henry Marten, a judge of the high court of admiralty, since Owen claimed that he had to have protection after he had been warned not to speak the truth, for he was well aware 'how strongly these Romish locusts are back't and countenanced... by great personages'. 
In 1628 Owen had informed the privy council that he was suspicious of the conduct of a Christopher Mallory, whom he had seen studying closely the ordnance defending the Tower Wharf, possibly for the French naval forces. Furthermore, Mallory was known to be seeking funds for 'the Carthusian cloisters at Mechlin and Nieuport' ('CSP dom.', '1628-9', 255, 328). The council began further inquiries, but Owen's subsequent activities are unknown. In frustration Anthony Wood commented: 'This Lewis Owen, who had a rambling head, was living in sixteen hundred twenty nine but what became of him afterwards, I cannot find' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.545). It is reported that he inherited from his mother's brother, William David Lloyd, an estate at Peniarth, Merioneth, where he died in 1633, leaving two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 21022


Owen, Morgan (1584/5-1645), bishop of Llandaff, was the third son of Owen Rees, clergyman, of Y Lasallt, in the parish of Myddfai, Carmarthenshire. His family claimed descent from the celebrated dynasty of physicians of Myddfai with legendary powers of healing acquired from a ghostly lady of Llyn Y Fan, a lake in the Black Mountains, and possessed extensive holdings of land inherited from various branches of the physicians' clan. Educated first at the grammar school in Carmarthen, Owen went subsequently to Jesus College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 16 December 1608, aged twenty-three. He became chaplain of New College, Oxford, from where he graduated BA on 6 July 1613, and proceeded MA in June 1616 from Hart Hall. 
It is possible that Owen 'taught school' in Carmarthen (Yardley, 250). He was rector of Port Eynon, Gower, in 1619, and later of Shirenewton, Monmouthshire. From the status of a well-to-do parochial cleric he soon broke through to the ranks of the higher clergy. On 7 April 1620 he was collated to the second cursal prebend at St David's Cathedral, and on 26 July 1622 to the prebend of Cleddau; he became canon residentiary at St David's on the same day. He owed these rapid preferments to the interest taken in him by William Laud, his bishop, who was impressed by his 'zeal and piety'. In 1624 he became deputy chancellor of Carmarthen, and two years later prebendary of Llanarthne in the same county. 
Owen's career and that of Laud himself became closely linked. When Laud became chancellor of Oxford in 1630, in an election in which Jesus College fellows supported him against hostile Welsh interests elsewhere in the university, Owen could look forward to an enhanced status outside Wales, where he had resigned his position as prebendary of Llanarthne on taking the precentorship of Brecon and the prebend of Llanfynydd in July 1635. In 1636 he was awarded the degree of doctor of divinity when Charles I visited Oxford. Using his extensive landed wealth Owen enclosed the south yard of St Mary's Church at Oxford with a freestone wall, and in 1637 commissioned the building of a 'curious and beautiful porch' (Yardley, 250) leading from High Street to the church, at a cost of $230 and adorned with a statue of the Virgin and child. It was said that he built the porch instead of giving a Latin sermon. When Laud later came to trial, his prosecutors cited Owen's conspicuous Oxford building as an example of one of the archbishop's projects. It was only a matter of time before such an active supporter of Laud was rewarded, and on 28 February 1640 the king recommended Owen for the bishopric of Llandaff. On 12 March he was elected bishop, and the appointment received the royal approval a week later. He was installed on 30 June, retaining the livings of Bedwas and Rudry, on the borders of Glamorgan and Monmouthshire 'in commendam' with his bishopric. On 20 January 1641 the borough of Carmarthen recognized the achievement of its son by electing him to the common council; he was present to take the oath. 
It was Owen's misfortune to reach this pinnacle just before the enemies of his great patron, Laud, began to close in on the archbishop and his allies. A little over six months after his installation, on 23 February 1641, Owen was named with bishops Richard Mountague and Roger Manwaring as objects of the attention of a committee of the House of Commons. Bills were to be drawn up against these three to deprive them of their sees and to prevent them holding any ecclesiastical office, but Owen seems to have been very much an afterthought of those framing the scope of the committee. The anti-episcopalian Sir Simonds D'Ewes does not even mention Owen in his diary entry for that day's work in the house. However, any hope he might have had that he might be regarded as small fry compared with these other Laudians would have evaporated by the spring of that year, as the promoters of the root and branch petition against episcopacy made advances in parliament. None the less, it was proposed in April to fine Owen $1000 -- less than the $20,000 suggested for Laud, or even the $5000 for Mountague. 
The bishops were eventually impeached on 4 August, for promulgating the canons of 1640. By October 1641 Owen was imprisoned in the Tower of London, but was at large again by 31 December, when he, Archbishop John Williams of York, and nine other bishops used their seats in the Lords to protest against their treatment. According to Clarendon the other signatories were overborne by Williams. They asserted their ancient right to sit in the Lords, declared their abomination of popery, protested against threats to their safety by crowds, and demanded protection. The final part of their protest was a repudiation of all orders in the House of Lords since 27 December 1641 and all orders and votes to come, in their enforced absence. There could be no going back from this position, and the same day they were all sent to the Tower following their impeachment for high treason. Owen declined repeatedly to change his plea from not guilty when brought to the bar of the House of Lords to plead. On 6 April 1642 he was voted $200 per annum subsistence by the House of Commons, and subsequently released on bail, then rearrested. 
Owen was released in May 1642, and retired to Y Lasallt, as his episcopal estate and palace at Matharn, Monmouthshire, had been seized by partisans of parliament. There he renewed friendship with Rees Prichard, vicar of Llandovery and a former colleague among the cathedral clergy of St David's. Owen accompanied Prichard, no Arminian, but a strongly moralistic devotee of the Church of England in Wales, on his last visit to St David's, on 2 August 1643, and oversaw his will a year later. 
In December 1644 Owen drew up his own will, leaving lands in nine Carmarthenshire parishes, and the tithes of two, with two Pembrokeshire rectories, to his nephews. He had no children from his marriage to Maud, widow of Edward Atkins of Carmarthen. He made further provision for the poor of Myddfai and the school at Carmarthen. Owen died on 5 March 1645 at Y Lasallt -- it was said that on hearing the news of Laud's execution he 'sunk down in his chair and dy'd soon after' (Willis, 70). He was buried in the chancel of Myddfai church, on the north side of the altar. 


@@@@@


doc= 21023


Owen, Nicholas (d. 1606), carpenter and Jesuit lay brother, was born in Oxford, probably in St Peter le Bailey. On 2 February he was apprenticed for eight years to William Conway, an Oxford joiner. He sometimes used the aliases Draper and Andrews. He had three brothers: John ('b'. 1560), a seminary priest; Walter (1568-1591), who died as a deacon at the English College in Valladolid; and Henry, who was apprenticed to the university printer Joseph Barnes and later ran secret presses in the Clink prison in London and in Northamptonshire. All four may have been sons by a previous marriage of Walter Owen (died 1607), a carpenter who leased 3 Castle Street from Magdalen College from 1566 onwards and whose wife Agnes (died 1609) was a recusant in 1603-4. 
In 1588 Nicholas Owen became servant to the Jesuit superior Henry Garnet. From then on 'his chief employment was in making of secret places to hide priests and church stuff... in all shires and in the chiefest Catholic houses of England... of several fashions in several places, that one being taken might give no light to the discovery of another. ('Catholics under James I', 182-4)' From documentary and architectural evidence it is possible to identify the characteristics of his work: a liking for sites away from outside walls; an ability to think in three dimensions and in curves; and the inventiveness noted by John Gerard and not shown by some other builders. Surviving examples include those at Oxburgh, Norfolk (1589?); Baddesley Clinton, Warwickshire (1588-91); Braddocks, Essex, and Sawston, Cambridgeshire (both 1592-3); Scotney Old Castle, Kent (by 1598); and Harvington, Worcestershire (about 1602). 
On 23 April 1594 Owen was arrested with John Gerard at a house in London. He was tortured, but gave nothing away and was released for 'a good round sum of money' ('Catholics under James I', 183). In October 1597 he helped Gerard to escape from the Tower of London. About 1600 he became a Jesuit lay brother and an accident with a restive horse left him with a slight limp. Both he and Henry Garnet were finally taken at Hindlip, Worcestershire, during a twelve-day search in January 1606 when 'eleven secret corners and conveyances were found in the said house' (BL, Harleian MS 360, fol. 101'r'). Owen and a companion, Ralph Ashley alias Chambers, were starved out of a hide in the long gallery on Thursday, 23 January, after four days with one apple to eat between them. Owen was imprisoned first in the Marshalsea and then in the Tower, where he was ruthlessly tortured despite suffering from a rupture. He died of the torture on the night of 1-2 March; according to Gerard, 'his bowels gushed out together with his life', and the official version was that he had 'ripped up his own belly with a knife without a point' (BL, Stowe MS 168, fol. 364'r'). According to Henry More he was buried within the Tower, 'in ipsa arce' ('Historia provinciae Anglicanae', 1660, 322). He was beatified by Pope Pius XI on 15 December 1929 and canonized by Paul VI on 25 October 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 21024


Owen, Nicholas (1752-1811), Church of England clergyman and antiquary, was born on 2 January 1752 at Llandyfrydog, Anglesey, the second son of Nicholas Owen ('c'.1730-1785), rector of Llandyfrydog, with Llanfihangel Tre'r-beirdd, and Margaret ('fl'. 1735-1790), his wife (daughter of Robert Edwards, rector of Llanrug, Caernarvonshire). On 30 June 1769 he matriculated from Jesus College, Oxford, and graduated BA in 1773 and MA in 1776. 
Ordained in 1773, Owen obtained a curacy, but it is not known where. He had moved to a curacy at Winslow, Buckinghamshire, by 1779, where it is believed he also kept a school. Dissatisfied with the living, he resigned it in 1789 to live for a time with his mother at Bangor. He made several appeals to a number of patrons for the livings of Llandyfrydog, Llanbeblig, and Llangynhafal, and his letters to the bishops of Bangor and of Chester, the archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord Bulkeley contain material little short of direct insults and represent him as a persistent seeker after preferment. A stubborn and cantankerous character, Owen was severely reprimanded by Lord Bulkeley and had to make a public apology to the bishop of Bangor. The dean of Bangor made him perpetual curate of Llanfihangel Ysgeifiog and Llanffinan in November 1790, and he was given the rectory of Mellteyrn with Botwnnog in October 1800. He died, unmarried, on 30 May 1811 at Bangor, Caernarvonshire, and was buried on 5 June at Llandyfrydog. 
Though Owen published a sermon on the founding of a Sunday school at Winslow in 1788, he severely criticized these establishments in a letter to Dr Porteous, bishop of London, in March 1789 because their frequenters often turned Methodists. He was no friend of dissent or Methodism, whose clergy he often attacked in the press under the pseudonym Observator. Owen's own publications were mainly about local antiquities. 'British Remains' (1788) covered such topics as a history of the lords-marchers, an account of the supposed discovery of America by Madog ab Owain Gwynedd, and also a biography of the naturalist Edward Lhuyd. A selection from the 'phrases' of Horace for schoolboys appeared in 1785. 'Carnarvonshire: a Sketch of its History' was published in 1792, and Owen is one of several authors who have been credited with the authorship of the anonymous 'A History of the Island of Anglesey, with Memoirs of Owen Glendower' (1775). 


@@@@@


doc= 21025


Owen, Richard (1606-1683), Church of England clergyman, was the son of 
Richard Owen was born on 3 October 1606 at Llanfechain, Montgomeryshire, and baptized there on 7 October. He matriculated at Oxford on 28 June 1622 and entered Oriel College as a servitor. He was a 'Bible' clerk from October 1624 until 2 February 1627, graduated BA on 19 February 1625, was Dudley exhibitioner from 30 March to 25 October 1626, and on 21 March 1628 was elected a fellow of his college. He proceeded MA on 22 June 1630. At an unknown date he resigned his fellowship and married Anne, whose other name is unknown; they had ten children. In 1634 Owen became rector of Llanfechain, but he was 'drawn to the richer livings of the English dioceses' (Richards, 'Puritan Movement', 6). On 10 February 1636 he was installed as the vicar of Eltham, Kent, and on 2 September 1638 he was instituted to the rectory of St Swithin at London Stone. On 4 December that year he proceeded BD. 
In 1643, as a consequence of his royalist sympathies, Owen was ejected from his livings, but he continued to live at Eltham, where he was on friendly terms with John Evelyn. As the diarist noted, Owen frequently preached and administered the sacrament at Evelyn's house at Sayes Court, as well as baptizing his son and churching his wife. Owen is supposed to have published in 1650, as 'Elenchus motuum nuperorum in Anglia', a free translation and amplification in Latin of George Bate's 'Royal Apologie' (1648). He also translated into English, but did not publish, most, if not all, of Juvenal's satires. In 1657 he supplied 'som British proverbs' for James Howell to enter in his 'Lexicon tetraglotton'. 
Meanwhile, his wife, Anne, having died in March 1653, Owen married, on 6 January 1655, Amy Kidwell, with whom he had at least two sons. On 13 November 1656, with the support of the vice-chancellor of Oxford, John Owen, and Joseph Caryl, he petitioned the council of state for a licence to preach. His appeal was referred to the committee for the approbation of public preachers, and on 30 December he was approved. In the same year he was appointed minister of North Cray, Kent, while in 1658 he resigned his position at Eltham. 
Following the Restoration, Owen retained North Cray, and after being given the right to choose which living to hold by act of parliament he was nominated to St Swithin's. On 1 August 1660 he was created DD at Oxford and on 16 August was appointed to the prebend of Reculverland at St Paul's, London. He was held in 'high esteem for his holy life and conversation, for his orthodoxness in judgement, conformity to the true ancient doctrine and discipline of the Church of England, and in the former revolutions, for his loyalty to his sacred majesty' (Williams, 386). His one extant sermon was delivered at St Alfege, London, on 8 May 1666, the sixth anniversary of the proclamation of the king in London, and published as 'Paulus, multiformis concio ad clerum' (1666). The family friendship with the Evelyns endured: in 1680 Amy Owen wrote an amusing letter to John Evelyn and received a reply on the subject of her 'trading for tulips' ('Diary and Correspondence', 1.41-2). 
Owen made his will on 23 January 1683 and died shortly afterwards; he was buried at Eltham, as he had wished, on 27 January. He was survived by his wife, Amy (died 1694), son, John, and daughter, Elizabeth Evans; nine sons and three daughters who had predeceased him had been commemorated by Owen on a marble inscription in Eltham church in 1679. 


@@@@@


doc= 21026


Owen, Sir Richard (1804-1892), comparative anatomist and palaeontologist, was born on 20 July 1804 in Lancaster, the sixth and youngest child and second son of Richard Owen (1754-1809) and Catherine Longworth, 'nee' Parrin (died 1838), the daughter of Robert Parrin, a church organist in Lancaster. Owen's father, a merchant in the West Indies trade, was something of a self-made man who had been raised in Fulmer Place, Buckinghamshire, by his maternal grandfather, Richard Eskrigge (his own mother having died in childbirth). Owen's mother was a descendant of French Huguenot immigrants. Like her father a knowledgeable musician, she was a woman of intelligence and social sophistication with close friends as well as more distant relatives in the middle class of the town and county. 
At the time of Owen's birth the family was financially well off, living in a large house in the fashionable part of the city. When his father died five years later, however, the effects of the Napoleonic war and the defalcations of a business associate had forced a financial crisis which led to a move to the less fashionable Castle Hill area. There Catherine Owen established a girls' boarding-school that her three unmarried daughters continued to run after her death in 1838. 
In 1810 Owen entered the old-fashioned, half collegiate Lancaster grammar school as a day student. He was said to be somewhat troublesome, a small boy who grew rapidly in his adolescence, neither particularly good at, nor very much interested in, his lessons. Although prone to high jinks and practical jokes, he nevertheless learned Latin (and probably a smattering of French), the arithmetic that passed for mathematics, a bit of theologically orientated philosophy, and some history. Strangely, natural history did not feature in his school education; during the Lancaster years he seemed to have had no interest in the subject. When he was sixteen, unable to proceed to university and intending to become a surgeon-apothecary, he began an apprenticeship with a succession of three masters for the next four years. Not only did he learn the rudiments of medical practice and develop a skill in dissection with a knowledge of human anatomy, but he also discovered his vocation. Now, with the exception of free access to the local library of the Amicable Society, which provided him with scientific literature, provincial Lancaster had little to offer Owen: he left his apprenticeship and went off to the University of Edinburgh to complete his medical qualification. 
Owen arrived in Edinburgh in October 1824 but remained for only two terms, during which he completed the classes designed to prepare students for formal admission to medical practice. Except for John Barclay's proprietary course in anatomy he seems not to have been impressed with what he learned at the university, nor to have established close personal associations with either his fellow students or his professors. Barclay's last course, which Owen attended, was in the still novel comparative anatomy that, supported by a large anatomical collection, placed human anatomy in the wider context of the whole of the animal kingdom. Barclay introduced Owen to a generally anti-materialist holistic philosophical approach to what was essentially a purely analytically descriptive field. It was from Barclay's 'earnest teaching', Owen later wrote, that he had first received his 'strong predilection for Zootomical pursuits'. Of more immediate value was Barclay's recommendation that Owen leave Edinburgh and go to London to complete the requirements for membership in the Royal College of Surgeons -- thus qualifying to pursue a private medical practice or, as he seemed to desire, to become a naval surgeon. More valuable still was Barclay's letter strongly recommending his student to John Abernethy, then an influential member of the London medical establishment as professor of St Bartholomew's Hospital's 'ad hoc' medical programme and president of the Royal College of Surgeons. 
Persuaded by Barclay's advice and with his letter in hand, Owen moved to London soon after the completion of his second term at Edinburgh. On his arrival he still had courses to complete and was too young to qualify for membership in the college but, impressed by Barclay's recommendation, Abernethy dissuaded Owen from his plans for a naval career and took him on as the prosector for his surgical lectures. The appointment, though unpaid, was fortunate in that it relieved Owen of the financial burden entailed by the need to complete the course requirements while at the same time providing him with valuable experience as a practising anatomist. At least as useful in a social system in which 'interest' or influence was an important factor in professional success was the sponsorship of so influential a member of the medical establishment. Within a year, immediately after reaching the minimum age requirement of twenty-two, Owen passed the examination for membership of the college. Although he had already given up the idea of becoming a naval surgeon he was still determined to become a medical practitioner and to that end he began his practice close by the college, at 11 Cook's Court on Carey Street, just off Chancery Lane, hoping to draw his patients from the young lawyers in the nearby chambers of the inns of court. With so many young men with similar hopes, the prospect for success was not a particularly happy one. Abernethy's patronage continued, however, the result of which was to change both the career and the life of his protege. 
In the mid-1820s the Royal College of Surgeons was in a difficult position. It found itself one of the targets of the aggressive attacks on the medical establishment by Thomas Wakley in his recently founded medical journal 'The Lancet'. Specifically it was charged with failing to produce a useful catalogue of the collection of John Hunter, which had been purchased by the government in 1800 and entrusted to its care. Without such a catalogue the collection was virtually useless as either an instructional tool or the visual representation of the ideas of the important anatomist and surgeon upon whose reputation the existence of the college rested. William Clift, Hunter's last student-assistant, employed by the college as conservator of the collection, had been unable to produce the long-promised catalogue. With Clift's latest assistant about to leave, Abernethy engineered Owen's appointment as his successor. 
Owen's entry into the Hunterian Museum on 7 March 1827 at a salary of $30 per quarter was the beginning of his long and productive career as a natural scientist. The salary, soon increased to $150 per annum, was only just sufficient to satisfy the lifestyle his position required, yet for one his age -- without family background or funds -- it was a fortunate appointment. The experience with the Hunterian collection, his friendship with its long-time conservator, and the acquaintance of the influential members of the medical establishment at the college exceeded anything that a young man in his early twenties could have hoped for in the way of a training in comparative anatomy and in the making of a professional career. 
Owen fitted in well at the Hunterian. Clift was an easy-going master, an engaging friend, and the professional colleague of many of those who were converting natural history into natural science. His son and presumed successor, William Home Clift, was Owen's age and, with similar interests in music, the theatre, and the bachelor life of pre-Victorian London, the two workmates became friends. In addition, Clift's daughter Caroline Amelia (1801-1873), three years older, soon became Owen's fiancee. 
The work of redescribing Hunter's specimens as well as those which were being continually acquired was congenial, even exciting, for one who was entering a new world of activity far removed from the practicalities of the medical profession. To pursue science alone, still primarily the avocation of gentlemen collectors of means, Owen could hardly expect to find an income sufficient to allow him to marry and to establish himself as both a gentleman and a professional. He kept his options open. He maintained a middling medical practice that hardly covered his expenses while attending to the requirements of his position and doing the odd job from which he might earn a bit beyond his museum stipend. From 1828 he gave optional lectures in comparative anatomy at St Bartholomew's while attending to an occasional patient or assisting senior members of the college, particularly in anatomy. 
At the beginning of 1830 there was the possibility of change when, having rapidly passed the tests of the Society of Apothecaries, Owen rushed to Birmingham to compete for an open position of hospital surgeon-apothecary. Although it seemed certain that he would receive the appointment, the contrast between the excitement and possibilities in London and the drabness and provincialism of industrial Birmingham led him to return to the college, his friends, and especially Caroline Clift. He resolved to stay and to make his future there as comparative anatomist, a physiologist, or, in its later redefinition, a biologist. 
Owen's first task at the Hunterian had been to catalogue the natural history specimens, to be followed by the soft-tissue preparations in spirit, many of which had lost their identifying labels and virtually all of which required dissection and comparison with recently acquired materials. The anonymity of the subsequent publications of the catalogues rankled and was a source of his lifelong concern that he be given appropriate credit for his work. (Indeed, there is still debate whether a number of works were by William Home Clift or by Owen.) The position, however, was much more than that of a technician; the loose definition of his role allowed him opportunities to explore the new territory of comparative anatomy and zoology whose boundaries were being expanded primarily by French savants and their continental colleagues. Occasionally Owen would substitute for William Clift in the obligatory guided tour of the collection for distinguished visitors and, because he knew French, acted as guide to Cuvier for his visit in 1830; reciprocating, Cuvier invited Owen to visit him in his own establishment at the Jardin des Plantes in Paris. 
Also in 1830 Owen became the youngest and most active member of a small group, within the recently organized Zoological Society of London, whose interests in zoological research led them to establish, as the 'de facto' research arm of the society, a committee on science and correspondence, to meet fortnightly at the society's museum on Bruton Street 'for the purpose of suggesting and discussing questions and experiments in animal physiology'. At its first meeting late in 1830 Owen described, in what was to be his first publication under his own name, his dissection of a rare orang-utan that had recently died soon after its arrival in the society's gardens. This paper initiated a long series of precisely described anatomical works that, his successor at both the Hunterian and British museums wrote, 'extending over a period of more than fifty years... has done so much to advance the knowledge of comparative anatomy and to give an illustrious place to their author in the annals of science' (W. H. Flower, 'Essays on Museums and other Subjects Connected with Natural History', 1898, 177). The availability of the specimens from the zoological gardens led Owen to focus on the vertebrates, the class on which most of his subsequent work would depend. The committee operated independently until two years later, when its functions were absorbed into the main Zoological Society, and in that time Owen, although still working on the Hunterian catalogues, contributed twenty-eight papers to its meetings, the largest number of any of its members. 
The Royal College of Surgeons provided Owen with a view of what comparative anatomy could be -- beyond the descriptions provided by the skilful use of the scalpel in the dissecting room. Since arriving there he had attended, and had been impressed by, J. H. Green's lectures on comparative anatomy in which he introduced his audiences to the transcendental and holistic views of German natural philosophy. Owen recalled thirty years later that: 'For the first time in England the Comparative Anatomy of the whole Animal Kingdom was described, and illustrated by such a series of enlarged and coloured diagrams as had never before been seen. The vast array of facts was linked by reference to the underlying Unity [of Nature]. (J. Simon, 'Memoir on the Life of Joseph Henry Green', 1865, 1.xiv)' For Owen, coming to comparative anatomy with hardly more philosophy than the easy-going vitalism of Barclay and Abernethy, Green's Anglicized German Romanticism provided a vision of what an integrative natural science could become. 
At a more limited and workable level, a sense that comparative anatomy was something more than a succession of individual dissections was reinforced by Owen's visit to Cuvier's establishment in Paris. Seizing the first opportunity available to him Owen spent a month in Paris during his vacation in the summer of 1831. He met Cuvier informally and visited his working establishment and the osteological collection which served as a reference for both his comparative anatomy and the 'fossil zoology' which he had virtually invented. Cuvier's teleological functionalism, stressing the designed unity of the organism to play a particular survival role, was different from both Hunter's systemic particularism and Green's universalism. Owen also encountered the implied transformationism of Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire and the outright materialism of Lamarck's 'Philosophical Zoology', a copy of which he bought, read, and annotated. None of these different views as to the nature of 'Nature' was totally unknown to him, but to hear them argued out, in private and at public meetings of the Institut de France, was a novel experience. 
Back in London, the zoological gardens were proving to be not the only source of Owen's anatomical subjects; the Hunterian Museum received specimens from travellers and members of the College of Surgeons serving in colonial outposts around the world. It was from one of them, George Bennett (subsequently a lifelong friend of Owen), that it received a rare specimen of the pearly nautilus whose shell, outwardly similar to the fossil ammonites commonly found in the Mesozoic marine deposits, was an important desideratum for every shell collector but whose living form had not previously been described. Another singular specimen was the popularly named duck-billed platypus ('Ornithorhynchus anatinus'), rare specimens of which the college had received since its first sighting in 1799. First described by Everard Home, it generated a continuing dispute as to its classificatory status in the face of reports that, despite mammalian characteristics, it laid eggs. Owen's ingenious observations on the museum's specimens supported observations of both Blainville and Meckel that, whether egg-laying or not, this strange animal possessed lactating mammae and thus was assuredly mammalian. The publication of the nautilus memoir early in 1832 and Green's presentation to the Royal Society of Owen's paper describing the mammary glands of the platypus shortly thereafter ('PTRS', 1832, 517-38) mark the end of a strenuous five-year training period from which he emerged a professional comparative anatomist and a promising member of the scientific community. 
Despite the critical success of these accomplishments, Owen's future seemed as bleak as ever. Posts for a comparative anatomist were extremely rare, and never more than a minor adjunct to a more lucrative medical practice. With the tentativeness of his position and the precariousness of financial support, it was impossible for Owen and Caroline Clift to marry, nor did there seem any hope for anything in the future. A year after the excitement of the Paris visit, he was under great stress: Cuvier was dead; the nautilus monograph was not yet in print; he was very busy with his non-curatorial activities beyond the requirements of his appointment; some members of the council were openly critical of his increasing involvement with the Zoological Society; and there was an increasing feeling of frustration at the financial obstacles to his marriage. 'The strongest mind', he wrote to Caroline after a quarrel as to their future, 'after being on the stretch for hours, loses its tone, and is readily rendered irritable and unable to turn and avert the leading steps to misunderstanding' (Owen to Clift, 11 May 1832, Hirtzell Collection, fo1. 16). None of his subsequent successes could or would cancel the difficulties and anxieties of this period when it seemed both his career and his domestic life hung in the balance. 
Although in 1832 Owen's career remained uncertain, the five years as junior curatorial assistant at the Hunterian provided the foundation for his future career. The particular investigations he initiated and pursued during that period each opened an expanding area of research for which he was not loath to claim proprietary rights. Although primarily a vertebrate specialist, his opportunistic anatomy of the nautilus led him to the invertebrate 'Cephalopoda', in the description and classification of which he became the recognized expert. Similarly, his initial papers on monotreme and marsupial generation were the beginning of a lifetime's work on the physiology and palaeontology of those primarily Australian orders. The first of his memoirs for the Zoological Society on the orang-utan was the start of a series on the higher apes that demonstrated ever more particularly their close physical affinities with the human species. 
Apart from the grounding in both the process and substance of a broadly defined physiology that his experience provided, Owen learned to be a professional. An incessant reader with an unusually retentive memory, he drew on the well-stocked college library for the published tradition; if his citations are to be believed, he was also familiar with a greater part of the extant literature. Moreover, the Hunterian Museum was internationally renowned for its collections; no naturalist would come to London without paying a visit to the museum, whose collections and conservator were more available and helpful than those at the British Museum. From these professionals, as from the active colleagues with whom he worked at the Zoological Society's museum, he acquired the trappings of professionalism; from Clift, who had grown up with the collection, who knew everyone, and who could gossip about them all, he learned something of the institution of science and the politics of its professional practitioners. In short, during the five years Owen was immersed in and became an active member of a still small community whose members were engaged in the construction of a discipline still in the process of definition. 
For Owen the most important member of that community was William Buckland who, with Cuvier dead, would become his guide and his patron. When Owen first knew him, probably in 1832, Buckland was at the peak of his career with both a scientific and political influence far beyond that of his Oxford professorship. Buckland was a geologist and not an anatomist but he followed Cuvier's functionalist model in reshaping the fossil fragments into the living forms of the past worlds for which each had been designed. No one could better bring to life the inhabitants of past creations. As the closing event of the highly successful meeting of the newly established British Association for the Advancement of Science in Oxford in 1832 Buckland gave an animated, lengthy public lecture in which, through metaphors that even the least scientific of his large and mixed audience could understand, he breathed life into the giant 'Megatherium' from South America which even in Cuvier's hands had been little more than a marvellous pile of bones. Owen was in the audience and he returned to London excited by the possibilities of the Cuvierian creation of a 'fossil zoology' through the use of comparative anatomy. He immediately sent Buckland proofs of the yet unpublished nautilus memoir for comment. The subsequent correspondence established a close professional and personal friendship from which Owen received counsel, support, and political patronage. Although often referred to as the English Cuvier, Owen was more properly a Buckland disciple who would continue to operate within a Bucklandian ideological framework long after Buckland's descent into the dark world of madness in 1850 and his death six years later. 
Just when Owen's career prospects seemed bleakest, his future was assured by the death, in September 1832, of William Home Clift in a street accident. Although he was to stay on for another decade as conservator, William Clift never recovered fully from the loss of his son, both at the personal and institutional level. Thus Owen became 'de facto' co-conservator of the Hunterian Museum just at the time that the college was making plans for its major restructuring and expansion. It was a project in which Owen inevitably became involved and from which emerged his interests in the establishment of a national museum of natural history. 
During the next decade through his own continuing stream of publications at a time during which an avocational natural history was becoming professionalized in Britain as natural science, Owen transformed himself (under Buckland's patronage) from temporary assistant at the Hunterian to the foremost natural scientist of his generation. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1834. His career successes were reflected in the resolution of the most pressing of his domestic problems: on his thirty-first birthday in 1835, after a long and frustrating wait for both of them, he and Caroline Clift were married. 
Owen was wedded as well to his work. What he produced during this initial decade of his professional career constitutes an amazing corpus of a wide range of anatomical and palaeontological publications, most of which were first presented before the Zoological Society, the Royal Society, the Geological Society, the Linnean Society, and the British Association for the Advancement of Science -- in all of which he played an increasingly important role. Chief among his anatomical works in addition to the continuing production of the Hunterian catalogues were: those on the marsupials and monotremes of Australia, culminating in his survey of both for Todd's 'Cyclopedia of Anatomy' in 1847; his formal description and classification of the 'Trichina', first noticed by James Paget when a student at Bart's; a survey of the 'Cephalopoda' in 1836 begun with the nautilus monograph; his grand analysis and comparative survey of dentition, the initial parts of which were published in 1840; and his continuing work on the comparative anatomy of the Primates, which demonstrated the validity on anatomical grounds of the inclusion of the human species within the order and, specially, the close affinity between that species and the higher apes. In all, the more than 150 separate publications in this decade -- abstracts, memoirs, monographs, articles, books, and reports -- reflect an immense amount of investigative work concurrent with fulfilling regular curatorial duties. 
In 1836 Owen was appointed Hunterian professor of comparative anatomy and physiology at the Royal College of Surgeons. One of his first tasks after the inauguration of the renovated and expanded museum in 1837 was to deliver the first of what was to be an annual series of twenty-four lectures. At the same time, he became an active member of the specialist societies on whose councils he served as well as the president of the newly established Microscopical Society, which he helped to found. However, the climax of this decade of intensive activity was his two-part report on the British fossil Reptilia requested and funded by the British Association and presented in 1839 and 1841. It was the kind of work at which he was adept. As a by-product of the rapid development of the work of structural geologists and amateur collectors, a wide variety of fossil remains of large and primarily extinct reptiles were scattered unclassified among the various public and private natural history collections in Britain. It was Owen's task, brilliantly accomplished, to examine as many collections as were available, describe the fossils, and arrange them in some anatomically based classification. The result served as the basic reference for the rest of the century. In the second part of the report he defined a coherent category of large terrestrial reptiles to which he gave the ordinal name Dinosauria, and it is on this that much of his popular reputation rests. At this time too, in good Cuvierian fashion and on the basis of a single fragment of a fossilized bone, he predicted the presence of an extinct but varied terrestrial avian fauna in New Zealand, a prediction that was fully realized by subsequent discoveries. Early in 1842, only a decade after his first major publication, Owen succeeded Clift as resident conservator of the Hunterian. In the same year, through Buckland's influence, he also received a civil-list pension of $200 per annum. Thirty-eight years old, he had become Professor Owen, a major figure in the London scientific establishment. With his election three years later to membership in The Club, an exclusive literary society, he extended his relationships to the wider intellectual community. He had become a member of the intellectual elite, an active member of a new aristocracy of merit. 
Later, at the height of his career, in response to a request for biographical information, Owen merely listed his major works, his professional affiliations and his honours, and concluded disingenuously: 'The peaceful career of this indefatigable cultivator of Natural Knowledge has been a continued series of labours for the promotion of scientific truth and its practical application to the well-being of mankind; & the titles of his Publications form the best illustrations of his life.' No period of his career better illustrates the evasiveness of this autobiographical fragment than his varied activities of the mid-1840s to mid-1850s, during which he extended his territory from the zoo-anatomical analyses of the living to fragmented evidences of those from a bygone past; from the position of laboratory scientist to that of theorist; and from the position of scientist to that of government consultant and spokesman for natural science to the public at large.Although still the comparative anatomist, the focus of Owen's science was shifting from zoology to palaeontology. As with his earlier encounter with Cuvier, his discovery of the fossil past, first with Buckland and then through the analysis of Darwin's South American collections, was something of an epiphany that opened a whole new area of creative effort. More and more he was asked to report on the increasing flow of fossils from Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa -- sent to the Hunterian for his description and explication. He had become a palaeontologist whose seemingly magical success in recreating the long-extinct vertebrates depended upon collaborative data from both the anatomy of the living and the fragmentary fossil evidences of the past. His publications during the 1840s comprise an almost bewildering collection of important contributions to both palaeontology and comparative anatomy, from that of the Mylodon (and the subsequent classification of the whole of the extinct and living Edentata) to a review of British fossil mammals and birds to match that of the reptiles; descriptions of the anatomy of the living monotremes and marsupials of Australia and their extinct forebears; and dissections of chimpanzee, orang-utan, and, finally, the recently available gorilla. Averaging some ten descriptive articles a year, he wandered through the extended research territory which he had cleared and not infrequently claimed as his own. In addition there were lengthier monographs and the annual lecture series for the college which, under his revision of the charter of the lectureship, became an open-ended textbook on the changing state of contemporary natural science. 
Owen's most important works of the period were the longer essays 'On the Archetype and Homologies of the Vertebrate Skeleton' (1848) and 'On the Nature of Limbs' (1849). Coming after almost twenty years of an intense familiarity with both the extreme diversity of the organic world as well as what seemed the patterns which underlay it, he realized the need, as others had before him, to understand and to describe the forces that not only held the system together but also directed its changes through time. The rapidly increasing fund of detailed information from geology, palaeontology, biography, and anatomy was shifting the focus from detailed studies of the Cuvierian sort to the processual questions of diversity and to that 'mystery of mysteries', the origin of species. Other than the occasional biblicist on the periphery, all geologists accepted a long period of strata building in the history of the earth; and virtually all natural scientists rejected the ideas of a continuous particularized creative process to explain the novelties that palaeontology was constantly producing. By the mid-1840s most were willing to consider the possibility that, except for the origin of the human species -- considered to be the special concern of a creating deity -- the whole of the natural universe owed its structure to a creative plan rather than a continuing process of 'ad hoc' creative intrusions. In response, there was a re-emergence of Geoffroyan holism, of German Romanticism, and Lamarckian transformationism. As the foremost palaeontologist and comparative anatomist of his generation, Owen felt the need to enter the field. As with much of his work, his response, the concept of the archetype, was an eclectic one to which he added his own positive mark. 
Owen's invention of the admittedly idealist archetype was based empirically on his valuable clarification of the commonly used but vaguely defined term, analogy, to describe cross-species comparisons. Analogy, important in Cuvierian teleology, was to be restricted to similarities of use or function, such as the wings of a fly and those of a bird; Owen's verbal invention, 'homology', was to note similarities of structure or form, such as the wings of a bird and the forelimbs of a horse. Analogical similarities reflected 'ad hoc' adaptations to changing conditions and needs, functional in the Cuvierian sense; homological similarities, on the other hand, had their origins in an idealized simple form which gave rise to more particularized 'descendent' forms through a variety of 'secondary laws' or processes according to changing functional demands, but always in a progressive direction described graphically by a natural classificatory system with the human species at its apex. Owen's explication of the archetype, its origins, and its generative power was never very clear. It was, however, a fail-safe position, as yet inexplicable and perhaps unknowable, but both the idealization and heuristic reification of a 'primary cause' (and the presumably divinely inspired creative design that activated it). Owen, and some of his advocates, thought he had solved the problem of both diversity and progress; his critics knew, however, that he had only verbalized it. There were those who, like Owen himself, saw in the controlled process of change from an inchoate beginning through continuing progress by means of a variety of secondary causes (of which adaptive selection was one) an anticipation of Darwin's theory of the origin of species through natural selection. Superficially the two touch each other here and there, but the essential idealism of the archetype model, theological in spirit and in fact, mark it as distinct from and in opposition to the materialism of Darwin's more restricted view. Owen's attempt to resolve the problem of diversity, change, and progress through the construction of the ideal archetype as universal ancestor with some invested 'power' demonstrates, both in its eclecticism and in its philosophical confusion, his limitations as a philosopher or grand theorist. 
The utility of the homology-analogy distinction and the divinely inspired progressionism of his archetype confirmed for an admiring constituency Owen's professional eminence. That, however, did not sit well with his employers at the college, who were concerned that the servant was becoming the master -- something of a possibility when Owen sought, though unsuccessfully, to become a member of its council. From the beginning of his appointment as curator in 1842, a continuing series of frustrating controls was imposed on his activities by the council, not least of which was its refusal to sanction a broadening role and increased independence for the museum. Increasingly Owen found his position becoming too restrictive. He wanted out. He was virtually certain in 1851 that he would be appointed head of the important mineral and geology department at the British Museum, but he was passed over; he toyed with the idea of succeeding to the chair of natural history at the University of Edinburgh but the conditions were too restrictive; and he talked of accepting an invitation to the United States with its enthusiastic and welcoming audiences for visiting British lecturers. He was, however, too deeply rooted in London to move and, despite difficulties with his employers, the museum served as an important base for the continuation of his research. As a sign of royal favour for his accomplishments, in 1852 he was awarded lifetime occupation of Sheen Lodge in Richmond Park where he lived as something of a country gentleman, enjoying the garden he cultivated. Finally, in 1856, at the urging of influential friends, Owen was appointed superintendent of the natural history departments of the British Museum, a position newly created for him (but with duties poorly defined). 
During the years leading up to this appointment -- those of his greatest reputation -- Owen's difficulties were not only institutional. Increasingly both he and his science were coming under attack from a younger group of professional natural scientists, building their careers upon different conceptual foundations. They drew their inspiration from German developmental anatomy and the new morphology that was replacing the increasingly outmoded French tradition, so important a part of Owen's practice. T. H. Huxley, who was to become Owen's most vocal opponent and the leader of this new generation, was quick to pick up on the personal and ideological conflicts on his return in 1851 from his own exploratory voyage to the south Pacific. 'Owen is both feared and hated', he wrote in an unusually perceptive comment: 'It is astonishing with what an intense feeling of hatred [he] is regarded by the majority of his contemporaries... The truth is, he is the superior of most, and does not conceal that he knows it, and it must be confessed that he does some very ill-natured tricks now and then... Owen is an able man, but to my mind not so great as he thinks himself. (L. Huxley, 'Life and Letters of Thomas Huxley', 1900, 1.93-4)' There were bitter conflicts over matters of fact and priority and Owen damaged his own reputation by what were considered ill-natured attacks on Gideon Mantell and the perceived unfairness of his anonymous review of Lyell's anti-progressionism. Huxley's open criticisms of Owen's science and his barely veiled attacks on his professional character in a series of trenchant papers opened a rift between the two men which was to last for the rest of their lives. 
Owen's career as a natural scientist reached its climax at the end of the 1850s. His move to the British Museum provided him with a recognized position of eminence within the scientific community and a platform for the diffusion of his views both to a lay and professional audience. Relieved from the frustrations of the college's control of his outside activities, as well as curatorial responsibilities for which he was not temperamentally fitted, he was free to construct his own programme. He accepted a long-postponed three-year appointment as Fullerian professor of physiology at the Royal Institution and, at the same time, initiated a palaeontological lecture series at the School of Mines. For the next decade he was also a popular lecturer to provincial audiences eager to learn the latest truths from the foremost expert in natural science. With his diagrams and his drawings hung on the wall behind him, he was equally eager to satisfy their demands, to earn the fees they offered, and to educate the public in the particular value of science in the search for the ultimate truth which underlay and would explain the whole of organized nature. 
In 1858 both Owen's scientific merits and the political role he had come to play in the scientific institution were recognized by his election to the presidency of the British Association. The following year he was invited to give the first of the renewed Reade lectures at Cambridge. Taking advantage of the opportunity, he laid out his new classification of the mammals, the first since that of Cuvier, in which he used neural distinctions in conjunction with the traditional classificatory criteria to provide a more natural classification of the class. Through such a classification he sought to demonstrate that the presumed distinction of human mind possessed a physical correlate in the brain that justified a distinct subclass of which the human species would be the only occupant. In general his new classification was respectfully received even by his opponents, although the elevation of human singularity provided the springboard for the violent attacks against his anatomy a year later. 
Owen had become a statesman of science, one whose demonstrated excellence recommended him as a consultant to government as it became increasingly obvious that the complexity of problems within the control of government required the knowledge and competence that specialist scientists alone could provide. It was a relationship which he was willing to exploit in his effort to seek a greater -- and separate -- role for the natural history department of the British Museum. 
These years of Owen's success were a period of significant changes in both concept and method for the analysis and understanding of the increasingly complex problems raised by the rapidly accumulating data from the natural world. A process of continuing change was replacing the stasis of designed creation as an essential assumption in the construction of a natural philosophy. The new physiology from Germany was redirecting, if not indeed replacing, the functional comparative anatomy of the French. The vast expansion of knowledge of the living world as well as that of the repopulation of eons past by palaeontology raised questions that traditional views seemed unable to answer. Ideas of the essential unity of organic nature and, in one form or another, transformationism threatened the accepted view of what was at its basis the fixity of the Cuvierian world. Owen was caught in the middle. Not unsympathetic to the new physiology and having himself created a limited transformationist model in his vertebrate archetype, he considered himself still a Cuvierian for whom the species itself was an unchanging reality. His inability, during the critical decade of the 1850s, to accommodate fully to the changes that were occurring and the controversies to which they led dislodged him from the position of leadership and prestige which he had finally attained. 
The most serious confrontation arising from Owen's position -- and that which unfairly later defined his place in history -- was that initiated with the publication of Darwin's 'Origin of Species'. The hastily arranged reading in mid-1858 of the brief reports of Darwin and A. R. Wallace on the importance of natural selection as the means by which new species arise alerted Owen to the serious threat posed to his ideological position. As shocking as the doctrine itself was the fact that so important a solution to what was essentially a zoological problem was the product of neither a professional anatomist nor a zoologist but of two naturalists with limited training or experience as either. His irritation is clear in his intemperate review, in the 'Edinburgh Review' (111, 1860, 487-532), of the more detailed 'Origin' a few months after its publication, in which unfairly -- almost insultingly -- he questioned Darwin's professional competence to discuss the species question. Darwin might have been the field naturalist 'extraordinaire', but for Owen both the definition of the problem of organic diversity and the search for its solution lay in the laboratory, his laboratory in particular. There precise anatomical dissections could (and could alone) provide the lines of division between species, the only real units of classification. A career in the laboratory, 'going from bone to bone', had not prepared him for the shift to the living population as the unit of species definition and change upon which Darwin had based his theory. In preparing his review Owen was blinded by Darwin's humility in the discussion of species through which he concluded that like the other increasingly inclusive classificatory units the species too was the product of the classifier rather than of nature. 
Ignoring most of the remainder of Darwin's carefully arranged argument, Owen attacked the heresy of species indeterminance with a bitterness that many thought was the result of personal pique at being upstaged. The use of his own works in the same review as the basis for his attack merely supported such a view. Beyond the personal, however, was Owen's inability to abandon the concept of fixed species; to do so would have meant the crumbling of the whole essentially static system of organic creation to the demonstration of which he had devoted so much of his scientific activity and thought. 'That classification is the task of science, but species the work of nature', with which he concluded his long review, is a statement of his scientific faith that was impossible for him to abandon. 
As important and disagreeable as the materialism of the theory itself were its implications for the equally important 'man question', the nature of the species and the place it occupied in a nature from whose workings divine concern had been excluded. Owen was caught between two positions: attempting to find a middle way between the proofs, many of which he had himself provided, of the physical affinities between the human species and the rest of the primates on the one hand, and its divinely inspired nature on the other, he was attacked by both the biblicists for the one and the scientists for the other. Huxley publicly attacked Owen's attempted anatomical demonstration of the physical locus for uniqueness of the human brain. Owen's subsequent maintenance of that position in the face of repeated proofs of his error merely emphasized his fallibility as an anatomist. Huxley's attacks on Owen's science and ideology (as well as Owen's own behaviour in continuing to defend the indefensible) alienated a new generation with whom he had little in common socially or scientifically. Not all were so open in their dislike as one distinguished scholar who even a decade after Owen's death was still sufficiently bitter to write that 'Owen was a [damned] liar. He lied for God and for malice. A bad case' (E. Clodd, 'Memories', 1926). Nevertheless, many other young scientists felt much the same. Moreover, Owen's friends, colleagues, and sympathizers of his own generation were dying, their work, like his, challenged and superseded by their successors. 
Owen recognized his estrangement from the new biology and its leaders. For the rest of his life, with only an occasional return to anatomy, he restricted his scientific work to the continuing description and classification of the accumulated and accumulating fossil material from England and the colonies. He had become irrelevant to the new biology. In these later years, he was honoured more by the medical establishment than by the scientific. 
With the publication of his 'Palaeontology' in 1860 and his three-volume 'Anatomy of the Vertebrates' (1866-8), however, Owen began to bring his separate works together to serve as visible and useful monuments of his career. 'Anatomy' was followed by compilations of his long-continued series of works on the extinct mammals of Australia (1877-8), on the extinct avian fauna of New Zealand (1879), and on British fossil reptiles (1884). He saw these not only nor so much as monuments to his own industry but also as sometimes faltering steps in the progress of science from which his successors might learn. 
Owen's retreat into palaeontology was made easier by his continuing efforts, initially against the almost unanimous opposition of his scientific colleagues, to establish a separate and independent natural history museum. Although he had long considered the need for such an institution it was only in 1859, after he had become familiar with the unsatisfied needs of natural science within the structure of the British Museum, that he formally proposed a plan for a new museum to be erected in South Kensington. Although initially blocked by partisan political rivalries, his plan was approved and work begun in the early 1870s. The museum's official opening in 1881 was Owen's last, and most important, contribution to natural science. It was the realization of a vision that he had pursued for almost the whole of his career. Brock's welcoming statue, now, after some controversy, standing on the landing of the great staircase facing the entrance of Waterhouse's impressive neo-Gothic structure, is symbolic of the public role he sought for professional science. 
With all the collections finally transferred from the cramped Bloomsbury quarters to their new galleries in South Kensington, and with a knighthood conferred on 5 January 1884, Owen retired to Sheen Lodge but still continued his work of a lifetime in the new museum. Embittered by the incomprehensible suicide of his only son in 1886, he grew old among his grandchildren, none of whom was to understand or appreciate his accomplishments. He died on 18 December 1892 at Sheen Lodge. On 23 December his body, followed by a small but distinguished delegation representing both science and the public, was carried to the cemetery in Ham churchyard where he was buried alongside Caroline, who had died in 1873. 
History has served Owen poorly. Although his death was recorded in the popular press it caused little excitement. It was Darwinian theory which framed natural science, and he had been its most serious opponent. 'Owen must have been a wonderful manipulator & anatomist as well as acute observer; but I think', commented a contemporary at his death, 'his life shows that it is brain which tells in the long run. It is not the no. or weight of a man's papers but the point in them by which he is ultimately estimated' (J. W. Gregory to C. D. Sherborn, 3 March 1893, BL, Add. MS 42580, fols. 69-70). Further, the manner of his opposition -- the most public of the controversies which punctuated his career -- has obscured his role as the most important and most influential natural scientist of his generation. Even in a period when controversy was an acceptable part of intellectual discourse he handled it poorly. Too often he considered a personal attack and invested too much of his ego in the demonstration of error. Whether in a letter to the public press, an anonymous review, or personal encounter, his response went too often beyond the limits of gentlemanly behaviour and was considered to be hurtful rather than helpful. 
Owen's accomplishments, however, were many and important, his role only recently being reassessed in a fuller understanding of the history of natural science. It was indeed by standing on his shoulders that his successors were able to see further. As significant as any of his more particular contributions which the extensive record of publications describes was his ability to bring order out of the accumulating chaos of the collectors' cabinets and the conflicting methodologies used to account for them. His annual series of Hunterian lectures at the College of Surgeons, his review of the whole of comparative anatomy, his compilations of his works in palaeontology and, in particular, the initial ordering of the fossil reptiles and mammals of Britain, the virtual creation of a comparative vertebrate osteology and odontology, and his design for the Natural History Museum -- all laid the groundwork for others who, as intended in the assumption of a progressing science, would alter their shape and challenge their substance. 
An essential aspect of Owen's personality was the sense of himself as a performer and as such he was never unaware of his audience, whether on the lecture platform, amid controversy, or in the many carefully composed and written letters he sent to family, friends, and colleagues. From his early years he had a deep and continuing interest in music and the theatre: he had an acceptable baritone voice and enjoyed harmony singing; he played well both the flute and the cello, either or both of which he would carry along with him when visiting friends whom he could join in an informal concert; and when in London he attended concerts and plays and was in awe of the talents exhibited by professionals in both, some of whom became friends. Except for music, however, his tastes in the theatre and in popular literature, which he read almost compulsively, were commonplace. Nevertheless, he was also a great teller of stories, recalling and sometimes embellishing anecdotes of his own history in which he would take on the characters of the participants. 
Physically Owen was an imposing figure. Six feet tall, his thinness made him seem taller. Handsome in his younger years, he seemed to grow more gaunt as he aged, but until his last years he never lost the romantic flair of his public presence. William Flower, who knew him well, noted specially his 'massive head, lofty forehead, curiously round, prominent and expressive eyes, high cheek bones, large mouth and projecting chin, long, lank, dark hair, and during the greater part of his life, smooth-shaven face and very florid complexion' (Plarr). His eyes were particularly remarkable in their intensity, a character which Holman Hunt caught in his portrait of 1881. 
Late in life, after the appearance of the characteristic 'Vanity Fair' caricature, Owen scribbled a brief note on a scrap of paper: '
'Vanity Fair' says that I am a 'bit of a dandy;' Mr. W. K. Parker calls me a 'parlour anatomist' and 'Lotus Eater'.... How difficult it is to know oneself & how much one ought to be obliged to those who are so kind as to help us to that hardest of all knowledge. (private information)' It is just such a difficulty in defining who he was that makes it difficult to understand some of the contradictions in his own behaviour. He kept his own counsel and, as he wrote to his fiancee early in his courtship, 'I have from early life been thrown among strangers and have had greater control over my actions than is usual' (Owen to Caroline Clift, 3 May 1832, Temple University, Hirtzell Collection, fol. 15). In his work he was essentially a 'loner', acrimoniously protective of his interests and the proprietary rights to the research territory he laid out for himself but genial in the company of others where there could be no threat to that which he possessed. 
Late in life Owen doubted even what he had earlier gratefully accepted as his single-minded divinely granted dedication as a 'cultivator of Natural Knowledge [through] a continued series of labours for the promotion of scientific truth and its practical application to the welfare of mankind'. Having only recently retired from the museum, and with his own research winding down, he wrote to an old student and faithful friend who had become a very successful ophthalmologist, wondering which of them had chosen the better career path: 'We can both look back, now to much life-work in our respective walks; but yours must have left many grateful memories of direct reliefs, of gifts, indeed, of the most precious of our bodily senses. My labours, when successful, bear but remotely on the needs of our fellow mortals. (Owen to W. W. Cooper, 12 Dec 1884, London, Wellcome L., Owen MS 64)' Notwithstanding doubts he may have had about his own choice of career, Owen welcomed the many honours he attracted throughout his life, from the Geological Society's Wollaston medal in 1838 for his work on Darwin's fossils to the first of the Linnean medals, jointly with Joseph Hooker, of the Linnean Society in 1888 for the corpus of his work through his career of more than half a century. Among the most satisfying were both the royal and Copley medals of the Royal Society in 1846 and 1851; membership in the Legion d'honneur in 1855 and the Prix Cuvier of the Institut de France in 1856; the Baly medal of the Royal College of Physicians in 1869, and the new honorary medal of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1883; honorary degrees from the universities of Edinburgh (1847), Oxford (1852), and Cambridge (1859); and from Queen Victoria, creation as commander of the Bath in 1873 and knight commander of the Bath in 1884. 


@@@@@


doc= 21027


Owen, Robert (1771-1858), socialist and philanthropist, was born on 14 May 1771 at Newtown, Montgomeryshire, the son of Robert Owen (1741-1804), a saddler and ironmonger as well as the local postmaster, and his wife, Anne Williams ('c'.1735-1803), a farmer's daughter. He was the youngest, but one, of seven children, and his childhood seems to have been a happy one. Intellectually precocious, he devoured a book per day, including novels, histories, and travel books, and became the schoolmaster's assistant. As a producer of pious sermons, he was known as 'the little parson' ('Selected Works', 4.54). At the age of ten, however, as he later claimed in his somewhat teleological autobiography, 'The Life of Robert Owen', he underwent a religious crisis, concluding that 'there must be something fundamentally wrong in all religions, as they had been taught up to that period' ('Selected Works', 4.54). Religious scepticism was to become a dominant theme in his later life. 
Anxious to leave home, Owen was permitted in 1781 to become apprenticed to James McGuffog, a cloth merchant in Stamford, Lincolnshire, who specialized in well-to-do ladies' wear. Having learned much about fabric and the trade, in 1784 Owen joined a London retailer, working twelve hours daily for $25 p.a., and then moved to a similar position at $40 p.a. under John Satterfield in Manchester. Here Owen soon became curious about the new machinery being applied to cotton spinning. Borrowing $100 from his brother William, he entered into a partnership with a machine-maker named Jones constructing 'mules' for making thread, and soon the firm of Jones and Owen had forty employees. When he was bought out in 1789-90, his old master, McGuffog, offered him half the profits in his shop. Owen chose instead in April 1792 -- not in 1790, as the 'Life' states ('Life', 1.32) -- to manage a mill with 500 employees owned by Peter Drinkwater, who had first applied the Boulton and Watt engine to cotton spinning in Manchester. Despite his inexperience, Owen applied himself rigorously, spending six weeks studying the factory, and proposing many refinements to the manufacturing process. Soon the quality of his thread was renowned. 
It was at this time that Owen, who as yet had few political opinions to speak of (though he signed a loyalist address with other Manchester manufacturers in 1795, during the war with France), became concerned with the moral and physical condition of his workforce. He began to apply the principle which was to dominate most of his life, the environmentalist dogma that character was derived from 'circumstances' rather than created by the will. This did not at this stage inhibit his success as it was later to do. He accepted a partnership with Drinkwater's sons, but then characteristically renounced it, without complaint, in order to allow Drinkwater's son-in-law, the manufacturer Samuel Oldknow, greater control in the firm. He joined the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society on 1 November 1793, and here met philanthropically inclined physicians like Samuel Bardsley. Here, too, he read at least two papers, now lost: 'On the origin of opinions with a view to the improvement of the social virtues' and 'Thoughts on the connection between universal happiness and practical mechanics'. Shy and sensitive among strangers, speaking a kind of Welsh English, Owen here began to acquire social grace. 
On a business visit to Glasgow, Owen met Ann Caroline Dale (1779-1831), the daughter of a prominent cotton spinner, David Dale (1739-1806), who had started as a Paisley weaver, and in 1785 with Richard Arkwright had built a mill at New Lanark south of Glasgow. Owen first visited the site on 15 June 1798, and was impressed both with its delightful location and with Dale's pioneering efforts to improve his labourers' working and living conditions. He married Caroline Dale on 30 September 1799 at Dale's palatial house on Charlotte Street, Glasgow. In the same year Owen acquired the New Lanark mills with several partners for $60,000, and he moved there on 1 January 1800 to take the post of manager of the New Lanark Twist Company, with a ninth share in the profits. When Dale died in 1806, Owen formed a new partnership (another would follow in 1810, following resistance to his experiments) which returned him about 40 per cent of the profits, averaging 121/2 per cent p.a. Eventually he was to share in approximately $300,000 from the mill. He had tremendous drive and energy, was adept at handling both his partners and business associates, and was scrupulously honest in his dealings. Skilled as both manager and entrepreneur, he typified the early self-made capitalists of the era. 
Owen evidently set out to make New Lanark an experiment in philanthropic management from the outset. He was not yet a 'socialist' (the term was not coined until the mid-1820s) and advocated neither profit-sharing nor the elimination of 'competition' at the mills. Instead, he sought to reduce both vice and punishment while improving living and working conditions, expecting in return an increase in output from the workforce. 
Despite initial resistance from his workers and continuing suspicion from his partners, especially from the pious Quaker philanthropist William Allen, Owen was remarkably successful in all these areas. Some 1800 people were employed at the mill, including about 500 pauper children sent by various parishes. Their working day was reduced by Owen in 1816 from eleven and three-quarter hours to ten and three-quarter hours. Shoddy and expensive goods in the company store were replaced with better ones at wholesale prices. Owen aimed to reduce living costs still further with plans (never realized) to introduce communal cooking and eating arrangements. His efforts at infant education -- of which he is rightly regarded as among the founders -- culminated in the opening of the Institute for the Formation of Character in 1816, where dancing, singing, and other lessons were taught. At the institute Owen, who taught military tactics himself, sought in particular to exclude punishment from education, to make learning interesting to young minds, and to encourage children to believe their own happiness to be dependent on that of others. In the workplace he installed 'silent monitors' -- multi-coloured blocks of wood which rotated above each labourer's workplace; the different coloured sides reflected the achievements of each worker, from black denoting poor performance to white denoting excellence. Employees with illegitimate children were fined. Pilfering and absenteeism were reduced. One-sixtieth of wages was set aside for sickness, injury, and old age. In the village surrounding the factory, groups of houses were organized as 'neighbourhood divisions', of which heads of households annually chose a 'principal'. These elected twelve 'jurors' to sit monthly for one year, hearing and judging cases respecting the internal order of the community. 
All resistance to these schemes was finally broken when, in 1806, Owen continued to pay full wages during an American cotton embargo. By 1816 New Lanark, often termed 'the happy valley', was renowned throughout Europe, and was deluged with visitors (over 20,000 between 1815 and 1825) curious to see how Owen had combined high profits with philanthropy. Owen, however, could not rest satisfied, and moreover met increasing resistance from his partners. In 1813, avoiding a hostile take-over effort on their part, Owen secretly raised enough capital to outbid his partners at a public auction of New Lanark. Now he formed a new partnership composed of the Baptist physician and philanthropist Joseph Fox, a former fishmonger and future lord mayor of London, Michael Gibbs, William Allen, two other Quakers, Joseph Foster and John Walker, and the philosopher Jeremy Bentham, for whom it was a rare profitable venture. Owen found Allen's objections to his own views on religion irksome, as they clearly had a bearing on the educational ideas he first presented in 'A New View of Society, or, Essays on the Principle of the Formation of the Human Character' (1813-14). Here, in what remains his best-known work, Owen demanded a system of national education to prevent idleness, poverty, and crime among the 'lower orders' ('Selected Works', vol. 1), and recommended restricting 'gin shops and pot houses', the state lottery and gambling, as well as penal reform, ending the monopolistic position of the Church of England, and collecting statistics on the value and demand for labour throughout the country. Owen denied proposing 'that the British government should now give direct employment to all its working population'. Instead, education should lead the poor 'to find employment sufficient to support themselves, except in cases of great sudden depression in the demand for, and consequent depreciation in the value of, labour' ('Selected Works', 1.97). To ensure the primacy of private enterprise, public labour on roads, docks, and shipbuilding would be paid less than the average local wage. There was nothing socialistic in these proposals, and it is hardly the case, as Leslie Stephen erroneously assumed ('DNB'), that Owen's 'essential views' were encapsulated here. 
Instead Owen attracted widespread support from philanthropists and even, despite his growing reputation for anti-clericalism, from church officials. His ideas might have been swallowed up in the plethora of poor-law reform proposals of the immediate post-war period. But Owen possessed the supreme confidence of the self-made man. Animated by opposition, especially when his early efforts to pass a factory reform bill faltered, his views became more extreme. Between 1813 and 1818 Owen made about fifty visits to the philosophical anarchist and religious sceptic William Godwin, whose 'Enquiry Concerning Political Justice' (1793) had caused a great stir during the revolutionary debates a generation earlier, and who shared Owen's environmentalist faith in the principles of 'necessity'. 
From 1814 Owen had a relatively free hand to pursue his ideals at New Lanark. But his eye was already on the growing problem of national poverty. In 1816 Owen announced that 'the chief object' of his existence would be to make 'universal' the results of his experiments with the character of the labouring classes. Crucially, he now also insisted that the new manufacturing process be 'gradually diminished', and that Britain aim for greater self-sufficiency in food ('Selected Works', 1.126). In 'Observations on the Effects of the Manufacturing System' (1815) he identified for the first time: 'immediate pecuniary gain, to which on the great scale every other [principle] is made to give way' as the 'governing principle of trade, manufactures, and commerce'. 'Buying cheap and selling dear', and the 'spirit of competition', which had made Owen rich, were now vilified as the moral cause of the excesses of industrialization. The factory system, moreover, bred 'a new character in its inhabitants... formed upon a principle quite unfavourable to individual or general happiness' ('Selected Works', 1.112-13). Machinery should be introduced 'only in aid of, and not in competition with, human labour', in order to reduce the hours of work required to secure a decent living (ibid., 1.154). But technical innovation, as Owen later stressed, was possible 'in every department', so that each community might have 'a full supply of the best machinery' (Owen, 'The Revolution in the Mind and Practice of the Human Race', 1849, 45). (This contradicts David Ricardo's charge that Owen opposed all machinery, which was obviously calculated to bracket him with the Luddites.) 
The experiment at New Lanark was to be the germ from which would spring model industrial townships to combat both the growing immorality fostered by industry as well as the more immediately pressing issues of unemployment and hunger. Moreover, Owen was persuaded increasingly that labour, rather than capital, essentially created wealth. In these communities, therefore, economic justice could also be attained. Moreover, not only the poor, but 'every class in society' who wished to join would soon be able to escape 'intemperance, disease, and suffering' ('Selected Works', 1.219). These 'villages of union' of 500 to 1500 people united by 'mutual and combined interest' would be situated in the countryside, but would have some machinery of their own (shown steaming away in the background in early illustrations). Thus they could be largely self-sufficient. Ideally, he thought, communities should be constructed in the form of a large quadrangle, with public buildings in the centre. Persons of a particular political or religious persuasion might want to associate with others of their kind, and Owen designed a table showing 140 combinations of such views. Each community could start with as little as $60,000, which the government would, he hoped, provide, though if private capital were necessary a 5 per cent return was thought likely. 
The year 1817 was the turning point in the conversion of Owen the philanthropic 'prince of the cotton-spinners' to Owen the socialist. Much of his time was now spent in London attempting, with the assistance of the elder Sir Robert Peel, himself a cotton lord, to get a bill regulating the employment of children approved by a select committee of parliament. This sought to prohibit employment before the age of ten; to reduce hours of labour to ten and a half per day (in 1818, he proposed ten hours); and to require a minimal education to begin work. These regulations he wished to apply to all manufactories. Owen met the committee five times, first embarking on a tour of the factory districts with his eldest son. Conditions were worse than he had feared. As many as a quarter of the children he saw suffered from work-related injuries or deformities, which were well documented by some of the physicians Owen had first met at the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society. His first substantial economic tract, 'Observations on the Cotton Trade and on the Late Duties on the Importation of Cotton Wool' (1803), had argued against new duties on raw cotton imports passed by parliament, holding that these would undermine Britain's advantage over growing foreign competition. But Owen, outraged, now declared, 'perish the cotton trade, perish even the political superiority of our country (if it depend on the cotton trade), rather than they shall be upheld by the sacrifice of everything valuable in life by those who are the means of supporting them' ('Selected Works', 1.105-6). Most of Owen's fellow manufacturers disagreed strenuously with any restriction beyond the twelve hours per day limit for workhouse apprentices established by Peel's 1802 act. When another parliamentary select committee met to consider poor-law reform, it refused to his deep disappointment even to take his evidence. Increasingly frustrated, Owen suspected that the clergy were at the root of opposition to his plan. 
During the summer of 1817 Owen bombarded the newspapers with letters about his proposals, and bought thousands of copies when they printed his appeals, spending some $4000 in two months and on one occasion delaying the departure of the London mail coaches by twenty minutes. His ideas about how to solve the problem of poverty had clearly shifted quite dramatically. In July he discussed 'the principle of united labour and expenditure' as applied to a 'community of mutual and combined interests', which by implication included a community of goods. Still, he claimed that communities might produce only 'to the amount of their own immediate wants; and constituted as they will be, they can have no motives to produce an unnecessary surplus'. In the long run, however, when the 'true interests' of society were clarified, they would be permitted 'gradually to supersede the others' ('Selected Works', 1.160-65). 
Owen's determination to publicize these conclusions to the entire nation reached a peak in two remarkable public meetings in 1817. On 14 August he addressed an audience of many hundreds at the City of London tavern. Prominent members of the clergy and government were present, as well as political economists and many of the leaders of London plebeian radicalism. The radicals attended chiefly to assail what they saw as a paternalistic plot to 'turn the country into a workhouse' or 'pauper barracks' and 'rear up a community of slaves' (in the words of Robert Wedderburn, himself the son of a slave; 'Black Dwarf', 20 Aug 1817, 469). Owen's plans omitted any demand for parliamentary reform and reduced taxation. Rumours abounded that the government was manipulating him in order to deflect working-class attention from political reform, and that Owen himself actually wished, as W. T. Sherwin had suggested in the spring, to deprive the working classes of their political rights. At the 14 August meeting, the radical leader Henry Hunt thus moved to amend Owen's proposals so as to portray excessive taxation as the root of pauperism. The whig political economists present also desired to see Owen defeated, since he was increasingly reputed to oppose both free trade and machinery. (Ricardo was later to state that he was 'completely at war with Mr. Owen'; 'Wooler's British Gazette', 19 Dec 1819, 412.) Their representative, Major Robert Torrens (1780-1864), thus complained at length that Malthus's population doctrines had long since invalidated all but the harshest regimes of poor relief. At the second meeting, on 21 August, Owen insisted against his radical critics that lowering taxes would only add those who lived from public spending to the ranks of the unemployed. Instead, he sought to persuade them that increasing mechanization was a far more fundamental source of distress. Most astonishingly, however, Owen for a few minutes then rounded on all teachers of religion as having made man 'a weak, imbecile animal; a furious bigot and fanatic; or a miserable hypocrite' ('Selected Works', 1.207). His audience, Owen later recalled, was 'thunderstruck' (ibid., vol. 4, 216). A few clergymen hissed. But 'the loudest cheers' then erupted in praise of what 'The Observer' politely described as Owen's condemnation of the 'vices of existing religious establishments' ('The Observer', 24 Aug 1817, 4). None the less this support was insufficient to win over his audience, and Owen's proposals were dismissed as impracticable at the end of the meeting 'by a great majority' present, on a vote introduced by the London radical Robert Waithman. 
In 1817 Owen began to speak the language of the millennium, and to cast himself in the role of a prophet both of a secular apocalypse, 'the crisis', and, in his mind's eye, of the 'new moral world' or 'millennial world' which would succeed it, where laws, commerce, religion, war, and self-interest would disappear. He had already suggested in 1813, but now began loudly to proclaim, closely following Paul's letter to the 'Corinthians', that charity was the core of all religion, and the highest good any individual could attain. Owen's object, thus, was no longer solely 'the relief of the poor', but now, far more importantly, 'the emancipation of mankind'. Unfortunately his reputation in respectable circles was greatly damaged by the events of August 1817. Clerics aimed broadsides at him, and in a new edition of Malthus's 'Essay on Population', first published in 1798, he became a key target, supplanting Godwin and Condorcet. 
Yet Owen still continued to court the famous and influential. Stopping at the post-war congress of the great powers at Aix-la-Chapelle in 1818, he distributed a pamphlet written for the occasion to many European leaders (failing, however, to press one into the hands of the tsar, who had no pocket large enough for the bulky octavo, and dismissed Owen so gruffly that he did not try again). At dinner, he sat next to Metternich's associate Friedrich Gentz, who complained, in response to Owen's remonstrances, that 'we do not want the mass to become wealthy and independent of us. How could we govern them if they were?' ('Selected Works', 4.238). Much of the period 1818-20 he spent in London, chiefly at the house of John Walker at 49 Bedford Square, meeting, among others, his principal patron, the duke of Kent, father of the future Queen Victoria, who chaired meetings in 1819 of a newly formed society to further his plans, but then died suddenly in 1820. 
At the invitation of a group of Lanarkshire notables, Owen in 1820 also composed one of his most important works, the 'Report to the County of Lanark' (1821). Partly in reaction to a great commercial crisis in 1819, this suggested that in order to avoid fluctuations in the money supply as well as the payment of unjust wages, labour notes representing hours of work might become a superior form of exchange medium. Here Owen first proclaimed at length his belief that labour was the foundation of all value, a principle of immense importance to later socialist thought. The 'Report' also offered a novel account of the relationship between money and the expansion and contraction of the market. Previously Owen had argued that mechanization at a time of reduced demand depressed wages in many industries. Now, denying the market's ability to find a natural equilibrium, Owen stressed the under-consumptionist aspects of productive capacity, and the failure to find 'a market, or means of exchange, co-extensive with the means of production'. The use of gold and silver created 'a mere artificial standard' of value which 'retarded the general improvement of society' because it was too dependent on the value and supply of metals. Hence after the gold standard had been reintroduced amid fierce debate in 1819, the resulting deflation and depression had 'plunged the country into poverty, discontent, and danger'. The 'Report' also first explicitly stated Owen's intention of beginning upon 'the principle of united labour, expenditure, and property, and equal privileges' ('Selected Works', 1.289-90, 305). For this reason, in particular, it is sometimes regarded as marking the origins of modern socialism. Owen explicitly condemned the 'principle of individual interest', or the idea: 'that man can provide better for himself, and more advantageously for the public, when left to his own individual exertions, opposed to and in competition with his fellows, than when aided by any social arrangement which shall unite his interests individually and generally with society.' The existing divisions within society, he asserted, were 'the most anti-social, impolitic, and irrational, that can be devised'. Against Adam Smith, Owen particularly insisted that further specialization within production would only harm the working classes. Private interests were 'placed perpetually at variance with the public good; and in every nation men are purposely trained from infancy to suppose that their well-being is incompatible with the progress and prosperity of other nations'. The new system, however, would combine 'extensive mental and manual powers in the individuals of the working classes [and] a complete identity of private and public interest' ('Selected Works', 1.308-9). 
In May 1822 Owen formed the British and Foreign Philanthropic Society to raise funds for a community, but soon discovered that many of its illustrious members (who included MPs, generals, and bankers) had more limited aims in mind. He journeyed to Ireland in 1822-3 to examine conditions there, speaking for three hours in Dublin to a large meeting which included the lord mayor and several nobles. At this time, his emphasis was somewhat more upon the agricultural basis of communities (as elsewhere pastoral imagery occasionally loomed large in Owenism). 
In the second half of the 1820s Owen's energies focused on the prospect of building a community in America. In 1825 he purchased from a Pietist German emigre sect, the Rappites, a ready-built township set on 20,000 acres at New Harmony in southern Indiana. Unfortunately the establishment soon became an enormous drain on his resources. In a short time Owen spent about $40,000, or four-fifths of his New Lanark fortune (his interest in the mills was finally sold in 1828), in a fruitless effort to organize the disparate group of 800 radicals, freethinkers, backwoodsmen, and scientists who had no desire to be 'governed' like mill hands. In early 1825 he addressed the president, senate, and supreme court at the house of representatives in Washington, DC. 
New Harmony was briefly the most vibrant and sophisticated cultural outpost on the American frontier. But centrifugal tendencies tore at the community from the beginning, and by late 1827 the experiment was in the final stages of dissolution, with its half-dozen projected imitators elsewhere following close behind. In 1828 the opportunity arose of securing a very substantial land grant from the Mexican government to settle the Texan frontier with the United States. Owen first paused at Cincinnati for an eight-day public debate about religion to an audience of a thousand. Then he sailed to Vera Cruz via Jamaica, but failed ultimately to secure a grant of land. 
On his return to Britain, Owen found that a consumer co-operative society indebted to his ideas had been started in Edinburgh by an inspired tanner named Abram Combe (1785-1827), who had also begun plans for a community modelled on Owen's ideals, at Orbiston, south of Glasgow. By 1830, moreover, some 300 co-operative societies had sprung up across the country. Owen found his ideas developed by economists like William Thompson (1775-1833) and John Gray (1799-1883). Cast once again into relative obscurity when he began to lecture in London in 1830, Owen found that his secularism was the main appeal to his small audiences. In 1830-32 he continued to oppose radical political reform, as insufficient to meet the economic evils of society. By 1832-3, however, he had emerged as the leader of several 'labour exchanges', notably at Gray's Inn Road, London, and at Birmingham, where artisans could exchange goods directly without the intercession of middlemen. The culmination of his efforts in the early 1830s came with the formation of the first attempt to create a general union of all trades, the Grand National Consolidated Trades Union, which Owen helped to lead in 1833-4, with the chief aim of achieving the eight-hour working day. 
With the collapse of the union, however, ended Owen's always reluctant involvement with large-scale working-class organizations. In 1835, beginning what is usually termed the 'sectarian' phase of the Owenite movement, he formed the Association of All Classes of All Nations, later renamed the Universal Community Society of Rational Religionists, or Rational Society for short. As a propaganda machine the association was remarkably effective: by 1839, the 'Westminster Review' observed, Owen's antipathy to competition was seemingly 'the actual creed of a great portion of the working classes' (see 'New Moral World', 20 April 1839, 404). By 1840 the Rational Society boasted over 60 branches of self-styled 'socialists' concentrated in the manufacturing districts, with perhaps 50,000 flocking to weekly lectures, among them the young German merchant Friedrich Engels, who first was instructed in the tenets of socialist political economy by the Manchester lecturer John Watts. The society's regular paper, the 'New Moral World', ran for nearly eleven years (1834-45), and achieved a circulation of about 40,000 weekly at its peak ('c'.1839-1841). In this period Owen composed his most extensive work, 'The Book of the New Moral World' (7 pts, 1836-44). Intellectual stature was lent to the movement by writers like Charles Bray and John Minter Morgan. The prime minister, Lord Melbourne, even presented Owen to the queen in 1839. 
As 'Rational Social Father' of his new organization, which was intended to bear some resemblance to a dissenting sect despite his earlier dismissal of the idea, Owen retained virtually complete control over its activities until late 1844. Of the considerable sums raised by the branches, much -- at least $22,000 in 1839-40 alone -- went towards constructing local 'halls of science' where members attended lectures and held soirees. In the meantime, however, the Rational Society had acquired land in Hampshire, erected buildings, and in late 1839 commenced a new community called Queenwood on a 533-acre site designed for 700 members. Owen's own vision of its creation as a symbol of his ideas also became steadily more grandiose and impractical. Much of the money collected for the community was spent on constructing, in 1842, an impressively large building with lavish fittings. Especially noteworthy was a model kitchen with a conveyor to carry food and dishes to and from the dining room which, its architect exulted, rivalled the amenities of any London hotel. This would have been a great achievement had Owen been a hotelier. Owen's defence was that the community was intended to be the standard for a superior socialist future where all would enjoy privileges the wealthy monopolized at present, nay even more, for all apartments were eventually to have central heating and cooling, hot and cold water, and artificial light. Its main building thus ought to be superior to any palace. By 1844, after over $40,000 had been spent, Queenwood bankrupted the society. 
Organized Owenism now ground to a halt. The branches broke up, with some emigrating 'en masse' to the United States. Owen himself returned to America several times over the next few years. Although he failed in 1845 to address the senate again, he bombarded the government with addresses. In 1846 he helped (having met many of the principal negotiators in Mexico nearly twenty years earlier) to ease tensions between Britain and the USA over a border dispute in Oregon, crossing the Atlantic four times in fewer than six months in the effort. In 1848 Owen spent four months in revolutionary France to popularize his views, placarding the walls of Paris with broadsheets. The last decade of his life was dominated by his conversion to spiritualism in 1853. He died at the Bear's Head Hotel in Newtown on 17 November 1858, and was buried with his parents, next to, appropriately, the abandoned church of St Mary's, Newtown. 
Robert Owen was survived by three sons: Robert Dale Owen (1801-1877), David Dale Owen (1807-1860), a prominent geologist, and Richard Owen (1810-1890), also a geologist. His other children were William Dale Owen (1802-1842), who became a merchant and bank director; Anne Caroline Owen (1805-1830), who remained in Scotland and never married; Jane Dale Owen (1805-1890), who married a civil engineer, Robert Fauntleroy, and settled at New Harmony; and Mary Owen (1810-1832). 
Physically, Owen was of athletic build, of middling height, with brown hair, later white and, in the later 1850s, accompanied by a full white beard (a specimen cutting of which is preserved in the Goldsmiths' Library, University of London). His boyish looks were preserved long in life. A benevolent demeanour, with kindly eyes and compelling smile, were often recorded by contemporaries. 
Though he was recognized as one of the greatest philanthropists of his day, Robert Owen was marginalized after the decline of Queenwood. Communitarian socialism was disregarded during the prosperous years from 1850 to 1875, and, overshadowed by the revolutionary Marxian socialism of the 1880s and later, never again became a serious alternative socialist vision. None the less Owen's reputation revived considerably between 1880 and 1900. Leading Marxists like William Morris and H. M. Hyndman (who referred to Owen in many of his works) acknowledged his seminal role in founding British socialism (for example, Hyndman, 'The Evolution of Revolution', 1920, 270), and praised him as the 'noble and unselfish' producer of 'some of the most luminous thoughts on political economy ever met on paper' (Hyndman, 'The Historical Basis of Socialism in England', 1883, 198, 85) and the originator of labour laws. This influence was also acknowledged by ideological enemies like W. H. Mallock (for example, 'The Limits of Pure Democracy', 1918, 207-10). Practically, Owen's impact was most substantial upon the theory of the growing co-operative movement. Following J. S. Mill's conversion to co-operation in the 'Principles of Political Economy' (3rd edn, 1852), many Liberals acknowledged Owen's role in their foundation; Henry Fawcett, for instance, both doubted that the failure of Queenwood had greatly undermined the popularity of Owen's principles, and noted that many subsequent co-operatives had been managed by former Owenites (Fawcett, 'Essays and Lectures on Political and Social Subjects', 1872, 11-12). Despite their distaste for his secularism, Christian socialists also took up some of his views of the poor. 
Owen's biographers all underestimated the importance and vitality of the Owenite movement of 1836-45, which was first examined at length in J. F. C. Harrison's 'Robert Owen and the Owenites' (1969). The claim is occasionally still heard that Owen was principally a 'scientific manager', but this view requires treating Owen's experiments at the New Lanark mills (now largely reconstructed) in isolation from his later life. More persuasively, it was argued already in Owen's lifetime (first by William Hazlitt, in 'Political Essays', 1816, 97-104) that Owen was a man of 'one idea', New Lanark, and his role in it. But the idea that character was formed by the environment and not the will -- perhaps the core assumption of the Enlightenment -- was in fact a fundamental one for modern thought, and was developed by Owen in many ways, though contemporaries found its endless repetition tedious. Owen's complete works comprise at least 160 titles, many of which are brief addresses. He also edited and contributed to many periodicals (a relatively complete bibliography is given in J. F. C. Harrison's 'Robert Owen' (1969)). 


@@@@@


doc= 21028


Owen, Robert Dale (1801-1877), social reformer and emancipationist, was born at Glasgow on 7 November 1801, eldest son of Robert Owen (1771-1858), entrepreneur and social reformer, and his wife, Ann Caroline (1779-1831), daughter of David Dale, a successful Glasgow merchant and philanthropist who in 1785 built the cotton-spinning community of New Lanark. It was acquired by an English partnership and managed from 1800 by Owen's father, who subsequently used it to test his social and economic ideas. Although Owen became a prominent American citizen and spent most of his life there he also followed in his father's footsteps, making an important contribution to social and educational reform in both Britain and the United States. His earliest memories were of his grandfather's funeral (1806) and being led round New Lanark mills by his father, who explained to him the importance of order, thrift, and sobriety among the workers. Like the rest of the family he was initially educated privately, being taught French by an officer prisoner of war billeted in nearby Lanark. In his early teens he had a serious illness, but after recovery accompanied his father on a tour of factories gathering evidence for a parliamentary select committee on the employment of children (1816). 
Owen's father was by that time rich and successful, able to afford the lifestyle of a Scottish laird and pursue an expensive propaganda campaign designed to advance the ideas he had articulated in 'A New View of Society' (1813-16). Owen was seen by his father as his successor in his plans to reform society, and was educated accordingly. In 1818, having learned German, Owen and his brother William went to Switzerland to a school at Hofwyl, near Bern, run by Phillip Emanuel von Fellenberg. Fellenberg's educational theories had been partly influenced by Pestalozzi, whose ideas were becoming known in Britain. Indeed Owen's father modified them for use in the school at New Lanark. The curriculum in Fellenberg's school aimed to inculcate philanthropic and humanitarian values in its elite students and at the same time expose them to the agricultural labour those attending a parallel school for the poor were expected to undertake. As with Pestalozzi, environmental and social awareness figured prominently in the curriculum. Owen and his brother responded positively, looked upon Fellenberg as a father figure, and corresponded with him for years after. 
On his return to Scotland in 1821 Owen found his father prospering in business, but as a radical reformer having lost much ground. Owen then became a teacher in the schools and institute at New Lanark, publishing in 1824 a detailed account of the facilities and curricula, emphasizing the work of the pioneering infant school (called the 'baby school' by American visitors) and the teaching of subjects such as history, geography, environmental studies, music, and dancing. While his father was in the United States during 1824-5, Owen deputized as manager of the mills. During 1825 he went to the Netherlands, where he pursued his interest in social reform by visiting Frederiksoord, Veenhuizen, and other agricultural communities for the poor resembling those proposed by his father in 1817. 
In 1825 Owen left for New Harmony, Indiana, a village his father had purchased after temporarily abandoning his community experiments in Britain. Owen accompanied his father on a propaganda tour of the eastern United States before sailing down the Ohio from Pittsburgh to Mount Vernon on a keel-boat nicknamed the Boatload of Knowledge. Its passengers included the scientists William Maclure, Thomas Say, and Charles Alexandre Lesueur, the teachers Marie Fretageot and William Phiquepal d'Arusmont, and other notables going to join the community in Indiana. Owen's diary records his experiences on the journey, noting (in German) an increasing scepticism about his father's views. On arriving at New Harmony he became one of the elite group which drew up a series of constitutions, rules, and regulations for the community, but within a short time it was in disarray. While the equality his father wanted was gradually abandoned Owen, physically unfit for the manual work for which he had volunteered, threw himself into teaching, and from September 1826 edited the 'New Harmony Gazette'. The periodical soon reflected his thought on social reform issues. 
When the community collapsed Owen had to decide what to do next. Rejecting his father as mentor, he went his own way. He became a trustee of Nashoba, a farming community Frances Wright, the reformer, had started near Memphis, Tennessee, to educate and emancipate slaves. He joined her in May 1827, but when she became ill accompanied her in June that year to Europe. After visiting France he returned to Scotland, hoping to marry his childhood sweetheart, a spinner at New Lanark, but later claimed that his mother prevented him doing so. During this visit he renewed his acquaintance with Jeremy Bentham, one of his father's partners, and met William Godwin, who had greatly influenced his father's thinking, Henry Leigh Hunt, and Godwin's daughter, Mary Shelley, whom he found attractive physically and intellectually. 
Back in the United States, Owen continued his editing at New Harmony and co-operated with Frances Wright and others promoting liberal views on religion, divorce law, popular education, and greater equality of wealth. He moved to New York in June 1829, where for several years, periodically assisted by Wright, he edited the 'Free Enquirer', successor to the 'New Harmony Gazette'. In New York he became one of the leaders of the movement for public education, which achieved some success during 1829-30. The 'Free Enquirer' campaigned vigorously on behalf of the Working Men's Party, which was active on educational issues. Any thought that he might marry Frances Wright was dashed when in 1831 she revealed a liaison with Phiquepal d'Arusmont. Owen then married Mary Jane Robinson, daughter of a supporter of the Working Men's Party, on 12 April 1832. Accompanied by his bride Owen returned to Britain to assist his father in his propaganda, and from November helped edit 'Crisis', the organ of Owenism. The movement rejected political action in favour of social reform. Owen felt this was out of step with the mood of the times and, becoming even more disillusioned with his father's approach, returned to New Harmony in April 1833 after only six months as joint editor. His younger brothers, David and Richard, had also emigrated to the United States and became successful geologists. 
Owen played an active part in maintaining and developing New Harmony's reputation as a centre of educational and social reform. He pursued these aims as a democratic member of the Indiana legislature (1836-8) and as a member of the United States Congress (1843-7). In 1844 he helped solve the Oregon boundary dispute with Britain and in 1845 saw through the bill that set up the Smithsonian Institution. He subsequently had a distinguished role in its design and development as a centre of research and education. His diplomatic career began in 1853 when President Franklin Pierce appointed him charge d'affaires in Naples, making him minister in 1855. Possibly this was to remove him, for Pierce, a prominent pro-slaver, must have been aware that Owen was an emancipationist. While in Italy, Owen came to Britain on several occasions to visit his then ailing father. He was present at his death and funeral at Newtown, Montgomeryshire, in 1858. 
On his return to the United States, Owen became an active emancipationist, publishing a pamphlet, 'The Policy of Emancipation' (1863), which greatly influenced Lincoln, and a more detailed study, 'The Wrong of Slavery' (1864). However, his views did not extend to immediate suffrage as he thought former slaves should not be given the vote until a decade had elapsed. He held liberal views on divorce law, on which he published pamphlets, he wrote about birth control (to which his father often alluded, though never directly), and from his stay in Italy was interested in spiritualism (to which his father had also been attracted). He published a series of autobiographical essays covering his early life in a book, 'Threading my Way' (1874). His first wife died in 1871 and he married secondly Lottie Walton Kellogg on 23 June 1876. Following a period of mental derangement Owen died at his summer home on Lake George, New York, on 24 June 1877. Although Owen's major contributions to social reform (overshadowed to some degree by his notoriety as an exponent of liberal divorce laws and birth control) occurred in the United States, his description of the schools at New Lanark earned him a reputation as an educational pioneer in Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 21029


Sir Roger Owen (1572/3-1617), landowner and lawyer, was seventeen at the time of his matriculation at Christ Church on 30 October 1590. He was educated at Shrewsbury School from 1583, entered Lincoln's Inn in 1589, and graduated BA from Christ Church on 5 February 1592. He was called to the bar in 1597. Owen's local consequence was reflected in his appointment to the quorum of the peace from 1601 to 1614. He was returned as MP for Shrewsbury in 1601, 1605, 1610, and 1614, was a member of the council in the marches of Wales from 1602 to 1607, was sheriff of Shropshire from 1603 to 1604, and was knighted on 30 May 1604. He was a notable parliamentarian, who spoke against the 'Pluralities Bill' on 16 November 1601 and opposed James VI and I's efforts to levy impositions by his own will, being one of the MPs deputed on 21 May 1610 to confer with the House of Lords on the issue. This led to his loss of royal favour, and he was removed from the commission of the peace when the 1614 parliament was prorogued. Owen continued his association with Lincoln's Inn, becoming a bencher in 1611, treasurer in 1612 (to 1613), and barrister in 1613. He married Ursula ('bap'. 1587), only child of William Elkin, of London, and his wife, Alice (Owen's stepmother). They had two daughters. Owen died intestate in London on 29 May 1617 and was buried at Condover on 5 June, being succeeded by his brother Sir William Owen. 


@@@@@


doc= 21030


Owen, Samuel (1768/9-1857), marine painter, exhibited eight watercolours at the Royal Academy between 1794 and 1807, including 'A View of the British and Spanish Fleets' (1797) and three drawings of the engagement between the 'Director' and the 'Vryheid' in the action off Camperdown (South Africa) on 11 October 1797 (1799). In 1808 he joined the Associated Artists in Water-Colours and sent eleven drawings of shipping and marine subjects to its first exhibition, exhibiting twenty-nine pictures in all before he resigned his membership in 1810. Painting more as a landscape artist, concerned with atmosphere and composition, he had a more Romantic approach than the eighteenth-century marine artists, with their faithful attention to detail. He supplied a series of eighty-four drawings which were engraved by William Bernard Cooke for his work 'The Thames' (1811), and seven others for the 'Picturesque Tour on the River Thames', published by Owen himself and William Westall in 1828. 
Owen gave up painting many years before his death. He died on 8 December 1857 at Sunbury, Middlesex. Eleven of his paintings are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, including 'Shipping in a Calm with Fishermen on the Beach' (1800), and two coastal scenes in sepia are in the museum's department of prints and drawings. Many prints of his works are in the collections of the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich. 


@@@@@


doc= 21031


Owen, Thankful (1620-1681), Independent divine, was born in the City of London, the son of Philip Owen of Taplow, Buckinghamshire, gentleman, a member of the common council of the City of London, and Joane Smith. Owen attended St Paul's School, which granted him an exhibition to Oxford University. He matriculated from Exeter College on 1 June 1636, aged sixteen, and it was perhaps about this time that 'he was remarkably preserved in his youth as he was swimming near Oxford, after he had twice sunk under water' (Calamy, 1.181). He graduated BA on 16 January 1640 and was elected a fellow of Lincoln College in 1642. According to Wood, he then 'left the university, and so consequently did not bear arms for his majesty, as other scholars did, within the garrison of Oxford' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 2.90). At the end of the civil war, on 1 July 1646, he proceeded MA. At a meeting of the court of assistants of St Paul's School on 5 November, Owen was 'restored to his Exhibition of $10 per annum from Midsummer last and 20 nobles ($6/13/4d) was granted to him towards the incouragement in his studies and his taking his degree' (McDonnell). 
In 1647 Owen co-operated with the parliamentary commission set up to reform and regulate the university and on 30 September was appointed one of the Lincoln College delegates to the visitors. On 11 May 1648 he formally submitted to the authority of parliament vested in them and eight days later was appointed by the proctors one of the twenty delegates to be answerable for the affairs of the university. On 5 July Owen became one of the examiners of candidates for fellowships and scholarships. On 13 March 1649, in an irregular appointment, for it was not the turn of his college, he was named senior proctor for the university: 'Queen's seems to have had no one who could be trusted' and Owen was 'more in the confidence of the Visitors than even Cheynell' (Burrows, 287). The moderate presbyterian Francis Cheynell was coming to the end of his reign at St John's. Following his resignation, on 6 September 1650, Thankful Owen, a 'pious man, of an unblameable conversation, and in regard of his good parts, learning and public spirit' (Costin, 111), was appointed president of St John's College by the committee for the reformation of the universities. The senior fellows of the college consented to the new appointment, but did not let Owen get all his own way. The following year the attempts of the college to fill only one vacancy were rejected by the fellows who elected three new members; in the conflict over this, Owen found it prudent to retreat. But, also in 1651, he was added to the list of preachers before the university, a move which reflected the shift towards the Independents. 
On 3 August 1652 at St Andrew's, Plymouth, Owen married Loveday, daughter of Sir Francis Vivian of Trelowarren, Cornwall, but otherwise he remained in Oxford. On 15 June 1652 a new parliamentary committee was appointed, of which Owen was a member. Its first known meeting was on 20 June 1653, and Owen was a regular attender. He was one of the commission of triers or approvers under the ordinance of 20 March 1654. There is no doubt of Owen's puritan outlook or his religious independency, and many ministers sent their sons to St John's during the protectorate. Yet the pace of reform there was slow and there were complaints that the president assigned college property on favourable leases to friends and relations. In the university Owen became a member of the third interregnum body of visitors, appointed by Cromwell on 2 September 1654, and attended its meetings until 1657. On 24 September 1659, with John Owen (1616-1683), he was ordered to preach at Whitehall during October and November or to provide another 'person of eminent Godliness and gifts for the work', and was ordered to be paid $20 for his pains ('CSP dom.', '1659-60', 221). 
Owen signed the college register for the last time on 19 July 1660, before his ejection by the commissioners. Not long after he was discovered by the militia at Stadhampton, the estate of his namesake, the extruded vice-chancellor and dean of Christ Church. He then moved to London, and before October 1665 was living in Tree Alley, Bunhill. On 22 July 1677 he married his second wife, Ann Vivian, at St Edmund's, Salisbury, Wiltshire. He published 'A true and lively representation of popery, showing that popery is only new modell'd paganism and perfectly destructive of the great ends and purposes of God in the gospel' (1679), but gained greater fame as the joint editor, with John Barron, of the works of Thomas Goodwin. Following the death of Goodwin in February 1680, Owen was chosen to succeed him as pastor of the Independent congregation in Fetter Lane, London, but he died suddenly, on Good Friday, 1 April 1681, at his house in Hatton Garden. He was buried near Goodwin in Bunhill Fields. In his will Owen left freehold property at Llangofen in Monmouthshire, the county of his father's father, 'granted me by the bishop, archdeacon and chapter of Llandaff' (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/368, fol. 21'v'). He was reportedly a man 'of genteel learning and an excellent temper; admired for an uncommon fluency and easiness in his composures and for the peculiar purity of his Latin style' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.181). 


@@@@@


doc= 21032


Owen, Thomas (d. 1598), judge, was born at Condover, Shropshire, the eldest son of Richard Owen, a merchant and alderman of Shrewsbury, and his wife, Mary (died 1562), daughter of Thomas Ottley of Shrewsbury. He graduated BA from the University of Oxford on 17 April 1559, as a member of either Broadgates Hall or Christ Church. He was admitted in 1562 to Lincoln's Inn, where he was called to the bar in 1570 and made a bencher in 1579. 
By 1572 Owen married Sarah (died in or before 1594), daughter of Humphrey Baskerville. The couple had five sons, including Sir Roger Owen ['see below'], and five daughters. Owen was JP for Shropshire from about 1583 and for most other counties from about 1595. He was Lent reader in 1583, and served Lincoln's Inn as treasurer between 1588 and 1589. In 1589 he was created serjeant-at-law, and he was made queen's serjeant on 25 January 1593. On 21 January 1594 he was made a judge of the court of common pleas. He was rumoured to be a candidate for the vacant mastership of the court of wards in 1598, but died before any steps could be taken to fill the position. Owen married for a second time in 1594 or 1595, becoming third husband to Alice, 'nee' Wilkes (1547-1613) ['see 'Owen, Alice], the third child of Thomas Wilkes of London and widow of William Elkin (1523-1593) of London. They had no children. Owen was a man of wide culture, his library at his death containing books in French, Italian, and Spanish as well as the more technical works of common law. Owen was without doubt a capable technical lawyer, but he was above all a man of very sound and reliable judgement, 'a noted counsellor, and much resorted to for advice' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.673). From a relatively early stage of his career he was frequently called upon by the privy council to carry out a variety of commissions, and he was employed by William Cecil, Baron Burghley, in the attempts to arrange a marriage between his granddaughter and William Somerset, Baron Herbert. He attempted, perhaps for a time successfully, to defuse a serious contretemps between the courts of king's bench and common pleas; and as recorder of Shrewsbury (1588-92) he permitted the continued observance of popular customs opposed by the more puritanical faction in the town. 
Owen maintained strong connections with Shrewsbury throughout his life, serving the borough in various ways and representing it in 1584 in parliament, where he was active on a range of committees, including those concerning common informers (9 December 1584) and delays of executions (5 March 1585). He purchased land in the vicinity, and was responsible for the building of Condover Hall, described as the finest Elizabethan stone manor house in Shropshire. Although his professional life required him to live in London, it was Condover that he regarded as his main residence at the end of his life. He was a member of the queen's council in the marches of Wales from 1590, though he does not appear to have taken an especially active part in its business. Owen made his will on 9 December 1598, leaving the bulk of his property to his heir, but with substantial provision for his other children. He also made bequests to the poor of Shrewsbury, Condover, and Westminster, while his wife got much of his household goods. He died on 21 December 1598 and, despite his direction that his funeral be simple, was buried in Westminster Abbey. His widow later founded a school in Islington, Middlesex, and was a notably charitable benefactress. 
Owen's son 


@@@@@


doc= 21033


Owen, Thomas (c.1556-1618), Jesuit, was born in Winchester 'of an ancient Catholic family', according to contemporaries (Foley, 7.562). He studied at Winchester and Douai, then read civil and canon law, 1575-8, at Paris. He entered the Society of Jesus at Lyons in 1579. He taught humanities and philosophy at Avignon, 1584-6, and at Tournai, 1586-95, where, despite frail health, he was appointed dean of the language curriculum and professor of logic. He read theology at the Collegio Bradensi, Milan, in 1596-7 prior to taking up his post at the English College in Rome. From 1597 he served at the college as confessor, consultor, and minister under the rectorship of Robert Persons, who urged that he be named his successor. Owen was duly appointed rector on 23 April 1610. 
Within two years of his appointment Owen published three English versions of works by two leading French controversialists. Two were by a Jesuit friend, Pierre Coton: 'A Letter of a Catholike Man... [on] the Imputation of the Death of Henry IIII' in 1610, then in 1611 'The Copie of a Letter... an Answere to... the Anti-Coton', an abridged version of his reply. His last effort was Cardinal Du Perron's initial confrontation with James I. In 1612 appeared his 'Letter Written from Paris... to Monsr. Casaubon in England'. 
In 1598 Claudio Acquaviva established an administrative structure for the English Jesuits that was unique in the society; this was based upon the document 'The office and rules of a prefect'. His actions were unpopular with provincials in Spain and the Spanish Netherlands because the document created a type of ecclesiastical peculiar outside their jurisdiction yet within their geographical provinces. Their protests were rejected by Acquaviva and Owen was named prefect on 27 January 1612. However, at the general congregation convened on Acquaviva's death in 1615 they secured a decree which reduced Owen's powers as specified in 'The office and rules'. For three years Owen challenged the legality of the change, citing the authority of Clement VIII and of the previous general, who had established the unique status of the mission and its separate houses to prepare properly a clergy for the unusual problems in England. After Owen's death at the English College, Rome, on 6 December 1618 his views were vindicated since the mission was preserved in a new rank of a vice-province. At his burial in the vault of the church of the English College, Pope Paul V paid tribute to him as a 'man of distinguished prudence and a solid religious' (Foley, 6.224, 531). 


@@@@@


doc= 21034


Owen, Thomas (1749-1812), Church of England clergyman and translator, was born in Anglesey, the son of Thomas Owen. He matriculated from Jesus College, Oxford, on 20 March 1767, graduating BA in 1770, and proceeding MA from Queen's College in 1773. In 1779 he was presented to the living of Upton Scudamore, Wiltshire. Owen's translations included 'The Three Books of M. Terentius Varro Concerning Agriculture' (1800), ''Geoponika', Agricultural Pursuits' (2 vols., 1805-6), and a translation of 'The Fourteen Books of Palladius on Agriculture' (1807). Owen died in Anglesey in May 1812. 


@@@@@


doc= 21035


Owen, Thomas Ellis (1764-1814), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, born at Conwy on 5 December 1764, was the son of William Owen, draper, and his wife, Elizabeth Ellis of Mochdre, daughter of John Ellis, a lawyer. He was admitted to Westminster School in 1780, and matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 26 May 1785. The bishop of Oxford ordained him deacon on 7 June 1789, the year of his graduation, and priest on 8 March 1790. On 25 November 1790, while yet a student at Christ Church, he was instituted to the vicarage of South Stoke, Oxfordshire. Four years later, on 10 December 1794, he returned to Wales when he was instituted rector of Llandyfrydog in Anglesey, on the presentation of the bishop of Bangor. From the end of 1812 he was also perpetual curate of Penmynydd, Anglesey. He resided at Beaumaris. 
Owen is best known as the author of two anti-Methodist pamphlets, 'Hints to Heads of Families' (1801) and 'Methodism Unmasked' (1802). Owen was one of a number of clerics in north Wales to defend the Anglican establishment by attacking the Methodists. In his 'Hints' (which ran into a third edition after one year of publication) he denounced the Methodists as sectaries, the blind instruments or wilful tools of anarchists or atheists, who were conspiring to achieve a revolution similar to the French, which had 'deluged the Continent with blood' (Owen, 23). In the course of his diatribe he accused the Welsh Methodist preachers who accompanied the Welsh militia to Ireland of fomenting disloyalty among the troops. This statement aroused the anger of the Methodist leaders in north Wales, who considered taking a libel action against him. Thomas Charles and Thomas Jones, the leading Welsh Methodists, answered the charge of disloyalty levelled by Owen and others in 'The Welsh Methodists Vindicated' (1802). 
Owen's last published work (1809) was an obituary on the death of William Pitt, 'The Tears of Britannia', addressed to the Menai Pitt Club, which published it. His own obituarist in the 'North Wales Gazette' (8 December 1814) wrote that he was a 'man eminently endowed with talents both natural and acquired, and his abilities were strenuously and successfully exerted, in defence of the Established Religion of his country'. He died at The Green, Beaumaris, on 1 December 1814, and was buried at Llanfair-is-gaer, in Caernarvonshire, where there is a tablet in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 21036


Owen, William (c.1488-1574), lawyer, was the son of Rhys ab Owen (died 'c'.1544), a freeholder, of Henllys, Nevern, near Newport, Pembrokeshire, and Jane, daughter of Phillip Elliot of Earwere, near Amroth, and his wife, Janet, daughter of Sir Thomas Perrot of Eastington; his mother had previously been married to Philip ap Gwilym of Stone Hall in the Pembrokeshire parish of St Lawrence. On 28 November 1514 he was admitted at the Middle Temple where he had such travail in copying Sir Anthony Fitzherbert's abridgement of the laws, 'La graunde abridgement', that when he produced his own abridgement of statutes he did this 'in soe small a volume as the price thereof was but 12d.' (Owen, 'Description', ed. Owen, 238) under the title 'Le breggement de touz les estatutz... par Guillame Owein de Medill' Temple'. This was printed by Richard Pynson in London in 1521, and a second edition followed in 1528. His son, George Owen, claimed that he 'also wrote other works'; one of these was an unsigned edition of the 'Natura brevium'. 
William Owen was settled at Pembroke by 1521 and, in 1527, he was mayor of that town. In 1521 he married Margaret Swyllyngton of St Clement Danes. He was afterwards clerk of the court of Pembroke, and was controller of the ports of Pembroke, Haverfordwest, and Tenby. He shared in the duties of steward and receiver of the county of Pembroke with Sir Rhys ap Gruffydd until the latter was executed for treason. He was a member of the commission for the division of Wales into shire ground under the 'Act of Union', 1536, and held the office of escheator for the county of Pembroke from 1545 to 1560. In 1535 he acquired the estate of Maesgwenith in the county of Monmouth, conveniently situated between Pembrokeshire and London and Bristol, for the pursuit of his legal activities. Owen still had chambers in the Middle Temple in 1521, and was described as of the Temple in 1540 and in 1552, when Middle Temple sued him for dues. 
Owen had no children with his first wife. However, he had already had nine natural children, five by his mistress, Jane Lee, and four by other mistresses, by the time he was married again, to Elizabeth ('c'.1520-1603) in 1551. She was the daughter of Sir George Herbert of Swansea and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Thomas Berkeley, and niece of the earl of Pembroke; they had a son, George, and a daughter, Katherine. 
While he was in London Owen met John Touchet, Lord Audley, who had been restored to the barony of Cemais, in north Pembrokeshire, that had become forfeit to the crown on the attainder and execution of his father; and Audley appointed him clerk of the courts of Cemais. Being impoverished following the sequestration of his father's property, Audley obtained a loan of $600 from Owen in November 1523 for which he made him 'a bargain and sale of the barony... with a condition of redemption upon payment of $300' (Owen, 'Description', ed. Owen, viii, n. 1). Twenty years later, he conveyed the barony to Owen and commanded his tenantry to 'obbey the said William Owen as theire very lord and right owner of the barony.' On 4 October 1571 Owen settled the barony, with the castle of Newport and the advowson of six churches on his son, George. 
Although George Owen claimed that his father 'was accounted to have lyved 105 yeares', he could not have been more than eighty-six years when he died at his home, Henllys on 29 March 1574, and was buried the next day at St Brynach's Church, Nevern. A number of bards sang elegies at his passing. 


@@@@@


doc= 21037


Wiliam Llyn (1534/5-1580), Welsh-language poet, may have hailed from Llyn in Caernarvonshire: the name adopted by Wiliam, and by his brother and fellow poet Huw Llyn, and references by contemporary poets, support this supposition. In spite of several conjectures -- one links Wiliam with the Griffith family of Cefnamwlch -- the exact nature of his connection with Llyn remains a mystery. What is known is that by 1569 he had married and settled in Oswestry (his son, Richard, was baptized there that year), and a lease of 1574 shows that he was residing in Willow Street in a house that he later bequeathed to his wife, Elizabeth, and which she subsequently leased (1587) to Llyn's bardic pupil and elegist, Rhys Cain. 
The earliest poem by Wiliam that can be accurately dated is a series of 'englynion' to Gruffudd Dwnn of Ystradmerthyr, Carmarthenshire, composed in 1557. Thomas Wiliems claims that Dwnn, who was renowned for his patronage and learning, instructed both Wiliam and his brother Huw in the poetic art (Cardiff Central Library, Cardiff MS 4.330, 223). Wiliam himself acknowledges his debt to the poet Sion Brwynog of Llanfflewin, Anglesey, who died in 1562 (Stephens, poem 101), but his most important bardic teacher, and the figure with whom he is invariably associated, was Gruffudd Hiraethog. Of Gruffudd's numerous pupils it was Llyn who gained pre-eminence ['see also 'Cywyddwyr (act. c.1330-c.1650)]. According to the master, 'Nid oes dim yn anwybodus i Wiliam Llyn' ('There is nothing that Wiliam Llyn does not know'; Bowen, 242). After his death in 1564 many of Gruffudd's books found their way to Wiliam's home in Willow Street. Wiliam followed in his mentor's footsteps, and, having previously graduated as 'disgybl disgyblaidd' ('amenable apprentice'), won recognition as 'pencerdd' ('chief of song'), and possibly as bardic teacher, at the Caerwys eisteddfod of 1567. Wiliam's poignant elegy to Gruffudd is regarded as his most outstanding composition. 
Gruffudd's books contained genealogical and heraldic material. Wiliam annotated and augmented these; he likewise compiled genealogical and heraldic books which now form part of the Peniarth collection at the National Library of Wales, Aberystwyth, as well as historical, grammatical, and astronomical texts, which have not survived. His vocabulary (Cardiff Central Library, Cardiff MS 3.12) was patterned on Gruffudd's, and he exemplified individual words with quotes from his own poems and those of contemporary and earlier poets. Wiliam in turn bequeathed 'all the bookes and rolls that I have' to his pupil Rhys Cain (Morrice, xx-xxi), who paid tribute to his instructor in a moving elegy, as did another pupil, Sion Phylip. 
Between 1557 and 1580 Wiliam composed about 175 'cywyddau' and 'awdlau', half of which are safeguarded in two manuscript collections in his own handwriting (Cardiff Central Library, Cardiff MSS 2.103, 5.167). In many cases the year of composition is conveniently recorded. The note 'Wm llyn ai k ar diwaytha y kafodd dal am dano 1580' ('Composed by Wiliam Llyn; the last for which he received payment 1580') follows the 'cywydd' to Edward Llwyd of Plas Is-y-clawdd, Chirk. These pieces are mostly eulogies and elegies to members of the gentry, and occasionally to church dignitaries such as Richard Davies, bishop of St David's, and to lesser lights, such as Owain ap Gwilym, curate of Tal-y-llyn in Merioneth. In keeping with the poet's social role in late medieval Wales, Wiliam composed verse soliciting gifts on behalf of his patrons; he also had cause to thank two of his patrons for gifts -- a peacock and a bow -- that he received. 
Wiliam seems to have been reluctant to travel far from Oswestry in his search for patronage. The greatest number of his poems by far were addressed to families in the counties of Flint and Denbigh, Merioneth and Montgomery, and visits to Caernarvonshire and Anglesey in the north, and to south Wales, were noticeably less frequent. On one occasion he was induced to seek reconciliation with one Wiliam Gruffudd of Caernarfon. Reading between the lines, it appears that Wiliam had failed to keep an engagement, and, significantly, his two other conciliatory poems sought to appease patrons who lived across the Menai Strait in Anglesey. It is not inconceivable that their evident displeasure could have been the result of a broken promise by the poet. 
Welsh poets in the second half of the sixteenth century used the 'englyn' form to a far greater degree than their predecessors, and Wiliam Llyn was no exception. About 100 of his 'englynion' have been recorded. Those describing the hospitality he received in individual homesteads naturally belong to the same genre as his more formal praise poetry. Others convey his dealings with fellow poets such as Morys Dwyfech, Raff ap Robert, and Simwnt Fychan. Many can be loosely described as love and religious verses, two themes that are given no prominence in the 'cywyddau' and 'awdlau'. Wiliam is credited with only one religious 'cywydd', which is somewhat reminiscent of Sion Cent, and one love poem (Gruffudd Hiraethog again comes to mind), an 'awdl', which effectively demonstrates his technical dexterity even if its content lacks passion. 
Wiliam Llyn's importance as an elegist has long been recognized. J. C. Morrice claimed that he was 'the best elegist not only of the sixteenth century but, perhaps, of all Welsh bards' (Morrice, xxxix). The acute expression given to the poet's personal lamentation at the loss of a patron and acquaintance and to the grief felt by family and society alike is in keeping with this particular genre. In Wiliam's elegies, stark and candid comments of the inevitability of death and man's helplessness in view of his impending fate recur with unnerving consistency, all conveyed in a dignified yet sparing and proverbial style that complements the 'cywydd''s compact couplets. The two most remarkable elegies were composed to Gruffudd Hiraethog and to fellow poet, Owain ap Gwilym, the latter recorded in over ninety manuscript sources. Both feature a dialogue between the dead and the living, a device employed by Rhys Cain when he had cause to mourn Wiliam Llyn's death, and copied by several poets during the course of the following century, especially in connection with the death of a member of the bardic fraternity. Saunders Lewis and other critics have argued that Wiliam's elegies are an expression of Renaissance stoicism. 
Nine poems by Wiliam (including the two elegies mentioned) were included in 'Gorchestion beirdd Cymru' (1773) and about 100 in 'Cynfeirdd Lleyn' (1905). The most comprehensive collection of his works, Morrice's 'Barddoniaeth Wiliam Llyn' (1908), unfortunately contains verse that cannot now be safely attributed to the poet. 
The registers of Oswestry parish church record the death and burial there of 'Will'm Llyn Bardus' on the last day of August 1580. According to Rhys Cain, Wiliam Llyn died before reaching the age of forty-six. 


