@@@@@


doc= 21038


Owen, William (1769-1825), painter, was born at 13 Broad Street, Ludlow, Shropshire, and baptized in Ludlow parish church on 3 November 1769, the eldest of the six children of Jeremiah Owen, hairdresser and bookseller, and his wife, Mary (died 1785). His father had trained for the church but failed to obtain a living and so returned to Ludlow to assist his father, William Owen (died 1783), who had a barber's shop at 13 Broad Street. By 1779 Jeremiah Owen had enlarged the shop to include a bookselling and stationery business, but in 1800 he went bankrupt. Owen was educated at Ludlow grammar school. His uncle was butler to Richard Payne Knight and it was through his recommendation that Owen moved to London in 1786 and was apprenticed for seven years to the coach-painter Charles Catton RA (1728-1798). Owen, however, wished to develop further and was encouraged by Sir Joshua Reynolds after he saw Owen's copy of his own painting, 'Perdita' (Bryan, 'Painters'). On 14 October 1791 he entered the Royal Academy Schools. His first work was exhibited at the Royal Academy in the following year and he continued to exhibit every year, with the exception of 1823, until his death. His portrait of the dowager Lady Clive (exh. RA, 1793; priv. coll.) and other members of her family, together with Ludlow landscapes by Owen in her possession, indicate that she was an early patron of Owen's work. 
Owen married the daughter of a London shoemaker who lived in the Haymarket. According to Farington (17 December 1803) the shoemaker was supposedly wealthy, but at his death was found to be insolvent, which resulted in Owen being declared bankrupt and carried to gaol in Dover. Farington (12 November 1803) also reported that Owen's supposed neglect of his wife was one of the reasons he was not elected a member of the Royal Academy earlier. However, he was elected ARA in 1804 and RA in 1806. Owen and his wife had one son, the Revd William Owen. 
Owen's work comprised mainly portraits. His output was prodigious and he had a distinguished list of sitters including William Pitt, Lord Grenville, William Howley, Sir John Soane, and John Wilson Croker. Although his portraits were admired as truthful representations, contemporaries felt he 'did not succeed in displaying the graces of the female form' ('GM', 571), and that they lacked the fluency and sparkle of contemporaries such as Sir Thomas Lawrence. He painted and exhibited many rustic scenes and fancy subjects such as 'Boy and Kitten' (1807; RA) and 'Horatia Nelson Kneeling before her Father's Tomb' (NMM). Many of these became popular engravings. His work shows a strong sense of composition but his anatomical knowledge of the human figure and his drawing are sometimes weak. Owen was made portrait painter to the prince of Wales in 1810 and was commissioned to paint 'Sir David Dundas' (1812; Royal Collection), which was well received. The prince of Wales promised to sit for Owen but never did, and he was left to copy John Hoppner's portrait of the prince. 
Owen was a dark-haired, full-lipped, handsome man who, according to contemporaries, diligently carried out his duties at the academy, winning the students' respect. He became severely disabled by an infection of the spine and after 1820 was unable to paint. He died of poisoning on 11 February 1825 at his home, 33 Bruton Street, Berkeley Square, London, because a chemist's assistant mistakenly gave him a bottle of opium instead of a harmless draught. His funeral was held on 19 March 1825. Many of Owen's unfinished portraits were completed by Edward Daniel Leahy. 


@@@@@


doc= 21039


Owen, William Fitzwilliam (1774-1857), naval officer and hydrographer, was the second illegitimate son of Captain William Owen RN, of the Glansevern Owens of Montgomeryshire and of Passamaquoddy Bay, New Brunswick. His mother, and that of his brother Sir Edward Campbell Rich Owen (1771-1849), was either Sarah Haslam or Jane Johnson, both of whom were in Captain Owen's household. Owen was born near Warrington, Lancashire, on 17 September 1774. Abandoned in Madras on his father's death in 1778, he was taken aboard the frigate 'Cormorant' as the captain's servant by Captain Sir Thomas Rich. He went with his benefactor to the 'Enterprize', in which he was present at the moonlight battle off Cape St Vincent in 1780, before being sent to schools in north Wales and near Liverpool. 
Owen went back to sea in 1788 as a midshipman, joining the 'Culloden' (74 guns) under Sir Thomas Rich again. He was present in her at the battle of the Glorious First of June in 1794. After service in the 'Ruby' (64 guns) in the expedition to capture the Cape of Good Hope, Owen was appointed to the 'London' (98 guns), flagship of Vice-Admiral Sir John Colpoys. In May 1797, when the crew of the 'London' joined the mutiny at Spithead, Owen was among the officers put ashore. 
Later that year Owen was promoted lieutenant in command of the gun-vessel 'Flamer', in which after the battle of Camperdown he salvaged the Dutch prize 'Overijssel'. His next command was the fireship 'Nancy', where he came under the orders of Nelson for a planned attempt to fire the invasion fleet mustering in Boulogne. In 1803 Owen was given command of the brig 'Seaflower', employed first off Brest and later in eastern seas. It was here that he first began the hydrographic work for which he is best-known, discovering and charting deep-water channels through the Maldives and in the islands off Sumatra. In September 1808 the 'Seaflower' was taken by the French frigate 'La Manche', and Owen was imprisoned on Mauritius until January 1810. Meanwhile he had been promoted commander and appointed to the sloop 'Barracouta'. Before taking up his command he was involved in the planning for the capture of Mauritius. After its fall he returned to the East Indies, where he helped Sir Stamford Raffles impose British rule over Java and Sumatra. He was promoted captain in May 1811 and appointed to the frigate 'Cornelia', where, as senior officer of the Batavia squadron, he suppressed piracy in the Indies. 
In 1815 Owen was ordered to Kingston, Ontario, to survey the Great Lakes of Canada. In the next two years Owen and his team of four assistants charted most of the Canadian shores of the Great Lakes and the upper St Lawrence River, as well as delineating the border between the United States and Canada from Lake Champlain to the St Lawrence. In 1818 he married Martha Evans; they had two daughters. After her death in 1852 he married later the same year Amy Nicholson, a widow, of Saint John, New Brunswick. 
After a period on half pay Owen was appointed in 1821 to the sloop 'Leven', in which, with the brig 'Barracouta' also under his command, he was instructed to survey the east coast of Africa from the boundary of Cape Colony to Cape Gardafui. The squadron arrived at Simonstown in July 1822, and returned there from their last surveying season in September 1825, having surveyed some 20,000 miles of coast, depicted in almost 300 charts. Fever ravaged the ships' companies, and it was not until they began treating it with the native remedy of chinchona bark infusion, instead of bleeding, that mortality was brought within bounds, though it was never eliminated. 
Already disgusted by the slave trade from his experiences in the East Indies, Owen was determined to stamp it out. Finding the Mazrui rulers of Mombasa under siege by their suzerain, Sayyid Said, sultan of Oman, Owen in February 1824 on his own initiative raised the siege and took the town under British protection in return for a promise by the Mazrui to abolish slavery. Though disowned by the home government, the protectorate lasted over two years. 
After leaving Simonstown in October 1825, the two ships carried out extensive surveys on the west coast of Africa on their way home, before reaching Deptford in August 1826. Owen published 'A Narrative of a Voyage to Explore the Shores of Africa, Arabia and Madagascar' in 1833, but the similar work by Thomas Boteler, a lieutenant on the survey, is generally considered the better record. 
At the end of 1826 Owen was appointed to the frigate 'Eden' and as superintendent of Fernando Po, where it was intended that he should establish a colony for freed slaves. Despite a promising start, hopes that the island was free from fever proved false, and Owen left at the end of 1829. He remained in the 'Eden' until August 1831, when he came ashore for the last time. 
In 1835 Owen and his family moved to the estate on Campobello Island in Passamaquoddy Bay, New Brunswick, colonized by his father, where, apart from short trips away, he remained for the rest of his life. In 1842 the surveying ship 'Columbia' was sent out to chart the coast of the Bay of Fundy, and Owen was placed in charge of her operations for five years. He was promoted rear-admiral in 1847, and vice-admiral in 1854. He died in St John on 3 November 1857, and was buried at St Anne's churchyard, Welshpool, Campobello Island. 


@@@@@


doc= 21040


Owens, John (1790-1846), merchant and philanthropist, was born in Manchester, the eldest son of Owen Owens (1764-1844) and his wife, Sarah ('nee' Humphreys). Two other sons died in infancy. His parents were Welsh, his father being a native of Holywell, Flintshire; they married in 1788 and moved to Manchester shortly after. Owens was educated at a private school in Manchester owned by John Huthersal, author of textbooks on English grammar, arithmetic, geography, and Latin, but by 1808 he was helping in his father's business of hat-lining cutter and hat maker. Until 1812 the firm confined itself to the home trade, but from then on began to seek markets overseas. 
In 1815, at the age of twenty-five, Owens became a partner in the firm, which by then also made a variety of cotton goods on the putting-out system, manufactured umbrellas, and exported all these and other goods to North and South America. The firm's home trade was neglected after about 1820 and soon ceased to have any importance. In and after 1825 the Owenses invested $10,000 in a cotton mill owned by Samuel Faulkner & Co., in which George Faulkner was a partner. The investment proved satisfactory, giving a return of nearly 10 per cent per annum over eighteen years, after which Owens withdrew his capital. About 1830 Owen Owens retired from business, leaving his son in sole charge at their dingy warehouse in Carpenters Lane off Tib Street. There was an immediate widening of the firm's range of export markets to include the Middle East, India, and China. At the same time the manufacture of cheap cotton goods for export was abandoned. The profits of foreign trade were by no means derisory if a merchant had the patience to wait for his returns, but by 1840 Owens was turning, in a familiar transition, from trade to finance. Speculating in corn, cotton, and railway shares, and moneylending on the security of such shares, occupied most of his business mind in the remaining years of his life. He died at his home, 10 Nelson Street, Rusholme, Manchester, on 29 July 1846, at the age of fifty-six, and was buried in the churchyard of St John's, Byrom Street, Manchester. In the forty years during which he was associated with the business he had seen its capital grow from perhaps $5000 to more than thirty times as much. 
Accounts of Owens's appearance agree in describing him as unprepossessing, and in little else: he has been called above and below middle height, broadly built, and sharp featured. Like his father, he disliked borrowing, spent little of his income, worked long hours, and had few holidays, none of them further from home than London. In his lifetime he subscribed moderately to local medical and educational charities, supported the Anti-Corn Law League, bought the 'Edinburgh Review', read some at least of Scott's novels, and worshipped at his local Anglican church, St Saviour's. At his death his personal effects were valued at $400, which did not allow for much plate or for a large library. Although variously described as morose or a recluse, he belonged to a glee club, and entertained modestly at his house in Rusholme, then a pleasant Manchester suburb. He died a bachelor, with no relatives closer than cousins. 
Nothing in his life suggested that Owens would in death found a university college, but it does not follow that the idea was put into his head by George Faulkner or Samuel Fletcher; there is no evidence one way or the other. Talk of a university college in Manchester had been in the air since the mid-1830s. The idea, whatever its origin, was already in Owens's mind in 1844, because he was instructing his solicitor about a will embodying large charitable bequests within five weeks of his father's death. He finally signed the will on 31 May 1845. After substantial bequests to relatives, friends, and servants, and small bequests to local charities, he left the residue (nearly $100,000) to found a college for the instruction of young men not less than fourteen years old, 'in such branches of learning and science as are now or may be taught in the English universities'. Apart from the restriction to men, which was to be expected at the time, no stipulations were to be imposed on staff or students, whether as to religion, condition in life, or place of birth. 
Owens's trustees lost no time in liquidating the remaining stock of textiles and other often ancient reminders of businesses long since abandoned. They sold all but the soundest of his railway shares, and invested the proceeds in safe securities. In view of the subsequent fall in share prices the trustees acted wisely, for Owens would probably have died a poorer man had he lived a few years longer. Owens College opened in 1851 in Quay Street, Deansgate, Manchester, and remained there until 1873 when it moved to new and much larger premises in the Oxford Road. The University of Manchester traces a direct line of descent from this foundation, and until recently was affectionately and fittingly known to its students as 'Owens'. 


@@@@@


doc= 21041


Owens, John Lennergan (fl. c.1780), actor, was born in Ireland, where apparently he confined his performances. He acted at the Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin, where his Zanga in Edward Young's tragedy 'The Revenge' was considered the best that ever succeeded that of Henry Mossop. He was known for his persistent inebriety and once, coming onstage as Polydore in Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan', he was hissed by the audience for obvious intoxication. Placing himself in a fighting position at the front of the stage he delivered the soliloquy 'Here I'm alone and fit for mischief' with a scowl. The audience's resentment was subdued by the rage of the actor; they joined in laughter and he was permitted to finish his performance. Unfortunately, Owens's alcoholism reduced him to extreme poverty and he eventually became a beggar in the streets. On seeing John Kemble announced to play Zanga, his favourite character, six years after playing it himself Owens begged money from a person of decent appearance. When asked his name he replied with tragic solemnity 'Has six years' cruel absence extinguished majesty so far that nought shines here to tell you I'm the real Zanga? Yes, sir, John Lennergan Owens, successor to Henry Mossop'. The gentleman was moved with compassion and gave him a shilling. On his way to get some dinner Owens was stopped by another mendicant, who implored his assistance; he stepped into a public house, changed his shilling, and gave half to the other beggar. Though the foreword to 'The Thespian Dictionary' claims to list only important actors of the period Owens does not seem to be noted in other contemporary theatrical memoirs or records. 


@@@@@


doc= 21042


Owen, Owen (1543/4-1593), Church of England clergyman, the son of Owen ap Robert, was born at Bodsilin, in Aber, Caernarvonshire, where the house still bears the family inscription. He matriculated at Christ's College, Cambridge, at Easter 1560. He graduated BA in 1560-61, MA in 1564, when he was identified as Ovinus Owen, and incorporated at Oxford on 21 February 1566. He was ordained deacon, in London in 1566, and priest in February 1567, when he was identified as 'scholar of Christ's, aged 23'. 
Owen became rector of Burton Latimer, Northamptonshire, in 1567, which remained his permanent home. He married Margaret Matthews and, after her death, Jane, daughter of Robert Griffith of Caernarfon, with whom he had five sons and three daughters. His eldest son, John Owen, was baptized at Burton Latimer in 1580. Despite a long sojourn in England, he maintained firm links with Wales. He was instituted to Llangeinwen, with the chapel of Llangaffo, Anglesey, by Nicholas Robinson, bishop of Bangor, on 11 August 1573. Robinson appointed him a canon and prebendary of Bangor Cathedral on 28 December 1576. He served as archdeacon of Anglesey, drawing an income of $58 10's'. 6died, from 1583 until his death. His appointment was not recorded in Robinson's register, which provides very limited information about cathedral dignitaries, but his tenure was noted by Henry Rowlands in the eighteenth century and his name occurs in modern lists of archdeacons. He was the last archdeacon of Anglesey to hold the office 'pleno jure' (with full legal right); after his death the bishops of Bangor held it 'in commendam' (with enjoyment of revenues). The late sixteenth century was a period when very few dignitaries resided in the diocese, and it would appear that he continued to live at Burton Latimer, where he died, and was buried on 21 March 1593. His successor at Llangeinwen was appointed on 4 May 1593. His eldest son, John, the future bishop of St Asaph, was still a youth when Owen died, but he succeeded to the rectory of Burton Latimer in 1608. 


@@@@@


doc= 21043


Owenson, Robert Nugent (1744-1812), actor and theatre manager, was born in the barony of Tyrawley, co. Mayo, Ireland, the son Walter MacOwen and his wife, Sydney Bell. His parents were poor, and he was principally educated in a hedge-school. He converted to protestantism, Anglicized his name, and travelled to London about 1765, under the patronage of an Irish absentee landlord who had recently returned from the West Indies and had been impressed by hearing Owenson sing. With the assistance of Thomas Augustine Arne, who declared him to have one of the finest baritone voices he had ever heard, particularly in falsetto, Owenson took singing lessons from John Worgan. 
Owenson's earliest known appearance as a singer was in 1770 at Vauxhall Gardens, and he made his anonymous acting debut with Younger's provincial company in Southampton in July 1771. On 4 November that year he made his first appearance in London, at Covent Garden (in the title role of Nicholas Rowe's 'Tamerlane') and was engaged for a further two seasons, during which he added considerably to his repertory of comic stage Irishmen, including Sir Lucius O'Trigger in Sheridan's 'The Rivals', Major O'Flaherty in Richard Cumberland's 'The West Indian', Teague in Robert Howard's 'The Committee', and Foigard in Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem'. Cumberland and Sheridan thanked Owenson for redeeming their creations from caricature. 
On 15 December 1772 Owenson married Jane Hill (died 1789). Jane's family were prosperous, evangelical Methodists from Shropshire (her father was at one time lord mayor of Shrewsbury); deeply opposed to the theatre, they were shocked by her marriage to an actor, but did not cut her off, and she was left a significant legacy by her father. The Owensons had four children, of whom two daughters survived infancy. They were the novelist Sydney ['see 'Morgan, Sydney, Lady Morgan] and Olivia, who married the physician Sir Arthur Clarke. Owenson left Covent Garden at the end of the 1773-4 season and performed in 1774 with Samuel Foote's summer company at the Haymarket and in 1776 with Tate Wilkinson's company, where he was noticed by Dublin's Crow Street Theatre manager, Thomas Ryder, and offered a small share in that theatre and the post of deputy manager. 
Owenson's twenty-year association with the Irish theatre began at Crow Street on 21 October 1776, when he appeared in his most famous role, Major O'Flaherty in 'The West Indian'. A Dublin critic found his brogue 'characteristic, and not too vulgar' ('Freeman's Journal', 22 Oct 1776). Owenson quickly established himself as Crow Street's Irishman, playing a wide variety of Irish roles and singing Irish songs in the Irish language, both in Dublin and on his frequent visits to provincial theatres. He also became known for his comic monologues, such as 'Larry O'Shaughnessy's Tour thro' Dublin' and 'The Black Cart, or, A Peep at Channel Row'. In the next nine seasons he acted regularly in nearly a hundred roles, about half of which were Irish parts, and he became very popular, especially during the period after 1779 when the Irish Volunteers, to which Owenson belonged, constituted a significant part of Irish theatre audiences. Owenson was the only entertainer of any stature in his day to sing songs in the Irish language in the professional theatre. In addition to at least one prologue in Irish, Owenson is credited with writing a popular comic piece called 'The Prelude' (1777), at least two songs, 'Rory O'More' and 'Love's the Fairest Creature', and a long poem entitled 'Theatrical Fears' (1804). 
Owenson led a company of actors to Sligo and Galway in October 1782 and was so successful that, with the encouragement of the local gentry, he built a small but elegant new theatre in Kirwan's Lane, the first structure to be built in Galway specifically for theatrical performances. Whether his experiences in Galway ignited in him the desire to manage in Dublin, or whether he quarrelled with Daly, is not known with certainty, but on 20 December 1784 Owenson opened a rival new City Theatre in the refurbished playhouse in Fishamble Street. Lady Morgan's largely inaccurate account of the life of this theatre must be corrected. Owenson had long been associated with the nascent nationalist movement in Ireland, and, although this point is largely conjectural, he had almost certainly hoped to capitalize on these connections in his new venture. But Lady Morgan's claim that her father had founded the first Irish 'national' theatre at Fishamble Street is not reflected in the repertory, which contained little that was original, or even particularly Irish. After a strong start the Fishamble Street theatre operated with increasing irregularity until early June 1785. There is, however, some evidence to support Lady Morgan's insinuation that the Fishamble Street venture was discouraged, if not suppressed, by the Irish government in order to grant a patent and theatrical monopoly to Daly. 
By August 1785 Owenson was to be found again with Daly's Crow Street company, where he remained for the next ten seasons. During a part of the 1793-4 season, and again in the following season, he was at Kilkenny at the head of a company, probably as Daly's deputy. He spent the summer of the 1796-7 season at Crow Street and made a visit to Cork in October 1797. Thereafter he retired from the stage, and perhaps became the landlord of a Dublin public house. As early as the time of the closing of the Fishamble Street theatre he had taken up the importation of French wines as a sideline, and he met with considerable success in the business. His wife, Jane, died in late May or early June 1789 in Drumcondra. She had never deviated from her evangelical piety and opposition to the stage, nor had she settled easily into Irish society. Her daughter observed that she was forced to live in 'her penal settlement... hating both potatoes and papists with Christian inveteracy, and culinary prejudice' (Campbell, 22-3). 
Owenson came out of retirement briefly in 1807, when he acted the part of O'Driscoll several times in his daughter's comic opera 'The First Attempt'. On 27 May 1807 at Crow Street he took what was almost certainly his farewell benefit. He died, at the age of sixty-eight, at the Dublin home of his younger daughter shortly before 28 May 1812, and was buried in the graveyard in Irishtown. 


@@@@@


doc= 21044


Owtram, William (bap. 1626, d. 1679), Church of England clergyman, was the son of Robert Owtram and was baptized in Derbyshire either at Barlow, near Chesterfield, on 17 March 1626, or at the adjacent parish of Dronfield six weeks earlier on 5 February. In May 1642 he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, whence he graduated BA in 1645 and proceeded MA in 1649. From 1648 to 1657 he was a fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge; in 1655 he was junior proctor of the university. In 1660 he was created DD. 
In May 1656 Owtram was presented to the living of Navenby in Lincolnshire, which he held until 1659 when he was appointed to the rectory of St Mary Woolnoth, London. It is likely that he received episcopal ordination during this time, as others like Simon Patrick did, for he continued to hold the living at the Restoration and retained it until 1666. In 1664 he was appointed rector of St Margaret's, Westminster, and in 1670 a prebendary of Westminster Abbey. In July 1669 he was also installed as archdeacon of Leicester. He died on 23 August 1679, and was buried two days later in Westminster Abbey, where a monument was erected to him. 
Owtram was a respected churchman, and the nonconformist Richard Baxter had a high regard for him, considering him 'understanding, Conscionable & peaceable' (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.105). He gained a reputation as a scholar, especially knowledgeable in rabbinic literature. This was demonstrated in his work 'De sacrificiis libri duo' (1677), which he dedicated to Thomas Osborne, earl of Danby. The book was written to defend the doctrine of atonement against the Socinians, and to refute the idea that Christ's death was merely an example of piety. It is a discussion of Hebrew sacrifices and their meanings, buttressed with patristic and rabbinical references, and concludes with a discussion of Christ's heavenly intercession. An English translation by John Allen was published in 1817. 
After Owtram's death Joseph Hindmarsh published six sermons which he alleged were shorthand versions of Owtram's sermons. His friends repudiated their authenticity, claiming that they were 'thrust out into the world' only to serve the ends of profit ('Twenty Sermons', sig. A5'r'). James Gardiner, later bishop of Lincoln, published some of Owtram's genuine sermons under the title 'Twenty Sermons Preached upon Several Occasions' in 1682, with a revised edition in 1697. The introduction portrayed Owtram as identifying the danger of three enemies -- papists, libertines, and dissenters -- and the sermons were commended as 'an Antidote very seasonable for the malignity of the Age' ('Twenty Sermons', 380). The sermons bear out the description. They advocated stability in the nation and obedience to the magistrate, and several took issue with the Roman Catholic church on the use of scripture and on its teaching on the eucharistic presence. Against the dissenters who repudiated the use of a set form of prayers Owtram noted: 'All the Protestant Churches of other Nations, and all the Christian Churches in the World, have set forms for their publick Offices, and so hath the whole Church had for fourteen hundred years at least' ('Twenty Sermons', 137-8). Preaching on '1 John' 3: 7 Owtram launched an attack on John Saltmarsh and other antinomians who 'own no covenant between God and us, but only between God and Christ. This, say they, Christ hath performed, and so reconciled us unto God without the performance of any condition on our parts' ('Twenty Sermons', 380). 
In his will Owtram bequeathed lands in Derbyshire and Lincolnshire to his widow, Jane, and left legacies to his nephews and nieces. Surviving him by forty-two years, his widow died on 4 October 1721 and was buried in Westminster Abbey eight days later. A catalogue of Owtram's library was compiled by William Cooper in 1681. 


@@@@@


doc= 21045


Oxberry, William (1784-1824), actor and printer, was born in Moorfields, London, on 18 December 1784, the son of an auctioneer. At the age of fourteen he was made a pupil of the artist George Stubbs, but having developed at school a fascination for the stage he quickly abandoned painting, first for bookselling and then for indentures with a Tottenham Court Road printer named Seale, who fortuitously was equally obsessed with the theatre. Oxberry appeared in amateur theatricals (in nearby Queen Ann Street and Berwick Street), where he performed in 'Macbeth' and 'The Castle Spectre'. In the intervals between acting he learned the printing trade, but in 1802 made a bid for the professional stage, and made his first appearance at Watford as Antonio in 'The Merchant of Venice'. Later, at Godalming, he was noticed by Trotter, manager of the Worthing and Hythe circuit, and given a renewable engagement as low comedian. While thus employed, he married at Southend in 1806 sixteen-year-old Catherine Elizabeth Hewitt, 'a lady of most respectable connexions' ('Memoir', 235). 
At Worthing, Oxberry impressed Henry Siddons, who recommended him to Covent Garden, where he was offered by John Kemble a three-year contract, beginning at $5 per week. On his debut as Robin Roughhead in Allingham's farce 'Fortune's Frolic' (7 November 1807) reviewers were divided: the hostile 'Monthly Mirror' refused to 'consider him as a desirable acquisition to the London stage', yet 'The Times' liked his 'perfect boyish simplicity' and compared his rustic characterization with that of experienced players such as Edward Knight, John Emery, and John Liston. Oxberry played Lord Duberly in Colman's 'The Heir-at-Law' (14 November), but did not settle at Covent Garden and, before the season was over, negotiated release from his contract. Thereafter at Glasgow and Aberdeen he performed with reasonable success in tragedy. George Raymond, on tour in Scotland, induced him to return to London to play in Siddons's 'The Russian Imposter' (Lyceum, 22 July 1809), when Samuel Arnold was impressed enough to offer him a three-year rising contract, beginning at $7 a week. He later obtained similar terms at Drury Lane, and a handsome follow-on four-year contract rising from a $9 base to $12 in the last two years. From 1807 to 1811 he also contributed occasional journalism to 'The Cabinet' and the 'Monthly Mirror', which, as well as the 'Theatrical Inquisitor', he seems to have edited for a short while. 
Oxberry was a regular member of the Drury Lane company between 1812 and 1820, when his roles included Dan in Colman's 'John Bull', Justice Greedy in Massinger's 'A New Way to Pay Old Debts', Mawworm in Bickerstaffe's 'The Hypocrite', and Leo Luminati in Kenney's 'Oh! This Love'. But when Robert Elliston reduced salaries in 1820, Oxberry left to star at the Sadler's Wells, east London, and Surrey theatres. He also played at the Haymarket in the summer of 1821. 
The last years of Oxberry's short life were bound up with Elliston, who took on the Olympic in 1818 and Drury Lane in 1819. At the former, where he is said to have been stage-manager and partly responsible for the theatre's straightened finances, Oxberry made a successful debut in 1819 as a playwright with the one-act afterpiece 'The Actress of All Work' (28 January), usually erroneously attributed to his son. In this essentially single-actor piece, the heroine is in love with a theatrical manager's son. Desperate to join the company, she auditions in six disguises, ranging from 'country gawky', through Parisian opera singer, to amorous eighty-year-old, before convincing the father of her talent. Refused by Frances Kelly, for whom it was written, the part went to Elizabeth Edwin, who 'made it a sterling favourite' ('Memoir of Mrs Edwin', 208). Later performers, including Mrs Tayleure and Clara Fisher, gave the play an extended life in the repertory. Oxberry altered Pilon's comedy 'He Would be a Soldier' (1786) into 'The High Road to Marriage' (9 November 1820), in which he starred himself. It had some success but was never published. Winston credits Oxberry with authorship of 'How to Pay your Taxes', which when read in the green room was discovered to be 'so bad it had to be given up' ('Drury Lane Journal', 6). It was licensed for the Olympic in November 1820, but apparently not performed. Another piece, described as 'taken from the poem of 'Marmion', [was] performed at the West London Theatre' ('Memoir', 240). Oxberry was also a leading actor at the Olympic from 1820 onwards (notably as Jerry Hawthorn in Moncrieff's 'Tom and Jerry'). He gave the address on the opening night of the 1821 season (3 November); but in January 1822 he led an actors' strike when Elliston fell behind with the wages. The theatre remained closed for a month. In the year of his death, Oxberry agreed a new three-year contract with Elliston for the ensuing season at Drury Lane. 
Oxberry utilized his skills as a printer throughout his life. From his press at 8 White Hart Yard, Drury Lane (moved to 1 St George's Place, Camberwell, in 1824), he issued playbills and several lightweight collections of anecdotes and miscellaneous material under his own editorship, including 'The Theatrical Budget' (2 vols., 1809) and 'Flowers of Literature, or, The Encyclopaedia of Anecdote' ('c'.1821-2; 2nd edn, 4 vols., 1824), published in shilling numbers, and designed for 'amusement without toil'. Considerably more substantial was 'Oxberry's [Edition of the] New English Drama', issued as separate plays (from 1818) and collected into twenty (sometimes twenty-two) volumes from 1819 to 1825 or 1826. It featured 'the peculiar business of the Performers, and the general directions of the Stage, as practised at the 'London Theatres Royal'... [with] costumes, acting times for each act, & 'Original Remarks' on the merit of every Drama'. Some commentaries were Oxberry's, some were by unknown writers, and eighteen were by William Hazlitt (later reprinted by him elsewhere). Also noteworthy is 'Oxberry's Dramatic Biography, and Histrionic Anecdotes', a series of 'chiefly original' memoirs of contemporary actors and actresses, edited after Oxberry's death by his widow, Catherine, who claimed her husband delayed publication because of the sensitivity of some of the material: he 'could not review as a critic the man that he met as a brother' ('Advertisement'). Between 1 January 1825 and 15 April 1826, when Mrs Oxberry's responsibility ended, sixty-four memoirs were issued (4 vols.), some written by Oxberry himself. Later that year a fifth volume, usually ascribed to Catherine Oxberry's second husband, Leman Thomas Rede, whom she married in 1824, concluded the original series. 
Oxberry's strength as an actor was in dialect and rustic parts, though he was never a great performer, partly perhaps because, unlike rivals such as Liston, 'he bestowed too little study on his profession' ('Memoir', 239). However, Hazlitt gave a superbly evocative description of his role as Justice Greedy, in whom 'apparitions of fat turkeys, chines of bacon, and pheasants dressed in toast and butter, evidently floated in rapturous confusion before his senses' ('The Examiner', 14 Jan 1816). Art seemed to imitate life, for Oxberry had a reputation as a 'free liver' and was never happier than feasting and drinking in company with like-minded friends. It was no surprise when in December 1821 he acquired the Craven's Head chop-house in Drury Lane, a popular venue for theatrical people, where 'we 'vocalize' on a Friday, 'conversationize' on a Sunday, and 'chopize' every day' ('Memoir', 239). Although he tried latterly to moderate his habits, he simply lived life too hard. Following two attacks, from which he appeared to recover, he died of an apoplectic fit at the Craven's Head on 9 June 1824. As the 'Gentleman's Magazine' put it, an addiction to tavern life 'shortened the days of a very shrewd, pleasant, good-humoured man'. Winston was blunter: 'this is another instance of early death from drinking' ('Drury Lane Journal', 89). Oxberry was buried in a vault at St Clement Danes, Strand. 
Dark in complexion, with curly dark hair, Oxberry was just under 5 feet 10 inches tall and, in later years, rather plump. A distinctive feature was the piercing and expressive nature of his eyes. Of Oxberry's three children two survived infancy and aspired to theatrical careers: a daughter, who made her debut in 1826 at the Olympic, and, much more successfully, a son, William Henry Oxberry. 


@@@@@


doc= 21046


Oxberry, William Henry (1808-1852), actor, the son of the actor and theatrical writer William Oxberry (1784-1824) and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Hewitt, was born on 21 April 1808, probably in London. He received his preliminary education at Merchant Taylors' School, London, which he entered in September 1816. At a school in Kentish Town, kept by a Mr Patterson, he received some training in acting. On leaving there his education was continued under John Clarke, the author of 'Ravenna', and Revd R. Nixon. First placed in his father's printing office, he became afterwards, like him, 'the pupil of an eminent artist'. He was then apprenticed to Septimus Wray, a surgeon of Salisbury Square, Fleet Street, where he remained until his father's death in 1824. 
About the beginning of 1825 Oxberry appeared at a private theatre in Rawstorne Street, London, as Abel Day to the Captain Careless of Frank Matthews. After playing Tommy in 'All at Coventry', he made his first professional appearance at the Olympic at a benefit for his stepfather, Leman Thomas Rede, on 17 March 1825, as Sam Swipes in 'Exchange No Robbery'. He was then employed by Leigh Hunt of 'The Examiner', but soon returned to the stage, and played in Chelmsford, Hythe, Manchester, and Sheffield before joining Hammond's company at York and Hull. In the autumn of 1832 he acted at the Strand in Rede's 'Loves of the Angels'. At the close of the season he went with Harriet Smithson to Paris and played low-comedy parts at the Italian Opera. 
After returning to England, Oxberry accepted a four-year engagement at the English Opera House (Lyceum), of which, with disastrous effect upon his fortunes, he became manager. He was then at the Princess's. In autumn 1841 he succeeded Robert Keeley at Covent Garden and played Flute in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream'. In 1842 he was again at the Lyceum, where he appeared principally in burlesque and won a reputation as a comic dancer. The occasional parts he took in farce included his repeatedly revived Victim in John Oxenford's 'My Fellow Clerk' and Mizzle in the same author's 'A Day Well Spent'. In January 1843 he was at the Princess's playing the hero, a jealous husband, of 'A Lost Letter'. In June he was a ridiculous old schoolmaster in John Poole's drama 'The Swedish Ferryman', and in September, with Edward Wright and Paul Bedford, was at the Strand playing in 'Bombastes furioso' and 'The Three Graces'. On returning to the Princess's Oxberry appeared with the Keeleys and Walter Lacy in W. T. Moncrieff's farce 'Borrowing a Husband', and in 1844 was Wamba in the opera of 'The Maid of Judah', a version of 'Ivanhoe'. In February 1845 he was Sir Harry in James Townley's 'High Life below Stairs', and in April, Verges to Miss Cushman's Beatrice. In July he was the original Mrs Caudle to the Mr Caudle of Henry Compton in 'Mr and Mrs Caudle'. He was also at Covent Garden under the management of Madame Vestris. There were few theatres at which he was not seen, and for a time he managed the Windsor theatre. 
A very little man, with a quaint, peculiar manner and a thin voice, Oxberry was a lively actor and dancer in burlesque, but was said rarely to know his part on first nights. He was a member of the Dramatic Authors' Society, and a somewhat voluminous dramatist. His plays have never been collected, and many of them were never printed. Nicoll lists twenty-two, of which the melodrama 'Matteo Falcone' (performed at the Lyceum in June 1836) and the farce 'The Pacha's Pets' (Royal Victoria, September 1838) are perhaps the most noteworthy. Oxberry himself claimed to have left behind thirty unacted plays, which he trusted would be given after his death for the benefit of his second wife (his first wife, Ellen Lancaster, had died in 1842) and three children, otherwise unprovided for. He was responsible for 'Oxberry's Weekly Budget of Plays' (1843-4), consisting of thirty-nine plays edited by him, and 'Oxberry's Dramatic Chronology' (1850). Up to his death he was, with Charles Mathews and Madame Vestris, playing in 'The Game of Speculation' and 'The Prince of Happy Land'. His death, through lung disease, augmented by somewhat festive habits, took place on 29 February 1852. By a curious and painful will, printed in 'The Era' for 21 March 1852, and written four days before he died, he left such property as he possessed to Charles Melville, a tragic actor better known outside London, in trust for his children. He expressed many wishes concerning his funeral which were not observed; asked that his heart might be preserved in some medical museum as a specimen of a broken one; hoped that a benefit might be given him to pay his debts, which were moderate; and left messages of farewell to many well-known actors. 


@@@@@


doc= 21047


Oxburgh, Henry (d. 1716), Jacobite insurgent, was a member of a Roman Catholic family of Bovin, King's county, Ireland, a cadet branch of the Oxburghs of Emneth, Norfolk. A Hewer Oxburgh (a name common to both English and Irish branches of the family) had almost 1000 acres in King's county in 1655-6. The family were staunch supporters of James II, with a Hewer Oxburgh serving as sheriff in 1687 and as an MP in 1689. Both a Colonel Francis Oxburgh and Henry Oxburgh were named as assessors for tax in King's county in April 1690, and a Henry Oxburgh served as a captain in Sir Hewer Oxburgh's infantry regiment. No fewer than six Oxburghs were attainted in 1691. A Colonel Oxburgh (probably Sir Hewer) was killed at Aughrim in July 1691, as his widow, Clare, filed a claim for her jointure out of his estate, and a Henry Oxburgh filed a claim for a remainder in tail. 
In December 1692 Colonel Henry Oxburgh was arrested in Dublin as a precaution against a French descent. He may have been the Colonel Oxburgh who it was suggested might be secured from doing any mischief at home by serving in the army of the emperor or the duke of Bavaria in 1695. Henry served in the army of Louis XIV, and he may have returned home about 1700 and settled in Lancashire. However, in May 1705 and March 1714, Colonel Henry Oxburgh of Bovin, King's county, was licensed to carry arms. According to his own account, Oxburgh was in London when the oaths to George I were tendered 'and having truly a scrupulous conscience' (Boyer, 533-5) he left London for the north. His claim to have been persuaded into the rising lacks credibility, and it seems that he was sent to foment rebellion in the guise of a tourist. He was present at the first gathering of the Jacobites in Northumberland, and was an important commander of the English forces during the rising. 
Oxburgh led a party of soldiers to Lowther Hall, home of Viscount Lonsdale, and also to Hornby Hall, the residence of Colonel Francis Charteris. He was 'frequently at the head of the English horse' (Boyer, 522) during the march into Lancashire, and a key adviser of the commanders, Thomas Forster and Lord Widdrington. Having reached Preston and being confronted by Hanoverian troops under the command of General Charles Wills, Forster decided to treat for terms. Oxburgh was subsequently blamed for this decision, some Jacobites opining that 'he was better at his beads and prayers, than at his business as a soldier, and we all thought him fitter for a priest than a field-officer' (Patten, 121). Oxburgh was sent into the English camp on the grounds that he had an acquaintance with some English officers, but he met an intransigent Wills who would only offer surrender 'at discretion'. Some dispute remains about whether Wills implied that he would intervene with the king by saying 'you cannot better entitle yourselves to clemency than by surrendering yourselves prisoners at discretion' (Ware, 140). In the event the Jacobites surrendered and Oxburgh was sent to London. 
Oxburgh was tried on 7 May 1716. His defence counsel argued that the indictment was invalid as it referred to 'Colonel Oxborough', and that he had only ever worn a sword (the normal attire of a gentleman), had not committed any overt act of hostility, and that his being sent by the rebels to treat was not manifest treason. Lord Chief Justice Parker dismissed these arguments and Oxburgh was sentenced to death on the 9th. Oxburgh petitioned for clemency, but there is no evidence that his petition reached the king and on 14 May he was hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyburn. In his speech from the scaffold he denied that the rebellion was designed to re-establish Roman Catholicism in England, 'for I never could find, that either by the laws of God, or the ancient constitution of this nation, difference of religion in the prince made any change in the allegiance of the subject' (Szechi, 66). His head was placed on Temple Bar which, according to reports reaching the Jacobite court, occasioned some resentment among the populace. It appears that Oxburgh was married, for following his execution Queen Mary evinced some concern for his children. His estate was confiscated and sold. 


@@@@@


doc= 21048


Oxenbridge, John (1608-1674), preacher and pastor in the West Indies and America, eldest son of Daniel Oxenbridge (1571-1642), physician, and of his wife, Katherine Harby (died 1651), and grandson to the Northamptonshire puritan radical divine John Oxenbridge (died 1618), was born at Daventry on 30 January 1608. Admitted a pensioner of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, on 8 April 1626, he matriculated the same year but received his BA from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 13 November 1628 and his MA on 18 June 1631, subsequently becoming a tutor of the college, where the future Unitarian John Biddle was among his students. Laud deprived Oxenbridge in May 1634, after he had required his scholars to sign an oath that regulated their lives and deportment towards him more strictly than required by university statutes. 
Oxenbridge left Oxford and about 1635 married his first wife, Jane Butler ('c'.1621-1658). She was said to be 'a schollar beyond what is usual in her sex, and of a masculine judgment in the profound points of religion' and Oxenbridge 'loved commonly to have her opinion upon a text of scripture before he preacht from it' ('Ambrose Barnes', 64). The Oxenbridges left England in 1635 for Bermuda, where Oxenbridge provoked controversy with his conventicles and his vigorous catechizing. He and his wife were later said to have planted the seeds of congregationalism on the island. 
Oxenbridge returned (in 1641) to England, where he preached in various towns. Having served in 1643 as an assistant to William Bridge at the congregationalist church in Norwich, he proceeded to Beverley, Yorkshire, where he was filling the perpetual curacy of the minister in 1644. In 1648 he was appointed a joint preacher at St Mary's, Beverley, and served as a minister in Beverley and Berwick upon Tweed. On 25 October 1652 he was appointed a fellow of Eton College (perhaps because his sister Elizabeth had married Oliver St John) and on 25 June the next year Cromwell appointed Oxenbridge a member of a new company charged with governing Bermuda. Andrew Marvell boarded with the Oxenbridges in Eton, and it was probably they who inspired him to write his poem 'Bermudas'. Marvell wrote a tender epitaph for a memorial slab for Jane Oxenbridge, who died on 25 April 1658 and was buried in Eton chapel, describing her as 'with primitive modesty plying the same successful pursuit for souls at home as he abroad'. Anthony Wood, the Oxford antiquary, regarded Oxenbridge as displaying the height of nonconformist hypocrisy in that, although Oxenbridge had vowed eternal love to his first wife, within a year of her death he married a 'religious virgin', Frances Woodward (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 3.468). Frances died within the year in childbirth and was also buried at Eton. 
At the Restoration, Oxenbridge was ejected from his Eton fellowship. He published a set of sermons in 1661 to discourage Fifth-Monarchy sentiments, and, having returned to Berwick upon Tweed, preached there until silenced by his refusal to comply with the 'Act of Uniformity' in 1662. That year he moved to Surinam in order to propagate the gospel. A letter from him (superscribed Comaween, 29 October 1662) to his wife's brother-in-law, the Newcastle merchant Ambrose Barnes, trying to round up money and settlers, reports that 'having many English servants is not good; but some negros, cattle, and Indian trade will bring an ordinary English estate to a comfortable subsistence and use in these parts'. The Indians were more peaceful than elsewhere in the Americas and their language was easily learned, he reported ('Ambrose Barnes', 45-6). He published a brief prospectus for propagating the gospel in Surinam, part of a larger manuscript. 
Oxenbridge left for Barbados in 1667, perhaps because of the turmoil undergone by Surinam in the Anglo-Dutch War and his own financial and personal losses there. In Barbados his affairs did not prosper either, and in 1669 he moved to Massachusetts. While in Barbados he married his third wife, a widow, Susanna Abbot (died 1696). Oxenbridge's friend, Thomas Parris, introduced the couple, and it was probably Oxenbridge's presence in Massachusetts that induced Parris to send his son Samuel, later best known for setting off the Salem witchcraft hysteria in 1692, to Harvard. 
In Massachusetts, Oxenbridge first preached at the Charlestown church, but he turned down a call there on 25 October 1669 because he had already accepted a call from the First Church of Boston; on 20 January 1670 he and Susanna were made members there. The elderly teacher of the church, John Davenport, having died on 13 March 1670, Oxenbridge was ordained as his replacement on 4 May, and was made a freeman a week later. The First Church was currently at the storm centre of a major controversy over the half-way covenant. This reconceptualization of New England congregationalist church membership allowed members' children who had become parents but who had not testified to a work of grace in their souls to have partial church membership in order to have their own children baptized. The synod of 1662 had endorsed the half-way covenant, with a vocal minority protesting against it as a betrayal of the New England church order. The First Church had sided with the minority, and Oxenbridge continued that alignment. He and his church encouraged like-minded dissidents to resist the installation of a new minister at Newbury and to form their own church at Salem; he preached an election sermon in 1671 denouncing the half-way covenant and advocating tolerance for Baptists, who were admired by his minority of congregationalists because, whatever their errors about baptism, they preserved the purity of church membership; he harassed dissenters who had split from the First Church to form their own church. In 1672 Oxenbridge was appointed one of the licensers of the press. He died on 28 December 1674 of an apoplexy with which he was seized while delivering a sermon. 


@@@@@


doc= 21049


Oxenden, Ashton (1808-1892), bishop of Montreal, sixth son of Sir Henry Oxenden, seventh baronet (1756-1838), and Mary, daughter of Colonel Graham of St Lawrence, near Canterbury, was born at Barham, Broome Park, Canterbury, on 20 September 1808. He had six brothers and five sisters. 
Educated at Ramsgate School and at Harrow School (with H. E. Manning and Christopher Wordsworth), Oxenden matriculated from University College, Oxford, on 9 June 1826, graduated BA in 1831, MA in 1859, and was created DD 10 July 1869. At university he neglected his work to hunt and play cricket. In December 1833 he was ordained to the curacy of Barham, Kent, where he introduced weekly cottage lectures and tried to enliven the services. His parish work ruined his health and he spent much of the decade from 1838 travelling on the continent. From 1849 to 1869 he was rector of Pluckley with Pevington, Kent, and in 1864 was made an honorary canon of Canterbury Cathedral. On 14 June 1864 he married Sarah (died 1903), daughter of Joseph Hoare Bradshaw, a London banker; they had a daughter, Mary. At Pluckley he first began extemporaneous preaching. He published his cottage lectures as the popular 'Barham Tracts', followed by the 'Pluckley Tracts', 116 pamphlets in all. 
In May 1869 Oxenden was elected -- as a compromise candidate between the evangelicals and the Tractarians -- bishop of Montreal and metropolitan of Canada by the Canadian provincial synod. He was consecrated in Westminster Abbey on 1 August, and installed in Montreal Cathedral on 5 September. Three-quarters of the population of the city were Roman Catholics, but the Church of England possessed twelve churches there besides the cathedral. Oxenden presided over nine dioceses. He assiduously attended to his episcopal duties, generally living in Montreal during the winter and visiting the country districts in the summer. 'My First Year in Canada' (1871) was written to raise funds for the diocese. He considerably increased the number of clergy, but found his time much taken up by rows about ritualism. Ill health caused his resignation of the bishopric in 1878. 
On his return to England Oxenden attended the Pan-Anglican synod and then moved to southern France, acting as chaplain at Cannes, 1878-9. From 30 May 1879 to 1884 he was vicar of St Stephen's, near Canterbury, and from 1879 to 1884 he officiated as rural dean of Canterbury. In 1891 he wrote 'The History of my Life', the last of his many works which had made him one of the best-selling clerical authors of his time. He was a master of the plain but lively exposition of Christian principles. Oxenden died at Chalet Esperance, Biarritz, France, on 22 February 1892. 


@@@@@


doc= 21050


Oxenden, Sir George (1620-1669), administrator in India, was the third son of Sir James Oxenden of Dene, Kent, and Margaret, daughter of Thomas Nevinson of Eastry, Kent. He was baptized at Wingham, Kent, on 6 April 1620. His older brother was Sir Henry Oxenden, first baronet (1614-1686), and his nephew, George Oxenden (bap. 1651, d. 1703), was a notable lawyer and politician. In 1632 he went to India in attendance upon the Revd Arthur Hatch of Wingham. During the following six years he became fluent in the languages used in north-western India and made himself invaluable, mostly at Ahmadabad, to the East India Company's factors. In their letter to the company (4 January 1639) the president and council at Surat praised the young man's activities and his character and recommended him to the directors for more formal and better-paid employment in the company. 
In 1639 Oxenden returned to England, where the Surat council's recommendation for 'his civil carriage and expert knowledge of the Industan language' resulted in his formal employment by the company as a factor for Surat on a salary of $25 per year (29 Jan 1641, Sainsbury and Foster, 2.137). Back in India between October 1641 and January 1653, he continued to demonstrate the linguistic and commercial skills which had so impressed his colleagues. He was entrusted with ventures to Goa, Cape Comorin, and Macau, but mostly to Mocha (Yemen). He also demonstrated a willingness to advocate strong measures against local rulers who attempted to expropriate the company's property, and a constant loyalty for the company's senior officers. These aspects of his character gained him a continuing respect and affection from indigenous merchants and governors and Englishmen alike, throughout his career in India. 
In 1653 Oxenden returned to England. Between 1656 and January 1659 he pursued private stock ventures to the East, taking advantage of the East India Company's loss of its old monopoly (1654-7). The ventures do not appear to have been very successful, and when offered the post of president at Surat, Oxenden accepted (25 October 1661). On 24 November 1661 he was knighted at Whitehall. His commission of employment (19 March 1662) described him as 'President and Cheife Director of all our affaires at Suratt and all other our factories in the north parts of India from Zeilon to the Redd Sea'. Excluded from his control were Madras, Bengal, and Bantam, areas of which he had little experience. It was also thought that his responsibilities in north-western India would take all his time. His salary, $300 plus a gratuity of $200 per year, reflected his great experience and value to the company. 
At the end of March 1662 Oxenden sailed for India, accompanied by the third earl of Marlborough and royal troops intending to take over the old Portuguese possession of Bombay, ceded to Charles II in his marriage settlement with Catherine of Braganza. He arrived at Surat on 18 September. At this time he focused his attention on re-establishing amicable relationships with local powers; trying to secure the release of Englishmen held captive by the Maratha chieftain Sivaji at Rairi; reorganizing the company's trade following the royal charter given to the East India Company; and suppressing private trading activities. Affairs at Bombay were in the hands of the crown's forces. When the Portuguese refused to surrender Bombay, causing great difficulties for the English personnel, Oxenden was forced to take a greater role, especially in supplying the dwindling numbers of men with provisions and shelter. This was made more difficult by the Mughal fears that Bombay would take trade from Surat, and their concern about armed foreigners landing in their dominions. Oxenden skilfully balanced the different contending demands and responsibilities. 
Sivaji raided Surat on 6-13 January 1664 and only the English and Dutch factories held out against him. The town itself was severely damaged and looted. The English actions gained the Mughal governor's gratitude and friendship, and the more tangible benefit of a reduction in the customs duties to which English trade had been liable at Surat. For the employees' heroism in protecting the company's substantial possessions the directors expressed their gratitude through a reward of $200 and a gold medal worth $20 for Oxenden, and various much smaller sums of money for other employees at Surat. These were not sent to India until 1668. 
In 1665 Oxenden's attention was taken by consequences in India of the Second Anglo-Dutch War (March 1665-July 1667); the transfer of Bombay to the English, and the reprehensible activities of the crown's personnel at Bombay in seizing Indian ships, causing retaliation by the Mughal governor at Surat; and the problems created by Sir Edward Winter's usurpation of the English settlement at Madras. He was also increasingly disturbed personally by the company's willingness to listen to accusations against him of trading privately outside the company's indulgence to him. In 1666 he asked the company to nominate his successor, so that he could return to England according to his contract (1 January 1666). His increasingly poor health, the difficulties in India, and the death of his sister Elizabeth (Dallison), who was also his agent in England, caused him to renew his request on 26 March 1667 to return to England. 
This request caused the directors to state their appreciation of, and total support for, Oxenden's administration. The directors realized that they needed Oxenden's experience, abilities, and skills more than ever. The grant of letters patent making Bombay over to the East India Company (27 March 1668) removed the basis for the conflict between the two sets of English authorities in western India, and the directors asked Oxenden to stay in India to secure the company's authority at Bombay (dispatch to Surat, 27 March 1668). 
Oxenden made his only visit to Bombay on 2-29 January 1669, where he made clear his hopes for an orderly and efficient settlement under the company's administration. The commission appointing him 'Governor and Comander in Cheife of our port and island of Bombay' was sent to India on 10 March 1669; it arrived at Bombay on 4 October 1669, after Oxenden had died. His long struggle with various debilitating illnesses succumbed to a consumptive disease at Surat on 14 July 1669. He was buried the following day in the English cemetery alongside his brother Christopher, who had died at Surat in February 1659. A large mausoleum was erected over their remains, probably by their nephews Streynsham Master and Henry Oxenden. 
Reports of his death and funeral demonstrate clearly the high regard in which Oxenden was held among all the communities in Surat. The letter from the council at Surat to the company (26 November 1669) records that he 'departed this life the 14 July last, to your and our unvalluable loss and the unspeakable greife of the Governor and all the officers and merchants in Surat, among whome his language, wisdome, and obliging deportment hath rendered him highly honnoured. The next day he was enterred with all possible solemnity; the French Director and Dutch Comandore attending the corps on foot, with an incredible number of people, so universally was his loss apprehended by all. (Foster, 13.182)' In England, despite all its protestations of appreciation, the company scrambled to audit Oxenden's accounts and liabilities for permitted trade, and only allowed Oxenden's estate to be finalized in July 1675. 


@@@@@


doc= 21051


Oxenden, George (bap. 1651, d. 1703), lawyer and politician, was baptized at Wingham, Kent, on 31 October 1651, the fourth (but third surviving) son of Sir Henry Oxenden, first baronet (1614-1686), of Dene, Wingham, and his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1659), daughter of Sir William Meredith, first baronet, of Leeds Castle, Kent. His uncle was Sir George Oxenden, governor of Bombay, and the poet Henry Oxenden was a distant cousin. Oxenden was entered at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, as a scholar on 8 July 1667, and he graduated LLB in 1673, MA 'per literas regias' in 1675, and LLD in 1679. On 14 July 1674 he was incorporated at Oxford. He was admitted to the court of arches on 10 July 1679, and on 12 July 1679 registered at Doctors' Commons. 
A fellow of Trinity Hall from 1671, Oxenden regularly contributed to the compilations of Latin verse composed by members of the university to commemorate public events; the first of his seven offerings was on the occasion of Princess Anne's marriage in 1683, and the last following the death of William III and accession of Queen Anne in 1702. They included some congratulatory verses on the birth of the prince of Wales in 1688, which were to prove somewhat embarrassing in future years. Oxenden was elected regius professor of civil law in 1684, an appointment which prompted John Dolben, the archbishop of York, to say that he was 'as well read in Galen and Hippocrates as he is in Corpus J[uris] C[ivilis]' ('Downshire MSS', 1.25). He became master of Trinity Hall on 11 November 1688 and remained so until his death. By 23 October 1689 he was president of Doctors' Commons. In that year he was also made vicar-general to the archbishop of Canterbury, dean of arches, and a judge of Admiralty; he retained all of these offices until his death. He served as vice-chancellor of Cambridge University in 1692-3. 
In 1693 Oxenden married Elizabeth (died 1704), daughter of Sir Basil Dixwell, first baronet, of Broome House, Kent, a maid of honour to Queen Mary, who ordered $2000 to be given as a marriage portion in May 1693. Oxenden had first attempted to enter parliament for the university at a by-election in 1692, but he had withdrawn his candidature. He was successful at the 1695 general election. Evidence from division lists indicates that he was a court whig in politics, and he spoke and voted on the prosecution side in the debates on the attainder bill against the Jacobite plotter Sir John Fenwick. He did not stand in 1698 and was subsequently rebuffed by Sandwich and the university in later years. 
Oxenden's most controversial case as a judge concerned the deprivation for simony of the high-flying bishop of St David's, Thomas Watson. His conduct on that occasion was described as more akin to that of an advocate than that of a judge. With less controversy he presided over the trial for piracy in May 1701 of Captain Kidd. 
Oxenden died on 21 February 1703 at his house in Doctors' Commons, and was buried in Wingham church. His will referred to his estate 'great part out upon funds in the Exchequer and Bank of England'. His wife died at Bath on 18 September 1704. His son Henry succeeded his uncle Sir Henry as fourth baronet in February 1709, and he in turn was succeeded in April 1720 as fifth baronet by Oxenden's second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 21052


Sir George Oxenden (1694-1775), who was born on 26 October 1694 and educated at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he was a fellow from 1716 to 1720. Sir George was 'an extremely handsome' but profligate man, who served as MP for Sandwich (1720-54) and, successively, as a lord of the Admiralty (1725-7) and a Treasury lord (1727-37). In May 1720 he married Elizabeth, the eldest daughter and coheir of Edmund Dunch, seduced his sister-in-law, Bell Dunch, and was thought to be the father of the third earl of Orford. He died on 20 January 1775. 


@@@@@


doc= 21053


Oxinden, Henry (1609-1670), gentleman and letter-writer, was born on 18 January 1609 at the house of Sir Adam Sprakeling in the parish of St Paul, Canterbury, the eldest son of Richard Oxinden ('bap'. 1588, died 1629), gentleman, of Great Maydekin in the village of Barham in Kent, and his wife, Katherine Sprakeling (1587-1642) and grandson of Sir Henry Oxinden, knight, of Deane, near Wingham, Kent. He had three younger brothers and two younger sisters. Most of the information about Oxinden's life comes from his surviving correspondence, held in the British Library, the Centre for Kentish Studies in Maidstone, Canterbury Cathedral Archives, and the Folger Shakespeare Library, Washington, DC. In addition over 200 titles from Oxinden's library survive as the core of the Elham parish library, now housed in Canterbury Cathedral Library. This material provides a rich source for the life of a country squire in seventeenth-century Kent, in particular during the civil war. 
Henry Oxinden attended Wye grammar school in Kent. He went to Oxford in 1624, aged fifteen, matriculated at Corpus Christi College on 10 November 1626, and was awarded the BA on 1 February 1627. His studies at Oxford were cut short by the death of his father in 1629, and he returned to Barham to administer the family estates. In June 1632 he was admitted to Gray's Inn. On 28 December of that year he married Anne Peyton (1613-1640), daughter of Sir Samuel Peyton (1590-1623) of Knowlton in Kent; they had a son, Thomas (1633-1668), and two daughters, Margaret ('b'. 1635) and Elizabeth ('b'. 1636). After Oxinden returned from Oxford he had to settle his brothers and sisters in life. For James (1612-1660), the second eldest, he obtained the living of Goodnestone, near Faversham in Kent. Both Richard ('b'. 1613) and Adam (1622-1643) were apprenticed to London merchants but neither was happy in trade. In 1641 Richard joined the army, in which he prospered. Both Oxinden sisters were successfully married: Katherine to Thomas Barrow, a London merchant, in 1636, and Elizabeth to James Love of Faversham in 1645. 
Oxinden took no part in the stirring events of the 1640s except to serve on the parliamentary side in the siege of Arundel in 1643. The ties of kinship and friendship can clearly be seen to override political differences in his correspondence. He helped both Sir Thomas Peyton and Sir Anthony Percivall, imprisoned as royalists. His uncle Sir James Oxinden and his cousin Henry were prominent in the parliamentary committees running Kent, and with these he kept in close touch throughout the 1640s and 1650s; he also counted as friends Captain John Dixwell, the regicide, and Robert Hales of Howletts. However, his correspondence shows a desire to be left out of the political and military conflict of the time. In June 1642 Oxinden's friend Vincent Denne of Wenderton, near Wingham in Kent, died, leaving his nephew Thomas Denne the younger his main heir, and Oxinden his executor. This was the start of a troublesome and ultimately ruinous relationship between Oxinden and the Denne family. Thomas Denne the elder, father of the heir and recorder of Canterbury, angered by his late brother's dispositions, disowned his son and began a series of legal suits against Oxinden, which were to drain Oxinden's financial resources. 
Following the death of his first wife in 1640, Oxinden married, on 15 September 1642, his young ward, Katherine Culling (1624-1698); they had two daughters, Katherine (1644-1716) and Mary (1648-1674). Two of Oxinden's older children caused him grief in the 1650s. The marriage of his daughter Margaret to John Hobart, in August 1649, involved him in yet more lawsuits, on his new son-in-law's behalf. Thomas, Oxinden's only son, caused him anxiety all through his life, from his poor performance as a scholar to his shameful death. Thomas married Elizabeth Edwards, heir of Nowds in Lynsted, in 1652, when he was nineteen years old and she was fourteen. Elizabeth was sent to live with Oxinden's wife, Katherine, at Barham, and here she formed close relationships with her mother-in-law and with Thomas's two half-sisters, Katherine and Mary. By the time that she reached her majority, in November 1660, the marriage was in difficulties, despite the birth of a son, Richard, in 1655. Thomas seems to have lived a life of dissipation on the fringes of the Restoration court after bouts of soldiering in the 1650s. He fell in with some notorious criminals by the late 1660s, was arrested in June 1668, and was incarcerated in king's bench prison, where he died in December 1668. 
In 1647 Oxinden had published the first of his four volumes of verse, all of which were produced at his own expense. 'Religionis funus et hypocritae finis' included an engraved portrait by Glover and was in two parts: a criticism of contemporary attitudes towards what Oxinden called true religion, and an attack on puritan ministers. It ended with support for Charles I, surprising from one who claimed to be neutral in his views. His 'Jobus triumphans' (1651) applied Job's story and stoicism to the current troubles, and in 1660 he published both 'Eikon basilike', a celebration of Sir Basil Dixwell's marriage, and 'Charls Triumphant', in praise of the Restoration. From 1647 Oxinden kept a list in his commonplace book of all the plays in his library. There were 123 in total and they included a remarkable number of early plays, probably not collected by Oxinden himself. 
The sale of Great Maydekin in December 1662, for $800 to Edward Ady of Greenwich, and Oxinden's attempts to obtain a living in the church shows the increasingly desperate state of his finances. He was ordained, probably in 1661, by the bishop of Winchester, and in 1663 he was presented to the living of Radnage, near High Wycombe in Buckinghamshire. He preached there twice in 1664 but never took up residence, citing ill health as the reason. He died of an unknown cause, at the age of sixty-one, and was buried in Denton church on 17 June 1670. Oxinden having died intestate, his library and papers, reflecting his literary and antiquarian interests, were handed down through his daughter Katherine's family. She married the Revd John Warly (1640-1673); their son, John (1673-1732), a physician in Canterbury, and their grandson, Lee Warly (1714-1807), attorney of Canterbury, inherited her estate. Warly died, unmarried, and left the library, which he had greatly augmented, to the parish of Elham in Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 21054


Oxnead, John of (d. in or after 1293), Benedictine monk and chronicler, was presumably born at Oxnead, Norfolk. He became a monk of the abbey of St Benet of Hulme, 9 miles east-north-east of Norwich. A chronicle of the world, from the creation to 1293, which was composed at Hulme at about the latter date, has been attributed to him. However, the only evidence for his authorship and, indeed, for his existence, is an inscription in the late thirteenth-century copy of the chronicle in BL, Cotton MS Nero D.ii, folios 217-37, in which Sir Robert Cotton himself, in an inscription at the top of the first page, attributes it to John of Oxnead, monk of St Benet's of Hulme. This attribution has generally been accepted and, since the chronicle itself has no reference to John of Oxnead, Cotton must have had some other evidence, possibly a medieval inscription. However, in 1888 Liebermann stated that he found nothing to substantiate such a possibility and no John of Oxnead has been found in the abbey's records. 
The chronicle is mainly a compilation from standard authorities, for example William of Malmesbury, Henry of Huntingdon, John of Wallingford, and the chronicle of Bury St Edmunds formerly attributed to John Eversden, interspersed with additional matter concerning the history of Norfolk, but more especially that of St Benet's Abbey: although of little value for general history it is an indispensable source for local affairs. Oxnead's chronicle also has historiographic value because it is one of the East Anglian chronicles that throws light on the composition of the Eversden chronicle, from which it borrows for the annals for 1020-1169 and 1258-92. Bartholomew Cotton (died 1321/2), another borrower from 'Eversden', uses Oxnead's chronicle for his annals for 1279-84. From the mid-1270s, however, the variants in Oxnead's chronicle from that of Eversden become increasingly important and by 'c'.1290 the Oxnead chronicle was indebted to a collection of Bury material rather than to a written-up text. For example, although the letter of Edward I of 1291, enclosing the letters of submission of the competitors for the Scottish throne to Edward's judgment, is addressed to the abbot and convent of St Edmunds, the competitors' letters are in Latin, not French as in Eversden's chronicle. 
Two copies, both late thirteenth-century, are known of Oxnead's chronicle. Neither is copied from the other, but they descend from a common exemplar. One, the already mentioned Nero D.ii, folios 217-37, is a codicological curiosity. The chronicle is on quarto-sized leaves. Each page has six, eight, ten, or twelve blocks of text copied onto it in three columns. Originally the leaves were folded, once horizontally and twice vertically, down each column. Presumably they were once kept in a pouch. Such folded manuscripts are extremely rare. Henry Ellis edited the chronicle in Nero D.ii in 1859 for the 'Rolls Series'. After he had completed his edition another copy was discovered in a historical miscellany of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries in the duke of Newcastle's possession. It is now BL, Egerton MS 3142. This volume had belonged to St Benet's of Hulme until 'c'.1294 when it was acquired by the Augustinian priory of Hickling (about 6 miles north-east of Hulme). It has many additions relating to the priory's history. A collation of the Oxnead text (fols. 105-200'v') was appended to Ellis's edition. 


@@@@@


doc= 21055


Oxenford, John (1812-1877), playwright and translator, was born on 12 August 1812 at Camberwell, Surrey, the son of William Oxenford (1783-1867), merchant, and his wife, sister of Thomas Massa Alsager. Acquiring most of his compendious knowledge as an autodidact, he was also privately educated for some two years under the tutorship of S. T. Friend. The latter probably tried to dissuade Oxenford from his dramatic career, considering that he had the 'highest philosophical faculties, together with a versatility of powers which pointed to another sphere', but was powerless, since Oxenford's 'dramatic taste... was developed so early that his heart was not to be given to other pursuits' ('The Times'). Urged by his family, however, Oxenford began his working life as an articled clerk with Willis & Co. of Tokenhouse Yard, and was admitted to practise as a solicitor in 1833. 
Apparently Oxenford did not much enjoy his profession, finding relief, like many of his colleagues, in the theatre. His first play, entitled 'My Fellow Clerk' (Lyceum, 20 April 1835), is set in a lawyer's office and displays this autobiographical background. It was followed by a rapid succession of all types of drama which ended only two years before Oxenford's death. Out of his total of well over a hundred plays it is perhaps his farces that retain the greatest freshness today. They include such memorable successes as 'A Day Well Spent' (Lyceum, 4 April 1836), which was adapted by J. Nestroy as 'Einen Jux will er sich machen' (Vienna, 1845), and via Nestroy's adaptation formed the basis of such well-known pieces as Thornton Wilder's 'The Merchant of Yonkers' (Boston, Massachusetts, 1936) -- later reworked, adapted, and turned into David Merrick's hit musical 'Hello Dolly!' -- and Tom Stoppard's 'On the Razzle' (Edinburgh, 1981). His numerous melodramas, most of which are adaptations or translations from the French, were equally applauded, particularly 'The Two Orphans' (Olympic Theatre, 14 September 1874), based on Dennery and Cormon, but also 'East Lynne' (Surrey Theatre, 5 February 1866), which was the most successful of the many adaptations of Mrs Henry Wood's novel. 
Like many of his poorly paid fellow playwrights at the time, Oxenford also had to find other ways to make a living. About 1840 he became theatre critic for 'The Times' through the influence of his uncle, Thomas Massa Alsager (1779-1846), who managed the City department of 'The Times' from 1817 to 1846. Although today his theatrical reviews would be considered of slight value as works of criticism, their concise plot summaries and often minute documentation of the productions render them a precious source to the theatre historian. Oxenford's greatest contribution to theatre criticism must, however, be seen in the respectability with which he endowed the profession. As the acclaimed 'doyen of critics', he was deferentially allowed a private box in all theatres (Fitzgerald, 77f.). 
Beyond his work connected with the theatre, the variety of Oxenford's interests is reflected in the many review articles he contributed to a long list of periodicals. His mature and independent critical judgement can best be exemplified by his article on Rabelais in the 1843 'Foreign Quarterly Review', and by 'Iconoclasm in German philosophy' in the 'Westminster Review' for 1853. The latter essay, an assessment of Schopenhauer's style and philosophical system, played a significant role in bringing about the German philosopher's final breakthrough to public recognition: not only in Great Britain, but, in its German translation in the 'Vossische Zeitung' (May 1853), also in his own country. 
Oxenford's work as a translator was equally fruitful. From the French he rendered a number of plays, including Moliere's 'Tartuffe'; from the Spanish, Calderon's 'La vida es sueno' ('Monthly Magazine', 1843) and several ballads ('New Monthly Magazine', 1846). However, the foreign language in which he felt most at home was clearly German. His major translations of Goethe were that of 'Aus meinem Leben: Dichtung und Wahrheit' as 'The Autobiography' (1848), and of 'Die Wahlverwandschaften' as 'Affinities', first serialized in the 'Musical World' (1846-7); together with 'Conversations with Eckermann and Soret' (1850), translated from 'Gesprache mit Goethe' they set a high standard and were frequently re-edited, 'The Autobiography' as recently as 1971. To this must be added a host of other serialized and minor translations of German legends, stories, and poems by such diverse authors as Gottfried August Burger, Hermann Ferdinand Freiligrath, Heinrich Heine, Heinrich von Kleist, Lenau, Jean Paul and Friedrich Ruckert, to mention only a few. 
Oxenford's original writings are more scarce. They, too, range from the musingly philosophical and romantic, such as the 173 sonnets included in the 'Musical World' (1846-50), to the witty and broadly humorous, such as his contributions to the early numbers of 'Punch', 'Bentley's Miscellany', or Dickens's 'Household Words'. Nevertheless they cannot be credited with the same merits as his other literary activities. Here, as with his manifold critical output, it appears that the focusing of the gleanings from his most diverse and wide reading, reliable judgement, and acquired literary taste into unified concepts and original textual structures ultimately eluded him. 
Later in life Oxenford began to suffer from some form of pneumonial disease, which more or less disabled him during the last two years before his death. 'Long a deist', as Hawkins reports (Hawkins, 89), he was received into the Roman Catholic church in September 1875. He died on 21 February 1877 at his home at 28 Trinity Square, Southwark, London. After a requiem mass at St George's Cathedral, Southwark, he was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 28 February. He had been married, albeit none too happily ('Life and Reminiscences of E. L. Blanchard', 1.134), and was survived by his wife, Alice, a son, John, and a daughter, Caroline. 


@@@@@


doc= 21056


Oxenham, Henry Nutcombe (1829-1888), Roman Catholic convert and ecumenist, was born at Harrow, Middlesex, on 15 November 1829, the eldest son of William Oxnam (1800/01-1863), who later took the name Oxenham, an Anglican clergyman and second master of Harrow School, and his wife, Mary Susannah, daughter of the Revd T. Carter, lower master of Eton College. He was educated at Harrow School and at Balliol College, Oxford, where he won a classical scholarship. He graduated BA in 1850 (MA 1854) with second-class honours in classics, and was president of the Oxford Union in 1852. He was ordained in the Church of England in 1854 and served as a curate at Worminghall, Buckinghamshire, and then at St Bartholomew's, Cripplegate, London. As an Anglican curate, he began to write and publish religious works which testified to his Tractarian views and practice. His slim volume of poetry, 'The Sentence of Kaires and other Poems', first published in 1854, eventually ran to three editions. In the same year 'Simple Tracts on Great Truths by Clergymen of the Church of England' and a 'Manual of Devotions for the Blessed Sacrament' were published under his editorship. 
Oxenham was at the inaugural meeting of the Association for the Promotion of the Unity of Christendom (APUC) in September 1857 with the Anglican, F. G. Lee and the Roman Catholic Ambrose Phillipps De Lisle. The APUC promoted a reunion of the Roman Catholic, Anglican and Orthodox churches, which would allow each to retain its distinctive patterns of worship and customs. Less than two months after joining the APUC, however, Oxenham was received into the Roman Catholic church by his fellow convert H. E. Manning. As he explained in 'The Tractarian Party and the Catholic Revival' (1858), he had lost confidence in Anglicanism which he saw as Erastian and ununified. He retained a strong attachment to the Church of England, however, and disliked what he considered to be the excesses of ultramontanism. He became a member of the Brompton Oratory and received minor orders but did not proceed to the priesthood. He could not be convinced that his Anglican orders were invalid and clashed with members of the Roman Catholic hierarchy. In the 1860s he vigorously defended the liberal Catholic periodical 'Rambler' to Bishop Ullathorne of Birmingham, who regarded it as the mouthpiece of the restless unorthodox. Oxenham also publicly drew attention to the deficiencies of English Catholic seminaries. He took up a teaching position at St Edmund's College, Ware, and then briefly at the Oratory School, Birmingham, where he helped to trigger a staff mutiny at the end of his first term: Newman refused to take him back. He increasingly came under the influence of J. J. I. von Dollinger, the Bavarian church historian and liberal, later translating his major works as 'First Age of Christianity and the Church' (1866) and 'Lectures on the Reunion of the Churches' (1872). In 1865 Oxenham published his own 'The Catholic Doctrine of the Atonement'. 
Oxenham remained a passionate supporter of reunion even after the APUC was criticized in a papal rescript in 1864 for encouraging the idea that churches other than the Roman Catholic were truly 'catholic', and after the English bishops had pressed for a condemnation of the society. Oxenham contributed essays to F. G. Lee's two series of 'Sermons on the Reunion of Christendom' (1864, 1865) in which he advocated reunion as a response to rationalism, and argued for theological discussion between churches and for a distinction to be drawn between the essentials and non-essentials of faith. In terms that anticipated the twentieth-century ecumenical movement, he argued that Christians would naturally begin to understand one another as they worked side by side on social questions. In 1866 his 'Dr Pusey's Eirenicon Considered in Relation to Catholic Unity: a Letter to Revd Fr Lockhart' included a plea for an official Roman Catholic investigation into the validity of Anglican orders. In response to rigorous criticisms by the ultramontane 'Dublin Review' he returned to the subject in another collection edited by Lee, 'Essays on the Reunion of Christendom' (1867), which dismissed 'the bluster of a little coterie of amateur theologians [and] the idiosyncrasies of a crotchety journalist' with disdain (Oxenham, 189). Like his mentor, Dollinger, Oxenham was appalled by the definition of papal infallibility pronounced at the First Vatican Council in 1870, although he came to disapprove of the Old Catholic church. He continued to write on reunion and to criticize ultramontanism in the pages of the 'Saturday Review'. He edited and translated the second volume of Bishop Hefele's 'The History of the Christian Church' (1876) in the same year that he brought out 'Catholic Eschatology and Universalism'. In 1879 Oxenham published 'Eirenicon of the Eighteenth Century' and an edition of 'Essay towards a Proposal for Catholic Communion' which was first published anonymously in 1704 and is usually ascribed to Joshua Basset. In 1884-5 he published 'Short Studies in Ecclesiastical History and Biography' and 'Short Studies, Ethical and Religious', and in 1886 a 'Memoir of Lieutenant Rudolf de Lisle RN'. Oxenham's tall, thin, and dark appearance, as well as his manner, may have suggested a recluse, but he was passionate, and his theology and approach to reunion were to be officially adopted by the Roman Catholic church less than a hundred years after his death. He died in full communion with the Roman Catholic church at 42 Addison Road, Kensington, on 23 March 1888, and was buried in Chislehurst, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 21057


Oxenham, John (c.1536-1580), sea captain, was by his own account a native of Plymouth. He accompanied Sir Francis Drake's 1572 raid upon Nombre de Dios, on the Caribbean coast of the Panama isthmus; of him and Thomas Sherwell, the English mariners were said to have 'conceived greatest hope of them next our Captaine' (Wright, 169, 322). At Nombre de Dios, Oxenham and John Drake were appointed by their now injured leader to lead an attack upon the treasure-house there, but were obliged to withdraw when Francis Drake collapsed. The success of Drake's expedition inclined Oxenham to make his own attempt on the isthmus in 1576. With fifty-seven men and a ship of 100 tons' burden, he departed from England on 9 April. According to his later testimony, he intended to trade with the 'cimarrones' -- escaped black slaves who preyed upon Spanish possessions in the isthmus -- but his subsequent actions indicate that any trade he undertook was only to acquire allies in plunder. In his ship he carried two dismantled pinnaces; these he assembled and, leaving his ship in a bay to the west of Cartagena, took them to range the isthmus coast. At Veragua his pinnaces assaulted a Spanish ship but were repulsed with some loss. At Acla, some 45 miles from Nombre de Dios, he struck inland and made contact with a group of 'cimarrones'. In the meantime, Spanish forces found and took Oxenham's ship with most of his trading goods and artillery, and destroyed a small fortified camp he had built at Acla. Between September 1576 and February 1577 the Englishmen remained inland with the 'cimarrones' at or near the Pacific watershed. There they built a new boat, and in spring descended the Pinas River to the Pacific shore: the first Englishmen to enter the ocean. For several weeks they raided the Pearl Islands, freeing slaves (whom they handed over to the 'cimarrones') and, according to Spanish eyewitnesses, desecrating Catholic churches. Finally, at Quayaquil, they captured a bark laden with Peruvian treasure. Following this hugely profitable seizure, they returned to the Pinas to begin their passage back to the Atlantic Ocean. 
The Spanish authorities reacted swiftly to these new depredations. A small flotilla sailed north from Lima; at the mouth of the Pinas some 200 soldiers under Juan de Ortega disembarked to pursue the Englishmen. In May 1577 Ortega caught up with and fell upon a group of them, killing several, though Oxenham was elsewhere at the time. A ship's boy who surrendered to the Spaniards disclosed the nearby hiding place of his compatriots' hard-won treasure. The Spaniards thereafter attacked and destroyed the 'cimarrone' village where Oxenham planned to replenish his supplies. Half of his remaining men left the expedition to make for the Atlantic and attempt to steal a boat in which to return home; the 'cimarrones' themselves, apparently angered by Oxenham's refusal to kill every Spaniard he captured, would give no further assistance. When Ortega's men advanced upon them, they fled without warning their English ally. Oxenham and his remaining men were captured on 7 September 1577 in a banana grove near Villano. 
The Englishmen were taken to Panama, where, after a brief trial, most were hanged. Oxenham and seven others were taken to Lima. For more than three years the authorities there hesitated to impose the death penalty; but news of Drake's depredations in the Pacific probably inclined them to make an example. Oxenham, his master, and pilot were hanged at Lima, several days after an 'auto-da-fe' of 29 October 1580; the remaining five captives, all ship's boys, were alive still in 1586. During his interrogation at Panama, Oxenham had given his age as forty-two. Undoubtedly courageous and bold, he wantonly underestimated his enemies and paid the price. He was reported by his interrogators to have been 'thick of speech... of grave demeanour, much feared and respected and obeyed by his soldiers' (Wright, 112-3, 234). Drake appears to have liked and respected him; while at the port of Calloa de Lima in February 1579, during his circumnavigation, he heard of Oxenham's incarceration and sent a Spanish prisoner to plead for his release and to threaten reprisals if he were executed. 


@@@@@


doc= 21058


Oxford, John of (d. 1200), administrator and bishop of Norwich, was the son of Henry of Oxford, sheriff of Oxfordshire (died 1164). He had become rector of St Peter's-in-the-East and of St Mary's, and also rural dean of Oxford, by 'c'.1160, when he was already active in royal administration, frequently attesting charters of Henry II both in England and on the continent. It was, however, the king's dispute with Thomas Becket that propelled him to the front rank of royal councillors. He was probably one of a group charged with drawing up the constitutions of Clarendon, and in February 1164 he was dispatched on the first of several missions to the papal curia and other European courts to argue the royal case. In May 1165, during an embassy to negotiate the marriage of the king's daughter Matilda to Henry the Lion, duke of Bavaria and Saxony, he was present with Richard of Ilchester at the imperial Council of Wurzburg, and here he allegedly swore that Henry II and his dominions would renounce obedience to Alexander III ('r'. 1159-81) and would recognize the emperor Frederick Barbarossa's rival pope, Paschal III. Although John strongly denied this, Becket's circle henceforth contemptuously dubbed him 'iurator' ('the oath-taker'). Also early in 1165 John received the deanery of Salisbury, and Becket argued that this was against papal prohibition and effected by royal coercion. John headed the list of those excommunicated by the archbishop at Vezelay on Whitsunday (12 June) 1166, a sentence confirmed by the pope. This did not, however, disrupt his diplomatic career, and in November 1166 he obtained papal absolution, to the fury of Becket's supporters, who were alarmed by the apparent success of his latest mission to the papal court. He returned to England early in 1167, and convened a council to transmit to the higher clergy of England the instructions of king and pope. 
The anticipated settlement was, however, delayed, and for the next three years John was still involved in negotiations relating to the dispute. In August 1169 he was present at discussions between Henry II and the papal legates at Domfront, and subsequently went once more to the papal curia, now at Benevento. When peace was eventually made between archbishop and king at Freteval, it was John who escorted Becket back to England at the end of November 1169, and he who averted an ugly incident when royal officers attempted to intercept the archbishop at Sandwich. He had left Becket before the martyrdom a month later, which ended an episode in his own life. His role is difficult to assess. At times he appears to be an agent, even the instigator, of royal malevolence; occasionally, however, he seems to have been a moderator, attempting to restore peace on reasonable terms. The abuse heaped on him by Becket's adherents is, however, certainly a recognition of his influence in these years of conflict. 
After a period of silence John's diplomatic career resumed following his elevation to the bishopric of Norwich in December 1175. The next year he was dispatched to Sicily to finalize negotiations for the marriage of another of the king's daughters. Ralph de Diceto preserves a vivid account of his tribulations on this mission, presumably from John's own mouth. In 1185 he was sent to mediate between the king of France and the count of Flanders. In England he was present at important councils, such as Henry II's arbitration between the kings of Castile and Navarre in March 1177, and at Geddington two months later when the king reached an agreement with the Welsh princes. Between 1176 and 1189 he attested some sixty royal charters, although now these were all issued in England. Most notably, he served Henry II in a judicial capacity. In April 1179 he was appointed with the bishops of Ely and Winchester as one of three chief justices who were to superintend a general eyre of the realm. This fusion of ecclesiastical and secular office, condemned by Becket, was now vigorously defended by Richard of Dover (died 1184), Becket's successor as archbishop of Canterbury. Thereafter John frequently delivered judgments at Westminster, and as late as 1189 was on eyre in the eastern and south-eastern counties. He was one of the most active justices in the later years of Henry II's reign. He appeared frequently in the company of the new king, Richard I, in late 1189, and in February 1190 was one of the group that crossed to Normandy to discuss the problems arising from the conflict of the two justiciars. In October 1191 he attended the council convened to protest at William de Longchamp's treatment of Archbishop Geoffrey of York. He also acted as justice on eyre at York in 1192 and on the eastern circuit in 1194-5. He was, however, no longer at the centre of policy making, and it is very possible that his relationship with Richard I had become strained after John, who had set out on the third crusade, obtained absolution from his vow from Pope Clement III ('r'. 1187-91) and returned home from Italy -- he was subsequently amerced by the king. His last appearance on the national stage was at the coronation of King John, just a year before his own death on 2 June 1200. 
John's elevation to the episcopate in December 1175, at the king's behest, may in one sense be seen, with the promotion of other leading opponents of Becket to Ely and Winchester two years earlier, as a triumph for Henry II's interpretation of the correct relationship between the crown and the English church. In fact, however, John as bishop was far from subservient to the king's government, and was rebuked very publicly by Henry II for his excommunication of the earl of Arundel during a dispute over their respective rights in Lynn. Several times before 1170 John had met Pope Alexander III, one of the great legislators of the medieval church, and after 1175 he participated actively in the expansion and definition of Roman canon law instigated by that pope and his successors. He attended the Third Lateran Council of 1179, and although not one of the most prominent of those employed by the papacy to judge cases in England, he was commissioned as papal judge-delegate by Alexander III on at least five occasions between 1176 and 1181, and in at least three cases thereafter. Three of his letters to the pope requesting the elucidation of doubtful points of canon law were incorporated into the universal law of the church in the 'Decretals', or 'Liber Extra', of 1234. 
The evidence for John of Oxford's administration of his diocese is provided by over 160 surviving 'acta' -- this is as many as for the previous three bishops over eighty-three years, and many more have certainly been lost. Their content, as is usual with such collections, is extremely varied -- confirmations, institutions, to benefices, institutions and judgments. A large number, however, relate to the regulation of the parochial ministry in East Anglia, and it is notable that, although on fifty-seven recorded occasions he granted the revenues of parish churches to monastic houses, in forty-five of these, in marked contrast to his predecessor, he made specific provision for the service of the church. There is strong circumstantial evidence that, after his retirement from court in the early 1190s, he devoted himself in person to the regulation of his large diocese along lines advocated by more prominent reformers. 
John of Oxford's episcopate was, however, marred by a long-running dispute with his monastic cathedral chapter at Norwich. Like many of his contemporaries, including the primate, he was hostile to such institutions, not least because they deprived bishops of lucrative prebends with which they might reward their own clerks. The monks of Norwich complained that Bishop John had inflicted serious financial losses on them, had usurped their patronage of parish churches, had interfered capriciously in the internal administration of their community, and had forbidden them to appeal against his unilateral actions. Pope Celestine III in 1194 and Pope Innocent III in 1200 ruled in favour of the convent, and the bishop's successor, John de Gray (1200-14) made a determined effort to reach an agreement with the monks of Norwich. 
John of Oxford was, during the middle years of his career, the object of much abuse from Becket's circle, and, as a bishop, from his own cathedral chapter. The records reveal that he was one of the most active of Henry II's administrators throughout his long reign, employed indifferently in diplomatic, judicial, and financial tasks. It may point to a parallel breadth of intellectual interests that he had links with the astronomer Daniel of Morley, whose 'Philosophia' was written at John's request. After 1175 John experienced no dramatic conversion, but the evidence of his own 'acta' and of papal decretals addressed to him suggests that he did attempt to apply reforming principles in his own diocese and that he did not shrink, on the rare occasions when he felt it necessary, from confrontation with the secular government. In general, however, he was one of those who believed, like Gilbert Foliot and Hubert Walter, that the interests of the church in England were best served by co-operation with the crown. His criticism of Thomas Becket, expressed to the aged Empress Matilda in 1164, that the archbishop was striving to extend the privileges of the clergy for the sake of ambition and worldly gain, may have been more than propaganda, and a genuine statement of his personal view. 


@@@@@


doc= 21059


Oxlee, John (1779-1854), philologist and writer on theology, son of a well-to-do farmer in Yorkshire, was born at Guisborough in Cleveland, Yorkshire, on 25 September 1779, and educated at Sunderland. After working as a tailor for a short time he studied mathematics and Latin, taught classics at a school near Greta Bridge, and made such rapid progress in Latin that in 1802 Dr Vicesimus Knox appointed him second master at Tonbridge School. There he lost, through inflammation, the use of an eye, yet began studying Hebrew, Chaldee, and Syriac. In 1805 he was ordained to the curacy of Egton, near Whitby, where he married a daughter of John R. A. Worsop of Howden Hall, Yorkshire, and took in pupils. In 1811 he moved to the curacy of Stonegrave, from 1816 to 1826 he held the rectory of Scawton for the master of Downing College, and in 1836 the archbishop of York presented him to the rectory of Molesworth in Huntingdonshire. 
Oxlee's power of acquiring languages, considering that he was self-educated, has rarely been excelled. He is said to have obtained a knowledge more or less extensive of 120 languages and dialects. In pursuing his studies he often had to form his own grammar and dictionary. He left among his numerous unpublished writings a work entitled 'One hundred and more vocabularies of such words as form the stamina of human speech, commencing with the Hungarian and terminating with the Yoruba' (1837-40). He spent much time on mastering the Hebrew law and in studying the 'Talmud'. His only recreation was walking, and he at times walked 50 miles to York or Hull to obtain a book in Hebrew or some other oriental language. He was a contributor to the 'Anti-Jacobin Review', 'Valpy's Classical Journal', the 'Christian Remembrancer', the 'Voice of Jacob', the 'Voice of Israel', the 'Jewish Chronicle', the 'Jewish Repository', 'The Yorkshireman', and 'Sermons for Sundays and Festivals'. 
Oxlee's minute study of the Hebrew writings led him to differ on many important points both from the Jewish and Christian interpreters. His most important work is 'The Christian doctrine of the Trinity and incarnation considered and maintained on the principles of Judaism' (3 vols., 1815-50). During the thirty-four years which elapsed between the publication of the first and third volumes he was busy collecting materials. The work contains a mass of abstruse learning. He held that the Jewish rabbis were well aware of the doctrine of the Trinity, and that in the 'Talmuds' the three persons of the Godhead are clearly mentioned and often referred to. In his 'Three Letters to the Archbishop of Canterbury' (1842) and 'Three More Letters' (1845) he stated his reasons for declining to take any part in the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews, and his grounds for not believing in the personality of the devil. From 1842 to 1854 he corresponded with a Jewish scholar, Mr Peynado, respecting the differences between Judaism and Christianity. Seven previous letters, addressed to J. M., a Jew, are printed in the 'Jewish Repository' (1815-16). An article in the 'Jewish Chronicle' welcomed his stance on Judaism, calling him 'a believing priest of the Church Tolerant' (11 July 1845). 
Oxlee's many controversial pamphlets, letters, and sermons included his 'Three letters to the Archbishop Lawrence of Cashel on the apocryphal publications of his grace (Enoch, Ezra, and Isaiah) on the age of the Sepher Zoar and on the two genealogies of Christ as given in the gospels of St. Matthew and St. Luke' (1854). This publication amazed Dr Nicholl, regius professor of divinity at Oxford, by its immense number of correct extracts from early and late Jewish writers. Oxlee's taste for controversy is exemplified in 'Three letters to Mr. C. Wellbeloved, tutor of the Unitarian College, York, on the folly of separating from the mother church'. 
Oxlee died at Molesworth rectory on 30 January 1854, leaving two children: an unmarried daughter, Marianna, and a son, John Oxlee (died 1892), vicar of Over Silton in 1848 and rector of Cowesby in 1863 (both in Yorkshire). The latter's intention of publishing a memoir of his father does not seem to have been fulfilled. Oxlee himself left many unpublished works, including an Armenian and an Arabic lexicon. 


@@@@@


doc= 21060


Oxley, John Joseph William Molesworth (c.1785-1828), surveyor and explorer in Australia, born at Kirkham Abbey, Yorkshire, was the son of John Oxley, a man of landed stock, and his wife, Isabella, said to have been a daughter of the fourth Viscount Molesworth in the peerage of Ireland. He joined the navy in 1799 and arrived in Australia on the 'Buffalo' in 1802. His ship was involved in survey work, and his enthusiasm and efficiency impressed Governor King. After returning to England in 1807 Oxley obtained a lieutenancy, and in 1808 he was back in Sydney as first lieutenant on HMS 'Porpoise'. However, the business opportunities in the colony had not escaped him; he brought $800-worth of goods to sell and an order for a grant of 600 acres, which Lieutenant-Colonel Paterson, the acting governor, increased to 1000 acres. 
Oxley began a life which mixed surveying, exploration, and business. Back in England in 1810 he twice sought the surveyor-generalship of New South Wales, allegedly paying the incumbent to resign before obtaining the position in February 1812, through the interest of the Farquhar family, patrons of John Macarthur, his one-time friend. Oxley reached Sydney in November, and during Macquarie's administration was more involved in exploration than in the technicalities of his profession. In March 1817, with the botanist Alan Cunningham, he led an expedition to follow the Lachlan River and to search for the fabled inland sea; after nineteen weeks he was stopped by impenetrable marshes on the Lachlan and returned to Bathurst, the praise of his governor, and a gift of $200. 
Convinced that the inland sea did exist, Oxley set out again in May 1818 and followed the Macquarie River from Bathurst until he met the reeds of the Macquarie marshes. Then he turned north-east and came across the Castlereagh River; to the east he traversed the rich Liverpool plains and the Peel River, and followed the Hastings River to its mouth at Port Macquarie. The six months' expedition had found valuable grazing land, and Oxley thought (wrongly) he was close to 'an inland sea, most probably a shoal one' (Oxley, entry for 3 July 1818). He explored Jervis Bay and the five islands in 1819 but was unimpressed, though in December 1820 he recommended Port Macquarie as the site of a new penal settlement. In 1823 he sailed up the Queensland coast as far as Port Curtis, and on his return surveyed Moreton Bay and the Brisbane River, recommending that a penal colony be established there -- as it was, at Redeliffe, in August 1824. The administration of his department came to occupy more of Oxley's time. He advised Commissioner Bigge on land sales, drew up regulations on the matter for Governor Brisbane (1824, 1825), and was involved in the first attempt to survey the colony on the orders of London, constantly complaining about the inadequacies of his staff and his fees. 
Oxley failed as a merchant and businessman. He was constantly in debt, and in 1812 this cost him his hoped-for marriage to Elizabeth Macarthur; her father, John Macarthur, refused Oxley's offer for her hand, declaring, correctly, that Oxley would never survive among the 'sharks' of the colony. Even his illegal deals to sell cattle to the government stores failed; his only success was as a grazier, although even here he was accused of selling crossbred sheep as pure merinos. He antagonized both Macquarie and Macarthur; indeed, many thought him unprincipled and factious, but he was a member of the legislative council in 1824-5, a generous patron to the churches and to charity, and active in all aspects of public life in New South Wales. 
Denied Elizabeth Macarthur's hand in 1812, on 31 October 1821 Oxley married an educated English gentlewoman, Emma (1798-1885), the daughter of John Norton, a landowner of Mulgoa, New South Wales, with whom he had two sons, John and Henry. He already had three illegitimate daughters, two with Charlotte Thorpe and another with Elizabeth Marnon. He lived well, dividing his time between his town house in Sydney and his property at Kirkham, near Camden, where he had moved in 1817. He died on 26 May 1828, at Kirkham, from a kidney disease probably caused by the privations of exploring, and was buried in the Devonshire Street cemetery in Sydney. He was virtually penniless, but the British government awarded his sons 5000 acres in recognition of their father's explorations. 
A brave, diligent explorer, Oxley was a complex man who craved social acceptance and economic success. The latter eluded him, but his travels through New South Wales were crucial to the great pastoral 'break-out' of the 1830s. Australians remember him as a man who tried -- and failed -- to solve the problems of the western rivers, but his book, 'Journals of Two Expeditions into the Interior of New South Wales' (1820), was the first detailed account of Australian exploration by land. 


@@@@@


doc= 21061


Oxley, Joseph (1715-1775), Quaker minister, the eldest son of John Oxley (1682/3-1724), corn factor, and Ann, 'nee' Peckover (1685/6-1720) of Fakenham, Norfolk, was born at Brigg in Lincolnshire on 4 November 1715. His mother, who was a Quaker minister, died in 1720, aged thirty-four; four years later, in January 1724, his father died, and thereafter he was raised by his Quaker uncle Edmund Peckover. After five years at Gilbert Thompson's school at Sankey in Lancashire he was apprenticed to Robert Henderson, a Quaker clockmaker, at Scarborough. It has been suggested that as a youth Oxley was 'led away by the influence of evil associates to an indifference towards religion, a neglect to attend meetings for worship and other unprofitable and disorderly practices. He became a source of great trouble to his relations and friends' ('Oxley, Joseph', 'Dictionary of Quaker biography'). In 1738, aged twenty-three, he moved to London to find employment. Soon afterwards he attended a large meeting on Kennington Common, held by the Calvinistic Methodist George Whitefield, and on account of his small stature was almost crushed to death. A gentlewoman who witnessed his predicament helped rescue him from danger, and this event led to his conversion to Quakerism. In 1742 he became a minister of the Society of Friends and travelled on missionary visits to Scotland, Ireland, and all parts of England. 
In 1741 Oxley moved to Fakenham in Norfolk and opened a shop. On 28 June 1744 he married Elizabeth Fenn (1719?-1753), a Quaker from Norwich, and formed a partnership in a prosperous woollen mill. On 22 March 1745 Ann, the first of his five children, was born; his wife died in 1753, when his children were still in their infancy. On 5 January 1757, at Huntingdon in Cambridgeshire, Oxley married Mary Burr (1716-1794), a Quaker minister originally from Royston in Hertfordshire; they had no children. 
During the summer of 1762 Oxley conducted a missionary visit to Friends in Cork, where on 15 July it was recorded that he was 'a sound Minister, a worthy Friend and a most agreeable companion' ('Travelling in Ireland', 261). In July 1770 he sailed for America, and in September arrived at New York and proceeded to visit many Quaker meetings. At the yearly meeting in Philadelphia later that month Oxley recorded that it was a solemn meeting 'such as he had not seen before; so consistent in appearance of dress and uniformity throughout, agreeably to our holy profession' (Janney, 3.392). His letters and details of his life were later published by John Barclay under the title 'Joseph's offering to his children: being Joseph Oxley's journal of his life, travels, and labours of love in the faith and fellowship of our Lord Jesus Christ' (1837) and provide interesting information about the colonies of Virginia, Maryland, and New England. 
Oxley returned to Norwich in April 1772, having travelled 13,755 miles, and died there suddenly on 22 October 1775; he was interred in the Quaker burial-ground at Norwich four days later. On 26 April 1776 Norwich Friends composed the following testimony: 'This our dear Friend was exemplary in conduct and agreeable in conversation, honest in advice, charitable in sentiment, and unwearied in Benevolence. He was therefore deservedly esteemed by his neighbours and beloved by his Friends... The love of God being shed abroad in his heart, he preferred the Lord's business to his own and when he felt divine drawings to visit the Churches he resigned himself fully. ('Testimonies', 3.87)' 



@@@@@


doc= 21062


Ozell, John (d. 1743), translator, was the son of John Ozell. Little is known about his parents. His father was said to be from a Leicestershire family, of French origin. Ozell was educated at the free school in Ashby-de-la-Zouch, and then at Christ's Hospital, after which it was expected that he would go to Cambridge, and become a clergyman. However, he decided instead to enter business and he moved to London where he joined an accountant's office. He was successful in this, and managed several important accounts, including those of the City of London, St Paul's Church, and St Thomas's Hospital. 
While Ozell was working as an accountant he taught himself a number of foreign languages, which, together with the classical languages he had learned at school, enabled him to undertake the series of translations of foreign classics for which he is chiefly known. Some of the most significant translations that he produced were his versions of Boileau. In 1708 he translated his 'Le Lutrin', and between 1711 and 1713 he published an edition, 'The Works of Monsieur Boileau' (translated by Ozell and others), both of which were influential in introducing the French author's works to an English-speaking public at this time. Like many translators of this period, Ozell's treatment of the texts that he was working on was a free one, in which he continually expanded upon the original. Thus he used Boileau's account of the 'battle of the books' in the 'Lutrin' to comment upon contemporary English writers. 
The attack on William Wycherley's poetry included in this translation brought Ozell into conflict with the influential group of Scriblerian writers. Alexander Pope was a friend of Wycherley's, and at this time he was engaged in editing and revising the older writer's 'Miscellaneous Poems'. He immediately responded to Ozell in his 'Epigram, Occasion'd by Ozell's Translation of Boileau's Lutrin', written in 1708, in which he claimed that 'those were slander'd most whom Ozell prais'd' ('Minor Poems', 6.37). Ozell continued to be lampooned as the epitome of the hack translator in both Pope's 'Dunciad' and Jonathan Swift's 'Introduction to Polite Conversation'. Yet although he was mocked for his literary incompetence, his translations were not only good by the standards of the time, but also useful to Pope for his own work on the classics. In 1712 Ozell produced a blank-verse translation of Anne Dacier's French version of Homer's 'Iliad', and Pope borrowed from this heavily when he began to publish his own famous 'Iliad' translation three years later. 
Part of the tory Scriblerians' hostility to Ozell may have been due to his political affiliations. He seems to have been associated with the group of whig writers such as Eustace Budgell and Ambrose Philips, who centred around Joseph Addison, and 'Button's' club, held at Daniel Button's Coffee House in Covent Garden. Ozell's translations certainly suggest that his political views were whiggish. His violent anti-Catholicism is demonstrated in his 1716 translation of the life of the 'saint' Veronica of Milan, and in 1717 he published a translation of Rapin de Thoyras's very whiggish 'Dissertation sur les Whigs et les Torys' of that year ('An Historical Dissertation upon Whig and Tory'). Ozell's literary career continued to be marked by literary controversy: in 1728 the Anglican churchman Richard Bundy began to publish a version of F. Catrou's and P. J. Rouille's 'Histoire romaine, depuis la fondation de Rome' (1725-35), as 'Roman History', upstaging Ozell, who had also been planning to release a translation of the text. Ozell responded by publishing a lengthy commentary on the various mistakes and omissions in Bundy's translation. He also issued an advertisement in the newspaper the 'Weekly Medley', in which he attacked both Bundy, and his old enemy Pope, whose 'Dunciad variorum' had appeared that year. In the advertisement he vindicated the reputation of his own scholarship, and claimed that Pope was 'that second Cain, whose Hand is against every Body, and every Body's Hand against him' ('Weekly Medley', 20 Sept 1729). 
Ozell never married. At the time of his death he was financially secure, due to his accountancy work and an inheritance that he was left by an old family friend from Leicestershire. He died at his house in Arundel Street in Westminster on 15 October 1743, and was buried in the church of St Mary Aldermanbury, Westminster. He left his estate to his brother, Austin Ozell. 


@@@@@


doc= 21063


Pabo (supp. fl. c.500), chieftain, is named by the earliest Welsh genealogies (BL, Harley MS 3859) as a son of Cenau ap Coel Hen and thus placed at the beginning of the sixth century. Later genealogical sources make him the son of Arthwys ap Mar ap Cenau ap Coel, but internal chronology supports the earlier versions. In the genealogies Pabo is chiefly named as the father of Dunod Fwr, Sawyl Benuchel, and Ardun Benasgell, and as the grandfather of three Welsh saints, Deiniol, Asaf and Tysilio. In medieval Welsh literature he is styled 'Post Prydain' ('the Pillar of Britain'), an epithet also applied to Urien Rheged. Pabo is alleged by tradition to have been buried at Llanbabo in Anglesey and to have given his name to the church there. The earliest written reference to this tradition appears in the work of the eighteenth-century antiquary Henry Rowlands, but Pabo Post Prydain is also linked to Llanbabo by a fourteenth-century monument discovered, according to Lewis Morris, in the churchyard during the reign of Charles II. The slab is carved in low relief with the figure of a king and an inscription, which can be read in part and has been interpreted as: 'Hic iacet Pa[bo] Post Priid Co[nf Gr]... [t]el [i]ma[ginem obtulit]' ('Here lies Pabo the Upholder of Britain, Confessor, Gruffudd ab Ithel offered (this) image'). However, as there is no earlier evidence that the north British Pabo became an ecclesiastic or that he died in Anglesey, it is likely that it is some other Pabo who is commemorated in the name of the church. 


@@@@@


doc= 21064


Pace, John (b. c.1523, d. in or before 1592), scholar and court jester, was probably the son of John Pace, a brother of Richard Pace (1483?-1536), secretary to Henry VIII, diplomat, and humanist. In 1522 the elder John Pace received 'license to exercise by deputy the office of customer... in the port of Lynne' and 'to keep, buy and sell ships, and negociate as to the freightage of ships'. He was then a London resident, and owned 'lands and offices' estimated at the yearly value of $40, 100 marks ('LP Henry VIII', 3.2, 889, 1052). Richard Pace informs us that, in 1527, his brother John had a 'wife and children' (ibid., 4.2, 1472), but their names are unknown. 
John Pace the younger studied at Eton College and was afterwards elected to King's College, Cambridge. In 1539 he is described as a 'went away Fellow' at the latter institution (Harwood, 157), although John Heywood, a contemporary satirist, credits him with a master of arts degree (Camden, 266). However, Pace, who was known for his caustic wit, abandoned his scholarly career to become a court jester, in which capacity he was 'appointed' to Henry VIII (Harwood, 157) and then to the duke of Norfolk. To those contemporaries who were outraged 'that Pace being a maister of Arte had disgraced himselfe with wearing a fooles coate', John Heywood presumably indicated that 'it is lesse hurtfull to the common-weale, when wise men goe in fooles coates, than when fooles goe in wise mens gownes' (Camden, 266). 
Pace's religious affiliation has been subject to debate. Cole believes that he 'retained his integrity' as a Roman Catholic (Cole, fols. 26'v'-27). To this attests an anecdote included in Cardinal Allen's 'Apologie' for the English colleges, an anti-protestant pamphlet written and published in exile in 1581, as a response to Queen Elizabeth's two recent proclamations issued against the English Catholics studying in foreign seminaries. After blaming his adversaries for their attempts to 'forbid the entering, having, or reading' Catholic books, Allen relates that 'madde Pace meeting one day with M. Juel [John Jewel, bishop of Salisbury]... saluted his L. courtly, and said, Now my Lord, quoth he, you may be at rest with these felowes [the Catholics], for you are quit by Proclamation' (Allen, 58'v'). Pace's anachronistic remark (Jewel had died in 1571) served to voice Allen's disapproval of the queen's legal ban on Catholic books. Doran maintains that Pace was, on the contrary, a supporter of the protestant movement, although he himself questions the reliability of the story which supports his view (Doran, 164-6). 
Whatever his religious credo might have been, Pace remained hostile to Queen Elizabeth. Francis Bacon, who coined the name Bitter Fool for Pace, relates in his 'Apophthegmes New and Old' (1625) that Pace, who had been kept away from the queen because of his acerbity, was admitted one day before her, at the insistence of her courtiers, 'undertaking for him that he should keep compass'. But when the queen said: 'Come on, Pace: now we shall hear of our faults', Pace uninhibitedly replied: 'I do not use to talk of that that all the town talks of' ('Rogeri Bacon opera', 330). His witty sayings earned Pace the reputation of an authority in satirical literature. In his pamphlet 'Pierce Penilesse' (1592) Thomas Nashe includes Pace among famous 'Orators and Poets', such as 'Machevill', 'Tully' (Cicero), Ovid, Roscius, and Robert Greene (Nashe, 1). In the prologue to the tragedy 'Thorney Abbey, or, The London Maid', by 'T. W.' (1662), the Fool nostalgically calls 'Pacy' one of his 'venerable predecessors' (Welsford, 249). Pace is mentioned again in a nineteenth-century historical account of anecdotal literature ('GM', 410). 
Pace had died by 1592, for Nashe, in 'Pierce Penilesse', includes the 'Ghost of... Pace, the Duke of Norfolks Jester' among those to whom he claims to have dedicated 'epistles' (Nashe, 1). 


@@@@@


doc= 21065


Pace, Richard (1483?-1536), diplomat, humanist, and administrator, was probably born in Winchester, Hampshire, in 1483, of parents whose identity is unknown. The Pace family were probably members of the minor gentry. Few details of Pace's early life are known, apart from those revealed in his 'De fructu qui ex doctrina percipitur' (written in 1517). He had a brother, John Pace, who became customer of King's Lynn, Norfolk. 
Pace joined the household of Thomas Langton, bishop of Winchester from 1493 to 1501, and became his amanuensis. He was educated in Langton's 'domestica schola' at his Winchester palace of Wolvesey. Langton sent the musically gifted and academically promising Pace to study 'bonae literae' at the University of Padua about 1498. Pace was not, as traditionally believed, a student at Queen's College, Oxford, before leaving for Italy. Langton provided for his expenses in Italy from about 1498, and his will of 1501 bequeathed $10 a year for seven years further. Abbot de Bere, much interested in the study of Greek, also assisted Pace financially. 
Pace was educated by Niccolo Leonico Tomeo of Padua, Paolo Bombace of Bologna, and Leoniceno of Ferrara in rhetoric, Greek, medicine, Platonic and Aristotelian philosophy, and the natural sciences. He may not have studied in Padua for more than a few years, because by 1501 he was studying at Bologna. He was definitely in Ferrara some time before the end of 1508, when Desiderius Erasmus was his guest. Pace there introduced Erasmus to his good friend Celio Calcagnini, a scholar of Hebrew and of Roman law. Calcagnini would later offer his services to Henry VIII on the divorce issue on Pace's encouragement. Pace, William Latimer, and Cuthbert Tunstall belonged to the second generation of English scholars gathered around the Anglophile Tomeo in Padua. Thomas Lupset, Thomas Starkey, and Reginald Pole constituted the younger generation, and Tomeo's correspondence reveals that Pace acted as their patron in the years 1522 to 1525 when he was in Rome and the Veneto on diplomatic business. Lupset for a time was Pace's secretary. 
Pace struck up an enduring friendship with Erasmus, and the latter wrote to him more than to any other correspondent during the period until 1536. Pace said that they spent much time together in study at various places, including Bologna. In 1508 Erasmus praised his expertise in Greek and Latin literature. Pace collected notable classical metaphors and allegories into a companion volume to Erasmus's adages, although it was never published. While in Ferrara, Pace translated the preface to Simplicius's commentary on the Aristotelian 'Categories', and at some point was preparing a treatise on arithmetic along Pythagorean and Neoplatonic lines. 
Pace's other humanist and, later, diplomatic friendships which were forged in Italy during this time included those with Gasparo Contarini, Pietro Bembo, Marco Musurus, Gianmatteo Giberti, Alberto Pio, Francesco Maria Molza, Niccolo Guideco, Polydore Vergil, Alexander Alexandrini, Cornelius Agrippa, and Ulrich von Hutten. Through a network of associations he very probably had contact with the Roman Academy of John Goritz and the Aldine circle. 
Erasmus's efforts to find Pace patronage in the English court in return for kindnesses rendered in Italy bore fruit. Pace entered the service of Christopher Bainbridge, archbishop of York and Henry's newly appointed agent at Rome from the end of 1509. Bainbridge was Langton's nephew. Firmly pro-Venetian and vehemently anti-French in his policies, the bellicose Bainbridge was given the brief to assist in forming a league around Julius II which would drive the French out of Italy (the Holy League). Pace shared his views. For its part the Venetian republic regarded Pace as a learned and virtuous advocate for its interests, who was to be received as a native Venetian rather than a foreign diplomat. 
Bainbridge was made a cardinal in March 1511, by which time Pace was his Latin and Italian secretary. Pace's long series of lively and colourful diplomatic dispatches to Henry and Thomas Wolsey dates from September 1513. From 1512 Bainbridge was patron of the important humanist satiric and poetic 'festa' of Pasquino celebrated on 25 April each year. (The statue in the Piazza Navona was dressed as a pagan deity and scurrilous -- and frequently obscene -- pasquinades attacking the prominent were attached to carpets at its feet.) Pace was among Bainbridge's senior servants who probably assisted the various printers in selecting and editing the Latin and Italian epigrams for the printed collections, and contributed pasquinades of their own. Bainbridge called him his Master Pasquyll. In the spring of 1514 Pace visited England, where he was made archdeacon of Dorset, having taken holy orders before 1 May 1510, when he was made prebendary of North Muskham in Southwell, Nottinghamshire. His friendship with Thomas More probably dates from this time. 
Pace attended Bainbridge at the 1513 conclave which elected Leo X, and his experience of this was subsequently used by Henry and Wolsey. The Holy League began to disintegrate as early as October 1513 with Leo's reconciliation with France, and in March 1514 Ferdinand II of Aragon and Sicily and Louis XII signed a truce. Bainbridge's ascendancy in Rome had in fact began to decline from 1512 as a result of double-dealing in the Tudor court, but Pace served him loyally until his death from suspected poisoning in July 1514. Pace, then in Zurich, hurried back to Rome to act as Bainbridge's executor; he suspected that Wolsey's agent, Silvestro Gigli, bishop of Worcester, had instigated the crime and strenuously pursued the cause but without result. When Gigli was absolved by a papal consistory Pace acted prudently, and upon the recommendations of the pope and the cardinals accepted the patronage of Wolsey and entered his service. Pace returned to England in April 1515. 
Pace had begun researching a history of music in the Vatican library on the urgings of Latimer, but as Bainbridge's sudden death ended his life in Italy it was left unfinished. He did complete and publish a collection of Latin translations of Plutarch and Lucian, 'Plutarchi Cheronaei opuscula... Ex Luciano', with the press of Jacopo Mazzochi in 1514 or 1515, dedicating it to Bainbridge and addressing it to students. It was only the third book by an Englishman ever to be printed at Rome, and the second translation of Lucian by an Englishman (after More). It was both a tribute to Tomeo's interests in teaching Greek, ethics, and rhetoric through the vehicle of Plutarch and Lucian, and a testament of loyalty to Bainbridge. Pace pointedly drew attention to the appropriateness of the essay 'How to derive benefit from enemies' for the diplomatist cardinal and described a careworn and anxious Bainbridge denied rest by the demands of serving curia and country. If Pace's diplomatic career had begun auspiciously under Bainbridge it was to become an arduous, frustrating, and health-denying one also. Vergil and Shakespeare (and Fletcher) attributed his final insanity and impoverishment to a jealous Wolsey's desire to keep him away from England and the king's favour on continuous and gruelling ambassadorial duties from 1515 to 1525. He was often adequately provided neither with the necessary salary for conducting negotiations (especially with Maximilian I) nor with full and unambiguous instructions, and so it is not surprising that his missions usually achieved little success. This was especially true of his mission to Switzerland from October 1515 to late 1517. In the wake of Francois I's victory at the battle of Marignano against the Swiss, Henry hoped to work with Maximilian and to buy Swiss soldiers in order to counteract the intrigues of the papal and French emissaries. The 'De fructu' was composed, in an inn in Constance, as a Stoic consolation amid the dangers of diplomatic life, and published hurriedly about January 1518 because, as Pace explained, 'I am free by nature but not by choice. For I have bound myself to serve my invincible King as the servant of the wise Cardinal of York. To serve one's country exceeds all freedom' (Pace, 'De fructu', 13). His fears for his life and health were not exaggerated. The French apparently tried to poison him, the Swiss imprisoned him twice as security for the emperor's debts to their soldiers, and he suffered many attacks of fever before his return to London. 
Pace had also alternated between periods of elation and depression in 1516, the year in which he became Henry's 'primarius secretarius' or principal secretary (J. S. Brewer, 'The Reign of Henry VIII from his Accession to the Death of Wolsey', 2 vols., 1884, 2.64). He was the king's personal secretary and owed his appointment to his energy, connections, ability, fluency in several languages, and experience of foreign travel. As secretary he was in close proximity to the king and wrote almost all his personal correspondence. This relationship gave him great influence over royal patronage and he built a strong rapport with Henry. His appointment did not please all, and several prominent people thought him an odd choice. For his part Maximilian expressed his wonder to Sir Robert Wingfield that the king should use 'such a proterve and dyssymulyng persone; for whatsoever he saith now, within an hour he turneth it of another, or rather into twenty divers fashions' ('LP Henry VIII', 2/1, 2104). 
Pace's writing came under criticism too. Erasmus criticized the 'De fructu' for its stylistic transgressions and lack of judgement while praising Pace and his scholarship. However, he wrote to Pace in October 1518 saying that the book was read avidly by the Germans, although some in Constance had been offended by being characterized as bereft of learning and fond of drinking. Guillaume Bude, Beatus Rhenanus (a likely editor), and Martin Bucer were also initially appreciative. By 1520 at least an 'Apologia ad Pacaeum' was circulating in Germany and Switzerland. Accepting Erasmus's judgement, twentieth-century commentators were critical of the apparent incoherence and disconcerting shifts in tone and diction of the 'De fructu', even attributing this to Pace's mental illness. More recently, however, the work has been re-evaluated. It is a pedagogical miscellany and Menippean satire commissioned for use in the study of Greek and Latin at St Paul's School by Erasmus on behalf of John Colet, to whom it is dedicated. Its literary form accounts for its hybrid and anecdotal presentation, and it has much in common with More's 'Utopia', published only months earlier. The 'De fructu' is one of the earliest statements by an Englishman of humanist methods and theories of education and is the earliest English rhetorical textbook. 
For Pace the vital fruit of a humanist education was the provision of counsel to the secular and spiritual realms of Christendom. The 'De fructu' is highly critical of attempts made to stifle counsel offered in the appropriate courtly, ecclesiastical, or conciliar context. The declamation of each of the liberal arts introduces satire of the papacy, clergy, and courts of Europe of a type even more pointed and specific than that of Erasmus's 'Praise of Folly' (1511), and this alarmed the ever cautious Erasmus. Pace insinuated a theory of conciliarism against the background of European war and peace, and the failures of the Pisa-Milan and the Fifth Lateran councils to effect reform in the years 1511-17. 
Erasmus suppressed Pace's unpublished letter to Martin Dorp, composed while staying with More in Bruges in December 1517. This was not the only occasion on which More and Pace collaborated to defend humanist and Greek studies, and the scriptural methods of Erasmus. Letters of More and Pace to Edward Lee in support of Erasmus were published in the 'Epistolae aliquot eruditorum virorum' of 1520. In March 1521 More and Pace both attended the court at Abingdon. With the apparent approval of Henry and Wolsey they attacked the Trojans at Oxford. In April 1520 the king offered Pace $10 per annum for a certain lecture in Greek to be read and taught at the University of Cambridge. 
Early in 1518 Pace was reported as occupying the third seat in the secret council and in February was made a gentleman by a grant of arms. He remained in England until May 1519, attending the king at court and travelling from one royal palace to another. On the occasion of the proclamation of the treaty of universal peace of 1518 at St Paul's Cathedral on 3 October, which he had helped to negotiate, Pace delivered a much admired Latin oration before Henry, the two papal legates Wolsey and Lorenzo Campeggi (who was also bishop of Salisbury), and foreign ambassadors, praising peace as the highest good. On 25 October 1518 Pace succeeded Colet as dean of St Paul's. After the death of Maximilian on 12 January 1519 he was sent to Germany on the delicate task of discovering the intentions of the electors while appearing neutral -- there were several likely imperial candidates including Henry, Francois I, Charles, king of Spain, and Frederick Weftra III, duke of Saxony. If support for election of Henry proved impossible to garner Pace was to press for Charles rather than Francois. He arrived on the continent in May 1519 and travelled to the meeting of the Frankfurt diet, where the imperial election was to be held. Pace and Erasmus travelled on together to Brussels, for the former's interview with Margaret of Austria. Charles was elected on 28 June; Pace returned to England at the end of July and was rewarded with many benefices. In 1519 he was made archdeacon of Colchester, Essex, rector of Barwick in Elmet, West Riding of Yorkshire, prebendary of Exeter, vicar of St Dunstan's, Stepney, Middlesex, and prebendary of Finsbury, Middlesex. He was made dean of Exeter in 1522 and later of Salisbury ('c'.1529-31). 
Henry apparently did not perceive, or was not averse to, the strong undercurrents of warning and correction in Pace's 1518 peace oration. He again chose him to deliver a 'goodly speech' in Latin to the royal congregation on the manifest benefits of peace at the Field of Cloth of Gold in June 1520, although the text does not survive. In the following year Wolsey had Pace make a copy of Martin Luther's 'De captivitate Babylonica' for the king. John Fisher, bishop of Rochester, preached in support of the papal bull against Luther, promulgated in London on 12 May amid much ceremony, and Pace produced a Latin translation to be sent to the pope. Nicolas Wilson's preface describes Pace as possessing superlative eloquence and facility in languages, as of much and varied learning, and as a man of candour and integrity (J. Fisher, 'Joannis Fischerii Opera omnia', 1967, 1374). As dean Pace attended the burning of Luther's books at Paul's Cross. 
Leo X died on 2 December 1521 and Pace was dispatched to Italy for the first time since 1515 to promote Wolsey's candidature for the papacy. Adrian VI was elected, however, before Pace reached Rome. Pace's 'Plutarchi' was reprinted in January 1522 in Venice by Bernard dei Vitali, and Plutarch's 'De garrulitate' and 'De avaritia' added, the first dedicated to Tunstall and the second to his friend Campeggi. The 'De avaritia' was issued in a second and corrected edition later the same year. In his preface to Campeggi, Pace explained that it was translated when the pestilence at Rome and his own illness impeded 'negotium'. In 1523 Pace obtained permission from the Venetian senate for the publication of Tomeo's famous translation of and commentaries on Aristotle's 'Parva naturalia'; its dedication to Pace praises his learning fulsomely. After spending some months in Venice and Switzerland, Pace and his colleague John Clerk were again sent to Rome to support Wolsey's bid for papal election upon the death of Adrian on 14 September 1523. But Clement VII, well known to Pace, was elected. Pace was welcomed back to England with an encomium from John Leland, but was soon ordered to Lombardy to take part in negotiations with Charles Bourbon III, duke of Bourbon, Francois's rebellious subject. He remained with Bourbon's army when it invaded France, retreating to Italy after the failure of the siege of Marseilles in September. Once more attempting to persuade the Venetians to fight against the French, Pace shuttled between Brescia, Mantua, and Venice. His dispatches reveal his suspicions that Wolsey had come to a secret understanding with Francois and was hence to blame for Henry's failure to send sufficient troops and funds to support Bourbon, and describe the cardinal as having a base nature. Pace himself seems to have supplied credit so that the soldiers were paid and could therefore fight for Bourbon. 
The defeat of the French at Pavia on 24 February 1525 may have given Pace much satisfaction, but from 1522 onwards he was frequently seriously ill, attended by the finest Italian physicians, and nursed in Venice and Padua by Tomeo and Pole. In reply to Lupset's description of Pace's unrelieved fever and insomnia Erasmus wrote that he feared that it was his love affairs that were the source of his illness rather than his burdensome diplomatic duties. Pace made few references to women, apart from those to Katherine of Aragon, Margaret of Austria, Lady Darcy, and his sister-in-law, suggesting that he may have been socially awkward in their company. The doge himself urged Pace's recall in October 1525, after Wolsey failed to heed Pace's similar request in March. Pace may have taken some comfort from the birth of his nephew John Pace about 1523. 
Pace arrived in London in November 1525. After some months William Knight became secretary and coadjutors were appointed to administer his deaneries of St Paul's, Exeter, and Salisbury. Pace retired to the Brigettine cloister of Syon at Isleworth, Middlesex, and recovered sufficiently to move back to the deanery of St Paul's only in the autumn. He found solace in a continuation of the scriptural and language studies which had recently occupied him in Italy, such as the translation of the 'Psalms'. In 1527 he became involved in a dispute with his friend Fisher over the doctrine of the inspiration of the 'Septuagint', and Richard Rex argued that Pace's neglected 'Praefatio in Ecclesiasten recognitum ad Hebraicam veritatem' was the first sally. It is extant in only two copies, one of which belonged to Pace's friend Thomas Elyot. Pace claimed to have learned Hebrew in one month, and Richard Wakefield said that he taught him Hebrew, Chaldean, and Aramaic in three months while at Syon. Pace's revised 'Ecclesiastes' is not extant. This intensity of work, study, and debate was central to his character but affected his physical and mental health. 
In August Pace presented the 'Praefatio' to Henry, and during an interview was apparently called upon to give his opinion on the legality of the king's marriage to Katherine. The following day he sent Henry a letter and book written by Robert Wakefield, reader in Hebrew at Oxford, which answered some of the king's counsel, who maintained that 'Deuteronomy' 25: 5-10 annulled 'Leviticus' 22: 21. Thus was Wakefield drawn into the controversy. Enclosed in the letter Pace sent a Hebrew alphabet to be delivered to Edward Foxe, believing that within the space of one month he would have sufficient knowledge to compare the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin translations of the 'Bible' to assist Henry to his great advantage. However, for his part Pace appears to have become convinced of the validity of the marriage after discussions with Fisher. 
By 1527 Wolsey was actively hostile to one who now seemed a rival for the king's confidences and who was poised for a return to courtly service if his health allowed. A dispatch of 26 October sent by the imperial ambassador, Inigo de Mendoza, bishop of Burgos, reported rumours that Pace had made prejudicial disclosures regarding Wolsey's government to Henry in his absence, and had spoken out in support of Katherine. These reports must be handled with care because Henry's councillors were putting misinformation out at this time. Pace need not have been overtly critical of the divorce to Henry's face. Wolsey may have been behind his fall. He knew that Pace's extensive library of humanist works gathered over many years in Italy was dangerous. Pace had been offended by Julius's behaviour as pope and collected an extraordinary library on conciliarism and anti-papal critique. He made his library readily available to others who supported the divorce, giving them the necessary material to attack Wolsey's careful diplomacy and putting the cardinal in a difficult position. Therefore Wolsey was keener than ever at this critical time, when the momentum for divorce was growing, to remove Pace from power. On Wolsey's return in September he ordered a legal inquiry into Pace's conduct, with the outcome that Pace and some of his servants were committed to the Tower of London. His papers and books were seized although nothing incriminating was found except one which Pace had written on the irregularities of the pope and cardinals. An inventory of Pace's plate was carried out by his own brother at the end of the month. Wealthy from 1519, Pace had a substantial household, with plate and furniture, and was described as taking many servants and goods with him on his embassies. 
Anthony Wood claimed that Pace made charges against Wolsey which the king asked him to refute. Instead Pace was tried by Wolsey and Thomas Howard, third duke of Norfolk. Pace was reported to have been deeply critical of the divorce. People felt the charges against him were dubious, and it is difficult to reconstruct what really happened from the available sources. Fisher himself later seems to have pleaded when he defended himself against Thomas Cromwell for not having revealed the supposed prophecies of Elizabeth Barton, the nun of Kent, that the treasonable sayings of Pace had not been reported by others but were hearsay. Erasmus wrote in August 1528 that Pace had written indiscreetly to Wolsey. This delighted many of Pace's critics at court when it became known, and he was subsequently imprisoned. Anybody too forthright might have been both unwelcome and dangerous in the atmosphere at court in the late 1520s. 
On 25 October 1529 Eustace Chapuys, Mendoza's successor as imperial ambassador, wrote to Charles V that Pace was at liberty after two years' imprisonment. Pace probably spent only a short time in the Tower before being entrusted to the care of Thomas Skevington, bishop of Bangor and abbot of Beaulieu, who presumed him incurably insane. Part of the reason for keeping him in custody may have been to monitor his condition during his bouts of illness. He probably spent much of his time at Syon Abbey. He was not always cared for well. Wakefield complained at some point after 1532 to Thomas Boleyn, earl of Wiltshire, about Pace's ill treatment at the hands of 'an enemy of his and mine, or rather a common enemy of all' (H. H. Milman, 'Annals of St. Paul's Cathedral', ed. A. Milman, 1869, 185). It has been suggested that this was Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester. Wolsey's treatment of Pace was one of the charges brought against him in 1529. It is poignant to recall that in 1517 Pace had referred to Wolsey as 'quasi alter deus', almost another God to him, who had preserved his life two or three times and modelled him as a tool to be turned to whatever uses he desired. This ambiguously poised encomium had even then implied that Wolsey was usurping the king's temporal jurisdiction -- it was Pace who first described the cardinal as 'alter rex'. Erasmus wrote to Pace to tell him he was delighted by the news that he was safe and restored to his former dignity. He observed that the deity who rescued the innocent and cast down the proud was not asleep. 
Pace was recalled to court but retired ill to St Dunstan's, Stepney, in 1530 and remained there until his death in 1536. In Pace's last years John Foxe reported that his condition was 'no perpetual frenzy, but came by fits; and the fit was past, he could look on his book, and reason and talk handsomely' ('The Acts and Monuments of John Foxe', ed. G. Townsend and S. R. Cattley, 8 vols., 1837-41, 4.599). There was a false rumour of Pace's death in 1532. He died on 28 June 1536 and was buried in the church of St Dunstan, near the great altar. Originally a monument and epitaph (preserved by John Weever and incorrectly stating that he died in 1532) marked his burial place. 
There is no authenticated image of Pace. However, it is known that he presented himself to the doge of Venice wearing a long gown of satin trimmed with sable and this was said to be his usual attire. Accomplished, witty, and musical, with a great capacity for arousing affection from princes and scholars alike, Pace could also provoke enmity and mistrust. His forthrightness and impulsiveness sometimes impaired his abilities as a diplomat, but the imperial ambassadors considered him the most able and best-informed of Henry's envoys and a possible successor to Wolsey as chief counsellor, if the cardinal became pope. Erasmus and Tomeo regarded him as an outstanding scholar whose time and strength were wasted in public service. In his role as dean of St Paul's School, Pace's 'De fructu', oratory, and scriptural studies reveal a principled and reforming spirit, much concerned with education. His periodic and increasingly severe bouts of mental illness (possibly bipolar disorder, despite Erasmus's suspicion that it was syphilis), combined with recurrent attacks of 'fever' and gastritis, were eventually to cut short his active political and literary life. His importance as a Tudor diplomat, humanist, and cleric have all been contested by twentieth-century scholars, but he is now re-emerging as a substantial figure worthy of the attention bestowed on him by his contemporaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 21066


Pacifico, David (1784?-1854), merchant, was a Sephardic Jew of Italian descent. Accounts of his early life, founded on his own conflicting statements, vary considerably. The child of parents married at the Bevis Marks Synagogue, London, in 1761, he variously gave his birthplace as Oran or Gibraltar, and once claimed Spanish nationality. While resident in Portugal, he allegedly suffered for his liberal sympathies at the hands of the legitimists. As compensation, the victorious liberals made him consul in Morocco and Portuguese by naturalization (1835). In 1837 he moved to Athens as consul-general, an appointment he lost in 1842. His duties, light in Greece, were combined with trade. 
Pacifico achieved international notoriety in April 1847. To avoid offence to a visiting financier, a Paris Rothschild, the authorities banned the burning of Judas Iscariot in effigy from the Orthodox Easter celebrations. Popular resentment was visited on Pacifico, prominent in the small Jewish community. Police allowed the mob to sack his house. As a British subject, with the legation's support, he sought some $32,000 compensation from an unresponsive Greek government. On instructions from Lord Palmerston interest at 10 per cent was added, with $500 for physical violence and distress inflicted. While another claim of Pacifico's for land acquired by the state was accepted, Greek ministers ignored or evaded representations about his losses in the riot. 
Britain eventually deployed her fleet in January 1850, giving Greece twenty-four hours to meet the demands in this and other outstanding cases. Underlying the Anglo-Greek dispute and Palmerston's high-handed action was the resistance of the Bavarian King Otto of Greece to the constitutionalism Palmerston preached. The ensuing blockade elicited protests from France and Russia; co-founders with Britain of the Greek kingdom, they objected to the British attitude. France, backed by the tsar, negotiated a settlement, but not before British tactics provoked the recall of her ambassador in London (May 1850). The British minister in Athens, Thomas Wyse, used force to compel acceptance on terms less favourable to Greece (28 April) than those agreed a few days earlier between Britain and France in London (19 April). Wyse pleaded the absence of instructions from Palmerston, who placated France by adhering, substantially, to the London convention (20 June). Under its provisions, the figure put on Pacifico's compensation, based on claims which Palmerston conceded were inflated, was drastically reduced. 
The combined forces of the parliamentary opposition at Westminster attacked Palmerston's handling of the whole question. In a celebrated speech (25 June), he asserted Britain's right to ensure that her subjects everywhere enjoyed the security of Roman citizens in their day. Even such a man as Pacifico might say, as it were, 'Civis Romanus sum', and receive armed assistance ('Hansard 3', 112, 1850, 444). Unenforceable against powerful countries, the declaration was one of equality with nations strong enough to overawe weaker states. It won a majority of forty-six in a full house, and delighted the public. Gladstone, who deplored British methods in Greece, thought the defence 'extraordinary and masterly' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 4.221). Palmerston condemned the racial prejudice evident in references to Pacifico, 'as if... because a man is of the Jewish persuasion, he is fair game for any outrage' ('Hansard 3', 112, 1850, 387). In more senses than one, he gained a famous victory for contemporary liberalism. Nevertheless, Pacifico embarrassed his co-religionists. When he died at 15 Bury Street, London, on 12 April 1854 and was buried on 14 April at the Spanish and Portuguese Jews' burial-ground at Mile End Road, London, the 'Jewish Chronicle' (21 April) merely noted the demise of 'this individual who... caused so much sensation in the political world'. 


@@@@@


doc= 21067


Pack, Sir Denis (c.1772-1823), army officer, was probably born in Kilkenny, Ireland, the son of Thomas Pack DD, dean of Kilkenny, and his wife; he was the grandson of Thomas Pack of Ballinakill, Queen's county. He was described as a descendant of Christopher Packe (c.1599-1682), lord mayor of London, whose younger son, Simon, settled in co. Westmeath, Ireland. 
Pack was appointed cornet in the 14th light dragoons on 30 November 1791 and served with a squadron that formed the advance guard of Lord Moira's force in Flanders in 1794. Pack volunteered to carry an important dispatch into Nieuwpoort and had much difficulty in escaping when the French invested it. Later he was engaged at Boxtel and in the winter retreat to Bremen. Following that retreat the 14th squadron was transferred to the 8th light dragoons after being attached to it. When Pack came home he obtained his lieutenancy in the 14th on 12 March 1795. He commanded a small party of dragoons in the Quiberon expedition, and in this period did duty for some months as a field-officer on Isle Dieu. He received his troop in the 5th dragoon guards on 27 February 1796, and while serving with them in Ireland in 1798 he led a patrol near Prosperous against a party of rebels, who lost twenty men and eight horses. 
Pack commanded the escort which conducted General Humbert and other French officers to Dublin after their surrender at Ballinamuck. On 25 August 1798 he was promoted major in the 4th Royal Irish dragoon guards and on 6 December 1800 he was appointed lieutenant-colonel in the 71st highlanders. He commanded the 71st at the recapture of the Cape of Good Hope in 1806, where he was wounded at the landing in Lospard's Bay. During the ill-fated operation in South America in 1806-7 he was taken prisoner, but he managed to escape. He then commanded the light troops of the army in two successful actions against the enemy and in Whitelocke's disastrous attack on Buenos Aires, in which he received three wounds. 
In 1808 the 71st was ordered to Portugal, and he commanded it at the battles of Rolica and Vimeiro. He marched with Sir John Moore's army into Spain and in the retreat to Corunna. After returning to England he took part in the Walcheren expedition in 1809, in which he bravely stormed one of the enemy's batteries during the siege of Flushing. He became aide-de-camp to the king with the rank of colonel on 25 July 1810. He was then appointed with local rank to a Portuguese brigade under Marshal Beresford and commanded it at Busaco in 1810, and in front of Almeida in May 1811. When the French garrison escaped Pack pursued them to Barba del Puerco, and upon orders of Sir Brent Spencer blew up the defences of Almeida. At the capture of Ciudad Rodrigo, Pack, who had been appointed a British brigadier-general, led his Portuguese brigade to make a feint attack on the outwork of the Santiago gate, which was converted into a real attack. 
Pack distinguished himself at the battle of Salamanca and was honourably mentioned for his services in the operations against Burgos. He became a major-general on 4 June 1813 and was present with his brigade at Vitoria. Wellington placed him in temporary command of the 6th division in the Pyrenees, and he was wounded again at Soraven. He commanded a division at the battles of Nivelle, the Nive, Orthez, and Toulouse, where he received yet another wound and was honourably mentioned. For his Peninsular services, in which he was eight times wounded, he received the Peninsular gold cross and seven clasps. He was offered a brigade in the expedition to America but instead was appointed to command at Ramsgate. He was made KCB on 2 January 1815. 
In June 1815 Pack commanded a brigade of Picton's division at Quatre-Bras and Waterloo, where he was again wounded. That was his last foreign service. He married, on 10 July 1816, Lady Elizabeth Louisa Beresford (died Jan 1856), fourth daughter of the second earl of Waterford, and sister of the first marquess. Pack held the orders of the Tower and Sword in Portugal, Maria Theresa in Austria, and St Vladimir in Russia. He was appointed colonel of the York chasseurs in 1816, lieutenant-governor of Plymouth on 12 August 1819, and colonel of the 84th foot on 9 September 1822. Pack died at Lord Beresford's house in Upper Wimpole Street, London, on 24 July 1823. In 1828 his widow erected a monument to him, surmounted by a marble bust by Chantrey, in the cathedral church of St Canice, Kilkenny, of which his father had been dean. After his death Lady Pack married, in 1831, Lieutenant-General Sir Thomas Reynell KCB (died 1848), who had been one of Pack's majors in the 71st. 


@@@@@


doc= 21068


Pack, George (fl. 1700-1724), actor and singer, had a light voice, bordering on the contralto. According to William Chetwood he pleased audiences by taking the female part in sung dialogues with Richard Leveridge. Nothing is known of his birth or upbringing, but he made his acting debut as Westmoreland in Betterton's revival of '1 Henry IV' at Lincoln's Inn Fields on 9 January 1700. He made regular appearances in that theatre from 1700 to October 1705, always in supporting roles such as Roderigo in 'Othello'. He was probably at his best in playing social misfits, losers, and eccentrics, and managers tried to provide him with songs when the text allowed it. As Ogle in Susannah Centlivre's 'The Beau's Duel' on 21 October 1702, for example, he was applauded for his whimsical song. It was Centlivre's later play 'The Busy Body' that provided Pack, as Marplot, with his most famous original part. That was at Drury Lane on 12 May 1709, at a time when London's actors were still in search of a settled theatrical home. 
Pack had already learned something of the perils of his craft when, in 1701-2, he was one of the group of actors brought to trial for 'using indecent expressions in some late plays' in the wake of Collier's 'Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage' (1698). The actors were acquitted, and Pack was part of the company that struggled with the acoustics of the new Queen's Theatre in the Haymarket from 1705 to 1707 before settling at Drury Lane in 1708. He remained at Drury Lane until the end of 1714, relishing in particular the chance to play the title role in 'Marplot' (30 December 1710), Centlivre's opportunistic sequel to 'The Busy Body'. The lightness of his voice served him in occasional transvestite roles, and these became more frequent after his move to John Rich's company at Lincoln's Inn Fields in 1715. Pack's singing was useful to Rich, who rated high art below entertainment, and Pack remained at Lincoln's Inn Fields for the rest of his active theatrical life, singing between the acts when he was unable to sing during them, and often enough wearing women's dress when doing so. 
When the playhouses closed Pack entertained at London's summer fairs. In 1717 he and Pinkethman operated a booth at Southwark fair, and in the summer of 1718 he performed at Pinkethman's playhouse in Richmond, where he sang one of his best-loved songs, 'London is a Fine Town'. That autumn he was again at Southwark fair, and in 1720 he operated a booth in Hounslow. On 10 March 1722 he announced his farewell performance at Lincoln's Inn Fields. The part he chose was Marplot, and a portrait sign of Pack in that role hung outside the tavern he opened in August 1722. According to Chetwood the tavern was called The Globe and situated near Charing Cross, but the likelier alternative is that it was called the Busy Body and situated at the corner of Haymarket and Pall Mall. It may be that his business did not flourish. Certainly he returned to Lincoln's Inn Fields in the spring of 1724 to play in his own benefit performance and in that of Mrs Knight. Nothing is known of his later career, but he had evidently been dead for some time by 1749, when Chetwood published his 'General History'. According to Chetwood, Pack was unmarried, but an otherwise unknown Mrs Pack was awarded a benefit at Lincoln's Inn Fields on 28 May 1719; she may have been his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 21069


Pack, Richardson (1682-1728), army officer and writer, born on 29 November 1682, was the son of John Pack (1652-1723) of London, gentleman, who settled at Wickham Skeith and then Stoke Ash in Suffolk, serving as high sheriff there in 1697, and his wife, Hannah (died 1713), the daughter and coheir of Robert Richardson of Tudhoe, co. Durham. From Merchant Taylors' School, which he entered in 1693, Pack matriculated as a fellow-commoner at St John's College, Oxford, in June 1697, but left in 1698 to study law at the Middle Temple. After eight terms he was called to the bar but, preferring the active life, joined the army, and by March 1705 had obtained command of a company of foot under Colonel Nicholas Lepel. He was still a bachelor when on 5 October 1707 he and Audrey Gibson (later Mrs White) baptized their daughter, Rebecca, at St Giles Cripplegate; the child was given Pack's name and he remembered her in his will of 1729, recalling that 'on other occasions' he had 'encouraged her good behaviour'. 
Pack next served in the War of the Spanish Succession; he wrote from Mombris in Catalonia in October 1709 to John Creed at Oundle. His regiment served with Marshal Stahrenberg at the battle of Villaviciosa in December 1710. The day after General Stanhope and his troops were taken at Brihuega, Pack's major was killed, and his bravery, as senior captain, won him immediate promotion and the lifelong friendship of his general, John Campbell, duke of Argyll. More of Pack's movements and friends are revealed by addresses on his published pieces, the first collection of which he dedicated to Colonel William Stanhope, ambassador in Madrid. The notorious Edmund Curll was his faithful London publisher, but others produced Dublin editions. In 1713 he was writing to his friend Captain David Campbell from Minorca, presumably while on the staff of Argyll, governor there at the time. 
Back in Ipswich in June 1714, Pack complained of the hardships of a half-pay officer; later that summer he was at Stoke Ash with his widowed father. At the time of the Jacobite rebellion he was recalled as major in Colonel Lucas's regiment of foot, in which he served for three years. About then Captain Campbell died, and Pack married Mary, a Campbell heiress (perhaps the daughter David and Mary Campbell, baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 30 November 1688); whether she was related to the captain cannot now be established. Some time in 1719 Mary gave birth to a son, John, at their house in Jermyn Street, St James's, but the next year they were living at Bury St Edmunds in Suffolk, where Pack had acquired the ruins of the great abbey. Probably for the materials, he dismantled the 400 foot east range of the Great Court, the former abbot's palace, and obliterated all traces of the abbey's formal gardens. Pack's poems, headed 'Bury Toasts', show how much he enjoyed the society of young ladies of good family there; he wrote and dedicated verses to, 'inter alia', a Bunbury, a Paston, a Hervey, a D'Ewes, even the countess of Rochford. 
It was during the last nine years of his life that Pack's work began to be published. He admired the Roman elegiac poets, translating their poems, and three of their lives from the Latin of Cornelius Nepos: T. P. Atticus, Miltiades, and Cimon; he was too indolent to do more as he intended. The three lives appeared in his 'Miscellanies in Prose and Verse' (1719); for the second set the same year he added two 'essays on study and conversation' in letters to David Campbell. Both were printed at Dublin in 1726, and the year after his death his complete works appeared in one volume. Pack wrote a prologue to George Sewell's 'Tragedy of Sir Walter Raleigh' and an epilogue to Thomas Southerne's 'Spartan Dame'; Sewell responded with lines written on reading Pack's poems. He exchanged poems with Matthew Prior, and asked Prior to sit for his picture for him, and to ask Pope and Congreve to do the same. 
In 1722 Pack bought Northgate House in the street of that name in Bury St Edmunds; and when in spring 1724 he became dangerously ill, it was the celebrated Richard Mead who saved his life. Early in 1725 he was again in service at Exeter as a major in Colonel Montagu's regiment of the Devonshires, the 11th foot. In October 1727 he wrote an ode in praise of George II, addressed to the new monarch through the earl of Scarbrough. Expecting an invitation to court to be thanked, he was instead ordered to march with his regiment from Exeter to Aberdeen. In December 1728 Scotland, that 'country, which was his aversion when living, proved to be the scene of his death' (Pack, 'Memoir'). His wish to be buried at Stoke Ash was not carried out, and he was buried on 3 January 1729 in St Nicholas churchyard, Aberdeen. 
Pack's will was locked in a desk at Northgate House, as one of his executors, Sir Edmund Bacon, bt, of Garboldisham, deposed: 'about the middle of December... a messenger came express from one Mr ACourt in Scotland' bearing a letter with the key. Pack's widow, Mary, was left an annuity of $50 without further comment; that and the episode of the key imply that they were estranged. Rebecca Pack and Edmund Bacon both received $50 legacies, but the other executor, George Read, esquire, of Golden Square, was left a 'gold watch that was the glorious King William's'. Pack's estates near Birmingham and at Hepworth in Suffolk, as well as property in Bury St Edmunds, were to provide for his 'dear and entirely beloved and only son John', not yet ten years old. John went up to Pembroke College, Cambridge, where in 1744 he became LLB and a fellow, and was ordained. From 1752 to his death eleven years later he was rector of Little Whelnetham, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 21070


Packe, Christopher, appointed Lord Packe under the protectorate (c.1599-1682), politician, was the son of Thomas Packe of Kettering, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Catherine. He was bound apprentice in the Drapers' Company of London to John Kendrick, a merchant adventurer, who died in 1624 leaving Packe a legacy of $100 and a $300 loan to set up in business in the woollen trade. After gaining his freedom in the Drapers in 1633, Packe was admitted to the livery in 1639; he served on its governing body in 1647-77 and 1679-81 and was master in 1648-9 and 1654-5. He married three times. His first wife was his late master's granddaughter, Jane Newman (died 1638), daughter of Thomas Newman of Newbury, Berkshire, a merchant and fellow draper. Anne Edmonds (died 1658), daughter of Simon Edmonds, a London merchant and future alderman, was his second wife. On 13 July 1669 Packe married his third wife, Elizabeth ('b'. 'c'.1609, died in or before 1681), daughter of one Richards of Berkshire and widow of Alderman Michael Herring, another prosperous London merchant. With his second wife Packe had two sons and five daughters, two of whom died in infancy; his two other marriages were childless. 
Packe acquired considerable wealth in the 1630s by trading in cloth in English and European markets and investing in the Company of Merchant Adventurers and the East India Company. He lived close by Blackwell Hall, the headquarters for the woollen trade, in one of the substantial merchants' houses on Basinghall Street, in St Michael Bassishaw, one of the parishes nestling under the Guildhall. In the 1638 tithe assessment Packe had the fourth highest rating in the parish and he was one of the wealthy merchants in his ward listed in 1640 for a possible forced loan. 
By 1640, therefore, Packe was an experienced and successful merchant comfortably established in the heart of the City. He played no noticeable part in London's reaction to the developing political tensions between king and parliament prior to August 1642, when he was appointed by parliament as a collector for money and plate in the ward of Bassishaw. The following December he became a ward assessor for parliamentary levies and in the summer of 1643 contributed $100 towards defending the City. Once his political sympathies were known his financial expertise was soon being drawn upon by parliament. In 1643 he was called upon to advise the committee for the advance of money on raising money to supply the army in the west and he also acted as an intermediary between parliament and the City about raising money to pay the Scots. By 1643 Packe had also become a common councillor for Bassishaw, followed by promotion to ward deputy in 1645-7. He served on more than a dozen common-council committees in 1643-7, including the influential City lands committee in 1646-7. But it was membership of more senior financial committees that increasingly drew on his energy in the 1640s, including committees for the accounts of the whole kingdom, for assessment, for customs, for bishops' lands, and for compounding. 
A cautious pragmatism refined on the road to mercantile success may have been the key to Packe's ambiguous reactions to the divisions of presbyterians versus Independents that opened up in the mid-1640s. He would appear to have been a religious presbyterian; he acted as a lay trier for elders in the seventh London classis, was twice delegated to the London provincial assembly, and served on all the common-council committees concerned with setting up a presbyterian church. Furthermore, a leading London presbyterian divine, Dr Thomas Jacombe, was a close friend and was to be a beneficiary under Packe's 1681 will. Yet Packe's political stance was more complex for, although he was appointed to the presbyterian-dominated London militia committee of May 1647, he subsequently adopted a role as mediator between the City, parliament, and the army during the tense summer months and was one of three City representatives sent to reside with the army until the parties reached agreement. As a result, after the army's march on London he was trusted enough to be appointed to the September militia committee with its strong Independent bias. Shortly afterwards Packe joined the aldermanic bench; he was elected for Cripplegate in 1647-53 and for Bassishaw in 1653-60. 
Packe was an active supporter of both the Commonwealth and the protectorate and during these years his influence and wealth grew. He attended the special session of the court of aldermen in April 1649 when the pro-royalist Mayor Reynardson was deposed from office, and was one of the fifteen aldermen who attended the formal proclamation of the abolition of monarchy on the following 30 May. The same year saw him elected as one of the London sheriffs and appointed president of the Bridewell and Bethlem hospitals; he also became a member of the indemnity committee. At the beginning of 1649 he had paid over $8000 for the Huntingdonshire manor of Buckden, part of the estates of the bishop of Lincoln, and in March 1650 he was able to add the Leicestershire manors of Prestwold and Cotes. However, there was a big setback too for Packe in 1649 when he and two fellow merchants were removed from the customs committee and ordered to present their accounts. The matter of the accounts was to drag on, and surface acrimoniously on occasion, until the late 1650s. 
Although unsuccessful in the City elections of July 1654 for the first protectorate parliament, Packe was shortly afterwards elected lord mayor and subsequently established close relations with Oliver Cromwell as they purged government opponents from City offices. Packe also helped deal with the threat of royalist plots in early 1655 as a member of a new militia committee charged with the task of raising fresh regiments. Among the actions he was responsible for as lord mayor were the arrest and commitment for trial of the Socinian John Biddle in July 1655. Following the end of his mayoralty, Packe was knighted by a grateful Cromwell. Packe's known financial and commercial expertise earned him further responsibilities in 1655 as one of the treasurers for contributions for the relief of Piedmont protestants and as a member both of the admiralty and of the trade committees. He was also appointed to a committee to consider the arguments for the readmission of the Jews, an initiative he was said to have most vehemently opposed. A proposal in January 1656 that he accompany Bulstrode Whitelocke on a mission to Sweden to further a protestant alliance was aborted shortly afterwards. 
Packe was finally returned as a City MP in the August 1656 elections to the second protectorate parliament. He was to prove an active member, being nominated to seventy-one committees, with trade, religion, and City affairs being his principal concerns. He developed a particular animosity towards the Quakers at this stage. In the December 1656 debate over what kind of punishment should be inflicted on James Naylor, Packe initially favoured clemency, only to move in support of the motion that the house consider the death sentence when Naylor proved recalcitrant, and in the following May he was to speak out strongly in favour of a bill against Quakers. Packe became governor of the Company of Merchant Adventurers in 1656 and vociferously defended the company's monopoly of the woollen trade at the committee of trade when it later came under attack. Completing his ascension of the mercantile heights, he also joined the governing body of the East India Company in 1657. His greatest claim to fame in 1657, however, was his part in the presentation to the house on 23 February of a new constitution, the 'Humble petition and advice', which provided for a second chamber and held out the possibility of Cromwell's becoming king. Packe was not one of the constitution's authors, only agreeing to act for them in presenting it after Whitelocke had declined to do so, yet during the subsequent constitutional debate he voted in favour of inviting Cromwell to accept the crown. On 10 December 1657 Packe was called to the new second chamber as Lord Packe. 
The end of the protectorate, however, was the signal for Packe's enemies to rally against him. The restored Rump considered excluding him from the 'Act of Indemnity' and initiated an inquiry into any public funds still in his hands. As a result he was forced to return over $10,000 of the money collected for the Piedmont protestants and later a further $22,000 of customs money owed by him and a fellow commissioner was ordered to be repaid. In both cases allegations of corruption were vehemently denied and the blame placed on parliament. 
At the Restoration, Packe formally attended the proclamation of the king in London and signed a senior City declaration on 5 June 1660 accepting the royal pardon and pledging obedience. He faced the lesser penalty of exclusion from holding public office for life and accordingly in August 1660 he was removed from the aldermanry and the presidency of the hospitals. Nevertheless, while necessarily maintaining a low profile, he continued to prosper and became one of the creditors of Charles II's government. An attempt in 1666 to procure a baronetcy for his elder son, Christopher Packe (b. in or before 1657, d. in or after 1708), mysteriously failed after the grant had been issued. After his third marriage in 1669 Packe retired to his manor at Cotes, where he died after a long illness on 27 May 1682. He was buried in the parish church at Prestwold, where his heir erected an impressive monument. His will, made on 10 November 1681 and proved on 26 June 1682, was that of a prosperous merchant who had diversified into land and other properties. The bulk of his estate had already been settled upon his elder son, his three surviving daughters had each received a dowry of $3500 on their marriage, and his younger son, Simon, had been given $1150. Packe's remaining property in London, Huntingdonshire, Leicestershire, and Devon was divided among his children and heading his numerous charitable bequests was $100 for ejected godly ministers and their widows. 


@@@@@


doc= 21071


Packe, Christopher (b. in or before 1657, d. in or after 1708), chemical physician, was the son of Sir Christopher Packe (c.1599-1682), a woollen merchant, who was lord mayor of London during part of the Commonwealth, and his wife, Anne (died 1658), eldest daughter of Simon Edmonds, alderman of London. Packe set up his laboratory in 1670 at the sign of the Globe and Chemical Furnaces in Little Moorfields, London, and styled himself a professor of chemical medicine. He supposedly practised as a quack under powerful patronage, including that of Robert Boyle and the king's physician, Edmund Dickinson, though there is little to confirm this; in 1684 he circulated a list of his specifics. 
In 1689 Packe brought out in folio his translation of Glauber's writings, which he published as 'Works of the Highly Experienced and Famous Chymist, John Rudolph Glauber', accompanied by the original copperplates, which he had purchased at Amsterdam. This task occupied him for three years, and he secured a large number of subscribers. He must have been an able Latin scholar as the translation reads very well. Packe also included a great deal of scarce German material by Glauber, but for the translation of this, he says, he relied upon a friend. His other publications were chiefly designed to promote the sale of his specifics. They include 'One Hundred and Fifty Three Chymical Aphorisms' (1688); 'Mineralogia, or, An account of the preparation, manifold vertues, and uses of a mineral salt, both in physick and chyrurgery' (1693); and 'Medela chymica, or, An account of the vertues and uses of a select number of chymical medicines' (1708), at the end of which is a catalogue of his medicines, with their prices. 
Little is known of Packe's private life. He appears to have been married, as he had at least one son -- Edmund Packe ['see below'] who inherited the business; the physician Christopher Packe (1686-1749) was probably also his son. The details of his death and burial are obscure. 
His son 


@@@@@


doc= 21072


Packe, Christopher (1686-1749), physician and cartographer, was born in St Albans, Hertfordshire, on 6 March 1686 and was probably the son of Christopher Packe (b. in or before 1657, d. in or after 1708), chemist. Little is known of his life, but he was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, from 11 September 1695; received the degree of doctor of medicine at Cambridge in 1717, 'comitiis regiis'; and was admitted as a candidate of the Royal College of Physicians on 25 June 1723. In January 1726 he presented an organ to St Peter's Church, St Albans. On 30 July of that year he married Mary Randolph of the precincts, Canterbury, in Canterbury Cathedral and from about that date settled with her in Canterbury, where he practised medicine until his death. 
In 1726 and 1727 Packe was embroiled in a heated controversy and pamphlet war with Dr John Gray of Canterbury. The dispute concerned the treatment of one Robert Worger of Hinxhill, Kent, who died of 'concussion of the brain' after falling from his horse. Worger had at first been treated by Packe, but his relatives, not satisfied with Packe's methods, called in Gray and two surgeons, who, Packe argued, caused Worger's death by excessive bleeding and trepanning. 
As well as contributing several papers to 'Philosophical Transactions', Packe published two cartographical works: 'A dissertation upon the surface of the earth, as delineated in a specimen of a philosophical-chorographical chart of East Kent' (1737) and ''Ankographia'' (1743, by subscription), an expanded version of the former. Cartography occupied Packe's thoughts during 'many otherwise tedious journeys' around his Kent practice (Jarcho, 52), and both works endeavoured to describe and explain the topography around Canterbury by using charts which Packe had made by taking bearings from the tower of Canterbury Cathedral. They also indicate that Packe considered the structure of the human body to be a microcosm of the natural world, for when writing of the River Stour he claimed that its 'minute Division and Graphic Portrait of the Vallies and their Waters... differ[s] but little, if at all, from the Anatomical Descriptions of the several Systems of the Arteries, Veins, or Nerves, that are with such exquisite Art distributed all through our bodies. (Jarcho, 50)' Packe died on 15 November 1749. He was buried in St Mary Magdalene, Canterbury, and left a son, Christopher, who also became a physician (graduating bachelor of medicine from Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1751); who also practised in Canterbury; and who, after his death on 21 October 1800, aged seventy-two, was buried in St Mary Magdalene, alongside his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 21073


Pack, Faithful Christopher (1760-1840), painter, was born on 12 August 1760 in Norwich, the son of a Quaker merchant whose family claimed a connection with that of Sir Christopher Packe, lord mayor of London. Though employed by his father in early adulthood Pack showed a strong aptitude for painting. With the failure of the family business he took up painting as a profession, and moved to London in 1781. He made friends with the painter John Hamilton Mortimer, and studied under Sir Joshua Reynolds, making copies after his portraits. After a brief spell in Norwich,Pack spent four years (1783-7) in Liverpool, exhibiting at the Society for Promoting Painting and Design in 1784. Returning to London, he showed at the Royal Academy in 1786 and 1787. 
With a recommendation from Reynolds to the duke of Rutland, then lord lieutenant of Ireland, Pack departed for his first period in Dublin about 1789. He had some success as a portrait painter, reputedly meeting Gilbert Stuart at an artists' dinner on St Luke's day in 1789. In 1790 he contributed two pictures to an exhibition at the Lyceum in College Green. Again in London, he exhibited four pictures at the Royal Academy in 1796 (the same year that he stood as a candidate for associate there) including 'One of the Society of Quakers, Aged 83'. He then taught drawing for a number of years in Bath, living at 19 Green Park Street. 
Returning to Dublin once more in 1802, Pack continued as a teacher of drawing and painting. From that time until 1821 he exhibited widely, including pictures of horses, portraits, and landscapes. He was president of the Society of Arts in 1812, showing thirty-seven works there, and was vice-president of the Royal Hibernian Society in 1814. By 1820, however, he seemed to experience harder times. His offer to lecture at the Dublin Society was declined, and in the following year, on 21 March 1821, a sale of his pictures was conducted from his residence, 33 Dawson Street. He finally left Dublin for London, contributing to the Royal Academy in 1822 and 1840, but mainly to the British Institution (1825-39), works in oil and watercolour. He also made landscapes in pastels, and reproduced some of his Irish views in aquatint, of which proofs were signed 'F. Chris Pack'. In exhibition catalogues his name appears under the names 'C.' 'F. C.' or 'F. Christopher' Pack. He died aged eighty-one at 20 Sandwich Street, Gray's Inn Lane, London, on 25 October 1840, a few months after his wife, who had died in August that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 21074


Edmund Packe (fl. 1735) carried on the business at the Golden Head in Southampton Street, Covent Garden, calling himself 'M.D. and chemist'. He published an edition of his father's 'Mineralogia' (n.d. [1730?]) and 'An answer to Dr Turner's letter to Dr Jurin on the subject of Mr Ward's drop and pill, wherein his ignorance of chymical pharmacy is fairly exposed' (1735). 


@@@@@


doc= 21075


Packer, John (1572-1649), politician and landowner, was born at Twickenham, Middlesex, on 12 November 1572, the son of William Packer (died 1600), clerk of the privy seal, and Elizabeth Borwell (died 1611). He was educated at Westminster School and then matriculated from Trinity College, Oxford, on 13 March 1590; during the same year he was admitted a scholar at Trinity College, Cambridge, and he took a BA degree in 1593-4. He dedicated to Lord Burghley, addressed as Maecenas, a manuscript book of Greek and Latin verses which he composed while at Cambridge, entitled 'Elizabetha, sive, Augustissimae Anglorum principis encomium'. After university Packer travelled in France and became secretary to Sir Henry Neville, English ambassador there from February 1599. After Neville's departure in August 1600 he acted as agent in France for a time. In July 1604 Packer was granted the reversion of a clerkship of the privy seal, and in March 1614, with Francis Godolphin, was made a protonotary of the chancery, for life. According to his son-in-law, he was also made French secretary. He enjoyed the patronage of the Sackville earls of Dorset, and in January 1610 reported that Thomas, Lord Dorset, had invited him to be his travelling companion in France. In the autumn of that year Packer was sent to Denmark as a special ambassador. His instructions concerned relations between Denmark and Sweden, and giving the Swedish delegates James I's response to the Swedish proposal for a marriage between Gustavus Adolphus, Charles IX's heir, and Princess Elizabeth. He returned in 1611. 
On 13 July 1613, at the church of St Katharine Cree, London, Packer married Philippa ('bap'. 1590, died 1665), daughter of Francis Mills of Westminster and Alice Jones. Four of their sons, Robert, George, Philip, and John, were educated at Oxford. Robert Packer (1616-1687) was MP for Wallingford and married Temperance, daughter of Colonel Edward Stephens of Sodbury. George Packer (1617-1641) was a fellow of All Souls College, Oxford. Philip Packer (1618-1686) married Isabella, daughter of Sir Robert and Elizabeth Berkeley. Isabella died in 1664, and he then married, in 1666, Sarah Isgar of West Lavington, Wiltshire. He was paymaster of the king's works, usher of the exchequer, and an original fellow of the Royal Society. John Packer (1626-1708) married Jane Fettiplace of Fernham, Berkshire, and was a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. William Packer (1627-1655), fifth son of John and Philippa, married Jane Saunders of Woolston. Of his sisters, Elizabeth ('b'. 1616) married in 1636 John Browne, clerk of the parliaments from 1638 until his death in 1691 (but not during the interregnum), and Katherine (1623-1721) married John Gell of Kopton, Derbyshire. Frances was born in 1619 and died in 1633. 
In 1612 Packer became secretary to Robert Carr, later earl of Somerset. After Somerset's fall, in 1615 Packer was appointed secretary to George Villiers, who was created successively earl, marquess, and duke of Buckingham, and held the post until Buckingham's assassination in 1628. According to John Browne he often acted as secretary to the king and declined offers to be made a secretary of state. Yet when, in February 1619, the king decided to appoint a new secretary of state he preferred Sir George Calvert to Packer and Dudley Carleton, both of whom were being promoted by Buckingham. When the king's preference became clear Buckingham dropped his support for Packer. His influence as Buckingham's secretary was considerable. In 1623 Isaac Barrow wrote from Cambridge seeking Packer's support for his, ultimately successful, efforts to obtain the post of regius professor of physic for John Gostlin, master of Gonville and Caius College. Packer enjoyed an appreciable income from fees and gratuities, as well as from other sources. In May 1614 he was one of four men granted a licence for thirty-one years for the manufacture of indigo neale; in March 1617 he was awarded an annual pension of $115 from the court of wards on the surrender of a similar annuity from the exchequer and treasury of the chamber; and by 1635 he was receiving payments of $292 per annum out of the duchy of Lancaster. 
Packer acquired a considerable estate. He bought from Lord Dorset the manor of Groombridge in Kent and Sussex, and in 1620 the manor of Shellingford in Berkshire from Sir Henry Neville's son, also Sir Henry. In 1632 he acquired the manor of Shaw-cum-Donnington in the same county, and Charles I, on his coronation, gave him other lands in Berkshire, in recognition of his loyalty. His property included Chilton Foliat in Wiltshire and Berkshire, and land at Kingston Lisle, Fawler, and Baulking in Berkshire, and at Hams and Spencers in Sussex, which he held on lease from the earl of Dorset. He also owned a share of the New River Company. In 1625 Packer spent over $500 on a new church at Groombridge, in thanksgiving for the king's safe return from Spain, as recorded in a Latin inscription on a tablet on the porch. He allowed a minister there $30 per annum, and in his will provided an endowment of $20 per annum for the minister's stipend. Also in 1625 he spent at least $200 in work on St Faith's Church at Shellingford, which included the raising of a new spire and the erection of a new south porch. In 1629 he paid most of the cost of rebuilding St Mary's, Chilton Foliat, where the body of the church was rebuilt and re-roofed, and a new chancel screen was installed. John Browne's account mentions that at his own expense Packer sent ministers to preach in Lancashire, Staffordshire, Westmorland, south Wales, and 'other remote parts of the kingdom' ('Abergavenny MSS', 174); he allowed them at least $30 and in some cases $50 per annum. He was a regular frequenter of sermons and an assiduous reader of the 'Bible', knowing by heart the 'New Testament', the 'Psalms', and 'Proverbs'. 
Packer sat as an MP for West Looe, Cornwall, in the parliament of 1628-9. He made a number of brief interventions in debates and was appointed to several committees, some of which were to draft petitions to the king. His influence, and presumably fees and perquisites, fell after Buckingham's assassination, but in 1635 he served on a commission that enquired into the abuses of the Fleet prison in London, and on 1 May 1647 he was appointed a visitor of Oxford University. When the king asked for loans of money in March 1640, Packer refused. In November 1641 he donated $100 for the affairs in Ireland. He was a supporter of parliament during the first civil war. The royalists sequestered his lands within their control and garrisoned Donnington Castle, which was largely ruined by the time that it was surrendered on 1 April 1646. Packer made his will in July 1645, directing that there should not be any feasting at his funeral, which would be 'very unfitting and unseasonable at such a time' (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/209/153). This stipulation was not changed in the codicil he added in May 1648. Packer died at his house in the college at Westminster, and was buried at St Margaret's Church on 15 February 1649. 
Browne praised Packer's behaviour to all who knew him, his lack of pride at his success and his charity, mentioning his donations to the poor clergy banished from the Palatinate and La Rochelle, and to the poor protestants of Ireland, and his bequest providing for the bringing up of Irish children as protestants. His other bequests included provision for medicines and surgery for the poor, $100 for the poor at an almshouse, $200 to young divinity students at Oxford and Cambridge, and sums for his servants. His wife, who acted as his executor, was buried at Shaw in Berkshire on 21 November 1665. 
A collection of letters and state papers formed by Packer passed to G. H. Fortescue of Dropmore, Buckinghamshire, and in 1872 was deposited in the Bodleian Library. It was calendared by the Historical Manuscripts Commission, and in 1871 the Camden Society published a selection, edited by S. R. Gardiner. 


@@@@@


doc= 21076


Packer, John Hayman (1730-1806), actor, was born on 21 March 1730 in the Strand, London, the son of John Packer, a Glass House Street saddler, and his wife, Anne Partridge. He was baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 16 March 1731. His mother was a widow when she died in 1763, leaving John a freehold house in Kensington Square. It is unknown whether he ever married. One sister, a widow named Elizabeth Foster, survived him. After being apprenticed to his father Packer followed the saddler's trade, but went on the stage at Newcastle upon Tyne in 1754. His London debut at Covent Garden on 24 January 1758 led to an engagement with Garrick at Drury Lane, where he first appeared on 19 September 1758 as Selim in Congreve's 'The Mourning Bride'. In forty-seven seasons at Drury Lane he played supporting parts, creating such roles as Patent in Garrick's 'A Peep behind the Curtain' (23 October 1767), Snake in Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal' (8 May 1777), and Allan in Lewis's 'The Castle Spectre' (14 December 1797). His parts in the Shakespeare repertory chart an undistinguished career. Assigned at first to young, supporting roles -- Rosencrantz in 'Hamlet' (1758), Benvolio in 'Romeo and Juliet' (1759), Malcolm in 'Macbeth' (1761) -- he later assumed maturer, but still secondary, parts, such as Horatio and Banquo (1758). Finally he was relegated to the old men he would play for the rest of his career: Friar Lawrence (1772), Claudius (1777), Duncan (1780), Gloster (1788). He seems to have been a useful actor who, if he ever possessed 'animation and fire', had lost those qualities by the time Waldron mentioned their absence in 1795. He retired from the stage in 1805. A fall downstairs on 31 January 1806 hastened his death, which occurred on 16 September of that year. He may have been buried on 21 September at St Paul's, Covent Garden. He left an estate of less than $200. 


@@@@@


doc= 21077


Packer, William (fl. 1644-1662), army officer and deputy major-general, entered the parliamentary army early in the civil war, and was a lieutenant in Cromwell's 'Ironsides' in 1644. In the spring of that year he was put under arrest by Major-General Crawford for disobedience to orders, although the incident may have arisen from the presbyterian Crawford's known distaste for Packer's Particular Baptist views. Cromwell, however, strongly defended Packer as a 'Godly man' and secured his release. Following Marston Moor, he held the rank of captain from 29 July 1644 to 29 April 1645. Originally named to the 9th regiment of horse in the New Model he was objected to by the Lords. He later exchanged places with Robert Swallow and became senior captain of the 1st regiment of horse, Fairfax's own regiment. He sided with the army in its quarrel with the parliament, but helped to quash Leveller agitation within the army in April 1648. During the second civil war he was present at the siege of Colchester. In November 1648 he was one of the officers selected for a committee charged with drafting a compromise version of the 'Agreement of the People' but took a prominent part in suppressing the Leveller-inspired mutinies of May 1649. At the battle of Dunbar he seems to have commanded Cromwell's own regiment of horse in the absence of its major, and took part in that flank attack on the Scottish army which decided the issue of the battle. In 1652 he became major of the regiment, and, as such, was colonel in all but name, receiving the salary and exercising all the functions of the office on behalf of Cromwell. Noted for his godliness, on 7 July 1653 he received a licence from the council of state authorizing him to preach in any pulpit in England, if it was not required at the time by its legal possessor. By 1652 he was allied with the London Fifth Monarchy preachers, but he broke with them when he failed to oppose the protectorate. He was on the commission to promote the gospel in Wales, became a trier, and served on a number of 1650s committees, including the Hale commission on law reform. In 1656 he acted as deputy major-general for Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, and Hertfordshire, and proceeded against Edmund Waller until the protector interfered on behalf of the poet. 
By this time Packer had become a man of property, and bought, in conjunction with some other officers, the royal manor of Theobalds, Hertfordshire. George Fox mentions him as a great enemy to the Quakers, and describes an interview between himself and Packer. In Cromwell's second parliament he represented Woodstock; but he had become discontented with the policy of the protector, and joined the opposition in the parliament and the army. Cromwell, after failing to convince him of the error of his ways by argument, deprived him of his command. According to Packer's own account, his opposition to the revival of the House of Lords was the cause of his dismissal. 'I thought it was not 'a lord's house', but another house. But for my undertaking to judge this, I was sent for, accused of perjury, and outed of a place of 600'l'. per annum.... without any trial or appeal, with the breath of his nostrils I was outed, and lost not only my place, but a dear friend to boot. ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 3.165)' Packer was returned to Richard Cromwell's parliament for Hertford, but on a petition he was unseated. On the restoration of the purged 'rump' of the Long Parliament in 1659, that assembly made Packer colonel of his old regiment, regarding him as a sufferer for republican principles; but having taken part in the promotion of a petition which the house considered dangerous, he was cashiered by vote of 12 October 1659. He consequently assisted Lambert to expel the parliament, and was one of the leaders of the army during the two months of military rule which followed. But the restoration of the Rump Parliament at the end of December put an end to his power; the command of his regiment was given to Sir Arthur Hesilrige, and Packer was ordered to leave London on pain of imprisonment. When Lambert escaped from the Tower, Packer was immediately seized and committed to prison (15 April 1660). The Restoration entailed upon him the loss of the lands he had purchased, and, though he escaped punishment, the government of Charles II considered him dangerous, and more than once arrested him on suspicion of plots. His wife, Elizabeth, petitioned for her husband's release in August 1661, stating that he had been for three months closely confined without being brought to trial. In May 1662 Packer was transferred from the Fleet prison to the Gatehouse. In September 1662 he was taken from king's bench prison and put on board the 'Colchester' for Dublin Castle, where he arrived in October. His subsequent history and the date of his death are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 21078


Padarn (fl. 6th cent.), founder of churches, is traditionally thought to belong to the sixth century. Along with David and Teilo he was regarded in medieval times as one of the principal saints of south-west Wales. He is the subject of a life, 'Vita Paterni' (BL, Cotton MS Vespasian A.xiv), probably originally written 'c'.1120 at Llanbadarn Fawr near Aberystwyth. Unfortunately the 'Vita Paterni' cannot be depended upon for a single historical fact since it is, in the words of G. H. Doble, 'a collection of traditions and legends, mostly late and untrustworthy, arranged by a writer who used the Lives of two different saints and corrupted them to suit his own ideas'. It has been shown that the text is a combination of a Welsh life, now lost, and a life of Paternus, bishop of Vannes, in the fifth century, which had already been combined with the life of Paternus, bishop of Avranches, who lived in the sixth century. The identification of the Welsh Padarn with the Breton saint was probably facilitated by the fact that Padarn in his original life was, like many other Welsh saints, possibly associated with Letavia (Llydaw), a district in south-east Wales often mistakenly identified with Armorica. 
There are numerous scattered references to Padarn in medieval texts, the earliest of which occurs in the life of St David written about 1097. None of these appears to contain information about the original historical saint however, although it has been thought by some historians that the pedigree that appears in 'Bonedd y saint', a genealogical table of the Welsh saints compiled in the thirteenth century, may contain ancient traditions about him. The churches dedicated to Padarn are Llanbadarn Fawr, Llanbadarn Odwyn, and Llanbadarn Fach (or Trefeglwys) in Cardiganshire, Llanbadarn Fawr, Llanbadarn Fynydd, and Llanbadarn Garreg in Radnorshire, and Pencarreg in Carmarthenshire. Views as to what extent these sites reflect the movements of the historical Padarn and his cult vary, but it is generally agreed that his headquarters and the mother church of his cult was at Llanbadarn near Aberystwyth where a 'clas' (the church of a hereditary clerical community) existed until Norman times. In the eleventh and twelfth centuries it included the family of the scholar Sulien, including his son Rhigyfarch ap Sulien. His feast day is 15 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 21079


Paddock, Tom (1822-1863), pugilist, was born near Redditch, Worcestershire, and baptized at St Stephen's Church, Redditch, on 25 August 1822, the son of George Padock, a labourer, and his wife, Elizabeth. His place of origin earned him the sobriquet of the Redditch Needle-pointer. A burly, pugnacious farm boy, he developed a taste for boxing and became a strong, enduring, and resolute fighter, but never attained to the first rank as a scientific boxer. When his professional career commenced in 1844 his height was 5 feet 101/2 inches, and his fighting weight was 12 stone. His career progressed steadily, if unspectacularly, interrupted by ten months' hard labour at Derby in 1852, when police intervention at his fight with Harry Poulson was riotously opposed. 
In 1850 Paddock was defeated by William Thompson (Bendigo), a very shifty performer, who was declared winner in consequence of a foul blow which his conduct had invited. Five years later Paddock arguably became champion of England through default of Harry Broome, but he was not generally recognized and forfeited the position next year (1856) to Bill Perry (the Tipton Slasher). He made two unsuccessful attempts to regain the title. Paddock had for a long time been ambitious to fight Tom Sayers, but before the arrangements for the meeting had been finalized Paddock fell ill. Sayers visited him in the hospital and, on learning that he was poor, generously gave him $5. On his recovery Paddock renewed his application to fight Sayers for the championship; but as he was unable to raise the usual stake of $200 he appealed to his opponent to waive $50, a request that was at once granted. The fight took place on 16 June 1858, and Paddock was defeated in twenty-one rounds, which occupied an hour and twenty minutes. In the last round Sayers delivered a crushing blow with his left and drew back his right hand to complete the victory; but seeing his adversary staggering forward at his mercy, instead of hitting he offered his right hand in friendship, and led him to his seconds, who accepted defeat. 
Paddock's last fight took place in 1860 (when he was unfortunately suffering from a knife wound). His opponent was the gigantic Sam Hurst, who gained the victory by a chance blow. Paddock died of heart disease on 30 June 1863 at 22 Upper Rathbone Place, London, and was buried at Finchley on 5 July. His widow died four days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 21080


Paddy, Sir William (1554-1634), physician, was born in Middlesex, the first of the two children of Roger and Margery Paddy, merchants. His brother, Nicholas, died in 1602. William was educated at the Merchant Taylors' School, London, from 15 January 1568 to 1570, then at St John's College, Oxford. After receiving his BA in July 1573, he travelled to the University of Leiden to study medicine and was awarded his MD on 21 July 1589. This was incorporated at Oxford on 22 October 1591. Shortly after receiving his MD Paddy returned to London and applied to the College of Physicians for a licence to practise physic. He was examined at the college on 23 December 1589 and unanimously approved for admission as a licentiate, and was sworn in on 8 May 1590. He became a fellow on 25 September 1591 and was a censor in 1595 and between 1597 and 1600; he became an elect in 1606, and was president of the college in 1609, 1610, 1611, and 1618. He became a consiliarius in 1624. Between 1596 and 1609 he was 'desector of Anathomies' to the Barber-Surgeons' Company. 
From 1594 to 1602 Paddy was physician to William Cecil, Lord Burghley. In 1603 he wrote verses lamenting Queen Elizabeth's death, and praising her successor. James I knighted Paddy on 9 July 1603, and appointed him his personal physician. Paddy was summoned in March 1625, when James I became acutely ill. James died two days later, and Paddy recorded the king's last solemn profession of faith in his copy of the 'Book of Common Prayer', which is preserved in St John's College, Oxford. Paddy was MP for Thetford, Norfolk, from 1604 to 1611, and was a member of the privy council from 1609 to 1610. On 7 April 1620, with his colleague and friend Matthew Gwinne and several merchants, grocers, and apothecaries, he was commissioned to set down ordinances, orders, and directions to regulate the quality and sale of tobacco. 
As one of the most prominent physicians of his time, Paddy was a vocal proponent of learned medicine and firmly defended the privileges of the College of Physicians. In 1614 he was appointed to plead the immunity of the members of the college from bearing arms before the lord mayor, Sir Thomas Middleton, and the recorder, Sir Henry Montagu. He spoke before the court on 4 October, and pointed out the nature of the acts 14 and 32 Henry VIII, which set out the privileges of physicians. The recorder decided in favour of the claim of the college. Later that year Paddy and Edward Lister were sent to the bishop of London, John King, to plead for the suppression of Helkiah Crooke's treatise on anatomy. The physicians argued that parts of it were obscene and that no such work should be printed in English. Paddy and Lister succeeded in ensuring that the final two sections of the book were corrected by members of the college, and the work was published, as 'Mikrokosmographia: a description of the body of man', in 1615. In February of that year Paddy spoke against the proposals of Henry Atkins for the separation of the apothecaries' professional association from that of the grocers. When the midwives of London petitioned the king in 1615 for a charter for incorporation, regulation, and education, the College of Physicians was consulted, and Paddy proposed an alternative scheme. In May 1624 he again opposed innovations, this time by the surgeons, which potentially infringed the territory of the physicians. Though Paddy's medical ideas were thoroughly Galenic, his 1592 communications with Joannes Heurnius in Leiden show signs of a less rigid adherence to classical medical ideas. 
Although Paddy did not publish anything in the field of medical politics, many of his friends and colleagues did. He supported Matthew Gwinne's attack on the chemical physician Francis Anthony, and contributed commendatory verses to Gwinne's 'In assertorem chymicae, sed verae medicinae desertorem, Fra. Anthonium, Mattaei Gwynn adversaria' (1611), as he had earlier done for his play, 'Vertumnus sive annus recurrens Oxonii...' (1607). Paddy also contributed verses to another work aimed against Anthony, Thomas Rawlin's 'Admonitio pseudo-chymicis' (1610?). Many years before, Paddy had written in support of the 'Sphaera civitatis' (1588) of the Aristotelian scholar John Case. In 1619, as president of the College of Physicians, Paddy drafted a preface for its pharmacopoeia. Paddy's power and prestige are signalled by the fact that Michael Maier's 'Arcana arcanissima' (1614?), Robert Fludd's 'Medicina catholica' (1629), and Raphael Thorius's 'Hymnus tabaci' (1626) were all dedicated to him. Sir Theodore Turquet de Mayerne praised Paddy in the preface to his edition of Thomas Moffett's 'Insectorum... theatrum' (1634). Paddy was also a friend of William Laud, and on one occasion defended him when he was ostracized after delivering an offensive sermon at Oxford. 
Little is known about Paddy aside from his contributions to St John's College, Oxford, and the College of Physicians. However, it is recounted that at the age of fifty-five the eminent physician and one of his female patients were caught with their clothes off (Pady, 74). Paddy had a son, William (1600-1658), perhaps the product of a brief marriage. Paddy died in London on 3 December 1634, and was buried in the chapel of St John's College, Oxford. He left nearly everything to St John's College; this was in addition to his gift in 1602 of 1123 works in 682 volumes. His bequest included an organ, $1800 for the improvement of the choir, and $1000 towards the commons. After his father's death William Paddy travelled to America, where he became a prominent citizen in Plymouth and Boston. 


@@@@@


doc= 21081


Padua, John of (fl. 1543-1557), architect and musician, was one of a number of foreign architects and craftsmen employed at the court of Henry VIII. He is first recorded in the exchequer accounts on 30 January 1544, when a fee of 2's'. a day was paid 'in consideration of the good and faithful service which [he] has done and intends to do us in architecture and in other inventions in music' (Rymer, 'Foedera', 34). This grant ran from Easter 1543 and was renewed in 1549 and 1554. Although the exchequer invariably refers to him as an 'architect', John is described variously elsewhere as 'artificer', 'deviser', and 'engineer'. No work can be ascribed to him, although he must have been engaged in some form of architectural design, possibly ephemeral, and possibly in a number of mediums. The only evidence of his life outside the royal works is as executor of the will of a London-based Murano glassworker in 1551, where he was described as 'architect and servant of the king's majesty' (Colvin, 3.44). In 1557 he was provided with mourning cloth for the funeral of Henry, and his last annuity was paid in Michaelmas that year. His movements after this date are not known; however, the cancellation of his annuity in the early years of Elizabeth's reign, when he is described as a musician, was not recorded as due to his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 21082


Pagan, Isobel (1741/2-1821), poet, was a native of New Cumnock, Ayrshire, and passed her life mainly in the neighbourhood of Muirkirk in that county. Born with a deformed foot, she was abandoned early by her parents. In one of her poems she describes her education as 'ten weeks when I was seven years old' ('Collection of Songs'). However, she read in her spare time, especially the 'Bible'. 
A charitable landlord allowed Pagan to live rent-free in an old brick store in Muirkirk. In what was essentially a hovel, she sold whisky to both peasants and gentry and entertained them with her dramatic monologues and bawdy songs. Pagan reputedly had a beautiful singing voice, but she was habitually drunk and unashamedly sexually promiscuous. Her sarcasm was formidable. A clergyman once said she was 'the most perfect realisation of a witch or hag that I ever saw' (Blain, Clements & Grundy, 'Feminist comp.'). 
Since Pagan could not write, her poems were transcribed by her friend William Gemmell, a tailor. In 1805 her 'Collection of Songs and Poems on Several Occasions' was published in Glasgow. Two songs attributed to her but not included in the 'Collection', 'Ca' the Yowes to the Knowes' -- a realistic tale of lovers' tricks -- and 'Crook and Plaid' -- a more dignified appraisal of the virtues of the lowly -- demonstrate her lyrical abilities. Her satirical skills led to her being nicknamed Wicked Tibbie. Having heard 'Ca' the Yowes to the Knowes', Robert Burns created his own version by adding a verse of his own, but he did not acknowledge Pagan as the original source (see 'The Scots Musical Museum', 1787-1803). Isobel Pagan died on 3 November 1821 in Muirkirk and was buried in Muirkirk churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 21083


Pagan, James (1811-1870), newspaper editor and antiquary, the son of James Pagan and Elizabeth Blackstock, was born on 18 October 1811 at Trailflat, in the parish of Tinwald, near Dumfries, where his father was a bleacher. The family removed to Dumfries shortly after James's birth, and he received a sound education at Dumfries Academy. On leaving school he was apprenticed as a compositor in the office of the 'Dumfries Courier', and afterwards became a reporter for the paper. He soon left to become partner in a printing firm in London; but in 1839 he settled in Glasgow on the staff of the 'Glasgow Herald', and also edited a little broadsheet, the 'Prospective Observer'. In 1841 Pagan married Ann, 'nee' McNight-Kerr, a native of Dumfries and a friend of Robert Burns's widow, Jean. They had three sons (two of whom died in infancy) and two daughters. 
In 1856 Pagan was appointed successor to George Outram as editor of the 'Glasgow Herald', which he converted in January 1859 from a tri-weekly into a daily paper. He was also, from 1857, the correspondent of 'The Times' in Glasgow. Under his editorship the 'Herald' became one of the first provincial daily papers. Pagan greatly expanded coverage of local news, verbatim reporting of political and religious speeches, and news by telegraph. He was a shrewd, genial man, and a keen snuff taker (he used his snuff-box also as a store for shorthand notes). 
Pagan was a devoted student of Glasgow's history and antiquities, and published 'Sketches of the History of Glasgow' (1847), 'History of the Cathedral and See of Glasgow' (1851), 'Glasgow Past and Present; Illustrated in Dean of Guild Reports' (2 vols., 1851), 'Old Glasgow and its Environs' (1864), and 'Relics of Ancient Architecture and other Picturesque Scenes in Glasgow' (1885). Pagan died in Glasgow on 11 February 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 21084


Adam Paynel (fl. 1166-c.1205) was holding Broughton in 1187 by royal grant, and was probably the Adam Paynel who was a benefactor of Guisborough Priory. The Paynels of Broughton continued into and beyond the thirteenth century, and from one of their younger lines sprang the Paynels of Boothby Pagnell, Lincolnshire, who continued to 1595. The arms of the Paynels of West Rasen and Drax were argent, a bend sable. 


@@@@@


doc= 21085


Fulk (I) Paynel (d. 1182/3), and Robert de Gant. Hugh's portion included West Rasen, Lincolnshire, that of Fulk included Drax, and that of Robert was scattered in Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, Somerset, and Leicestershire. William's Norman estates were divided between Hugh and Fulk, the former receiving Les Moutiers-Hubert, the latter acquiring Hambye. 
Fulk (I) was more interested in French affairs than those in England. He married Lesceline de Grippon or de Subligny ('fl'. 1198) with whom he had five or six sons. At some time between 1151 and 1153 he made an agreement with his brother Hugh for the partition of their mother's inheritance. Fulk attested over thirty of Henry II's charters in France between 1156 and 1183, campaigned with Henry in Brittany in 1166, acted as one of the guarantors of an agreement between Henry and Humbert, count of Maurienne, in 1173, and served as custodian of Alencon and La Roche-Mabille in 1180. Like his predecessors Fulk patronized religious orders. He helped his father to found Hambye Abbey and endowed the priories of Drax and Holy Trinity, York, and the abbey of Mont-St Michel. 
Fulk was succeeded in Drax and Hambye by his eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 21086


Fulk (II) Paynel (d. before 1230) about 1188 or 1189. Although Fulk was a benefactor of Drax Priory, he also appears to have given priority to his Norman interests. This is reflected by his patronage of Hambye Abbey and by his marriages. His first wife was Cecily, daughter of Jordan Tesson and Lettice, niece and heir of Roger, vicomte de St Sauveur, and his second, whom he married in 1187 or later, was Agatha, daughter of William du Hommet, constable of Normandy, and widow of William, the son of Ralph de Fougeres. The second marriage appears to have brought Fulk land in Northamptonshire and Normandy, as well as five children, the marriages of two of whom, William and Lucy, strengthened the Paynel links with the Tesson and Vitre families respectively. In 1199 and 1200 Fulk was present in King John's court in Normandy, and in 1202 received custody of the Norman castle of Pontorson. Between 1198 and 1203 he made an agreement with Roger de Lacy, constable of Chester, concerning the honour of 'Vallis Seye' in Normandy. His association with du Hommet and the lordship of Chester emerges again in 1203 when King John, whose control of Normandy was then threatened by Philip Augustus of France, heard that the earl of Chester and Fulk Paynel were planning to withdraw their fealty and service to him. John travelled to the earl's castle of Vire, and on the following day Fulk and the earl appeared before the king and reaffirmed their allegiance to him. Fulk delivered his son to the king as a hostage, and the earl named William du Hommet as his pledge for good service and Roger de Lacy as his hostage. After John lost Normandy to Philip in 1204, Fulk continued to hold his Norman lands as a fief of the king of France and forfeited his English estates. He was one of the Norman barons who on 13 November 1205 drew up a record of rights that Henry II, Richard I, and they had in matters affecting the church. The bulk of Fulk's Yorkshire estates, including Drax and its dependencies, passed to Hugh (II) Paynel of West Rasen ('c'.1181-1244), grandson of Hugh (I) Paynel and Hugh's wife, Nichole, and son and ('c'.1200) successor of Peter Paynel. Hugh (II) received them as compensation for the forfeiture of his Norman honour of Les Moutier-Hubert to Philip Augustus after his decision to remain loyal to John, and thereafter pursued his career in England and was a benefactor of Drax Priory. Between 1226 and 1228 the soke of Drax was worth yearly $52 12's'. and 120 hens and 700 eggs. Fulk was received into King John's favour in June 1214 and was granted the lands he had held of the king in England and other estates in Normandy as he had them when the king last crossed to Normandy. However, in June 1217 the sheriffs of Yorkshire and Leicestershire and the chamberlain were commanded to give seisin of all of Fulk's land to his brother Hasculf, a royal clerk. 
The Paynels of Hooton Pagnell, descendants of Alexander son of Ralph Paynel, were an important branch of the Paynel family whose 'caput' was almost certainly Hooton in Yorkshire. In addition to acquiring the lands of his brother Jordan, Alexander had probably received from his father, as a younger son's portion, the manor of Broughton. His marriage to Agnes, daughter of Robert, son of Nigel Fossard, strengthened further the Paynel links with the Fossards and the honour of the count of Mortain, and brought Alexander three sons and a daughter and control of land in Bramham, Yorkshire. Together with his wife Alexander was a benefactor of Nostell Priory, and also favoured Holy Trinity Priory, York. Most of his lands passed not later than 1153 to his eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 21087


Ralph Paynel (d. before 1124) whose tenancy-in-chief was valued at over $80 a year in 1086, and who also held a tenancy of Ilbert (I) de Lacy in Yorkshire valued at $9 10's'. a year. The Lacy tenancy may have been acquired through a possible marriage to Ilbert's sister or daughter. After 1086 Ralph acquired further estates in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire, including a share of the lands held in 1086 by Richard de Surdeval of Robert, count of Mortain, which may have come to Ralph as a result of a second marriage to a certain Maud, with whom Ralph had four sons and a daughter. The eldest son, Jordan, was provided for with most of the Surdeval estates, married Gertrude, a member of the Fossard family, and eventually died childless. His estates thus passed to his brother Alexander Paynel (died in or before 1153), the ancestor of the Paynels of Hooton Pagnell. In 1088, when William II faced a baronial rebellion in England, Ralph Paynel served as sheriff of Yorkshire, attended the trial of William de St Calais, bishop of Durham, and was accused by the bishop of invading and seizing his lands. In the period 'c'.1090-1100 Ralph refounded Holy Trinity, York, as a dependent priory of the abbey of Marmoutier, Tours. He was also a benefactor of St Mary's Abbey, York, St Peter's Hospital, York, and the abbey of Selby. 
Ralph's lands in Drax, Yorkshire, and Middle Rasen, Lincolnshire, passed by 1124 to his eldest surviving son, 


@@@@@


doc= 21088


William (I) Paynel (d. 1145x7), who may also have secured possession of Les Moutiers-Hubert and Hambye in Normandy through him, and added further holdings in Leicestershire and Nottinghamshire to the Paynel honour. In September 1136 William's castle of Les Moutiers-Hubert was attacked by Geoffrey of Anjou, who opposed King Stephen. William, continuing the Paynel tradition of religious patronage, founded the Augustinian priory of Drax ('c'.1130-39) and the Norman abbey of Hambye ('c'.1145-7), and endowed the monasteries of Selby, Holy Trinity Priory, York, and St Stephen, Caen. William married first a daughter of William, son of Wimund, and sister of Robert d'Avranches, with whom he had four sons and possibly a daughter, and second Avice de Rumilly (died 'c'.1176), daughter and coheir of William Meschin, lord of Egremont, and Cecily de Rumilly, lady of Skipton, and widow of William (II) de Curcy. With Avice William had a daughter, Alice, who married first Richard de Curcy in or before 1147, and second Robert de Gant, younger brother of Gilbert (II) de Gant, earl of Lincoln, in or before 1153. After William's death the cross-channel Paynel honour was broken up, and William's English estates, which had initially passed with his daughter to Richard de Curcy and then to Robert de Gant, were divided after 1154 between William's eldest two sons from his first marriage, Hugh (I) Paynel (died 'c'.1179) and 


@@@@@


doc= 21089


Paynel, Gervase (d. 1194), baron, was the grandson of Fulk Paynel who married Beatrice, daughter and heir of William fitz Ansculf, a 'Domesday' tenant with land in eleven counties later known as the barony of Dudley. Fulk founded the Cluniac priory of Tickford in Buckinghamshire. His son, Ralph Paynel, was a supporter of the Empress Matilda. Gervase had succeeded by 1153. Respecting his father's intentions he founded the Cluniac priory of Dudley, for the salvation of himself, his wife, Isabella, and his son, Robert. In addition to the site of the priory itself, he endowed the house with the churches of St Edmund and St Thomas in Dudley, together with four other churches and land at Churchill. The monks received tithes, pasture, pannage, and seignorial rights, and were made subject to the prior of Much Wenlock. His wife was Countess Isabella, widow of Simon (II) de Senlis, earl of Northampton and of Huntingdon, and daughter of Robert, earl of Leicester. They married some time after August 1153. Gervase Paynel was also a benefactor to his father-in-law's foundation of Kintbury in Berkshire, later moved to Nuneaton in Warwickshire, and gave the nuns the mill of Inkpen, Berkshire. The vill of Greenham, in the same county, was given to the hospitallers. In 1166 Paynel reported to the king that he held fifty knights' fees of the old enfeoffment and five and two-thirds of the new. In 1172 he owed the service of one knight in the bailiwick of Le Passeis in Normandy; he had four knights in his own service. He participated in the rising of Henry, the Young King, in 1173-4 and in consequence Dudley Castle was destroyed by Henry II in 1175. Paynel was restored to favour for the sum of 500 marks. However, his liberties at Newport Pagnell were taken from him and were not restored in his lifetime. None the less, he spent time with the king, witnessing charters at Tours and at Chinon. The latter was a grant to the abbey of Marmoutier, of which Tickford Priory had once been a cell. In 1187 Paynel confirmed his father's and grandfather's grants to Tickford and added others of his own. He was present at the coronation of Richard I on 13 September 1189. Paynel died in 1194, and since his son, Robert, had predeceased him, his heir was his sister, Hawise, who married first John de Somery and, second, Roger de Berkeley of Dursley. Hawise died 'c'.1208; the barony of Dudley had passed to her son, Ralph de Somery, who had paid 300 marks for seisin in 1194. 


@@@@@


doc= 21090


Page, Benjamin William (1765-1845), naval officer, was born at Ipswich, Suffolk, on 7 February 1765. He entered the navy in November 1778 under the patronage of Sir Edward Hughes, with whom he went out to the East Indies in the 'Superb', and in her was present in the first four actions with Suffren, the French commander. In December 1782 he was appointed acting lieutenant of the 'Exeter', and in her took part in the fifth action, on 20 June 1783. In August he was moved into the 'Worcester', in the following February to the sloop 'Lizard', and in September to the frigate 'Eurydice', in which he returned to England in July 1785. His commission as lieutenant was then confirmed, dating from 20 November 1784. From 1786 to 1790 he was on the Jamaica station in the frigate 'Astraea', commanded by Captain Peter Rainier, whom he followed to the 'Monarch' in the channel for a few months during the Spanish armament. In December 1790 he was appointed to the 'Minerva', in which he went out to the East Indies; in August he was transferred to the 'Crown', and in her returned to England in July 1792. In January 1793 he was appointed to the 'Suffolk', again with Rainier, and in the spring of 1794 went out in her to the East Indies. In September Rainier promoted him to command the sloop 'Hobart', a promotion afterwards confirmed, but to date only from 12 April 1796. 
In consequence of Page's long acquaintance with eastern seas, he was ordered, in January 1796, to pilot the squadron through the intricate passages leading to the Moluccas, which were taken possession of without resistance, and proved a very rich prize, each of the captains present receiving, it was said, $15,000. Unfortunately for Page, some important dispatches were found on a Dutch brig which was taken on the way, and the 'Hobart' was sent with them to Calcutta. Page was thus absent when Amboyna, in the Dutch East Indies, was captured, and did not share in the prize money. In December 1796 he convoyed the China trade from Penang to Bombay City with success, for which he was specially thanked by the government, and by the merchants, who presented him with 500 guineas. In February 1797 he was appointed acting captain of the frigate 'Orpheus' (32 guns), but a few months later he received his post rank from the Admiralty, dated 22 December 1796, and was ordered to return to England. In January 1800 he was appointed to the 'Inflexible' (64 guns), which, without her lower-deck guns, was employed during the next two years on transport service in the Mediterranean. She was paid off in March 1802, and in November Page commissioned the frigate 'Caroline' (36 guns), in which, in the following summer, he went to the East Indies, where he captured several privateers, and especially two in the Bay of Bengal, for which the merchants of Bombay and Madras each voted him a present of 500 guineas. In February 1805 he was transferred to the 'Trident', as flag captain to Vice-Admiral Rainier, with whom he returned to England in October. In 1809 to 1810 Page commanded the sea-fencibles of the Harwich district, and from 1812 to 1815 the 'Puissant' (74 guns), guardship at Spithead. 
Page had no further service afloat, but became, in course of seniority, rear-admiral on 12 August 1819, vice-admiral on 22 July 1830, and admiral on 23 August 1841. He had married Elizabeth (died 1834), only child of John Herbert of Totnes in Devon; they had no children. During his retirement he lived principally at Ipswich, and he died there on 3 October 1845. He left the Ipswich corporation a collection of marine paintings. 


@@@@@


doc= 21091


Page, David (1814-1879), geologist and author, was born on 24 August 1814 at Plantation Street, Lochgelly, Fife, the son of a mason, builder, and contractor. Educated at the parish school, he entered the University of St Andrews in 1828 to study for the ministry in the Church of Scotland. He pursued a literary career upon leaving St Andrews in 1834, although he remained a lifelong adherent of the moderate party in the church. He lectured, edited, and wrote for the newspapers, publishing a geological essay on Fife and Kinross in 1834 and a volume of poems in 1838. His switch of allegiance from the liberal whig 'Fife Herald' to the tory 'Fifeshire Journal' led to Page's being known as the 'Judas' editor and 'a literary prostitute' (Campbell, chap. 6). In 1843, on 16 October, he married Annzella Maria Wetier, daughter of Thomas Snooks, a captain in the Fifeshire militia. 
From 1843 until 1851 the Edinburgh publisher W. and R. Chambers employed Page to contribute to its ambitious programme of popular education. The anonymous 'Rudiments of Geology' (1844) was the first of Page's hugely successful series of geological primers. In the course of his work for the firm, he was told the great secret of Robert Chambers' authorship of the anonymous 'Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation' (1844), and he corrected scientific mistakes in early editions of this evolutionary best-seller. Page was willing to consider creation through secondary causes, as long as this was subsidiary to the divine plan. Enraged by 'the moral cowardice that shrinks from avowing its paternity' (Page, 209), he exposed Chambers as the 'Vestiges' author in 1854, although many continued to attribute the work to others. 
By this time Page had left his position after a bitter disagreement about terms of employment. He returned to journalism and rewrote his textbooks, which henceforth appeared under his own name as 'Introductory Text-Book of Geology' (1854, 11th edn, 1877) and 'Advanced Text-Book of Geology' (1856, 5th edn, 1872). From the late 1850s a torrent of geological titles appeared from his pen, usually brief and often repetitive: among the most important were a 'Handbook of Geological Terms' (2nd edn, 1865); 'The Earth's Crust' (1864, 6th edn, 1872); and 'Geology for General Readers' (1866, 12th edn, 1888). His books on physical geography were equally successful. 
Although Page presented over a dozen research papers to scientific societies, his reputation as a prolific writer led to accusations of book-making. As the 'Athenaeum' (12 June 1869, 801) said in reviewing 'Chips and Chapters', 'It is the business of working geologists to make Chips, as it seems to be that of Dr. Page to make Chapters'. Readers, however, appreciated Page's flair for clarity and logical organization, and his writings introduced a generation to the fundamentals of a rapidly developing and controversial science. He also became a popular lecturer, and in 1871 moved from Edinburgh to Newcastle upon Tyne to take up an appointment as professor of geology and mineralogy at the Durham University College of Physical Science. 
Page had two sons and a daughter. He died on 9 March 1879 at his home, 6 Pleasant Row, Newcastle, from a paralysis which had been in progress for several years. His widow was granted a civil-list pension of $100 in 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 21092


Page, Sir Francis (1660/61?-1741), judge, probably was born at the end of 1660 or in 1661, the second son of Nicholas Page (died 1696), a country parson whose parish was Bloxham in Oxfordshire. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in June 1685 and called to the bar in June 1690. On 18 December of that year he married Isabella White of Greenwich, Kent; after her death he married, on 11 October 1705, Frances ('c'.1689-1730), the daughter of Sir Thomas Wheate, first baronet, of Glympton, Oxfordshire. By neither marriage were there any children. 
Having begun his legal training somewhat later than was customary Page's career at the bar was slow to develop. Although his whiggish views were said to have prompted him to pen several political pamphlets in his early days as a barrister he came to wider public notice in 1705 as one of four lawyers engaged by Thomas Wharton, fifth Baron Wharton, on behalf of the 'men of Aylesbury' in the celebrated case of 'Ashby v. White', which bore upon the crucial question of whether the House of Commons or the courts of law (and ultimately the House of Lords as the highest appellate authority) had the power to determine the right to vote. The Commons had committed the Aylesbury men to Newgate for having brought proceedings against the local returning officer who had refused their votes, and in February 1705 Page and the other counsel presented their plea in queen's bench for a grant of habeas corpus. The Commons responded by declaring him and his colleagues guilty of a breach of privilege and immediately ordered them into the custody of the serjeant-at-arms. Though granted protection by the House of Lords, Page went into hiding until parliament was prorogued in April. 
Page was himself elected to parliament, for Huntingdon in 1708, through the offices of one of his clients, Edward Montagu, third earl of Sandwich, who controlled the borough seat, and he remained an MP until 1713. He featured moderately in proceedings but was not an active spokesman for the whigs, his professional obligations sometimes requiring absences from parliament. In May 1713 he was elected a bencher at the Inner Temple. Having failed to make any headway in his career during the tory administration of Robert Harley, first earl of Oxford, he received rapid promotion from the whigs in the early years of George I's reign. By 28 November 1714 he had been made a serjeant-at-law, he was knighted on 21 January 1715, and a week later he was appointed king's serjeant, a rare distinction which gave him superiority over barristers who were king's counsel. During 1715-16 he served on a special commission for the trial of Jacobite rebels in Lancashire, and on another for investigating the outbreaks of rebellious behaviour in Oxfordshire. 
In May 1718 Page was raised to the judicial bench as a baron of the exchequer. His integrity as a judge came under the scrutiny of the House of Commons in 1722, when it was complained that he had acted with corrupt intent in the political affairs of Banbury. The profits of his law practice had enabled him in 1714 to purchase the manor of Middle Aston, in Oxfordshire, which he had consolidated with further acquisitions of land. The borough of Banbury lying nearby, he became involved with the corporation's whig faction, so much so that in 1722, with a general election rapidly approaching, he offered to fund improvements in the town to the tune of $1200 if the corporation would elect a whig of his choosing, Sir William Codrington. A hearing in the Commons on 13 and 14 February ended with a division in which Page was exonerated by a mere four votes. 
The following year, however, 'Baron Page' had the opportunity of showing himself a true pillar of the whig establishment when it found itself under attack. With deer-stealers at large in Berkshire and Hampshire he took the opportunity, at Winchester assizes in January 1723, to supplement the reading of a proclamation against the 'blacks' with his own strict charge against them; and in June he presided over the special commission of oyer and terminer at Reading, a showcase event at which four death sentences and six transportation sentences were meted out over three days to men who had caused menace in Windsor Forest. 
In November 1726 Page was promoted judge in the court of common pleas, and in September 1727 was transferred to king's bench. He has often been branded one of the most brutal judges of the Walpolean era, who with a reputation as 'the hanging judge' exemplified the worst excesses of the eighteenth-century judiciary. These verdicts must be treated with a degree of caution, however, and Page may have been no worse or no better than any other occupant of the bench. A nineteenth-century authority on the lives of the judges, Edward Foss, observed that the few reported trials over which Page presided did not appear to warrant his ill fame but concluded that it was unlikely that he would have been so reviled by leading eighteenth-century men of letters had there been no justification. It was Page's misfortune, however, to have made a particular enemy of the literati of his time through his treatment of the poet Richard Savage, who was tried before him for murder in 1727. Two of Savage's literary friends, Alexander Pope and Samuel Johnson, in addition to Savage himself, subsequently denounced Page in their work in a way destined to ensure his distinctive notoriety. The account of the trial by Johnson in his 'Life of Savage' (1744) reports verbatim the roaring manner in which Page was supposed to have blatantly misrepresented Savage's defence and incited the jury against him. Pope's 'Imitations of Horace' (satire 1), published in 1733, contained the couplet: '
Slander or poison dread from Delia's rage, 

Hard words or hanging if your judge be Page 
(ll. 81-2)' which was said to have provoked Page to fury. After Page's death Pope's fourth book of 'The Dunciad' (1742) included an allusion to him that was damningly footnoted with a declaration that 'there was a judge of this name, always ready to hang any man that came his way, of which he was suffered to give a hundred miserable examples during a long life' (Thompson, 211). There is at least one occasion on record, however, when Page and Pope dined together amicably. Henry Fielding had had the opportunity of seeing Page presiding at the summer assizes at Salisbury in 1739, and in his novel 'Tom Jones' (1749) described the trial of a horse-stealer that he had witnessed on that occasion (book 8, chap. 11). Fielding drew on and embellished Page's 'literary' persona to epitomize the workings of judicial terror, and the judge is seen coarsely haranguing the defendant, denying his counsel a hearing, and condemning the man to death. At the original trial that Fielding had seen Page had in fact acquitted the prisoner. 
Page continued to sit as a judge in king's bench until his death, apparently at the age of eighty. There is a story, the provenance of which is uncertain, but quoted by the 'Dictionary of National Biography', that towards the end of his life, as he shuffled unsteadily one day away from court, an acquaintance enquired after his health. 'My dear sir,' came the reply, 'you see, I keep 'hanging' on, 'hanging' on'. He died at Middle Aston on 19 December 1741 and was buried on 29 December at Steeple Aston church, near his country seat close to a huge and ornate monument with full-length reclining figures of himself and his second wife that he had commissioned during his lifetime from the Flemish sculptor Henry Scheemakers. 


@@@@@


doc= 21093


Page, Frederick (1769-1834), writer on the poor laws, was born in Newbury, Berkshire, the son of Francis Page. He matriculated at Oriel College, Oxford, on 14 July 1786 but left the university without taking a degree. Called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1792, he became a bencher in 1826. A substantial landowner, he was also interested in the development of the navigation of the River Thames and a major shareholder in the Kennet and Avon Canal Company. 
Page's attention was first drawn to the poor laws by the manner in which the poor rate affected his own property. Having been assessed to the value of the whole amount of the tolls for the navigation of the Kennet between Reading and Newbury, which were collected by his agent, he appealed to the Berkshire quarter sessions, where the rate was confirmed. The case was later tried in the court of the king's bench in 1792, where the result was upheld. 
Between 1794 and 1818 Page served as an overseer in three separate parishes of Berkshire and later he became a magistrate and then deputy lieutenant for the county of Berkshire. His practical experience of administering relief in the difficult year of 1795 was communicated to his friend Sir F. M. Eden, who included it in his 'The State of the Poor', of 1797 (Eden, 1.576-87). This account highlighted the difficulties which arose from the practice of subsidizing the wages of labourers in line with the price of bread adopted by the famous meeting of Berkshire magistrates at Speenhamland that year. This mode of relief, Page argued, encouraged idleness in the labourer by removing the necessity of finding additional sources of income and also produced a perverse effect upon the labour market by allowing farmers to retain labourers at less than the market rate, passing their costs on to the community as a whole. 
Page continued to study the influence of the poor laws and became an active participant in the debates leading up to their eventual reform in 1834. He favoured an improved organization of the existing model of the poor law through such means as the 'Select Vestries Act' which facilitated a growing professionalism in pauper management, and retained the belief that local administration provided the most effective model for judicious and economical relief. In opposition to the more radical critics of the poor law, including Malthus, Page defended its moral basis and its practical efficacy in comparison to other systems. To this end he engaged in historical and comparative researches into the principles of relief, travelling to Ireland and more widely in continental Europe, and published two works which set out his comprehensive views on the subject: 'The Principles of the English Poor Laws Illustrated and Defended' (1822), and 'Observations on the State of the Indigent Poor in Ireland' (1830). Page died at Newbury on 8 April 1834. In his will he named among the beneficiaries his wife, Sarah. 


@@@@@


doc= 21094


Page, John (c.1760-1812), singer and music editor, was from 1790 until 1795 lay clerk of St George's Chapel, Windsor, and he also deputized in the Chapel Royal and St Paul's Cathedral, as a tenor. In 1801 he was appointed vicar-choral at the cathedral. He was a professional member of the Catch Club between 1792 and 1797. In 1800 Page completed the three volumes of 'Harmonia sacra', a collection of anthems by English composers of the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries, including previously unpublished works by contemporary composers such as his friend Jonathan Battishill, Samuel Wesley, and Thomas Attwood. This was intended as a supplement to the collections of 'Cathedral Music' of William Boyce (1760-73) and Samuel Arnold (1843). Among other collections of religious music made by Page were 'The Anthems and Psalms as Performed in St Paul's Cathedral' (1795) and 'Divine Harmony' (1798). In 1804 a collection of four volumes of madrigals, glees, and elegies, 'Festive Harmony', appeared. Page edited the music from Lord Nelson's burial service in 1806, and he composed a little himself, notably the Christmas hymn 'See the morning star appear'. He died on 16 August 1812, at 19 Warwick Square, Newgate Street, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 21095


Page, Samuel (1574-1630), poet and naval chaplain, was the son of a Bedfordshire clergy family. He matriculated as a scholar of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 1 July 1587, aged thirteen; he graduated BA on 5 February 1591 and became a fellow on 16 April. He proceeded MA on 15 March 1594. Before 1595 he took holy orders and became chaplain to the earl of Nottingham, Charles Howard, admiral of the fleet. He accompanied Howard on the Cadiz expedition of 1595 and, as he says in his funeral sermon for Sir Richard Leveson, Howard's son-in-law: 'It pleased him [Leveson] in this expedition, to take knowledge of mee, and often to vouchsafe me his conference, he received at my hands the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ... in one of the harboroughs of that land [Spain]. (Page, 'Sermon', 2.234)' By 1597 he had obtained the living of St Nicholas, Deptford (or West Greenwich). 
Before this appointment, which he retained for the rest of his life, Page had had a reputation as a poet and Francis Meres, in 'Palladis tamia' (1598), ranked him among the very greatest when describing 'the most passionate among us to bewaile and bemoane the perplexities of love... Spencer, Daniel, Drayton, Shakespeare, Wetstone, Gasgoyne, Samuall Page sometime fellowe of Corpus Christi College in Oxford' (p. 284). His surviving poems are slight: a short commendatory poem to 'Coryats Crudities' (1611) and 'The Love of Amos and Laura', published in a miscellany called 'Alcilia' (1613); in the second edition of 1619 it has a dedication to 'my approved and much respected friend Iz[aak] Wa[lton]', but in the third edition of 1628, this dedication becomes merely an address by 'the author to his book'. This 'heroic poem' was his 'maiden muse'. 
Page proceeded doctor of divinity on 6 June 1611. His naval experience led to patronage by the brethren of Trinity House 'by whose unexpected and undeserved bounty, my labours and Studies have been comforted and encouraged' (Page, 'Cape of Good Hope', dedication). He was also commissioned to preach 'God be thanked: a sermon of thanksgiving for the happy successe of the Englishe fleetes sent forth by the... Company of Adventurers to the East Indies, preached to... the whole company of their good ship the Hope Merchant, happily returned to Deptford on Maunday Thursday, 29 March 1616'. This is addressed to Sir Thomas Smith, governor of the company, and Page declares that he is 'no stranger to your free Charity'. His church in Deptford seems to have had a special relationship with the burgeoning merchant marine for, 'we the people of this Congregation,... have ever ioyned in Common supplications before the Throne of Grace, for the good successe of your voyages' ('God be Thanked', 30). He compiled a 'Divine Sea Service containing sundry and necessary and useful formes of prayer and thanksgiving for the helpe of such as travaile by sea' ('God be Thanked', added at end). 
Page died in 1630 and was buried in St Nicholas's on 8 August. His personality is characterized by his friend Nathaniel Snape of Gray's Inn: 'the Clergy thought him a reverend, learned, and orthodoxe Divine; and... the laytie found him alwaies painfully zealous in his Ministry, upright, and conscionable in his life and conversations' (Page, 'A Godly and Learned Exposition', dedication). 


@@@@@


doc= 21096


Page, Thomas (1803-1877), civil engineer, was born in London on 26 October 1803, the eldest son of Robert Page of Nags Head Court. His father was a solicitor, first in Gracechurch Street and later in Mark Lane, London. Page grew up at Romaldkirk on the banks of the Tees and was educated for a career at sea, but, at the suggestion of Thomas Tredgold, he took up civil engineering instead. After working as a draughtsman in an engineering works at Leeds he subsequently moved to the London office of the architect Edward Blore. While making a measured survey at Westminster Abbey he discovered a previously unknown passage connecting the transept to the crypt under the chapter house. 
In 1835 Page became an assistant engineer under I. K. Brunel on the Thames Tunnel, progressing to acting engineer in 1836 when Richard Beamish retired. He was responsible for the completion of the tunnel and of the shaft on the north bank. In 1842, in competition with Walker and Burges, Charles Barry, Colonel French and others, his design for the embankment of the Thames from Westminster to Blackfriars was recommended for adoption by the commissioners for metropolis improvements. Under Page's control the Thames Embankment office was set up within the Office of Woods and Forests to consider the various schemes and he became its consulting engineer. A dispute between the crown and the City of London corporation over rights to the bed and soil of the river, and difficulties over the coal dues, resulted in the project's being abandoned. His position as engineer to woods and forests meant that any railway scheme affecting crown property had to receive his approval, often only after incorporating revisions he had suggested. This happened on lines through the New Forest, the Old Deer Park at Richmond, and in the Home Park at Windsor. 
In January 1844 Page made a survey of the Thames from Battersea to Woolwich and the tidal action of the river between Sheerness and St Katharine's Dock. In 1845 he prepared plans for a central railway terminus to be constructed on reclaimed land in the Thames between Hungerford and Waterloo bridges. Connections were to be made with the Great Western Railway at Hanwell, the Eastern Counties Railway at Blackwall, and the south coast railways by a river crossing on the site of the present Blackfriars Bridge. In the same year he designed, in conjunction with Joseph D'Aguilar Samuda, a railway, to be worked by the atmospheric system, connecting the Brighton lines with the Eastern Counties Railway via a tunnel under London docks. He also prepared and deposited plans for a railway from Lincoln via Horncastle to Wainfleet, with a branch to Boston. 
In 1846 Page reported on the relative merits of Holyhead and Porth Dinllaen as harbours for the Irish mail service and prepared plans for the construction of docks at each. In 1847 he prepared plans for docks at Swansea. In 1848-9 he designed and constructed new roads between Windsor and Frogmore, the Albert Bridge over the Thames at Datchet, and the Victoria Bridge near Old Windsor. These works included opening out a considerable area of the Home Park for public use. At the request of the government he prepared plans for the south side of the Thames between Vauxhall and Battersea bridges, involving an embankment and road (opened in 1869) along the river, the Chelsea suspension bridge across it (opened in 1858, replaced in 1936-8), and the road leading to Sloane Square. 
In May 1854, after lengthy examination by a select committee, work started on Page's design for the Westminster new bridge. The bridge was divided longitudinally into two halves, the first half being demolished and reconstructed before the demolition and reconstruction of the second half, so that traffic on the river and across it was not interrupted. It was built without the use of coffer dams or centering and opened on 24 May, 1862. His scheme for Blackfriars Bridge was accepted by the bridge house lands committee of the City corporation, but a vote in common council selected the design by Joseph Cubitt. Page designed and constructed bridges at Lendale, York, and Thornton and produced designs for many others, including a single span across the Thames at the Tower, across the Golden Horn at Constantinople, the Rhine at Cologne (which was displayed at the 1851 exhibition), and the Danube at Budapest. He was consulted on the reclamation of land on the River Tagus at Lisbon and on the railway between Lisbon and Cintra, and in 1860 reported on the improvement of the River Nene at Wisborough, recommending widening from Peterborough to the sea. As engineering surveying officer he held courts and reported on proposed improvements for Cheltenham, Taunton, Liverpool, Falmouth, Folkestone, and Penzance. With Sir John Rennie he advised the City of London on the widening of London Bridge and the treatment of the Thames as a navigable river. 
Page was interested in naval matters and in 1859 investigated and published a report on the suitability of Milford Haven as a port for ocean-going steamships and as a naval arsenal. He invented a system for firing guns under water. In 1870 he read a paper to the Society of Arts proposing a tunnel in the form of a submerged tube between England and France. 
Described by contemporaries as a man with a large circle of friends, Page was seen as one of the last links that connected the rising generation of engineers with the heroic figures from the early years of the nineteenth century. His early architectural training was considered responsible for his ability to combine architectural beauty with engineering utility. Both his Chelsea suspension bridge and Westminster Bridge were admired for their architectural elegance, even if the latter was sometimes criticized for a lack of rigidity in the bridge deck. He died suddenly in Paris on 8 January 1877. Nothing is known of his wife, but his eldest son, G. G. Page, and his youngest son were both present at his funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 21097


Page, Sir Thomas Hyde (1746-1821), military engineer, was born in Harley Street, Westminster, the son of Robert Hyde Page (died 1764), military engineer, and Elizabeth, daughter of Francis Morewood. He attended the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and as the first cadet received a gold medal from George III. Appointed practitioner engineer and second lieutenant in the corps of Royal Engineers on 28 July 1769, Page was promoted sub-lieutenant and engineer in 1774. The following year Lord Townshend, then master-general of the ordnance, requested Page 'to take a view of the Bedford Level', with the purpose of improving the general drainage in the county. This he did, and his manuscript report to Lord Townshend, dated 31 March 1775, is in the library of the Institution of Civil Engineers. He also constructed a ferry at Chatham and was awarded a gold medal of the Society of Arts, 1775. 
Page went with his corps to North America and distinguished himself in his capacity as aide-de-camp to General Pigott at Bunker Hill (17 June 1775), when he was severely wounded, losing his leg below the knee. His disability earned him a pension of 10 shillings per day. In 1777 he married Susanna, widow of Edmund Bastard of Kitley, Devon, and sister of Sir Thomas Crawley-Boevey, baronet. Appointed commanding royal engineer of the eastern coastal district, for the next few years Page supervised the refurbishment of defences at Dover, Chatham, Tilbury, Gravesend, Sheerness, and Landguard Fort. He also organized, in 1780, the Dover Volunteers. In 1782 the Board of Ordnance, anxious about the lack of pure water in its garrisons and dockyards, asked Page to bore a well at Sheerness garrison. He determined to try to sink through the quicksands by means of two cylindrical frames of wood of different diameters, excavating within the small circle first, and lowering it progressively as the large circle was formed above it. The experiment failed, and Page was much blamed. In the House of Commons the experiment was said to be 'not a well for fresh water, but a sink for the money of the public'. A second attempt was made, this time in Fort Townshend at Sheerness, and was successful. Page's report upon the Sheerness well is dated 12 May 1783. Plans and sections were published in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society', 74, together with an account of similar treacherous soils at Harwich and Landguard Fort. 
Page's certificate of candidature of the Royal Society was read on 3 April 1783 and supported by Charles Hutton and others. On 10 July 1783 he was elected a fellow, being described as 'a gentleman well versed in mechanics and many other branches of experimental philosophy'. He was knighted on 23 August 1783, but states in his 'Account of the Commencement and Progress in Sinking Wells at Sheerness' (1797), p. 10, that he 'considered the knighthood to have reference to his military services, and not to the well at Sheerness'. In 1783 he married Mary Albinia (died 1794), daughter of John Woodward (formerly captain in the 70th regiment) of Ringwould, Kent, and they had five children. His third marriage, to Mary, widow of Captain Everett RN, was childless. 
Page was promoted captain-lieutenant in 1784 and captain on 20 April 1787, before being moved to the invalid engineers four months later. His expertise remained in demand none the less. He was chief consulting engineer in the improvement of the port of Dublin, of Wicklow harbour, of the inland navigation of Ireland, and of the Royal Shannon and Newry canals. He directed the repairing of the disastrous breach in the dock canal at Dublin in 1792, and was chief engineer for forming the new cut from Eau Brinck to King's Lynn, a problem of navigation and drainage that had puzzled engineers since the time of Charles I. 
Page lived for many years at Betshanger Park, Kent, but latterly retired, for reasons of health, to France. He died at Boulogne on 30 June 1821, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 21098


Page, William (1590-1664), Church of England clergyman, was born at Harrow on the Hill, Middlesex, and probably baptized there on 20 December 1590, one of at least two sons of Richard Page, and his wife, possibly Frances Mudge. His father's profession is unknown, but several members of the family were barristers of the Inner and Middle temples; a brother, John, was a master in chancery. Page entered Balliol College, Oxford, on 7 November 1606, graduated BA in 1610, and proceeded MA in 1614 (incorporated at Cambridge in 1615). In 1618 he became a fellow of All Souls, becoming bachelor of divinity in 1621 and attaining the doctorate in 1634. He was known within the university as a preacher and polemicist, tending towards the Arminian side in the then current disputes within the Anglican church. 
His first published work, 'A Treatise Justifying Bowing' (1631), was a 266 page treatise defending, against the attacks of William Prynne, the Arminian practice of bowing at the name of Jesus during prayer. Archbishop Abbot attempted to prevent its printing as unnecessarily provocative, but was overruled by his nominal subordinate, William Laud, then bishop of London; the Calvinist professor of divinity, John Prideaux, was obliged to issue an imprimatur. From 1634 Page was rector of Hannington, Hampshire, and at some point he became chaplain to Walter Curll, bishop of Winchester from late 1632, whose ecclesiological outlook he evidently shared. Page's translation in 1639 of Thomas a Kempis's 'De imitatio Christi' was noteworthy mainly for its introduction, which followed the fashionable eirenic line that the different churches ought to practise charity towards one another, and chided the Catholics for their insistence that salvation was impossible outside their version of the faith. A suggestion that all Christians, from papists to Socinians, should find unity in a crusade against the Turks says little for his sense of political reality. While ready to admit that all sides of the current religious disputes were sincere in their beliefs, he saw this as an argument for settled authority within the church, and was unable to accept the conclusions of John Hales and William Chillingworth that reason could be a valid criterion. In his 1642 'Animadversions' to Hales's 'Tract Concerning Schism' he was concerned to register his dissent from Hales's attack on hierarchical authority; this, he argued, was dangerous, and there was no knowing where it might lead. 
In addition to his published works Page left a number of manuscripts, preserved in the Bodleian and various Oxford college libraries. Two are on the special merits of women and of widows, a genre popular in the 1620s; others deal with more esoteric themes -- the existence of paradise, and the state of the soul when separated from the body. In 1635 he wrote an opinion for the warden and fellows of All Souls that praying for the soul of their founder, Henry V, did not necessarily imply a papistical belief in purgatory. 
Sequestered from his rectory at Hannington in 1646 by the committee for plundered ministers, apparently more for absence than for any doctrinal reasons, Page was appointed in January 1647 by All Souls to the vacant rectory of East Lockinge, then in Berkshire. His name does not appear as a fellow at the time of the parliamentary visitation in 1648, but is mentioned in connection with a college election in 1657. Anthony Wood and various later writers have erroneously conflated him with another William Page MA and later BM of St John's College, Oxford, sometime schoolmaster at Reading. Page does not seem to have married. He died in 1664 and was buried at East Lockinge on 19 February, leaving goods to an inventory value of $67 14's'. and, in a will dated 20 November 1661, naming a nephew, Nathaniel Page, as residual legatee. 


@@@@@


doc= 21099


Pagham, John of (d. 1157), bishop of Worcester, took his name from Pagham, Sussex, where the archbishops of Canterbury held property. He joined Archbishop Theobald's staff about 1145, witnessing his charters, sometimes with the title 'magister', which suggests that he was educated at one of the nascent universities. His studies probably included law. A letter of John of Salisbury shows that he was consulted by the archbishop on a legal problem, along with known legal experts; he also acted as a papal judge-delegate, and a report from him about a lawsuit involving the abbey of St Victor, Le Mans, shows evidence of the influence of Roman law on ecclesiastical procedure in England. 
Pagham was consecrated bishop of Worcester on 4 March 1151. He gave to the abbey of Osney the rich church on his episcopal manor at Bibury, Gloucestershire, in spite of the protests of his monks; the grant was challenged later, and Worcester won substantial compensation. He was also an early benefactor to his former colleague in Theobald's household, Thomas Becket, giving him the church of St Mary-le-Strand in London. Pagham died at Rome in December 1157. He may have been out of England for a year or more, for John of Salisbury noted in 1156 that the bishop was about to leave the island, and Becket, writing in 1166, mentions the expulsion of Bishop Pagham by the king. The incident is otherwise unrecorded. The continuation made at Bec of Robert de Torigni's chronicle, noting the bishop's death in Rome in December, describes him as a godly man, and outstandingly learned. His obit was commemorated at Osney on 22 December. Copies survive of some thirty of his charters, dealing with episcopal and judicial business. In some of these instruments he employs a style -- 'Wigorn' ecclesie servus devotus' -- reminiscent of the papal 'servus servorum Dei'. 


@@@@@


doc= 21100


Paget, Lord Alfred Henry (1816-1888), official in the royal household, was the second son of Henry William Paget, first marquess of Anglesey (1768-1854) from his second marriage, to Lady Charlotte, 'nee' Cadogan (died 1853), the divorced wife of Sir Henry Wellesley. He was born on 29 June 1816, and educated at Westminster School. He became a lieutenant in the Blues in 1834, purchased an unattached company in 1840, and exchanged into his father's regiment, the 7th hussars, in which he served for several years, rising to the rank of general on the retired list in 1881. On 8 April 1847 he married Cecilia (died 1914), second daughter and coheir of George Thomas Wyndham of Cromer Hall, Norfolk, and had six sons (of whom the eldest was Sir Arthur Henry Fitzroy Paget) and six daughters. 
Paget was MP for Lichfield from 1837 to 1865, and held court office under all the whig ministries during that period. He was equerry to the queen in 1837-41 and chief equerry and clerk-marshal in 1846-52 and 1852-8, and again held those positions in 1859-74 (the clerk-marshal having ceased to change with the ministry in 1866). In 1874 he resigned as chief equerry, remaining clerk-marshal until his death (on 24 August 1888, on his yacht off Inverness), after which the post was abolished. 


@@@@@


doc= 21101


Paget, Sir Arthur (1771-1840), diplomatist, third and most distinguished of the six sons of Henry Bayly Paget, first earl of Uxbridge of the second creation, and his wife, Jane, eldest daughter of the Very Revd Arthur Champagne, dean of Clonmacnoise, was born on 15 January 1771. He was brother of Henry William Paget and Edward Paget. He entered Westminster School on 10 April 1780 and was elected to the foundation in 1783. From there he went to Christ Church, Oxford, matriculating on 8 June 1787; he took no degree but established a close relationship with Dean Cyril Jackson. In 1791 he entered the diplomatic service, and on 22 November 1794 he was returned to parliament for Anglesey, which he continued nominally to represent until 1807. Paget was a man of easy charm who made his way with little difficulty up the diplomatic ladder, assisted by his moderate whiggery. On the abandonment by Prussia of the defence of Holland, in July 1794, he was dispatched to Berlin as envoy-extraordinary to remind King Frederick William of his obligations. His conduct of this delicate mission was commended by Lord Malmesbury. Obtaining no satisfactory assurances from the king, he withdrew to Pyrmont about Christmas, and, when the French crossed the Waal, he returned to England by way of Brunswick and Holland. Some letters from him to the countess of Lichtenau written during this dangerous journey, in which, as a last resort, he implores her to use her influence with the king on behalf of the Dutch, are printed in 'Apologie der Grafin von Lichtenau' (2 vols., 1808). 
Paget was accredited envoy-extraordinary to the elector palatine and minister to the diet of Regensburg on 22 May 1798. He was appointed envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary to the court of Naples on 17 January 1800, and to that of Vienna on 21 August 1801, where his extravagance gained him the nickname 'The Emperor' ('Paget Papers', 1.xiii). His dispatches from Vienna in July 1802, after Napoleon's reorganization of the smaller German states, contained a remarkable prediction of the eventual acquisition by Prussia of the hegemony of Germany. In 1805 he contributed materially to the formation of the third coalition against France, and reported its total discomfiture by the battle of Austerlitz, on 2 December 1805. His gloomy dispatch on the day after the battle is said to have contributed to the death of Pitt. Recalled in February 1806, he was accredited, on 15 May 1807, ambassador to the Ottoman Porte. On the signature of the treaty of Tilsit on 7 July following, he told the sultan of the secret article by which the provisions in favour of Turkey were rendered nugatory, and exhausted the resources of persuasion and threat, even bringing the British fleet into the Dardanelles, in an attempt to detach the Porte from the French alliance. In this, however, he failed. In May 1809 he was recalled, and retired on a pension of $2000. 
Paget was sworn of the privy council on 4 January 1804, and was nominated KB on 21 May following. On 18 May 1808 he eloped with Augusta Jane Parker, Lady Boringdon ('nee' Fane), second daughter of John, tenth earl of Westmorland, causing considerable scandal. He married her on 16 February 1809, two days after her divorce from John, second Baron Boringdon, afterwards earl of Morley. With her he had several children who survived him, one of whom was the diplomatist Sir Augustus Berkeley Paget. He spent his retirement years as an agriculturalist and yachtsman. He was made GCB in January 1815. Paget died at his house in Grosvenor Street, London, on 26 July 1840 and was buried on 1 August in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 21102


Paget, Sir Augustus Berkeley (1823-1896), diplomatist, the fourth son of Sir Arthur Paget (1771-1840), diplomatist, and his wife, Augusta Jane, 'nee' Fane, was born on 16 April 1823. The father was the third son of the first earl of Uxbridge, and a brother of Henry William Paget, first marquess of Anglesey, and of Sir Edward Paget. Augustus Paget was privately educated, and in 1840 entered the service of the crown as clerk in the secretary's department of the General Post Office, soon transferring to the Audit Office, and again on 21 August 1841 to the Foreign Office. 
Paget then decided to enter the diplomatic service, and on 2 December 1843 was appointed temporary attache at Madrid, where he remained until 1846. On 6 February 1846 he was appointed precis writer to the foreign secretary, Lord Aberdeen, but on 26 June became second paid attache to the British embassy at Paris. Here he witnessed the 'coup d'etat' of 1848, and the establishment of the Second Empire; on 18 December 1851 he became first paid attache. On 12 February 1852 he was promoted to be secretary of legation at Athens at a time when diplomatic relations with Greece were more or less in abeyance, so that his position was peculiar and required much tact. From the end of the same year, Paget succeeded to a number of important diplomatic posts: in Egypt (1852-3); The Hague (1854-7); Lisbon (1857-8); Berlin (1858-9); and Copenhagen (1859-66). He was created CB on 10 February and KCB on 16 March 1863. 
As minister at Copenhagen, Paget saw the accession of Christian IX at the close of 1863, and had to play a leading part with respect to the Schleswig-Holstein difficulty in 1864; nor was his position much less difficult when in 1866 Prussia meditated war against Austria. On 9 June 1866 he was sent to Portugal as envoy-extraordinary. Appointed on 6 July 1867 to Italy as envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary to Victor Emmanuel, he represented Great Britain in Italy during one of the most critical periods of Italian history; he saw the entry of the Italian troops into Rome and the beginning of a new era of national life there. In that trying period his tact was conspicuous. He remained in Italy for a long time, becoming ambassador-extraordinary on 24 March 1876, the same year in which he was sworn of the privy council in London. On 12 September 1883 he relinquished his post in Rome and, after a short period of leave, became ambassador at Vienna on 1 January 1884. From that post he retired on 1 July 1893. He devoted much of the leisure which now came to him to the preparation of his father's memoirs, 'The Paget Papers' (2 vols., 1898). 
On 20 October 1860, Paget married the 
Augustus Paget died suddenly on 11 July 1896 while visiting Lord Salisbury at Hatfield House. He was buried at Tardebigge, Bromsgrove. 


@@@@@


doc= 21103


Paget, Charles (c.1546-1612), Roman Catholic conspirator, was a younger son of the Tudor statesman William Paget, first Baron Paget (1505/6-1563), and Anne (died 1587), daughter and heir of Henry Preston. He matriculated on 27 May 1559 as a fellow-commoner of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, and was a member of Trinity Hall in August 1564, being present there when Elizabeth I visited the college. Like many other students of his rank he left without taking a degree. He was also admitted to the Middle Temple on 9 October 1560, but never practised the law. Following his father's death in 1563 he inherited, among other property, the lordship of Weston upon Trent, Derbyshire, which he claimed in 1598 was worth $200 a year. 
Various members of Paget's family were overt or covert Roman Catholics, and it was to enjoy religious freedom that about 1581 he began his exile. He went to Paris and was to make his base in France for the next seven years. He lived largely in Paris, but also in Rouen, where he first went in late 1582 to recover his health by drinking English beer, which was more readily available there. Paget quickly associated himself with Thomas Morgan, who was a representative of Mary, queen of Scots, in Paris. Within a short time he was also a correspondent of Mary's and enjoyed her confidence, as well as a pension from her. Paget was possibly already known to Mary, since his family had their estates not far from her main place of imprisonment; his noble blood would also have recommended him to her. Even before he went into exile Paget had defended Mary in conversations he had with Henry, Lord Howard. Paget and Morgan worked but also quarrelled with James Beaton, archbishop of Glasgow, who was official ambassador of Mary at the court of the king of France. They kept Mary informed, as far as they could, of events in France and in the Catholic world generally, corresponding by way of Claude Nau and Gilbert Curle, Mary's resident secretaries in her English prison. Paget certainly deferred to Morgan as representative of Mary in Paris, and according to Morgan until 1585 Paget led a rather private life. In 1585, however, Morgan was placed in the Bastille at the insistence of Elizabeth I, and Paget was forced to take a more prominent role. 
Paget and Morgan also helped Beaton administer Mary's income from her dower lands in France, which were considerable, and which provided them with their pensions. The degree of control which they were able to exercise over Mary's finances was probably quite slight, although Morgan and to a lesser extent Paget were accused by their enemies of fraud. However, it seems unlikely that they could cheat Beaton and also the French officials who were in charge of her funds. Indeed it is possible that Paget himself was deceived, since in 1586 Mary wrote to Beaton asking him to conceal from Paget the fact that Beaton had received a sum of money from Philip II of Spain; this, she explained, was so that Paget did not ask for repayment of a loan of 4000 crowns which Paget had previously made to Mary's estate. 
Paget and Morgan were, like their mistress, involved in a number of plots against the government of England. The first plot with which Paget was associated was hatched by Robert Persons and William Allen, and discussed with Beaton in 1582. The plan was to involve the duke of Guise, Philip II of Spain, the pope, and Scottish and English Catholics in a concerted effort to invade England, release Mary, and depose Elizabeth. According to Persons's later account of this plot, Paget and Morgan did not give it their full support, although they pretended to do so. Paget should have been an influential figure in all this since he could give the foreign plotters contact with the alienated Catholic aristocracy in England. Persons alleges that out of personal rivalry and spite Paget refused to co-operate sincerely with the plans. Another less hostile interpretation of the very scattered evidence might be that Paget was cautious and not keen to involve himself and his English friends in plans which would not be successful, but which threatened their lives. 
Whatever the case, in the summer of 1583 Paget went from Rouen secretly into England, using the pseudonym Mope. He stayed first with William Davies at Patching in Sussex, and then at Conigar Lodge in the grounds of Petworth House, the residence of the earl of Northumberland. He met the earl, and also his own brother Thomas Paget, fourth Lord Paget, who came to the lodge to meet him. Charles Paget was known to the earl and had been looking after Northumberland's sons, who had recently been staying in Paris. He also had a meeting in Patching Wood with a gentleman called William Shelley. He probably also met Henry, Lord Howard, who had come to Sussex from Norfolk at that time. Paget then returned to France. 
It is difficult to interpret Paget's visit to England. Clearly there may have been both some Paget and Northumberland family business to transact. An interpretation which is consistent both with Persons's account and that given later in a letter to Mary, queen of Scots, by Paget himself is that Paget met his friends in Sussex and told them what was being discussed, but advised them that it was unlikely to succeed and that they should keep out of it. The impracticality of these plots is perhaps illustrated by the fact that Persons was also at this time attempting to get Paget to agree that Northumberland's sons should be sent into Italy expressly to be arrested by the Inquisition, so that they might be weaned away from protestantism. Paget rejected this scheme, which he may have broached with the earl at Petworth. After Paget returned to France things unravelled quite quickly because the government got wind of the meetings. Lord Paget fled abroad and the Throckmorton plot, which was linked to these projects, was revealed. Shelley and Northumberland were arrested eventually, and the former was executed for treason, while the latter was found shot dead in the Tower of London, apparently a suicide. These deaths were blamed on Paget by his enemies, but unless he actually revealed what he had done to the English government, for which there is no evidence, this accusation is unfair. 
That Paget was not a double agent at this time is demonstrated by the response of the English government to his journey to England. In June 1584 Sir Edward Stafford, the English ambassador in Paris, asked the French authorities, unsuccessfully, for the extradition of the two Paget brothers and various of their associates. They were attainted of treason by act of parliament in 1587. 
In 1586 Mary, queen of Scots, was revealed by the English government to have received and written treasonable letters as part of what became known as the Babington plot. She was tried and executed early in 1587. Charles Paget was named in Mary's trial as one of the correspondents who had plotted with her, and her letter to him of 17 July 1586, which the government intercepted, formed part of the evidence against her. Elizabeth I demanded Paget's extradition from the French ambassador, and in her interview with the ambassador threatened that she could easily have Paget assassinated if he remained in Paris. Paget and Morgan have also been accused by Catholic historians of helping lure Mary into a trap set by Walsingham to convict her. Thus Paget discussed invasion schemes and plans for insurrections with Ballard, a misguided adventurer priest who was travelling the continent in 1585, and who then plotted with Babington and his associates in England early in 1586. Ballard was executed along with the other plotters a little before Mary's own death. In a letter to Mary of late 1585 Paget had recommended Ballard to her. Similarly, Morgan had written to Mary advising her to write to Babington. Were they, therefore, culpable of Mary's death? The notion that they deliberately co-operated with the English authorities and that Paget was, as Lady Antonia Fraser puts it, following the Jesuit Leo Hicks, an 'outright spy' in 'Walsingham's service' (Fraser, 553), is not supported by any real evidence. It is difficult to see, in any case, what their motive was for such an action, since it led Morgan to the Bastille, and led to Paget being threatened with assassination by the queen of England. Furthermore, to have Mary killed was to remove their chief financial support. It is worth emphasizing also that Mary retained to the end her affection for Paget and Morgan, but condemned her own secretaries, Nau and Curle, who definitely did betray her. 
Had Paget and Morgan innocently led Mary to her death by themselves being duped by Walsingham and his agents? Clearly there is some truth in this, but an air of caution is at times present in their letters written to Mary at this time. In 1585, after the Throckmorton plot, Paget had written to Mary advising her to avoid further plotting, but also saying that if she had the physical strength to escape she should do so. But by early 1586 it is possible that Mary's only hope was a plot of some sort since, as the armada campaign developed, the chances of her surviving a Spanish invasion were very slight indeed. If anyone could help Mary escape it was Babington, whose family estate was only a few miles from Mary's prison, and who was furthermore one of the midland gentry known to Paget. 
In March 1588 Paget moved from Paris to Brussels, where he lived for the next eleven years. France was no longer safe owing to its descent into civil war. He had already while in Paris been granted, like many other English Catholic exiles, a pension from Philip II; he received, intermittently, the comparatively large sum of 70 escudos a month. He was, not unreasonably, an enthusiastic supporter of the Spanish armada. However, the defeat of the Spanish efforts to conquer England gradually exposed the tensions within the English Catholic movement. Paget was involved at a number of levels in these faction struggles, which had first surfaced in 1582 in disagreements between himself and Morgan on the one hand and Robert Persons and William Allen on the other hand over policies to help Mary, queen of Scots. These quarrels rumbled on even after Mary's death, and in 1590 the rival group was able to get Morgan imprisoned in the Low Countries by the Spanish authorities on a series of charges which questioned his integrity in the service of Mary, queen of Scots. There was clearly a personal element in this, and also rivalry between Paget and Morgan as laymen and Allen and Persons as clergymen, although both factions had supporters from both groups. In addition, anti-Jesuit feeling was growing among the secular clergy and laity all over Europe at this time, but especially in France, and this sharpened hostility to Persons, and to Jesuit control over the English College, Rome. There were fundamental issues of strategy at stake, and these can be traced back to the quarrels of the 1580s too. Although an enthusiastic supporter of the Spanish armada and a recipient of a Spanish pension, Paget became in the 1590s again a committed supporter of a Scottish solution to the English succession question, while Persons adopted the Spanish alternative. 
Paget was also willing, as he had been from the beginning of his time in exile, to countenance some sort of accommodation with the English government in return for a degree of religious toleration in England. He had written to both the queen and Walsingham when he first went into exile in respectful terms, and like other exiles was in occasional contact with the various English ambassadors in Paris. After the armada he tried to make contact again with the English government, and was reported as early as 1591 as hoping to discuss the question of toleration for Catholics with them. During the reign of Elizabeth, however, he never recovered his credit in England, and in 1594 when Sir Thomas Wilkes was sent to the Netherlands on an embassy he was instructed to seek the extradition of Paget and other exiles. 
Specific events sharpened the faction fighting among Catholic exiles. The death of Allen in 1594 led Paget and his group to oppose the promotion of Persons to the vacant position of cardinal, and to support the candidature of Owen Lewis instead. In 1595 disputes began in the English College at Rome, and one of the dissidents, Robert Fisher, received Paget's strong support when he travelled to Brussels on his way to canvass for support among the secular clergy at Wisbech Castle in England, with whom Paget also had contacts. In 1598 fresh quarrels arose, due to the appointment of George Blackwell as archpriest. Paget supported Blackwell's opponents, the appellants, enthusiastically, and contributed a short written memoir to the controversial publications which were generated by the dispute. By late 1598 he had returned to Paris, now at peace, and a more congenial base from which to maintain an anti-Jesuit and anti-Spanish campaign. 
From Paris, Paget worked hard to curry favour with the English statesmen already preparing for a Scottish succession. The accession of James VI, whose mother Paget had served for six years, enabled him to return to England. His attainder was reversed, and on 13 July 1603 he recovered his lands. The king also granted him a pension of $200 per annum. He died, probably on his estate at Weston upon Trent, at the beginning of February 1612. He was unmarried and left his estate of six manors, a park, and the advowson of three benefices to his niece, Mary Gerard. 
Paget has suffered considerably at the hands of later writers. He has been accused of dishonesty and betrayal, or, at the very least, of hopeless incompetence as adviser to Mary Stewart. These assessments are very harsh, and not supported by evidence. What Paget's career illustrates is the difficulties faced by the dissident Catholic aristocracy in the reign of Elizabeth. The clerical Counter-Reformation proclaimed by Persons and Allen was a reasonable course to follow, but only if it worked; otherwise, a more pliable, co-operative policy, rather on the lines of the politique programme developed in France in the years of Paget's exile there was to be preferred. Paget's approach triumphed personally and James I allowed him to return. In the longer term the strategy of Catholic accommodation with the protestant authorities also won through. Unfortunately for Paget's reputation, the history books have tended to be based on the researches of those who have regarded themselves as descendants of his opponents. 


@@@@@


doc= 21104


Paget, Sir Charles (1778-1839), naval officer, born on 7 October 1778, was fifth son of Henry Bayly Paget, ninth Baron Paget, first earl of Uxbridge of the second creation (1744-1812), and his wife, Jane (1746-1817), daughter of the Revd Arthur Champagne, dean of Clonmacnoise. Henry William Paget, first marquess of Anglesey, Sir Arthur Paget, and Sir Edward Paget were elder brothers. Paget entered the navy in 1790 under the patronage of Sir Andrew Snape Douglas, and, having served in the North Sea and the channel, was, on 12 December 1796, promoted lieutenant of the guardship 'Centaur' in the Thames. On 27 June 1797 he was promoted to command the sloop 'Martin' in the North Sea, and on 17 October 1797 was posted to the 'Penelope' in the channel. From October 1798 to April 1801 he commanded the 'Brilliant' in the channel, and afterwards the 'Hydra' in the channel and the Mediterranean until November 1802. On 30 March 1803 he commissioned the large frigate 'Endymion', and commanded her for the next two years, cruising in the channel, the Bay of Biscay, and on the coast of Spain or Portugal. In 1804 he captured four Spanish treasure ships from South America, gaining $26,000 prize money, much of which he spent on a country seat and a wife. He married, on 7 March 1805, Elizabeth Araminta (died 1843), daughter of Henry Monck of Foure, co. Westmeath; they had four sons and six daughters. 
Paget was superseded in April 1805. He afterwards commanded various frigates or ships of the line in the channel, and from 1812 to 1814 the 'Superb' (74 guns), in the Bay of Biscay and on the coast of North America. From 1817 to 1819 he was in command of one of the royal yachts in attendance on the prince regent; on 19 October 1819 he was made a KCH; on 30 January 1822 he was appointed groom of the bedchamber; and on 9 April 1823 was promoted rear-admiral. From 1828 to 1831 he was commander-in-chief at Cork, and was made a GCH on 3 March 1832. On 10 January 1837 he was made vice-admiral, and commanded on the North America and West Indies station until his death. Paget sat as tory MP for the family boroughs of Milborne Port (1804-6) and Caernarfon Boroughs (1806-26, 1831-3, and 1833-4). He died of yellow fever at St Thomas, Jamaica, on 27 January 1839. 


@@@@@


doc= 21105


Paget, Lord Clarence Edward (1811-1895), naval officer and politician, was born on 17 June 1811, the first son of Henry William Paget, first marquess of Anglesey (1768-1854), and his second wife, Charlotte Cadogan (1781-1853), previously married to Henry Wellesley. His half-brothers included Henry Wellesley, first Earl Cowley. After attending Westminster School Paget entered the navy on 29 May 1823. As a midshipman he served on board the 'Asia' at the battle of Navarino on 20 October 1827. He passed his examination in 1830 and was promoted lieutenant on 14 May 1831; after a number of flagship appointments he was promoted commander on 25 September 1834, through the intervention of the prime minister, prompted by his father. In 1835 his father took him to Germany to cure venereal disease, and in 1836 he was seriously ill with abscesses on the liver. The former illness permanently damaged his eyesight. 
In 1837 Paget commanded the sloop 'Pearl' on the North American station; he paid her off after being promoted captain on 26 March 1839. That summer he accompanied his father to Russia, where he visited the tsar and observed naval and military manoeuvres. The following year he served as flag captain to Admiral Otway at Sheerness. He commanded the 'Aigle' in the Mediterranean between 1841 and 1845. In 1846 he was appointed secretary to the Board of Ordnance by his father, then the master-general, and in 1847 was elected a Liberal MP for the government borough of Sandwich, which he held until 1852. On 7 April 1852 he married Martha Stuart (died 1895), daughter of Admiral Sir Robert Waller Otway. They had one son and two daughters. In 1852 he left the Board of Ordnance on the retirement of his father. He was not considered to have been a success in this post, giving little indication of his real ability. 
In February 1854 Sir James Graham appointed Paget to command the steam battleship 'Princess Royal'. He served in the Baltic during 1854 and, with other aristocratic officers, was openly and unjustifiably critical of the admiral, Sir Charles Napier. Paget's letters to his brother-in-law Lord Sydney were used to discredit Napier in cabinet and at court. Paget had incurred Napier's wrath by poor station keeping and running his ship aground. He was transferred to the Black Sea for the 1855 campaign, during which he developed a system of lights to permit night attacks on Sevastopol from the sea. In July he had to be invalided home with a recurrence of severe eye problems and general ill health. On 4 February 1857 he became a rear-admiral. In March 1857 he regained the seat at Sandwich, this time supported by his business colleague Richard Green, a leading London shipbuilder and shipowner with local influence. 
Paget used his seat in the Commons to attack the administration of the navy, and quickly secured an offer of a seat at the Board of Admiralty, which he turned down, as acceptance would have required him to end his links with Green. In this period Paget co-operated with the economic radicals, especially William Schaw Lindsay and Richard Cobden, speaking effectively against the conservative navy estimates of 1859. The combination of radical links, parliamentary talent, and aristocratic origins persuaded Lord Palmerston to appoint him first or political secretary to the Admiralty under Edward Adolphus Seymour, twelfth duke of Somerset, first lord of the Admiralty. He held this post from June 1859 until April 1866, acting as departmental spokesman in the House of Commons. Gradually the members realized that his apparently frank and honest statements were artfully constructed smokescreens. He was an early advocate of the ironclad warship, encouraging and advising Gladstone in his attempt to circumvent the declared policy of the government and the Admiralty that it was necessary to build further wooden warships until the ironclad was proven. His support for smaller ironclads led the controller of the navy, Admiral Sir Baldwin Walker, to leave office. Paget joined Gladstone's attempt to secure a naval arms limitation treaty with France, using Lindsay and Cobden as emissaries, once again in clear opposition to the stated policy of the Admiralty and Palmerston. Having accepted office he was never again trusted by the radicals, a fact that had some influence over his decision to take a seagoing command rather than face a new election. 
On 24 April 1865 Paget reached the rank of vice-admiral and resigned from the Admiralty; he accepted the post of commander-in-chief of the Mediterranean Fleet on the 28th, took the Chiltern Hundreds on the 30th, and was sworn of the privy council. After a largely uneventful three-year term in the Mediterranean Paget returned home and actively canvassed for the post of first lord under his friend Gladstone, with the proviso that he was to be promoted to the peerage. In this he was unsuccessful. He reached the rank of admiral on 1 April 1870, but had no further employment and retired in 1876. In retirement he devoted his time to the arts, being an accomplished sculptor. He modelled and erected a colossal statue of Nelson on the coast of Anglesey, close to his home. He was made GCB in May 1886. Paget died at 65 Regency Square, Brighton, on 22 March 1895, and his wife died the next day. They were buried at Patcham, near Brighton, on 28 March. 
After an early career made by his father's whig connections Paget matured into an ambitious political admiral. Keenly aware of his limited opportunities as a younger son, albeit his father's favourite, Paget exploited his profession for personal advancement. Although an unimpressive sea officer, and an unscrupulous politician, he was, as first secretary, the most effective naval officer in the House of Commons in the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 21106


Paget, Sir Edward (1775-1849), army officer and colonial governor, born on 3 November 1775, was fourth son of Henry Paget, first earl of Uxbridge of the second creation (1744-1812), and his wife, Jane (died 1817), eldest daughter of Arthur Champagne, dean of Clanmacnoise, Ireland. Edward entered the army on 23 March 1792 as cornet in the 1st lifeguards and through skill, connections, and family fortunes, he advanced rapidly up the ranks. On 1 December 1792 he became captain in the 54th foot, on 14 November 1793 major, and on 30 April 1794 lieutenant-colonel of the 28th foot at the age of eighteen. He served in Flanders and Holland until March 1795, when he was ordered with his regiment to Quiberon, recalled, and then ordered to the West Indies under Sir Ralph Abercromby. Twice driven back by storms, he finally landed at Portsmouth in January 1796, and in July went to Gibraltar, and, remaining on the Mediterranean station, was present on 14 February 1797 at the action off Cape St Vincent. On 1 January 1798 he was made colonel in the army and aide-de-camp to the king; the same year he was at the capture of Minorca, and in 1801 served through the Egyptian campaign, his regiment being in the reserve under Sir John Moore. He was in the actions of 8, 13, and 21 March 1801, and was severely wounded in the last; was present at the investment of Cairo and Alexandria, and was given as a hostage to the French army at Cairo until they embarked in July 1801. Having returned to England late in 1801, he was in October 1803 appointed brigadier-general on the staff at Fermoy in Ireland; on 2 July 1804 he returned to England, and was made major-general on 1 January 1805. He stayed at Eastbourne until October when he went with his regiment to Cuxhaven and Bremen, returning in February 1806. In June he was sent to the Mediterranean, and placed in command of the reserve in Sicily, returning in January 1808 with the part of the army which was under Sir John Moore. On 23 February he became colonel of the 80th foot, and in April accompanied Sir John Moore to Sweden in command of the reserve. On his return to England in June he was immediately ordered to Portugal, and placed by Sir Hugh Dalrymple in command of the advanced corps of his army. He soon rejoined Sir John Moore in Spain, where he was credited with commanding the reserves at Corunna in such a way as to ensure victory; for this he received a medal, and was appointed to the staff of the Peninsular army under Wellesley, with the local rank of lieutenant-general, and command of the left wing of the army. It was in the Peninsula that Paget earned a reputation for energy and decisiveness, as well as for being a strict disciplinarian. He conducted the advance from Coimbra to Porto, and on 12 May 1809, in the action before Porto, lost his right arm. After recuperating in Britain, during which time he was promoted to lieutenant-general (4 June 1811), Paget rejoined Wellesley as his second-in-command. In November 1812 Paget, accompanied only by his Spanish orderly, rode out from his headquarters to try to restore some order to British troops who were then retreating from Burgos. Paget was captured by a French cavalry patrol and held prisoner until 1814. 
On 26 December 1815 Paget rejoined his old regiment, the 28th foot. On 31 October 1818 he was made captain of Cowes Castle, and in 1819 he readied himself for the office of commander-in-chief of Ireland, only to be informed at the last moment that the position had been given to Sir David Baird. On 4 November 1820 he received a commission as governor of Ceylon, and administered the colony uneventfully from August 1821 to March 1823. Meanwhile, on 3 January 1822, he had been appointed commander-in-chief of the forces in the East Indies, and took up his new duties as soon as he was relieved in Ceylon. Paget initially welcomed the posting to India on account of the very generous salaries paid by the East India Company. However, his tenure there gave him little pleasure as he soon became embroiled in several controversies. Ill health and a deep aversion to bureaucracy drove him out of Calcutta and he chose to spend much of his time touring cantonments in upper India. His presence was really needed in Calcutta where the British administration was coping with the demands of a difficult frontier war with Burma. His reputation was further battered by the controversy surrounding his brutal suppression of a mutiny in the Bengal army in 1824. Efforts by the East India Company to have him recalled were blocked by Wellington who, while publicly defending Paget's handling of the Barrackpore mutiny, privately criticized him for his cavalier attitude to his office. Paget became full general on 27 May 1825. He returned to England in 1825, and made Cowes Castle, on the Isle of Wight, his principal residence. Paget received the Portuguese order of the Tower and Sword on 29 April 1812, and was made a GCB on 12 June of that year. He was governor of the Royal Military College from 25 March 1826 to 1837 and then a governor of Chelsea Hospital until 1849. 
On 1 May 1805 Paget married Frances Bagot, fourth daughter of William, first Lord Bagot, who died in 1806 at the birth of her child Francis Edward Paget. In 1815 he married Harriet Legge, (died 1855), fourth daughter of the third earl of Dartmouth. They had eight children: Henry William, Patrick, Edward, Heneage, Frances Jane, Harriet, Charlotte-Louisa, and Mary Georgiana. Paget died on 13 May 1849 at Cowes Castle; after a private funeral he was buried on 21 May in the cemetery of Chelsea Hospital. 


@@@@@


doc= 21107


Paget, Francis Edward (1806-1882), Church of England clergyman and author, was born on 24 May 1806, the eldest son of General Sir Edward Paget (1775-1849) and his first wife, Frances (died 1806), daughter of William, first Baron Bagot. He was educated at Westminster School, where he was admitted on 16 September 1817; he proceeded to Christ Church, Oxford, matriculating on 3 June 1824. From 1825 to 1836 he held a studentship, and graduated BA in 1828 and MA in 1830. He became rector of Elford, near Lichfield, in 1835, and for some years was chaplain to Richard Bagot, bishop of Bath and Wells. On 2 June 1840 he married Fanny (died 1890), daughter of William Chester, rector of Denton, Norfolk, with whom he had six daughters and one son. 
Paget was an early and consistent supporter of the Oxford Movement, and in common with other Tractarian clergy he exploited the contemporary popularity of the novel to disseminate the ideas of the movement to a wider audience. In 1840 he began to contribute to 'The Englishman's Library' (vols. 9, 16, and 18) with his 'Tales of the Village' (3 vols., 1840-41), short stories designed to show how the parochial life of the Church of England could be revived. In 1841 followed 'St Antholin's, or, Old Churches and New: a Tale for the Times', which dealt with the problems of raising funds for church restoration. In 1842 came 'Milford Malvoisin, or, Pews and Pewholders', significant for its early criticism of the social fractures resulting from pewed churches, and in which Paget argued that, as a consequence, 'the wealthy few have driven, in many places, the Poor from our Churches'. 
In his own parish of Elford, Paget implemented in a practical way the ideas advocated in his fiction. As with other Tractarian clergy he introduced the practice of daily morning and evening prayer in the church, and began to increase the frequency with which holy communion was celebrated. He raised funds to restore the building, including the collection of pennies from the children for a new font. The reopening of the restored church was celebrated on 2 August 1849, during which Paget preached a sermon published as 'The Destinies of God's Temples' (1849). The annual dedication festival became, in subsequent years, an important meeting place for Staffordshire clergy. Further restoration work in 1869 was followed by his published account of the church in 1870. 
Paget's literary output was also notable for the variety of its subject matter. In 1840 he edited Bishop Simon Patrick's 'Discourse Concerning Prayer' and 'Treatise of Repentance and Fasting', similar to Newman's reprints from the writings of English bishops. He wrote for children in 'The Juvenile Englishman's Library' from 1845, including two series of 'Tales of Village Children', and for some while was editor of this collection. Under the pseudonym William Churne of Staffordshire he wrote the fairy tale 'The Hope of the Katzekopfs' in 1844. In 1859 his novel 'The Curate of Cumberworth and the Vicar of Roost' was published as a warning to his fellow clergy not to be too enthusiastic or to move too quickly in matters of parochial reform. 'Lucretia, or, The Heroine of the Nineteenth Century' (1868) was a satire on the sensationalist novel. 'The Pageant', a novel deploring the employment conditions of milliners' apprentices, led to Paget's appearance as defendant in a successful libel case in 1844. He also published other novels, and volumes of sermons, prayers, and religious treatises. 
Paget's final works continued this note of variety. In 1873 he privately printed 'Some records of the Ashtead estate and of its Howard possessors: with notices of Elford, Castle Rising, Levens, and Charlton', an uncritical compilation from family papers and other private sources. 'A Student Penitent of 1695', based on seventeenth-century letters between an Oxford undergraduate and his tutor, followed in 1875. 'Homeward Bound' in 1876 was a series of meditative essays about preparation for death, in a style typical of the period. Paget died at his rectory in Elford on 4 August 1882, and was buried there on 8 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 21108


Paget, Lord George Augustus Frederick (1818-1880), army officer, sixth son (third of the second marriage) of Henry William Paget, first marquess of Anglesey (1768-1854), and his second wife, Charlotte (1781-1853), daughter of the first Earl Cadogan, was born at Burlington Street, London, on 16 March 1818. He was educated at Westminster School (1829) and on 25 July 1834 was appointed cornet and sub-lieutenant in the 1st lifeguards, in which he became lieutenant on 1 December 1837. On 17 August 1840 he purchased an unattached company and exchanged to a troop in the 4th light dragoons (later hussars); he was promoted major on 30 January 1846 and lieutenant-colonel on 29 December the same year. After becoming a brevet colonel on 20 June 1854, he went out in command of the 4th light dragoons to the East, landed with them in the Crimea, and at the Alma and Balaklava was next senior officer of the light cavalry brigade to Lord Cardigan. He was privately critical of both Cardigan and Lucan, 'two spoilt children' (Hibbert, 158), and of Nolan. In the famous charge of the light brigade Paget's regiment at first formed the third line, and he appears to have done his utmost to fulfil Lord Cardigan's desire that he should give him 'his best support'. With the remnants of his own regiment and the 11th hussars (from the second line of the brigade), which he held together after the first line had disintegrated at the guns, he was enabled to check the Russian pursuit, and was one of the last to leave the 'Valley of Death'. He commanded the remains of the light brigade at Inkerman, and immediately afterwards he went home with a view to retirement from the service, an arrangement he had contemplated at the time of his marriage before the outbreak of the war. Although his bravery was not questioned, his return at this critical period exposed him to much press criticism, and he was reportedly 'greatly snubbed at home' (Hibbert, 236), which probably induced him to reconsider. 
Paget went back to the Crimea on 23 February 1855 accompanied by his wife -- whom Roger Fenton called 'the belle of the Crimea' (Hibbert, 329); he was reappointed to the command of the light brigade, and was in temporary command of the cavalry division during the absence of Sir James Yorke Scarlett, Lord Lucan's successor. Together with his wife, Paget was one of the small group of personal friends who gathered round Raglan's deathbed. Paget commanded the light cavalry brigade at Eupatoria and in the operations under General d'Allonville, and until a month before the evacuation of the Crimea; he received the CB (July 1855), Legion d'honneur, Mejidiye (third class), and Sardinian and Turkish medals. He became major-general on 11 November 1861, commanded the cavalry at Aldershot in 1860-62 and the Sirhind division of the Bengal army from 1862 to 1865, when he came home, and was appointed inspector-general of cavalry. He was made lieutenant-general and KCB in June 1871 and general in 1877; he was appointed colonel 7th dragoon guards in 1868, and succeeded Lord de Ros as colonel of the 4th hussars in 1874. Paget was whig MP for Beaumaris from 1847 to 1857, voting for the ballot in 1853. 
Paget married, first, on 27 February 1854, shortly before he left for the war, his beautiful young cousin Agnes Charlotte, youngest daughter of Sir Arthur Paget; she died on 10 March 1858, leaving two children. He married on 6 February 1861 Louisa, youngest daughter of Charles Fieschi Heneage and granddaughter on her mother's side of Thomas North, second Lord Graves; she survived Paget, married Arthur Algernon Capell, sixth earl of Essex, in 1881, and died on 25 January 1914. 
Paget in May 1852 addressed a letter to Lord John Russell on the establishment of an army reserve, which was printed for private circulation. He proposed that, instead of the revival of the militia, a bill for which was before the house, a reserve force should be established by compelling all soldiers who left the service at the end of ten years, under the act of 1847, without re-engaging, to serve five years after discharge in a reserve, which was to undergo six days' local military training in each year. Paget's Crimean journals were printed for private circulation in 1875; but after the publication of A. W. Kinglake's 'The Invasion of the Crimea' he appears to have revised them, and, in accordance with a wish expressed in a memorandum found among his papers, they were published by his son in 1881. Paget died very unexpectedly at his residence, 1 Farm Street, Mayfair, London, on 30 June 1880. 


@@@@@


doc= 21109


Paget, Sir George Edward (1809-1892), physician, was born at Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, on 22 December 1809, the seventh son of Samuel Paget and his wife, Sarah Elizabeth Tolver. After private tutoring in Yarmouth he followed his elder brothers to Charterhouse School in 1824. He matriculated at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1827, won a college prize in mathematics in his second year, and graduated in 1831 as eighth wrangler. His success delighted his family; such were their celebrations that his brothers Charles and James Paget commented that it was worth a lifetime's reading to have such an hour of rejoicing. In 1832 he was elected to a medical fellowship of his college and began to study medicine. He walked the wards at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, and visited Paris with his brother James. He graduated MB at Cambridge in 1833, ML in 1836, and MD in 1838. 
The annual income of $300 from Paget's fellowship proved vital in supporting his family, whose brewing business had fallen on hard times. His loans kept the business going through the 1830s, and in 1841 he raised $1500 on his own credit and security to save it from bankruptcy. He paid for the surgical education of his brother James, and the clerical education of his brother Alfred. He looked after his brothers Frank and Charles who suffered from physical and mental illness respectively -- results of their efforts to keep the family business afloat. Paget himself was a lifelong sufferer from rheumatism and hay fever. 
Paget was a leading figure within Caius College, and from his earliest days in the fellowship was earmarked to rise to the very top. In 1837 he passed over the chance to stand for the Downing professorship of medicine in the expectation that he would be able to stand for the mastership of Caius when Martin Davy, the incumbent, died. Unfortunately for Paget, Davy died in May 1839, when Paget was considered too young to become a candidate for the mastership. He did, however, become bursar of the college. In 1852, when Davy's successor Edward Chapman died, Paget's Norfolk origins made him unelectable following the university commissioners' attack of 1851 on closed fellowships. Paget took consolation in his election to the Linacre lectureship of physic at St John's College, and in his marriage, on 11 December 1851, to Clara, youngest daughter of Thomas Fardell, vicar of Sutton in the Isle of Ely; they had ten children. 
Paget was elected physician to Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, on the resignation of John Haviland, in 1839. He held this post for forty-five years. He was responsible for innovative uses of the hospital in the education of Cambridge medical students: in 1842 he created a practical examination in clinical medicine, the first of its kind in the country, in which the candidate was required to examine a patient, and discuss the diagnosis, prognosis, and best course of treatment. The following year, in collaboration with the recently elected surgeon George Humphry, he inaugurated a system of clinical lectures at the hospital. Paget and Humphry also collaborated in cataloguing the physiological and pathological series of the anatomical museum in the 1840s. 
Paget believed, as did most leading doctors of the time, that individual judgement was the physician's most important skill. He taught his students that for most diseases there was no one method of treatment, and that they should therefore treat each case individually. Nevertheless, Paget recognized the potential of scientific investigation for medicine. As he pointed out in his Harveian oration delivered at the Royal College of Physicians in 1866, he believed that physiological and pathological discoveries would ultimately advance medicine; until then scientific knowledge guarded the clinician against making errors, and was a 'trustworthy guide' in the prevention of disease. Paget was an ardent advocate for science within the university and the medical profession. In his presidential address to the 1864 meeting of the British Medical Association, held in Cambridge, he called for a broader public understanding of science among the classes of influence in the country and the empire, as well as among the medical profession, for whom, he argued, science was becoming the measure of its social influence, and its strength in maintaining truth in medicine against the errors of alternative practices such as phrenology or homoeopathy. He reiterated these views in his medico-political dealings in London, where he served as president of the General Medical Council from 1869 to 1874. His support of science was rewarded with the presidency of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, in 1855-6, and his election as FRS in 1873. He was knighted in 1887. 
Paget succeeded Henry Bond as regius professor of physic in 1872. By this time he was beginning to feel that the development of medical subjects such as sanitary science, medical jurisprudence, and midwifery were being neglected because most of the university's resources were being diverted towards the rapidly expanding departments of natural science. Paget's campaign on behalf of medicine brought him into direct conflict with scientists such as Michael Foster, to whose departments he had previously given his wholehearted support. He had some early successes: in 1875, at his instigation, the university created a diploma in public health, and in the early 1880s a programme of clinical teaching was created which allowed students to complete their medical education at Cambridge. Paget was unable, however, to procure resources to expand the range of subjects offered at the clinical school, and students continued to leave Cambridge for the majority of their clinical training. This process accelerated after Paget's death when Clifford Allbutt, who did not believe that Cambridge should have a clinical school, was appointed as his successor. 
Paget was one of the leaders of the conservative faction within the university, representing their interests on the council of the senate for many years from its inception in 1856. He was strongly against the abolition of university tests and the admission of women, and particularly disapproved of the redistribution of wealth away from the colleges in the late 1870s. Yet even when the university changed in ways of which he did not approve, Paget continued to be passionate in its defence, never letting an attack on Cambridge, medicine, or William Harvey go unanswered. 
Paget died of influenza at his home, 2 St Peter's Terrace, Cambridge, on 29 January 1892. His obituary in 'The Times' suggested that the 'remarkable confidence reposed by the governing body of the University' in Paget's judgement was 'a potent factor in effecting the various reforms which resulted in the proper recognition of the study of natural and medical science' ('The Times', 30 Jan 1892, 7a). It was a just comment. Paget presided over a remarkable transformation of the Cambridge medical school, and even if it did not become exactly what Paget had intended, the emergence of Cambridge as a leading centre in the natural and medical sciences owes much to his efforts. 


@@@@@


doc= 21110


Paget, Henry, first earl of Uxbridge (c.1663-1743), politician and official in the royal household, was the son of William Paget, seventh Baron Paget (1637-1713), and his wife, Frances, the daughter of the Hon. Francis Pierrepont. He was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1683 and was married on 2 January 1686 to Mary (died 1734), the eldest daughter of Thomas Catesby of Whiston, Yorkshire; the couple had two sons. Paget served as MP for Staffordshire from 1695 to January 1712, taking an active part in parliamentary affairs. Although from a Presbyterian, whig background, Paget was at first considered to be a member of the 'country' party, and then a moderate tory and supporter of Robert Harley (later earl of Oxford). From the start of his parliamentary career he was involved in the preparation and management of legislation. In 1699 his interest in the house was described as 'considerable'. In 1701 he was appointed to several committees, including the one formed to draw up the impeachments of four whig lords, and he was involved with the 'Militia Bill' of the following year. In April 1704, when Prince George of Denmark became lord high admiral, Paget was appointed one of his council, a post he held until 1708. He voted against the tories in 1704 when they attempted to tack the 'Occasional Conformity Bill' on to the 'Land Tax Bill', supported the court on the 'Regency Bill' in 1706, and voted against the impeachment of Dr Sacheverell in 1710. From 10 August 1710 to 30 May 1711 he was a lord of the Treasury in Harley's administration, then, from June 1713 to September 1715, captain of the yeomen of the guard. On 14 June 1711 he became a member of the privy council. 
Paget was created Baron Burton of Burton, Staffordshire, on 1 January 1712, being one of twelve peers created to obtain a tory majority in the Lords for Oxford's ministry. Towards the end of Anne's reign he opposed the government on a number of issues, but did not lose his household offices. He succeeded his father as eighth Baron Paget on 26 February 1713, and was lord lieutenant of Staffordshire from March 1713 until 30 September 1715. On 13 April 1714 he was appointed envoy-extraordinary to Hanover. He was created earl of Uxbridge on 19 October of that year and made a privy councillor on 16 November. 
In September 1715 Uxbridge resigned all his court employments and acted as part of the tory opposition in the Lords. As one of Oxford's 'dozen' he voted for the latter's acquittal in 1717. He became recorder of Litchfield in 1715, a post he kept until his death. His second marriage, on 7 June 1739, was to Elizabeth (1674-1749), the daughter of Sir Walter Bagot of Blithefield, Staffordshire. He died on 30 August 1743 at West Drayton, Middlesex, and was buried in Hillingdon church. 
His second son, but the only one to survive to adulthood, 
He was survived by his son 


@@@@@


doc= 21111


Henry Paget, second earl of Uxbridge (bap. 1719, d. 1769), miser, who was baptized at Isleworth, Middlesex, on 22 January 1719. Following his education at St John's College, Oxford, he succeeded his grandfather in 1743 as earl of Uxbridge. He was chiefly remarkable for an inordinate love of money. Peter Walter, the well-known usurer, who had been the first earl's steward, bequeathed to him in 1746 the principal part of his immense wealth. Uxbridge is said, however, to have continued to pay Walter's daughter, Mrs Bullock, a sizeable annuity during her life, although her father's will did not require it. He died, unmarried, on 16 November 1769, and on this date the earldom became extinct. The barony of Paget passed to Henry Bayly, the great-great-grandson of William, sixth Baron Paget, and father of Henry William Paget, first marquess of Anglesey. 


@@@@@


doc= 21112


Paget, Henry William, first marquess of Anglesey (1768-1854), army officer and politician, was born on 17 May 1768 in London, probably at Uxbridge House, Burlington Gardens, the eldest of the twelve children of Henry Bayly (1744-1812) and his wife, Jane (died 1817), daughter of Arthur Champagne, dean of Clonmacnoise, Ireland, and his wife, Marianne. By a tortuous line of descent from William, first Baron Paget (1505-1563), Henry Bayly became in 1770 the tenth Baron Paget (taking by royal licence the name Paget in place of Bayly) and, in 1784, the first earl of Uxbridge of the second creation. 
Henry William Bayly, as he then was, attended Westminster School, London, in 1777 and, as Lord Paget, Christ Church, Oxford, in 1784. After a two-year grand tour in Europe, he was elected unopposed for Caernarfon boroughs in 1790 and for Milborne Port, Somerset, in 1796. These he represented silently until succeeding to the earldom in 1812. Soon after the outbreak of war with France he raised, at the age of twenty-four, the 80th foot, largely from his father's tenantry. In June 1794 the regiment went to Flanders, joining the duke of York's army there. At Meteren on 30 December he had his baptism of fire, leading his regiment in a successful charge. During the army's disastrous retreat he found himself commanding an infantry brigade after only one year's service. On 25 July 1795 he married Lady Caroline Elizabeth Villiers (1774-1835), known as Car, daughter of George Bussy Villiers, fourth earl of Jersey; they had three sons and five daughters. 
In 1795 Paget, so as to achieve permanent rank without purchasing it, ran speedily (on paper) through all the ranks from lieutenant to colonel-in-the-army. In 1797 he obtained 'the height of his ambition' -- command of the 7th (Queen's Own) light dragoons. He became full colonel of the regiment in 1801, remaining thus for forty-five years. 
Paget commanded the cavalry brigade in the ill-fated Anglo-Russian Helder campaign in the Netherlands in 1799. Near Egmont-op-Zee on 2 October he first made his name as an enterprising cavalryman; through a speedy reaction he destroyed a French formation led by General Vandamme. On 6 October at Castricum he ambushed a superior body of enemy cavalry, which resulted in a complete rout and hundreds of soldiers taken prisoner. Over the next eight years he turned his regiment into one of the most efficient in the army. In 1802 he was promoted major-general and in 1808 lieutenant-general. At about this time he was gaining the reputation of a dandy: in the 7th light dragoons he set a famously high sartorial standard, and up to his death, seventeen years into the Victorian era, he still wore his unfashionable Regency 'Paget blue coat'. 
In 1808, on Sir John Moore's being given command of a 20,000-strong expeditionary force to Spain, Paget obtained command of the cavalry of Sir David Baird's 19,000-strong force sent to Corunna to join Moore's marching up from Lisbon. Napoleon's rapid advance and his complete overthrow of the Spanish armies that Moore was to have succoured, led to the necessity for an immediate retreat, of Baird to Corunna and of Moore to Lisbon. Moore desired Baird to send him a regiment of cavalry. Instead, Paget persuaded Baird to let him have three cavalry regiments and six horse artillery guns to make 'a rapid march over an immense plain... overrun by the enemy's cavalry' (Paget and Paget, 113-14). 
Meanwhile, it was learned that Napoleon, believing that Moore and Baird were in full flight, had decided to march on Madrid, leaving only Marshal Soult's 18,000 men in the north-west. Moore's and Baird's armies met at Mayorga on 20 December 1808. So successful was Paget in masking the junction that Soult was quite unaware that it had taken place. Next morning there followed what Charles Oman described as 'perhaps the most brilliant exploit of the British cavalry during the whole six years of the [Peninsular] war' (Oman, 536). At Sahagun Paget totally surprised a French cavalry brigade, charging with only the 15th hussars and killing or capturing 500 French soldiers. 
On 22 December Moore learned that, on the capitulation of Madrid, Napoleon's 200,000 men were marching to attack him. The retreat was instantly resumed. It now fell to Paget's five regiments, facing thirteen of the French on a 30 mile front, to keep the retreat secret and the advance guard at bay. Nearly every troop was constantly in action, leading Napoleon himself to set down the cavalry at double its actual strength. 
At Benavente, on 29 December, the bridge over the Esla having been blown up, General Lefebres-Desnouettes, commanding the elite of Napoleon's cavalry, took time to find a ford. While Paget's pickets kept the French occupied, he concealed the 10th hussars until the enemy were in the act of charging down upon the pickets. The regiment then crashed into the French flank. Utterly surprised, the enemy horsemen broke and did not again attempt a crossing that day; Moore's army had gained a vital day's march. Although the retreat started on 24 December, it was not guessed at by Soult until late on the 27th. 'By this time', wrote Fortescue, 'the contempt of the British for the French horse was such that they cheerfully engaged greatly superior numbers' (Fortescue, 'Brit. army', 352). Moore found it impossible 'to say too much' (ibid.) in praise of the cavalry. 
As the plains were replaced by the Galician Mountains, the infantry commanded by Paget's brother, Edward Paget, took over the rearguard. Paget himself, meanwhile, had succumbed to the prevalent ophthalmia, being practically blinded by it. From this resulted the 'tic douloureux' (facial neuralgia), from which he suffered untold agonies during the last thirty-five years of his life. He was already aboard ship when he heard of Moore's death on 16 January 1809 at the battle of Corunna. 
Back home, Paget, feted as a hero, became the centre of a famous scandal. Earlier he and Lady Charlotte Wellesley (1781-1853) had fallen in love. A daughter of Earl Cadogan and the wife of Henry Wellesley (Sir Arthur Wellesley's youngest brother and later Lord Cowley), Char, as she was known, was the mother of five children. Paget deserted his wife Caroline and eloped with her. Henry Wellesley offered to take Char back conditionally but she replied that, not being 'lost to all Sense of Honor' (Plas Newydd MSS), she could not return to a husband whom she had left or to children she had abandoned. Paget's family, while condemning him and, more forcefully, Char ('that 'maudite sorciere''), befriended 'poor Car' (ibid.). Paget's brothers failed to persuade him to return to his wife. 
Char's brother, meanwhile, required her to give Paget up. On her refusing to do so, he challenged Paget to a duel. This he refused, writing that, as Char had 'lost the world' upon his account, the only atonement he could make was to devote himself to alleviating 'her suffering', adding that: 'my motive for acting thus is good' (Plas Newydd MSS). Since Paget failed to contest Wellesley's action for 'criminal conversation' (6 May 1809), his damages were assessed at $20,000 with costs. The final decree was granted on 7 July and a private act passed on 22 February 1810. 
Nine months earlier, Paget's brother had persuaded him to be temporarily reconciled to Car. It seems that she agreed to his returning 'without any stipulations whatever' (Plas Newydd MSS), but the transaction is shrouded in mystery. All that is certain is that Paget returned to Car on 17 May 1809 and that Char was financially looked after. Thus, Paget now felt able to accept Cadogan's further challenge to a duel, which took place on 30 May. Cadogan fired his pistol and missed, but Paget aimed off, saying that nothing would induce him to add to the injuries he had already inflicted on the family 'by firing at the brother of Lady Charlotte Wellesley' (ibid.). On 4 March 1810 Char gave birth to a baby girl whose father was Paget. 
Paget's conduct was markedly unlike the typical military libertine of a generation earlier and the actions of all concerned were illustrative of the growing decencies of life of that period. Though both families involved were tory, the comments of the whig press, eschewing past practice, were irreproachable. 
Car now set in motion divorce proceedings. Only in Scotland did the law provide a wife with the same remedy as a husband; and to Scotland, therefore, she and Paget resorted. As soon as all was settled, Paget married Char, while Car married the duke of Argyll, to whom she had for some time been engaged. Car and her husband had no children, while Char and Paget had ten. It was many years before Char was accepted in society. The whole business had cost Paget $55,000. 
The death of Paget's father in 1812 revealed large debts. Yet extensive estates, and copper-, lead-, and coalmines, still produced income between 1819 and 1835 averaging $76,200 p.a., while overspending averaged $1600 p.a. In the meantime, Paget had commanded an infantry division in the ill-starred, short-lived Walcheren expedition of 1809. He saw little action but escaped the miasmatic fever which decimated the army. 
For the next five years, besides commanding the London district troops in the corn law riots early in 1815, Uxbridge (as he now was) saw no active service. This was partly because the duke of Wellington disliked 'clever' cavalry officers. Uxbridge's view that a cavalry general should 'inspire his men... with the most perfect confidence in his personal gallantry', with his added comment of 'let him but lead, they are sure to follow... hardly anything will stop them' (Le Marchant, 157-8), would have alarmed the duke. For the Waterloo campaign Wellington would have preferred the more experienced, but plodding Lord Combermere. Yet Uxbridge was thrust on him by the prince regent and the duke of York. 
On 15 April 1815 Uxbridge assumed command of some 13,000 allied cavalry and forty-four horse artillery guns, the duke of Wellington giving him 'carte blanche'. (The Dutch/Belgian horse, until the eve of Waterloo, remained under the prince of Orange.) Chiefly for forage supply reasons, the cavalry was distributed over a wide area. This meant that at Quatre-Bras (16 June) it failed to concentrate in time to assist the infantry. On the 17th Uxbridge was left by Wellington to cover the infantry's retirement from Quatre-Bras to Mont-St Jean. He was enjoined to avoid a serious engagement and remain in position as long as possible, and he did both admirably. In the course of the operation, described by Uxbridge as 'the prettiest Field Day of Cavalry and Horse Artillery that I ever witnessed' (Siborne, 7), the 7th hussars, through no fault of their own, were repulsed by the French 'lanciers' at Genappe. Consequently, as soon as the 'lanciers' had debouched from the narrow village street, Uxbridge ordered the heavy horsemen of the 1st Life Guards to charge, thus retrieving the situation. 
On 18 June, at perhaps the most critical moment of the great battle, when Lieutenant-General Thomas Picton's infantry of 3000 were facing some 10,000 enemy infantry about to pour through a gap left by the flight of Rijlandt's Netherlanders, Uxbridge 'galloped up to the Heavy Cavalry', as he later wrote, 'and ordered the Household Brigade to prepare to form line, passed on to [the Union Brigade]', told its commander 'to wheel into line when the other Brigade did, instantly returned to the Household Brigade, and put the whole in motion' (Siborne, 8, 238). He put himself at the head of the two brigades as they poured over the ridge and crashed headlong into the enemy's serried ranks. Thus, 2000 'heavies' swept 15,000 French soldiers in wild disorder before them, destroying two field batteries and taking more than 2000 prisoners and two eagles. The enemy's casualties numbered about 4500, but the cavalry lost 700 men and 900 horses. 
These high casualties are accounted for, in part, by Uxbridge placing himself at the head of the first line instead of the second: 'a great mistake', as he put it. 'The 'carriere' once begun, the leader is no better than any other man.' When he sounded the rally, 'neither voice nor trumpet availed. The pursuit continued without order and too far' (Siborne, 9-10). It penetrated even to Napoleon's 'great battery'. As they retired, the exhausted survivors were badly cut up by fresh French cavalry. 
For the rest of the battle Uxbridge galloped from regiment to regiment of his light brigades, leading numerous counter-attacks against the massed cavalry which again and again assaulted the British 'squares'. He had eight or nine horses shot under him. At a moment of maximum crisis he saw an infantry regiment wavering. 'Galloping to the rally, he reminded this regiment of its distinguished name... told them who he was, and led them to the charge. They followed him to a man, drove back the Enemy, and maintained their post' (Siborne, 17, 20). 
As the battle was ending, a grapeshot passed over the neck of Wellington's horse and smashed into Uxbridge's right knee as he rode beside the duke. 'By God, sir, I've lost my leg!' he is supposed to have exclaimed. The duke momentarily removes the telescope from his eye, considers the mangled limb, says 'By God, sir, so you have!' (marquess of Anglesey, 149), and resumes his scrutiny of the victorious field. The leg had to be amputated that night and was buried in a Waterloo garden under an elaborately inscribed 'tombstone'. For its loss Uxbridge was offered and refused an annual pension of $1200, thus saving the nation $47,000. 
Within three weeks Uxbridge was back in London. Later, the first articulated artificial limb ever devised -- the 'Anglesey leg' -- was fitted to his stump. On 4 July he was created marquess of Anglesey. Baron Stockmar described him at this time as 'a tall, well-made man, wild martial face, high forehead, with a large hawk's nose, which makes a small, deep angle where it joins the forehead. A great deal of ease in his manners' ('Memoirs', 53). In 1816 a 100-foot grey marble column by Thomas Harrison was erected in Anglesey, paid for chiefly by local subscriptions, commemorating Anglesey's 'heroic conduct'. In 1859 a bronze statue by Matthew Noble was placed on top of it. 
Anglesey was made a knight of the Garter in 1818 and promoted general in 1819. At the time of Queen Caroline's trial in 1820 he is said to have been surrounded by an angry crowd insisting that he should give the cry 'The Queen!' He complied and said: 'God save the Queen -- and may all your wives be like her!' (marquess of Anglesey, 163-4). At George IV's coronation in 1821, he acted as lord high steward. 
On 30 April 1827 Anglesey succeeded Wellington as master-general of the ordnance in Canning's cabinet. In midsummer, before Canning's death, he was designated to succeed Marquess Richard Colley Wellesley as lord lieutenant of Ireland at the end of the year. Being more of a Canningite than an ultra, he had scruples -- which he soon overcame -- about serving under Wellington when he became prime minister in January 1828. His views on Catholic emancipation, the great Irish question of the day, had long been equivocal. To the king, fussed about breaking his coronation oath, he protested that he was neither protestant nor Catholic and would act impartially. 
Daniel O'Connell's Catholic Association was already a potent nationwide organization. When -- though as a Roman Catholic unable to sit or vote -- O'Connell was returned at the County Clare by-election, $14,000 in 'Catholic Rent' was subscribed in a week to his election fund. Anglesey, faced (he believed) by 'open rebellion' from both Catholics and Orangemen, made it known that 'the first moment of tranquillity should be seized' to adjust the question (Anglesey to F. L. Gower, 2-3 July 1828, Plas Newydd MSS). This gained him much popularity but angered Wellington, who refused to discuss the subject until he had won the king round. Meanwhile, he made massive military force available to Anglesey. 
Anglesey and Wellington now engaged in an acrimonious correspondence. Wellington wrote privately that he thought Anglesey had been bitten by 'a mad Papist or instigated by the love of popularity' ('Despatches, Correspondence', 5.280). On 30 December he was recalled. 
Anglesey's departure was hastened, but not caused, by his letter to Dr Patrick Curtis, the Catholic primate, who had drawn from Wellington a letter stating that he was anxious for a settlement and advising that the question should be buried 'in oblivion' for a time. This Curtis sent on to Anglesey. Since Wellington had thus gone behind his back, Anglesey decided to 'follow His Grace's example'. He wrote to Curtis saying that allowance should be made for the difficulties of the prime minister's situation, but disagreeing with the 'burying in oblivion' and adding that all constitutional means should be used 'to forward the cause' and recommending 'patient forbearance' (Anglesey to Curtis, 23 Dec 1828, Plas Newydd MSS). The letter's publication led to Anglesey being ordered home immediately, but not before the Catholic Association had resolved that all Catholics should be guided by so enlightened a lord lieutenant. 
On 19 January 1829, a day of mourning in Dublin, hundreds of thousands of silent, sober people lined the route to Kingstown as Anglesey departed. Hearing of the recall, the French politician Talleyrand told Palmerston that 'he saw at once that the Duke had determined on conceding the Irish Catholic claims, and that he did not mean anyone else to have the credit' (Ashley, 185). Thus it was, for, five days after Anglesey's departure, the 'Relief Bill' was announced from the throne, and on 13 April 1829 it became law. 
Declaring that he was 'attached and bound to no party' (memorandum, 1 Nov 1830, Plas Newydd MSS), Anglesey had no hesitation in accepting the lord lieutenancy again when Earl Grey's whig administration succeeded Wellington's in December 1830. O'Connell's campaign for repeal of the union (home rule) had now made that the great issue of the day. Anglesey, like virtually everyone in England, was unequivocally against it. O'Connell's prodigious power by the time of Anglesey's arrival had so inflamed the people that the first of numerous, mostly fruitless, proclamations had to be issued. On 14 January 1831 'the Liberator' (as O'Connell was called) publicly recommended a run on the banks. Anglesey decided to arrest him, declaring that 'things are now come to that pass that the question is whether he or I shall govern Ireland' ('Greville Memoirs', 2.109). However, O'Connell was never brought to court, for the political situation had suddenly undergone a radical change. 
When on 1 March 1831 the government outlined its scheme for parliamentary reform (of which Anglesey was an ardent advocate), O'Connell gave it his fullest support and temporarily ceased to agitate for repeal. Instead he pressed for the abolition of the compulsory payment of tithes by the Catholic population to the protestant clergy. Anglesey urged the cabinet to remove this and other intolerable imposts and corrupt practices -- with only partial success, the 'Irish Church Act' of 1833 achieving only a few of the desired reforms. At the same time a stringent 'Coercion Act' was thought necessary, but Anglesey, finding that the threat of it was enough, never put it in force. When an unaccustomed period of calm followed, Anglesey took advantage of it and in September 1833 he resigned, leaving behind him his greatest achievement, the national education system. In 1830 the mass of the Irish population received no education whatsoever, but by 1843 400,000 children were attending state-aided schools. 
In 1842 Anglesey exchanged the colonelcy of the 7th hussars for that of the Royal Horse Guards, thus becoming gold stick-in-waiting. In 1846 he was made field marshal. 
In July 1846 Anglesey became for the second time master-general of the ordnance, under the prime minister, Lord John Russell -- but without a seat in the cabinet. He presided over 'this charming department', as he called it, until the government's fall in 1852, at which time he was then nearly eighty-four. 
Together with Sir John Burgoyne, whom he had appointed inspector-general of fortifications, Anglesey and Wellington (the latter as commander-in-chief) fought hard to bring government and public opinion to realization of the defenceless state of the country when steamships were beginning to make, as Anglesey put it, 'all parts of the coasts of this Empire' (Wellington to Anglesey, 3 April 1847, Plas Newydd MSS) vulnerable to attacks in all weathers. Both men made numerous visits to coastal defensive works, on horseback and by steamer, Anglesey in his yacht on one occasion looking into the French port of Cherbourg and finding it 'amply protected' (ibid.). He and Wellington became in their last years the closest of old cronies, being often seen together in public and private -- two deaf old noblemen shouting at each other. Anglesey was the only senior commander present at Waterloo to outlive his chief. 
Anglesey also outlived Char by nine months, dying of a stroke at Uxbridge House, Burlington Gardens, London, on 29 April 1854. At Queen Victoria's wish, he was given a state funeral and was buried in Lichfield Cathedral on 6 May. 
The lord lieutenancies of Anglesey and Staffordshire (in which were his principal residences, Plas Newydd and Beaudesert Hall) were among the many posts Anglesey held. He was also constable of Caernarfon Castle, ranger of Snowdon forest, and captain of Cowes Castle. Of his eighteen children, Lord Clarence Paget became an admiral and Lord Alfred Paget clerk-marshal of the royal household, and Lord George Paget served as second in command to Lord Cardigan in the charge of the light brigade at Balaklava during the Crimean War. 


@@@@@


doc= 21113


Paget, Sir James, first baronet (1814-1899), surgeon, was born on 11 January 1814 at Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, the eighth of seventeen children of Samuel Paget (1774-1857), brewer and shipowner, and his wife, Sarah Elizabeth 
(Betsey; 1778-1843)
, daughter of Thomas Tolver and Sarah Elizabeth Applewhite (only nine of the children survived to adulthood). His oldest brother, Frederick, migrated to Vienna and established himself in business there. Another brother entered the medical profession: Sir George Paget became regius professor of physic in Cambridge. His brother Arthur, a student at the inns of court and a friend of W. M. Thackeray, died of consumption at the age of twenty-five. Another brother, the Revd Alfred Paget, was a schoolmaster at Shrewsbury and later rector of Kirstead. Two brothers worked in their father's brewery. These last two, Alfred, and his sisters Martha and Katherine never married. 
After attending a local private school James Paget served an apprenticeship in Great Yarmouth with Charles Costerton, who had trained at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. With introductions from Costerton and his brother George, Paget moved to London in 1834, where he enrolled at St Bartholomew's to continue his medical education. There he met Henry Wentworth Acland, who became a very close friend. Acland later became regius professor of medicine at Oxford. After a prize-winning student career, Paget qualified as a member of the Royal College of Surgeons on 13 May 1836, and he was elected one of the original group of fellows when that rank was created in 1843. After qualifying he visited Paris on a short medical tour and then returned to London to establish himself in his profession. 
Even before qualifying Paget began publishing scientific and medical letters. While living in Great Yarmouth, he and his brother Charles studied the local flora and fauna and produced 'A Sketch of the Natural History of Yarmouth and its Neighbourhood' (1834). Paget contributed a number of biographies of famous medical practitioners to Knight's 'Penny Cyclopedia' between 1833 and 1844, and from 1837 to 1842 he was sub-editor of, and contributor to, the 'London Medical Gazette'. He also contributed articles to the 'British and Foreign Medical Quarterly' and the 'Biographical Dictionary'. 
Remaining in London was a clear sign that Paget meant to make a career for himself in the metropolis, and the first rung of the ladder was his appointment in 1837 as curator of the museum at St Bartholomew's Hospital. A second step was his teaching appointment from 1839, as demonstrator of morbid anatomy at Bart's, a post he held for four years. His excellence as a teacher led to his promotion to lecturer on general anatomy and physiology in May 1843. This, together with his appointment as the first warden of the college for students of St Bartholomew's Hospital medical school in August of the same year led Paget to believe that 'all was changed' (Paget MS 236), for it signalled the possibility of a bright professional future. The students admired and respected him, and he stayed on as warden until October 1851. Writing, teaching, and administration were essential sources of livelihood in these early years, for Paget's practice brought in $8 a year in the first two years and had not reached $50 even a decade later; he lived on meagre earnings and money borrowed from his brother George. 
In 1836 Paget had engaged himself to Lydia North (1815-1895), daughter of the Revd Henry North, domestic chaplain to the duke of Kent, despite the limited prospects he then had. She was a pious and talented young woman. As a girl she studied at the Royal Academy of Music, where she won prizes. Her musical talents included both composition and playing the piano. But the collapse of Paget's father's businesses, and James and George Paget's commitment to pay their father's debts and those of their brother Arthur, meant that family life had to be postponed. James and Lydia finally married on 23 May 1844; they had two daughters and four sons, including Francis Paget, and enjoyed a tender and affectionate relationship for more than fifty years of married life. 
In 1841 Paget had been appointed surgeon to the Finsbury Dispensary, but real professional opportunities came only with an appointment to one of the teaching hospitals, and in 1847 the chance for a post at Bart's arose. In a hotly contested election Paget won appointment as assistant surgeon -- contested perhaps because of his lack of experience as a surgical dresser and houseman, and perhaps because of the opposition of one senior member of the hospital staff. He became a full surgeon at Bart's in July 1861, a position he resigned in May 1871 to become consulting surgeon to the hospital. He continued his teaching at the medical school, as lecturer in physiology from 1859 to 1861 and as lecturer in surgery from 1865 to 1869. 
Benefiting from his links with St Bartholomew's, Paget's practice as a surgeon blossomed. At the height of his career he travelled two, three, or even four thousand miles within Britain each year to confer with other medical practitioners and to operate. Among his patients were many medical and public figures, as well as ordinary sufferers. His most famous patients were members of the royal family. In 1858 he became surgeon-extraordinary to Queen Victoria, and at various times he treated members of the royal family, including Princess Alexandra. He was named serjeant-surgeon-extraordinary in 1867 and a decade later was appointed serjeant-surgeon to Queen Victoria. He left the poverty of his early professional days behind and was able to afford excellent education for his sons; he estimated that it cost some $19,000 to establish them in life (Paget MS 223). At his death his personal estate was valued at almost $75,000. 
In the emerging environment of medico-scientific inquiry in the 1840s and 1850s Paget found a place congenial to his scientific interests, his fine abilities as an observer, and his desire to launch a successful professional career. His acute observational powers were applied to medical pathology throughout his working life. Early in his London studies in the hospital dissecting room, he noticed that what others were seeing as specks in the muscle tissue of a cadaver were, in fact, spiral worms enclosed in cysts. He presented a paper before the Abernethian Society on 'Trichina spiralis' in February of 1835, though with his agreement the first publication credit went to his senior, the anatomist Richard Owen. 
The opportunity to make his name in pathology was not lost, however. Indeed, Paget made the most of his early appointments at St Bartholomew's. In 1846 he published 'A Descriptive Catalogue of the Anatomical Museum of St Bartholomew's Hospital' (2 vols.); a third volume was edited by W. S. Savory. This, together with his 'Descriptive catalogue of the pathological specimens contained in the museum of the Royal College of Surgeons of England' (5 vols., 1846-9), established, some believe, the basis for his reputation in medical science. 
Appointed Arris and Gale lecturer at the Royal College of Surgeons from 1847 to 1852, Paget carried out research in the Hunterian museum of the college and then delivered a series of lectures in pathology. He published these as 'Lectures on Surgical Pathology' (2 vols., 1853), and the next generation credited Paget with reviving, thereby, the neglected study of pathology. 
Paget was an indefatigable writer, publishing nearly two hundred books and papers. He researched, delivered speeches, and wrote articles on a range of topics in addition to medicine, surgery, and pathology -- on alcohol, science and religion, medical education, and medical history -- many of which remain documents of the medical, moral, and social life of his times. A few of his papers have become medical classics. 
In 1874 Paget published 'On disease of the mammary areola producing cancer of the mammary gland' ('St Bartholomew's Hospital Reports', 10, 1874, 87-90). This classic paper described a skin eruption associated with breast cancer which was subsequently called Paget's disease of the mammary nipple and areola. Paget's most famous paper, a description of a long-known disease, was 'On a form of chronic inflammation of bones (osteitis deformans)' ('Medico-Chirurgical Transactions', 60, 1877, 37-63), in which he identified an inflammatory disease characterized by thickened bones and lesions in the neck and skull. This disease came to be known as Paget's disease of the bone. 
Paget's name has been attached to other medical processes and syndromes, among them Paget's cell, Paget-von Schroetter syndrome (a form of thrombosis), Paget's abscess (a residual abscess), Paget's test (to differentiate between solid and cystic tumours), and Paget's quiet necrosis (bone disease without signs of inflammation). In the twentieth century he was credited by B. V. Shenoy and W. B. Scheithauer with original observations regarding dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans in Paget's article 'Recurring fibroid and fibro-nucleated tumors' ('Lectures in Surgical Pathology', 1853). 
Paget's wardenship of Bart's was only the first of his long series of positions of influence and leadership in the medical profession. He also served on the council of the Royal College of Surgeons from 1865 to 1889 and was vice-president in 1873 and 1874, examiner on the midwifery board in 1874, and president in 1875. He went on to serve as the college's representative on the General Medical Council from 1876 to 1881. At the college he delivered the Hunterian oration in 1877, the Bradshaw lecture in 1882, and the Morton lecture in 1887. He held many other professional positions, including chairmanship of the Clinical Society (1869), the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society (1875), and the Pathological Society of London (1887), and the presidency of the International Medical Congress in 1881. Honours were many, among them election as fellow of the Royal Society (1851) and honorary degrees at Oxford, Cambridge, Edinburgh, Dublin, Bonn, and Wurzburg. Paget was created a baronet in 1871. 
The relationship between the hospital medical schools and the University of London was a complex and vexed one for most of the century. In 1860 Paget was elected to the senate of the university, where he served until 1895. He served as vice-chancellor of the University of London from 1884 to 1895. During this period tensions between the university (in its examining role) and the teaching faculty led to proposals for changes in the university or, alternatively, to the creation of other degree-granting institutions in London. Paget's governance of the university senate in these years was 'gentle and considerate' but might have been more effective if he had been more forceful (Harte, 142). Two royal commissions (Selborne, 1888-9, and Gresham, 1892-4) examined the situation of university education in London. 
Paget was known for the clarity and eloquence of his speech and for his courteous but reserved manner. At the end of his life colleagues remembered his 'self-restraint, self-judgment, reserve, self-discipline'. To some 'he seemed an austere man... rather hard on soft people.... But to all men who were strong enough to feel his strength, and good enough to see his goodness, he was guide and master and friend' ('BMJ', 6 Jan 1900). His lack of a classical and Oxbridge education and his family's financial collapse may have contributed to his reserve, seriousness, and caution. But he rarely took absolute moral positions (for instance, on the use of alcohol), and he did not use medical arguments to sustain moral positions (for example, on masturbation). He supported the entrance of women into the medical profession. 
Paget was a devoted and perhaps demanding father. The Pagets' eldest child, Catherine Paget, married the Revd H. L. Thompson, schoolmaster and later vicar of St Mary the Virgin, Oxford. Their eldest son and heir to the baronetcy, John Rahere Paget, was a barrister and the author of 'The Law of Banking' (1904; 10th edn, 1989). Their second and third sons, Francis and Henry Luke, were churchmen: one was dean of Christ Church and later bishop of Oxford and the other was bishop of Chester. Their fourth son, Stephen Paget, became a surgeon but then turned to writing and to campaigning for medical research. The Pagets' youngest child, Mary Maud, lived with her parents throughout their lives. She was a musician, wrote articles on music history, and engaged in philanthropic activity. Lady Paget died on 7 January 1895. 
Paget died of pneumonia on 30 December 1899 at his home, 5 Park Square West, Regent's Park, London. He was buried in Finchley cemetery after a funeral service on 4 January 1900 in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 21114


Paget, John (d. 1638), Reformed minister in the Netherlands, was apparently descended from the Paget family of Rothley, Leicestershire; his parents' names are unknown. He was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1595 and proceeding MA in 1598. From earliest years he sensed an inner call and 'ardent affection' to be a preacher (J. Paget, 'An Answer to the Unjust Complaints', 1635, 16). He served as rector of Nantwich from 1598 to 1604, but was ejected for nonconformity. In 1605 he went into exile in the Netherlands and for two years was a chaplain with English troops, under the commands of Sir John Ogle and Sir Horace Vere. 
In 1607 Paget moved to Amsterdam to become founding pastor of the English Reformed church, which ministered to English and Scottish residents of the city. Supported by the city magistrates, the church was the English-language wing of the Dutch Reformed church. Paget's inaugural sermon, on 5 February 1607, was on the text 'Create in me a clean heart, O God' ('Psalm 51': 10); these words are to this day inscribed on the walls of the church sanctuary. He was formally established in office on 29 April 1607. Paget held this position for thirty years, often with a co-pastor, and became emeritus in 1637. 
Under Paget's leadership, the English church took a strong puritan, presbyterian stand. He refused any use of the English prayer book or Anglican ceremonialism; rather, he joined the Amsterdam classis of the Dutch church and thoroughly approved of the Dutch Reformed way of religion, which he considered compatible with his own presbyterian sentiments. The presbyterian system, he said, is 'appointed by God' (J. Paget, 'A Defence of Church Government', 1641, 2.29). Under Paget's leadership, the church grew in membership. Amsterdam had several other English churches composed of separatists and Anabaptists, but Paget always opposed these sectarian factions. He preached and wrote against them and had success in winning a few of the dissidents to his own church. His was the respectable, 'English Orthodoxicall church' (membership registers, nos. 85, 86) in comparison to the separatist, schismatic groups. 
In the 1630s, having somewhat quieted the separatists and Anabaptists, Paget had trouble within his own flock, from members who wanted more lively, powerful preaching and discipline. The agitators favoured a newer kind of puritanism, the emerging non-separatist congregationalism (based on teachings of William Ames and Henry Jacob), and they tried to bring in as co-pastors of the church first Thomas Hooker (1631) and then John Davenport (1634), who had gone to the Netherlands as exiles. Paget labelled this new puritanism as a dangerous semi-separatism. Although he finally withstood Hooker and Davenport and sent them on elsewhere, Paget was troubled for several years with controversy with fellow puritans about the role of baptism, the authority of synods, and the degree of congregational autonomy. These troubles spilled over into the English synod of the Netherlands, headed by John Forbes of Delft. Paget refused to join, fearing its radical tendencies. 
Through his well-publicized debates and books, Paget became famous as a champion of the Reformed, presbyterian religion. He was author of five books. Most important were 'An Arrow Against the Separation' (1618), in opposition to Henry Ainsworth, 'An Answer to the Unjust Complaints' (1635), against William Best and John Davenport, and finally, 'A defence of church-government, exercised in presbyteriall, classical, & synodall assemblies' (posthumously published in 1641). Through his books and church work, from his Amsterdam location, he became one of the chief defenders of the presbyterian version of puritanism. 
In addition to his dogmatic writings, Paget was active in the intellectual life of Amsterdam, being a part of a learned circle of puritans in exile (composed of Paget, Henry Ainsworth, Hugh Broughton, and Matthew Slade), who studied languages and Jewish history. He worked at Hebrew and Arabic and, according to his nephew Robert Paget, he could use the 'Chaldean, Syriack, Rabbinicall, Thalmadicall, Arabick, and Persian' versions and commentaries 'with much ease'. However, he was hesitant to allow such knowledge into his religious faith. He had a debate with Henry Ainsworth in 1618 about how far to go in appreciation of Hebrew language and learning, with Paget on the conservative, cautious side. 
John Paget married Briget Masterson ['see 'Paget, Briget (b. 1570, d. in or after 1647)] of Nantwich at an unknown date. They were prosperous; they had investments in the West India Company and owned two houses. They had no children, but they took in their nephew, Robert Paget (died 1683), supporting his education at Leiden University and making him a beneficiary in their will. He became pastor of the English church at Dort. John Paget died on 18 August 1638 from weakness, colic, and catarrh. His wife lived until at least 1647, when she sold their two houses. 




@@@@@


doc= 21115


Paget, John (1808-1892), agriculturist and writer on Hungary, was born on 18 April 1808 at Loughborough, Leicestershire, the eldest of the three children of John Paget (1773-1833), manufacturer, and his wife, Anne (1789-1811), daughter of John Hunt, surgeon. His father, a pillar of the Unitarian church in the midlands, retired to the estates at Thorpe Satchville, which he bought about 1821. Paget completed his early education at Revd Charles Berry's academy, a Unitarian private academy in Leicester, and in 1823 was sent to Manchester College, York. He matriculated at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1827 as a medical student, but received his degree of MD from Edinburgh University in 1831. He never used the title or practised, although he successfully pursued further medical studies in Paris and maintained a lifelong interest in medicine. Between 1833 and 1837 he travelled extensively on the continent. During the winter season in Rome in 1835 he met the Baroness Polyxena Wesselenyi (1801-1878), the estranged wife of a Hungarian magnate, Baron Laszlo Banffy, a highly cultivated woman and society belle. They married on 15 November 1836, on Paget's second visit to Hungary (the first had been in 1835). As a result of these visits, Paget gained an intimate knowledge of Hungarian society including the protagonists of the liberal opposition. 
Out of his rich experience Paget produced a well-written travelogue in two volumes: 'Hungary and Transylvania; with Remarks on their Condition, Social, Political, Economical' (1839), illustrated by George Hering, who had accompanied him to Hungary. The book was well received and soon translated into German. It was, however, on account of the Hungarian war of independence in 1848-9 that the work achieved the prominence it deserved. In the general search for reliable background information on Hungary it was 'ransacked' ('The Times', 3 April 1850) by editors, and new issues followed in quick succession (1849, 1850, 1855), including an American edition (1850). Many of Paget's observations found their way into reference books. 
Before the war of independence Paget purchased an estate in Transylvania at Gyeres where he settled with his family and was granted Hungarian citizenship by an act of the diet of Transylvania in 1847. There he devoted his energies to introducing the latest farming techniques, modern machinery, improved animal husbandry, and selective horse breeding. However, all his efforts were ruined in late 1849 or early January 1850, when marauding Romanian peasants burnt down his English-style manor house and destroyed his possessions; he fled with his family to England. After periods in Loughborough (and subsequently Dresden and Nizza) the family was able to return to Gyeres in 1855 having finally (with the assistance of the British authorities) managed to obtain safe conduct. Paget spent the rest of his life there in high-standard farming and viniculture. 
During his time in Transylvania Paget had been a staunch supporter of the Unitarian church there, and had forged strong links with British Unitarians. As a result, he came to the rescue of the independent Unitarian schooling when it was threatened by measures of the Austrian government (1857). 
Paget also published scientific treatises and was a contributor to 'Erdelyi Gazda' on agricultural matters. A regular visitor to, and adjudicator at, international agricultural fairs, in 1878 he was awarded the Legion d'honneur at the World Exhibition in Paris. His wife died in the same year. Paget himself died on 10 April 1892 at Gyeres; he was buried on 12 April in the Hazsongard cemetery at Kolozsvar. Both of his sons predeceased him -- the elder, Walter, in childhood, and the younger, Oliver (1841-1863), who fought in the Hungarian legion of Garibaldi, at the age of twenty-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 21116


Paget, John (1811-1898), police magistrate and author, was born in Humberstone, Leicestershire, on 14 May 1811, the second son of Thomas Paget, a Leicester banker and a man of some wealth. John Paget was involved in a bitter feud with his brother, Thomas Tertius Paget, over their father's substantial estate. The family was of Huguenot origin, descended from Valerian Paget who fled to England after the massacre of St Bartholomew. John Paget was educated entirely at home and for some years he was an assistant in his father's bank. He entered the Middle Temple on 16 October 1835, and was called to the bar on 2 November 1838. 
On 1 March 1839 Paget married Elizabeth, eldest daughter of William Rathbone (1787-1868) ['see under 'Rathbone, William (1757-1809)] of Greenbank, Liverpool, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Greg (died 1882). Her Unitarian family had long been associated with social reform. Her brother William Rathbone (1819-1902) was an MP and philanthropist, as was his daughter, Eleanor Florence Rathbone (1872-1946). They had a son and two daughters, one of whom, Mary Rosalind Paget (1855-1948), became an influential nurse and reformer of midwifery. 
From 1850 until 1855 Paget was secretary first to Lord Chancellor Truro and secondly to Lord Chancellor Cranworth. In 1864 he was appointed a magistrate at the Thames police court; he was transferred from this to the Hammersmith and Wandsworth courts, and on their separation he presided over the court at west London until his resignation in 1889. 
Paget gave his leisure to writing. He was a contributor to 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' between 1860 and 1888. His papers criticizing Macaulay's views of Marlborough, the massacre of Glencoe, the highlands of Scotland, Claverhouse, and William Penn, were reprinted in 1861 as 'The New Examen'. Other articles on a wide range of topics, including Nelson, Byron, well-known legal cases, and art, were published in 1874 as 'Paradoxes and Puzzles: Historical, Judicial, and Literary'. 
Paget was also a skilful draughtsman, and his illustrations to 'Bits and Bearing-Reins' (1875) by Edward Fordham Flower helped to make the reader understand the cruelty caused to horses by the method of harnessing against which Flower protested. In early days Paget was an ardent whig, and enrolled himself among those who were prepared to fight for the 'Reform Bill'. He joined the Reform Club when it was founded in 1836, and was a member of its library committee for twenty-four years and chairman from 1861 to 1865. He died on 28 May 1898 at his residence, 28 The Boltons, West Brompton, London. He was survived by his wife and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 21117


Paget, Nathan (bap. 1615, d. 1679), physician, was born in Manchester and baptized on 31 March 1615, the son of the puritan divine, Thomas Paget (d. 1660) ['see under 'Paget, John (d. 1638)], rector of Stockport, Cheshire, and St Chad's, Shrewsbury, and his wife, Margery Goldsmith (1588-1628). His uncle, John Paget (died 1638), was minister of the Amsterdam Presbyterian church from 1607 to 1637. His early education was under the tutelage of Richard Pigot at Northwich grammar school, Cheshire. He subsequently graduated MA at Edinburgh University in 1635, and on 25 November 1638 he entered Leiden University as a student of medicine, and graduated MD there on 3 August 1639. Paget's thesis, 'De peste' (1639), was dedicated to his father and various puritan ministers and laymen in Cheshire and Shropshire. On his return to England he practised at first outside London and was admitted an extra licentiate of the College of Physicians on 4 April 1640. He was incorporated MD at Cambridge on 3 June 1642, and was elected a fellow of the College of Physicians on 4 November 1646. Almost certainly sympathetic to the new regime, Paget was nominated physician to the Tower by the council of state of the Commonwealth on 31 December 1649. Best known, perhaps, as the friend of John Milton, to whom he introduced his cousin who became Milton's third wife, Paget probably shared his reformist religious inclinations. In 1662, for example, through his friendship with the Quaker Isaac Penington, he secured the services of the young Quaker Thomas Ellwood to act as a reader to the near-blind poet. Moreover, his residence in Coleman Street, London, was certainly well known as a haunt of radical puritans; and his extensive library of over 2000 works, which was dispersed after his death, contained a large number of heterodox works dating from the 1640s and 1650s. Further evidence of Paget's parliamentarian and puritan sympathies is provided by the evidence of his subscription to the solemn league and covenant in his parish of St Stephen's, Coleman Street, in 1643, as well as his marriage to Elizabeth ('b'. 1614), the daughter of Sir Philip Cromwell of Ramsey, Huntingdonshire, a first cousin of the lord protector. Paget's attendance on the miraculous Baptist maid, Sarah Wight, in London in 1647 is also suggestive of a man with radical puritan interests and connections. 
Little is known of Paget's medical practice, though the evidence which survives would appear to point to a man sympathetic toward the contemporary movement in favour of medical reform and innovation. In 1647, just six months after his election as fellow of the College of Physicians, he presented the college with a three-volume edition of the works of Francis Bacon. He also contributed, along with seven other physicians, to Francis Glisson's pioneering work on the rickets, first published in 1650. Interest in therapies other than Galenism is also suggested by Paget's ownership of large numbers of chemical and alchemical treatises, as well as by the fact that in 1651 he was lending rare chemical manuscripts to Elias Ashmole. Further evidence of his radical inclinations in this respect are suggested by his acquaintance with Samuel Hartlib, with whom he communicated in 1651. None the less, he remained an active figure within the tradition-bound College of Physicians, acting as censor in 1657, 1659, 1669, and 1678, and serving as an elect from 1667 until 1677. On 20 September 1663 he was designated Harveian orator for the following year. Paget died at his home in Coleman Street in January 1679 and was buried in the same month. The main beneficiary of his will, dated 7 January 1679, and proved eight days later, was his brother Thomas Paget, clerk, to whom he bequeathed property in Shropshire and London. He also gave $20 a year for thirty years to the president and fellows of the College of Physicians, as well as $20 to his cousin Elizabeth Milton. 


@@@@@


doc= 21118


Paget, Thomas, fourth Baron Paget (c.1544-1590), Roman Catholic layman and exile, was the second son of William Paget, first Baron Paget, the noted Tudor statesman (1505/6-1563), and Anne, Lady Paget (died 1587), the daughter of Henry Preston. He matriculated as a fellow-commoner of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, on 27 May 1559, and was admitted to the Middle Temple two years later. He succeeded to the family estates on the death of his elder brother in 1568, and (according to the decision of the House of Lords governing the succession of this title in 1770) succeeded his niece Elizabeth as the fourth holder of the Paget peerage in 1570, accordingly receiving a summons to parliament in 1571. He is mentioned in Ridolfi's memoranda about this time as having Catholic sympathies. Nevertheless, throughout the 1570s he was used by the privy council for various local government purposes in Staffordshire, where he principally resided, partly rebuilding Beaudesert House. He married, about 1570, Nazareth, daughter of Sir John Newton, and widow of Thomas Southwell of Woodrising, Norfolk (whose family was noted for its Catholicism). Their eldest son was the politician William Paget. 
By 1580 Paget's own religious views seem to have hardened. In July, when the Jesuit Edmund Campion landed in England, Paget arranged for him to preach a sermon to a gathering of London notables. In August he was summoned before the privy council and confined to a house in Windsor for fourteen weeks, where he was instructed in the doctrine of the Church of England by the dean. Early in 1581 he is to be found writing to Walsingham, asking to be excused attendance at St Paul's. The following year the bishop of Lichfield and Coventry wrote to complain of his conduct in providing 'singing cakes' rather than bread for use by the parishioners of Burton upon Trent, and of the behaviour of his servants in disrupting Easter Sunday service in Colwich parish church. Paget's life was in turmoil at this point: in 1582 he separated from his wife, telling Burghley that this was 'less ill than... living together with continual jars'. His wife died a year later. When the Throckmorton plot was uncovered in 1583 he fled abroad to join his brother, Charles Paget, who was in Paris, acting as agent there for Mary, queen of Scots. He presumably feared that his brother's connection with Mary and perhaps other links of his own with the plotters, who came like himself from the midlands, placed his life in England in danger. He wrote to Burghley from France that he had long had it in mind to travel, partly to find a cure for his gout, but also because for the past three years he had been much troubled in conscience. 
Paget's time in exile seems to have been a miserable one. The English ambassador in Paris, Stafford, described him a few weeks after his arrival there as 'toungue-tied... cold and patient... [he] governs himself either wisely or extremely cunningly'. A proclamation was issued in England commanding him to return, and there was a formal -- and unsuccessful -- request to the French authorities for his extradition. His estates in England were quickly seized by the government and in 1587 he was convicted of treason by the act of attainder which also condemned the Babington plotters. When he arrived on the continent he found himself in the middle of disagreements between the exiled English, with his brother in one camp and the leading Catholic exile clergymen, Robert Persons and William Allen, in another. He travelled from Paris to Milan and then to Rome, where he stayed in the spring of 1585 at the English College, along with his two servants. He was rather coolly received there, on account of the strength in Rome of the faction opposed to his brother. He then went to Spain where Philip II gave him a pension of 180 crowns a month. He next moved to the Spanish Netherlands in the hope of being restored by the Armada, and was consulted by Parma over the invasion plans. It was at Brussels that he died, some time in 1590. 


@@@@@


doc= 21119


Thomas Paget (d. 1660), John's younger brother, was also educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, becoming a sizar in 1605, graduating BA in 1608, and proceeding MA in 1612. After being driven from his position at Blackley, Lancashire, because of nonconformity, he too, from 1639 to 1646, served the English church at Amsterdam. On returning to England in 1646, he served at Shrewsbury until 1656, and then was rector of Stockport, Cheshire, until his death in 1660. All the Pagets, John, Thomas, and Robert, were strong presbyterians. 


@@@@@


doc= 21120


Thomas Catesby Paget, Lord Paget (1689-1742), politician, was educated at Trinity College, Oxford. He was one of the gentlemen of the bedchamber to the prince of Wales. On the latter's accession as George II he continued in the same post, which he held until 1736, when ill health forced him to resign. He was elected MP for Staffordshire on 3 February 1715 and on 22 March 1722. He also stood for Middlesex in 1727, but was defeated. He generally voted with the opposition. He married Elizabeth (died 1736), the second daughter of John Egerton, third earl of Bridgewater, on 6 May 1718 at Gray's Inn Chapel; they had two sons, Henry and George (1721-1737). Paget was a writer of minor repute, and his work, which was mildly praised by Horace Walpole, was collected as 'Miscellanies in Prose and Verse' (1741). He died at West Drayton on 4 February 1742, and was buried in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 21121


Paget, William, first Baron Paget (1505/6-1563), diplomat and administrator, was born probably in Colman Street near the Guildhall, London, the son of John Pachett or Paget of London, a citizen of small fortune variously employed as a shearman and sergeant-at-mace to the sheriff of London -- William's enemies later reviled him as the son of a catchpole. 
Paget was educated at St Paul's School, under William Lily, where his contemporaries and friends included Thomas Wriothesley, Edward North and Anthony Denny, and also John Leland whose Latin encomium, written in the mid-1540s, is the main source for Paget's youth. He went from there to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, during the mastership of Stephen Gardiner, who refers to Paget, Wriothesley, and himself as acting together in a performance of Plautus' 'Miles gloriosus' -- Paget played Meliphidippa and Wriothesley Palestrio. Strype reports Paget as having been a scholar supported by Thomas Boleyn, and as reading books by Luther and Melanchthon, but there is no independent corroboration for this. John Foxe even states that Paget was an 'earnest protestant' at Cambridge, but it is improbable that an overt radical would have been acceptable to Gardiner. The latter once wrote to Paget, 'ye told me once ye love noe extremites and the meane is best' ('Letters', ed. Muller, 74), and it was widely accepted in his later life that he was a man who abhorred extremes. In Mary's reign Foxe and Ponet saw him as a Catholic. That Richard Cox became godfather to his eldest son, Henry, along with Paget's acceptability to the German protestants, suggests that he always held a moderate course in religion. 
It is usually assumed that Paget read civil law, but although a later hand wrote in the margin of one of the Cambridge grace books that he was the 'dominus Pachett' admitted 'in utroque jure' in 1525-6 after two years of philosophy and four years in civil law, this man is more likely to have been Robert of Gonville Hall, who was probably William's brother. Although Gray's Inn admitted William Paget as an honorary member in 1537, and knowledge of civil law was certainly an asset in diplomatic posts, it is certain only that Paget was thoroughly trained in the literary, rhetorical, and linguistic skills which made him an excellent humanist, one to whom reforming rhetoricians, like Ramus, later dedicated their works. Probably about 1526-7 he went to Paris for at least a year, and on his return he joined Stephen Gardiner's household. 
In June 1528 Paget suffered an attack of sweating sickness, but recovered to take up his first appointment as one of the four clerks of the signet, and in 1529 he was elected to parliament for an unidentified seat; he is thought to have sat in every parliament thereafter until he became a peer. In June 1530 he was ordered to assist Edward Foxe, Reginald Pole, and Sir Francis Bryan, who were going to the University of Paris to solicit opinions on Henry VIII's marriage, and was credited with persuading the University of Orleans to condemn the pope's summons to the king. He evidently overcame his handicap of humble birth, for between 1531 and 1534 he was sent on a series of diplomatic missions to France and to the German princes, chiefly in connection with the king's divorce. He was already a master of the commonplaces of Renaissance rhetoric through which diplomacy was mediated, on more than one occasion, for instance, offering the platitude that 'society in a realm doth consist and is maintained by means of religion and laws. And these two or one wanting, farewel al just society' (Strype, 2/2.431). 
Paget's associate in these early missions was Christopher Mount, who at first had to act as interpreter, but Paget seems to have learned languages quickly and gained the confidence of German princes, especially the landgrave of Hesse and the elector of Saxony. His social insignificance made him a suitable envoy for conferences with Melanchthon and other protestant divines, with the added advantage that in a crisis he was easily disavowed. Hence, perhaps, his first surviving letter, thanking Thomas Cromwell for restoring him to the king's good graces. In 1534 he was sent back to Prussia and Poland with an impressive train, for negotiations with princes who had been sweetened by a gift of 50,000 crowns. His own reward was a licence to import 400 tons of Gascon wines at reduced customs. Shortly after Paget had made another secret trip to an undisclosed destination in 1535, Henry VIII was told by Edward Foxe that Paget should be sent back to the protestant princes as the best man for the job. During these comings and goings Paget married Anne (died 1587), daughter of Henry Preston of 'Prestcon', Lancashire. The exact date of their marriage is uncertain, but if he is the Mr Pachett noted in Cambridge University sources in 1532-3 then he was already married by then. The arrival of a family may be indicated by Paget's having leased a substantial house in Aldersgate in 1534. Their eldest surviving son Henry was born in 1536-7, and in March 1555 they had nine children living, six of them daughters. That the eldest of the latter, Etheldreda, was herself married by 1550, is a further pointer to her father's having married in or by the early 1530s. Paget was devoted to Anne, writing in 1545, when she was reported to have died, of 'my most obedient, wise, gentle and chaste wife, the remembrance of whom sitteth so deep in my heart that it maketh the same well near to burst for pain and anguish' ('LP Henry VIII', 20/1, no. 496). She recovered and outlived her husband, dying in February 1587. 
By 1536 Paget was well established and starting to accumulate a gentleman's estate, initially in West Drayton, Middlesex, where he was soon appointed a JP. He was appointed secretary successively to queens Jane Seymour, Anne of Cleves, and Katherine Howard, served on the grand jury which indicted Sir Geoffrey Pole for treason in 1539, and in autumn 1539 was sent to Ireland with $2600 and nearly 1000 soldiers, greatly to the satisfaction of the Irish establishment. 
On 10 August 1540, following Cromwell's execution, Paget was appointed clerk of the privy council, with the duties of maintaining its journal and engrossing bills. On 15 July 1541 he was also appointed clerk of the parliament. He attempted to reorganize government record keeping, but in September 1541 had to leave this to a deputy when he was sent as ambassador to the French court. To make him acceptable there in June 1541 he was granted a coat of arms, evidently an unsatisfactory one as the design was changed when he was knighted in 1544. As Henry was keeping Paget in ignorance of royal dealings with the emperor he lacked specific instructions, but nevertheless felt able to assure the king that 'I trust I have holden the balance so upright, as Your Majestie may put your fote in which syde You will, nothwithstanding anything that I have saide' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 9.180). He was also learning to manage a network of spies, maintaining informants as far afield as Rome. His long-drawn-out negotiations for the marriage of Henry's daughter Mary to the duc d'Orleans foundered, however, after the defeat of the Scots at Solway Moss on 24 November 1542. Francois I now roundly told Paget that no alliance would be made with England unless Scotland was an equal partner, and he sent 2000 German troops to Scotland, permitted Scottish privateers to take English shipping in Le Havre, and refused Paget permission to leave the country until his successor arrived. These actions confirmed Paget in his preference for an alliance with the emperor. 
Paget's exchange having been effected on 18 April 1543 he was appointed on the 23rd as one of the two principal secretaries of state and admitted to the privy council, rapidly becoming the senior when his old friend Wriothesley was created lord chancellor. In January 1544 he was knighted. In 1546 he bought eleven former episcopal manors in Staffordshire, Derbyshire, and Worcestershire, centred on Beaudesert, Staffordshire, thereby becoming a prominent landowner. He actively developed his landed interests, establishing ironworks and exploiting his woods. 
Meanwhile Paget had become one of the most powerful office-holders in the kingdom. He spoke for the monarch, controlled considerable patronage, and was the linchpin both of Henry's diplomatic correspondence and the national intelligence network. It was Paget's job to sift out from the intercepted mail and oral communications real plots from imaginary or invented ones, to distinguish reliable from double agents. To ensure the speed and secrecy of royal letters he became joint master of the posts on 29 September 1545. From 1544 he was involved in the desperate expedients employed to raise money for Henry's war with France -- land sales, benevolences, foreign loans, and above all currency debasement. He also became particularly concerned with the Anglo-Scottish borders, paying mercenaries and ensuring military supplies. As Henry became increasingly reclusive, Paget, who was always at the king's side except when absent on short diplomatic missions, became the essential conduit for information and direction for the resident ambassadors and for the king's other servants, while at the same time offering the advice of experience, on the principle that 'Men may better speke or do, beying present then absent' (Haynes, 7). He was drafting Henry's devices -- his personal correspondence and policy documents -- although the king did not always accept them. In his dealings with the imperial ambassador Vanderdelft, Paget's persuasiveness was critical to the deceptions that concealed England's weakness from her enemies. 
During this time Paget went on five short special embassies. In May 1544 he went to the emperor, for negotiations over a proposed Anglo-imperial attack upon France. He was largely unsuccessful and had come home by 12 June, after which he was plunged into the preparations for Henry's departure for France, along with negotiations for the marriage of the fourth earl of Lennox to the king's niece, Margaret Douglas, intended to bind the earl to English interests. Paget himself led 100 foot to Boulogne but was principally absorbed in negotiations with Francois and Charles V in an abortive attempt to prevent them making a separate peace. Although Henry held Boulogne he was diplomatically isolated and therefore permitted Paget to make approaches to the German protestant princes. In February 1545, although his wife was seriously ill, he was sent back to the emperor, with whom he had a difficult interview, reporting afterwards that 'dissimulation, vanity, flattery, unshamefastness reign most here' ('LP Henry VIII', 20/1, no. 426). In November he was again sent to treat with the French, who still would not yield enough, but further negotiations in 1546 finally led on 7 June to a treaty whereby for 2 million crowns over eight years England would return Boulogne to France. Paget saw this peace as essential to his country's interests. His memoranda had made his attitude clear -- as long as they perceived England as disaffected in religion, the emperor and France would both be potentially hostile, and England's security required that they be kept at odds. 
When Henry was in his last illness Paget conversed with him night after night, and he became a key figure in the politics surrounding Henry's death. The king looked to him to secure the condemnation of the earl of Surrey for high treason. He sat as one of the commissioners, and went to Henry VIII for secret instructions when the jurymen showed signs of doubt, returning to ensure that they convicted. It was Paget who made an agreement with Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford, in the gallery outside the death chamber, that the provisions in Henry's will for a council of state should be amended to admit the earl as protector to his nephew, the new king, and that in return he would be Hertford's principal adviser. It was Paget also who kept the notes of the promotions and grants that Henry was alleged to have planned and which were implemented within days of the king's death, with Hertford becoming duke of Somerset and Paget receiving lands worth a nominal 400 marks ($266 6's'. 8died) per annum. In adhering to Somerset Paget became involved in the downfall of his old friend Wriothesley, and also of his old master Gardiner. 
Somerset did for a time honour his part of the bargain. In 1547 Paget was made both a knight of the Garter and high steward of Cambridge University, and though the imperial ambassador's report that Paget was to be made Wriothesley's successor as lord chancellor proved false, on 29 June, as Somerset went north against the Scots, he was appointed comptroller of the household, giving him authority to protect the king's interests, and also chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. In 1548 he acquired the bishop of Exeter's former London house, just outside Temple Bar, a suitable residence for a leading government official. He was concerned to reform the crown's finances, though he was aware that there were powerful vested interests in the 'status quo' -- he later observed that Gardiner had once shown that more beer was consumed in a day at court than could run from a series of barrels, each one opened as the previous one ran dry, and 'proved it to be trewe in the presence of some whiche liked him ever after the worse for it' ('Letters', 118). 
Over time, however, Paget found the protector heeding him less and less, until he could describe himself as 'a Cassandra', fated to tell the truth and not be believed. By 1548 he was increasingly concerned for England's position both abroad and at home. He warned that Somerset's policies were giving rise to disturbances, and though he loyally followed the protector's instructions over both Sir Thomas Seymour's interrogation and Princess Elizabeth's household, his distrust of Somerset's advisers, men like Sir John Thynne, was growing, and by spring 1549, moreover, he was out of favour with Somerset's wife. He was also increasingly nervous of Somerset's sharpness and his neglect of the council, whose advice he had expected Somerset to take. He felt that in England's present financial straits, her peril from foreign foes could only be allayed by pretending to the emperor that her current religious changes were matters of little substance. Too much the realist to rely on divine intervention, he quoted on old proverb 'Youe maie lye longe ynough in the dytche or God will helpe youe yf youe helpe not your selfe' ('Letters', 24). May 1549 saw the first of a series of risings, but Paget, who in April had been devising papers on foreign policy for the council, was in early June sent to the emperor on a vain mission to revive the treaty of alliance and extend it to comprehend Boulogne. 
When Paget returned on 1 August the western rebellion in which his brother Robert had been a leader, had been subdued; despite a letter from Somerset saying that Robert Paget should not be spared because of his relationship to William, there is no firm evidence of his fate. The earl of Warwick, leading German mercenaries, was crushing the Norfolk risings, while France had declared war and was besieging Boulogne. Somerset's leadership, as Paget had warned, was largely discredited and Warwick gathered a majority of the lords around him. Paget avoided publicly defecting to Warwick, but although he was at Windsor with Somerset, the king, Archbishop Cranmer, and Sir Thomas Smith on 6 October, he was already preparing to mediate and was principally responsible for the conciliatory wording of the letter sent by the protector to the London lords. Somerset's surrender without a fight on 10 October, if Smith can be believed, caused Paget to fall weeping on his knees, clasping the duke about the knees and exclaiming, 'O my Lord, my lord, ye see now what my lords be' (BL, Harley MS 353, fol. 77). It still fell to Paget to arrest Somerset. 
Following his coup, Warwick had still to deal with the conservative group that had supported Somerset, and for this required that Paget should at least remain neutral. He also needed to put the comptrollership in the hands of a reliable subordinate in order to secure his own hold on the royal household. Following negotiations Paget surrendered the comptrollership without obtaining an alternative office, but on 3 December 1549 was summoned to the lords as Baron Paget of Beaudesert. His elevation required him to surrender his clerkship of the parliament, and he also resigned his clerkship of the signet. In January 1550 Warwick ensured Paget was out of the country when he staged his mini-coup against Wriothesley, Arundel, and others, sending him to negotiate peace with France, which kept him abroad until April. Paget was so certain that England should be rid of Boulogne, that he missed at least one concession that the French would have made over two English fortresses in Scotland. After his return Warwick acted quite contrary to Paget's advice on England's best strategy in foreign affairs, and failed to reward him with any lucrative or influential office. 
Paget hoped that Warwick would pay more heed to the council than Somerset had done, and pressed upon him a proposal for restructuring it. Warwick certainly did restore the council to a central place in government, and the rules about the signing of warrants which had been established at the end of Henry VIII's reign were reinstituted, but Paget's crucial suggestions, including secret voting, were rejected. Indeed Warwick sidelined him, although he still required him to testify at Gardiner's trial in January 1551, when Paget alleged that Henry had thought of trying Gardiner for treason. By the summer Paget was being kept away from court under virtual house arrest, and rumours circulated that he had plotted with Arundel and Somerset to arrest his enemies at a banquet to be held in his house. When he was arrested on 21 October, however, it was for the scandal of contradicting the emperor, who claimed Paget had promised religious freedom for Mary, an embarrassment for Warwick who was pressing conformity on her. On 8 November he was in the Tower, where he stayed until more serious charges could be prepared. Although Warwick was unable to tie Paget to the plots of which Somerset was accused, he was none the less degraded, being stripped of the Garter on 22 April 1552. Edward noted in his diary that it was because Paget was no gentleman on either his father's or his mother's side. Accused of corruption as chancellor of the duchy, on 31 May 1552 he signed a submission of guilt, and two weeks later made a public confession in Star Chamber, according to John Ponet 'on his knes of his bribery, extortion, dissimulacion, ambicion, robbing of the king, and suche like vertues, wherby he became noble' (Ponet, sig I 1'v'). He lost his chancellorship and was then released from the Tower. His $8000 fine was later reduced to $4000 for which he gave lands worth $125 per annum and $2000 in cash, paying the latter in February 1553. In December 1552 he received a full pardon, in February following he was restored to the privy council, and in March he kissed the king's hand. Nevertheless, he remained in retirement and may not have attended the March parliament. As Edward VI neared death, it was said that 10,000 men led by the earl of Huntingdon's brother were gathering at Paget's West Drayton house. As Jane's situation became desperate Paget was summoned back to the council and signed a letter to the lord lieutenant of Essex on her behalf, but then he and the earl of Arundel almost immediately led the councillors in London in declaring for Mary and himself informed her of their decision. 
Mary appointed Paget to her privy council, restored him to the Garter, made him a commissioner to hear coronation claims, and honoured him with the role of carrying the sword of state before her at the coronation, but she did not fully trust him. She had restored Gardiner, whom Paget had so spectacularly betrayed, to his ecclesiastical offices and also appointed him lord chancellor while Paget received no immediate office in reward. The two men have generally been seen as antagonists whose rivalry tended to divide the privy council over such contentious issues as the programme for the restoration of religious ties to Rome, with Paget heading a group predominantly 'secular' in outlook. In fact there seems to have been no fixed factional divide as groups coalesced and split up over particular issues, while Gardiner and Paget were not as far apart as has been suggested. Although Paget took a minimal interest in theology he none the less saw religion as the glue that held society together, and merely sought, as ever, to see necessary changes made with as little disruption as possible. 
To outward appearances Paget was the principal negotiator of Mary's marriage to Philip of Spain in the latter months of 1553, while Gardiner promoted Edward Courtenay. Ponet, however, implies that such appearances were deceptive, and that the cunning Gardiner, whom he describes in this context as the 'doctour of practices', had merely left Paget, as 'his scholar', to do the necessary work and bear any odium arising from the queen's Spanish match (Ponet, sig. I iiii 'r'- 'v'). Certainly although he was one of those officially appointed to treat for the marriage on 1 January 1554 Paget received no obvious reward. And although he appeared on horseback in arms at the muster in St James' Field during Sir Thomas Wyatt's rebellion and later brought Wyatt as a prisoner to court, mistrust of his advice continued. The emperor had disliked his earlier suggestion that Courtenay and Princess Elizabeth be married. He and Gardiner disagreed over the treatment of Elizabeth in the aftermath of the rebellions, and suspicions that Paget was a covert heretic, fanned by his wish to see only a few rebel leaders executed, undermined his authority, although it was said that he and some other councillors did obtain a pardon for eight conspirators by cornering Mary in her oratory. He was one of the councillors appointed to consider the laws to be put to parliament and decide who should draft them, but his preference for a step-by-step approach was ignored by Gardiner and his overt opposition in the April 1554 parliament to the detailed programme that Gardiner put forward for the restoration of the church as it had been before ties to Rome were severed, and particularly for a revival of the heresy laws, exasperated Mary who condemned him for inconstancy. Paget then avoided the council for four months. 
Philip, however, found Paget's temperate advice essential, gave him a pension of 1500 crowns, and returned him to power. Paget argued that the distribution of monastic lands to numberless secular owners could not now be undone, and that the pope must acknowledge the 'fait accompli' if Cardinal Pole's return to England and the country's reconciliation to Rome were to be made acceptable. This was reluctantly agreed and on 7 November 1554 Paget and Sir Edward Hastings went to the Low Countries and escorted Pole home. Paget took the opportunity for a private interview with the emperor, where he urged that a small inner council be set up and sought to persuade him that those born after England's breach with Rome should be treated more leniently than heretics of long-standing commitment. 
By this time Paget's health, which had been poor for some time, was seriously deteriorating and he spent long periods either in his bed 'like a beast' or seeking amelioration in the baths. He was absent from the council in March and April 1555, but by May was organizing a fruitless conference to arbitrate a peace between the empire and the French at Marck. He returned to England on 12 June and when it was plain that Mary's apparent pregnancy was false, again advised Philip on managing the kingdom. He was one of the inner council whose establishment Philip recommended in August before his departure for the continent. Gardiner's death on 11 November, after a reconciliation with Paget, saw the latter's formal return to the council, but although his influence was needed to counter growing anti-Spanish sentiment the queen rejected Philip's advice that Paget should be made lord chancellor on the grounds that a layman was inappropriate, appointing him lord privy seal instead on 29 January 1556. Shortly afterwards he was among those blamed for the truce of Vaucelles made on 5 February between France and the empire, which took no account of English interests. 
Paget was now once again the main supervisor of the country's failing finances, which were further stretched in March thanks to the French-backed Dudley conspiracy. He went to Brussels in April to attempt to bring Philip back to England but though he had intended to wait and return with Philip, on 12 May he was on his way back to England. It was at this point that there occurred the event that earned him condemnation by Ponet and others. He met Sir John Cheke and Sir Peter Carew 'en route' near Brussels, and although he greeted them kindly, they were suddenly arrested by the provost-marshal, carried aboard a ship, and taken to the Tower. As well as this apparent breach of faith, Ponet also accused him of seeking to betray the fervently protestant duchess of Suffolk and claimed that for this he had the queen's thanks. Always primarily concerned for peace and order, Paget may in fact have felt that a moderate Catholicism would be its best bastion, but his relations with the queen did not improve for Philip did not appear. In October and November he was away from court, but though confined to his bed he corresponded through the queen's Latin secretary James Basset about the problems of the proposed recoinage and the reduction of household expenditure. He also, uncharacteristically, led the minority of advisers who supported Philip's desire to persuade England to fight alongside the empire under the treaty of 1542. Philip's coming to England and Thomas Stafford's apparently French-backed attack on Scarborough in April 1557 put further pressure on the English government to support the Habsburgs, and in May Paget was heading a small war council as well as financing his own privateer. As war resources were virtually non-existent he also concerned himself with raising the customs rates. In January 1558 Calais fell, and Paget was virtually alone in continuing to plan for its recovery. In September he was again ill. 
Despite general expectations that Elizabeth would give him a post, the new queen set Paget aside. His illness was a convenient excuse and he remained undisgraced, offering advice from his sickbed to Sir William Cecil and Sir Thomas Parry about peace negotiations and arguing the need for at least the appearance of a position of strength. He also provided a long analysis of the problems attendant upon the recoinage. In November 1559 he was back at court and closetted with Elizabeth who thought of sending him as ambassador to Spain, but he declined on grounds of health. In November 1560 he was again sick and made his will on the 4th, providing for his wife, children, kinswomen, and servants in conventional style. He recovered and attended the St George's day Garter feast in 1561. He died on 9 or 10 June 1563, probably at West Drayton, and was buried there on the 18th. On the evidence of his portrait dated 1549, which records him as then aged forty-three, he was about fifty-seven years old when he died. A cenotaph bearing his effigy was erected in Lichfield Cathedral by his eldest son, Henry. His second son Thomas Paget died in exile as a committed Catholic. 
William Paget's subsequent reputation has always been that of a 'politique', albeit one endowed with considerable ability and presence. In the words of one seventeenth-century assessment, 'His addresse was with state, yet insinuating, his discours free but weighed, his apprehension quick but stayed, his ready and present mind keeping its pauses of thoughts and expression even with ye occasion and ye emergency' (BL, Sloane MS 1523, fol. 29'v'). Recent scholarship has generally doubted the sincerity of his convictions, while disagreeing about whether he should be seen as a statesman or merely as a pragmatist. But his political and administrative skills have been usually, though not invariably, acknowledged. Yet although the enigmatic mask that shrouded his personal feelings and beliefs reinforced his diplomatic skills, it did not prevent his being accepted as a wise and honest counsellor by the princes of Europe. It is hard to doubt the fundamental sincerity of his concern for good governance and the maintenance of law and order. His appreciation of the realities and the limitations that the existing structure of society in Europe imposed on rulers made him essentially conservative, concerned above all to avoid actions that would destabilize the realm. His invariable preference for caution and moderation enabled him to avoid the numerous traps implicit in involvement in high matters of state, but his scheming was directed more towards the benefit of the realm than of himself, and although he amassed a considerable fortune, there is no convincing evidence that he did so dishonestly. 


@@@@@


doc= 21122


Paget, William, fifth Baron Paget (1572-1629), politician, was son and heir of Thomas Paget, fourth Baron Paget (c.1544-1590), and Nazareth, widow of Sir Thomas Southwell of Norfolk and youngest daughter of Sir John Newton of East Harptree, Somerset, and Barre's Court, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Sir Anthony Poyntz. His father was attainted for treason in 1586 and in 1587 the conviction was confirmed by statute, whereby the barony and family estates were forfeited. On 27 April 1587 Elizabeth I, 'of her gracious favor and princely care for the good educacion of yonge William Pagett', made him a ward of Sir George Carey, her kinsman ('APC', '1586-7', 352). In 1587 he matriculated at Oxford, where he attended Christ Church; he graduated BA on 25 February 1590. He was admitted to the Middle Temple on 20 February 1611. Paget married, before 19 June 1602, Lettice Knollys (died 1655) of Kingsbury, Warwickshire. They had three sons -- William Paget (who was to succeed his father as sixth Baron Paget), Henry, and Thomas -- and four daughters, one of whom was called Anne ['see 'Waller, Anne]. 
During the 1590s Paget was knighted, saw active military service on the earl of Essex's Cadiz expedition of 1596, and was one of the gentlemen who accompanied Sir Robert Cecil on his embassy to Paris in 1598. When Cecil returned to England, Paget travelled to Italy, which troubled his uncle Charles Paget because it 'may prejudice him' ('CSP dom.', '1598-1601', 43). In 1597 William Paget petitioned to rent his attainted father's forfeited lands, and in July he and his heirs were granted lordships and manors in Middlesex and Buckinghamshire and other lands in Staffordshire, all of which had belonged to Thomas Paget and which had a rental value of $1053 19's'. 101/4died Paget and other Staffordshire gentlemen, 'frequenters to the earl of Essex', were suspected of complicity or at least sympathy with his rebellion in February 1601 ('Salisbury MSS', 11.34). No action, however, seems to have been taken against them. 
Paget was restored in blood and honours by James I and this was confirmed by statute in 1604. Not everyone approved. Ralph Fetherstonhalgh wrote, in November 1603, 'What! say they, hath not the King restored Arundel, Westmoreland and Paget, all of them known favourers, if not professors of the Romish religion'. Lord Saye and Sele wrote, 'I gave no consent to Mr. Pagett's bill', because of 'my duty to God' and his remembrance of the late queen ('Salisbury MSS', 15.283; 16.63). From 5 November 1605 to 1628 Paget was summoned to parliament as Baron Paget. He was one of those peers who protested against the creation of a large number of baronets (1618) and of Scottish and Irish nobles (1621). In May 1628 he also spoke at length in the House of Lords against a proposed saving clause to be added to the petition of right. 
Paget was widely involved in the promotion of colonial trade, through the East India Company, and in colonial projects: as a councillor of the Virginia Company (1612) and of the Amazon River Company until the surrender of its charter (1620), and as a commissioner of the new board for Virginia in June 1624. He was also a founder member of the Bermudas Company (1614) to colonize the Somers Islands, where his name was given to a fort and a people. Despite these endeavours he appears to have been in a permanent state of indebtedness. In 1620 he called himself 'the poorest man of his rank... endeavouring to pay off great debts to the King' ('CSP dom.', '1619-23', 196). He died at West Drayton, Middlesex, on 29 August 1629 and was buried there the next day. His will required that his younger children 'be instructed to serve God after the rule of the Religion professed at this daie in the Church of England and in no otherwise' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/154, sig. 110). 


@@@@@


doc= 21123


Paget, William, sixth Baron Paget (1609-1678), politician, was born on 13 September 1609, the eldest son of William Paget, fifth Baron Paget (1572-1629), of Beaudesert, Staffordshire, and his wife, Lettice (died 1655), daughter and coheir of Henry Knollys of Kingsbury, Warwickshire. Anne Waller, Lady Waller, was his sister. After a 'strict' (E. E. Harcourt, ed., 'The Harcourt Papers', 14 vols., 1880-1905, 1.171) religious upbringing in West Drayton, Middlesex, Paget attended Christ Church, Oxford, from where he matriculated on 18 December 1627. 
Made a knight of the Bath at Charles I's coronation, Paget inherited the title of Baron Paget on his father's death. However, he was an unsuccessful courtier, being confined to purely ceremonial roles such as waiting on ambassadors and appearing in court masques. Even Paget's marriage in 1632 to Lady Frances Rich (died 1672), the eldest daughter of the royal favourite, Henry Rich, first earl of Holland (bap. 1590, d. 1649), failed to secure him a major court office, although thanks to his father-in-law's influence he was appointed keeper of New Lodge Walk in Windsor Forest on 9 February 1642. 
By the end of the personal rule Paget had become increasingly alienated with royal policies, as shown by his refusal to serve in the first bishops' war in March 1639 and by his vote against granting the king supplies to renew hostilities with the Scots in the Short Parliament of 1640. His opposition to Charles I had become even more overt by August 1640 when he supported the twelve peers' petition urging the king to summon another parliament. On 28 September 1640 Paget was one of the sixteen peers appointed by the king to negotiate an Anglo-Scottish treaty following his disastrous defeat in the second bishops' war. During the first session of the Long Parliament 'honest Paget' as he was later termed by the earl of Manchester ('CSP dom.', '1644-5', 160), played a key role in the impeachment of Strafford and Laud, the passage of major constitutional measures like the abolition of Star Chamber, and, above all, the promotion of religious reforms. His 'violence' (J. Rochester, 'Diary of a bishop', BL, Harley MS 6424, fol. 39) against the bishops and the 'Book of Common Prayer' was what one might have expected of a man who was an unalloyed presbyterian and who showed a keen 'desire' ('JHL', 7, 1644-5, 19) to take the national covenant in October 1644. 
Paget's anti-court stance continued in the second session of the Long Parliament and is best epitomized by his support for the militia ordinance, which he implemented as lord lieutenant of Buckinghamshire in mid-May 1642. However, he now experienced a crisis of conscience and defected to the king, joining him at York on 14 June. There he signed a declaration to defend Charles's 'just rights and prerogatives' ('CSP dom.', '1641-3', 340, 342) and undertook to raise a 1200-strong infantry regiment. After seeing his regiment badly mauled at the battle of Edgehill in late October 1642, Paget joined the king in Oxford, residing at Wadham College. In January 1644 he served in the Oxford parliament and subscribed to the letter addressed to the earl of Essex calling for peace negotiations. By the following autumn his growing disillusionment with the royalist cause prompted his return to the parliamentarian fold. He surrendered at Plymouth in late September 1644 and, following a brief period of imprisonment, was fined $1500, of which he paid only a third. For all his efforts, Paget never secured readmission to the House of Lords, and this perhaps explains why he lent covert support to his father-in-law's pro-royalist uprising in June 1648. 
Paget was clearly horrified by Charles I's execution and viewed the Rump as a 'usurped authority' (TNA: PRO, SP 29/20/21); however, in Lord Lisle's telling phrase, he learned to be 'a good Commonswealthman' ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 6.482), which was just as well, since in October 1651 his estates again fell forfeit after the committee for compounding was informed of his former complicity in the earl of Holland's rebellion. The case dragged on until March 1653 when Paget was finally discharged by the 'Act of Pardon'. During the rule of the major-generals, however, Paget was threatened with decimation, but after an appeal to the protector he secured his exemption from the hated tax as well as obtaining a licence to reside within the cavalier exclusion zone around London. 
The meeting of the Convention Parliament marked Paget's return to public life, although he had to be commanded 'to give [his] attendance' ('JHL', 11, 1660-66, 27) by formal letter on 14 May 1660. He gave his full support to Charles II's restoration, but for the next decade concentrated on restoring his family's financial fortunes which were now in an 'ill-condition' (BL, Add. MS 29910, fol. 20). With debts amounting to over $3000, and living on an income of little more than $23, Paget was forced to petition the king for relief, but to no avail. This rebuff may partly account for Paget's opposition to the crown in the later stages of the Cavalier Parliament. In April 1675 he was one of the 'Country' (Swatland, 270, appx 1, col. 11) peers who expressed their dissent at government moves to tamper with the freedom of debate and the voting rights of members of the upper chamber. 
In the last eight years of his life Paget's health began to deteriorate: in November 1670 he was excused attendance in the Lords for being 'sick' ('JHL', 13, 1675-81, 16), and again in November 1675 his absence was condoned because he was 'not well' (ibid., 364). He died, intestate, at his house in Old Palace Yard, Westminster, on 19 October 1678 and was buried in the family mausoleum at West Drayton, Middlesex, on 7 November and succeeded by his son William Paget. He was said by a post-Restoration commentator to have been of 'Noe parts... except a good stomack' (Kidson, 40); and significantly in the funeral sermon preached by his chaplain, John Heynes, there is a deafening silence about his personal attributes. 


@@@@@


doc= 21124


Paget, William, seventh Baron Paget (1637-1713), politician and diplomat, was born at Beaudesert, Staffordshire, on 10 February 1637, the oldest surviving son of William Paget, sixth Baron Paget (1609-1678), and his wife, Lady Frances Rich (died 1672), daughter of Henry Rich, first earl of Holland, and his wife, Isabel, daughter of Sir Walter Cope of Kensington. Nothing is known of his education and early life, except that in January 1656 he was given a pass to travel abroad. By licence dated 20 July 1661 he married Frances ('c'.1644-1681), daughter of Francis Pierrepoint, younger son of Robert Pierrepoint, first earl of Kingston. Following the death of his father on 19 October 1678 Paget took his seat in the House of Lords (25 November 1678). There was a strong puritan element in the Pagets: his father had adhered first and last to the parliamentarians in the civil war, despite a short-lived attachment to the king in 1642-4; his father's sister Anna had two notable puritan husbands, and his mother belonged to one of the most famous puritan magnate families in England. Paget himself, by temperament and conviction, clearly remained throughout his life in the puritan/radical whig interest. In 1681 he was a signatory to the petition against the convening of parliament at Oxford, where he opposed the Lords' rejection of the impeachment of Edward Fitzharris as a conspirator in the Popish Plot. In the same year, after the death of his first wife, Paget married his cousin Isabella (died 1685), daughter of Sir Thomas Irby of Boston, and of his father's sister Katherine. 
Paget's own whig sympathies prevented his political advancement under the later Stuarts. In 1688 he was present at the trial in the Lords of the seven bishops, and on the landing of the prince of Orange Paget was one of the peers who unsuccessfully petitioned James II to call a free parliament and to negotiate with William; subsequently he voted for the vacancy of the throne and for settling the crown on the prince and princess of Orange. On 24 December 1688 he moved in the Lords that the princess of Orange should be declared queen. Following the accession of William and Mary, Paget was appointed lord lieutenant of Staffordshire (patent 24 March 1689; sworn 15 May). A few months later, on 4 September 1689, he was appointed English envoy to Vienna. At fifty-two Paget embarked on what was to be a lengthy diplomatic career in the king's service. At this point in his life he was twice a widower, and had lost both his elder son by his first marriage, William (died 1684), and his only son by his second wife, also William (died 1687). He never remarried; it is not clear how far the tragedies of his private life precipitated or magnified in diplomatic exile his known austerity of manner and almost Roman stoicism, as well as his conspicuous patience and on occasion notoriously short temper. With only one short break in London, in summer 1692, Paget remained abroad from September 1689 until April 1703, living first at the court of the Habsburg emperor, Leopold I, in Vienna and then, from 1693 to 1703, at the Ottoman court, living either at the English embassy at Constantinople or in uncomfortable circumstances at Adrianople, now Edirne, the principal residence of successive Ottoman sultans in the latter part of the seventeenth century. 
William III's aim, in appointing Paget to Vienna in 1689, was not only to cement his alliance with the emperor, but to add weight to his existing policies, carried on by Dutch diplomats in the field, of extracting the emperor by mediation from the conflict in Hungary with the Ottomans, which had been going on since 1683 and which was becoming increasingly successful, in order to free the best imperial generals and the emperor's most seasoned troops for the conflict against the armies of Louis XIV on the Rhine and in the Low Countries. In the event William's attempts at mediation were less than successful. Early in autumn 1692, following the successive deaths of two English ambassadors to the Porte (Sir William Hussey, who had died at Adrianople in summer 1691, and William Harbord, who had died at Belgrade a year later), the king transferred both Paget and his Dutch colleague Coenraad van Heemskerck from Vienna to the Porte in an effort to force the pace of the mediation diplomacy. At Vienna Paget was succeeded by George Stepney; at the Porte, Paget's strenuous but cautious advocacy of William's policies met with little immediate success, partly as a result of deep-seated personal animosities between Paget and van Heemskerck, partly because of the continuing primacy of pro-French grand viziers in the counsels of successive sultans, and the insurmountable difficulties of long-distance diplomatic communication between the Porte, Vienna, The Hague, and London. It was not until late in 1697, after the conclusion at Rijswijk (Ryswick) of peace in the west between William III and Louis XIV on 11 September and of the destruction at the battle of Zenta on 12 September of the Ottoman army and the main military leaders of the pro-French war party, that Paget was able to induce a new Ottoman regime to agree to a mediated peace with Austria and its Sacra Liga allies. Paget's subsequent roles, as chief intermediary in the year-long preliminary negotiations, as co-mediator with his Dutch colleague Jacobus Colyer, and as joint chairman at the congress of Carlowitz (Karlofca; Karlofci) from 2 November 1698 to the conclusion of peace on 26 January 1699, mark the culmination of his diplomatic career. Paget remained at the Porte for almost four more years, returning home loaded with honours from both the Ottoman and Habsburg rulers, some months after the death of William III. 
Paget arrived in London in April 1703. On 24 June, after an interval of nearly fourteen years, he was reappointed lord lieutenant of Staffordshire. His later years were uneventful. Having professed his personal faith in his will of 14 April 1711, he died at his London house in Bloomsbury Square on 26 February 1713 and was buried in the church of St Giles-in-the-Fields on 20 March. His sole surviving son, Henry Paget (c.1663-1743), later created earl of Uxbridge, the younger son of his first marriage, succeeded to the title. 


@@@@@


doc= 21125


Pagett, Ephraim (1574-1646), heresiologist, was baptized at Wold (Old), Northamptonshire, on 28 May 1574, the second of three children of Eusebius Pagit (1546/7-1617), vicar of Lamport in the same county, and his wife, Anne Gyles, about whom nothing else is known. Pagett's sister, Katherine ('b'. 1573), and brother, Nathaniel ('b'. 1589), died shortly after birth. At the age of eleven, Pagett translated from Latin twenty-eight of Ludwig Lavater's sermons on the book of 'Ruth'. On 25 May 1593 he matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, aged eighteen. Though no record remains of his graduation, he was a great linguist, speaking fifteen or sixteen languages. On 19 August 1601 he was admitted rector of St Edmund the King, Lombard Street, London. On 29 June 1602 he married Jane Rogers ('b'. 1584), with whom he had two children, Ephraim and Elizabeth. At some point, Jane died; a second wife, Anne, was buried at St Nicholas's, Deptford, in 1621. On 16 April 1632 Pagett married Mary, widow of Sir Stephen Bord. 
Pagett's 'Christianographie, or, The description of the multitude and sundry sorts of Christians in the world not subject to the pope' (1635) was an attack upon Roman Catholicism and appeared in subsequently enlarged editions (1636, 1640; reissued 1674). Pagett described protestantism's international solidarity and accepted as protestants many exotic kinds of Christian around the world. His increasing episcopalianism in later editions has caused him to be identified as a 'Laudian' writer, but such Laudianism was probably contrived by Pagett himself since he was trying to secure Laud's support in exporting 'Christianographie' to the continent. About 1635 Pagett commended 'Christianographie' to the patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, the Maronites, Prince Radziwill of Poland, and John Tolnai of Transylvania, along with Elias Petley's Greek translation of the English prayer book and Laud's account of his conference with the Jesuit John Fisher. In 1638 Pagett produced an abbreviated version of 'Christianographie' and, in 1640, two Latin versions, all of which were dedicated to Laud. 
Despite the wide definition of reformed opinion in 'Christianographie', Pagett's religious beliefs were Calvinist and unequivocally rooted in the reformed traditions of the English church: the monarch, the prayer book, and the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. By the 1640s his stance began to appear anachronistic, and his conception of orthodoxy narrowed as he turned away from international protestant Christianity towards describing the heterodoxies immediately around him. 
His 'Heresiography, or, A Description of the Heretickes and Sectaries of these Latter Times' (1645) grew out of a sermon he delivered against heresy, first published as 'The Mysticall Wolfe' (1645) and reissued as 'The Tryall of Trueth' (1645). Pagett claimed that he knew several heretics personally, but 'Heresiography' is principally a compilation of heresies from the period's radical literature and earlier continental and patristic heresy lists. As a heresy list 'Heresiography' is heresiological rather than heresiographical; it is only modern scholarship which has come to use Pagett's coinage, 'heresiography', to refer to all anti-sectarian writing, thereby underlining his historical and literary importance. Indeed, 'Heresiography' went through six successively enlarged editions (1645 (again), 1646, 1647, 1654, 1661) and three issues (1647, 1648, 1662); more than any similar text. It remains perhaps the most systematically copious, if excessive, account of the sects during the period. 
Circumstances forced Pagett to take the covenant in 1645, but he was soon silenced; an interim was introduced into the parish the same year. He left his ministry and retired to Deptford. He wrote his will on 6 August 1646 and died within a few months. He was buried on 27 October 1646 at St Nicholas's Church, Deptford, aged seventy-two. His bookseller, however, who oversaw 'Heresiography''s editions after 1646, claimed he was eighty-four, in accordance with Pagett's nicknames, Old Ephraim Pagitt and Old Father Ephraim. Pagett's cause of death is unknown. His will instructed that most of his land and property be sold to settle his debts, though he provided for his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 21126


Pagit, Eusebius (1546/7-1617), Church of England clergyman, was born at Cranford, Northamptonshire, the third son of Richard Pagit, gentleman, and his wife, Katherine, daughter of Euseby Isham of Pitchley, Northamptonshire. In 1559, at the age of twelve Pagit was admitted to Christ Church, Oxford, as a chorister. According to his son, he injured his right arm while carrying the pax in a religious service, an accident that may have prompted him to question aspects of the traditional ceremony. The arm failed to heal properly, and he later subscribed documents as 'lame Eusebius Pagit'. Admitted to Christ's College, Cambridge, on 22 February 1564, Pagit graduated BA in early 1568, having earned repute as 'the golden sophister'. He was ordained deacon in London in June 1569, aged twenty-two, and priest three months later. In either 1569 or 1570 he became rector of Old, Northamptonshire, where his uncle, John Isham, was patron. At Old, Pagit became a popular preacher of funeral sermons. For refusing to subscribe the articles, he was suspended in 1571. He became rector of nearby Lamport, which was also in John Isham's patronage, on 21 April 1572. On 12 June of that year, in a sermon preached less than a mile from Greenwich Palace, he likened the English bishops to Pharisees and to Catholic abbots and cardinals. Edmund Scambler, bishop of Peterborough, suspended Pagit on 29 January 1574 for nonconformity, depriving him of Lamport three weeks later. However, Pagit was appointed rector of Barnwell St Andrew, also in Northamptonshire, on 19 June 1575. By the following year he and John Oxenbridge were serving as moderators of the prophesyings at Southam, Warwickshire. With the support of such gentry as Sir Richard Knightley and, probably, Anthony Cope of Hanwell, he travelled throughout the midlands, visiting exercises, organizing classes (clerical conferences), and acting as what John Aylmer, later to be bishop of London, called a 'posting apostle'. For these activities Pagit and Oxenbridge were arrested and taken to London. Although no record of his fate at the hands of the ecclesiastical commission survives, his deprivation must be assumed. 
Pagit found refuge with his uncle, John Isham, in whose Northamptonshire household he used a catechism, published in 1579 as 'Short Questions and Answeares', intended to benefit both householders and outsiders in worship and instruction. Appearing in thirty-one known editions by 1641, it contained brief answers averaging just over twenty words apiece. Pagit and Robert Openshaw later revised it, doubling the number of questions and halving the length of answers (other than biblical quotations). A Latin version appeared in 1585. Every day for twenty-six years, Pagit had a question-and-answer session on the 'Bible' in his household, reading an 'Old Testament' chapter at dinner and a 'New Testament' one at supper. 
Although Pagit refused to conform, John Woolton, bishop of Exeter, instituted him as rector of Kilkhampton, Cornwall, in 1580. The living, which was in Sir Richard Grenville's gift, had been obtained with the help of Sir Francis Hastings of Leicestershire. During Pagit's tenure he published two of his sermons, 'A Verie Fruitful Sermon' (1583) on predestination, and 'A Godlie and Fruitefull Sermon' (1583) on 'Genesis' 14: 20-21, in which he defended tithing, outlined acceptable social behaviour, and criticized bishops who granted leases of benefices to relatives. In March 1584 Woolton insisted that Pagit conform, but he refused to do so. Later that year, the curate of Barnstaple, Devon, brought charges against Pagit before the high commission. He was cited before the court on 11 January 1585 for declining to observe all the provisions of the 'Book of Common Prayer'. He denied the charge, admitting only that he had varied from some of its provisions. Such practice, he argued, was followed by Archbishop Whitgift, Woolton, and other clergy. Although the commissioners suspended him, he continued to preach, possibly having received a royal pardon, but was eventually deprived for refusing to wear the surplice, use the sign of the cross when baptizing, and read the prayers in full. Grenville took possession of the parsonage, prompting allegations that he had terrorized Pagit's wife and committed unlawful violence. Pagit in turn charged Woolton with failing to undertake diocesan visitations, not attending sermons, and refusing to punish two members of his household who had impregnated harlots. 
With the Scot David Black, Pagit established a 'reformed College' at Kilkhampton, but this, too, he was forced to relinquish for refusing to subscribe the articles. He subsequently taught for a time at Heston, Middlesex, and then at Deptford, Kent. A homily preached at Deptford was published in 1586 under the title 'A Godly Sermon'. Wrongly suspected of having written the Marprelate tracts, Pagit was cruelly satirized by the anonymous author of 'The Returne of the Renowned Cavaliero Pasquill' (1589) as a man with two clubs, 'one in his foote, another in his head', and by the author of 'An Almond for a Parrat' (1590) as a schismatic, whoremaster, and 'poltfoote Paget' (Carlson, 66-7, 70). 
Weary of being harried for his beliefs, Pagit wrote to the lord admiral, Charles, Lord Howard of Effingham, on 3 June 1591, after Sir John Hawkins had approached Howard on his behalf. For twenty years, Pagit averred, separatists had urged him to join them, and in the past six months he had devoted considerable time to conferences with them, and with learned men opposed to them. Professing loyalty to the established church notwithstanding its blemishes, he insisted that the essence of a true church was gospel preaching. Calling attention to his children and orphans entrusted to his care, he appealed not to be evicted from his house and forced to beg. He appears to have continued to live and to teach at Deptford until 1598, when he was appointed lecturer at St Botolph, Aldgate, in London, succeeding William Hubbock, who obtained the post for him. For failing to obtain a proper licence he was temporarily suspended, but by 1599 he was attracting so many people from neighbouring parishes to his lectures that the vestry complained. He explored biblical passages in depth, lecturing on 'John' 19: 1-33 from 17 June to 30 September 1599. In 1603 he published another best-seller, 'The History of the Bible', which used the question-and-answer format. Having now made his peace with the ecclesiastical authorities, Pagit left his lectureship to become rector of St Anne and St Agnes, Aldersgate, on 21 September 1604, a position he held until his death in May or June 1617. He was interred in his church. His son, the heresiographer Ephraim Pagett, was granted letters of administration for his estate on 16 June that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 21127


Pagula, William (d. 1332?), canon lawyer and theologian, probably came from Paull, near Hull, Yorkshire. Granted letters dimissory by Archbishop Greenfield of York on 24 November 1313, he was instituted as perpetual vicar of the church of Winkfield, near Windsor Forest, Berkshire, just inside the boundary of Salisbury diocese, on 5 March 1314, during the episcopate of Simon Ghent (died 1315). He was ordained into the priesthood by Archbishop Walter Reynolds (died 1327) in Canterbury Cathedral on 1 June 1314. 
Pagula seems to have been intermittently in residence at Winkfield during the early years of his vicariate. Perhaps already a master in 1314, he received a doctorate in canon law at Oxford, possibly as late as 1323 but probably by 1319-20. Thereafter Pagula devoted himself primarily to his parish. The subject matter of his chief writings, as well as specific references within them, indicate considerable familiarity with the conditions of rural parishioners and clergy, especially in the Windsor Forest region. 
Pagula was licensed as penitentiary for Reading deanery on 8 March 1322, an appointment possibly later extended to the whole of Berkshire. But although he was made a canon of St Paul's, London, about 1323, there is no evidence that he sought or was granted further ecclesiastical preferment. He was still vicar of Winkfield in 1326, but seems to have been succeeded in that post by Master John Lavyngham in November 1332. Since records make no mention of Pagula after the latter date, he probably died in the summer or autumn of 1332. 
Pagula's literary productions encompassed a broad range of topics. His 'Oculus sacerdotis', a manual of pastoral theology, deals comprehensively with the matters that ought to fall within the 'view' of the parochial clergy. The 'Oculus sacerdotis' represents an elaboration of the programme of pastoral instruction imposed by the Council of Lambeth in 1281 for the Canterbury province. The work is composed of three parts: the 'Pars oculi', dealing with confessional practice; the 'Dextra pars oculi', concerned with the teaching of morals; and the 'Sinistra pars oculi', which addresses matters of dogma. The 'Dextra pars' and 'Sinistra pars' have been dated on internal and external evidence to 1320-23, while the 'Pars oculi' was written after 1326 but probably before 1328. 
The readership and influence of the 'Oculus sacerdotis' were extensive. Fifty manuscripts of it survive, and it is often mentioned in church registers and in the wills of priests. Later in the fourteenth century an abbreviated version was produced under the title 'Pupilla oculi' by John Burgh ('fl'. 1370-1386), chancellor of Cambridge University, and in that form it was printed at least three times between 1510 and 1518. 
In addition to the 'Oculus sacerdotis' Pagula compiled a substantial tract on the responsibilities and station of the clergy entitled the 'Summa summarum', which was also probably completed between 1320 and 1323. Comprising five books and about 350,000 words, the 'Summa summarum', cast in question and answer form, was designed to enumerate the duties pertaining to each office in the ecclesiastical hierarchy, ranging from the parochial clergy to the upper echelons. The 'Summa summarum' enjoyed a wide readership, attested by the eleven manuscripts presently known. 
Even more ambitious than the 'Summa summarum', however, was Pagula's 'Summa praelatorum', a treatise approaching 700,000 words written as a definitive source book for parish priests. The 'Summa praelatorum' contains, among other features, a large collection of church statutes relevant to parish affairs, and an extensive set of sermon themes for every Sunday, feast day, and special occasion within the liturgical year. Dated to 1320-23, the 'Summa praelatorum' clearly did not enjoy the popularity of Pagula's other theological writings, as only a single (and incomplete) manuscript has been identified. 
Pagula later formed excerpts from the 'Summa praelatorum' into the much briefer 'Speculum religiosorum', a handbook that concentrates on the rudiments of canon law necessary for pastoral care. Although the 'Speculum religiosorum' incorporates some new material, it demonstrates no awareness of important developments in ecclesiastical legislation from the mid-1320s. Thus, it was most likely compiled soon after the 'Summa praelatorum' and the 'Dextra pars oculi', to which it also refers, and certainly before 1325-6. The 'Speculum religiosorum' is known to exist in ten manuscripts, suggesting a broader audience than was achieved by the 'Summa praelatorum'. 
Near the end of his career at Winkfield (and possibly of his life) Pagula turned his pen to political affairs. He has been conclusively identified as the author of two recensions of a 'speculum regis' treatise, addressed to Edward III, which defends the right of the king's subjects, especially the peasantry, to refuse royal prises and purveyance. The first version, sometimes known as the 'Epistola ad regem Edwardi III', has been dated on internal evidence to 1331, while the second was evidently completed the following year. Both tracts warn Edward III that his soul is endangered by permitting the theft of his subjects' goods, and foretell the loss of his kingdom if he does not reform his administration. Pagula advises the king to curtail his expenditures, pay his debts, and care for the churches and poor of the realm. 
The origins of Pagula's complaints against Edward are obscure. He claims to have witnessed personally the exploitative practices of royal officials in the Windsor Forest area, and to be among those who fear the coming of Edward's entourage. But purveyance records do not indicate any exactions in the region during or immediately before 1331-2. Moreover, the language and grievances of the 'Speculum regis' closely resemble a document dating to 1316 which is quoted in the 'Vita Edwardi secundi'. It is possible that Pagula adapted and revised an earlier work (either by himself or another) directed against Edward II, in order to express renewed dissatisfaction about royal conduct. 


@@@@@


doc= 21128


George Richard Pain (1792/3-1838), who was born in London. After Nash had designed Lough Cutra Castle, co. Galway, for Charles Vereker in 1811, he recommended that the two brothers should be given charge of carrying out the work. James, who was already in his early thirties, had arrived in Ireland by the summer of 1813 and soon established himself in Limerick. George Richard, who exhibited architectural designs at the Royal Academy from the London address of 1 Diana Place, Fitzroy Square, between 1810 and 1814, may possibly have gone to Ireland a little later; he settled in Cork but worked in close partnership with James until his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 21129


Pain, James (1779/80-1877), architect and builder, was born at Isleworth in Middlesex, the eldest son of James Pain, builder and surveyor, and a grandson of William Pain. He was apprenticed to John Nash, as was his younger brother 
Between them the two brothers were responsible as architects or contractors for a large number of churches, country houses, court houses, prisons, and bridges in the south and west of Ireland. It was said that, of the two, James was better at running the business and planning buildings, while George Richard, the more skilful draughtsman, designed the elevations. The brothers tended to take an orthodox, academic approach towards their classical buildings, but they were generally more fanciful in their Gothic and Tudor Gothic designs. Their country houses, usually castellated or Tudor Gothic in Nash's picturesque manner, include Dromoland Castle, co. Clare (from 1819), Mitchelstown Castle, co. Cork (1823), Strancally Castle, co. Waterford ('c'.1830), and Castle Bernard, King's county ('c'.1833). At Blackrock, on the outskirts of Cork, they remodelled the existing riverside castle in 1828-9 for the use of Cork corporation. Within the city they designed the house of correction (1818-19), the Cork county club (1829-31) and the county and city court house (1830-35), all classical buildings. Works in Limerick included the county gaol (1817-22), Bael's Bridge (1831), Athlunkard Bridge (1833), and Thomond Bridge (1837). 
In 1823 James Pain was appointed architect to the board of first fruits for the ecclesiastical province of Cashel, responsible for all the churches and glebe houses within the jurisdiction. He continued to work for the board, which was replaced by the ecclesiastical commissioners in 1833, until at least 1843. Assisted by George Richard he built many new churches, some -- such as St John's, Buttevant, co. Cork (1826) -- on a cruciform plan but most of them simple rectangular halls with a tall tower at the west end and ornamented with needle-sharp pinnacles. Between the 1820s and the 1840s he surveyed all the existing churches in the province of Cashel, some of which had been built to his own designs; these survey plans and elevations, bound into six volumes, are preserved in the library of the Representative Church Body, Dublin. George Richard designed several Catholic churches, including the Gothic Holy Trinity Capuchin Church, Cork (begun 1832) and the classical St Patrick's, Cork (1836). For the Church of Ireland in Cork he made classical alterations to Christ Church (1828) and designed St Luke's, Summerhill (1837), in a Tudor Gothic style. 
George Richard Pain died in Cork, where he lived, on 26 December 1838 at the age of forty-five and was buried at the church of St Mary Shandon in Cork. James lived on for many years in Limerick, where he died at his home, 17 Upper Glentworth Street, on 13 December 1877, aged ninety-seven. He was buried four days later at St Mary's Cathedral, Limerick. 


@@@@@


doc= 21130


Pain, William (fl. 1743-1794), writer on architecture, described himself variously as an architect, carpenter, and joiner. Almost nothing of his professional or private life is known, but it is safe to assume that his great success as an author of pattern books made him an influential figure in eighteenth-century building practice, both in Britain and North America. His first book, 'The Builder's Companion, and Workman's General Assistant' (1758), was co-published by the London printseller and publisher Robert Sayer. Like most of Pain's subsequent output, this substantial folio was intended to instruct builders and craftsmen who wished to work in one or other of the prevailing styles (Palladian, rococo, or Gothic). A minimum of text accompanies a large number of technical illustrations. 'The Builder's Pocket-Treasure' (1763), containing the first known architectural engravings by Pain's future publisher Isaac Taylor, was a smaller book of the same kind. In its preface Pain claims more than twenty years of professional experience and states that in his course of work he had 'executed almost every Part of the Book himself'. 
A decade later, when Taylor's firm began marketing a series of new books by Pain, he was sufficiently abreast of fashion to be of significant help in diffusing the so-called Adam style (named after the architect brothers Robert and James Adam). In 'The Practical Builder' (1774), 'The Carpenter's and Joiner's Repository' (1778), and 'The Carpenter's Pocket Directory' (1781) Pain concentrated on his principal area of expertise, that of wood construction. His reputation established, he then published independently 'The Builder's Golden Rule' (issued in parts, 1780-81; with a supplement, 1782), 'The Practical Measurer' (1783), 'Pain's British Palladio' (1786), 'The Practical House Carpenter' ('second edition', 1788; 1st edn untraced), and 'The Builder's Sketch Book' (1793). The title-pages of these books indicate that Pain lived in London at 3 Little Red Lion Court, Charter House Lane, near West Smithfield, from 1782 to 1786; at 12 Fisher Street, Red Lion Square, Holborn, from 1787 to 1793; and at 1 Diana Place, New Road, opposite the west end of Fitzroy Square, in 1794. 
Most of Pain's books were published in several editions, often improved with an unusual degree of care by the author for at least the first few years after their initial appearance. 'Pain's British Palladio', his most ambitious work, included designs by his son James Pain, described as a builder and surveyor. It may have been this family partnership that allowed the father to advertise his willingness to build the houses he featured at the listed prices. 
It was undoubtedly the number and clarity of Pain's illustrations for all kinds of structural and decorative woodwork that made these pattern books popular in America, where the existence of numerous copies can be traced from 1760 onwards, and where four of Pain's titles were reprinted before 1800. 'The Practical House Carpenter', his most successful work, had the rare distinction of being reprinted both in Boston (1796) and Philadelphia (1797). Unlike its predecessors it shows roof trusses complete with purlins and wall plates rather than as isolated frames, and it was this kind of advance in technical illustration, rather than any great innovation in building techniques, that made Pain's books useful in New England even as they were being superseded in Britain by the works of the architect Peter Nicholson. Pain was last noticed in 1794, and his date and place of death are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 21131


Paine, James (bap. 1717?, d. 1789), architect, can probably be identified with the infant of that name baptized on 9 October 1717 at Andover, Hampshire, the youngest in the family of three sons and two daughters of John Paine (died 1727), carpenter, of Andover, and his wife, Jane Head ('bap'. 1684). The date is compatible with the statement in his obituary of November 1789 that he died 'in his 73rd year' ('GM', 1153), and the location with his remark in a letter to Sir William Chambers that, on his journeys to Wardour Castle in Wiltshire, he passed through the town where he was born. However, little is known of Paine's early life. In the preface to the first volume of his collected designs he stated that 'he began the study of architecture in the early part of his life, under the tuition of a man of genius... the late Mr. Thomas Jersey' (Paine, 1.i); but Jersey (died 1751) is an obscure figure, a builder or surveyor who is known only as having later acted as clerk of works for the building of the Radcliffe Camera in Oxford. More significantly, Paine appears to have studied in London at the St Martin's Lane Academy, an institution founded by William Hogarth in 1735 to enable artists to practise life drawing -- and Paine was later said to have attained considerable skill in drawing the human figure. Here he would have come into contact with a number of the period's most innovative designers, and more particularly with the architect Isaac Ware, who was in charge of the academy a few years later, in 1739. He then appears to have become known to the circle of the third earl of Burlington, an introduction which was presumably due to Ware, and to have started on his career from this point. His first professional task, which he received at the age of nineteen, was to supervise the erection of Nostell Priory, Yorkshire ('c'.1737-1750), a large country house designed by Colonel James Moyser, a friend and follower of Lord Burlington. 
While Paine was still engaged on this project, and living in the nearby town of Pontefract, he was commissioned to design a prominent public building in the area, the Mansion House at Doncaster, Yorkshire (1745-8); from these beginnings he developed during the 1750s a large country-house practice in the north and north midlands, which he appears to have extended from Yorkshire to the north-east by taking over the north-country practice of Daniel Garrett, another associate of Lord Burlington, who died in 1753. His patrons in the region included the first duke of Northumberland at Alnwick Castle, Northumberland ('c'.1754-1768), Lord Burlington's son-in-law the fourth duke of Devonshire at Chatsworth, Derbyshire (1756-66), the ninth duke of Norfolk at Worksop Manor, Nottinghamshire ('c'.1758-1767), and the fourth earl of Scarbrough at Sandbeck Park, Yorkshire ('c'.1763-1768). As early as 1746, however, he returned to live in London, and his practice was never wholly confined to the north. From the mid-1750s onwards he also established a significant presence in London, beginning with a large town house in Whitehall, for Sir Matthew Featherstonhaugh (1754-8). From the end of the decade, following his contact with the duke of Norfolk, he received further major commissions from Roman Catholic patrons, notably at the ninth Lord Petre's Thorndon Hall, Essex (1764-70), and the eighth Lord Arundell's Wardour Castle, Wiltshire (1770-76). In the final phase of his career during the 1770s and 1780s he erected a number of bridges in the Thames valley, the finest being that over the Thames at Richmond, Surrey (1774-7). It was this extensive and varied output which prompted Thomas Hardwick's well-known observation of 1825, that Paine and Sir Robert Taylor 'nearly divided the practice of the profession between them, for they had few competitors till Mr. Robert Adam entered the lists' (Chambers, xlviii-xlix). Hardwick's comment does also raise the question of the extent to which Robert Adam's rise to fame in the 1760s had an adverse impact on Paine's career; and it was in the north that the effect was most marked, with Adam supplanting him at Kedleston Hall, Derbyshire, early in the decade and at Alnwick Castle in 1768. But the atrophying of his northern practice was compensated for by developments elsewhere and Paine's personal prosperity appears to have been on the increase throughout this period; by the later 1770s he was able to move towards an affluent semi-retirement and the life of a country gentleman. 
Alongside his private practice Paine also pursued a career in the office of works; but this aspect of his professional life can hardly be regarded as having been a success, as promotion to a senior position, commensurate with his standing in the profession, proved elusive. His first appointment, in January 1745, was as clerk of the works at the Queen's House at Greenwich -- a post he is said to have owed to the patronage of a former surveyor-general, the Hon. Richard Arundell, another close associate of Lord Burlington. In December 1746 he was promoted to the clerkship at the Royal Mews at Charing Cross, but in August 1750 he exchanged posts with Kenton Couse for the almost sinecure clerkship at Newmarket and in March 1758 he also became clerk of the works at Richmond New Park Lodge. At that time, however, he had hopes, with the support of Richard Arundell, of succeeding Thomas Ripley as comptroller of the works, but the post went to the older and longer-established Henry Flitcroft; and an even more serious disappointment came two years later, when, in spite of the support of the earl of Northumberland and Sir Rowland Winn of Nostell, he failed to secure one of the two newly created posts of architect to the works. It was only in December 1780 that he was belatedly appointed to one of these positions, and in a final stroke of irony the posts were abolished two years later under Burke's reform of the civil service. 
In 1755-6 Paine made a tour of Italy, visiting Rome and apparently the Veneto, but the visit does not seem to have played a very significant part in his artistic development. In the preface to his 'Plans, Elevations and Sections of Noblemen and Gentlemen's Houses' (1767) he criticized the fashion for foreign travel among architects and the age's developing obsession with archaeological precedent, emphasizing the importance of practical convenience rather than the pursuit of 'inconsistent antiquated modes' and dismissing the architecture of the Greeks as 'despicable ruins' (Paine, 1.ii). He nevertheless valued highly the 'new and striking' in architecture, but his own considerable originality was achieved almost entirely within the framework of English Palladianism. He was a pioneer of the compact, centrally planned Palladian villa as a country-house form, in particular exploiting the practical and visual potential of the central top-lit staircase and the practical advantages of the 'villa with wings'. At the same time he developed a lively and individual elevational style, based on the 'staccato' isolation of architectural components found in the work of Lord Burlington and William Kent. For a number of his villas he adopted a hallmark formula in which coupled pilasters at the angles were combined with a subsidiary cornice linking the heads of the piano nobile windows, while early experiments with interlocking pediments on the model of Palladio's Venetian church facades were succeeded by striking tripartite compositions derived from Kent's triple-pedimented wings at Holkham Hall, Norfolk. His distinctive repertory of smaller-scale details -- mainly derived from a single source, Kent's 'Designs of Inigo Jones' of 1727 -- included empty niches, splayed window surrounds, open pediments, and vestigial cornice-strips. These characteristics are or were to be found in a sequence of works including Heath House, near Wakefield, Yorkshire (1744-5) -- his first independent commission as an architect -- Kirkstall Grange, Yorkshire (1752), Serlby Hall, Nottinghamshire (1754-73; remodelled 1812), Belford Hall ('c'.1755-1756), and Gosforth Hall (1755-64; altered 1880 onwards), Northumberland, Stockeld Park, Yorkshire (1758-63), Bywell Hall, Northumberland ('c'.1760), and Hare Hall, Romford, Essex (1768-70). 
Paine's greater houses of a more traditional non-villa type were by contrast relatively few in number, the principal examples being the uncompleted Worksop Manor (1761-7; demolished 1843), where he combined a palatially expanded version of the main block of Holkham Hall with a central 'Egyptian hall' on the model of Lord Burlington's at the York assembly rooms; and Sandbeck Park, Yorkshire ('c'.1763-1768), and Thorndon Hall, Essex (1764-70), which are both variants on Colen Campbell's Houghton Hall, Norfolk. In two designs, however -- his proposals for Kedleston Hall, Derbyshire (1759), and Wardour Castle, Wiltshire (1770-76) -- he used the Palladian villa form for a house of the largest size, the logical consequence of the progressive development of the villa idea. At Kedleston, as one of several different architects involved in the project, his part in the finished building was not extensive, but Wardour represents the real climax of his career, the juxtaposition of its great circular staircase hall and the quadrant form of the wings suggesting a creative revision of Palladio's unexecuted circular-salooned villa design for the Trissino brothers in the light of the practical requirements of English country-house design. His individual manner was also displayed in some of his urban buildings, notably the Middlesex Hospital, London (1755-78; dem. 1925), his second major public building, and his redevelopment of Salisbury Street, off the Strand, London (1765-73; dem. 'c'.1923), a speculative venture where in the riverward frontage he ingeniously combined a tripartite grouping with the quadrant form. On a small number of occasions he appears to have absorbed influences from beyond his normal range of sources, notably at the Gibside Chapel, co. Durham (1760-66), his only free-standing ecclesiastical structure, and in the staircase at Brocket Hall, Hertfordshire ('c'.1770). The former appears to represent a fusion of Palladio's Pantheon-inspired Tempietto at Maser and the Greek-cross-in-square form used by Christopher Wren in a number of the City churches; while the latter, with its free-standing columns carrying isolated blocks of entablature, is reminiscent of the interior of James Gibbs's church of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. 
Paine also made a contribution to mid-eighteenth-century Gothic. His most substantial projects in this manner were reconstructions and modernizations of actual medieval buildings, at Raby Castle, co. Durham ('c'.1753-1760; altered 'c'.1870), and Alnwick Castle, Northumberland ('c'.1754-1768; reconstructed 1854-8), where practical convenience rather than either antiquarian scholarship or an appreciation of the style's pictorial or emotive qualities was evidently the prime consideration; but even so some of his details appear to be the fruit of a close observation of authentic Gothic design. For his interior decoration Paine adopted in his early years the rococo style which had been pioneered in England in circles close to the St Martin's Lane Academy; but he combined such enrichment with elements of Palladian detail, and in his chimneypieces in particular (a speciality of his, for which from the 1760s he maintained his own craftsmen and workshop) he endowed conventional Palladian formulae with a new lightness and delicacy. Examples of this manner are at Nostell Priory, the Doncaster Mansion House, Wadworth Hall, Yorkshire ('c'.1749-1750), and Felbrigg Hall, Norfolk (1751-6). Later, however, conceding only that 'Palmyra and Baalbec' were 'valuable for the ornaments' (Paine, 1.i-ii), he devised a variant on the type of neo-classical decoration popularized by Robert Adam, examples of which are in the ballroom at Sandbeck Park and the Temple of Diana at Weston Park, Staffordshire ('c'.1770). He also favoured the Kentian combination of plasterwork and decorative painting, the most notable instance being the saloon at Brocket Hall (1771-3). 
For a number of years Paine was a leading member of the Society of Artists of Great Britain, showing many of his designs at the society's annual exhibitions between 1761 and 1772, as well as serving as a director from the same year and as its president in 1770-72; and during his presidency he designed its Exhibition Room in the Strand, London (1771-2; dem. 1815), a project which was undertaken on his initiative. The circumstances surrounding this undertaking, however, were controversial. In 1768 the society had split and the Royal Academy had been founded by the defecting group led by William Chambers, and the Exhibition Room quickly proved to be an ill-affordable luxury; at the end of his presidency, with the society still losing ground to the new body, Paine himself abandoned it. However, the story that the original schism was the result of rivalry between Paine and Chambers is without foundation, and although he was to exhibit at the Royal Academy only once, in 1783, Paine's relations with Chambers were always a model of professional propriety -- as was his attitude to his principal successor in the north, John Carr of York. Paine was also one of the first English architects to take articled pupils on a regular basis, among whom were Christopher Ebdon, John Eveleigh, John Kendall, and Charles Middleton; while John Woolfe served as his assistant during the 1750s. In 1751 he published his 'Plans, elevations, sections and other ornaments of the mansion-house, belonging to the corporation of Doncaster' and subsequently two volumes of his collected designs, 'Plans, Elevations and Sections of Noblemen and Gentlemen's Houses', the first in 1767 and the second in 1783, when a second edition of the first volume was also issued; but perhaps because of the unfashionable opinions which were trenchantly expressed in the preface of the 1767 volume, they were not in general directly influential among the architects of the following generation. 
On becoming based in London Paine lived at the Royal Mews and then from 1750 in Holles Street. In 1754 he remodelled a large house in St Martin's Lane as his residence, then in 1768 he moved into one of the new houses of the redeveloped Salisbury Street. In 1773 he bought the lease on a country estate, Sayes Court, near Chertsey, Surrey, where he is said to have made additions to the house 'in the Elizabethan style' (Papworth, 6.8) and to have formed a fine collection of architectural drawings. In his role of country gentleman he then became a justice of the peace for Middlesex in December 1776 and for Surrey in June 1777, and served as high sheriff of Surrey in 1785. He was married twice, first in March 1741 to Sarah Jennings, daughter and coheir of George Jennings of Pontefract, and second, by June 1748, to Charlotte Beaumont (1722-1766), youngest daughter of Richard Beaumont of Whitley Beaumont, near Huddersfield. With his first wife he had a son, the architect, sculptor, and topographical watercolourist James Paine (1745-1829), and with the second two daughters, the younger of whom married the painter Tilly Kettle. In 1789, 'finding the infirmities of age steal fast upon him, and a family occurrence of a singular nature preying upon his spirits' ('GM', 1153), Paine retired to France, where he died a few months later in the autumn of that year. The nature of the 'family occurrence' is not recorded. 


@@@@@


doc= 21132


Paine, James (1745-1829), architect, sculptor, and artist, was baptized at Pontefract, Yorkshire, on 28 August 1745, the only child of James Paine (bap. 1717?, d. 1789), architect, then of Pontefract, subsequently of London, and his first wife, Sarah Jennings. Like his father before him, he studied at the St Martin's Lane Academy and as early as 1761 started exhibiting watercolours at the Society of Artists of Great Britain; and he trained as an architect with his father, assisting the latter in supervising the erection of Thorndon Hall, Essex, which was begun in 1764. He visited Rome on two occasions, the first in 1766-9, when he also spent some time sketching in the Campagna, and in Venice, where he made the acquaintance of the celebrated connoisseur Consul Joseph Smith; the second, with his wife in 1773-5, when he made a number of measured drawings and other studies of buildings in and around the city (J. Paine sketchbooks, V&A). In 1771 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and he was one of the original members of the Architects' Club, founded in 1791. On 16 August 1773 he married Elizabeth Crow; they had four children, a son who died young and three daughters. Before his marriage, after leaving his father's house in 1772, he had lived in King Street, Covent Garden; and by 1776 he was living in Charlotte Street, Marylebone. By 1788 he had moved to North End, Hammersmith, and by 1809 to a 'model cottage' at Sunninghill, Berkshire. 
In relation to two of the three media which he essayed, however, Paine's career was essentially a failure. Regarding his work as a sculptor, his friend the artist Joshua Green commented in 1776 that 'he cannot now flatter himself of ever getting anything but Chips in the Phidian Art' (Green to Humphrey, 10 Dec 1776, Royal Academy, Ozias Humphrey MS HU 2/47), and it never amounted to much more than a small group of chimney-pieces and funerary monuments, mainly executed in the 1770s. As an architect, even more starkly, he has only a single executed commission credited unambiguously to his name, a villa called Belmont at Mill Hill, Middlesex, of 'c'.1770, which was evidently deputed to him by his father; and the main reason for this state of affairs was a serious and prolonged estrangement from the latter, which began shortly after the Mill Hill commission. There followed only a sequence of rejected or otherwise abortive proposals and optimistic exhibition projects, and at the most mere scraps of executed work; and by the time the breach was healed, in 1783, his father was virtually in retirement and no longer had an active practice to pass on. So in the 1790s he appears to have abandoned his attempts to establish himself in this field also and turned instead to the third string in his bow, that of topographical painting, in which he seems to have achieved a modest success. A sketchbook inscribed 'J. Paine Rome 1776' containing Italian views is in the Victoria and Albert Museum. 
Paine's Belmont is nevertheless a building of some interest, a creative variation on his father's manner, notable features of which include a virtuoso sequence of varied room shapes. In his subsequent projects he adopted a rather different idiom, examples being the designs for a stable block and a pavilion at Ugbrooke, Devon (1779), in a visionary neo-classical style, and an ambitious scheme for residential development on the marquess of Salisbury's Thames-side estate at Millbank, Westminster (1787-9). Of his works of sculpture the most substantial are the monument to the actor William Powell in Bristol Cathedral (1771) and an elaborate chimney-piece embellished with caryatids for Brocket Hall, Hertfordshire ('c'.1773), designed and executed in conjunction with his father's reconstruction of the house. Of his achievement as a topographical artist it is not possible to form a just estimate owing to the dearth of identified examples, but in 1809 Joseph Farington recorded a comment on 'Payne's best manner', that he 'has a little too much manner, and does too much' (Farington, 'Diary', 10.3564). A 'worthy little man' in Joshua Green's estimation (Green to Humphrey, 10 Dec 1776, Royal Academy, Ozias Humphrey MS HU 2/47), he died at Sunninghill in May 1829, aged eighty-three, and was buried there on 12 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 21133


Paine, Thomas (1737-1809), author and revolutionary, was born in Thetford, Norfolk, on 29 January 1737, the first of two children of Joseph Pain (1708-1787), stay-maker and tenant farmer, and Frances Cocke (1697- 'c'.1790), daughter of Thomas Cocke, attorney and town clerk of Thetford. Paine's only sibling, Elizabeth, born a year later, died aged seven months. Paine's father was a Quaker and his mother an Anglican, and it is likely that Paine was baptized into the Anglican church, as was his sister. 
Paine's father retained his Quaker principles and, though Thomas was confirmed, his father forbade him to learn Latin when he attended the local grammar school at the age of seven. He received a basic education, in which he showed some signs of mathematical ability and a bent for poetry; a short poem to a crow, supposedly written when Paine was eight, shows a certain prescience: 'Here lies the body of John Crow / Who once was high but now is low / Ye brother crows take warning all / For as you rise, so must you fall'. When he was twelve his father removed him from school and took him on as an apprentice. 
Paine recounts, in 'Rights of Man', how, as a youth of little more than sixteen, influenced by the maritime stories of the Revd William Knowles, a master of Thetford grammar school, he enlisted on the 'Terrible', a privateer commanded by Captain Death (fitted out at execution dock and carrying on board Lieutenant Devil and Mr Ghost, the ship's surgeon). It is likely he was nearer twenty, but he was fortunate in yielding to his father's pleas to stay ashore, since the ship lost all but 26 of her crew of 200 in an engagement. Within six months he enlisted again, this time on the 'King of Prussia', also a privateer, but one which enjoyed considerably greater success. The exact movements of Paine at this time are uncertain. Either between his privateering bouts, or subsequently, he worked in London for John Morris, a stay-maker on Hanover Street, Long Acre, in Covent Garden. Some biographers suggest that Paine's later account in 'Age of Reason', that he attended the scientific lectures of Benjamin Martin and James Ferguson, refers to this period, but he may equally refer to other times spent in London, especially in 1773, which fit more exactly with the little evidence available and with his memory. In the spring of 1758 he worked for the stay-maker Benjamin Grace in Dover, and the following year established his own business in Sandwich, where he is reputed to have taken up as an occasional Methodist preacher. On 27 September 1759 he married Mary Lambert (died 1760), who died in childbirth the following year after the couple moved to Margate following business difficulties. 
After his wife's death Paine resolved to abandon the stay-making business and sought a career in the excise, the occupation of his wife's father. He returned home to live with his parents while he learned the skills of the trade at the hands of Henry Cocksedge, recorder of Thetford. He was accepted into the service and received a first appointment to Grantham in December 1762, moving subsequently to Alford, also in Lincolnshire, in August 1764. His career was cut short in August 1765 when he was dismissed from his post for 'stamping' -- certifying examinations not actually made. He was forced to resume stay-making, finding work at Diss under a Mr Gudgeon, from where he wrote apologizing to the excise board. He was reinstated on 4 July 1766 but had to await a new posting. In the interim he taught first at a school run by Daniel Noble in Mill Yard, Leman Street, Goodman's Field, London, and then from January 1767 in a school in Kensington run by a Mr Gardiner. His teaching seems to have kept him adequately provided for, since he was able to turn down an excise post in Grampound, Cornwall, in May 1767 in the hope of finding something closer to London. This is the longest period Paine spent in the capital, and it may have been at this time that he developed his scientific interests. On 19 February 1768 he accepted the post of excise officer in Lewes, where he took up lodgings with Samuel Ollive, an innkeeper, and his family, eventually sharing with them in the setting up of a tobacco mill to supplement his income. Paine settled comfortably in Lewes. His name appears alongside Ollive's in records of the town's governing body and he was a vocal member of the local debating club, known as the Headstrong Club, where he developed a reputation as an obstinate haranguer. He was also known as a player of bowls and as a skater, with his skills earning him the nickname the Commodore. His friend from this period, Thomas 'Clio' Rickman, described him as of about 5 feet 10 inches, rather athletic, and broad-shouldered. His eye 'was full, brilliant and singularly piercing', and had in it the 'muse of fire'. He was cleanly dressed, 'wore his hair cued with side curls and powdered and looked altogether like a gentleman of the old French school' (Rickman, xv). In manners he was easy and gracious, his knowledge was universal and boundless, and while in private company he was fascinating, in mixed company he was reticent and was no public speaker. Paine's political views were whig: he was 'tenacious of his opinions which were bold, acute, and independent, and which he maintained with ardour, elegance, and argument' (ibid., 38). Although he subsequently claimed that America had made him an author, biographers agree that he wrote several poems, a mock drama, 'The Trial of Farmer Carter's Dog Porter', and some prose pieces, several of which he published a few years later in America. In one of the most stable periods of his life he lived for 'several years in habits of intimacy with a very respectable, sensible, and convivial set of acquaintance, who were entertained with his witty sallies and informed by his more serious conversations' (ibid.). 
Samuel Ollive died in July 1769, leaving his widow, Esther, and daughter, Elizabeth, in poor circumstances. For propriety's sake, Paine took up lodgings elsewhere, but the following year he joined the Ollives in opening a shop, and on 26 March 1771 he married Elizabeth ('c'.1749-1808) who was at least ten years his junior. The following year he was nominated to press the excisemen's case for improved pay and conditions in London. He wrote his first political pamphlet, 'The Case of the Officers of Excise', and late in 1772 travelled to London. He corresponded with Oliver Goldsmith and developed (or expanded) his acquaintance with members of scientific circles, including John Bevis and George Lewis Scott. It is also possible that his acquaintance with Benjamin Franklin dates from this visit. In the cause of the excisemen he was unsuccessful. He failed to have the matter brought before parliament, and the petition he carried with the signatures of some 3000 excisemen was ignored. He returned to Lewes in mid-April 1773 to face the collapse of his business affairs. Little or nothing is known of Paine in the year subsequent to his return, but the following April he received a double blow, being dismissed from the excise on 8 April 1774 for 'having quitted his business, without obtaining the Board's Leave for so doing, and being gone off on account of the Debts which he hath contracted', and being forced to sell off by auction on 14 April 'all the household furniture, stock in trade and other effects... also a horse tobacco and snuff mill, with all the utensils for cutting tobacco and grinding off snuff' (Conway, 'Life', 1.29-30). Moreover, in May 1774 Paine and his wife separated, with a formal document being signed on 4 June 1774. Twenty years later the separation generated extensive prurient speculation, with reports that the marriage was not consummated, but Paine remained characteristically reticent: 'It is nobody's business but my own: I had cause for it, but I will name it to no one' (Rickman, 47). The settlement gave Elizabeth her full inheritance from her father and left her free to trade. The April sale must have left Paine with some money, since we have no record of him working between April and October, when, carrying a letter of introduction from Benjamin Franklin, he paid for a berth on a ship to America. Early biographies of Paine, especially the deeply hostile lives by Francis Oldys (George Chalmers) and James Cheetham, were often maliciously inventive in their reconstruction of Paine's first thirty-seven years, ascribing his first wife's death to his cruelty and accusing him of a variety of fraudulent practices. Despite his friendship with Paine, Rickman is no more informed about the early years. Subsequent biographers devoting space to this period of Paine's life have compensated for the paucity of evidence by literary licence and speculation. What is clear is that Paine's early life was not a success and that he was probably heartily glad to leave England behind him and to embark on a new set of challenges in the new world. 
When his ship docked in Philadelphia on 30 November 1774 Paine had to be carried off on a stretcher. He was so weakened by acute seasickness and putrid fever that it took him several weeks to recover. Franklin's letter introduced him to his son-in-law, Richard Bache, who sought pupils for him to teach, and he also became acquainted with Robert Aitkin, in whose Front Street bookshop he frequently browsed. Aitkin offered to employ him as the editor of a new journal he was planning, the 'Pennsylvania Magazine', for an annual salary of $50. Aitkin proposed to leave the detailed editorial work to Paine while retaining the right to control the policy and content of the magazine. Paine's contributions have been much disputed as none appears under his name and various pen names were used, but he wrote between seventeen and twenty-six pieces for it over the following eighteen months, including an essay against slavery which brought him an introduction to Benjamin Rush, and pieces on the deaths of Wolfe and Clive which raised issues of British colonial policy that were highly pertinent given the growing tensions between Britain and her American colonies. Paine's developing literary reputation introduced him into political circles in Philadelphia, through which he became acquainted with the issues of the day and many of the leading activists. As he later commented, he 'thought it very hard to have the country set on fire about my ears almost the moment I got into it' (Conway, 'Life', 1.55-6). After growing tension between Britain and the Americans, active conflict broke out in April 1775 with skirmishes between British troops and American militiamen at Lexington and Concord. A second continental congress was called in May, at which further moves towards reconciliation with Britain were made. However, these too failed, and by December the colonies were openly denying parliament's right to rule them directly, while continuing to look to George III as their protector and king. 
In the autumn of 1775, encouraged by Rush, Paine began work on a pamphlet putting the case for independence. Although he read aloud drafts to Rush and showed a completed draft to David Rittenhouse, Benjamin Franklin, and Samuel Adams, the work was wholly Paine's -- except for the title, for which Rush claimed credit. The result, 'Common Sense', 'written by an Englishman', was the most widely distributed pamphlet of the American War of Independence, and has the strongest claim to have made independence seem both desirable and attainable to the wavering colonists. Paine's ability to write in accessible prose, and to convey his beliefs as simply the promptings of common sense, was coupled with his insistence that the issues between Britain and America were of universal import. This was not a little local difficulty. Rather, 'the cause of America is in a great measure the cause of all mankind... 'Tis not the concern of a day, a year, or an age; posterity are virtually involved in the contest, and will be more or less affected, even to the end of time, by the proceedings now. ('Complete Writings', 1.3, 17)' It is a universal cause because America remains the providentially chosen asylum for liberty while Europe crumbles into despotism. Society, Paine announces in the opening paragraphs of the pamphlet, 'in every state is a blessing, but government even in its best state is but a necessary evil; in its worst state [it is] an intolerable one' (ibid., 1.4). People are driven into society by the multiple benefits it brings; government only becomes necessary as vice develops, and it best serves the end of protecting freedom and security by taking a representative and republican form. The much vaunted constitution of England is an amalgam of pure republican elements with the remains of monarchical and aristocratic tyrannies, which are wholly incompatible with the preservation of freedom. Government by kings runs contrary to the natural equality of man, ''Tis a form of government which the word of God bears testimony against, and blood will attend it' (ibid., 1.16). This is what has happened in America: following the commencement of hostilities in April, all plans for reconciliation must be jettisoned and Americans must recognize that they are dealing not with a 'mother country' but with a tyrannical oppressor. Moreover, America cannot reap a single advantage from reconciliation that could not be had from independence, while 'the injuries and disadvantages we sustain by that connection, are without number' (ibid., 1.20). 'Reconciliation is 'now' a fallacious dream', since, citing Milton: 'never can true reconcilement grow where wounds of deadly hate have pierced so deep' (ibid., 1.23). Having shown that the obvious and necessary step is independence, Paine sketches a plan of self-government for the country, which is to begin from a continental conference to frame a continental charter and a government 'securing freedom and property to all men, and above all the free exercise of religion'. In contrast to Europe, 'in America THE LAW IS KING' (ibid., 1.29). 
The pamphlet appeared on the same day as news of the king's intransigent response to the colonists' petitions arrived in Philadelphia and was able to turn widespread dismay at the king's failure into a recognition that monarchical government was simply not to be trusted. The success of the pamphlet was unparalleled. Rival second editions appeared within a matter of three weeks, and Paine turned against his publisher, Robert Bell, whom he accused of pirating a second edition. Seven editions appeared in Philadelphia alone, with other cities also producing editions from the beginning of February. Despite this, Paine made no money by the pamphlet, and probably financed an edition from his own resources to promote circulation. His objective was to ensure that the argument for independence should be spread throughout America. By April 1776 he was claiming that 120,000 copies had been sold, and he later gave a figure of 150,000 for America alone. It is unlikely that he greatly exaggerated: Rush, in July 1776, recalled:'Its effects were sudden and extensive upon the American mind. It was read by public men, repeated in clubs, spouted in Schools, and in one instance, delivered from the pulpit instead of a sermon by a clergyman in Connecticut' ('Autobiography of Benjamin Rush', 114-15). The pamphlet also produced a flood of criticism, beginning with James Chalmers's 'Plain Truth', some resisting independence while others, such as John Adams's highly influential 'Thoughts on Government', offered more nuanced and subtle criticism of his enthusiasm for simple, democratically elected and centralized government. Overnight Paine became a controversialist, embarking on a series of essays (signed The Forester), engaging with some of the criticisms raised against his arguments for independence, and becoming embroiled in both local Philadelphia politics and those around the continental congress based there. On 2 July congress declared independence, and on 4 July it approved Thomas Jefferson's declaration (in which some have thought Paine had a hand). 
A few days later Paine joined a body of Pennsylvania volunteers who marched towards New York. The anticipated British attack never materialized, and Paine spent the summer as secretary to Daniel Roberdeau, the commander of the flying camp. When it was disbanded he travelled to Fort Lee and served as aide-de-camp to General Nathanael Greene, who became a close friend. He also served as a field correspondent, puffing American successes in small skirmishes and supporting the decisions of Greene and Washington despite their frequent military blunders. The retreat of Washington's army towards Trenton and Philadelphia at the end of 1776 produced despondency in those who six months before had been enthusiastic for independence. When Paine visited Philadelphia he found the people in a 'deplorable and melancholy condition... afraid to speak and almost to think, the public presses stopped, and nothing in circulation but fears and falsehoods' ('Complete Writings', 2.1164). To rouse their spirits he produced 'The American Crisis', the first of thirteen letters designed to muster the American people to the cause and to set straight the record of military affairs. It is a resounding piece of political rhetoric, with as powerful an opening as any political pamphlet published: 'These are the times that try men's souls. The summer soldier and the sun-shine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of his country: but he that stands it 'now', deserves the thanks of man and woman. Tyranny, like hell, is not easily conquered: yet we have this consolation with us, that the harder the conflict, the more glorious the triumph. What we obtain too cheap, we esteem too lightly; it is dearness only that gives everything its value. (ibid., 1.50)' Tradition has it that Washington ordered the pamphlet to be read aloud to the troops on the evening of Christmas day before the battle of Trenton. 
With the American War of Independence Paine had found a cause and an apposite voice with which to advocate it. In reinventing himself as an American patriot, he discovered a gift for articulating the hopes and fears of ordinary men and women in ways which revealed to them their higher purpose as Americans. John Quincy Adams later described Paine as having 'no country, no affections that constitute the pillars of patriotism' (Hawke, 33). Some of Paine's comments encourage such a view -- in his 'Crisis No. 7' he insisted 'my principle is universal. My attachment is to all the world, and not to any particular part' ('Complete Writings', 2.146), and his concern for America was a concern for the principles it represented -- liberty, security, and republican government (which he understood as representative democracy and the sovereignty of the people). He never wavered in his commitment to these principles, but nor did he ever doubt that America offered the greatest hope for their realization. His writings during the War of Independence, including 'The American Crisis' and subsequent 'Crisis' essays, were often directed at particular events and matters of local importance, but he rarely failed to lift the issue onto the larger stage of the cause of freedom against the despotism of England and its corrupt monarchy. 
Paine also became still more practically involved in the struggle, coupling his need to make some money with his commitment to the cause by accepting a job as secretary to a congressional commission to treat with Native American peoples on the Susquhanna. In March 1777, when congress returned to Philadelphia, he was appointed secretary of a new committee for foreign affairs. This relatively undemanding post left him time to work on a projected history of the American War of Independence for which he was collecting materials. Late in the summer, when the British landed in Delaware Bay and marched towards Philadelphia, defeating the Americans at Brandywine Creek on 11 September, Paine was forced to pack his papers and quit the city. After a brief stay with his friend Colonel Joseph Kirkbride in Bordentown, New Jersey, he set off to find Washington's army, arriving during the battle of Germantown. He stayed only a few days, but returned in October after Timothy Matlack, secretary of Pennsylvania's executive council, suggested he act as an observer to ensure a more constant intelligence of Washington's army. Over the next six months Paine divided his time between visits to Valley Forge, where the army waited out the winter, the hospitality of Kirkbride's house, and, after January 1778, William Henry's home in Lancaster, where his reported indolence caused considerable resentment among those more active in the cause. 
In the spring of 1778, following British proposals for peace and the prospect of a political treaty with France, Paine's optimism grew. With French support, he believed, the Americans could bring the war to a close. Although the British proposals were rejected they vacated Philadelphia, and in June congress returned to take up its business there. Paine's energies also revived: 'The American Crisis', number 6, in October 1778, attacked the British peace proposals, and was followed in November by number 7, explaining why the British would never conquer the Americans and inciting the British people to overthrow their government. In December he also wrote a series of letters defending the unicameral form of the Pennsylvanian constitution, something which he had first commented on over a year previously in his 'Candid and Critical Remarks on a Letter signed Ludlow' (1777). 
Paine's responsibilities as secretary had not been onerous, and it may well have been intended as a sinecure, but he was encouraged by friends to see it in a larger light, leading his detractors to accuse him of styling himself 'secretary of foreign affairs'. His sense of the importance of his office led to the first major set-back in his American career. Silas Deane was one of three commissioners (with Franklin and Arthur Lee) with responsibility for securing financial support under cover of a commercial treaty with France. The covert nature of the gift of arms and supplies enabled Beaumarchais, who headed the company which acted as a front for the arrangement, to demand payment from congress. When Deane wrote from Paris supporting Beaumarchais's claim against congress for 4.5 million livres he was ordered home to report. On his arrival in Philadelphia in the summer of 1778 opinion rapidly polarized between those who accepted his claim to have been a loyal servant of American interests and those who saw him as profiteering. With his knowledge of the secret arrangements with France, Paine felt obliged to attack Deane, but his veiled accusations were perplexing for observers and infuriated Deane's supporters, who physically attacked Paine on the street on two occasions. None the less, he maintained a stream of letters attacking both Deane and mercantile interests in congress for profiteering. Broadening his attack increased his enemies and blunted the force of his main claim. Moreover, in claiming that the supplies from France were a gift, Paine betrayed a secret which was extremely embarrassing to France. The French minister, Conrad Gerard, flatly denied the gift and demanded that congress repudiate Paine's allegations. When congress complied Paine offered his resignation, but refused to apologize. After several days of intense debate congress, by the narrowest margin, accepted his resignation, sparing him the indignity of dismissal. Gerard, rather surprisingly, then offered Paine a large sum (Paine claimed it was in excess of $700) to write supporting French interests and the alliance with America. Paine refused, but seemed mollified until he discovered that Gerard had thanked congress for their repudiation of Paine's 'false and dangerous insinuations' (Hawke, 92). He sought a retraction from Gerard and, on failing, secluded himself in his rooms, shunning all company and writing eight further pieces to vindicate his conduct in the affair and establish Deane's culpability. The affair gradually subsided, but it was not until two years later, when Deane wrote a series of letters encouraging American union with Britain, that his supporters finally questioned Deane's integrity. 
Paine's seclusion ended when financial difficulties led him to accept a job as clerk in Owen Brindle's merchant office. He also accepted appointment to two committees to scrutinize Robert Morris's business affairs. He returned to print in the summer of 1779 with a series of letters defending America's Newfoundland fishing rights. The rights were a source of contention in negotiations with Britain, and Gerard and others believed that insisting on them would only prolong the war. During the controversy Whitehead Humphreys, a local merchant, penned a series of vicious attacks on Paine until he was lectured firmly on the freedoms and duties of the press by Paine's supporters. In November he was fully rehabilitated when he was appointed as clerk to the Pennsylvania assembly, and in the following year he was awarded an honorary MA from the University of Pennsylvania. 
Paine was convinced that a principal obstacle to American success was inadequate federal finance. A few days before the dramatic surrender of General Lincoln and some 5000 American troops at Charleston in May 1780, he drew out the salary he was owed as clerk and sent half of the sum, $500, to Blair M'Clenaghan as a priming contribution for a voluntary subscription fund to support the recruiting system. As a result a permanent securities subscription was established, which developed into the Bank of North America and supplied the army throughout the rest of the war. The bank, and the subscription initiative, exemplify Paine's conviction that the interests of the poorer and wealthier classes were essentially identical and that each could be prevailed upon to contribute their due to the war effort. The same conviction informed his 'Crisis Extraordinary' in October 1780, in which he argued for the acceptance of higher rates of taxation to support the war. The land claims of Virginia to the western territories also drew him into controversy, partly because Maryland (a small state with no adjacent territories) refused to ratify the articles of confederation without limitations being placed on territorial claims, thereby leaving America without a constitution, and partly because it opened the possibility of raising federal income. Drawing heavily on information supplied by the Indiana Company, Paine's 'Public Good' (1780) argued that the western territories should be recognized as the property of the federal government, and might accordingly be sold to support the war effort. The pamphlet turned many Virginians against Paine, and his acceptance of shares and cash from the Indiana Company led to allegations of his being a company hireling. 
Paine also sought more practical involvement in the conflict. He asked congress to support him on a secret mission to England to write encouraging efforts for peace and recognition of American independence, thereby following up suggestions in 'Crisis No. 8' that the conflict be somehow brought onto British soil. Late in the day he was dissuaded by friends who feared that, if caught, the British would use him as a reprisal for the American execution of the spy Major Andre. However, he welcomed the suggestion of Colonel John Laurens, the son of Paine's friend Henry Laurens, the former president of congress, that he act as his secretary while special envoy to France. When objections were raised in congress to Paine acting in an official capacity, he agreed to go as Laurens's companion, paying his own expenses. They sailed in February 1781, with an eventful voyage encompassing icebergs and the liberation of a Venetian merchantman from a Scottish cutter. In France Paine made a number of new acquaintances. Franklin's grandnephew, Jonathan Williams, found him 'a pleasant as well as sensible man' (Aldridge, 'Man of Reason', 87). Elkanah Wilson, on the other hand, described him as 'coarse and uncouth in his manners, loathsome in his appearance, and a disgusting egoist, rejoicing most in talking of himself and reading the effusions of his mind' (Hawke, 116). Moreover, Wilson claimed he was filthy of appearance, awkward and unseemly in address, and that he stank from being treated for scabies -- a fault Wilson cured by insisting Paine took a bath. In Paris, Paine had little social life, being received only at Franklin's (then American ambassador) and at Laurens's hotel. Laurens's trip was successful (although credit for this seems best placed with Franklin) and they returned to America in August with substantial funding. 
Paine returned penniless: he had no income and claimed to have spent all his savings. Because of his financial plight and his sense that he was unappreciated, he talked of quitting America for Europe, where he hoped to live by his pen. However, Robert Morris wrote to him in September 1781 encouraging him to write in support of taxation for funding the war, and over the next six months Paine and Morris reached an agreement whereby congress paid him $800 per annum to urge state legislatures to allow the federal government sufficient tax income and to press for the extension of federal powers (the first fruits of which were his 'Six Letters to Rhode Island', 1782-3). Paine needed the money, but he was advocating a cause to which he was already publicly committed. He also regarded the payment as part compensation from congress for the fact that he had neglected his own interests by publishing without thought of personal profit. On several occasions he pressed both Morris and Washington for official financial recognition of his services to the revolution. It also seems likely that he received some payment from the French ministry. Barbe de Marbois, the French charge d'affaires, reported in April 1782 that Paine had published nothing since his return from France without previously consulting La Luzerne (Gerard's successor as French minister to America), and it is likely that 'Crisis No. 11' was a result of French encouragement, repudiating as it did the possibility of America making a peace with Britain independently of her allies France and Spain. 
Paine's projected history of the American War of Independence never materialized. La Luzerne claimed he was too indolent for such a task and it is true that his forte lay elsewhere. However, the work he had done doubtless contributed to his decision to write a refutation of the Abbe Raynal's 'A Philosophical... History of the... Indies', the last volume of which was published in translation in 1781 and dealt with the American War of Independence. Paine objected to Raynal's claims that the war arose entirely from a dispute over taxation and that peace efforts had been hampered by the Americans' alliance with France. His 'Letter to the Abbe Raynal, on the Affairs of North America' (1782) is an exemplary piece of diplomacy, carefully establishing the self-driven character of the American War of Independence and implicitly denying a special significance to France's involvement. It is also an immensely optimistic work, which insists that the American cause cannot be understood wholly in pragmatic terms, but is evidence of a progressive enlightenment which is bringing man from barbarism to civilization. Commerce is central to this process: just as it once formed men into societies to furnish their wants and harmonize their interests, so too will it operate between nations, when guided by reason rather than the interests of despotic regimes, to end war through the emergence of universal society of mutual benefit. The 'Letter' did much to secure Paine's European reputation; it also earned him both gratitude and financial reward from the French minister. 
When the war finally ended Paine required a means of subsistence. On Robert Morris's advice, he drew up a letter to congress outlining his services and suggesting that if congress were to make him financially independent he could undertake a history of the war. A committee was appointed to consider his suggestion and recommended he be appointed official historian, but congress took no action. In June 1784 the New York assembly presented him with a farm in New Rochelle confiscated from a tory, but similar initiatives in the Virginia assembly failed because of local opposition. Following further letters from Paine, congress agreed in October to pay him $3000 for his services, and the following March Pennsylvania set aside $500 as a temporary recompense for Paine, while referring to congress the matter of any further grant. Paine bought a farm in Bordentown, near his friend Colonel Kirkbride, having decided to rent out the New Rochelle property. Hope of further support from Pennsylvania was ended by conflicts over the Bank of North America and the issue of paper currency in the aftermath of the war. The assembly sought to repeal the bank's charter following its opposition to issuing paper currency. Paine remained a staunch defender of the bank and its charter, and in February 1786 published 'Dissertation on Government; the Affairs of the Bank; and Paper Money', followed by a number of letters amplifying his position. Many of his contemporaries saw Paine's defence of the bank as a reactionary and elitist move, and assumed he had been paid to champion the interests of property against those of the people, but his position is consistent with his belief in the independence of financial institutions and the dangers of paper currency. In the course of his defence Paine insisted both that sovereignty could not bind successive generations (a key principle in his 'Rights of Man') and that contracts between the state and particular individuals (such as charters) could not subsequently be revised without the consent of both parties. On Paine's account the assembly was acting unconstitutionally in attempting to repeal the charter. 
Once established at Bordentown, Paine's interests turned towards scientific experiments. He was invited by Washington to stay near Princeton, where they spent a day investigating marsh gas in a local creek, and he experimented on a smokeless candle with Franklin. His energies were increasingly absorbed, however, on his plans for a single-span bridge, constructed in sections from iron and designed to span large distances without the use of piers. Late in 1785 he hired John Hall, a carpenter and mechanic recently emigrated from England, to work with him on a model of the bridge which he hoped to persuade the Pennsylvania assembly to build across the Schuylkill river. He may well have drawn his ideas from models he had seen on his trip to France, where proposals for single-arched iron bridges had recently been discussed at the Royal Academy of Sciences. Paine's design was distinctive in constructing the arch on the model of a spider's web, on the grounds that 'when Nature enabled this insect to make a web, she taught it the best means of putting it together' (Aldridge, 'Man of Reason', 109). Hall and Paine began with models made from wood, and in May 1786 set to work on a model in iron. In December he took a single-arched model of wrought iron to Franklin's house and demonstrated it first to Franklin and subsequently to the Pennsylvania assembly. The cost of building a bridge of iron was high, American foundries being small, and although the assembly discussed the project no action was taken. This discouraging response, combined with a long-standing sense on Paine's part that he was inadequately appreciated in his adopted land and had little role to play in the newly constituted republic, determined him to take his model to France to solicit expert opinion and find financial backing to build the bridge. He sought letters of introduction to members of the French court from Franklin and embarked for France in April 1787. 
Paine landed in Le Havre in May 1787 and set off for Paris. His letters of introduction brought him into contact with French scientific circles, and he renewed his acquaintance with Thomas Jefferson (now American minister in Paris). He presented his model to the Academy of Sciences in July, which reported favourably at the end of August. Paine then left France to visit his parents, while Jefferson and Lafayette continued to encourage the government to use his design for a bridge across the Seine. He returned to Paris briefly in December and, once back in England, sent Jefferson a proposal for financing the bridge in France, asking him to read it and, if appropriate, have it translated and communicated to the ministry. The search for finance for the bridge continued until the summer of 1788, when Paine decided to concentrate on securing support in Britain. He applied for and received letters patent and engaged the Walker brothers' ironworks in Rotherham to construct an arch of 90 feet, this being a more practical proposition than his original aspiration for a 250 foot span (and one which could be accomplished indoors). He remained in Rotherham until November 1788, when the first half was completed, and then returned to London. In April 1789 the arch was assembled, to his great satisfaction. He entered an agreement with the Walkers that they should manufacture a complete bridge of 110 feet, to be erected over the Thames and then put up for sale, with proceeds being divided equally. The bridge was cast in Rotherham and shipped down to London, arriving in May 1790. It was assembled on a field halfway between Paddington and Marylebone near a public house, the Yorkshire Stingo, where Paine and his mechanic, a Mr Buel, took up residence. The bridge was completed in September 1790 and attracted public interest, along with a fair amount of criticism -- not least from Gouverneur Morris, who found himself living uncomfortably close to Paine and noted that 'it is not so handsome as he [Paine] thinks it is. Qu. also whether it be as strong. It has a very light appearance however' ('Diary of the French Revolution', 1.589). By October the wood abutments on which the bridge rested began to yield beneath the load and the metal began to rust in the poorer weather. The Walkers repossessed the ironwork and transported it back to Rotherham, and by the end of November Paine had become wholly engaged in political affairs. 
When he had arrived in France in 1787, Paine had formed a friendship with the secretary of the archbishop of Toulouse, the Abbe Andre Morellet, to whom he had written at length on the prospects for peaceable relations between France and Britain, suggesting that there was no interest in war in either court, but that France had an enemy in the vulgar prejudices of the British. He accordingly planned a pamphlet to rectify the misunderstanding between the two peoples. Assured by Morellet of French support, Paine brought out his 'Prospects on the Rubicon', in which the British are offered a stark sense of their choice between war and its many costs, and peace and its benefits. The pamphlet is striking for its support of the French monarchy and its assertion of the common interest between the king and the people. Paine also canvassed his view that France was committed to peace with leading members of the whig opposition, including Edmund Burke, the marquess of Lansdowne, Charles James Fox, and the duke of Portland, claiming that he was 'in pretty close intimacy with the heads of the opposition' ('Complete Writings', 2.1276). He hoped for the fall of the Pitt government, believing he would be well placed to act in the capacity of American ambassador to England should the opposition attain power, and he watched closely the unfolding of the regency crisis during the illness of George III in early 1789. Through visits and correspondence he remained well informed about developments in France, and his membership of Lafayette's circle led to him being entrusted with conveying the key of the Bastille to President Washington -- a symbol of the common view that America's revolution had provided the spark for change in Europe. 
In January 1790 (before Burke's February speech on the army estimates which publicly signalled his abhorrence of the revolution) Paine was engaged in writing an account of the French Revolution. He also corresponded extensively with his English contacts (including Burke), informing them of French affairs. On both counts he drew heavily on letters from Jefferson. When Burke declared his intention of publishing an attack on the French Revolution Paine committed himself to answering it, and the material he had been preparing was put to this purpose (although there is some indication that he also tried to publish something in French to influence events through Lafayette in the summer of 1790). Burke's 'Reflections on the Revolution in France' appeared in November 1790; Paine's response, 'Rights of Man', was printed by Joseph Johnson for publication on 21 February 1791, then withdrawn for fear of prosecution. J. S. Jordan stepped in and published it on 16 March. 

'Rights of Man' opens by taking issue with Burke's understanding of the settlement following the revolution of 1688. Paine counters Burke's insistence that the British people had submitted themselves and their posterity forever to the crown with the claim (broached in his 'Dissertations on Government' of 1786) that 'There never did, there never will, and there never can exist a parliament, or any description of men, or any generation of men, in any country, possessed of the right or the power of binding and controuling posterity to the 'end of time', or of commanding for ever how the world shall be governed, or who shall govern it.... Every age and generation must be as free to act for itself, 'in all' cases, as the ages and generations which preceded it. ('Complete Writings', 1.251)' Government is by the living for the living, and each age must be sovereign over its own concerns. Paine then turns to the details of the French case. Continuing to canvass his views from 'Prospects', that the interests of the monarch and his people are united, he insists that the revolution should be understood as one which attacks the despotic principles of the French monarchy, not the king himself, and he takes the Bastille to symbolize the despotism that had been overthrown, giving a detailed account of destruction of the prison and countering Burke's account of the march on Versailles by the Parisian mob. Returning to his claims about the sufficiency of the rights of each generation, he distinguishes between the natural rights man has by virtue of his existence and his equality before his creator, and the civil rights we create by which we attempt to secure those natural rights which we lack the power perfectly to enjoy. Some natural rights, such as intellectual rights, or rights of the mind, or of religious belief, are rights we have the power to enjoy without needing society's support, but where our power is defective, as in the right to redress, we deposit the natural right in the common stock of society and use society as the means to enforce the right. 
Although there are intimations of this view as early as Paine's 'Candid and Critical Remarks... Ludlow', the fuller development of this position seems to have been worked out one night in France after an evening spent with Jefferson, and possibly Lafayette, discussing a pamphlet by the Philadelphia conservative James Wilson on the proposed federal constitution. On this view, and against Burke, natural rights are the ground and justification for civil rights, they are not simply given up on entering society. Moreover, against Burke's veneration of the English constitution, Paine insists that Britain has no constitution: that its government has arisen out of conquest and has never been generated by a sovereign act of the people. In contrast, the meeting of the estates general provided a convention of the people to form a constitution -- which can be compared item by item with its pretended British alternative, as he does. Turning subsequently to give an account of the development of pressure for reform in France leading to the declaration of the rights of man, he suggests that a major role was played by France's involvement in the American War of Independence, through the promulgation of its principles and from the return of those Frenchmen, like Lafayette, who had fought for the Americans. In his final miscellaneous comments he develops an attack on monarchy which reiterates the critique advanced in 'Common Sense', but now emphasizes its significance for the European states of which he had earlier despaired. Quoting Lafayette, he insists that 'For a Nation to be free, it is sufficient that she wills it' ('Complete Writings', 2.322): 'hereditary governments are verging to their decline, and... Revolutions on the broad basis of national sovereignty, and government by representation are making their way in Europe' (ibid., 1.344). 
In many respects 'Rights of Man' is a disordered mix of narrative, principled argument, and rhetorical appeal -- betraying the composite materials Paine used and the speed with which it was composed. But the vigorous and trenchant style in which it was written accounts for its huge success. It was quickly reprinted and widely circulated, with copies being read aloud in inns and coffee houses, so that by May some 50,000 copies were said to be in circulation. Of the 300 or more pamphlets which the revolution controversy spawned, 'Rights of Man' was the first seriously to damage Burke's case and to restore credit to the French both in Britain and America. 
When Paine returned to France in April 1791, those who encountered him found him intoxicated by his success. Etienne Dumont recorded that: 'his egregious conceit and presumptuous self-sufficiency quite disgusted me. He was drunk with vanity. If you believed him, it was he who had done everything in America. He was an absolute caricature of the vainest of Frenchmen' (Keane, 311). Nor was his conviction in the pace of progress dimmed when he was nearly lynched by a Parisian mob for failing to wear a cockade. Indeed, recognizing the increasingly republican spirit animating the French and parting company with Lafayette's circle, especially after the royal family's flight to Varennes, he joined Brissot, Etienne Chauviere, Francois du Chatelet, and Condorcet, and, with the help of Nicholas de Bonneville and Francois Lathenas, established a newspaper, 'Le Republicain, ou Le Defenseur du Gouvernement Representatif'. Paine produced a republican manifesto which was translated by Chatelet printed by Bonneville, and stuck up in the streets of Paris on 1 July. Paine's sense of the common interest between the king and the people had vanished; instead, the flight to Varennes was seen as tantamount to abdication, and he insisted throughout on referring to the king as Louis Capet. Although few supported the declaration, and the Abbe Sieyes engaged Paine in debate in the 'Gazette Nationale' on the virtues of elective monarchies, Paine rightly sensed that the tide was turning fast in a republican direction. Following a 4 July dinner in Paris, where Morris thought Paine 'inflated to the Eyes and big with a Litter of revolutions' ('Diary of the French Revolution', 2.212-13), he returned to England to follow events there and in Ireland more closely, and to work on a book, 'Kingship', which he later changed to a second part of 'Rights of Man'. 
In England, Paine lived a relatively retired life. He stayed with Thomas 'Clio' Rickman, an old acquaintance from Lewes, and now a London bookseller, visited John Horne Tooke, who held open house for radicals at his Wimbledon home, and in August attended a meeting chaired by Tooke at the Thatched House tavern, where a manifesto written by him for Tooke, celebrating events in France and calling for reforms in England, was read and warmly received. His circles of acquaintance also spread to literary radicals such as Mary Wollstonecraft, William Godwin, John 'Walking' Stewart, and William Blake. He also searched for a publisher, since neither Jordan nor Johnson was prepared to accept the risk. Through Thomas Christie he found a Thomas Chapman who was willing to proceed but who, late in the day, sought to persuade Paine to sell him the copyright, and when he was unsuccessful claimed to have had cold feet over the content of the work and refused to proceed. Paine inferred government intervention. He was able to persuade Jordan to take up the printing, indemnifying him by writing a disclaimer in which he claimed to be the sole author and publisher of the work. With a minimum of delay, 'Rights of Man: Part the Second, Combining Principle and Practice' was published on 16 February 1792. 
The controversy over the French Revolution is still signalled in Paine's dedication to Lafayette and in some perfunctory comments on Burke and his 'Appeal from the New to the Old Whigs' (1791) in the preface. But the introduction changes the focus dramatically by arguing that it is the American War of Independence that has inaugurated the changes that are bringing down the whole order of European despotism. In the first four chapters of the pamphlet it is America, rather than France, which is offered as exemplifying a society united by interest and ruled by a properly constituted representative government. Where in 'Common Sense' government was the badge of lost innocence, Paine now treats society as so united by instinct and reciprocal benefits that it needs very little from government. 'The more perfect civilisation is, the less occasion has it for government, because the more does it regulate its own affairs, and govern itself' ('Complete Writings', 1.358-9). Paine's attack on monarchy and aristocracy, his insistence that constitutions must arise from conventions of the people and cannot be amended by the governments which they order, and his defence of representative government as taking 'society and civilisation for its basis; nature, reason and experience, for its guide' (ibid., 1.367) are all familiar themes from his earlier writings, but they are brought together with an unequalled consistency of argument and clarity of presentation and are couched in a thoroughly trenchant, almost insouciant, language. Throughout, the American experience provides a touchstone for the practicality of republican government and the ease with which it can be established. The most innovatory arguments appear in the final chapter (which betray the influence of Paine's contacts with members of the Comite de Medicite de la Constituante, notably Condorcet), when he turns to a detailed examination of the obstacles to commerce and progress in Britain, and in particular to the amount of taxation being raised. Assuming the abolition of the court and its extravagances and the pooling of military expenditure with France and America, Paine argues that government spending could be reduced from $7.5 million to $1.5 million. Rather than cutting tax rates, he proposes a reform of the taxation system together with a whole range of welfare measures. A national system of poor relief financed by taxation would replace local poor rates. Benefits would include child benefit, conditional on attendance at school; supplementary benefits for those over fifty, with a full pension at sixty; a system of maternity and death grants; education for all those in need; a fund for the accommodation and employment of the casual poor of London; and compensation for disbanded soldiers and sailors and their families. Moreover, direct taxation would be replaced by progressive taxation, to be directed against inherited wealth rather than wealth from labour. 
Writing to John Hall in November 1791 Paine indicated that he was to bring out a new work which he hoped would 'produce something one way or another. I see the tide is yet the wrong way, but there is a change of sentiment beginning. I have so far got the ear of John Bull that he will read what I write -- which is more than ever was done before to the same extent. ('Complete Writings', 2.1321-2)' Paine's confidence was undiminished when he met Gouverneur Morris shortly after publication of part two of 'Rights of Man', when Morris was on his way to Paris to take up his new post as American ambassador -- an appointment Paine regarded as ''a most unfortunate one'' (ibid., 2.1323). Morris recorded: 'He seems Cock Sure of bringing about a Revolution in Great Britain, and I think it quite as likely that he will be promoted to the Pilory' ('Diary of the French Revolution', 2.368). Over the next six months, while parliamentary whigs sought to distance themselves from Paine's radicalism, the extra-parliamentary movement seized on the pamphlet as a means for mobilizing popular feeling for reform. Cheap editions combining the two parts of 'Rights of Man' were published throughout the country, and societies established among members of the artisan classes, such as Thomas Hardy's London Corresponding Society, provided new means for circulating and discussing Paine's work. At the same time, government newspapers attempted to stir up feeling against Paine, and friends persuaded him to decamp to Bromley, where he stayed incognito with William Sharp, the engraver. A visit to London to attend a meeting of the Society for Constitutional Information resulted in his being arrested for a debt of Peter Whiteside an associate in his bridge scheme. He was rescued by Johnson, but the rapid appearance of the story in the press was taken by all as indicating government plotting in the episode. At the end of May, Jordan was indicted for sedition as the publisher of 'Rights of Man'. Paine tried to persuade him to fight the case but Jordan chose to plead guilty and pay the fine. Two weeks later Paine was summoned to answer a charge of seditious libel, and a royal proclamation was issued ordering magistrates to seek out and prosecute those involved in writing or printing wicked and seditious writings. When asked in parliament why the government had delayed so long a prosecution against Paine, Henry Dundas (Tooke's next door neighbour) stressed the subversive character of the second part of 'Rights of Man' and the determination with which it was being disseminated throughout the kingdom. However Paine refused to be cowed. He wrote an address to the Jacobin Society in Paris claiming that reform societies dedicated to freedom, peace, and the rights of man were springing up throughout the country. In June he published a series of letters, to Dundas and Onslow Cranley, reiterating his scorn for hereditary government and the need for reform, and taunting the government on its decision to postpone his trial until December. He also produced his 'Letter Addressed to the Addressers of the Late Proclamation' (1792), effectively a third part to 'Rights of Man', in which he insisted that representative government relies upon a prior right of manhood suffrage -- a principle he had not previously clarified (partly, it seems, to avoid drawing attention to the limits on the franchise within the French constitution). The 'Letter' also set out a plan for a British convention to provide for a reform of parliament, a proposal which issued the following year in reform societies taking an increasingly confrontational attitude to the government, and subsequently in draconian sentences being handed down to delegates of the British Convention held in Scotland at the end of 1793 by Lord Justice Clerk and Judge Braxfield and in the arrest and indictment for treason of leading English radicals in the summer of 1794. Paine's only concession was to remove the paragraphs upon which his indictment for sedition was based from the six-penny edition published at the beginning of August 1792. Finally, on 13 September, only days after the September massacres, Paine left London with Achille Audibert and John Frost, took a circuitous route to Dover, where he was detained by a customs officer and searched before eventually being allowed to leave, and, seen off by a hostile crowd, caught the boat for a dramatically changed revolutionary France. He was accorded a contrastingly warm welcome when he landed in Calais. 
Paine had been one of seventeen foreigners accorded honorary French citizenship in August 1792, and four of the departmental electoral assemblies which met at the beginning of September had elected him as deputy to the new National Convention. Audibert had been in London to urge Paine to accept the seat for Calais and play a part in the new order, and he now conducted Paine through the obligatory ceremonies in Calais before seeing him off to attend the opening session of the convention on 21 September. It must quickly have been clear to Paine that he was out of his depth. He spoke little or no French and had to rely on a fellow deputy translating for him, and he had not grasped how dramatically the course of the revolution had changed with the elimination of the monarchy, the eruption of the sans-culottes onto the political scene, and the growing prominence of the Jacobin Club. Only days after the convention opened he sought to challenge Danton's proposal for a purge of the judiciary, only to be swept aside by the convention. Moreover, while he tried his hand at stirring addresses to the French people, it cannot be said that he showed the political nous which he had demonstrated in America or England. Above all he failed to see that the orderly constitutional process which he had believed to be central to revolution was being swept aside by forces that could no longer be controlled. Some of the forms of order remained: the convention elected him to sit on one of these, a committee of nine (including Sieyes, Condorcet, Brissot, Petion, Barere, and Danton) to design a republican constitution. But, although Paine did not recognize it, it was mainly a form. The committee was dominated by the Brissotins, and its recommendations would stand or fall according to their ability to dominate the Mountain: they failed, and of the nine members of the committee, only three survived the subsequent eighteen months. However, French success against the Prussians augured well, and the victory at Jemappes led the Brissotins to internationalize the revolution and offer aid to all oppressed people in November, and gave some grounds for Paine's continuing optimism. Sharing the Brissotin mood, Paine now saw no alternative to a revolution in England, and he said as much in an open letter to Archibald MacDonald, the prosecutor in his trial 'in absentia' in December 1792, at which he was outlawed. 
The Brissotins had resisted bringing the king to trial, but the discovery of incriminating documents in his former apartments in the Tuileries made this position untenable. Paine acknowledged this in his moderate discussion of the issues in 'On the Propriety of Bringing Louis XVI to Trial', but he also sought to save the king's life. After a bare majority had voted for death, Paine sought a reprieve by pressing for detention, and subsequent banishment to America, rather than execution (with Bancal reading a translation of his speech). Marat shouted him down on the grounds that he was a Quaker, and further interruptions by Marat and Thuriot challenged the accuracy of the translation being read and wrecked any chance of his plea finding support. 
The king's execution opened the French Revolutionary War, and the Brissotins' power began to crumble. The draft constitution, whose 368 articles and 85 pages ran against Paine's preference for simple structures, was shelved, and Paine's increasing distance from affairs was physically signalled by his move to a house in St Denis, a remote and quiet section of Paris, from which he watched the revolution begin to consume its own leadership. He sought to help the Brissotins when Marat was impeached by reporting a comment Marat made to him when they had first met belittling Paine's belief in republican government, but the initiative failed, and then became dangerously compromising when a fellow boarder, William Johnson, attempted suicide, leaving a note accusing Marat of seeking to extinguish the very liberty he had come to France to enjoy. Although Brissot reported Johnson's dying words, Johnson erred by surviving, and Marat turned the trial into a powerful endorsement. Paine was also involved in the trial of General Miranda, whom he had known in America and who was charged with failing to rally troops at the battle of Neerwinden -- on this occasion the charge was being prosecuted by the Jacobins in the hope of discrediting the Brissotins who championed Miranda. Paine was involved solely as a character witness, Miranda was acquitted, but Paine had again come to the attention of the increasingly powerful Jacobins. 
On approaching the National Convention on 31 May 1793 Paine was advised by Hanriott, the captain of the guard, to use his deputy's card for hair curlers, and Danton warned him not to go in. Three days later the convention voted to suspend and imprison twenty-two Brissotin members, but these did not include Paine. A few days later a deputation from Arras congratulated the convention on its decision, denounced Paine for his association with the Brissotins, and announced that he no longer represented the interests of the department of Calais. Although he seldom attended the convention, he remained willing to try to use his influence where he could, supporting on one occasion a number of American seamen detained in Bordeaux. Indeed, in the summer of 1793 Barere consulted him on the advisability of sending commissioners to America to seek an alliance in the war with Britain. Paine supported the proposal, warning Barere against trusting Gouverneur Morris, who was neither favourable to the French nor well liked in America. A memorandum from Barere's office proposed Paine as one of the commissioners to be sent to America, and Paine worked hard to bring the two nations closer, with Barere crediting him with responsibility for shipments of rice and grain which came from America in 1794. But the proposal came to nothing, and much as Paine wished to return to America (despite news in April that his New Rochelle house had burnt down) he took no active steps to do so. Within three months Barere had denounced Paine in the National Convention. On 27 December the committee of public safety ordered Paine's arrest; a memorandum among Robespierre's papers noted that it was 'for the interests of America as well as of France' (Aldridge, 'Man of Reason', 205), which has encouraged some commentators to think that both Morris and Robespierre wanted Paine out of the way. He was arrested at the Hotel Philadelphia and was required to deliver up his papers. This took all day, and involved Audibert as translator and Joel Barlow as an independent witness, but the soldiers found nothing suspicious. Indeed, they allowed him to hand over to Barlow the manuscript in English of 'The Age of Reason' before escorting him to the Luxembourg prison. Three weeks later a group of American citizens led by Barlow petitioned the convention for Paine's release, but found no support. The issue of Paine's citizenship seemed to become pivotal. As a French or British citizen he would be wholly at the mercy of the convention; if American, his government would have a legitimate interest in his case and would have some weight with the French. After representation from Paine, Gouverneur Morris wrote to Defourges, the minister for foreign affairs, stating that Paine had taken American citizenship during the American War of Independence, although admitting that he had subsequently been accorded French citizenship and had been elected as a member of the National Convention. Deforges treated Paine's election as overriding any claims he might have had as an American. Conway's biography of Paine was deeply critical of Morris for his inactivity, but without real cause. Morris's conduct, which Conway attributes to his deep dislike of Paine, derived from his view that if Paine kept his head down while in prison, he might contrive to keep it on. 
In prison Paine managed to produce (and to convey to Daniel Isaac Eaton, the radical London publisher) a dedication for 'The Age of Reason' and a new edition of the 'Rights of Man' with a new preface. Other essays written in prison, including one on Robespierre, did not survive, but he successfully maintained a poetic correspondence with an anonymous lady (whom he subsequently learned was the wife of his friend the banker Sir Robert Smyth), who signed herself 'a little corner of the world' to complement his 'the castle in the air'. Conditions in the prison deteriorated during the terror, and after six months Paine contracted a severe fever which rendered him semi-conscious for several weeks. He was cared for by the prison doctor, Markoshi, and two British inmates, Dr Graham, a physician, and Mr Bond, a surgeon, who successfully brought him through to give him the news of Robespierre's overthrow and execution. Within two weeks Paine was writing to the convention and to the committee of public safety, as were his friends, and when he learned that Morris had been replaced by James Monroe he immediately urged him to take up his case, producing a forty-three page memorial to Monroe insisting on his citizenship. Monroe reassured Paine that he was regarded as an American and entitled to his services, and after he wrote to the convention asking them either to bring Paine to trial or release him the papers were signed for his release. He was delivered from custody on 4 November 1794 and brought to Monroe's house to stay as long as he wished. A month later Antoine-Claire Thibaudeau rose in the convention and successfully proposed that Paine be restored to his seat. 
Although Paine played little role in the remaining days of the convention he did adapt a pamphlet written two years earlier in support of his case for eliminating the property qualification for voting from the new constitution. He attended the convention for the first time since his imprisonment in June to have his speech read to his fellow deputies. 'Dissertation on the First Principles of Government' (1795) is essentially an epitome of his case in 'Rights of Man' and provides an extremely clear and uncluttered statement of his mature views on government. The case for universal manhood suffrage was not, however, obvious to a convention which had been driven by the fury of the Parisian mob over much of the preceding two years, and the new constitution survived Paine's prose to be inaugurated in October 1795. Paine was not elected to it and his official role in France now ended. 
It is unclear exactly when Paine wrote 'The Age of Reason' (Conway, 'Life', 2.100; Hawke, 293, 446). Paine made conflicting statements, but it seems likely that he began early in 1793 and in March was able to turn over a number of completed chapters to Lanthenas for translation and setting. Events in the summer then caused a break in activity, but he returned to the work in the autumn, with Lanthenas translating as he wrote, ensuring that the first edition was published in French, possibly within days of his arrest. In his introduction to part 2 he claimed that he had written the book without either a 'New' or 'Old Testament' to hand, and that he had seen the likelihood of his arrest and had hurriedly drawn the work to a close. Neither circumstance harmed the text. 'The Age of Reason' is a trenchant and uncompromising attack on Christianity and all formal religions together with a brief statement of Paine's religious beliefs. More than anything else he wrote it was responsible for the hostility with which he was subsequently treated. Although denounced as epitomizing atheism and infidelity, the work was written with the express design of combating atheism, and it begins with a frank statement of Paine's faith: 'I believe in one God, and no more; and I hope for happiness beyond this life' ('Complete Writings', 1.464). He disavows both religious institutions, 'All national institutions of churches, whether Jewish, Christian or Turkish, appear to me no other than human inventions, set up to terrify and enslave mankind, and monopolize power and profit' (ibid.), and all revelation, 'A thing which everyone is required to believe requires that the proof and evidence of it should be equal to all, and universal' (ibid., 1.468). The only text which can claim this status is the text of nature: 'THE WORD OF GOD IS THE CREATION WE BEHOLD and it is in 'this word', which no human invention can counterfeit or alter, that God speaketh universally to man' (ibid., 1.482). Appealing again to the touchstone of common sense, Paine can find nothing to warrant belief in Christianity, and a great many grounds for suspecting imposture. His arguments follow the pattern of criticism developed in the deist controversy in England in the first quarter of the eighteenth century, but he makes his points in inimitably earthy fashion: 'Whenever we read the obscene stories, the voluptuous debaucheries, the cruel and torturous executions, the unrelenting vindictiveness, with which more than half the 'bible' is filled, it would be more consistent that we called it the word of a demon than the Word of God. (ibid., 1.474)' His deism and the associated account of the order of nature draws heavily on his understanding of celestial mechanics which he learned at the lectures of Benjamin Martin and James Ferguson and provides an alternative vision of the true religion. Soon after his release from prison he began working on part 2 of 'The Age of Reason'. With 'Old' and 'New Testament' now to hand he develops a line of biblical exegesis which shows the conflicting evidence and claims which the 'Bible' contains. Part 2 lacks the power and vision of the first part, but it offers instead a careful, often pedantic, critique, book by book, of the 'Bible's' claim to authority -- although some books are given lighter treatment, such as 'Ruth': 'an idle, bungling story, foolishly told, nobody knows by whom, about a strolling country-girl, creeping slyly to bed with her cousin Boaz. Pretty stuff indeed, to be called the Word of God!' (ibid., 1.535). Paine's case is that the 'Bible' must rest its claim to validity on the testimony it contains, but this testimony must itself be unimpeachable, especially given the improbability of the claims made, and that authority evaporates when the testimony is founded to be anonymous and contradictory. 
Paine completed part 2 of 'The Age of Reason' in August 1795 and left the Monroes for a brief holiday. Within a week he was back with a recurrence of the fever he had in prison and an abscess in his side. He remained seriously ill and bed-ridden, and recovered fully only by the beginning of 1796. During his illness, his long-standing sense of grievance towards America for having forsaken him in the Luxembourg prison finally spilt over, crystallizing into certainty that Washington had served him treacherously. He wrote a long, acerbic letter to James Madison complaining of Washington's treatment of him. Monroe sought to dissuade Paine, or at least to persuade him that he should not attack the president when he was a guest of his ambassador, but Paine sent at least one angry letter that reached Washington. Moreover, Washington's appointment of John Jay as minister to Britain resulted in a treaty which, to Paine, sacrificed American and French interests to Britain. Paine, and Monroe, feared that the treaty would provoke a breakdown in good relations with France and realign America with her former rulers. 
As he recovered from his illness Paine wrote 'Agrarian Justice' (1796), the most egalitarian of his writings, in which he identified a tendency for civilization to make one part of society more affluent, and the other more wretched, than would have been the case in a natural state. Developing a justification for the redistribution of property that had been absent from 'Rights of Man' (and responding in part to the radical challenge to the Directory from Babeuf's conspiracy of equals), the pamphlet argues that owners of property owe a ground rent for what they have acquired to the rest of mankind, and that the aim should be to ensure that increased wealth has, and is seen to have, reciprocal benefits for the general mass of society. To achieve this he advocated the creation of a national fund, out of which every person arriving at the age of twenty-one would be paid $15 in compensation for the loss of his or her natural inheritance by the introduction of the system of landed property. In addition, each person over the age of fifty would be paid $10 per annum. In both cases this would be a matter of justice, not charity. The English agrarian radical Thomas Spence criticized Paine for not advocating common ownership, but Paine was advancing a doctrine which he believed would be compatible with individual freedom and commercial activity, and which he saw as a necessary bedrock for the political equality that was required to ensure stability within modern states. 
Within two months of 'Agrarian Justice' Paine published 'Decline and Fall of the English System of Finance' (1796), an analysis of the financing of the British national debt and its exponential growth which predicted the collapse of the fiscal system as the government sought to fund the current war. The Council of Five Hundred voted for it to be officially printed and distributed, and it served to reintroduce Paine into the political circles of the Directory, which increasingly turned to him for advice on France's relations with America. This, in turn, raised further problems for Monroe, who suspected that Paine was indiscreet with information he obtained by residing with him. Moreover, Paine's anger at Washington resurfaced in public outbursts, and Monroe was finally forced to ask him to find alternative lodgings. Once he had done so -- in the spring of 1796 he moved to rooms in Suresnes, a suburb of Paris -- there was little to stop him from venting his anger in print. His 'Letter to Washington' (1796) is a long, rambling piece, prefaced by an attack on Jay's treaty and side-swiping at many of America's elder statesmen. The portrait of Washington is unmitigatedly critical, and extends back to accusations of a lacklustre performance as leader of the army during the war. Paine arranged to have it published in America, where it tarnished his reputation still further with the federalists and embarrassed most republicans. It is probably Paine's least likeable publication, even if many found 'The Age of Reason' more deeply offensive. Relations between France and America deteriorated further when Monroe was recalled in November -- a decision Paine saw as typical of 'the ingratitude and clandestine manoeuvring of the Government of Washington' ('Complete Writings', 2.614). Paine, now deeply despondent, decided to return with Monroe, until Monroe pointed out that this might not help him, and so instead Paine left for Havre-de-Grace in March 1797 to find a ship. However, his fears for his safety, with English warships stopping and searching American shipping, led to successive delays until, three months later, he gave up and returned to Paris. Bonneville invited him to stay for a week; he was still in residence five years later. Paine's reluctance to risk the journey, and the lack of any corroborating evidence, suggests that the Hambledon Cricket Club's minute for August 1796, which reports Paine's attendance at a club dinner in July 1796, is false! 
Paine returned to Paris as the newly elected Council of Five Hundred moved in an increasingly anti-republican direction and sought to reinstate some of the privileges of the Catholic church. In June, Paine criticized proposals to allow the ringing of church bells on the grounds that a stable republican polity required, in addition to equal political rights and a basic level of social and economic equality, a public culture free from the superstitions of Christianity and the power of its religious institutions. Some members of the Directory clearly shared this view. In January 1797 Paine, the Director La Revelliere-Lepaux, and an assorted group of intellectuals and leftists had organized the first meeting of the Theophilanthropy sect, which espoused a broadly rationalist deism, held services revolving around edifying readings, sentimental music, and meditation, and was thought to have the potential to become a state religion. 
Paine's sympathies with the Directory were also in evidence in September 1797 when the 'coup d'etat' of Fructidor purged the council, accorded emergency powers to the Directory, and halted the counter-revolutionary moves. His 'Letter of Thomas Paine to the people of France, and the French armies, on the event of the 18th Fructidor, and its consequences' accepts that the revolution had faced a crisis, owing to the 'darksome manoeuvres of a faction' ('Complete Writings', 2.605), and that the Directory had acted swiftly and without bloodshed to restore public tranquillity. None the less, he insisted that the 1795 constitution remained the best yet devised by human wisdom, and he regretted the necessity of overturning the results of the republic's first free elections. (When, in May 1798, the Directory acted again, in the 'coup' of 22 Floreal, against the newly elected left-republicans, Paine said nothing.) Also in his assumed role of adviser, encouraged by Irish republican exiles in Paris, he wrote to the Directory encouraging it to send troops to assist an Irish rebellion. The resulting rising and invasion attempt in August 1798 was a disaster, and the consequent repression destroyed Irish radicalism for a generation. Paine was also sought out by Bonaparte, who claimed he slept with a copy of 'Rights of Man' under his pillow, with whom he discussed the prospects for an invasion of England. In December 1797 he wrote two essays canvassing the design and financing of a fleet of 1000 gunboats to carry an invasion force across the channel, but Bonaparte abandoned the idea of attacking England in favour of Egypt in the first part of 1798. His sense of the increasing betrayal of France by the American administration, now under his long-standing enemy John Adams, may have driven him to the ultimate form of sedition -- an article appeared in Bonneville's newspaper 'Le Bien Informe' in September 1798 advising the government on the best means to conquer America. 
Paine became increasingly absorbed in non-political matters. He became close friends with the inventor Robert Fulton, revived his interests in matters scientific, and spent much of his time at Bonneville's residence working on bridge models which he cast himself. He visited Dieppe and went on to Bruges to spend several months with Joseph Vanhuele, a fellow inmate of the Luxembourg prison. His finances were in a disastrous state and his bills in Dieppe seem to have been paid by Captain Nathan Haley from Connecticut, a casual friend. The overthrow of the Directory by Bonaparte and the establishment of the Consulate in November 1799 slipped by without comment from Paine. When he returned to Paris and tried to involve himself in the newly arrived commission from America, he was warned by the Foreign Office that they considered his behaviour irregular and that he would be sent back to America at the first complaint against him. He revived thoughts of returning to America when he heard that Jefferson was likely to be elected president as Adams's successor, and he wrote a spate of letters to Jefferson in October 1800, including an essay entitled 'Compact Maritime' on the desirability of an international association of nations dedicated to protect the rights of commerce. These went unanswered until March, when Jefferson's reply offered him a place on a public ship due to return soon and informed him that an old friend of Paine's, Robert Livingston, would be the next minister to France. Paine deferred acceptance, saying he would await Livingston's arrival, imagining that if he delayed he might be offered a public post. To Jefferson's embarrassment, he published a copy of the letter. The peace of Amiens, signed in March 1802, gave him the opportunity to return safely. Six months later, having arranged for Bonneville's family to follow him, and with his financial problems largely solved by a gift of about $500 (from Francis Burdett and William Bosville), he set off again for Havre-de-Grace, accompanied by Rickman, who came to bid him farewell. 
Paine arrived in Baltimore on 18 October 1802 to a seemingly friendly reception. But the impression was fleeting. He was temporarily arrested on a dubious charge of indebtedness, and the federalists immediately sought to make capital of Paine's irreligion and Jefferson's offer of a public vessel. When he arrived in Washington only Jefferson and the most ardent republicans welcomed him. Even old colleagues, such as Benjamin Rush and Samuel Adams, turned against him because of his religious heterodoxy. And when he wielded his pen against the federalists in a series of seven letters, 'To the Citizens of the United States', written between November 1802 and April 1803, he often provided his enemies with ammunition against himself and his friends. He supported Jefferson both publicly and privately over the Louisiana purchase in 1803, and gave copious advice to Monroe, who was sent as minister extraordinary to negotiate over the purchase with the French government. When he suspected Jefferson of a certain coolness toward him and wrote in protest, the president's reply was warm and gracious, and satisfied Paine of his continuing affection. He left Washington in February and visited Bordentown. When he tried to catch the coach on to New York he was refused admittance by the coachman on account of his infidelity, and a crowd hissed and booed him as he left on horseback. His reception in New York was friendlier, with a testimonial dinner being held in his honour. He spent much of the next few months visiting friends and arranging for a cottage on his New Rochelle estate to be enlarged, although he also talked of returning to France should Napoleon's campaign against England be successful (and in 1804 wrote an epistle 'To the People of England on the Invasion of England' to assist that end). Although received warmly by friends and fellow republicans his proposal to publish a third part of 'The Age of Reason' was the cause of trepidation, and Nicolli Fosdick wrote to Jefferson, warning him that Paine was in the habit of reading out aloud letters from Jefferson which were best kept confidential, and encouraging the president to dissuade Paine from further publications on religious matters. 
In the summer of 1804 Paine settled again in New Rochelle. He arranged for Marguerite de Bonneville, the wife of a Parisian friend who had arrived in the summer of 1803, and whom he had lodged in his house at Bordentown, to move to New York and secured her employment as a French teacher, but financial difficulties quickly developed. They agreed that he should take her three sons into his care and see to their education at New Rochelle, but their mother seemed both to want them with her without being willing either to live at New Rochelle (because it was too quiet) or to have the children with her in New York. Her husband remained in France. On Christmas eve, 1805, Christopher Derrick, whom Paine had employed to look after the farm while in New York the previous year, combined an overindulgence in drink with bottled-up resentment against Paine and fired a musket at him while he was reading in his living room. Paine escaped without harm. Characteristically, he refused to press charges. 
Paine continued to write -- an eighth and final letter 'To the Citizens of the United States' in June 1805, against the federalists; 'Constitutions, Governments, and Charters' (also in June), in which he argued that the legislature proposing charters should not have the power to make them law; a brief 'Remarks on English Affairs' in July 1805, which contained such positive comments on Napoleon that Rickman, who had heard Paine's private views, declined to believe Paine was the author; and the essays 'The Origin of Freemasonry' and 'Constitutional Reform'. The following year he produced the speculative 'The Cause of Yellow Fever' and returned briefly to the federalists and affairs in Europe, and in 1807 wrote several essays on the use of gun boats and on the likelihood of war with Britain. But his health and powers were gradually fading, and he kept sliding into financial difficulties, from which he extracted himself by selling, reluctantly, parts of his farm. He tried to interest Jefferson and George Clinton in asking congress to take up the issue of financial acknowledgement for his services in the war of independence, but although efforts were made nothing came of them, and Jefferson turned down Paine's offer to act as a special envoy to Napoleon. In the spring of 1806 Paine left the farm to lodge in a local inn, where his friend William Carver found him weeks later, dishevelled, unshaven, drunk, and a good deal the worse for wear. Carver brought him to live with him in New York, but in June Paine had a fit of apoplexy and was so badly injured he was bed-ridden for weeks, nursed by Mrs Palmer, the widow of Paine's deist friend Elihu. On doctor's advice he moved from Carver's to lodge with John Wesley Jarvis, a portrait painter, in November. Carver then sent him a bill for his lodgings, and for the services of Mrs Palmer. His health improved and Jarvis reported him 'one of the pleasantest companions I have met with for an old man' (Aldridge, 'Man of Reason', 296). In November 1806 he visited New Rochelle to vote in the congressional elections, but the election inspector, Elisha Ward, refused to register his vote, insisting that he was not an American citizen -- a charge Paine sought to challenge in the courts. When Jarvis moved in April 1807, Paine found lodgings with Zakarias Hitt -- a disciple of Paine's -- who lived on the outskirts of New York. When Hitt raised his rent the following January Paine insisted he could not afford to pay, despite his continued ownership of property at both New Rochelle and Bordentown. He also insisted on writing to congress to ask for the reimbursement of his expenses for the trip he had taken to France with Laurens twenty-five years earlier. Congress demurred and an offer on the farm fell through, and he moved to a cheap tavern in February, where he remained until removed by friends in July. The Bordentown farm was sold for $800 and a new lodging was found in Greenwich Village. Paine had lost the use of his legs and he grew increasingly weaker. By January 1809 he needed constant care and he set out his will, in which the bulk of the estate went to Madame Bonneville for the education of her children. He asked the Quakers to allow him to be buried in their burial-ground, but was refused, and he made Madame Bonneville promise that he would be buried on his New Rochelle farm. In May, overwhelmed by his isolation, he persuaded Madame Bonneville to rent a house in which to care for him. He moved in with her on 4 May to 59 Grove Street in Greenwich Village and died at 8 o'clock in the morning of 8 June 1809. He was buried at New Rochelle, mourned by his negro servant, Madame Bonneville, her son Benjamin, and a handful of local people. In 1819 the former tory turned radical William Cobbett had his bones dug up and brought back to England, where they subsequently disappeared. 
The first biography of Paine was published in the summer of 1791, with government encouragement, by George Chalmers (under the pseudonym Francis Oldys), a government clerk in the Board of Trade and an accomplished and serious writer. The work is the sole source for a great many of the stories about Paine's life prior to his departure for America, but its thirst for information is coupled with an evident antipathy to its subject. However, it is only in the second edition of 1793 that any reference is made to Paine's drinking. Thereafter, accusations of drunkenness and associated slovenly habits become commonplace in reports of Paine. These reached new heights in the biography produced by James Cheetham, published shortly after Paine's death. Cheetham, a former radical and newspaper editor, had fallen out with Paine in 1806 and presented him as a hopeless drunkard and atheist, portraying the symptoms and side effects of Paine's stroke and deteriorating health as evidence of his alcoholism. Subsequent favourable biographies of Paine, notably Rickman's in 1819 and the first scholarly biography by Conway in 1892, tend to the opposite extreme, and tend also to underplay Paine's increasing egoism and vanity. From a wide variety of sources it seems clear that Paine drank to excess, especially when under strain; that he could be extremely lazy and self-indulgent; that he was prone to exaggerate his contribution to the world of politics, theology, and philosophy; that he lacked restraint in expounding his principles in company; that he bragged of disinterestedness in publishing as he did, then clamoured for compensation; that he was a hopeless manager of money and was not particular about repaying his debts; that in matters of dress and appearance he fell short of the standards of many of his contemporaries; and that his once rather handsome appearance was ravaged by his indulgence in alcohol. Moreover, after his imprisonment and illness these faults were exacerbated and his bitterness over his fate frequently clouded his judgement. But, alongside these faults, which contemporaries assiduously recorded and relayed, and which most biographers have subsequently either ignored or magnified, there are many other reports, often from unlikely quarters, of an entertaining conversationalist, with considerable charm and an engaging manner -- even if he was capable of reciting the most part of his major works by heart, while insisting that there was nothing to be gained by going back to earlier writers. If there is a balanced picture to be had, it is that he was a man from a poor background in an aristocratic age, whose capacity to offend was increasingly enhanced by his lack of deference and his sense of his own importance. That sense may have irritated his contemporaries, but it was not misplaced: he was an extremely effective pamphleteer, with a capacity to capture and relay ideas and principles of which his audience had hitherto only an inchoate appreciation. His originality is frequently disparaged, but he offers a powerful and distinctive account of the principles of democratic politics in which political and civil equality are supported by a degree of social and economic equality. Although commentators often stress the similarities of his account to John Locke's 'Second Treatise of Civil Government', despite Paine's claim never to have read it, there is nothing in Locke to match Paine's redistributive policies, his sense of his intimate connection between equal citizenship and political stability, or his insistence on the universalism of his political ideas and citizenship. And although his religious writings did most to stir up hostility against him for 100 years or more -- with Teddy Roosevelt describing him in 1888 as 'a filthy little atheist' (Roosevelt, 289) -- many working-class readers found in them the resources with which to rethink their religious commitments, just as the other writings allowed them to rework their politics. 
Although his precise intellectual and historical importance remains disputed, Paine is now accepted as a leading figure in the age of revolutions. Collections of his work have appeared regularly since his death, with M. D. Conway making the most important contribution at the end of the nineteenth century with a four-volume collection. A two-volume collection, edited by Philip Foner in 1945, remains the most comprehensive, but is far from complete and is flawed in some parts. No comprehensive bibliography has yet appeared. Statues of him have been erected in Paris, in the Parc Montsouris, and in Thetford, and one is mooted for Washington; active Tom Paine societies exist in both Britain and America, with regular meetings and newsletters, and the United States postal service issued a commemorative stamp with Paine's head in January 1968. He has also been the subject of a novel by Howard Fast, 'Citizen Tom Paine' (1945), and several plays, notably Paul Foster's 'Tom Paine' (1967) and Jack Shepherd's 'In Lambeth' (1990). 


@@@@@


doc= 21134


Painter, Edward (1784-1852), pugilist, was born at Stretford, 4 miles from Manchester, in 1784, and as a young man worked as a brewer. He may have been the infant baptized at St Mary's Church, Stretford, on 15 February 1784, the son of John and Mary Painter. A quarrel with a fellow employee in the brewery called Wilkins -- a man of heavy build -- led to a formal fight in the yard of The Swan inn, Manchester, where Painter quickly defeated his opponent and showed unusual power as a boxer. After receiving some training under his fellow countryman Bob Gregson, he was matched to fight J. Coyne, an Irish boxer from Kilkenny, 6 feet tall and weighing 14 stone. Painter weighed 13 stone; his height was 5 feet 93/4 inches. The men met at St Nicholas, near Margate, on 23 August 1813, when, after a fight of forty minutes, the Irishman was beaten. J. Alexander, known as the Gamekeeper, was Painter's next opponent, at Moulsey Hurst, Surrey, on 20 November 1813. In the twentieth round the victory seemed to be going to the challenger, but Painter, with a straight, well-directed hit, stunned the Gamekeeper, and became the victor. He was now reckoned a match for Tom Oliver, but in the fight, which took place on 17 May 1814, his luck for the first time deserted him. For a purse of 50 guineas he next took on John Shaw, the lifeguardsman, at Hounslow Heath, Middlesex, on 18 April 1815, when the height and weight of Shaw prevailed after twenty-eight minutes. 
On 23 July 1817 Painter met Harry Sutton, the black fighter, at Moulsey Hurst, and after forty-eight minutes found himself unable to continue the encounter. Not satisfied with the result, he again challenged Sutton to meet him at Bungay in Suffolk on 16 December 1817. The event excited great interest, and, despite rainy weather, 15,000 people assembled. There was a quadrangle of 24 feet for the combatants to engage in, with an outer roped ring for the officials. Outside this stood the spectators, several rows deep, and three circles of wagons surrounded the whole, giving the ring the appearance of an amphitheatre. This time Sutton, although he fought with great spirit, conceded defeat at the close of the fifteenth round. At Stepney, on 21 March 1817, Painter undertook for a wager to throw half a hundredweight against Mr Donovan, a man of great size, and beat him by 181/2 inches. He was equally good at running. On 7 November 1817, on the Essex Road, in a 5 mile race against an athlete named Spring, he ran the distance in thirty-five and a half minutes. 
The well-known Thomas Winter, alias Spring, was the next to engage with Painter, in a fight on Mickleham Downs, Surrey, on 1 April 1818. After thirty-one rounds, occupying eighty-nine minutes, Spring was victorious. The two men fought again on 7 August 1818, at Russia Farm, 5 miles from Kingston. In the first round Spring was floored by a blow over the eye, from which, although he continued fighting to the forty-second round, he never completely recovered. Painter now became landlord of The Anchor, Lobster Lane, Norwich, and intended to give up fighting, but on 17 July 1820 he again met his old opponent Tom Oliver, at North Walsham, and on this occasion was the victor. It is remarkable that Painter was defeated at the first attempt by Oliver, Sutton, and Spring, but in each case won the rematch. For many years he lived at The Anchor, then removed to the White Hart inn, Market Place, Norwich. He occasionally played a role in the arrangement of fights and was instrumental in founding a Norwich pugilistic club. Painter died at the home of his son, near The Ram, Lakenham, Norwich, on 18 September 1852, and was buried in St Peter's churchyard, Lakenham, on 22 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 21135


Painter, William (1540?-1595), translator and administrator, may have come from a Kentish family. Having joined the Tower of London as a gunner and clerk of the armoury, he began his translation career in 1558 with 'Horrible and Cruell Murder of Sultan Solyman', translated from the work of Nicolas Moffan, which appears as novel 34 in volume 2 of 'The Palace of Pleasure'. He became clerk of her majesty's ordnance at the Tower of London on a wage of 8died a day on 9 February 1560, and moved to an address near the Tower. As he was in charge of the day-to-day administration of the ordnance, Painter had considerable scope to increase his somewhat inadequate salary by creative management of the funds under his control. About 1565 he married Dorothy Bonham (1537?-1617) of Cowling. They had at least three sons, including Anthony, and four daughters. At about this time Painter bought the manors of Twedale and East Court at Gillingham, near Chatham. His official income was handsomely supplemented on 24 July 1566 by Edward Randolph, lieutenant-general of the ordnance, who assigned to 'William Painter, Clerk of the Ordnance, Richard Webb, Master Gunner of England, and Edward Partridge, Keeper of the Queen's Harquebutts, certain annuities and pensions' (Painter, 1890, 1.lvi). 
The printer William Jones entered Painter's 'Cytie of civelitie' on the Stationers' register in 1562 but it was never published. In 1566 Jones published the first volume of Painter's 'Palace of Pleasure', whose title-page promises readers a book 'beautified, adorned and well-furnished with Pleasant Histories and excellent Novels'. It was followed the next year by the second volume. The complete work was republished in two volumes in 1575 with a dedication to Ambrose Dudley, earl of Warwick, master of the ordnance. It is a collection of anecdotes and stories translated from ancient and humanist writers for recreational reading and some moral instruction. Painter's sources range from the Greek historian Herodotus through Romans, mainly Livy and Aulus Gellius, to Italians like Matteo Bandello and Frenchmen like Francois de Belleforest. The book was widely read, imitated, and plagiarized. Roger Ascham has a long passage in 'The Scholemaster' on the moral dangers such importations from Italy posed the more innocent English. Stephen Gosson, having abandoned the theatre, complains it 'was ransacked to furnish the playhouses of London' (Painter, 1929, 1.xviii). 
Painter seems to have left traces in every notable Tudor playwright, who dramatized popular literature with the zeal of the modern film producer. John Webster, for instance, takes all but minor details of the plot of 'The Duchess of Malfi' from Painter's version of Belleforest ('Palace of Pleasure', 2.23). Though there are some verbal echoes of Painter in his text, in general Webster's language is influenced by Philip Sidney's 'Arcadia'. Painter was hardly ever the sole or even the main source. The primary source of Shakespeare's 'Rape of Lucrece' was the Marsus edition of Ovid, 'Fasti', 2.725ff. (1550), but he coloured Ovid with Livy, 1.57-8, keeping an eye on the 'Palace of Pleasure' (1.2), Painter's version of the Livy story. The argument of the poem has strong echoes of Painter. Painter's 'Whereuppon they rode to Rome in Post' is echoed by Shakespeare's 'They all posted to Rome'; Shakespeare has Lucretia 'late in the night, spinning amongst her maids', where Painter writes 'late in the night, occupied and busie amonges her maids in the middes of her house spinning', a close translation of the Livy. The poem itself follows Ovid, with narrative touches taken from Painter (Baldwin, 113-31). There are touches of the Painter version of Livy in 'Titus Andronicus', IV.i. He is also supposed to be the Guil. P. G. who wrote 'A Moorning Diti upon the Deceas of the High and Mighti Prins Henri, Earl of Arundel' in 1580. 
The assiduous and skilled corruption endemic in the Elizabethan civil service exacerbated office rivalries. In 1586 John Powell, surveyor of the ordnance, formally accused Geoffrey Turville, Richard Bowland (who by now were dead), and Painter of embezzling $7075. Painter falsified his accounts either by billing the treasury for full shipments but taking delivery of only a part of them, or by charging the treasury the market price for equipment he issued to other military units from his stores in the Tower. Turville was held responsible for $2715 2's'. 8died, Bowland for $2418 2's'. 8died, and Painter for $1949 2's'. 8died Painter admitted to $1079 17's'. 3died, gave an accounting for $795 13's'. 10died, and ignored the shortfall of $73 11's'. 7died He 'humbly beseeched Her Majesty to have pitifull regard for his wife and marriageable children', and promised to repay 'in a reasonable time'. But he was overstretched. According to the charge-sheet the value of his lands at Gillingham was $413 10's'. 0died, their gross annual revenue $94 10's'. 0died, and annual profit $61 6's'. 10died But Painter was in debt for about $1200 for mortgages and the like. No action was taken against Painter and he never repaid the whole amount. This did not prevent him from laying counter-charges of corruption against Powell, who was just as vulnerable. 
In September 1587 Powell replied by charging Painter with false accounting and Dudley with 'great oppressions' (Painter, 1890, 1.lv). In answer to these charges Painter's son, Anthony, whom Painter employed as his assistant, acknowledged irregularities on the part of both himself and his father and Painter admitted on 23 June 1589 that equipment recently moved from store had been sold to its end-users rather than issued to them. No action was taken against the Painters or the earl. And finally in 1591 George Hogge, clerk of deliveries, laid detailed charges relating to July and August 1575. All of them relate to goods, mainly gunpowder and bowstaves charged for but not delivered. But Painter's accusers were no more innocent than he was. He could therefore present himself as the careful steward slandered by others whom he had found out and who were jealous of his administrative abilities. Apart from saving $40 a year by small economies, 'he yearly increases HM stores to the value of $2000 by taking returns of such munitions as return from the seas unspent in HM ships, which formerly were concealed and converted to private use' (BL, Lansdowne MS 75, no. 55; Painter, 1890, 1.lx-lxi). Painter claimed to have saved his employers $11,000 by careful accounting. Again no action was taken against him. 
Painter died between 19 and 22 February 1595 and was buried in St Olave's, Hart Street, London. Soon after his death the steward of the Tower estimated that the Painters, father and son, had defrauded the crown of $27,000. Little wonder that William's nuncupative will of 14 February 1594 is singularly uninformative about his property and the manner of dividing it among his heirs (Painter, 1890, 1.lxiii). On 11 May 1622 James I granted Painter's grandson discharge of the residue of his grandfather's debt to the crown which by then amounted to $7800. 
In the past William Painter the translator and naval administrator has been confused with a namesake, also from Kent. This second William Painter attended St John's College, Cambridge, between 1554 and 1557, when he left without taking a degree. Never the less around 1560 he was appointed headmaster of Sevenoaks School, a position earlier held by his father. On 25 April 1560 he was ordained deacon (he is not known to have become a priest) and appointed vicar of Grain, Kent, by the bishop of London, and shortly afterwards published a translation of William Fulke's 'Antiprognosticon', an attack on astrology. He left Grain in 1563, and was probably the William Painter recorded at his death, around 1597, as having been rector of Bramfield, Hertfordshire; he left a widow named Winifred, and was buried in St Mary Aldermanbury, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 21136


Paisible, James (c.1656-1721), composer and recorder player, was born in France, probably in or near Paris. He was related to Guillaume Paisible ('c'.1659-1728), a page in the 'chambre du roy' at Louis XIV's court, and probably to Louis Paisible, a wind musician there. Paisible presumably grew up learning wind and stringed instruments from one of the 'joueurs de violons, hautbois, sacquebouttes et cornets' in the 'grande ecurie'. Paisible apparently came to England in September 1673 with the composer Robert Cambert, whose plan to produce French-style operas failed. Paisible was among the French oboe and recorder players in John Crowne's masque 'Calisto' (Whitehall, February 1675). In 1677 he composed an unsuccessful 'comedie-ballet', 'Rare en tout', performed at Whitehall for Charles II's birthday. That October, the poet Rochester wrote to Henry Savile at court, sending Paisible, 'the best present I can make at this time', as the bearer, 'whom I beg you to take care of, so that the King may hear his tunes when he is easy and private, because I am sure they will divert him extremely' ('Letters of John Wilmot', 160). Savile replied that Charles had heard Paisible's compositions 'with very great delight' (ibid., 165) but failed to acknowledge the implied sexual present. That same year Paisible and three other French recorder players received a court appointment that was concealed, perhaps because of anti-Catholic sentiment. To the French ambassador, Honore Courtin, they played 'perfectly' (Buttrey, 200). Upon James II's accession in 1685 Paisible was openly appointed as a court musician, and on Christmas day 1686 he was given another post as an instrumentalist in James's new Roman Catholic chapel. 
About 1676-86 the French 'philosophe' Saint-Evremond organized musical activities at the duchesse de Mazarin's Chelsea home. His biographer, Pierre Des Maizeaux, wrote that he 'himself wrote the Idylls, Prologues and other pieces.... The 'symphonie' he charged with Monsieur Paisible, or some other capable musician' (Desmaizeaux, 231). 'Les noces d'Isabelle' features 'an old poet', presumably Saint-Evremond, and 'a young musician', once addressed as Paisible ('OEuvres meslees', 3.155-9). Saint-Evremond described Paisible as a 'great and slothful musician... with manners that savoured of a well-bred man, and expressions which he must have learnt in his little library' ('Lettres', 2.223). A later assessment of Paisible's character, that he was 'likely to forget in the morning what he promised the day before' (Nagel, 585-6), is due to the German viola da gamba player Ernst Christian Hesse (1711). 
On 4 December 1686 Paisible obtained a licence to marry Mary (Moll) Davis (d. 1708), a former singer, actress, and mistress of Charles II. Their marriage attracted ribald comments from court wits. Sir George Etherege wrote: 'Mrs Davies has given proof of the great passion she always had for music, and Monsieur Peasible has another bass to thrum than that he played so well upon' ('Letters', ed. Bracher, 118). On 16 December 1687 Paisible became a denizen. The following year he was living in St James's Place. When James II fled England about Christmas time, Paisible, being a Catholic, left to serve him in exile at St Germain-en-Laye, near Paris. In 1693 the Paisibles returned to England. Paisible was appointed composer to Prince George of Denmark, the consort of Princess Anne, and after Anne's accession (1702) wrote her annual birthday dance. Upon George's death (1708) he received a court annuity. For the London theatre he wrote act tunes (consisting of an overture and dances played between the acts) for Dorset Garden in 1693, then frequently for Drury Lane from 1694 to 1702. He also performed in public concerts and taught. 
By 1702 Paisible belonged to the Drury Lane 'band' (a small orchestra). He normally played the bass violin (almost obsolete in England), but for the interval 'entertainments' switched to the recorder. He and other members of the band often took part in concerts at York Buildings. In January 1708 he became a cellist at the new opera house, the Queen's Theatre in the Haymarket. The anonymous translator of Francois Raguenet's 'Paralele des italiens et des francois' (1709) attested that 'the famous Mr Paisible' on the recorder 'need not give place to any [Masters] at Paris' ('Comparison', 9). In 1710 the German traveller Zacharias Conrad von Uffenbach, hearing Paisible play the recorder in a concert, claimed that his 'equal is not to be found' (Quarrell and Mare, 66-7). In 1713 Paisible moved to White Hart Yard, off Castle Street, in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, and he remained there until his death. By 1715 he was playing again at Drury Lane, appearing in interval entertainments in competition with the recorder player John Baston from the Lincoln's Inn Fields Theatre. Both there and in concerts Paisible played the recorder and the echo flute or small echo flute (apparently two slightly different recorders fastened together to allow for soft and loud playing). 
Paisible died in the first half of August 1721 and was buried in the churchyard of St Martin-in-the-Fields on the 17th. Although he had been known in England as James, his French will preserved the original form of his forename, Jacques. His possessions were valued at $26 2's'. 0died plus 60 guineas in gold. 
Paisible's attractive theatrical music, consisting largely of French-style dances, was good enough to have been mistaken for Henry Purcell's. During the 1690s Paisible was one of the leading composers in England integrating elements of the French and Italian styles -- in his case, in a rather quixotic manner. His thirteen mixed-style recorder sonatas were probably the most virtuosic music written for the instrument up to that date, giving some idea of the impact he clearly made as a performer. His best-known work is the sombre 'The Queen's Farewell' (1695) for Mary's funeral, apparently for six-piece oboe band. 


@@@@@


doc= 21137


Pakeman, Thomas (c.1614-1691), clergyman and ejected minister, matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge, at Easter 1631, later migrating to Clare College, where he was admitted on 1 June 1633; he graduated BA in 1634 and proceeded MA in 1637. He was then employed for some years as a proofreader in the king's print house, and with three others presented a petition protesting against deteriorating conditions of work and a reduction in pay, imposed by the customs farmers. 
On 28 January 1643 Pakeman began his ministry at Little Hadham, Hertfordshire. He was one of sixty-three Hertfordshire ministers who petitioned the Lords on 24 July 1646, in protest against the growth of sects and of anti-Scottish sentiment, urging the establishment of presbyterian church government. On 13 August that year the county committee of Hertford was ordered to investigate the estates at Hadham of its sequestered minister, Thomas Paske, and Pakeman was named as a minister there. On 4 November 1646 Pakeman was nominated vicar of Harrow on the Hill, Middlesex; he was officiating there by September 1648. He had already married Mary (died 1690), daughter of Andrew Studeley of Shrewsbury, for they had baptized seven children at Harrow by 1659 and a son, Thomas, matriculated at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, on 18 October 1662, aged seventeen. 
After his ejection under the 'Act of Uniformity' in 1662 Pakeman seems at first to have remained at Harrow, and there 'had the instruction and boarding of several children of persons of quality' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.468). Soon, however, he moved to Brentford, where he continued to preach and to teach, with the assistance of Ralph Button, the former professor of geometry at Gresham College, who lived next door. Button was imprisoned under the 'Five Mile Act' but Pakeman escaped, finding shelter at the house of a Mrs Methwold in Brompton, near Knightsbridge. Here he continued as a preacher until finding more permanent accommodation in the household of Erasmus Smith, where, Calamy reports, he continued some years. Philip Henry recorded on 25 June 1672 a dinner at Stanwardine Hall, Shropshire, at which Pakeman and other ministers were present, and this may suggest he was sheltering with relations of his wife. In 1685 the family settled in London, where Pakeman attended the parish church of St Martin Outwich under its then minister, Richard Kidder, and sometimes received communion. Also in that year, when he was preaching at the house of his son Thomas both men were seized by the city marshal and fined by the lord mayor, Sir Henry Tulse. Pakeman moved in 1687 to Stratford, Essex, where he employed a schoolmaster at his own expense to teach poor children to read. He died in June 1691 aged seventy-seven, and was buried at St Martin Outwich on 8 July. His funeral sermon was preached by Kidder, who was soon to be instituted as bishop of Bath and Wells. In his will, dated 18 March 1691, Pakeman left land in and around Shrewsbury to his son, Timothy, and small sums to his daughters, Elizabeth Brise, Johanne Paulfreman, Anne Scadding, and Mary Abbott. 


