@@@@@


doc= 21138


Pakenham, Sir Edward Michael (1778-1815), army officer, second son of Edward Michael Pakenham, second Baron Longford (1743-1792), and his wife, Catherine (1748-1816), second daughter of Hercules Longford Rowley, was born at Longford Castle, co. Westmeath, on 19 April 1778. His younger brother was Sir Hercules Robert Pakenham (1781-1850). After a perfunctory education he became, on 28 May 1794, aged sixteen, lieutenant in the 92nd foot (an Irish unit afterwards drafted); a few days later he was made captain, and on 6 December, though still not seventeen, he became major in the 33rd or Ulster light dragoons. 
On 1 June 1798 Pakenham became major in the old 23rd light dragoons (disbanded in 1802), with which he served in Ireland during the uprising; and on 17 October 1799 he was appointed lieutenant-colonel, 64th foot, which he commanded at the capture of the Danish and Swedish West India islands in 1801. Socially Pakenham appears to have been a general favourite. The inhabitants of St Croix, one of the captured islands, presented some silver cups in token of their esteem for him and his officers. He commanded the 64th at the capture of St Lucia on 22 June 1803, when he was wounded. In 1805, after returning home, he became a brevet colonel. He was then appointed to a lieutenant-colonelcy in the 7th Royal Fusiliers, whose 1st battalion he joined at Weymouth in 1806, and commanded at Copenhagen in 1807 and at the capture of Martinique in 1809; afterwards he returned with the battalion to Nova Scotia. Pakenham joined Wellington, who in 1806 had married his sister Catherine (Kitty), in the Peninsula after the battle of Talavera (27-8 July 1809). He liked, admired, and worked well with Wellington. He was employed as an assistant adjutant-general to the fusiliers; the officers of the battalion placed his portrait in the mess, and presented him with a sword valued at 200 guineas. He was appointed deputy adjutant-general in the Peninsula on 7 March 1810; no desk soldier, he disliked what he called 'this insignificant clerking business' (Ward, 59). 
Pakenham commanded a brigade of the two battalions 7th fusiliers and the Cameron Highlanders, in Sir Brent Spencer's division at Busaco and Fuentes d'Onoro in 1810, and in 1811 he received the local rank of major-general in the Peninsula, and served with the headquarters staff. At the battle of Salamanca, on 22 July 1812, described by Wellington as the best manoeuvred battle in the whole war, Pakenham commanded the 3rd division, which broke the French centre. The two armies faced each other, and had been moving on parallel lines for three days. They saw each other clearly, from opposite rising grounds, as the valley between was not more than half a mile wide. Marmont's design was to interpose between Wellington and Badajoz; Wellington's object was to prevent this. In their eagerness to gain their point the French leading divisions outmarched those following, and thus left a vacant space in the centre, which Wellington saw, and at once exploited. 'Now's your time, Ned', he said to Pakenham, who was standing near him; Pakenham gave the order to his division, and began the movement which won the battle. Wellington wrote to the Horse Guards on 7 September 1812: 'I put Pakenham to the third division, by General Picton's desire when he was ill; and I am very glad I did so, as I must say he made the movement which led to our success in the battle of 22 July last with a celerity and accuracy of which I doubt if there are very many capable, and without both it would not have answered its end. Pakenham may not be the brightest genius, but my partiality for him does not lead me astray when I tell you that he is one of the best we have. ('Dispatches', 6.434)' Pakenham commanded the division at the capture of Madrid. He became major-general on 4 June 1812, and was appointed adjutant-general on 10 May 1813. He commanded the 6th division at Sauroren (battle of the Pyrenees), was made KB on 11 September 1813, was appointed colonel of the 6th West India regiment the same year, and was present as adjutant-general in the succeeding campaigns. He received the gold cross and clasps for Martinique, Busaco, Fuentes d'Onoro, Salamanca, Pyrenees, Nivelle, Nive, Orthez, and Toulouse. On the reconstitution of the Order of the Bath (4 January 1815), he was made GCB. Agreeable and widely liked, he was called by Sir George Napier, 'that most delightful of all characters' (Longford, 357). In 1812 he had proposed to Annabella Milbanke but she rejected him, alleging 'all the Pakenham family have a strong tendency to insanity' (ibid., 117). Instead she married Byron. 
Pakenham did not want to fight in the Anglo-American War, but the death of General Ross (of Bladensburg) before Washington (in 1814) led to his selection to command the British force that had operated on the Chesapeake, and which was to be used against New Orleans. Pakenham ought to have joined it in Jamaica, but adverse winds detained him, and he did not reach his command until after a landing had been made at New Orleans, and an action had taken place, in which each side had lost more than 200 men. He found the army on a narrow neck of land flanked on one side by the Mississippi River and on the other by impassable swamp, and unwisely he accepted this unfavourable position. Though brave, he failed in independent command. Against him was one of the ablest United States generals -- Andrew Jackson. 
After a costly reconnaissance Pakenham erected bastions of hogsheads of sugar, and mounted on them thirty guns; but on 1 January 1815 these were destroyed by American fire. In the following week both sides were reinforced. It is just possible that, if Pakenham had been patient enough to wait the development of his plans, he might have carried the American lines and entered New Orleans. He intended to attack on both sides of the river before dawn on 8 January 1815, but there was delay in crossing, and he sent up the signal rocket before his men on the west side of the river were ready. He was killed, shot through the spine, in the unsuccessful assault that followed. Also killed was his second in command, Sir Samuel Gibbs. Over 3000 officers and men were killed or wounded. Pakenham's body was brought back to Ireland and buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 21139


Pakenham, Sir Hercules Robert (1781-1850), army officer, third son of Edward Michael, second Baron Longford (1743-1792), and his wife, Catherine (died 12 March 1816), second daughter of Hercules Langford Rowley, was born on 29 September 1781. He was brother of Sir Edward Michael Pakenham, and brother-in-law of the first duke of Wellington. He was appointed ensign 40th regiment on 23 July 1803, became lieutenant on 3 February 1804, was transferred to the 95th rifles in April the same year, and obtained his company there on 2 August 1805. He served in the expedition to Copenhagen and in Portugal, where he was wounded at Obidos on 16-17 August 1808. 'He is really one of the best officers of riflemen I have seen,' wrote Sir Arthur Wellesley, recommending him for promotion (Gurwood, 3.129). He was promoted to a majority in the 7th West India regiment on 30 August 1810, but remained with the Peninsular army, and was assistant adjutant-general of Picton's division up to the storming of Badajos, where he was wounded. 
After being repeatedly recommended for promotion, Pakenham was made a brevet lieutenant-colonel on 27 April 1812, was appointed lieutenant-colonel 26th Cameronians on 3 September 1812, and transferred as captain and lieutenant-colonel to the Coldstream Guards on 25 July 1814, from which he retired on half pay in 1817. He was made brevet colonel and aide-de-camp to the king on 27 May 1825, became a major-general on 10 January 1837, was appointed colonel 43rd light infantry on 9 September 1844, commanded the Portsmouth district from 1843 to 1846, and became a lieutenant-general on 9 November 1846. He was made CB on 4 June 1815 and KCB on 19 July 1838. 
Pakenham married, in November 1817, Emily (died 26 Jan 1875), fourth daughter of Thomas Stapylton, Lord Le Despenser; they had six sons (one of whom was killed at Inkerman and another at the relief of Lucknow) and three daughters. He died suddenly at his residence, Langford Lodge, co. Antrim, on 7 March 1850. 


@@@@@


doc= 21140


Pakenham, Sir Richard (1797-1868), diplomatist, was born on 19 May 1797 at Pakenham Hall, Castlepollard, co. Westmeath, Ireland, the fifth son of Admiral Sir Thomas Pakenham (1757-1836) and his wife, Louisa, daughter of the Rt Hon. John Staples. He was a cousin of General Sir Edward Pakenham (1778-1815), who was killed at the battle of New Orleans in 1815. After attending Trinity College, Dublin, Pakenham began his diplomatic career on 15 October 1817, as attache to his uncle the earl of Clancarty, at The Hague. On 26 January 1824 he was assigned to Switzerland as secretary of legation. He was promoted and transferred on 29 December 1826 to Mexico, where he spent the next sixteen years of his life, first as secretary of legation and then from 12 March 1835 as minister-plenipotentiary. He was a friend of Sir Charles Vaughan (1774-1849), minister to the United States from 1827 to 1835, with whom he corresponded while in Mexico. Pakenham never married, although it was said he had been engaged intermittently to Luz Escandon, sister of Manuel Escandon, a prominent Mexican businessman. 
Pakenham was a very astute and effective diplomat, dealing mainly with the commercial and financial questions that formed the basis of Britain's connection with Mexico at a time of great political instability caused by years of revolutionary upheaval. He spoke perfect Spanish, often wore Mexican dress, and by contemporary accounts was well liked and respected by government, diplomatic, and commercial elites in Mexico. He was instrumental behind the scenes in effecting a settlement between France and Mexico in 1839 after the French attack on Vera Cruz (1838) over claims against the Mexican government. Less successful was the attempt to mediate a settlement between Mexico and Texas, who were at war after 1836, when Texas overthrew Mexican rule and established an independent republic. The Texas question preoccupied Pakenham for the remainder of his stay in Mexico, which lasted until 1842, when he took a leave of absence in England. On 13 December 1843 he was sworn of the privy council, and the next day he was appointed envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary to the United States. 
Two important issues were pending upon Pakenham's arrival in Washington on 13 February 1844: the annexation of Texas and the Oregon boundary dispute. The former question was especially delicate, as the American secretary of state, John C. Calhoun, accused Britain of having promoted the abolition of slavery in Texas to undermine the institution in the United States. The two exchanged diplomatic notes on the subject, later known as the Calhoun-Pakenham correspondence. Although the correspondence is better known for Calhoun's defence of slavery, Pakenham's deliberate avoidance of a continuing debate on Britain's official anti-slavery position enabled him to defuse the attacks against Britain during the annexation crisis. 
More threatening to the Anglo-American peace, however, was the Oregon boundary crisis resolved in 1846, during which Pakenham suffered a profound crisis of confidence in his diplomatic abilities. He received a reprimand from Lord Aberdeen, the foreign secretary, for having rejected outright an American counterproposal and thereby precipitated a temporary suspension of the negotiations. Pakenham asked to be recalled over the incident since 'the little confidence that I ever possessed in my own judgment is now so completely shattered that I shall no longer be able to proceed' (Pakenham to Aberdeen, 28 Oct 1845, BL, Add. MS 43123). Aberdeen reassured him and the crisis ended peacefully, but Pakenham felt that the American government mistreated him. He wrote of James Buchanan, Calhoun's successor, 'if you knew what it was to be pitied by such a man as Mr. Buchanan, you would understand that I could not but take the thing [the Oregon negotiations] a little to heart' (Pakenham to Aberdeen, 29 Dec 1845, BL, Add. MS 43123). 
Pakenham returned to Britain on leave in May 1847 and, rather than return to his post in the United States, took an early retirement. He was made KCB in 1848. The Foreign Office asked him to resume his career however, and on 28 April 1851 he was assigned to Lisbon as envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary. In May 1855 he returned to Britain on leave and on 28 June he retired on pension. His last assignment was a brief special mission to Lisbon from August to October 1855. He was awarded a diplomatic pension of the second class and retired to his family home at Castlepollard, co. Westmeath. He died at Coolure, near Castlepollard, during the last week of October 1868: there is uncertainty over the precise date, but 28 October seems most likely. 


@@@@@


doc= 21141


Pakenham, Sir Thomas (1757-1836), naval officer and politician, fourth son of Thomas Pakenham, first Baron Longford (1713-1766), and Elizabeth Cuffe (1719-1794), was born on 29 September 1757, possibly at Pakenham Hall, co. Westmeath. Owing to the modest circumstances of his father, Pakenham was destined early on for a military career. Following the example of his eldest brother, Edward Michael Pakenham (later second Baron Longford), he entered the Royal Navy. In 1771 he joined the 'Southampton', under the command of a fellow Irishman, Captain John Macbride, with whom he moved to the 'Orpheus' in 1773. In the following year he was on the coast of Guinea with Captain William Cornwallis in the 'Pallas', and in 1775 he was appointed acting lieutenant of the 'Sphinx' on the coast of North America. Following the arrival of reinforcements under Lord Charles Cornwallis off the American coast in May 1776 he was sent to deliver urgent dispatches to General Sir William Howe in Halifax. After successfully evading pursuit by an American squadron he completed his mission, and was consequently promoted by Vice-Admiral Molyneux Shuldham, commander-in-chief of the North American station, to the rank of lieutenant in the frigate 'Greyhound'. 
While assigned to this ship Pakenham was engaged in several actions both ashore and afloat, in the course of which he was severely wounded. On the return of the 'Greyhound' to England in 1778 he transferred to the 'Courageux' (74 guns), commanded by Lord Mulgrave, as second lieutenant. In the following spring he was moved into the 'Europe' (64 guns) as first lieutenant, going to North America with the flag of Rear-Admiral Marriot Arbuthnot, and on 21 September 1779 he was promoted to the command of the sloop 'Victor', newly captured from the enemy. He was then sent to the Jamaica station where, on 2 March 1780, he was appointed by Sir Peter Parker the elder to command the 'San Carlos' (32 guns), a ship captured from the Spanish. However, Pakenham's poor health compelled him to return to England in the autumn. In December 1780 he was appointed to command the 'Crescent' (28 guns), attached to the fleet under Vice-Admiral George Darby, which relieved Gibraltar in April 1781, and was sent to Minorca in company with the 'Flora'. 
On their way back, in passing through the strait of Gibraltar on 30 May, the British ships encountered two Dutch frigates, one of which, the 'Castor', eventually surrendered to the 'Flora', while the other, the 'Brill', overpowered and captured the 'Crescent'. However, the 'Crescent' was immediately recaptured by the 'Flora', the 'Brill' making her escape; but both 'Crescent' and 'Castor' had received so much damage in the action that they fell into the hands of two French frigates on the way home, only the 'Flora', with Pakenham aboard, escaping. He had refused to resume the command of the 'Crescent', maintaining that by his surrender to the 'Brill' his commission was cancelled, and that when recaptured by the 'Flora', the 'Crescent' was on the same footing as any other prize. For the loss of his ship he was tried by court martial and honourably acquitted, it being proved that he did not strike the flag until through heavy casualties, the fall of her masts, and the disabling of her guns further resistance was impossible. In recognition of his exemplary conduct he was at once appointed to the new frigate 'Minerva' (38 guns), which he commanded in 1782 at the relief of Gibraltar by Admiral Lord Howe. 
In 1785 Pakenham married Louisa ('c'.1765-1833), daughter of the Rt Hon John Staples of co. Tyrone, and niece of the prominent Irish politician and landowner Thomas Conolly. As a consequence of this marriage he came into wealth and property, and assumed a prominent place in Irish polite society. His eldest son, Edward Michael, born in 1786, later inherited the major part of the estates belonging to Conolly, and took this surname in lieu of Pakenham. In 1793 Pakenham commissioned the 'Invincible' (74 guns), and in her took part in the battle of 1 June 1794, when his conduct was described as particularly brilliant. Afterwards he was recommended by Lord Howe for the gold medal. Late in 1794 he seems to have been involved in negotiations at Spithead with striking Irish sailors and marines aboard the 'Culloden', then commanded by Captain Thomas Troubridge. In the following year he was made colonel of marines, and assumed command of the 'Juste' (84 guns), in the capture of which, on 1 June 1794, he had played a crucial role. In December 1796 he may have sensed the mood of dissatisfaction in the fleet that eventually led to the Nore and Spithead mutinies, warning the first lord of the Admiralty that seamen were 'increasingly discontented' at the substantial arrears in the payment of their wages (Dugan, 33). 
A flamboyant and popular officer, Pakenham was described by one contemporary as a 'regular character', who maintained a large following of Irishmen under his command at sea (Dillon, 1.137). He was promoted rear-admiral on 14 February 1799, became vice-admiral on 23 April 1804, and admiral on 31 July 1810, but despite his proven merit he never hoisted his flag on active service. He was for some time master-general of the ordnance in Ireland, and was active in this capacity during the uprising of 1798, serving under Lord Cornwallis and General Lake. He was an MP in the Irish House of Commons from 1783 to 1800, was knighted on 16 May 1820, and died in Dublin on 2 February 1836. His fifth son, Sir Richard Pakenham, achieved prominence in the diplomatic service. 


@@@@@


doc= 21142


Pakington, Dorothy, Lady Pakington (bap. 1623, d. 1679), friend of learned clergy, was baptized on 17 December 1623 at St Bride's, Fleet Street, London, the daughter of Sir Thomas Coventry (1578-1640), lord keeper from 1625 to 1639 and first Baron Coventry from 1628, and his second wife, Elizabeth (1583-1653), daughter of John Aldersey of Spurstow, Cheshire, and widow of William Pitchford. Dorothy Coventry married Sir John Pakington, second baronet (1621-1680), of Westwood, Worcestershire. The marriage probably took place in the early 1640s. Sir John Pakington had been Lord Coventry's ward since his father's death in 1624, and the match may have been arranged by Dorothy's parents, but however it was initiated it appears to have been a loving and companionate marriage. It is not known how many children Lady Pakington bore. In 1660 the couple had three children living, all of whom survived her: a son, John Pakington (c.1649-1688) ['see under 'Pakington, Sir John], who succeeded as third baronet, and two daughters. Her daughter Elizabeth, who married Anthony Eyre about 1660, was given possession of Lady Pakington's manuscript prayers and other papers. 
Like her husband, Lady Pakington was a zealous royalist. Many of her prayers composed during the civil war and interregnum express strong partisanship for the royalist cause, with fervent appeals to God during the trial and execution of Charles I. In early 1649 Lady Pakington begged God to 'suffer not the effusion of his [Charles's] blood to be added to the many provocations of a rebellious people... shew thyself a Lord of power... in averting this horrible fact' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Add. B.58, fols. 4'v'-5). Once the king's death was a 'fait accompli', she drew parallels between Charles's execution and Christ's crucifixion (ibid., fols. 5-5'v'). She also beseeched God to give political guidance to the youthful Charles Stuart, whom she considered an unsophisticated player in the game of factional politics: 'he is a young unexperienced Pilot to steer to turne a vessel in so impetuous a storme' (ibid., fol. 2). Lady Pakington pleaded for his restoration to the throne, but not by the 'unchristian complyances' Charles had offered to the Scots: 'Let thy mercy pardon whatever hath already of this kind past from him, and let the unsuccessfullnes of these sinister expedients but most principally the sinn of them, be a perpetuall document to him, to rely no more on such broken reeds... let not that treacherous party within our own bosomes [those royalists who promoted a Scottish alliance], continue to blast all his Enterprises. (ibid., fols. 2-3)' Meanwhile Sir John Pakington had compounded for his estates, which had been sequestered in 1646. In 1649 the lands were conveyed to the regicide Thomas Scott, although the Pakington family continued to live at Westwood throughout the interregnum. At this time Lady Pakington and her husband invited the king's chaplain, Dr Henry Hammond, to stay with them at Westwood, where Dr Hammond remained as an honoured guest until his death in 1660. Lady Pakington's exceptional intellect and her deep interest in theology led to a close friendship with Hammond. She was welcomed into the circle of Hammond's clerical colleagues, including such eminent divines as John Fell (dean of Christ Church and later bishop of Oxford), Richard Allestree, John Dolben (later archbishop of York), Humphrey Henchman (later bishop of London), George Morley (later bishop of Winchester), and other prominent churchmen, many of whom became her personal friends. As well as participating in theological and philosophical discussions Lady Pakington shared in the circulation of manuscripts (some of which were found in her possession at her death) written by Hammond and his coterie. Lady Pakington's friendship with Anglican divines and her scholarly interests were later continued by her son, John. Like his mother, John led a quiet studious life at Westwood, and under the tutelage of the non-juror George Hickes he became an outstanding Anglo-Saxon scholar. 
It may have been the close ties between Lady Pakington and the group of learned divines centring on Henry Hammond that led contemporaries to conjecture that she was the anonymous author of 'The Whole Duty of Man' and other works presumably composed by the same writer. The hypothesis of Pakington's authorship appeared to be supported by a range of contemporary evidence, including her daughter Mary Eyre's alleged possession of a copy of 'The Whole Duty' in Lady Pakington's autograph, and the statement of Dr Hickes in the dedication of his 'Linguarum septentrionalium thesaurus' to Lady Pakington's grandson (1697) that Lady Pakington's piety and intellectual talents entitled her to be called author of 'The Whole Duty'. Citing these and other 'witnesses', George Ballard argued the claim vigorously in his biography of Lady Pakington (Ballard, 290-300). In 1864, however, the Revd Francis Barham suggested that the author of 'The Whole Duty' was Hammond's friend Richard Allestree, a theory supported in 1884 in three articles by C. E. Doble, and now accepted virtually unanimously by modern scholarship. Nevertheless, the fact that her scholarly acquaintance were willing to assign authorship of such celebrated works to Lady Pakington gives some idea of her impressive intellectual gifts, and of the general esteem in which she was held during her lifetime. 
Lady Pakington died of a stroke at Westwood Manor on 10 May 1679. The cause of death was confirmed by autopsy, whose results are summarized in 'An account of the appearances upon dissection in the body of the honorable the Ladie Pakington' (BL, Sloane MS 4034, fol. 363). She was buried in the family vault in the church at Hampton Lovett, near Westwood, on 13 May. A memorial inscribed on the monument erected for her husband declared Lady Pakington 'Justly reputed, the Authoress of the 'Whole duty of Man'; Who was Exemplary for her great Piety and Goodness' (Ballard, 303). 


@@@@@


doc= 21143


Pakington, Sir John (b. in or before 1477, d. 1551), judge, was the eldest son of John Pakington and Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Washbourne of Stanford-on-Teme, Worcestershire. He began his professional career as an attorney of the common pleas, appearing for a Shropshire client in 1498, and acting as deputy for the sheriff of that county in 1500; his signature is also found on a bill in chancery as early as 1500. This may explain how he came to be chirographer of the common pleas in 1508, a valuable clerical office which he held until his death, though since the office was in the gift of the crown Pakington must have acquired a significant patron. Shortly before 1505 he became a member of the Inner Temple, but he did not immediately abandon attorneyship and in 1506 represented the inn itself in a debt action. In 1512 he was appointed solicitor to the Mercers' Company. However, by 1507 he was described as 'counsel' in the court of requests, in 1513 he became a justice of the peace for Gloucestershire, and in 1515 member of parliament for the same shire, while in 1517 he was sufficiently advanced at the bar to become a bencher of his inn without having read. 
In 1519 Pakington is mentioned as 'legis peritus de consilio' in a case in the London Guildhall (TNA: PRO, CP 40/1026, m. 101d). He delivered readings in the Inner Temple in 1520 and 1528, serving as treasurer from 1528 to 1533. Some new chambers erected in the inn at this time, doubtless at his expense, were named Pakington's Rents. In 1529 he received a very remarkable patent allowing him to wear a hat in the king's presence (and on all other occasions), and exempting him from being made a knight, a baron of the exchequer, or a serjeant-at-law. Perhaps a call of serjeants was already in the offing. Pakington was indeed offered the coif in 1531, but, presumably relying on his privilege, was never created. The reason may have been that his principal activities were keeping him away from London. 
By his marriage in the 1520s to Anne (died 1563), daughter of Henry Dacres, sheriff of London, and widow of Robert Fairthwaite (died 1521), Pakington acquired valuable city connections; but most of his land purchases were in his native county of Worcestershire, where in 1528 he settled at Hampton Lovett. He was a steward of estates in Worcestershire for Worcester Cathedral and Fotheringhay College; and he was active in the council in the marches in the 1530s, becoming a justice for north Wales (1532), recorder of Worcester (by 1539, when he was elected member for the shire), a Welsh judge on the Brecon circuit (1541), and recorder of Ludlow (1542). Waiving his patent of 1529, he accepted knighthood in 1545. He died on 21 August 1551 and was buried at Hampton Lovett, where there is a tomb chest. His sons having predeceased him, his daughters Bridget Littleton and Ursula Scudamore were his heirs-at-law, and his entailed estates passed to his nephew Thomas Pakington. Among various charitable bequests he left money for the marriage of between forty and sixty poor maidens, for making highways and bridges around Hampton Lovett, and for the poor-boxes of the Inner Temple and various parishes. The household servants remembered in his will included two minstrels. Dame Anne founded almshouses in Fleet Street and a charity for the poor of St Botolph, Aldersgate. 


@@@@@


doc= 21144


Sir John Pakington, first baronet (1600-1624), was the only son of Sir John Pakington and his wife, Dorothy. He was created a baronet in 1620 and sat in parliament for Aylesbury in 1623-4. His marriage to Frances, daughter of Sir John Ferrers of Tamworth, brought them one son, the politician Sir John Pakington (1621-1680), and one daughter, Elizabeth, who married first Colonel Henry Washington and second Samuel Sandys of Ombersley in Worcestershire. Pakington died in October 1624 and was buried on 29 October at St Mary's, Aylesbury. His widow married Robert Leasly on 29 December 1626. 


@@@@@


doc= 21145


Pakington, Sir John (1549-1625), courtier, was the son of Sir Thomas Pakington (died 1571), sheriff of Worcester, and Dorothy Kytson (1531-1577) ['see 'Tasburgh, Dorothy]. His grandfather Robert Pakington was a London mercer and MP for the city, murdered in 1537. Robert was brother to the judge Sir John Pakington (b. in or before 1477, d. 1551). From his uncle Sir John, Sir Thomas inherited estates near Droitwich in Worcestershire, including the manors of Hampton Lovett and Westwood; and from his mother, lands in and around the town of Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire. The main Worcestershire estates passed in turn to John, but John's mother, Dorothy, exercised what she evidently considered to be regalian rights at Aylesbury. On 4 May 1571, as 'lord and owner of the town', she nominated its burgesses without reference to any of the inhabitants. Dorothy's second husband, Thomas Tasburgh, sat more than once for the town and during the reign of Elizabeth, Aylesbury seems to have almost always sent Pakington nominees to parliament and has been justly described as an Elizabethan pocket borough. 
Pakington was enrolled as a student by special admission at Lincoln's Inn on 22 November 1570. He was presented to the queen during her visit to Worcester in 1572, and was invited to court. It was reported that Elizabeth admired his athletic achievements, but that when he challenged other courtiers to swim against him from Westminster to London Bridge, she vetoed the competition. Naunton described him as 'a brave gentleman and a very fine courtier', but 'an ill husband of opportunity'; for while at Elizabeth's court he 'stood very high in her grace, but he came in and went out, through disassiduity, drew the curtain between himself and the light of her grace' (Naunton, 32). However, Pakington remained sufficiently in the queen's favour to win a knighthood, conferred in November 1587. 
Pakington found other routes to fortune. In November 1598 he married Dorothy, daughter of Humphrey Smith and widow of Alderman Benedict Barnham, a liveryman of the Drapers' Company; one son, John, was born to them ['see below']. On 20 May of the same year Pakington was granted the lucrative starch patent, which he assigned to the grocer George Berisford and three others, who in turn issued licences to five London retailers. Another monopoly, of salt, appears to have borne heavily on the burgesses and bailiffs of Droitwich, where salt was extracted, and to have led to their refusal later that year to pay taxes. As their local lord, John Pakington was one of the justices to whom the privy council looked to enforce obedience. Probably in early 1601, a Nicholas Scott lodged a complaint to the effect 'that Sir John Pakington the starch patentee, and his assigns, have farmed the counties of England for yearly rents, to the impoverishment of the retail grocers of London' ('Salisbury MSS', 14.169). In the same year resentment at such patents was vented in parliament. The starch monopoly was later acquired by Robert Cecil and Lord Buckhurst. 
In June 1603 Pakington demonstrated his loyalty to the new king, providing James with lavish hospitality at his Aylesbury mansion. In the latter part of 1607 he became involved in his only recorded subversive act. He had been a member of the council in the marches in 1597, when he was in receipt of a sugar loaf for his pains. However, the council's continuing exercise of jurisdiction in four English marcher counties was said to involve many abuses and aroused growing opposition. In 1607 legal resistance began, led by the bishop of Hereford and twenty-six leading gentry. These included Pakington himself, a member of the commission of the peace and in that year the sheriff of Worcester, who refused to obey the precepts of the council in its role as a court. The dispute engaged the attention of the privy council and the lords chief justices. 
Pakington's family was not a happy one. In February 1607 it was reported that 'Sir John Pakington and his little violent lady are parted on foul terms' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.243). The scandal caused concern at the highest levels, King James even writing to Archbishop Bancroft urging that the couple be pressed to compose their differences. At about the same time, Dorothy Pakington was involved in an acrimonious dispute with Sir Francis Bacon, into which she drew Robert Cecil. Bacon had married Alice Barnham, Lady Pakington's daughter from her previous marriage, and she charged him with forcing into marriage another of her daughters, aged twelve. Relations between husband and wife did not improve. On 21 June 1617 there were reported to have broken out 'great warres between Sir John and his lady' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.86), and hostilities continued in the court of high commission. The issue finally fell to the arbitration of the lord keeper, who, unluckily for Dorothy, was then her old enemy, Francis Bacon. His verdict went against her. 
Sir John had fine properties with which to console himself for his familial strife. His main residence, which he erected early in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, still stands on high ground in the middle of Westwood Park. It was a substantial house in his time, and four distinctively designed wings were added after his death. In 1618 Sir John Pakington received a licence to enclose 1000 acres at Westwood, Hampton Lovett, and surrounding parishes, and here he impaled two great parks, stocking one with red deer and the other with fallow. His enclosure met with some opposition from the burgesses of Droitwich, on account of rights of way which they had enjoyed over the manor of Westwood. Sir John Pakington died in January 1625 and was buried at Aylesbury. 




@@@@@


doc= 21146


Pakington, Sir John, second baronet (1621-1680), politician, was born on 13 August 1621 and was baptized the next day at Hampton Lovett, Worcestershire. He was the only son of Sir John Pakington, first baronet (1600-1624) ['see under 'Pakington, Sir John (1549-1625)], and Frances, daughter of Sir John Ferrers of Tamworth, Staffordshire. He succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his father in October 1624, and to Westwood Park, Worcestershire, on the death of his grandfather, also Sir John Pakington (1549-1625), in January 1625. He was the ward of Thomas Coventry, the lord keeper. He would later ('c'.1648) marry Coventry's daughter, Dorothy ['see 'Pakington, Dorothy, Lady Pakington (bap. 1623, d. 1679)]. He took the oath of allegiance in May 1638, when he was granted permission to travel abroad for three years with the proviso that he should not visit Rome. Returned to parliament in March 1640 for Worcestershire and for the borough of Aylesbury, where he had property, he chose to sit for the county. In the Long Parliament he sat for Aylesbury. In November 1640 he participated in an attack in the House of Commons on Sir Francis Windebank, secretary of state, for remarks he was alleged to have made regarding those who had refused to pay ship money. Although he apparently acquiesced in the attainder of Strafford, by 1642 Pakington's sympathies lay with the court, and he received the king's commission of array for Worcestershire. He was then, in August 1642, disabled from sitting in parliament. 
With the other commissioners of array for Worcestershire, in August 1642 he raised a cavalry force to serve in the county. He fought at the battle of Edge Hill and was a member of the royalist committee of safety during the first civil war. In June 1643 he was admitted a freeman of Worcester on condition that he took no advantage from the privilege, and was serving as a justice of the peace for Worcestershire by 1644. 
In March 1646 he obtained a pass to travel to London, where he presented himself to the speaker of the Commons with the intention of compounding for his support of the royalist cause. He was imprisoned, and was held for two months. His own figure for the annual value of his estates was $1520, but the sequestrators assessed them as worth $1947 per annum. Pakington put his losses during the civil war at $12,000 in rents sequestered and damage to his woods and houses. He was fined $7670, a third of the value of his estates, with $3000 accepted as first payment. This was paid and in May 1649 he was restored to his estates, with the balance paid in May 1650. But his tenants at Aylesbury refused him possession, petitioning for restoration of their common rights at Heydon Hill, which they claimed had been unjustly taken away, and he was compelled to grant his property there to the inhabitants of the town. 
Pakington was arrested as the Scottish army under Charles II approached Worcester in August 1651, but was released when they entered the city. He attended the muster of the army on 26 August and was taken prisoner at the battle of Worcester on 3 September. He was tried in 1653 for appearing at the muster, but was acquitted. Nevertheless he was again fined, paying $1000, and undertook to pay $1000 more. In December 1654 he was one of the recipients of crates, said to contain bottles of wine, sent by the royalist agent Henry Norwood to Sir Henry Littleton. These aroused suspicion and in the following January he was arrested and charged with receiving arms in those crates. He was released in September 1655, but was again taken into custody in 1659, suspected of being involved in Sir George Booth's rising. During the 1650s his Westwood Park residence provided a congenial centre for Anglican and royalist sympathizers, and was the home of Henry Hammond, canon of Christ Church and archdeacon of Chichester, who died there in 1660. 
Following the Restoration Pakington was again appointed justice of the peace for Worcestershire, in June 1660, and served as deputy lieutenant for the county. He was returned to parliament unopposed in 1661 as member for Worcestershire. In 1661 a bill was introduced to cancel the conveyance of his property at Aylesbury, but it failed to make progress and was not reintroduced until 1664, when it passed. 
In November 1661 two letters dropped in a country lane in Worcestershire were taken to Pakington. Alarmed that they implied the existence of a plot for a 'suddaine riseing of the Presbiterian and factious party' (Greaves, 72), he forwarded them to Sir Edward Nicholas, secretary of state, and informed the lord lieutenant. A number of people were taken into custody, including the entrepreneur Andrew Yarrenton, and Ambrose Sparry, rector of Martley, the addressees of the letters. Richard Baxter was among the ministers implicated in what was referred to as the Pakington Plot or the Yarrenton Plot. He accused Pakington of intercepting a letter from him to his mother-in-law and sending it to George Morley, bishop of Worcester and Pakington's close friend. Impressed by Pakington's testimony, which was supported by that of other members, the Commons requested the king to issue a proclamation ordering all 'suspicious and loose persons' to leave London (Greaves, 76). The proclamation duly appeared and required all cashiered soldiers of the Commonwealth regime to leave the capital by 4 December and not return before 14 June 1662. Writing in 1681, in the context of the exclusion crisis, Yarrenton accused Pakington of having written the letters, and although this was not refuted, it seems possible that they were by another hand, perhaps that of a neighbour of Sparry's who had been rebuked by him for adultery. 
Dorothy, Lady Pakington, died on 10 May 1679; Sir John Pakington was buried at Hampton Lovett on 3 January 1680. Their only son, 


@@@@@


doc= 21147


Sir John Pakington, third baronet (c.1649-1688), matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 3 May 1662. In May 1665 he was granted a licence to travel for three years with his tutor, and visited Italy, Switzerland, Germany, and the Low Countries. He became a notable Anglo-Saxon scholar, tutored by George Hickes, appointed dean of Worcester in 1683. In 1668 Pakington married Margaret (died 1690), daughter of Sir John Keyt of Ebrington, Gloucestershire. Pakington was made a freeman of the borough of Droitwich in 1683 and an alderman of Bewdley in 1685. He was returned as member for Worcestershire in 1685 as a tory. He was buried at Hampton Lovett on 28 March 1688. His son, also Sir John Pakington (1671-1727), was a prominent tory politician. 


@@@@@


doc= 21148


Pakington, Sir John, fourth baronet (1671-1727), politician, was born on 16 March 1671, the only son of Sir John Pakington, third baronet (c.1649-1688), politician, of Westwood, Worcestershire ['see under 'Pakington, Sir John, second baronet], and his wife, Margaret ('c'.1647-1690), the second daughter of Sir John Keyt, first baronet (1616-1662), of Ebrington, Gloucestershire. Pakington's father prepared for his early demise by appointing Viscount Weymouth and his two brothers, James and Henry Frederick Thynne, as the guardians of his son. No doubt under their guidance Pakington matriculated at St John's College, Oxford, in October 1688. However, his stay there was short and he left without taking a degree in order to enter politics. When parliament was dissolved in February 1690 Pakington was still a minor, but he sought a seat at Droitwich, where he had inherited some fee farm rents and a small stake in the local salt industry. His pretensions were challenged by Philip Foley, and in defeat Pakington determined to stand for the county seat against the head of that family, Thomas Foley of Witley. He duly won a seat, defeating Foley's partner, Sir Francis Winnington. 
Pakington's minority may explain the low-key beginning of his parliamentary career. However, it was assumed by observers that he would follow in the footsteps of his father and grandfather, taking his cue from their strongly royalist and Anglican opinions. In June 1690 he caught smallpox, but having recovered he was named in November to the Worcestershire lieutenancy, the first step towards asserting his family's power in local society. The next step was a favourable marriage, and on 28 August 1691 he was licensed to marry Frances ('c'.1672-1697), the daughter of Henry Parker of Honington, Warwickshire, with a portion of $4000. This marriage produced four sons and three daughters, though all but one daughter predeceased him. At this stage of his career Pakington was already being noted as sympathetic to the 'country' reform programme, which was becoming increasingly attractive to the tory party, and he supported an attempt to enact triennial legislation in January 1693. Pakington's decision not to contest the 1695 election is difficult to explain, especially as he was involved in the Worcestershire campaign and also at Aylesbury, where he was lord of the manor. Out of parliament, he then lost his local offices in 1696 for refusing to sign the Association. Early in 1697 his wife died, bringing forth in Pakington, according to Sir Charles Lyttelton in a letter of March 1697, a desire 'to break up house and go abroad' (BL, Add. MS 29578, fol. 615), in order to improve his education. However, by June 1697 he had abandoned any such plans. 
Pakington re-entered parliament for Worcestershire in 1698, an election notable for a backlash against the court. Such a mood was much in keeping with Pakington's own views, and on 18 January 1699 he delivered an amusing speech in support of the 'Disbanding Bill', in which he singled out for criticism those who sought to justify a larger force by reference to the threat posed by the exiled James II. Pakington saw this as an empty threat unless King William's title was precarious, and he knew of only one man who had questioned it publicly. This was a sharp dig at Gilbert Burnet, bishop of Salisbury, whose 'Pastoral Letter' (1693) had argued that William's right to the throne was founded on conquest. Pakington's dislike of whig latitudinarian bishops resurfaced in the next session, when on 12 December 1699 he attacked Burnet as an inappropriate choice as preceptor to the duke of Gloucester, since the bishop was 'a republican in principle' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 130, fol. 406). A motion for Burnet's removal supported by Pakington was lost on the following day. 
On 16 November 1700 Pakington married for the second time; his new wife was Hester ('c'.1672-1715), the daughter and heir of Sir Herbert Perrott, of Haroldston, Pembrokeshire. By this match he acquired 'a good $1,100 a year' (BL, Add. MS 29579, fol. 242) and a small role in Welsh politics. The 1701 parliament saw him again preoccupied with the sins of whig bishops. Perhaps irked by rumours of Burnet's translation to the wealthy see of Winchester, on 8 March, after 'a very eloquent fine oration, long but admirably witty' ('Diary of Sir Richard Cocks', 81), Pakington moved successfully for a bill preventing the translation of bishops. This bill, which also contained a clause against the practice of occasional conformity, never emerged from committee. 
The second election of 1701 saw Pakington retain his seat by a mere fifteen votes in the face of concerted opposition from bishops Lloyd of Worcester and Talbot of Oxford. Indeed, his quarrel with Lloyd provoked Pakington into a defence of his views as a member of the Church of England and a believer in toleration. This battle with Lloyd was to grow more virulent during the 1702 election, when both sides entered into print to disparage their opponents. Lloyd used his episcopal visitation to campaign against Pakington, whom he criticized in private for debauchery and Jacobitism. 'The True Character of a Churchman' was erroneously believed to be written by Lloyd, but it was distributed about the diocese by the bishop's allies. It was answered by 'The Character of a Low Churchman', a panegyric to Pakington penned by Henry Sacheverell. Pakington complained to the newly assembled House of Commons on 2 November 1702 of a breach of privilege, and on 18 November Lloyd and his son were voted 'malicious, unchristian and arbitrary', and the queen addressed to remove Lloyd from his post as lord almoner. 
Pakington returned to the issue of occasional conformity in the 1703-4 session. In a speech being distributed in tory circles in February 1704, he attacked those who remained neutral in matters pertaining to the church, a thinly veiled criticism of the leading ministers lords Godolphin and Marlborough, before referring to the role of dissenters in the civil wars and execution of Charles I: the whigs and their dissenting allies were 'a party of men that are against the church and government; whose principle of hatred and malice to the family of the Stuarts descends to them by inheritance' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 153-4). He saw a bill against the practice of occasional conformity as designed to prevent hypocrisy (the taking of Anglican communion in order to qualify for political office) and to protect the Anglican monopoly of power. Without it, he prophesied the rise of dissent to a majority in parliament and an end to the Church of England. Such was his apocalyptic vision, born out of the experiences of his own family earlier in the century. Following the bill's defeat in the Lords, in the next session Pakington was a proponent of attaching the measure to a supply bill, an act dubbed 'the tack', in order to force it through the upper house. 
At the 1705 election Pakington was more involved than ever in the campaign. He did not limit his activities to Worcestershire, but stood also at Aylesbury (where he had been elected in 1702, though chose to sit for Worcestershire) to protect his interest. The previous parliament had seen the culmination of the celebrated 'Ashby v. White' case, which had begun as an attempt to undermine Pakington's interest and ended as a dispute between the two houses concerning the determination of the right to vote. Although narrowly defeated at Aylesbury, Pakington was re-elected for Worcestershire, his supporters carrying a banner proclaiming 'For the Queen and Church, Pakington'. 'The tack' and the supposed threat to the church played a large role in the election, with Bishop Lloyd again attacking his old adversary and even threatening to prosecute Pakington's supporters in the ecclesiastical courts. On this occasion the dispute between bishop and MP petered out, and there was even a reconciliation between the two men in September 1706 when Lloyd confirmed Pakington's daughter. 
Three of Pakington's speeches survive for the 1705-6 session. His principles refused to allow him to support the tories' cynical attempt on 4 December 1705 to embarrass the ministry by proposing an address to the queen that the electress of Hanover should be invited to reside in England. However, he was stirred into action on 8 December when it was proposed that the Commons endorse a resolution passed by the House of Lords that the Church of England was in a flourishing condition. He responded by listing four dangers to the church: the freedom to publish pamphlets against the church; the increase in the number of dissenting academies; the increase in the number of conventicles; and the influence of the kirk in Scotland, which could again be used in conjunction with English dissent to threaten the church (as in the civil wars). In this Pakington could be seen as putting in coherent form the inchoate fears of his high Anglican brethren. He also felt it necessary to criticize the 'Regency Bill' on 19 December, which he saw as putting the armed forces and the revenue into the hands of a group of regents who might endanger the succession. He preferred the traditional authority of parliament and privy council. Pakington viewed the impending union with Scotland with trepidation. He was particularly concerned for the fate of episcopalianism north of the border and the attendant threat to the Church of England posed by state-sponsored Presbyterianism in Scotland. Thus on 4 February 1707 he attacked the union as being carried by bribery and force and reflected so severely on the ministry that he risked being sent to the Tower of London. 
In the 1707-8 session Pakington was relatively quiet, and it is possible that Robert Harley had promised him office in a revamped Board of Trade as part of a scheme to reconstruct the ministry. In the event Harley lost office in a power struggle in February 1708. At the general election in May of that year Pakington was returned unopposed. In the new parliament he was soon involved in yet another tory 'cause celebre' -- the battle to prevent a new charter being foisted upon Bewdley in order to facilitate whig control of the borough. His 'flaming speech' ('Wentworth Papers', 70) when the election was decided at the bar of the house on 8 February 1709 was eventually published in the more propitious circumstances of 1710-11. Most startlingly he compared the silent surrender of Bewdley's charter unfavourably to the arbitrary surrenders of James II's reign. In the following session he voted against the impeachment of his erstwhile champion from 1702, Dr Sacheverell. 
With the return of the tories to power under Robert Harley in 1710, Pakington may again have harboured hopes of office. Certainly Lord Weymouth was pressing for his inclusion in the new Board of Trade, but Harley's predilection for moderates no doubt precluded Pakington. Instead Pakington concentrated his parliamentary energies on bringing the defeated whig ministry to account for their mismanagement. Thus, on 31 May 1711, as part of a long representation to the queen, the surrender of Bewdley's charter was voted illegal and destructive of the constitution. Pakington was also a member of the tory back-bench pressure group the October Club, which was dedicated to forcing a more complete tory policy upon the ministry. In order to buy off some of this opposition, in the summer of 1711 Harley (by then Lord Oxford) decided to take more tories into office, and Pakington accepted a secret pension of $800 per annum on the Irish establishment (paid under the name of Edwards). Possibly because of his pension, in the 1711-12 session Pakington was noticeably more restrained in his attacks on the ministry, although he still deemed the misdeeds of the previous administration and the duke of Marlborough as legitimate targets, speaking against the latter in January 1712. In June 1712 Pakington was rebuffed when he approached Lord Oxford for a public mark of the queen's favour, rather than his pension, which was technically in breach of the place legislation then in force. 
By 1713 Pakington was a keen advocate of a more active strategy in support of the Pretender, which sought to make public the regents named by the elector of Hanover under the 'Regency Act' (and widely reputed to be whigs) and then have them voted enemies of the constitution. In this scenario, the ensuing crisis would destroy the ministry and the 'Act of Settlement' could then be overturned. This aggressive strategy was vetoed by the Pretender, who preferred to rely on the assurances of the Oxford ministry. Returned in the 1713 election, Pakington was one of those tories who hoped for a lead from Henry St John, Viscount Bolingbroke. Bolingbroke, locked into a power struggle with Oxford, was keen for Jacobite support. Indeed, in late July 1714 rumours circulated of Pakington's imminent appointment to a new Treasury board. The queen's death on 1 August was thus a huge blow to Pakington's hopes. Indeed, he was so upset that on 6 August he sought to have the eminent physician Dr John Radcliffe expelled from the Commons for not attending the queen's sickbed. 
Despite unpropitious circumstances, Pakington topped the poll for Worcestershire in the 1715 election, once again falling out with Bishop Lloyd. The outbreak of the Jacobite rising later in the year saw Pakington arrested at Westwood. Forewarned of the event, he was able to arrange a comfortable trip to London in a stagecoach and upon his arrival convinced the privy council of his innocence. Although the exiled Stuarts continued to regard him as a potential supporter, it would seem that he was unwilling to countenance an armed insurrection backed by foreign troops to secure a restoration. 
In the 1715 parliament Pakington was an active opponent of the whig ministry, speaking against the 'Peerage Bill' in December 1719. Having been returned again in 1722 he opposed the re-election of Spencer Compton as speaker, although he could not find a seconder. However, he remained a popular figure with the opposition, even being elected recorder of Worcester in 1726. 
Pakington died on 13 August 1727, shortly after the dissolution, thereby allowing the only surviving son of his second marriage, Sir Herbert Perrott Pakington, fifth baronet, an easy accession to his seat in parliament. His will, written three days before his death, ordered that his body be interred in the parish church of Hampton Lovett, Worcestershire. A monument in the church referred to his parliamentary service in 'speaking his mind there without reserve, neither fearing nor flattering those in power, but despising all their offers of title and preferment upon base and dishonourable terms of compliance' (Nash, 1.539). This outspokenness, at once vituperative and partisan, makes it unlikely that Pakington was the model for Joseph Addison's amiable tory squire Sir Roger de Coverley in 'The Spectator', as used sometimes to be thought. 


@@@@@


doc= 21149


Pakington, John Somerset, first Baron Hampton (1799-1880), politician, was born at Slaughter's Court, Powick, Worcestershire, on 20 February 1799, the second son of William Russell (died 1812) and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1813), daughter of Sir Herbert Perrott Pakington, seventh baronet. Orphaned in his early teens, after attending Eton College Russell was admitted at Oriel College, Oxford, in 1818. On the death of his elder brother, William Herbert Russell, in 1819, however, he became heir to the family estates and left the university without a degree to take up the life of a country gentleman. In his young manhood he adopted the style of a dandy and was nicknamed Mr Brummell. On 14 August 1822 he married Mary (died 1843), only child of Moreton Aglionby Slaney of Shifnal, Shropshire, with whom he had a son (born in 1826). He fought a duel in 1827, reputedly the last such event in Worcestershire. On 14 March 1831 he assumed the name of Pakington in lieu of Russell, having inherited in the previous year, jointly with his maternal aunt, the estates of his uncle, Sir John Pakington, eighth baronet. These included Westwood Park, near Droitwich, Worcestershire, which became his seat. 
After three failed attempts to enter parliament -- for East Worcestershire in December 1832 and for West Worcestershire in May 1833 and January 1835 -- at the general election in July 1837 Pakington was elected Conservative MP for Droitwich, the seat he was to hold until 1874. He made his first Commons speech the following January (1838). Its subject, Canada, marked the beginning of a long interest in colonial issues: in 1841 he secured a select committee to inquire into the state of Newfoundland; the following year he chaired the select committee appointed to investigate the depression in the sugar plantations of the West Indies; and in 1848 he sat on Lord George Bentinck's select committee which examined the grievances of the colonial planters. 
Following the death of his first wife, on 4 June 1844 Pakington married Augusta Anne (1817-1848), daughter of George Murray, bishop of Rochester. During their short marriage they had a son and daughter. On 5 June 1851 he married his third wife, Augusta (1799-1892), daughter of Thomas Champion-de-Crespigny and widow of Thomas Henry Hastings Davies of Elmley Park, Worcester. On 3 July 1846, shortly after the fall of Robert Peel's ministry, he was created a baronet. 
Pakington began his parliamentary career as a supporter of Peel, though he was never quite a consistent one. Although he voted with Peel on the second reading of the 'Maynooth Bill' in April 1845, he voted against corn law repeal in 1846, and opposed reductions in sugar duties in 1848. 'All his liaisons are with Peel's party, whilst all his votes have been with yours', Disraeli was told (Stewart, 138). Nevertheless, he did not become clearly identified with protectionist Conservatism until he joined Lord Derby's government in February 1852, as secretary of state for war and the colonies. He had expected only a minor post, but such was the paucity of administrative talent on the protectionist side that he was 'pitchforked into the vacant place'. His appointment was the occasion of the duke of Wellington's famous remark, applicable to the ministry as a whole, 'Who is he? I never heard of him' (Vincent, 71-2); he had no experience of office, and spoke only occasionally in parliamentary debates. Pakington himself thought the 1852 government 'not strong enough numerically to be quite comfortable and independent' (Pakington to Disraeli, 9 Aug 1852, MS Hughenden B/XX/P/6). He was also perhaps somewhat hostile to Disraeli personally. 
Pakington's only major legislative act during the 1852 administration was successfully to carry through a bill, which he had inherited from his predecessor Sir George Grey, granting New Zealand a representative constitution. The 'New Zealand Act' (1852) 'was not unjustifiably claimed to be the most liberal colonial measure since the American Revolution' (Morrell, 'Policy in the mid-Victorian Age', 338). Other concessions which he made to colonial reformers included granting the Australian colonies control of lands and land revenues, and an undertaking to abolish the transportation of convicts. 
It was in the following six years, when the Conservatives were in opposition, that Pakington developed the most distinctive side of his political identity with a very public espousal of radical reform of working-class education. This was not a completely new departure, for it drew on his long experience of county government. From 1834 to 1858 he was chairman of the Worcestershire quarter sessions, where he formed an interest in penal policy and the roots of crime. He was one of the Conservatives who campaigned against beerhouses, introducing a 'Sale of Beer Act' in 1840. The link between ignorance and crime particularly impressed him. His 'Juvenile Offenders Act' (1847) reflected a long-standing concern about young offenders, which led him to support Mary Carpenter and Matthew Davenport Hill in their proposals for industrial schools. He was a member of the Worcester diocesan board of education, and helped to found in 1852 the teacher training college at Saltley. 
Although Pakington stressed the importance of religion in education, he took a less rigid denominational line than the leaders of the National Society, the body which ran most Anglican schools. He was the only member of Derby's cabinet in 1852 to voice disapproval of the proposed management clauses for elementary schools receiving government grants, on the decidedly unorthodox grounds (for a tory) that it would give too much power to the local clergy. In religious matters generally he was more liberal than the rest of his party, voting in favour of a bill (1857) to permit Jews to take their seats in parliament, and proposing (1858) a settlement of the contested issue of church rates by exempting dissenters from payment. He supported the work of the Church of England Education Society, founded in 1853 on a broader basis than the National Society, in that it did not restrict instruction to members of the established church, or require every pupil to be taught the catechism. 
Pakington's knowledge of the state of elementary schooling convinced him that schools supported by rates were needed to supplement the existing schools run by the churches. James Prince Lee, the Birmingham headmaster and subsequently bishop of Manchester, was an important influence. In October 1853 Pakington was approached by Manchester educational reformers, led by Lee, and asked to take charge of their 'Local Rating Bill' during the 1854 parliamentary session. Having consulted Lord Derby, Pakington refused, partly for political reasons and partly through doubts about some of the bill's religious provisions. But he made it clear that had time allowed he would have brought forward his own bill in 1854, and in 1855 he did so. 
In January 1855 Pakington gave notice of a bill which foreshadowed many of the features of the 1870 'Education Act', and which was indeed in some respects more radical. He believed he could promote educational reform in an independent and private capacity while, if the bill were successful, political advantage could accrue to the Conservative Party. His proposal was to allow ratepayers to elect school committees which could both build new schools and aid existing ones. New schools would be free. Existing ones would be aided only if they granted all pupils a conscience clause (that is, a declaration allowing parents to withdraw their children from denominational religious instruction), and gave up any power to refuse attendance on religious grounds. Religious instruction would be Anglican unless a majority of inhabitants were dissenters, in which case the privy council would decide. Undoubtedly Pakington expected some support from his front bench colleagues, if not official endorsement. Instead Derby and Disraeli believed they had been placed in 'an inconvenient and embarrassing position' (Disraeli to Pakington, 5 Jan 1855, Hampton MSS, 3835/7). The bill threatened the unity of the Conservative front bench -- Lord Stanley, a crucial figure, supported it, though with reservations -- at a time when the leadership anticipated the disintegration of the Aberdeen government. They urged Pakington to abandon the bill. 
Ignoring the pleas of Derby and Disraeli, Pakington introduced his bill on 16 March 1855. He depended on the Liberal government for parliamentary time, however, and Palmerston would only give him enough to keep the issue alive as an embarrassment for Derby, not to pass the bill. It was eventually abandoned in June. In the meantime Pakington had on 23 February 1855 been appointed to the committee of inquiry into the condition of the army before Sevastopol. 
In 1857 Pakington introduced another, slightly less radical, education bill. This time he had the support even of the Cobdenite radicals, represented by the National Public School Association, who were willing to back a measure aimed at satisfying both moderate Anglicans and dissenters. In 1856 he delivered an address on national education to the members of the Manchester Athenaeum; it was one of his few publications. As in 1855 he unsuccessfully tried to get party support for his bill, and after resisting strenuous efforts by Derby and Disraeli, the party leaders, to 'stave off the measure' (Vincent, 149), he introduced his bill in February 1857. It was lost in the dissolution, however, and never got a second reading. Nevertheless his espousal of educational reform, acknowledged by his appointment as president of the education department at the first congress of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science, held in 1857, was not without result. It was his resolution of 11 February 1858 which secured the appointment of the Newcastle royal commission on elementary education which he later referred to as 'my child' (Pakington to Disraeli, 10 April 1862, MS Hughenden B/XX/P/67). 
In March 1858 Palmerston's government fell and Pakington became first lord of the Admiralty in Lord Derby's second administration, having turned down the Home Office. Like that of his colleagues, much of Pakington's energy was taken up with the parliamentary reform issue, which it was widely recognized would make or break the administration. That aside, perhaps his most significant act was the announcement in February 1859 that the navy was to build its first two iron-clad battleships, the 'Warrior' and the 'Black Prince'. Pakington was later president of the Institution of Naval Architects, and took part in establishing the Royal College of Naval Architecture. He left office on the government's fall in June 1859, and was created GCB. 
In 1862 Pakington's involvement in educational reform resumed when he stepped into the controversy surrounding the Liberal government's revised education code, which was their response to the report of the Newcastle commission. He attempted to move resolutions widening the narrow political debate about the technicalities of the code to the principles upon which state support for education should be based. He particularly advocated giving power to local agencies -- the county and borough boards of education proposed by the royal commission -- as opposed to the centralizing authority of the committee of the privy council. But although he secured support from educationists such as Kay-Shuttleworth, and for once from other leading Conservatives such as Henley Walpole and Manners, Disraeli and Derby again acted to suppress the initiative. 
In February 1865 Pakington did secure the appointment of a select committee, which he chaired, into the structure of the education department. His motion attracted the support of many tories hostile to the general approach of the department, with its strong emphasis on securing access for children of all denominations to state-aided schools. But the committee's approach disappointed these tories. Pakington was perceived to have packed the committee 'with his own friends to the prejudice of genuine Tory principles' (Lygon to Disraeli, 9 Feb 1866, MS Hughenden B/XX/L/43); and the committee's draft conclusions were liberal in tone and noticeably wider in scope than originally envisaged. However, before the committee finalized its report the Russell government fell, and while the committee's draft report was published, no final recommendations were made. 
Embarrassment on the education issue having been duly avoided, in June 1866 Pakington was appointed first lord of the Admiralty for the second time, in Derby's third government. However, his second spell at the Admiralty was brief. In March 1867 resignations over the Conservative 'Reform Bill' forced Lord Derby to reshuffle his cabinet, and Pakington moved to the War Office. His speech on re-election at Droitwich (13 March 1867) was to become famous for revealing the hastily constructed nature of the cabinet's initial reform proposals, which as a consequence became known as the 'Ten Minutes Bill'. Pakington left office for the last time following the Conservative defeat at the general election of 1868. 
Pakington remained in the Commons throughout the 1868 parliament. He was generally supportive of the 1870 'Education Act', although he disliked the compromise Cowper-Temple clause which introduced broadly undenominational religious education in board schools. In the summer of 1871 he embarked on a brief flirtation with the new social movement -- an alliance of working-class leaders and aristocratic Conservatives designed by John Scott Russell, the naval architect with whom Pakington had a previous association, to find common ground on social issues. Pakington, Derby noted on 26 July 1871, was 'intoxicated with the prospect of being one of the regenerators of society, and reconciling the people with the aristocracy' ('Diaries', 86). His address later that year as president of the Social Science Association congress at Leeds was similarly criticized for 'giving encouragement to wild theories' of a socialist tendency (ibid., 90-1). In the general election of February 1874 he suffered the humiliation of losing his Droitwich seat to a Liberal, a result which may have come as a relief to the Conservative leadership. Disraeli related to the queen Pakington's self-deprecatory remark that 'Providence had disposed of him' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', ed. A. C. Benson and Lord Esher, and G. E. Buckle, 2nd ser., 1926-8, 2.321). 
On 6 March 1874 Pakington entered the Lords as Baron Hampton. In his first speech in the upper house he moved a resolution in favour of appointing a minister of education, something he had long favoured and for which he pressed strongly when in 1868 the Conservatives sought, unsuccessfully, to construct a passable 'Education Bill'. In November 1875 he was appointed first civil service commissioner, with a salary of $2000 a year, which he needed to alleviate his financial problems. But in view of his age the appointment was regarded as inappropriate in some quarters, and it was said to have contributed to the Conservative government's defeat on a vote on patronage in July 1877. Hampton died at his London home, 9 Eaton Square, on 9 April 1880. He was buried in the family mausoleum at Hampton-Lovett church, Worcestershire, on 15 April. 
Pakington was described as being 'of the middle size, with a pale face, and rather a hooked nose'. His dress and bearing gave 'indications of correctness and finish, rather than of greatness or genius' (J. E. Ritchie, 'British Senators', 1869, 40). Although never a serious candidate to lead his party -- and regarded by his colleagues as prone to muddled thinking -- Pakington was a front-bench political figure for almost twenty years. Known as a competent and an orthodox administrator when at the colonial, naval, and War offices -- and disapproving of Liberal policy in those areas -- he was in many respects representative of orthodox squirearchical Conservatism. However, he had a definite eccentric streak. A Peelite who nevertheless voted against corn law repeal, he was later attracted to the idea of fusion with Palmerstonian Liberalism. Above all he persistently promoted Liberal, indeed radical, educational reform. In retrospect that was the most distinctive aspect of his political identity. 


@@@@@


doc= 21150


Packington, William (d. 1390), administrator and supposed chronicler, probably came from the Leicestershire village of Packington near Ashby-de-la-Zouch; he later held the living of Burton Overy in the same county. His will refers to a brother named John and two sisters named Lucy and Reyne. Packington was in the service of Edward, prince of Wales, the Black Prince, from at least 1364. His brother, too, was apparently a servant of the prince. On the death of Edward in 1376 Packington became the receiver-general of his widow, Joan, and, following the succession to the throne of Richard II, was appointed keeper of the wardrobe on 1 July 1377. On 6 January 1381 he was appointed chancellor of the exchequer, and continued to hold both offices until his death on 25 July 1390. Although wardrobe expenditure was fairly low during Packington's keepership, he was unable to obtain sufficient funds from the exchequer to cover the wardrobe's outgoings, and at the time of his death the wardrobe had accumulated debts of approximately $6000-7000. 
Packington held at various times livings at Burton Overy, Ivinghoe in Buckinghamshire, Wearmouth in co. Durham, and elsewhere. He exchanged Ivinghoe for a canonry at Windsor in October 1381. On 20 September 1381 he was appointed archdeacon of Canterbury, an office that he retained until his death. On 28 December 1381 he became dean of Lichfield. He also held prebends in York, Lincoln, Chichester, and London. Shortly before his death he resigned as dean of Lichfield and became dean of St Martin's-le-Grand, London. A street in Islington, London, built on what was once prebendal land of St Paul's, is named after him. 
John Leland claimed that Packington 'did write a Cronique yn Frenche from the IX Yere of King John of Englande on to his tyme, and dedicatid it to his Lord Prince Edwarde' ('De rebus Britannicis', 2.455). The extracts given by Leland show that he was referring to BL, Cotton MS Tiberius A.vi, folios 121-9, a fourteenth-century chronicle based on the French 'Brut', the 'Flores historiarum', and the long continuation of the French 'Brut'. However, the manuscript contains no contemporary evidence indicating that Packington was the author of this chronicle, and Leland's attribution must remain doubtful. Given that Leland's comment is the only evidence that Packington ever wrote a chronicle, it is difficult to accept without further supporting evidence Galbraith's suggestion that Packington wrote the account of the rising of 1381 in the Anonimalle chronicle. 


@@@@@


doc= 21151


Palairet, Elias (1713-1765), classical and biblical philologist, was born in Rotterdam, of a French family which had taken refuge in the Netherlands following the revocation of the edict of Nantes in 1685. He studied at Leiden, where his first published work, the 'Histoire du patriarche Joseph mise en vers heroiques', appeared in 1738. After ordination he became in turn preacher at Aardenburg (1741), Doornik (1749), and Tournai (by 1752), before moving to England where he became pastor of the French church at Greenwich (1755) and later of St John's Church, Spitalfields. His first philological work, 'Observationes philologico-criticae in sacros Novi Foederis libros', was published in 1752, with the addition of a four-part index for ease of reference, first to the location of scriptural passages, and then in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. Its advertisement hailed the author as a man of rare industry and judgement as well as erudition. Palairet followed this, in 1754, with an eight-page specimen of critical thesaurus of the Greek language and, in 1755, a twenty-four-page pamphlet of philological exercises based on the books of the 'New Testament', intended to precede a revised edition of his 'Observationes'. In 1756 his 'Notes on the New Testament' appeared, while his correction of the 'Ajax' and 'Electra' of Sophocles, prepared in the same year, was published in 1758. On 8 April 1756 Palairet married Margaret Lefebure at Christ Church, Spitalfields. 
Palairet's work rapidly entered mainstream philological debate; several of his arguments from 1752 were refuted in the 1757 'Acta eruditorum Lipsiensium', 451-8, and by Charles-Louis Bauer in his 'Stricturarum Periculum' (1760), but Palairet returned to the task in 1760 with a study of Latin ellipses based on clear principles of linguistic structure, 'Thesaurus ellipsium Latinarum', a work accompanied by a dual index of authors and phrases and regarded as his most useful publication ('Nouvelle biographie generale'). In his preface Palairet promised a second edition, corrected and augmented, of Lambert Bos's 'Ellipses Graecae' to complement his own work, but this was never completed. 
Palairet dedicated the 'Thesaurus' to John Egerton, bishop of Bangor and, subsequently, of Durham, whose chaplain he had become after attracting notice with his preaching and pastoral work in London; this is said latterly to have included serving as preacher to the Dutch Chapel at St James's Palace, but there is no formal record of such an appointment in the memorials or admissions entries for the St James's Chapels Royal (TNA: PRO, RG4-4574 and 4575). None the less it is not unlikely that, given his ancestry, linguistic background, and continental experience, which remained defining influences throughout his career in England, he may have preached at the Dutch Chapel or had some connection with it. 
Palairet died at Marylebone on 2 January 1765; his philological reputation subsequently declined although Edmund Henry Barker, in the preface to his 1829 new edition of the 'Thesaurus', claimed that Palairet's work, as meritorious and useful as that of other philologists, deserved rescue from scholarly oblivion -- an aspiration never wholly fulfilled. 


@@@@@


doc= 21152


Palairet, John (1697-1774), tutor and educational writer, was born in Montauban, France, the fifth of six children of Dominique Palairet ('b'. 1654) and Marie ('b'. 1658), daughter of Blaise Lacaze and Isabeau Treissedre. He became agent of the states general of the United Provinces and went to London, where he married Elizabeth Dorsan (died 1734x8) in 1727. He had acted as tutor to the young prince of Orange, William IV (1711-1751), in the Netherlands; his royal pupil married Anne, the daughter of George II, in London in March 1734. From the 1730s Palairet was French tutor to three of George II's children: William Augustus, duke of Cumberland, Mary, and Louise. His second wife, Marthe Dorree (1712-1766), was born in Amsterdam, and the first two of their eight children were born in Rotterdam, in 1738 and 1739. 
Palairet wrote the first of several educational works, 'Nouvelle methode pour apprendre a bien lire et a bien orthographier', in 1721; it reached a twelfth edition in 1755 and continued to be reprinted until the mid-nineteenth century. He followed this in 1731 with a short treatise in French and English on the arts and sciences, and a French grammar that he wrote for the prince of Orange; both works ran to numerous editions. The most significant of his later works were a comprehensive atlas, dedicated to the prince of Orange, and an introduction to modern geography, both of which were published in the 1750s. Palairet died in the parish of St James, Piccadilly, in 1774. 


@@@@@


doc= 21153


Palavicino, Sir Horatio (c.1540-1600), merchant and diplomat, was born in Genoa, Italy, the second son of Tobias Palavicino (died 'c'.1580), a well-connected merchant aristocrat, and his wife, Battina (1522-1607), the daughter of Andrea Spinola. The family firm handled the papal monopoly of alum, an essential ingredient in the dyeing process, from the mines at Tolfa from 1566, and Horatio seems to have acted as their agent in Antwerp. When their monopoly expired in 1578 the family sought to undermine the new grantees by buying up alum stocks and negotiating monopoly agreements with the major consumers in England and the Low Countries. The plan backfired in England because of Burghley's anxieties about the consumer and because of attempts by the customs official Thomas Smythe to manipulate the markets himself. In the Low Countries the Palavicini were more successful. In return for a six-year monopoly of alum imports, they loaned stocks of alum worth about $30,000 to the states general, who could sell it to the clothiers for cash to support the war effort. Palavicino was sucked into England's orbit because this loan was underwritten by Queen Elizabeth and the city of London, and in 1581 he took over the share of his Spinola partners. Although the loan was never repaid, the interest payments proved lucrative, and by 1593 (when Elizabeth stopped the interest payments) Palavicino had received $45,479 11's'. 11died During the early 1580s he was based for much of the time in France, where he conducted the family's alum business, but his contacts among the international merchant community made him an invaluable source of intelligence to the English government, and he was used to transmit funds by bills of exchange to prop up the duke of Anjou's campaigns in the Low Countries. Like many in his position, his business interests were very diverse. He undertook the purchase of 'objets d'art' for the great; in 1591 he secured a portion of Sir Edward Stafford's licence for the export of undressed cloths which was sold to merchant adventurers; he had a reputation for speculating in corn in times of dearth; he lent money on a large scale, and in 1585 negotiated the earl of Leicester's loan from city merchants; and in 1592 he handled $24,000-worth of goods from the captured carrack the 'Madre de Dios'. 
Palavicino's allegiance to the Roman Catholic church was strained by the pope's arrest and torture of his brother Fabritio, and in 1584 Horatio was himself condemned by the Inquisition in absentia and his goods seized. Although he adopted the language of the godly in his correspondence with Walsingham, describing the pope as the Antichrist, he mixed more easily with the more conservative members of the protestant establishment, such as William Cecil, Lord Burghley, Robert Cecil, Lord Buckhurst, Gilbert Talbot, seventh earl of Shrewsbury (who acted as godfather to his first son), and Sir William Cornwallis. He was granted letters of denization in November 1585 and was knighted by the queen in November 1587. In 1588, in a demonstration of 'l'ardore dell'animo mio', he volunteered for service against the armada and wrote a propagandist pamphlet on the campaign. It is probably his talent for self-promotion which accounts for his otherwise inexplicable appearance among the naval commanders commemorated in the armada tapestry presented to the lord admiral by the Dutch government. His close relations with the queen are clear from the fact that in 1589 he was among the sixteen knights to receive new year's gifts of gilt plate from Elizabeth, and the exchange of presents continued through the 1590s. 
Palavicino's Anglophilia, his wide contacts in the commercial world, and his possession of courtly graces sufficient to commend him to the snobbish Queen Elizabeth made him an ideal candidate for diplomatic missions. He felt that the key to the neutralization of the Spanish threat lay in France rather than in the Netherlands. From March 1586 until April 1587 he was employed on an embassy to the German princes to persuade them to levy troops to assist Henri of Navarre and to free Henri III from the domination of the Guise and the Catholic league. It was not an easy mission. Elizabeth expected the Germans to pay for an army of 23,000 men in France for an indefinite period for the miserly sum of 50,000 ecus (then worth $15,468 15's'. 0died); she underestimated the reluctance of Brandenburg and Saxony to get involved, and she was banking on John Casimir of the Palatinate, whose reliability was in doubt, to act as her cat's-paw. In June 1586 Elizabeth agreed to supply an extra 50,000 ecus, enabling Palavicino to negotiate the treaty of Fridelsheim in January 1587, by which Casimir agreed to support an army of 9000 in France for three months. However, the expedition was undermined by Elizabeth's claim that she had intended that the extra 50,000 ecus should be paid only if the Germans provided their share. Palavicino was convinced of the need for a negotiated peace. He put out feelers to Philip II through his brother Fabritio and the Genoese authorities in 1586 and, hoping to exploit the tensions between Philip and his general, wrote to Parma to encourage him to take on the sovereignty of the Netherlands in 1588. But he also recognized the need to negotiate from strength and therefore pressed strongly on the queen the need for intervention in France in 1587-8. Elizabeth rejected his counsel until the dire position of Henri of Navarre after the assassination of Henri III necessitated a rethink. In March 1590 he was sent to negotiate joint action by the German princes in France, but his efforts were undermined by Elizabeth's diversion of her interests to Brittany. Palavicino's diplomatic efforts on a further embassy to Germany beginning in December 1590 bore fruit in the peace of Torgau (February 1591), by which Elizabeth was pledged to pay $15,000 to support the princes' campaign in France. Unfortunately Elizabeth claimed that he had exceeded his instructions by granting $5000 more than she had intended, even though his instructions had left him with discretion to agree to that amount if necessary. Although Robert Cecil turned to him for help in constructing his spy network in 1596, Elizabeth's fury over the German embassy of 1590-91 ensured that his diplomatic career was over. 
Palavicino did not marry until late in life, but it is clear that his sexual energies had found other outlets. In 1578 the governors of Bridewell Hospital in London interviewed one of his servants, who explained how his master had required him to find him some maiden who had not been 'meddled with' before. Unable to find one in London, the hapless servant was dispatched with a horse and 10's'. to Guildford. It was at about this time that Palavicino's illegitimate son Edward ('c'.1578-1630) was born. His quest for the hand of Anne, the daughter of the Huguenot leader Francois de la Noue, was rebuffed in 1588. Three years later, on 27 April 1591, he was married at Frankfurt to Anna Hooftman, the daughter of the Antwerp banker Gieles van Eychelberg, alias Hooftman. The marriage was not entirely happy, as Anna was inclined to melancholy, doubtless not helped by the dull Cambridgeshire society to which she was condemned, but there were three children, Henry (1592-1615), Toby (1593- 'c'.1644), and Baptina (1594-1618). 
In London Palavicino resided in the parish of St Dunstan-in-the-East (1578-84) and thereafter in a large house outside Bishopsgate. From 1585, however, he began to acquire property in the countryside, and purchased the manors of Cranbrook and Rayhouse in Essex from the earl of Leicester in 1585, Westacre in Norfolk from Sir Thomas Cecil in 1588, and Babraham and Mompillers in Cambridgeshire from Robert Taylor, the recently ruined teller of the exchequer, in 1589. His total investment in land has been estimated at $20,000. From the early 1590s he regularly resided in the house built by Taylor at Babraham in 1576, but he was never accepted by the Cambridgeshire gentry. His tax assessments in the county became a major cause of friction, as Lord North and his allies sought to make him pay a disproportionate share. Palavicino declared that they acted 'upon conceit of riches which are not in substance but in men's talk' ('Salisbury MSS', 8.282). His subsidy assessment was the highest in the city of London in both 1582 and 1598, and his fortune at his death was estimated to be $100,000. 
Palavicino died on 5 July 1600 at Babraham, where he was buried. By his will he left his daughter an annuity of $150 until her marriage, when she was to be given a portion of $5000. Apart from a number of other legacies, the bulk of the estate was to be held in trust to be divided equally between the two sons at marriage. Unfortunately Palavicino decided on his deathbed to remove his hitherto trusted agents, Giovanni Battista Giustiniano and Francisco Rizzo, from the position of executor, and died before he could appoint replacements, leaving his wife as sole executor. She remarried on 7 July 1601, taking as her second husband the heavily indebted Sir Oliver Cromwell of Hinchinbrook, possibly with the encouragement of the overseers of the will, Sir Robert Cecil and Gilbert, earl of Shrewsbury, who did nothing to remove the Lady Anne from the executorship on her remarriage as Palavicino had instructed. Cromwell managed the extraordinary feat of marrying his two daughters Catherine and Jane to Henry and Toby Palavicino on 24 April 1606, and later marrying his eldest son, Henry, to Baptina, so that there was no way in which the Palavicino fortune could not fall into the Cromwell family's hands. Sir Oliver's reckless extravagance was matched by that of his son-in-law Toby, who succeeded to the estates on his elder brother's death in 1615. A prodigious builder and gambler, he wasted his assets, fell into the toils of the London moneylenders, disentailed his estates by private act in 1624, and in the years which followed sold them off. 


@@@@@


doc= 21154


Paley, Frederick Apthorp (1815-1888), classical scholar and writer, was the eldest son of Edmund Paley (1782-1850), rector of Easingwold, York, where he was born on 14 January 1815. He was the grandson of Archdeacon William Paley, whose works his father edited, and elder brother of E. G. Paley (1823-1895), who was active as an architect and builder in the north of England. His mother was Sarah, daughter of the Revd Dr Apthorp. Educated under Samuel Butler at Shrewsbury School and at St John's College, Cambridge, he graduated BA in 1838 but, owing to his dislike of mathematics, did not attempt the mathematical tripos and was therefore ineligible for the classical tripos. He was devoted to classical studies from early youth, although his interests were always wide; as a boy he was good with mechanical things and fond of natural science. He published his first book as early as 1838, a translation of G. F. Schomann's 'De comitiis Atheniensium' (1819). He proceeded MA in 1842, and received the honorary degree of LLD from Aberdeen in 1883. 
From 1838 to 1846 Paley was in residence at Cambridge; in addition to reading with pupils, he studied classics and ecclesiastical architecture, and published in both. He was an original member of the Cambridge Camden Society, became honorary secretary and member of committee, and contributed largely to 'The Ecclesiologist' while that paper was the organ of the society. He eagerly supported the restoration of the Round Church at Cambridge. During the progress of the Oxford Movement, by which he was greatly influenced, he identified himself with the high-church party in the university. In 1846 he was suspected of having encouraged one of his pupils, John Morris, to join the Roman Catholic church, and he was ordered by the master of St John's to give up his rooms in college. The affair created a brief scandal in both local and national press, and it cost Paley any chance of conventional advance at Cambridge, then or later. Some of his letters reveal a certain bitterness, and he was caustic in print about the indolence of many who enjoyed college fellowships. 
Paley accordingly left Cambridge, but not before he had himself converted to Catholicism. From 1847 to 1856 he was employed as private tutor in Catholic families, successively those of the Talbots (earls of Shrewsbury), Throckmortons, and Kenelm Digbys. On 31 July 1854 he married Ruth, sixth daughter of G. M. Burchell of Bramley, Surrey; they had two sons and a daughter. After a brief period at Peterborough, where he also took pupils, he returned to Cambridge University in 1860, on the partial removal of religious disability, and became a private tutor to undergraduates. 
During the 1840s Paley began issuing an edition of Aeschylus in separate parts, with Latin notes, which, though coldly received abroad, met with success at home. Throughout his absence from Cambridge from 1846 to 1860 he studied and wrote incessantly, publishing in particular editions of Aeschylus and Euripides with English notes, Propertius and Ovid's 'Fasti', and works on architecture. His growing reputation as a scholar, as well as teacher, led to his being considered in 1854 by J. H. Newman for the chair of Greek at the new University College of Dublin; but a rival successfully thwarted the appointment. He also studied botany, geology, and zoology, publishing pamphlets and numerous articles on these and other scientific, religious, and educational matters. Among his studies were the habits of earthworms; he published on the subject both before and after the appearance of Charles Darwin's book on it (1881), which he reviewed. 
At Cambridge from 1860 to 1874 Paley was a thorough and well regarded tutor, who never consented to teach solely for the examinations (he published opinions on reform of the classical tripos, and examined in it in 1874). Among his pupils T. Field, W. Leaf, and S. S. Lewis wrote recollections of him. In 1872 he applied unsuccessfully for the chair of Latin at Cambridge, when J. E. B. Mayor was appointed; then in 1874 his probably unique qualifications and experience led to his selection by Cardinal Manning as professor of classical literature at the new Catholic University College at Kensington, London; this was the only professional post Paley ever held. The college quickly failed, and Paley ceased to be professor in 1877. The year before, he had been briefly considered for election as fellow of Peterhouse, Cambridge, expressly to complete the edition of Thucydides begun by the college's recently dead R. Shilleto; in fact Paley completed Shilleto's book ii privately, in 1880, and insisted on anonymity. While in London, he was classical examiner to the university (1875-80), a prestigious appointment, and to the civil service commission. 
Paley's first wife was killed in a carriage accident in 1870 near Peterborough and buried there. On 3 October 1871 he married his second wife, Selena Frances, youngest daughter of Revd T. Broadhurst of Bath. In 1881, owing to lifelong weakness of the chest (this, and his lean build, gave some the impression of desiccation), he removed to Bournemouth, delighting in the house he bought at Boscombe Spa and calling it Apthorp, his mother's family name. There he died on 9 December 1888 and was buried in the Catholic churchyard. His second wife survived him until 1908. She allowed his personal library to be purchased by his friend and former pupil S. S. Lewis, who presented it to Cavendish College, Cambridge; part survives still at Fitzwilliam College. 
The range, quantity, and quality of Paley's published work were determined by various factors: he was without reliable and salaried employment for much of his life; the flow of private pupils at Cambridge lessened in the 1860s; and most of his classical articles and reviews, as well as the papers on general subjects, were written to earn money, especially in his retirement (such investments as he had in lieu of a pension were largely in land which lost value or income in the agricultural depression of the 1880s). Great changes in the educational market from the 1850s, with a new demand for classical commentaries in English, gave Paley's unquestionable talent and facility its chance; he published about thirty such commentaries, some of them going into conscientiously revised editions. Many of these were the first of their kind and became for a time standard works, for scholars as well as students, like his 'Propertius' (1853; 2nd edn, 1872) and 'Select Private Orations of Demosthenes' (with J. E. Sandys, 1874), and above all his 'Aeschylus' (1855; 4th edn, 1879) and 'Euripides' (3 vols., 1857; 2nd edn, 1872); the latter, almost 150 years later, was still the most recent complete commentary on Euripides to have been undertaken. These two works were his best, singular in their day for the breadth and approachability of their introductions; the commentaries were workmanlike and honest, founded on knowledgeable sensitivity to tragic diction which led Paley to textual conjectures, and to suspicion of interpolation, judged rather more favourably nowadays than then. Paley seldom had leisure or patience for true research, and he could not read important German scholarship at first hand. He nevertheless studied accessible manuscripts for his editions and published scholarly papers on many topics, especially in the 'Journal of Philology' after its foundation in 1868. Homer was a particular interest. He wrote a commentary on the 'Iliad' (1866; 2nd edn, 1884), soon superseded by that written by his Cambridge pupil W. Leaf; he early formed, and constantly re-argued, his own 'Homeric theory', that the discrepant mythical and linguistic phenomena of the poems were only to be explained if they had been assembled 'anonymously' in the fifth century BC from a variety of older and newer sources. The theory won indifference or scorn in Britain, but appealed temporarily to German analysts of Homer. One pure work of scholarship stands out, his 'Commentarius' on the important Medicean scholia of Aeschylus (1878; reprinted 1978). The best appreciation of his scholarship by a near contemporary was that of E. C. Marchant in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', where a very great number of his publications is listed; judgements made one century later appeared in C. Collard, 'Liverpool Classical Papers', no. 5 (1995). 


@@@@@


doc= 21155


Paley, William (1743-1805), theologian and moralist, was born in July 1743 in Peterborough and baptized on 30 August in Peterborough Cathedral, the only son and eldest of four children of William Paley (1711-1799) and Elizabeth Clapham (1713?-1796), both of Giggleswick in the West Riding of Yorkshire. The elder Paley was a sizar at Christ's College, Cambridge, the traditional place of learning for Paley men since the early seventeenth century, where he graduated BA in 1733. In 1735 he became vicar of Helpston, Northamptonshire, and went to live in nearby Peterborough where he was a minor canon of the cathedral. In 1745 he was appointed headmaster of the free grammar school in Giggleswick, a post he held until his death, and it was here that his son received his early schooling. Paley was a studious boy, who displayed an early interest in mechanical ingenuity and whose principal amusement was angling. On 16 November 1758 he was admitted as a sizar to Christ's, with the benefit of a scholarship from Giggleswick. Before beginning his residence at Christ's in October 1759, he studied geometry and algebra with William Howarth at Topcliffe, near Ripon. Paley's father commented to one of his pupils that he expected his son to 'turn out a great man -- very great indeed -- I'm certain of it; for he has by far the 'clearest' head I ever met with in my life' (Meadley, 4). 
Paley's interest in mathematics continued at Cambridge. In classics he was not so well trained, but his training was sufficient for his needs. To the Giggleswick scholarship he added a foundation scholarship and a Mildmay exhibition. At Cambridge he enjoyed a certain celebrity; his powers of conversation and good humour, just as often directed against himself as others, made him an easy companion. On his own admission he spent the first two years at Cambridge 'happily, but unprofitably', frequently in society 'where we were not immoral, but idle and rather expensive' (Lynan, 1.5). His provincial dress and manners were a source of fun to his fellow students, but the superiority of his mind was soon discovered. At the commencement of his third year Paley was rescued by the intervention of a friend, who chided him that he was a fool for wasting his talents and threatened to cut him off if he did not change his ways. The admonishment seems to have had some effect. On 26 May 1761 Paley was awarded the Bunting scholarship, the highest mathematical prize offered at Cambridge. 
Paley's formal studies at Cambridge were conducted under the Plumian professor Anthony Shepherd (algebra, geometry, and natural philosophy) and William Backhouse (logic, metaphysics, and moral philosophy). To compete for honours an undergraduate was required to engage in a number of 'acts' and 'opponencies'. For one of these public disputations in Latin his opponent was John Frere, who was second to Paley in the mathematical tripos of 1763. Paley discussed whether eternal punishment was contradictory to the divine attributes. The fluent delivery of his thesis and strength of conception were the ingredients of his success, and in June 1763 he graduated as senior wrangler. 
From 1763 to 1765 Paley was a schoolmaster's assistant and then a Latin tutor at Bracken's academy in Greenwich, specializing in preparing boys for the military. For recreation he attended trials at the Old Bailey and visited the theatre, particularly when Garrick was on stage, an entertainment he enjoyed throughout his life. In 1765 he won one of the Cambridge members' prizes offered for the best dissertations in Latin prose by senior bachelors. His subject was 'A comparison between the Stoic and Epicurean philosophy, with respect to the influence of each on the morals of the people'; he argued that the Epicurean philosophy was more favourable to virtue and happiness, and characterized the Stoics as 'Pharisees in philosophy' ('Account of the life', 1.50). The dissertation concluded with a eulogy of Christian faith, including an imitation of a sentence from Locke with respect to the 'New Testament': 'It has God for its author; salvation for its end: and truth, without any mixture of error, for its matter' (Lynan, 1.11). Paley nearly lost the prize because he added notes in English, raising a suspicion that the essay was plagiarized. It is often said that this critique of the ancient moralists revealed an emerging utilitarianism. In the same year Paley left Bracken's academy after being ordained deacon and appointed assistant curate to John Hinchliffe, vicar of Greenwich and afterwards bishop of Peterborough. In Paley's lexicon curates were 'rats', and he referred to himself as a 'rat of rats' suffering from 'rat sickness' ('Account of the life', 1.63). For a time he continued working as a private tutor in Greenwich; one of his favourite pupils, John Ord, remembered him as his 'much loved friend and as it were a second father' ('GM', 1809, 103). 
On 24 June 1766 Paley became a fellow of Christ's, where Shepherd was now master, returned to Cambridge to take his MA, and remained there for the next ten years, during which time he earned a reputation as one of the university's most popular teachers. Among his closest friends at Cambridge were John Law, John Jebb, and Edward Waring. Law was the son of the theologian Edmund Law, then master of Peterhouse, and Knightbridge professor of moral philosophy; Jebb was a fellow of Peterhouse and the chief voice of reform at Cambridge; and Waring was the Lucasian professor, whose 'Miscellanae analytica' Paley later helped correct for the press. In 1767 Paley became praelector at Christ's (a position he held until 1779), junior dean, and catechist, and Bunting, Walhampton, and Knapwell preacher. He was ordained priest by the bishop of London on 21 December 1767, and the following year he and John Law were appointed assistant tutors under Shepherd, with Paley as senior Greek lecturer teaching Backhouse's old courses in ethics, metaphysics, and the Greek 'Testament'. Soon after, he was appointed steward, Mildmay preacher, and Hebrew lecturer. The last position, which Paley held from 1768 to 1770, was probably a sinecure, since he appears to have known little of the Hebrew language. In 1769 he was appointed chaplain to Edmund Law, newly elevated to the bishopric of Carlisle, and in 1771 was nominated one of the preachers at the Royal Chapel, Whitehall, a position he retained until 1776. He held the university post of taxor for the year 1770-71. The most senior post held by Paley at Christ's was senior dean, to which he was appointed in 1775. 
For his lectures on ethics Paley compiled his own material, later revised and reorganized for 'The Principles of Moral and Political Philosophy' (1785). For first-year metaphysics he used Locke's 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding', then went on to Clarke's 'On the Being and Attributes of God' and Butler's 'Analogy of Religion'. All undergraduates at Christ's were required to attend Paley's Greek 'Testament' lectures twice a week, for which he drew substantially on Locke's 'Reasonableness of Christianity'. The main point on which he insisted, a student later recalled, was 'that we should listen to God, not to man; that we should exert our faculties in understanding the language of holy men of old... and we should not call any our master in religion but Jesus Christ'. The same student recalled that as a lecturer 'the driest subjects were made interesting' by Paley, and notes from his lectures were highly sought after ('Anecdotes of Dr Paley', 414-17). 
While a fellow at Cambridge, Paley joined the Hyson Club, established by the wranglers of 1757, where he 'contributed to the general stock of brilliancy and merriment' ('Account of the life', 1.68). The members of the club met to drink hyson (green tea) and engage in 'rational conversation', and were mainly reform-minded latitudinarian Cambridge men, including Edmund and John Law, Jebb, and Richard Watson, the moderator who examined Paley's dispute with John Frere. The Hyson was at the centre of the controversy over subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', which began in 1766 with the publication of Francis Blackburne's 'The Confessional'. Five years of continued public debate culminated in the subscription meetings held at the Feathers tavern in London. The subsequent petition called for the liberty of every man to judge for himself to subscribe without penalty. Signed by almost all the members of the Hyson, it was presented to parliament in January 1772 by a group of Anglican clergy led by Jebb. Although Paley did not sign the petition on the regrettably flippant grounds that he 'could not afford to keep a conscience' (Meadley, 89), his general disposition on toleration was commonly known through his university lectures. In 1774 he defended Edmund Law against the criticisms of Thomas Randolph, Lady Margaret professor of divinity and president of Corpus Christi College, in an anonymous pamphlet, 'A defence of the 'Considerations on the propriety of requiring a subscription to articles of faith'' (1774). An early biographer dismissed it as 'written with a spirit of contemptuous superiority, and in the boldest tone of latitudinarian inquiry', the arguments of which 'will satisfy none but lax consciences' (Lynan, 1.16, 27). The arguments for toleration and free enquiry contained in this pamphlet stand as a summary of the position of the reformers, and were repeated later in a brief chapter in the 'Principles', criticized by the radical Gilbert Wakefield as a 'shuffling chapter on subscription' ('Account of the life', 1.75). In 1776 Paley's 'Observations upon the character and example of Christ, with an appendix on the morality of the gospel' was printed privately and bound together with Edmund Law's 'Reflections on the life and character of Christ', and distributed among the students at Cambridge. 
Paley's connection with the Law family greatly advanced his clerical career. He regularly spent vacations with John Law while they were Cambridge fellows, and they once met John Wilkes on one of their excursions to Bath and enjoyed an evening with him. Paley's 'long and faithful friendship' with Law was acknowledged in the dedication to 'Horae Paulinae' (1790). In 1777 Paley was invited to preach the visitation sermon in Carlisle Cathedral for Edmund Law, and in 1782 he preached the sermon at John Law's consecration as bishop of Clonfert and Kilmacduagh. Both John and Edmund Law encouraged Paley to revise his lectures on ethics for publication, and the 'Principles' was dedicated to the bishop of Carlisle. When the bishop died at Rose Castle in Carlisle in 1787 Paley wrote a short memoir of his life, which afterward appeared in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. The Law connection extended to the prelate's third son, Edward, later Lord Ellenborough and lord chief justice of the king's bench, whom Paley is said to have aided in his study of the law. 
It was at John Law's Carlisle residence that Paley met Jane Hewitt (1751?-1791), the daughter of a local spirit merchant, and they were married by Law on 6 June 1776. Initially they settled in Appleby, Westmorland, near Great Musgrave where Paley had been appointed to his first benefice by Bishop Law on 8 May 1775. The marriage produced a family of four sons and four daughters, including Edmund (1782-1850), his father's biographer. Paley once remarked: 'though I am a pluralist in preferment, I am a much greater pluralist in children' (Meadley, 161). Edmund later wrote of his mother, who died in May 1791, 'Sensible, but mild and unassuming, of retired habits, of a sweet and negative disposition, but inactive from ill health, and, as she used to call herself, a mere thread-paper wife' ('Account of the life', 1.91). 
In Paley pluralism was coupled with indifference to elevation in the church. Though he gained much in his career through patronage, he coined the term 'rooting' for 'that baseness and servility which like swine rooting in a dunghill will perform the basest acts for a rich patron, to gain his protection and good benefice' ('Anecdotes of Dr Paley', 511). Towards the end of 1776 Bishop Law presented Paley with the vicarage of Dalston, Cumberland, and the following year he was favoured by the dean and chapter of Carlisle with a more substantial benefice, the vicarage of St Lawrence, Appleby. Paley resigned Musgrave, which he attended only rarely to preach, and thereafter divided his time equally between Dalston and Appleby, until he resigned the latter in 1785. He often declared that he had passed some of the happiest days of his life in Appleby. 
In June 1780 Paley was appointed to a prebendary stall in Carlisle Cathedral, and on 29 July 1781 preached a general ordination sermon there. It was published in 1783, and was afterwards recommended to those preparing for holy orders 'as a correct standard by which they may examine their resolutions' (Lynan, 1.19). In August 1782 he succeeded his friend John Law as archdeacon of Carlisle, after the latter's elevation to the Irish bench, and with it acquired the vicarage of Great Salkeld, Cumberland. About this time he published anonymously a help manual for the clergy of Carlisle, perhaps originating from his own pastoral experience, 'The Clergyman's Companion in Visiting the Sick', a selection from the 'Book of Common Prayer' with extracts from the works of eminent divines. Paley held the archdeaconry until 1805. At the end of 1785 he was appointed chancellor of the diocese of Carlisle, succeeding Richard Burn, author of 'The Justice of the Peace'. 
Residing mainly in Carlisle, Paley enjoyed a diverse and agreeable society of friends and neighbours, paid close attention to the well-being of the local clergy, and was noted for the liberality with which he treated his curates. As chancellor Paley was responsible for the ecclesiastical courts, involving cases of clergy discipline and matrimonial and testamentary cases. He worked to establish a dispensary in the town, and promoted Sunday schools. The latter initiative led to a charge of plagiarism over a cheap compendium of materials for the schools which Paley compiled from the writings of various authors. He did not accept any money from the sales of this volume, and apologised to the Revd J. Robertson, one of the original authors, for unknowingly offending him, although the lessons in spelling he borrowed hardly constituted the plagiarism of which he was charged. From Carlisle, Paley frequently rode to Dalston, but he was a poor horseman and took little pleasure in the journey, save that he thought it good exercise. Summers were spent in the vicarage at Dalston, where he fished, farmed, and worked in the garden. 
In 1789 Bishop Yorke of Ely offered Paley the mastership of Jesus College, Cambridge. He declined because he was satisfied with his situation at Carlisle, commenting that the bishop was 'a man I know no more of than I do the pope' ('Account of the life', 1.95). John Law thought the decision hasty, on the grounds that this might be Paley's last chance for preferment. The offer is acknowledged in Paley's dedication of 'A View of the Evidences of Christianity' (1794), a work generally praised as a masterpiece of Christian apologetics, and which confirmed his reputation as one of England's most respected theologians. In May 1791 Paley was presented to the vicarage of Addingham, near Great Salkeld, by the dean and chapter of Carlisle, and in 1793 he vacated Dalston for the vicarage of Stanwix, near Carlisle, to which he was presented by the new bishop, Vernon. Paley's annual income was about $900 at this time, a princely sum by the standards of the day. In August 1794 Bishop Porteus of London, a fellow with Paley at Christ's College and an admirer of 'Evidences of Christianity', gave him the prebend of St Pancras in St Paul's Cathedral. Also in recognition of this book, in January 1795 Bishop Pretyman presented Paley to the subdeanery of Lincoln, the additional income from which permitted him to resign his prebend and the chancellorship at Carlisle. 'Evidences of Christianity' led to a doctorate of divinity from Cambridge in 1795, and the honour of preaching the commencement sermon before the university. On 14 March Paley acquired one of the most valuable livings in England, the rectory of Bishopwearmouth in the gift of Bishop Barrington of Durham, at which time he resigned from Stanwix and Addingham. The gift was repaid in the dedication of 'Natural Theology' (1802). In Bishopwearmouth Paley met the good friend of his final years, George Wilson Meadley, a banker and merchant of liberal views who later wrote his life. On 14 December 1795 Paley married Catherine Dobinson (1748?-1819) of Carlisle, and thereafter divided the year between Bishopwearmouth and Lincoln. 
In Lincoln, Paley was an active member of the local literary society and served as a magistrate. In the latter capacity his assertive manner served him well, although his main effort appears to have been directed unsuccessfully against the indiscriminate licensing of public houses, the consequences of which he often witnessed from the bench. In 1799 he assisted in measures to help the poor deal with food scarcities. Paley's value to the intellectual life of Lincoln was not doubted, but some thought him lacking in the dignity appropriate to a man of his station: 'The familiarity of his manners, his almost perpetual jests, his approximations to coarseness of language, weakened the splendour of his literary reputation' (Best, 182). Others appreciated his bluntness and self-deprecatory manner. 
Paley is best known as an orthodox theologian and utilitarian moralist, who tended to support established institutions but was progressive on questions of toleration and humanity. The popularity of his writings was due in part to his natural and easy style, but also to the fact that his philosophy expressed the leading scientific, theological, and ethical ideas of the day. He was a master at making complex philosophical positions accessible to a wider audience. As his son remarked: 'Christianity is treated as it would offer itself to the illiterate fisherman, or the ignorant natural man. Moral Philosophy is brought to the level of common sense' ('Account of the life', 1.73). A contemporary commented that the 'Principles' 'presents a subject which has always been considered as harsh and difficult, in the most agreeable and intelligible form... we sit down to be informed of our duty, and are surprised to meet with amusement' ('Public Characters', 118). 
Paley pointed out that his books should be read in the reverse order from that in which they were written. Thus the moral and political philosophy of the 'Principles' is grounded in the revelation of the scriptures, the subject matter of 'Horae Paulinae' and 'Evidences of Christianity'. In turn, this revealed theology is underpinned by the natural philosophy of the 'Natural Theology', in which knowledge of the attributes of the deity is derived from an empirical study of nature. In these works Paley posited a rationally ordered, purposeful, and divinely legitimated universe, assumptions later restated in a selection of the 'Bridgewater Treatises' of the 1830s. 
The 'Principles' was written in a forceful and clear style, which readily suited it for adoption as a textbook at Cambridge, with the consequence that the principle of utility penetrated the teaching of morality at the university. 'Whatever is expedient, is right', taught Paley. 'It is the utility of any moral rule alone, which constitutes the obligation of it' (W. Paley, 'The Principles of Moral and Political Philosophy', 1785, 161). The practice of virtue was supported by the expectations of a futurity in which there would be a proportionable accession of happiness. In developing this theory Paley owned that he drew upon many different sources and acknowledged a particular debt to Abraham Tucker. He also borrowed material from Thomas Rutherforth's 'Institutes of Natural Law' and was influenced by Locke, Gay, Hartley, and his patron Bishop Law. From Law he took his definition of virtue: 'the doing good to mankind, in obedience to the will of God, and for the sake of everlasting happiness' (ibid., 35; quoting Law, lii). His arguments underpinning moral and political obligation were thrown into question by the provocative and often misunderstood pigeon analogy in the Cambridge lectures of 1773-4. The depiction of ninety-nine pigeons gathering food for 'the weakest perhaps and worst pigeon of the flock' (ibid., 91), which he used to justify the inequality of property, was understood by some to be a criticism of monarchy, and caused John Law to warn Paley that it might cost him a bishopric. 'Bishop or no bishop', replied the author, 'it shall stand' ('Account of the life', l.341). Paley was paid handsomely for the copyright to this popular text, and exulted: 'Little did I think that I should ever make a thousand pounds by any book of mine' (Lynan, 1.21). The appearance of the 'Principles', with its religious and conservative utilitarian moral and political philosophy, prompted Jeremy Bentham to issue his own secular utilitarian and reformist 'Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation' in 1789. 

'Horae Paulinae' and 'Evidences of Christianity' were concerted attempts to prove the credibility of the 'New Testament' as a historical record of revelation. In 'Horae Paulinae' Paley showed he was thoroughly versed in St Paul's teachings, to which he applied a good deal of original criticism. He mounted a detailed comparison between Paul's epistles and the 'Acts of the Apostles', concluding that the similarities between the two reinforced the authenticity of the testimony they contained. In so doing he demonstrated that Paul's letters were not the contrived product of a personal or political agenda but rather were an authentic source of early Christian history. 'Horae Paulinae' was translated into German in 1797, by 1810 had gone through ten editions, and appeared in numerous editions throughout the nineteenth century. The arguments of this work were later challenged by Bentham in 'Not Paul, but Jesus' (1823). 

'Evidences of Christianity' was principally directed against Hume's scepticism concerning the grounds for belief in miracles, arguing for the reliability of the apostles' testimony. Paley's general approach was based on the four rules of biblical criticism laid down by the nonjuror Charles Leslie, and he also drew upon Bishop Lardner's 'Credibility of the Gospel History', Bishop Douglas's 'Criterion of Miracles', and Soame Jenyns's 'A View of the Internal Evidence of the Christian Religion'. His defence of the established religion in 'Evidences of Christianity' and the 'Principles' was based on its utility in the preservation and communication of religious knowledge. Though Paley later expressed surprise at the popularity of his writings, he thought 'Evidences of Christianity' would become a standard book at the universities and for persons entering into orders, and on this score was effective in getting better terms from the bookseller for its publication. 

'Natural Theology' was not based on lectures, and is the most original and entertaining of Paley's works. He wrote it, he says in the book's dedication, 'to make up my works into system'. Between 1802 and his death in 1805 it passed through nine editions. The centrepiece of the work is the argument from design, introduced in the famous opening pages. From the existence of a watch and observance of its mechanism we infer the existence of a watchmaker; so, from the existence of the world and its constituent elements we infer the existence of an intelligent creator. The conformity of empirical evidence to this central analogy between the watchmaker and the divine creator constituted a compelling probability argument. However, Paley thought it amounted to more than this and claimed invincibility for his proof, based on the intuitive certainty that any contrivance, natural or artificial, must be the product of an intelligent author. He dismissed evolutionary theory as a conjecture lacking empirical evidence, a weakness in the evolutionist position which persisted down to Darwin's 'Origin of Species'. In writing the book Paley received assistance from John Law and from Law's friend John Brinkley, the Andrews professor of astronomy at Trinity College, Dublin. He also drew substantial hints from many other authors, as his manuscripts make clear, including Boyle, Gregory, Cheselden, Derham, Ray, Monro, Adams, Wilkes, Tucker, Sturm, Goldsmith, Lesser, Smellie, Seed, Hervey, Addison, Keill, Watson, St Pierre, Cappe, Priestley, Maclaurin, and the 'Memoirs of Natural History' produced by the Academie Royale, Paris. Paley also seems to have borrowed from Cleanthes' side of the debate in Hume's 'Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion', while the essentials of the watch analogy were a commonplace of the day and can be found in Locke, Nieuwentyt, Rousseau, and Tucker, among others. Another vital ingredient, however, was the material Paley compiled from his own investigations of nature, bringing home stones and plants from his walks and analysing the bone structures of the hare, fish, or fowl he consumed at table. The principal arguments of 'Natural Theology' were countered by Bentham and George Grote in 'An Analysis of the Influence of Natural Religion on the Temporal Happiness of Mankind' (1822), which resurrected the chief elements of Hume's scepticism stated in the 'Dialogues'. 
Paley's theological publications placed him at the forefront of Anglican apologetics during this period and guaranteed his writings a place in the Cambridge curriculum for several generations. However, his religious commitments were not confined to the study and the lecture hall. Though a noted pluralist, he was assiduous and devout in the performance of clerical duties. Toward the end of his life he took up a study of clerical residence and he drew up proposals to tax non-residence in order to augment small livings for 'An act for the better promoting the residence of the parochial clergy'. When at Cambridge, Paley recommended that his pupils compose one sermon and steal five. However, he always took great pleasure in the composition of sermons and, even when he was no longer able to preach, continued to jot down hints for use in sermons. His sermons were popular, written in a style that was plain and unrhetorical and modelled on Sherlock, Clarke, and Hoadley. He never completed the project to publish a volume of his sermons. Knowing he was near to death in May 1805 he put his sermons in order, left directions for their publication in a codicil to his will, and expressed himself satisfied 'that now he had left that ready' ('Account of the life', 1.371). An edition of five hundred copies was to be produced, but not for sale; in the 'Advertisement' to the 'Sermons' Paley indicated they were to be 'distributed in the neighbourhood, first to those who frequented church, then to farmers' families in the country, then to such as had a person in the family who could read, and were likely to read them'. The task of editing was assigned to his curate, George Stephenson. The sermons, many of which covered themes familiar from his books, appeared in 1806 and went through seven editions by 1825. Another expanded volume was published in 1817, and Edmund Paley edited a two-volume collection in 1825. Certain omissions in the sermons raised doubts about Paley's trinitarian orthodoxy, a charge supported by the circumstantial evidence of his association with Edmund Law and others inclined to Socinianism. However Meadley, himself a convert to Unitarianism, was unconvinced. He found in Paley's works (including the sermons) sufficient evidence that he believed in 'the common notions, about the pre-existence, the propitiation, the present agency, and the intercession of Christ' (Meadley, 165). 
Paley never considered himself a party man. Though he enjoyed the daily paper, 'The Sun', and frequently commented on passing political events, in his writings he attempted to strike a balance between opinions on particular subjects. Above all a man of common sense, he had an instinctive distrust of the innovative and untested. Edmund Paley thought his father would have looked with amusement on those who sought to find political bias in his writings. He was not 'a secret advocate for ecclesiastical reform, or a political dabbler' ('Account of the life', 1.72), but rather an 'advocate of liberal principles' who never went 'beyond the bounds of fair and candid conclusions, or of established order' ('Account of the life', 1.71). 
Paley's liberal principles are evident in his opposition to the slave trade and his discussions of subscription. He also took a keen interest in prison reform and, in 1801, the plight of the Irish Catholics. In 1789 his views opposing compensation for slave traders were discussed in the newspapers of the day, and in 1792 he aired his criticisms of the 'diabolical traffic' at a public meeting in Carlisle convened to petition parliament and at which he occupied the chair. In general, however, Paley adopted a cautious attitude towards established institutions. Worried by events in France and by the popularity of Paine's 'Rights of Man', he published two tracts in defence of England's political institutions in 1792. The first, 'Archdeacon Paley's 'Essay upon the British Constitution'', was a reprint of chapter 7 of book 6 of the 'Principles' in which he extolled the virtues of the existing political arrangements. The second, originally a sermon given in Dalston in 1790, was 'Reasons for Contentment, Addressed to the Labouring Part of the British Public', in which he disingenuously argued that the labouring man should look on his lot as a happier one than that of the wealthy and pointed out the risks to every man of violent disturbance. This pamphlet elicited a good number of responses from the ranks of the radical reformers, and its arguments were contemptuously dismissed by the then radical Coleridge as 'Themes to debauch Boy's minds on the miseries of rich men & comforts of poverty' (S. T. Coleridge, 'Note Books', ed. K. Coburn, 1957, 1.75). Even moderate reformers, such as Samuel Parr, who respected Paley for his stand on the slave trade, were horrified by his apparent reversal, but Paley did not see anything inconsistent in it. Similar criticisms of Paley were later voiced by William Hazlitt and John Austin. 
A good number of Paley's manuscripts and notebooks survive, although often written 'in one of the worst and most illegible hands that ever adorned genius, mixed up in a confused and unconnected heap with penmanship of a fair and seemly quality' ('Account of the life', 1.133). It was his habit suddenly to snatch a pen and scribble down his ideas as and when they occurred to him, and in later life he used an impenetrable sort of shorthand. When reviewing his notes he was often heard to exclaim: 'What could I have been thinking or speaking about!' (ibid., 1.135). 
The general caution and orthodoxy of Paley's principal works were counterbalanced by the easiness of his conversation, the tendency of which was to undermine subordination and question the appropriateness of existing rules and practices. On the basis of his conversation Isaac Milner, the evangelical president of Queens' College, found him 'as loose in politics as he is in religion' (M. Milner, 'Life of Isaac Milner', 1842, 83). Paley was by no means lacking in courtesy or a proper deference to superiors, and his blunt manner of expression rarely rankled with his friends. In the company of young men engaged in a philosophical discussion of the 'summum bonum', he once remarked: 'I differ from you all; the true 'summum bonum' of human life consists in reading 'Tristram Shandy'; or in blowing with a pair of bellows into your shoes in hot weather, and in roasting potatoes in the ashes under the grate in the cold' (Meadley, 18-19). Thrifty, humorous, and down to earth, in old age he shocked an intellectual visitor, Henry Digby Best, by complaining about the discomfort of a small rush-seated chair: 'I hate these nasty little chairs, they sink in the middle and 'throost one's goots' up into one's 'brains'' (Best, 182). When Best first met Paley in the 1790s he found him 'a thick, short, square-built man' with 'bushy brows, a snub nose, and projecting teeth', in short 'ugly' (Best, 162-4). Other contemporaries remembered him as a man of considerable integrity and generosity. His buoyant optimism remained with him to the end. It is said that he was never grave but upon grave occasions, and it was one of his apophthegms that 'a man who is not sometimes a fool, is always one' (Lynan, 1.49). His son Edmund remembered him with great affection as a cheerful and witty man, who was fond of field sports, though it seems his dedication to angling was an excuse for quiet contemplation. 
For long Paley suffered from an intestinal complaint which he nicknamed 'the scorpion'. In later life he paid regular visits to the spas of Bath, Harrogate, and Buxton, and to Harwich for the balm of its sea water. In December 1800 the illness was exacerbated by what was probably a kidney stone, described by Meadley as 'a violent nephralgic complaint accompanied with a species of melaena' (Meadley, 197). A recurrence in the winter of 1801-2 curtailed his public appearances. Paley's physician, John Clark of Newcastle, spoke highly of his courage while he dedicated himself to the completion of 'Natural Theology'. During these years Paley still amused himself with reading. In particular, he admired Malthus's 'Essay on Population', certain arguments of which had much in common with the sections of the 'Principles' devoted to economic issues. Never a brilliant classicist, he continued his lifelong engagement with the works of Horace, Virgil, and Cicero. There was some talk of a bishopric and rumours that George III had vetoed William Pitt's recommendation that Paley should be made bishop of Gloucester -- purportedly stating: 'I can have no notion of the man who, in the direction of his conduct, would look for what is expedient, if he knows what is right' ('Account of the life', 1.340). His son thought there was little truth in the rumour, and quoted a letter from a friend stating that the king had enjoyed reading Paley's 'Principles'. 
Shortly after visiting his residence in Lincoln in the spring of 1805 Paley suffered from painful complications arising from his illness and died at Bishopwearmouth on 25 May. On 4 June he was buried in the north aisle of Carlisle Cathedral, beside his first wife. 
In the last twenty years of his life Paley became an intellectual colossus at Cambridge, and he long remained a significant influence through the use of his works by generations of university students. Keynes, who thought the 'Principles' 'an immortal book' (Keynes, 108), placed Paley high among the intellectual influences shaping Malthus's political economy and pointed out that his influence at Cambridge for a generation or more was second only to Newton's. From 1787 into the early nineteenth century the 'Principles' was mandatory for Cambridge examinations, and from 1822 to 1920 the 'Evidences of Christianity' was on the required list for the Previous, or Little-go, examination for all second-year undergraduates. By 1814 twenty English editions of the 'Principles' had appeared and by 1821 ten editions were published in the United States, where it is said to have been the most popular text on moral philosophy from the 1790s to the civil war. There were also French, Spanish, and German editions. The text remained on the Cambridge syllabus until 1920, providing an education in ethics and political economy for many generations of university graduates and leading to many abridgements and analyses. Darwin, who entered Christ's College in 1828, wrote of the 'Evidences of Christianity' and 'Natural Theology': 'The careful study of these works... was the only part of the Academical Course which... was of the least use to me in the education of my mind' ('The Autobiography of Charles Darwin', ed. N. Barlow, 1958, 59). In the second half of the century Paley's influence waned, falling victim to Darwin's evolutionary theory, which served to destroy the idea of nature as the product of design and with it the essential theological basis of his whole system. 
Early critics of Paley's utilitarian theory included Thomas Gisborne, Richard Whately, Dugald Stewart, Edward Pearson, and Thomas Brown, against whom Paley was ably defended by Latham Wainewright in 'A Vindication of Dr. Paley's Theory of Morals'. Whether they supported or refuted him, nineteenth-century thinkers had to take Paley's moral philosophy into account. John Austin followed Paley in adumbrating a religious form of utilitarianism and in explicating the necessity of rules in practical morality in 'The Province of Jurisprudence Determined' (1832), and William Whewell gave considerable weight to Paley's moral thought in his critical 'Lectures on Morality' (1852). As a mark of the popularity of the 'Principles', Brown denounced the 'Paleyans' not the Benthamites. And when Coleridge penned his anti-utilitarian barbs it was Paley rather than Bentham who was uppermost in his mind. On the other hand, Leslie Stephen, though he recognized the clarity of expression in Paley's work, thought him 'a condenser and a compiler' in moral philosophy who merely followed Locke, Waterland, and Law (Stephen, 2.121, 131). 
Twentieth-century commentators pointed to Paley as marking a philosophical era. Norman Sykes believed that Paley's importance 'lay in the exactitude with which he represented the 'zeitgeist'' of the utilitarianism of the eighteenth-century English establishment (N. Sykes, 'Church and State in England in the Eighteenth Century', 1962, 326). Gerald Cragg held that Paley 'represented the Indian summer of eighteenth-century assumptions' (G. Cragg, 'Reason and Authority in the Eighteenth Century', 1964, 215). In LeMahieu's account, the coherence of Paley's philosophy reflects 'an ideological consensus among British intellectuals in the eighteenth century'; he 'distilled and crystallized the strategic ideas of his predecessors into a philosophy whose very comprehensiveness justified its modest claims to originality' (LeMahieu, 'The Mind of William Paley', 152). 


@@@@@


doc= 21156


Palfreyman, Thomas (d. 1589?), author, was a gentleman of the Chapel Royal under Edward VI and Elizabeth I. In Edward's reign he was paid 71/2died a day along with the thirty-one other members of the lay choir, who included the well-known musicians William Hunnis, Richard Farrant, and Thomas Tallis; they were joined in 1569 by Tallis's pupil, William Byrd. He seems to have lived in the parish of St Peter Cornhill in the city of London. In 1589 Palfreyman, presumably on his death, was replaced by Robert Allison. John Pankhurst, bishop of Norwich, addressed a Latin epigram to Palfreyman and Robert Couch, praising their knowledge of both music and the 'Bible', as well as the piety of their lives: '
Vos non queo non dicere 

Doctos viros, viros pios. 
(I cannot but say that 

You are learned men, pious men.) (Pankhurst, 156)' Palfreyman's most popular works were his various revisions and enlargements of William Baldwin's 'A Treatise of Morall Phylosophie, Contaynyng the Sayinges of the Wyse' (1547), a collection of moral apophthegms attributed to ancient thinkers. In the first of Palfreyman's revised editions, issued 'c'.1555 and dedicated to Lord Henry Hastings, he rearranged the adages in Baldwin's treatise, wrote summaries of each chapter, and added three new books to the original four, but omitted much of the material on the history of ancient philosophy 'that therby the treatise should seme the lesse to be enlarged, and the more handsome of the reader to be caried' (sig. A4'r'). This omission led Baldwin to complain, when reissuing his own treatise in 1556, that 'mayster Palfreyman... hath lefte that out, whiche many most desyer' (sig. A2'v'). A further augmented edition, still in seven books, was brought out by Palfreyman in 1557, followed in 1564 by a ten-book version, bearing both authors' names on the title-page and printing both their letters of dedication. The treatise reached its final twelve-book form in 1579, with Palfreyman not only adding several new chapters but also restoring the previously omitted ones. This version was reprinted seven times from 1584 to 1610. Five further editions, published between 'c'.1620 and 'c'.1640, state on the title-page: 'Now the sixt time inlarged by T. Palfreyman'; in reality, however, they simply reprint his 1579 letter 'To the Reader', with the number of the edition altered, almost certainly by another hand. 
Apparently attempting to produce a Christian counterpart to Baldwin's work, Palfreyman published 'The Treatise of Heavenly Philosophie' (1578), dedicated to Thomas Radcliffe, third earl of Sussex. He drew on the 'Bible' and Christian writings in place of pagan works, which, though 'not utterly to be contemned', were 'not altogether to be tarried upon... or in any one jot to be compared to the Scriptures' (sig. *5'v'). Unsurprisingly, perhaps, this 900-page patchwork of biblical and patristic quotations, interspersed with devout prayers and hectoring exhortations, and prefaced by lives of Moses and David, failed to capture the popular market exploited by Baldwin and was never reprinted. 
Palfreyman's earliest work in print, 'A Myrrour Conteinyng the True Knowledge and Love of God' (1560), sets out in detail the Christian duties of different estates of the realm, from lords to rich farmers and merchants. Another devotional work, 'Divine Meditations' (1572), was dedicated to Isabel Harington, a gentlewoman of the queen's privy chamber. He also edited 'A Paraphrase uppon the Epistle of... S. Paule to the Romanes' (1572?), an anonymous work 'voide of good stile' and 'evell Englished' (sig. *3'r'), along with letters by Ulrich Zwingli, and tracts by Martin Borrhaus. These works, he explained, had been given to him by a friend during the 'dolefull dayes' of Queen Mary's reign, 'fastened in their bandes' in preparation for burning, 'although by Gods providence prevented to the contrary' (sig. *2'v'). 
Palfreyman's descendants may include the three Thomases surnamed Palfreman, Palfryman, and Palfreyman, recorded in the registers of the University of Oxford for the years 1586, 1633-6, and 1662-5 respectively. 


@@@@@


doc= 21157


Palgrave, Sir Francis (1788-1861), archivist and historian, was born in July 1788 at Green Street, Kentish Town, London, the only son of Meyer Cohen ('c'.1760-1831), a stockbroker, and his wife, Rachel, 'nee' Levien (died 1815). In 1797 Meyer Cohen published a volume of his son's verses, an innocent gesture which ultimately became a source of painful embarrassment. Francis changed his religion and his surname upon his marriage in 1823, an act that his detractors treasured zestfully far beyond his death. 
Francis Cohen was educated at home, where he mastered modern languages as well as Latin and Greek, but he was constrained to make his own way when his father lost his fortune on the resumption of war in 1802. He was then articled with a firm of solicitors, Loggen and Smith, of Basinghall Street. From 1808 he was their managing clerk, but by 1822, when he left the firm, he was also a frequent contributor on historical and literary subjects to the 'Edinburgh Review' and the 'Quarterly Review', and an editor and historian of whom Scott and Byron spoke with admiration. He was elected to the fellowship of the Royal Society in 1821. 
In 1822 Palgrave was appointed a sub-commissioner of the record commission, and also began to read for the bar. He had been intent on antiquarian studies since his youth, and his interest in Anglo-Norman, and in the Anglo-Norman period, may have provided his first common ground with Dawson Turner, the Norfolk antiquary. On 13 October 1823 he married Dawson Turner's daughter Elizabeth (1799-1852). Before his marriage he converted from Judaism to the Church of England, and changed his name by royal licence to Palgrave, the family name of Elizabeth's mother, Mary. There were four children of the marriage, all notably talented: Francis Turner Palgrave, William Gifford Palgrave, Sir Robert Harry Inglis Palgrave, and Sir Reginald Francis Douce Palgrave. 
Palgrave was called to the bar by the Middle Temple in 1827, and found a successful practice in peerage cases, but his interest was increasingly engaged by the business of archives. His 'Parliamentary Writs and Writs of Military Summons' was published by the record commission in two volumes in 1827 and 1834, and 'Rotuli curiae regis: rolls and records of the court held before the king's justiciars or justices' in 1831. 
Palgrave's marriage was a source of strength to him, as well as an obvious social advantage. It brought him no accession of wealth, however, for his wife had five sisters with claims upon their father's fortune, and until 1831 Palgrave had to maintain his own father, who had no other resource. He had useful political connections, including access to Holland House ['see also 'Holland House set], and enjoyed manifest professional success, but his early history made him anxious about the security of his income. 
In his extensive editorial work Palgrave employed transcribers, both for the publications which he undertook for the record commission and on his own account. The brothers Thomas Duffus Hardy and William Hardy were among them, and his association with them bred largely trivial but long-enduring animosities. The troubles seem to have begun with disputes over the terms of their employment, and to have flared into intrigue in and out of the office, and on one occasion into a brawl. The Hardys despised Palgrave for his birth and resented his undeniable accomplishments; he on his side was proud and, beneath his remarkable outward composure, irritably sensitive to slights. The record commission was itself a notable focus of scholarly contention and much ill feeling, and after its demise in 1837 several of its feuds echoed through the century. 
Palgrave was made a KH in 1832. In 1833 he was appointed to the municipal corporations commission, but though he took part in its investigations he did not sign its final report, and submitted a memorandum of his own which the Webbs subsequently praised. In 1834 he succeeded John Caley as the keeper of the records in the chapter house at Westminster. The building was leased to the crown as a repository for the ancient records of the exchequer, including 'Domesday Book', and a mass of parliamentary material. One of the most original and valuable of Palgrave's editorial works, 'The Ancient Kalendars and Inventories of the Treasury of H. M. Exchequer', appeared in 1836. The chapter house and its great archival hoard had narrowly escaped destruction in the fire of 1834, an event which spurred on public discussion of a secure general record office. When the 'Public Record Office Act' (1 & 2 Vict. c. 94) was passed in 1838 Palgrave was, in point both of his administrative and political experience, and of his scholarship, the obvious choice for its executive head. 
There was, however, a delay of some months, from September to December 1838, in confirming the appointment, caused by Palgrave's own sensitivities and financial concerns, Treasury intransigence over the salary to be offered, and some reservations which the master of the rolls, Lord Langdale, had over the quasi-ministerial role which the act had visited upon him. The hiatus led Thomas Duffus Hardy to suppose, quite erroneously, that he had himself been denied the post by some political machination. It was an ominous beginning to what was essentially a felicitous appointment, for though Langdale appreciated Palgrave's merits, his relations with Palgrave were never entirely easy, while Hardy was a watchful colleague and, like his brother, an unforgiving enemy. 
Palgrave's first care was to assemble the public records on the Rolls estate, in Chancery Lane, which became the designated site of the projected office, and to obtain funds to build a secure repository for them. In both endeavours he was strongly though not always harmoniously supported by Henry Cole, a senior assistant keeper. The records, ranging from the ponderous but generally well-ordered series of the great rolls of the exchequer to mouldering and congealed masses of loose parchment, came from more than fifty places in London and Westminster, principally the chapter house and the Tower, but including Carlton Ride, Somerset House, Lincoln's Inn, and the Temple. They rapidly filled what space remained in Rolls House and the Rolls chapel, where divine service was regularly conducted over and among them, and they packed the ramshackle tenements which stood in the grounds and along Chancery Lane. The foundation-stone of the new building, which was designed by Sir James Pennethorne, was not laid until 1851, and the repository then took nine years to build and occupy. By the time it was complete the records, which now included the contents of the state paper office, far outran its capacity, and an extension was begun in 1863. 
Palgrave would not move 'Domesday Book' from Westminster until its new quarters were secure, but he then allowed it to be taken to Southampton to be photographed by the Ordnance Survey and published in facsimile in 1861-3. He was deeply anxious for its safety, but it was a characteristically imaginative decision. So, ten years earlier, was his resolve to save the enumerators' returns for the decennial census, when the registrar-general proposed to destroy them. 
Palgrave had a genuine feeling for archives and a clear view of the historical potential of modern records, which was rare at the time. His professional sense was essentially self-inculcated, like the librarianship of Anthony Panizzi (of the British Museum), with whom he bears some comparison. Hypersensitive himself, he was not always a tactful manager, but he worked in difficult circumstances, and his accomplishments were formidable. The first twenty-two of the deputy keeper's reports show Palgrave and his colleagues collecting and gradually ordering the public records. The chief problems lay in the sheer profusion and the very various physical condition of the documents, which comprised both comparatively lucid series such as the chancery rolls and innumerable sacks of loose parchments and papers. Palgrave's achievement was to direct their assembly and secure accommodation, to supervise their arrangement and begin their listing for the first time as a single holding, and to enable the public to refer to them as a matter of right, and without the payment of fees for literary searches. He also constantly looked ahead to the acquisition and management of modern administrative records. He sought from the beginning to maintain the historical coherence of the records of all periods, but sanctioned the creation of some special categories, such as royal letters, ministers' accounts, and rentals and surveys, which despite their specious interest are in the long run a hindrance rather than an aid to research. They have to be seen, however, against an oppressive mass of material and the concomitant problems of conservation which it posed. Palgrave's annual reports are a monument to his understanding of fundamentals, and the office has developed ever since upon the general lines which he established. 
Palgrave's historical works are of less consequence than his editions of documents, though some, such as 'The Rise and Progress of the English Commonwealth' (1832), contain matter still of interest. In his medieval studies he emphasized the legacy of Rome in thought and institutions, but later English scholars dwelt rather upon the influence of Germanic traditions. Both approaches had their value, but each distorted the issues when deployed in isolation. Medieval scholarship was still inchoate in England, and Palgrave's works bear comparison well with others of their time; he was certainly on firm ground in seeking to consider England and Normandy together. Palgrave's scholarship was genuinely cosmopolitan, and his interests were wide: his publications include the first edition of the 'Handbook for Travellers in Northern Italy', produced by John Murray in 1842. Palgrave continued in post until the end of his life, though his health was evidently failing in the last months. He died on 6 July 1861 at The Green, Hampstead, where he had lived since 1846, and was buried at Irstead, Norfolk, beside his wife, who had died in August 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 21158


Palgrave, Francis Turner (1824-1897), anthologist and art critic, was born on 28 September 1824 in Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, in the house of his maternal grandparents, Dawson Turner, a banker, and Mary Turner, 'nee' Palgrave. He was the eldest of the four sons of Sir Francis Palgrave (1788-1861), the medieval historian, and Elizabeth Turner (1799-1852). Elizabeth's parents had permitted her to marry Francis Cohen only if he converted to Christianity and took his wife's mother's maiden name. As a child, Palgrave was not told of his Jewish heritage, but in later life he had to endure Swinburne sneering at his 'Cohenisms' ('Swinburne Letters', 16). 
As an outsider, Sir Francis struggled to support his family: until he became keeper of the public records, he could not afford to send his sons to school. Instead, he and his wife taught them at home in Hampstead, in what the 'Dictionary of National Biography' called an atmosphere of 'fervid anglo-catholicism' and 'strenuous thought', and his parents gave Palgrave a passion for classical Italy and Greece. When he finally went to school at fourteen as a day boy at Charterhouse School, Surrey, his early intellectual training did not, as he later told his daughter, compensate for his priggishness and lack of social skills. His early education did enable him to become head boy at Charterhouse and to win a Balliol College scholarship. In 1843 he went up to Oxford, where he joined a short-lived Balliol secret society called the Decade Club. He met Matthew Arnold and Arthur Hugh Clough there, and came under the influence of the master of Balliol, Benjamin Jowett. Jowett turned him (briefly) into an ardent republican, and together they went to Paris in 1848 to witness the revolution. 
Palgrave's university years were interrupted in 1846 because his father had arranged for him to take a university term off to act as private secretary to W. E. Gladstone, then colonial secretary in Sir Robert Peel's government. He did not enjoy the experience (though he retained links with Gladstone for the rest of his life) and returned to Oxford, where his first-class honours degree in classics was rewarded with a fellowship at Exeter College, though he stayed there only a year and in 1849 left Oxford. His first choice of career had been architecture, but his father had insisted that he join the civil service instead. Palgrave followed other Balliol men into the newly created education committee of the privy council. His first job, in 1849, was as a teacher at Kneller Hall in Twickenham, Middlesex, an experimental training college for teachers in the workhouses. After it closed in 1855, he returned to the ministry, where he stayed until his retirement in 1884. His job, first as an examiner and then as an assistant secretary, allowed him enough spare time to publish art and literary criticism, to write novels and lyric poems, and to cultivate his passion for artistic and literary celebrities. 
Palgrave's friendships with artists, particularly the Pre-Raphaelites, led him to produce articles and reviews on art (and literature) for, among other publications, the 'Saturday Review' and the 'Quarterly Review'. His criticism is recognizable for its intemperate language: he had difficulty balancing his loyalty to his friends with his critical objectivity, while his sometimes bitter jealousy of other more talented poets and artists often comes through. In fact, his violently expressed opinions got him into trouble early in his career. He was commissioned to write the 'Official Catalogue of the Fine Art Department of the International Exhibition of 1862', but instead of simply describing the works on exhibit, he praised the work of the Pre-Raphaelite sculptor Thomas Woolner at the expense of other, better-known exhibitors. One of those insulted, Matthew Higgins, writing under the pseudonym Jacob Omnium, pointed out in the letter column of 'The Times' that Palgrave and Woolner were housemates. The guide was immediately withdrawn, but on the strength of his notoriety Palgrave became the art critic of the equally outspoken 'Saturday Review' for three years, a period which produced a toned-down selection of his articles published as 'Essays on Art' (1866). 
In London in 1849 Palgrave had also been introduced to Tennyson, who had yet not achieved the fame that 'In Memoriam' (1850) would bring. His time as Tennyson's disciple was one of the highlights of his life, but Tennyson's need for admiring followers was eventually overcome by his dislike of being harried by the devoted Palgrave. On a walking tour of Cornwall in 1860, for example, while hunting for Arthurian sites for the 'Idylls of the King', Tennyson complained to William Holman Hunt that: 'all day long I am trying to get a quiet moment for reflection... but before I have finished a couplet I hear Palgrave's voice like a bee in a bottle, making the neighbourhood resound with my name, and I have to give myself up to escape the consequences. (Hunt, 2.213)' It was, therefore, little wonder that Tennyson 'dismissed' Palgrave in 1868, though Palgrave continued to regard himself as a lifelong friend. In fact, when Tennyson died in 1892, Palgrave immediately offered to help his widow, Emily, and their son, Hallam, to 'edit' Tennyson's papers. Appointing himself one of the guardians of Tennyson's reputation, he helped burn nearly 30,000 letters, including all those to Tennyson from Arthur Hallam. 
The friendship between Palgrave and Tennyson was responsible for producing Palgrave's only lasting claim to fame: 'The Golden Treasury of the Best Songs and Lyrical Poems in the English Language' (1861), an anthology so successful that, as J. W. Mackail wrote in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', 'it remains one of those rare instances in which a critical work has substantive imaginative value, and entitles its author to rank among creative artists'. On the walking tour of Cornwall which they had made together in 1860, Palgrave had suggested to Tennyson the idea of an anthology which would differ from all previous ones by being a collection of 'all' the best lyrics and songs in English. As Palgrave had had little success with his own lyric poetry and literary criticism, he hoped that this project would bring him fame, and that it would also be a project on which he could work with Tennyson. As he used Tennyson's name to help get the 'Golden Treasury' published, most critics have assumed that Tennyson must also have chosen the poems. The manuscript in the British Library reveals that although Tennyson was consulted on the manuscript, Palgrave himself made the initial and final selections, and that he often disregarded Tennyson's suggestions. The idiosyncratic editing principles, including the thematic arrangement of 'books' and the removal or rearrangement of lines, words, and whole stanzas, were Palgrave's alone. 
Tennyson did influence the 'Golden Treasury' in two important ways. First, he encouraged Palgrave to pursue the project, probably as a way of giving what he called Palgrave's 'pertinacious devotion' (Tennyson, 327) another outlet. He also refused to be included, causing Palgrave to omit all living poets, in whose work his taste was much shakier: his 'Golden Treasury' 'second series' of living poets, which appeared just a few days after his death in 1897, was a failure with critics and the public because his loyalty to his contemporaries had overruled his critical judgement. He also attempted to replicate the original anthology's remarkable popular success with 'Treasuries' of children's verse and sacred song. He wrote lyrics of his own, producing five volumes of original lyrics, from 'Idyls and Songs' in 1854 to 'Visions of England', based on his father's historical theories, in 1881. Like the lyrics he chose for the 'Golden Treasury', most of his own lyrics deal with love, mutability, and nature, modelled on those of his favourite poet, William Wordsworth. As his reputation as an editor grew after the 'Golden Treasury' appeared, he also edited selections of lyric poetry by others, including Shakespeare, Herrick, Keats, Wordsworth, and, of course, Tennyson. 
Although Palgrave's friendship with Tennyson was a great source of joy to him, his adult emotional life was initially very unhappy as a result of the unrequited love he felt for a childhood friend, Georgina Alderson, the subject of his two autobiographical novels, 'Preciosa' (1852) and 'The Passionate Pilgrim' (1858). After she married Sir Robert Cecil in 1857, he became suicidal, according to William Holman Hunt, but recovered eventually, though he was prone to depression throughout his life. Cecil Greville Milnes (1834-1890), whom he married on 30 December 1862, provided him with a happy and stable married life. They had four daughters and two sons. (One son died in infancy.) 
Upon his retirement from the education ministry, Palgrave stood (successfully) for election as professor of poetry at Oxford University in 1885, and served two consecutive five-year terms. While at Oxford he wrote a semi-official 'Ode' for Queen Victoria's jubilee (1887) and lectured on Chaucer, the influence of the Renaissance on English poetry, and the relationship between art and poetry, the last published as 'Landscape in Poetry from Homer to Tennyson' (1897). After his wife's death in 1890, Palgrave suffered a number of small strokes before the one which killed him on 24 October 1897, at the age of seventy-three, at his home, 15 Cranley Place, South Kensington, London. He was buried alongside his wife and infant son in the cemetery at Barnes Common, Barnes, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 21159


Palgrave, William Gifford (1826-1888), traveller and diplomatist, was born at 22 Parliament Street, Westminster, London, on 24 January 1826. He was the second son of Sir Francis Palgrave (1788-1861), founder of the Public Record Office, whose name had been Francis Cohen until in 1823 he converted to the Church of England before marrying and entering the legal profession. Palgrave's mother, formerly Elizabeth Turner, was the daughter of Dawson Turner, banker, of Great Yarmouth. Palgrave's three brothers, Francis Turner Palgrave, Robert Harry Inglis Palgrave, and Sir Reginald Palgrave, all achieved scholarly distinction. 
Palgrave attended Charterhouse School (1838-1844), where he won the gold medal for classical verse and became the school captain. He then went as a scholar to Trinity College, Oxford, gained a first in 'literae humaniores' and a second in mathematics, and graduated in 1846. He went to India and in 1847 received a lieutenant's commission in the 8th Bombay regiment of native infantry. His prospects as an officer were reportedly good, but after two years he converted formally to Roman Catholicism and entered the Jesuit college, Madras. He was employed in its missionary work in southern India until the summer of 1853, when he went to Rome. Following his conversion, Palgrave changed his name to Cohen, a possible indication of the deep concern about identity -- whether racial, national, or religious -- that runs through much of his writing. He was also known by other names, including Michael Sohail, before he resumed the name Palgrave. 
After studying in Rome, Palgrave went to Syria, in 1855, drawn to the Arab world by early impressions from reading the Arab romance 'Antar'. For some years he was a successful missionary, particularly in the town of Zahlah, making many converts and founding numerous schools. He became so accustomed to Arab society that he could pass as a native of the Middle East without difficulty. In the Druse attacks on Christians in 1860-61, Palgrave was nearly killed at the Damascus massacre; later he is reported to have organized the Christian defence of Zahlah. The Syrian mission being for the time disrupted, he returned to western Europe where Napoleon III obtained from him a report on the causes of the persecution of the Syrian Christians. He also visited England and Ireland, where he delivered fund-raising lectures on the Syrian massacres which were afterwards republished from newspaper reports, under the title 'Four Lectures on the Massacres of the Christians in Syria' (1861). 
With Vatican permission, Palgrave became a French agent. His first mission was to sound Halim Pasha about becoming viceroy of Egypt under French suzerainty; although that project failed, Palgrave used the opportunity to prepare plans for a French invasion of Syria from Egypt. His next mission was to report on the Arabian kingdoms of Ha'il and Riyadh. For many years Arabia had remained closed to Europeans. Ha'il had been penetrated by Europeans only once; Riyadh, never. Disguised as a Syrian Christian physician named Selim Abu Mahmoud al- 'Eis, Palgrave now undertook an adventurous journey across central Arabia, which he accomplished in 1862 and 1863, thereby becoming the first westerner to cross Arabia by an approximately diagonal route (from the north-west to the south-east). Travelling among the Wahabbis, he was in considerable danger, should he be detected as a European. Once, at Ha'il, he was recognized as having been seen at Damascus, and at Riyadh he was suspected and accused of being an English spy, but his skill at disguise, coupled with his presence of mind and good fortune, secured his safety. Palgrave returned to Europe in late 1863 and wrote 'Personal Narrative of a Year's Journey through Central and Eastern Arabia' (2 vols., 1865), a classic of Arabian travel literature, though its veracity has been attacked by several distinguished orientalists. 
Shortly after writing 'Personal Narrative' Palgrave renounced both Catholicism and Napoleon III and began his final career with the British foreign service. In July 1865 he was sent to Abyssinia on a mission to obtain from King Theodore the release of Consul Cameron and his fellow captives. Falsely informed that the captives had been released, the Foreign Office halted Palgrave as he was passing through Egypt on his way out. There he remained until June 1866, when he returned home and was at once appointed British consul at Soukhoum-Kale. In 1867 he was transferred to Trebizond, where he made extensive journeys in northern Asia Minor. 
In 1868 Palgrave married Katharine Simpson, daughter of G. E. Simpson of Norwich; they had three sons. He was appointed consul at St Thomas in the West Indies in 1873, and in 1876 he was transferred to Manila; two years later he was appointed consul-general in Bulgaria, but Disraeli soon dismissed him for his conduct towards the Austrians. In 1879 he was sent to Bangkok. While travelling in the Far East, he came under the influence of various Eastern religious systems, especially Shintoism. 
Palgrave's diplomatic career disappointed many who expected him to rise higher and in different postings. General Gordon forcefully proposed him as British minister to Cairo, but to no avail. Palgrave himself yearned to serve in the Arab world, but his tendency to disregard instructions and to act on his own, which caused repeated conflicts with the Foreign Office, cannot have enhanced his prospects. 
In 1884 Palgrave was appointed minister-resident in Uruguay, where he became reconciled to the Roman Catholic church. His health, which had been impaired by hardships on his return journey from Arabia and by the Siamese climate, did not improve in Uruguay, and he died of bronchitis at Montevideo on 30 September 1888. His body was brought to England and buried in St Thomas's cemetery, Fulham, London. 
Palgrave's published writings were, in addition to those already mentioned: 'Hermann Agha' (1872), 'Essays on Eastern Questions' (1872), 'Dutch Guiana' (1876), 'Ulysses, or, Scenes and Studies in many Lands' (1887), and a mystical religious poem entitled 'A Vision of Life: Semblance and Reality' (1891), with which he had been occupied almost until the time of his death. He wrote a number of notable articles for various periodicals, especially the 'Cornhill Magazine', 'Macmillan's Magazine', 'Fraser's Magazine', and the 'Quarterly Review'. He was a notable linguist, and acquired languages with extreme ease -- Japanese, for example, he learned colloquially in two months -- but his interest was not that of a philologist. He learned languages only for practical use; when he no longer required them he ceased to speak them. He was an accomplished student of Dante, a good Latin scholar, and something of a botanist; wherever he went, as his writings show, he was a keen observer. He became a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, a medallist of the French Geographical Society, and a member of the Royal Asiatic Society. 
Many who have written about Palgrave have assessed his accomplishments with reservations, sensing some measure of failure. He may indeed have dispersed his efforts while leaving his potential unrealized, but expectations for him were always unusually high. He earned a permanent place as a leading British explorer and scholar of the Middle East. 


@@@@@


doc= 21160


Palin, William (1803-1882), Church of England clergyman and author, youngest son of Richard Palin and his wife, Sarah Durden, was born at Mortlake, Surrey, on 10 November 1803. He was educated at Mortlake School, Lewes, in Sussex. While a private tutor he published in June 1829, when living at Southampton, 'The Persians of Aeschylus'. On 17 December 1829 he matriculated from St Alban's Hall, Oxford, but soon migrated to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1833 and MA in 1851. He was admitted 'ad eundem' at Oxford on 21 June 1861. He married Emily Isabella Slaughter (1813-1878), daughter of Stephen Long, a solicitor; they had three daughters and one son. 
Palin was ordained deacon by the bishop of London on Trinity Sunday, 1833, and was curate-in-charge of Stifford in Essex for twelve months. He was ordained priest in May 1834. From July 1834 until his death he was rector of Stifford. Between 1861 and 1863 the parish church was restored through his efforts. With one of his daughters he compiled 'Stifford and its Neighbourhood, Past and Present', a description of twenty parishes in south Essex (privately printed, 1871), and 'More about Stifford and its Neighbourhood' (1872); both volumes contained extracts from parish registers, and were full of information on local social life. 
Palin also published many religious works, including 'Village Lectures on the Litany' (1837), 'Bellingham: a Narrative of a Christian in Search of the Church' (1839), several papers on the weekly offertory, and 'The Christian Month: Original Hymns for each Day of the Month'. He wrote two hymns for Orby Shipley's 'Lyra messianica' (1864), to which his daughter Emily Isabella Jane also contributed. From 1853 to 1857 he edited the 'Churchman's Magazine', and he contributed frequently to various church periodicals. In 1851 he published a 'History of the Church of England, 1688-1717'. He planned to write a continuation, but the work involved more research than his clerical duties allowed. Palin died at the rectory, Stifford, Essex, on 16 October 1882, and was buried in the churchyard there. 


@@@@@


doc= 21161


Palk, Sir Robert, first baronet (1717-1798), Church of England clergyman and administrator in India, was born in December 1717, apparently at Ambrooke, Ashburton, Devon, and was baptized on 16 December 1717 at the Old Mission House, Ashburton. He was the second son of Walter Palk ('b'. 1686), yeoman farmer, and his wife, Frances Abraham. He was educated at Ashburton grammar school and at Wadham College, Oxford, from where he graduated in 1739. Having taken deacon's orders, on 27 April 1746 he entered the Royal Navy as chaplain to the 'Namur', Edward Boscawen's flagship. After seeing action against the French fleet off Cape Finisterre (3 May 1747), the 'Namur' proceeded to the Coromandel coast (4 November 1747). 
In July 1748 Palk arrived at Fort St David, at that time the chief British settlement while Fort St George at Madras was under French control (1746-9). Early in 1749 the company's chaplain at Fort St David, Francis Fordyce, was dismissed after publicly insulting Robert Clive. Palk, 'this very worthy and able divine' (Love, 'Report', v), was invited to replace Fordyce, which he did on 1 April 1749. This created confusion over the seniority and placement of the other chaplains. As a consequence, in October 1750 Palk sailed with the fleet to Bombay to resign his service and to seek formal employment with the East India Company. In March 1751 Palk returned to Fort St David, where he was reinstated. 
When Fort St George was restored by the French to the East India Company, Palk accompanied the government back to Madras (April 1752). Once again there was confusion over the numbers and seniority of the chaplains, so the Revd Robert Palk was appointed 'Paymaster and Commissary in the Field' (August 1752). In this position Palk associated with Major Stringer Lawrence, with whom he formed a lifelong friendship. In April 1753 and May 1754, during the contest for the Carnatic between Chanda Sahib (favoured by the French) and Muhammad Ali (supported by the British), Palk was deputed envoy to the raja of Tanjore, and prevailed on that prince to give assistance to the British candidate. In January 1754 Palk and Henry Vansittart were the two delegates appointed to discuss terms of settlement with the French agents, Father Lavaur, M. de Kerjean, and M. Bausset, at Sadras, a Dutch settlement between Pondicherry and Madras. No agreement could be reached. At the end of 1754 Palk and Vansittart arranged a provisional peace treaty at Pondicherry. Peace was eventually signed on 11 January 1755. 
During these years Palk developed a taste for matters political and commercial rather than religious. From a letter written on 26 October 1755 by the historian Robert Orme, a colleague of Palk's at Madras, a glimpse can be gained of some of the characteristics that identified the man. According to Orme, Palk had 'long since' given up studies of history and theology, and had thrown himself into active engagement with the contemporary affairs of the British at Madras. Palk enjoyed a reputation at this time for decency and a desire to conciliate everybody, even at the risk of being seen as all things to all men. Palk's early support for Thomas Saunders (governor from 1750 to 1755) changed to indifference when Palk became friends with Stringer Lawrence, whose relations with Saunders were acrimonious. Palk also received substantial financial benefits from activities put his way by Lawrence, making 'at least $10,000 from two he came with into India' (Love, 'Vestiges', 2.485-6). Palk's influence in the community as chaplain, paymaster, and commissary was such that his opinions of Saunders and Lawrence swayed public opinion against the former and in favour of the latter. When in 1758 the directors of the company instructed Palk to confine himself to his religious duties and to go to Fort St David, he decided to return instead to England. While there he married, on 7 February 1761, Anne (1738-1788), daughter of Arthur Vansittart and sister of his friend Henry Vansittart, now governor of Fort William, Bengal. They had three daughters, two of whom died in adolescence, and a son. 
Palk renounced his holy orders, and on 2 October 1761 entered the East India Company's civil service, and in company with Stringer Lawrence returned to Madras (16 October 1761), where he was appointed to council. When George Pigot resigned on 14 November 1763 Palk succeeded him as governor of Madras. In 1765 Lord Clive obtained a grant from the Mughal emperor Shah Alam of the five districts known as the Northern Circars, for the Madras presidency. In 1766 Colonel John Caillaud was sent from Madras to take possession of them. But Nizam Ali, 'subahdar' of the Deccan, to whom the territories had previously belonged, resented the transfer, and threatened to invade the Carnatic with a large army. Palk, alarmed for Madras, and with his usual desire to placate antagonists, hurriedly directed Caillaud to come to terms with the nizam. On 12 November 1766 a treaty was signed at Hyderabad, by which the company agreed to leave the Guntur Circar in the hands of the nizam's brother Basalat Jang, and to pay a tribute of eight lakhs of rupees a year for the remaining territory. The worst article in the treaty, however, was the second, by which the British promised to give the nizam military assistance 'to settle the affairs of his Highness's government in everything that is right and proper', a vague expression which, after Palk's departure in January 1767, involved the Madras government in the nizam's attack on, and the resulting war with Haidar Ali, the sultan of Mysore. 
On his return to England in 1767 Palk was 'well received by both the King and the Court of Directors' (Love, 'Report', viii). He had accumulated a large fortune in India, from his various salaries, gifts from local dignitaries, and army contracts, and from his own commercial activities. In 1769 he purchased and greatly enlarged and improved Haldon House, near Exeter. His old friend General Lawrence resided with him, and on his death in 1775 left all his property to Palk's children. In return, Palk set up a large monument to Lawrence's memory within his estate, on the summit of Haldon Hill. 
Palk was never a director of the East India Company, but his friendships with Laurence Sulivan and others kept him in constant contact with Indian affairs. He took a great interest in political matters, and was MP for Ashburton in 1767-8 and 1774-87. He generally supported the government, but took an independent line on Indian matters. On 19 June 1772 he was created a baronet. Palk Strait, which separates Sri Lanka from India, was named after him. Palk died at Haldon House on 29 April 1798, and was buried at Dunchideock churchyard. He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his son, Lawrence (1766-1813). 


@@@@@


doc= 21162


Palladius (fl. 429-c.433), missionary and bishop, was the first bishop of the Irish. There are three direct references to him in the contemporary writings of Prosper of Aquitaine. First, in his chronicle under the year 429, the deacon Palladius is said to have been responsible for inducing Pope Celestine to send Germanus, bishop of Auxerre, as papal representative to Britain to combat Pelagianism. In the second, also in the chronicle (s.a. 431), it is written that Celestine sent Palladius as the first bishop for the Irish who believed in Christ. In the third, in Prosper's 'Contra collatorem' (against Cassian, author of the 'Conferences'), written a year or two later, Celestine is praised for two achievements in the far north-west: he has saved 'the Roman island' for Catholicism and has made 'the barbarian island' Christian (chap. 21). The pope, therefore, was being praised for having saved Britain from Pelagianism and for having initiated the conversion of Ireland. 
Palladius, unfortunately, was a common name in the late Roman empire, especially in the east. There was a family of Palladii in Gaul whose number included, according to Sidonius Apollinaris, both bishops and rhetoricians; they are likely to have belonged to Berry. The first bishop of the Irish has been linked with these Palladii but on no good evidence. Palladius has usually been seen as deacon of Auxerre rather than of Rome; in other words, it has been thought that Germanus sent him to Rome to obtain papal authority for his anti-Pelagian expedition to Britain. There is no positive evidence for or against this theory. 
What remains very likely is that the mission to the Irish arose from Germanus's journey to Britain. Explicit papal policy at this period was that missions should be mounted only when those who were to be evangelized had already expressed an interest in Christianity. The Irish Christians to whom Palladius was sent must therefore have been considered a credible base from which to work; they may have requested a bishop when Germanus was in Britain. Since Germanus was then acting as papal representative, their request went to the pope; he responded by sending the same Palladius who had recommended Germanus. This small group thus brought about, in the eyes of Prosper, two notable achievements on behalf of the papacy: Celestine had saved one island from heresy and another from paganism. He had intervened in a former province where the Roman empire was now powerless, and also beyond the furthest bounds of the empire, even at its strongest. Prosper, having become the friend of Pope Leo I ('r'. 440-61), lived in Rome for part of the 430s and probably for most or all of the period from 440 to 455. Leo preached a sermon to the people of Rome on the feast of Peter and Paul in 441, in which he declared that Rome, 'a royal and a priestly city, having been made the head of the whole world through the holy see of the blessed Peter... came to rule over a wider territory through the worship of God than by earthly domination' (Leo, ed. Chavasse, 'Sermo' 82). The sermon is textually linked with Prosper's 'De vocatione omnium gentium', a work which considers both the theology and some of the practical details of missionary work. The mission of Palladius to the Irish was the clearest and most recent example which could be used to justify Leo's claim. The latter's friendship with Prosper makes it likely that he indeed had Ireland and therefore Palladius in mind. 
Leo's sermon casts doubt, therefore, on the late seventh-century Irish account by Muirchu which makes Palladius die shortly after 431. Muirchu was manifestly making such claims in order to exalt the reputation of St Patrick as the true missionary to all the Irish, whereas the contemporary Prosper expressed, and Pope Leo's sermon implied, a continued optimism about Palladius's mission. On the other hand, Muirchu may be approximately correct in so far as he is supported by place-name evidence in associating both Palladius and the other likely early missionaries, Iserninus, Secundinus, and Auxilius, with Leinster. Those three early bishops are more likely to have been disciples of Palladius than, as Muirchu, Tirechan, and the early annals claim, of Patrick. In the first half of the fifth century Leinster probably extended as far north as the River Boyne. This greater Leinster was the part of Ireland which has yielded most evidence of Roman influence, but it was to be reduced in size by Ui Neill conquests in the midlands, probably in the late fifth and early sixth centuries. Serious progress in the conversion of Leinster would be an achievement sufficient to give some justification to Prosper's optimistic claim that Celestine had made Ireland Christian. 
Palladius's relationship to Patrick can only be conjectured. It was already the subject of different ideas in the late seventh century. To judge by Patrick's own writings, especially his 'Confessio', his main area of activity was in the western part of Ireland: his proudest claim was to have taken the Christian faith to the furthest western extremity of the inhabited world; and the only part of Ireland with which he is securely connected is Mayo. Palladius and Patrick may, therefore, be seen as exemplifying two stages in the geographical expansion of Christianity in Ireland: Palladius, in the 430s, found a Christian community already established, but without a bishop; he was their first bishop and probably worked in Leinster; Patrick on the other hand took Christianity to the furthest west of the island; his activity as a missionary probably belongs to the second half of the fifth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 21163


Pallady, Richard (b. 1515/16, d. in or before 1563), household official and member of parliament, was born of a yeoman family at Irthlingborough, Northamptonshire. He was educated as a king's scholar at Eton College from about 1529 and admitted to King's College, Cambridge, on 18 August 1533 at the age of seventeen; he was a fellow of the college in 1536-7. From 1540 to 1548 he was an attorney in the sheriff's court of London; at some time during the same period he entered the service of the duke of Somerset, almost certainly under the patronage of his steward, Sir John Thynne, who had previously been a member of the household of Lord Vaux of Harrowden, lord of the manor of Irthlingborough, where Pallady was born. There is no evidence that he had any particular expertise in architectural matters and the attribution to him of the precocious design of Somerset House in the Strand, London (begun 1546), considered to be 'the most serious attempt to compose a classical facade yet seen in England' ('History of the King's Works', 4.252), cannot be substantiated. It is based on an unattributed description of Pallady as 'overseer of the works of the Duke of Somerset in the Strand' ('DNB') but he is not named among the 'cheiff and principall officers' (Pikarell) in the account roll drawn up after Somerset's execution, although he did account for over $500 of ready money in his hands. The earlier description of him as 'clerk of the works to the said Duke' (Tytler, 272) in the list of prisoners lately committed to the Tower with Somerset in October 1549 would explain his possession of such substantial sums and suggests a more humble administrative role without design responsibility. He was released three months later without any formal charges being brought against him. In 1552 he was responsible for settling a number of Somerset's outstanding debts in Reading and elsewhere in Berkshire. His rehabilitation was completed later in the year when he resumed his seat in the House of Commons, to which he had been elected in 1547 for Peterborough. He was elected to the parliament of 1559 to represent Heytesbury, Wiltshire, where Thynne had an interest. By this date he had moved from Ruscombe, Berkshire, where he had been living for most of the decade, to the Thynne manor of Buckland in Gloucestershire. He was married before 1544 to Catherine, daughter of Guy Armston of Armston, Northamptonshire, and then to Anne, daughter of William Kirkby of Upper Rawcliffe, Lancashire. He died intestate before 27 March 1563, when letters of administration were granted to his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 21164


Palliser, Fanny Bury (1805-1878), writer on art, was born on 23 September 1805, the daughter of Joseph Marryat (1757-1824) of Wimbledon House, Surrey, and Sydenham House, Kent -- a businessman and later MP for Horsham and Sandwich -- and his wife, Charlotte, daughter of Frederic Geyer of Boston, New England. She was one of fifteen children, many of whom later published; her siblings included Frederick Marryat (1792-1848), the novelist, and Joseph Marryat (1790-1878), the ceramics expert. On 8 August 1832 she married Captain Richard Bury Palliser (1796/7-1852), the third son of John Palliser of Derrybuskan, co. Tipperary; they had four sons and two daughters. 
Mrs Bury Palliser approached her career as a writer on artistic subjects in the oblique fashion common to nineteenth-century women art critics and art historians. In 1845 she published 'The Modern Poetical Speaker', a collection of modern verse suitable for recitation, and in 1855 'Handbook of the Arts in the Middle Ages', a translation from the French of Jules Labarte. She also assisted her brother Joseph -- with whom she shared a long-standing interest in the history of ceramics -- to revise the second edition (1857) of his 'History of Pottery and Porcelain', and was a significant figure among the growing number of women collectors of ceramics led by Lady Charlotte Shreiber and Lady Dorothy Nevill. She showed an interest -- unusual among women collectors -- in Italian maiolica, and in July 1857 was proposed for membership of the newly founded Collectors' Club (soon the Fine Arts Club) by J. C. Robinson. In later life, she published 'The China Collector's Pocket Companion' (1874), and 'History of the Ceramic Art' (1878), a translation from the French work by Albert Jacquemart. 
Fanny Bury Palliser's most significant publication dealt with an area of art history which, like ceramics, was considered eminently suitable for women writers. 'The History of Lace', published in 1865, established her as an expert on this subject; it reached a second edition in 1869 and a third in 1875. Her obituarist in 'The Academy' rightly described it as 'a complete and valuable work, abounding in illustrations' (p. 73): if not a model of style, it is a comprehensive classification of varieties of lacework and a mine of information on its history. Its durability was confirmed by a full revision in 1902, by Margaret Jourdain and Alice Dryden: in the preface, they described it as 'still the classic work on the subject'. It still features frequently in the footnotes of contemporary studies of lace and its history. Palliser was chosen to produce 'A Descriptive Catalogue of the Lace and Embroidery in the South Kensington Museum' (1871); she produced a revised edition in 1873 and at the time of her death was preparing another revision (later completed and published by her fellow lace expert, Alan Summerley Cole, in 1881). She took a leading part in the organization of the International Lace Exhibition of 1874 at South Kensington, arranging and cataloguing the materials, and donated many examples of lacework to the museum. Thus she assisted in the formation of what is now one of the largest lace collections in the world; she may also have contributed indirectly to the revival of the lace industry which took place after her death, with the philanthropic foundation of lace associations in the 1870s and 1880s. 
A contributor to the 'Art Journal' and 'The Academy', Palliser also published 'Historic Devices, Badges, and War Cries' (1870) -- a collection of papers which had earlier appeared in the 'Art Journal' -- and 'Mottoes for Monuments, or, Epitaphs Selected for Study and Application' (1872). An engaging travelogue, 'Brittany and its Byways', appeared in 1869. She died at her home, 33 Russell Road, Kensington, on 16 January 1878, and was buried in Brompton cemetery on 21 January. Her memorialist in 'The Reliquary', L. F. W. Jewitt, praised her as 'a discriminating, clear-headed and just critic', who was nevertheless 'a true woman in every thought, feeling, and impulse and action' (Jewitt, 227-8). His opinion may not have been uninfluenced by her extremely favourable review of his 'Ceramic Art in Great Britain' (1878) in the 'Art Journal' for January 1878 -- probably the last piece she wrote. 


@@@@@


doc= 21165


Palliser, Sir Hugh, first baronet (1723-1796), naval officer and politician, was born on 26 February 1723 at Kirk Deighton in the West Riding of Yorkshire. He was the son of Captain Hugh Palliser, army officer, of North Deighton and Mary, daughter of Humphrey Robinson of Thicket Hall, Cottingworth, Yorkshire. In 1735 he was entered as a midshipman on the 'Aldborough', commanded by his uncle, Nicholas Robinson. Two years later he moved, with Robinson, to the 'Kennington', in which he remained for three years. He was for a few months in 1740 in the 'Deptford' storeship and in the 'Tiger', and early in 1741 he joined his uncle in the 'Essex'. He passed his examination for lieutenant on 12 May 1741, and, continuing in the 'Essex', was promoted to that rank on 18 September 1741. At the beginning of the winter Robinson was superseded in the command by Richard Norris, son of Sir John Norris, and Palliser, continuing with him, was first lieutenant of the 'Essex' in the action off Toulon on 11 February 1744. Amid the charges and counter-charges that followed, Palliser, with some of the other lieutenants of the 'Essex', preferred a charge of cowardice and misconduct against Norris, whose career was subsequently terminated. 
On 3 July 1746 Palliser was promoted commander of the 'Weasel', and on 25 November captain of the 'Captain', going out to the West Indies with the broad pennant of Commodore Edward Legge. On Legge's death (19 September 1747) Palliser was moved into the 'Sutherland' (50 guns), and in the following March he was severely wounded by an explosion and was obliged to return to England. By December he had recovered sufficiently to be appointed to the frigate 'Sheerness', in which he was sent out to the East Indies with news of the peace. He joined Edward Boscawen on the Coromandel coast in July 1749, and returned to England in the following April, when the ship was paid off. 
In January 1753 Palliser was appointed to the 'Yarmouth', guardship at Chatham, from which in March he was moved to the 'Seahorse', a small frigate employed during that and the next year on the coast of Scotland to prevent smuggling. At the end of September 1754 the 'Seahorse' was ordered to refit at Sheerness. From there she went to co. Cork, and sailed in January 1755, in charge of a convoy of transports, for Virginia, from where Palliser returned to England on 26 July, Commodore Augustus Keppel taking a passage with him; they arrived at Spithead on 22 August 1755. 
A month later Palliser was appointed to the 'Eagle' at Plymouth, and early in October he was sent to cruise off Ushant, where he captured several vessels coming home from Newfoundland. During 1756 the 'Eagle' was one of the fleet cruising off Ushant and in the Bay of Biscay under Admirals Edward Hawke, Edward Boscawen, or Sir Charles Knowles, and in 1757 she was with Rear-Admiral Francis Holburne off Louisbourg. During the summer of 1758 Palliser commanded the 'Shrewsbury' in the fleet off Ushant under Lord Anson; and in 1759 he took part in the operations in the St Lawrence leading up to the reduction of Quebec. In 1760 he was with Sir Charles Saunders in the Mediterranean, and for some time had command of a detached squadron in the Levant. In 1762 he was sent out to Newfoundland with a small squadron to retake St John's; but that service having already been accomplished, he returned to England. 
In April 1764 Palliser was appointed governor and commander-in-chief at Newfoundland, with his broad pennant in the 'Guernsey'. This was at that time a summer appointment, the ships coming home for the winter; but in Palliser's case it was twice renewed, in 1765 and 1766, during which time he acted as a commissioner for adjusting the French claims to fishing rights, and directed a survey of the coasts, which was carried out by the circumnavigator James Cook. In 1770 Palliser was appointed comptroller of the navy, and on 6 August 1773 he was created a baronet. In the following year he was elected MP for Scarborough. He took his seat as a supporter of Lord North's ministry and spoke on naval affairs during the American War of Independence. On 31 March 1775 Palliser was promoted rear-admiral, and shortly afterwards he was appointed one of the lords of the Admiralty, under the earl of Sandwich. In the same year, by the will of his old chief Sir Charles Saunders, he came into a legacy of $5000, and was appointed lieutenant-general of marines in succession to Saunders. On 29 January 1778 he was promoted vice-admiral of the blue; and in March, when Vice-Admiral Keppel was appointed to the command of the Channel Fleet, Palliser, while still retaining his seat at the Admiralty, was appointed third in command under him. 
Off Ushant for three days (24-7 July 1778), the English and French fleets were in each other's presence, Keppel vainly trying to bring the enemy to action. On the morning of 27 July a shift of wind enabled Keppel in the 'Formidable' to bring the enemy to a brief, indecisive but damaging action. After the two fleets drew clear of each other Keppel signalled to reform the line, hoping to renew the battle. However, Palliser's rear squadron had been damaged and was unable to get into its station until after nightfall. Next day the French fleet was not in sight and Keppel returned to Plymouth. This indecisive engagement created great disappointment at home. The 'opposition' press, led by the 'General Advertiser', blamed Keppel's failure to defeat the French on Palliser's tardiness in supporting him for a renewed attack. Furious at this, Palliser in November desired Keppel to write to the press to contradict their accusation. Keppel refused, whereupon Palliser issued his own explanation of events in the 'Morning Post'. The two men clashed in the House of Commons on 2 December, when Keppel implied Palliser had been negligent if not disobedient in failing to answer his signals. Impulsively Palliser demanded a court martial on Keppel for misconduct and neglect of duty. In a court packed with Keppel's friends he was honourably acquitted in February 1779. The London mob celebrated his acquittal by gutting Palliser's house in Pall Mall, and by burning Palliser in effigy. In York they are said to have demolished the house of Palliser's sister. 
The court martial on Keppel had pronounced the charges 'malicious and ill-founded' (Drummond, 3.247). Palliser consequently resigned his appointments, including his Admiralty seat, withdrew from parliament, and applied for a court martial on himself in February 1779. Keppel declined to prepare the charge for the trial which began at Portsmouth on 12 April. Because of Keppel's decision there was accordingly no prosecutor and no charges; proceedings were rather in the nature of an inquiry. Even so they lasted twenty-one days. Palliser's 'conduct was considered in many respects highly exemplary and meritorious' (ibid.); however, he was criticized for failing to inform his commander-in-chief of the state of his ship, and, though he was acquitted of any misconduct, his acquittal was neither unanimous nor with honour. 
Although he requested to be reinstated in the offices which he had resigned Palliser was appointed, only through the efforts of Sandwich, to the governorship of Greenwich Hospital in 1780. He did not stand at the 1780 general election but did contest, and win, the vacant seat of Huntingdon in October of that year. He became an admiral on 24 September 1787 and died, unmarried, at his country seat of Vach in Buckinghamshire, on 19 March 1796, allegedly 'of a disorder induced by the wounds received on board the 'Sutherland''. He was buried in the parish church of Chalfont St Giles. At his death the bulk of his estate passed to his illegitimate son. The baronetcy descended to his grandnephew Hugh Palliser Walters, who took the name Palliser, and from him to his son, on whose death it became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 21166


Palliser, John (1817-1887), geographer and explorer, was born on 29 January 1817, the eldest of five sons born to Wray Palliser (died 1862) of Comragh, co. Waterford, sometime lieutenant-colonel of the Waterford militia, and Anne, daughter of John Gledstanes of Annesfift, co. Tipperary; Sir William Palliser was his younger brother. John Palliser was sheriff of Waterford in 1844 and served in the Waterford militia. In 1847 he went on a hunting expedition among the native people of western and north-western America and his 'Adventures of a Hunter in the Prairies' (1853) sold at least eight thousand copies. In 1856 he proposed to the Royal Geographical Society that he explore the Canadian prairies and continental divide. The society's expedition committee refined his aims to comprise tracing the course of the Southern Saskatchewan, evaluating the region for settlement, and exploring the Rockies for a southerly pass to British Columbia. They estimated that this would take two years and cost $5000. Roderick Murchison, president of the society, stressed in his submission of the plan to the Colonial Office that there was a possibility that coal would be discovered and that a British expedition would be timely given the United States' railway surveys in the far west. In 1857 Henry Labouchere, secretary of state for the colonies, agreed to support the expedition. The Treasury subscribed $5000 and the Royal Society advised on the scientific aspects of the journey; but more important than science were the strategic desires to counteract American infiltration of the British prairies, to develop transport routes to stop the Red River colony looking south rather than east for links to the outside world, and to review the activities of the Hudson's Bay Company which was widely criticized for maintaining the isolation of the Pacific west and understating its resource endowment in order to protect its own trading privileges. It was in part Palliser's aloofness from the political controversy surrounding the venture that led, on 31 March 1857, to his appointment as leader of the expedition, supported by Thomas Blakiston as astronomer and James Hector as geologist and zoologist. 
The expedition had assumed a far more scientific and political character than Palliser had originally envisaged, and became even more highly charged politically after gold was discovered on the Fraser River in 1858. In 1857 Palliser explored the White Fish and Kaminstikwia rivers and the land between the Southern Saskatchewan and the border with the United States, and confirmed the feasibility of establishing communication, particularly a railway line, between the rocky regions of lakes Superior and Winnipeg and the prairies. In 1858 he approached the Rockies from the Buffalo prairie between the Northern and Southern Saskatchewan and explored the passes through the mountains lying in British territory. For the results of this journey he was awarded the patron's gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society in 1859. In 1860 he headed for the Southern Saskatchewan River following the course of the Red Deer River. He went westwards to the Rocky Mountains from the point where he had turned in his first season's explorations and thus completed the survey of the hitherto unknown prairie region. He also examined the country to the west of the Columbia River, establishing the fact that there was a route connecting the Saskatchewan plains east of the Rockies with the gold mining regions of British Columbia -- information which was vital in the struggle to establish British control over areas which were attracting more American than Canadian prospectors. Palliser considered that western North America should form a series of British colonies independent of Canada -- an idea which proved unworkable; and that the Hudson's Bay Company should have its privileges curtailed -- a view which prevailed soon afterwards. 
As the government sponsors of the expedition feared, its actual cost of $13,000 was nearly three times the original estimate; yet much had been achieved for costs far more modest than those spent on the United States' side in surveying western lands. The general topography of a huge swathe of territory had been established, the first accurate map of the British Rocky Mountains drawn, several passes discovered, and substantial knowledge gained about the geology and natural history of the area. On 30 May 1877 Palliser was awarded the companionship of St Michael and St George. He died, unmarried, at Comragh, co. Waterford, on 18 August 1887. 


@@@@@


doc= 21167


Palliser, William (1646-1727), Church of Ireland archbishop of Cashel, was born at Kirby Wiske in Yorkshire, the son of John Palliser. He received his early education at Northallerton, probably under Thomas Smelt. Having entered Trinity College, Dublin, as a pensioner on 13 January 1661, he became a fellow in 1668 and graduated BD in 1674 and DD in 1679. He married Mary Wheeler, a granddaughter of Jonah Wheeler, bishop of Ossory and son-in-law of Sir Philip Perceval, at an unknown date. 
Palliser received deacon's orders at Wexford in November 1669, and priest's orders on the 28th of the following January in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin. He was elected 'medicus' in Trinity College in October 1670, and appointed professor of divinity there in 1678. In the same year he delivered a Latin oration at the funeral of James Margetson, archbishop of Armagh. In October 1681 Palliser resigned his fellowship in Trinity College for the rectory of Clonfeacle, co. Tyrone. However, four days after his resignation he was readmitted as a fellow to Trinity College by dispensation, on his resigning Clonfeacle. 
By patent dated 14 February 1693 Palliser was appointed bishop of Cloyne, and was consecrated in the chapel of Trinity College on 5th March. In 1694, on the orders of the government, he prepared an account of the diocese of Cloyne in 1693-4, and supplied with it a plan for union of parishes. He was translated to the archbishopric of Cashel on 26 June 1694, and continued to occupy it until his death at Rathfarnham, Dublin, on 1 January 1727. He was buried in St Andrew's Church, Dublin, later that month. The great wealth which he accumulated was inherited by his only son, William. Archbishop Palliser made a gift of communion plate to the cathedral of Cashel. He donated $1500 to Trinity College, to which he also bequeathed a selection of 4000 of his books, on condition that they should be always kept together as a collection in the college library and designated Bibliotheca Palliseriana. 


@@@@@


doc= 21168


Palliser, Sir William (1830-1882), army officer and engineer, was the fifth and youngest son of Lieutenant-Colonel Wray Palliser (died 1862) of the Waterford militia and Anne Gledstanes of co. Tipperary. He was born in Dublin on 18 June 1830, and was educated at Rugby School (1845-9), Trinity College, Dublin, from 1849, and Trinity Hall, Cambridge, from 1851. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1854, after which he went on to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, obtaining a commission as ensign in the rifle brigade on 22 April 1855. In the same year he became lieutenant and joined the 1st battalion in the Crimea, but saw no active service, returning to England in June 1856. In 1858 he exchanged into the 18th hussars, and on 5 August 1859 was promoted to the rank of captain. He then served as aide-de-camp to Sir William Knollys at Aldershot for a time, before going to Dublin as brigade major of cavalry on 6 July 1860. He remained there until 4 October 1864, when he accepted an unattached majority, finally retiring from the army in December 1871. 
Palliser is chiefly remembered for his innovations in ordnance, and it was while still an undergraduate at Cambridge that he first turned his mind in that direction. Some shot of his design was tested at Shoeburyness in 1853, followed by a rifled mortar in 1855, and he took out a patent for projectiles as early as 20 July 1854. However, it was in 1862 and 1863 that he developed the three inventions that proved most fruitful, and with which his name is chiefly identified. The first of these, entitled 'Improvements in the construction of ordnance and in the projectiles to be used therewith', was granted a patent on 11 November 1862. The essential problem that this patent attempted to address was the propensity of cannon and other artillery to explode unexpectedly when placed under the severe stress produced when they were fired. The solution Palliser offered was to form the barrels of such cannon from concentric tubes of metal of different elasticities, so that, as he explained in the patent, 'owing to their respective ranges of elasticity, when one tube is on the point of yielding, all the tubes may be on the point of yielding'. One application of this principle was to insert tubes of coiled wrought iron into cast-iron guns that had been suitably bored out. Guns so treated were found, when tested, to give excellent results, and the method provided an efficient means of utilizing the large stockpile of cast-iron smooth-bore ordnance. It became possible to convert 68-pounder smooth-bore guns into 80-pounder rifled guns, and 8 inch and 32-pounder smooth-bores into rifled 64-pounders, at one-third of the cost of new guns. Some thousands were altered in this way, and became known as 'Palliser converted guns'. 
On 6 December 1862, Palliser took out a patent for screw-bolts, the second invention for which he was known. The stem or shank of these bolts was designed so as to be slightly smaller in diameter than the bottom of the thread of the screw in order to cause any extension in the shank to be confined to the screwed part, resulting in an increase in the strain they could take before breaking. This was especially intended for the bolts used in securing armour-plates, and the principle proved so effective that Palliser bolts, even without elastic washers, were found to be better than ordinary bolts with them. Supplemented afterwards by Captain English's spherical nuts and coiled washers, the 'plus thread', as it was called, satisfactorily solved the very difficult problem of armour bolts. 
Palliser's third main invention was granted a patent on 27 May 1863, and was for what were called 'chill-cast projectiles'; these subsequently became known as 'Palliser projectiles', despite the claim of James Nasmyth to have invented them first, some months earlier. When tested in November 1863 these projectiles were found to be a marked improvement on ordinary cast iron, but it was not until 1866 that chill-cast shot was actually recognized as superior to steel for attack on wrought-iron armour, and introduced into service at a cost of one-fifth that of steel projectiles. However, owing to the introduction of steel-faced armour, steel shot subsequently superseded them. Between 1867 and 1871 Palliser was awarded $15,000 for his chilled projectiles. 
Palliser's inventions were further developed in subsequent patents, of which he took out fourteen dealing with guns, bolts, and projectiles, between 1867 and 1881. He also patented improvements in fastenings for railway lines, in powder magazines, and in boots and shoes, between 1869 and 1873. In 1868 he married Anne, daughter of George Perham. During the siege of Paris he wrote several letters to 'The Times' and some leading articles in it, which were afterwards embodied in a pamphlet of 1871 entitled 'The Use of Earthen Fortresses for the Defence of London, and as a Preventive Against Invasion'. In these, he proposed to surround London with a chain of unrevetted earthworks, about 5 miles apart, extending from Chatham to Reading, and to occupy the most important strategical points between this chain and the coast by similar works, or clusters of works. 
In acknowledgement of his services, Palliser was made CB (civil) in 1868, and was knighted on 16 January 1873. In March 1875 he received the cross of a commander of the Crown of Italy. After unsuccessfully contesting Devonport and Dungarvan, he was elected in 1880 for Taunton, as a Conservative, heading the poll. 
Palliser died suddenly from 'angina pectoris' (heart disease) at 21 Earl's Court Square, London, on 4 February 1882, and was buried in Brompton cemetery five days later. Before his death he complained that he was 'persecuted to the bitter end' by officials in the War Office, a complaint that was repeated by others, who said that the treatment he received hastened his death. The basis of the complaint was that the War Office had deliberately blocked Palliser's application for an extension on his patent for chill-cast shot. A valuable account of the controversy that resulted can be found in the report of the royal commission on warlike stores, published in 1887. 




@@@@@


doc= 21169


Wray Richard Gledstanes Palliser (1821/2-1891), one of Sir William's elder brothers, became sub-lieutenant RN on 13 May 1845, and lieutenant on 28 February 1847. He distinguished himself in 1854 in expeditions against Chinese pirates, being in command of the boats of the frigate 'Spartan', of which he was first lieutenant. He stormed three forts, mounting seventeen guns, and he boarded the chief vessel of a pirate fleet and rescued a French woman who was a prisoner in it. In the act of boarding he himself fell between his own boat and the other, and broke several ribs. For his gallantry in these actions, which were colourfully related in his obituary in 'The Times', he was made commander on 6 January 1855. In 1857 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Fitzgerald of Muckridge House, co. Cork. He was placed on the retired list as a captain on 21 April 1870, and died of bronchitis at the Queen's Hotel, Chester, on 6 June 1891. 


@@@@@


doc= 21170


Palmer, Alicia Tindal (1763-1822), writer of historical fiction and biography, was born in Bath, the daughter of the actor John Palmer (1728-1768), called Gentleman John to distinguish him from another of the several actor John Palmers, who was known as Plausible Jack, and of Hannah Mary Pritchard (1739-1781), who had been an actress since the age of six. The more famous tragedienne Hannah Pritchard was grandmother to Alicia and her brother, William Vaughan Palmer, army officer (1762-1822). Alicia probably spent her early years in Bath and in London, where her father died on 23 May 1768. Her mother then retired from the stage, inherited property in London and Twickenham from Hannah Pritchard in the same year, and in the next year married Maurice or Morris Lloyd, wealthy businessman and close friend of Lord North. Hannah Mary died in August 1781 at Dillington House, Whitelackington, near Ilminster, Somerset, a house rented for her by her husband. 
Palmer was thus comfortably off in her early years. It was 1809 before she published her first book, 'The Husband and Lover', which she subtitled 'An Historical Moral Romance'. It was well reviewed. Next year came 'The Daughters of Isenberg: a Bavarian Romance', designed to inculcate in young female readers a proper filial obedience and respect for the proprieties. Her heroine shows 'bewitching timidity' and 'sweet deprecation'. The plot has Gothic and stereotypical elements -- wicked barons, idyllic landscape gardens, a coquette being punished, and a learned lady being mocked -- but also shows evidence of some shrewd observation of human behaviour. It hardly deserves the attack it received in the 'Quarterly Review', from John Gifford, who ridiculed Palmer's ideas on history and geography, indulged in sideswipes at other women writers, and ended with a circumstantial tale of how Palmer had offered him $3 (disguised as a charitable contribution) for a favourable review. His final insult was to say he would pass on the money to either the Lying-In or the Foundling Hospital, thus equating Palmer with the mother of an illegitimate child. 
Undeterred, Palmer issued her next book, 'The Sons of Altringham' (1811), as a venture to raise money for a boy who was deaf and mute. 'Altringham' is not a novel but a collection of three tales. Her last publication was a historical biography, 'Authentic Memoirs of the Life of John Sobieski, King of Poland' (1815), published with a distinguished subscribers' list. The nobility and clergy are well represented, as well as the literary world (Byron and others), the theatrical world (Edmund Kean), women, and book clubs. Sobieski, who lived in the seventeenth century, was a national military hero as well as a ruler; his name had recently been mentioned in parliament in connection with the current fate of Poland. Palmer emphasizes the value of liberty, and the responsibility of those countries, such as Britain, which enjoy liberty, to work to make it more widespread in the world. Palmer died in 1822. 


@@@@@


doc= 21171


Palmer, Anthony (bap. 1616, d. 1679), ejected minister, was baptized at Great Comberton, Worcestershire, on 27 October 1616, the only son of Anthony Palmer. Although the younger Anthony Palmer was married with at least two children, nothing is known of his mother, his wife, or his family life, although one of his works mentioned 'many dear Relations and Kindred' in Gloucestershire (Palmer, 'Gospel New Creature', sig. A2). He matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, in 1634, graduated BA on 7 April 1638, was admitted fellow on 29 November 1640, and graduated MA on 7 December 1641, taking orders shortly afterwards. He took the solemn league and covenant in 1643 and signed the rigidly presbyterian 'Gloucester-shire ministers testimony' in 1648, but was always a committed Independent. He was presented to the rectory of Bourton on the Water, Gloucestershire, on 4 July 1646, resigning his fellowship and taking the engagement in 1649. 
Palmer was an influential figure in Cromwellian Gloucestershire, as part of a closely knit group of Independent pastors, notably Carnslew Helme at Winchcombe, William Tray at Oddington, and John Wells at Tewkesbury. They were connected to several radical JPs who had risen through military service and membership of gathered churches. With these men, their congregations, and others, Palmer signed four petitions between 1653 and 1657. They successfully nominated the Gloucestershire members of the Barebone's Parliament, urged Cromwell to reject the crown in 1656, and generally upheld the cause of the gathered churches. As part of this group, Palmer was involved in two significant local controversies: a disputation in Winchcombe church against the Anglican Clement Barksdale in November 1653, and the attempted prosecution of the itinerant Ranter Richard Coppin for the doctrines he preached at Stow on the Wold in March 1654. He was also an assistant commissioner to the Gloucestershire expurgators in 1654 and attended the Savoy House conference in 1658. Of Palmer's six published works, 'A Scripture-Rale to the Lord's Table' (1654) and 'The Gospel New Creature' (1658) were the most important. The former expounded his belief in the need for the godly to separate voluntarily from the profane masses and preserve unmixed communion under the discipline of the minister, as in the primitive church. This, to Palmer, transcended differences of emphasis between presbyterian and Independent over matters such as appeals. After much prayer, his group agreed that attempting to enforce purity through the magistrate was derogatory to Christ; only mutual agreed subjection to him could bring people together in holy fellowship. In practice they depended on sympathetic JPs to enforce their views, which caused much discontent in their parishes. 
Palmer was ill-treated by the cavalier-dominated militia in the spring of 1660. Like Helme, he abandoned his living and moved to London, where he lived at Little Moorfields and headed a mixed Baptist-Congregationalist church at Pinners' Hall. Both men remained committed opponents of the Restoration regime, which regarded them as Fifth Monarchists and kept them under sporadic surveillance. Palmer preached to the large gathering in Glovers' Hall on 10 March 1661, soon after Venner's rising, and was one of five main preachers at the large conventicle of All Hallows-the-Great in late 1661, where he prayed for the final fall of Babylon and urged the faithful to have no dealings with the restored Anglican clergy or with superstition of any kind. In November 1661 he and Helme were reportedly travelling around to 'blow up the Coales of rebellion' (TNA: PRO, SP 29/44/135) and he was named by some informers as one of the 'council of six' which masterminded the Tong Plot of late 1662. This -- and, indeed, the existence of the plot -- is uncertain, but Palmer did have connections with known plotters at various times. He was licensed as a Congregationalist at a house on London Bridge on 19 April 1672, died in London on 26 January 1679, and was buried in the New Bethlehem graveyard, Moorfields, London. 
Another 


@@@@@


doc= 21172


Anthony Palmer (bap. 1613, d. 1693), also an ejected minister, was baptized in Barnstaple, Devon, on 23 January 1613, the son of William Palmer of Barnstaple. He matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, in 1631, graduated BA in 1635, and proceeded MA in 1637. He was presented to the sequestered rectory of Bratton Fleming, Devon, in 1645. He was a member of the Devon Association in 1655 and was ejected by October 1662, despite having previously protested his fidelity to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'; Edward Walker noted that he had administered communion only once in fourteen years in Bratton. He then returned to Barnstaple, where he was licensed as a presbyterian in April 1672. In 1690 he was recorded as having no fixed ministry. He was buried on 12 September 1693 in Barnstaple. 


@@@@@


doc= 21173


Palmer, Anthony (c.1675-1749), colonial governor, was probably born in England but went at an early age to Barbados, where he made a considerable fortune as a merchant at Bridgetown. In 1707 he invested in land in Philadelphia and, after moving there, continued to prosper through his mercantile ventures. 
In 1708 Palmer was summoned to the provincial council of Pennsylvania, a position that he held for the rest of his life. He became in 1718 a justice of the peace, and soon after a judge of the court of common pleas, and in 1720 one of the first masters in chancery. In 1747 he was president of the council, and in May, when Governor George Thomas resigned, he assumed the administration of the colony, which he governed for eighteen months through a period of great anxiety. Britain was then at war with France and Spain, whose privateers were making constant attacks along the Delaware coast. The provincial council, which was controlled by Quakers, declined to take measures of defence. Palmer induced his government to act independently, and was remarkably successful. About the same time he made treaties of friendship with several American Indian peoples, especially those of the Six Nations. 
In 1730 Palmer purchased Fairman Mansion at Philadelphia: he cut up part of the grounds into building plots, and became the founder of what is now the city's Kensington district. He lived here in some comfort until his death, in Philadelphia, in May 1749. His daughter Thomasine married the son and heir of Sir William Keith, a later governor of Pennsylvania. 


@@@@@


doc= 21174


Palmer, Arthur (1841-1897), classical scholar and critic, was born at Guelph, Ontario, Canada, on 14 September 1841, the sixth child of the Ven. Arthur Palmer, archdeacon of Toronto, and his first wife, Hester Madeline Crawford. He was educated first by his father, then at the grammar school, Guelph, under the Revd Edward Stewart, leaving there after about four years in 1856. In 1858 he went to Cheltenham College, where he remained less than a year and had, as he used to say, 'just a sweet taste of English public school life'. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1859, obtained a university scholarship in 1861, and in 1863 he graduated with senior moderatorship and gold medal in classics, as well as a junior moderatorship and silver medal in experimental and natural science. In 1867 he was elected a fellow, and in 1880 succeeded Professor Tyrrell in the chair of Latin. In 1888 he succeeded Judge Webb as public orator. He was MA (1867) and LittD of his own university, and honorary LLD of Glasgow (1890) and DCL of Oxford (1894). From 1867 to 1880 he was a college tutor, and as such exercised a marked influence on a large number of pupils. On 4 October 1879 he married Miss Frances Greene of Clevedon. They had two sons: Arthur ('b'. 1881) and Uther ('b'. 1892). 
Palmer's contributions to classical scholarship were mainly emendations of Latin and Greek texts. He was most successful in his corrections of the works of Plautus, Catullus, Propertius, Horace, and Ovid, while he aided largely in constituting the text of the 'editio princeps' of Bacchylides (1897), and made many excellent suggestions in the first edition of Herondas (1891). Specimens of some of his cleverest and most convincing emendations will be found in an obituary notice in 'Hermathena', 10 (1899). Palmer's posthumously published edition of Ovid's 'Heroides' received the careful attention of A. E. Housman in the 'Classical Review' in 1899. 
Palmer had special qualifications for the emendation of poetry. He had a wide knowledge of ancient and modern literature and a sensitive appreciation of style. His versions in 'Kottabos' and 'Dublin Translations' exhibit his skill in reproducing the idiom and spirit of Latin poetry. His most important editions were of Ovid's 'Heroides' (1874; revised and enlarged 1898), Propertius (1880), Horace's 'Satires' (1883), and Catullus (1896). He also contributed articles, chiefly critical, to 'Hermathena', the 'Journal of Philology', the 'Classical Review', and other periodicals. 
Palmer was very attractive as a youth. He was a fair cricketer, and for some seasons he successfully captained a team of old university cricketers who assumed the name of Stoics. He was a good racket-player and golfer. As a conversationalist he was delightful, and he greatly enjoyed society until failing health forced him largely to forgo it. His health until middle age was excellent, but during the last ten years of his life he suffered much from disease of the bladder, and died of a cancerous growth in that region on 14 December 1897 at his home, Noel Lodge, Kingstown, co. Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 21175


Palmer, Sir Arthur Hunter (1819-1898), politician and pastoralist in Australia, was born on 28 December 1819 in Armagh, Ireland, the elder son of Lieutenant Arthur Palmer RN (died 1836), and his second wife, Emily (1797-1826), the daughter of Robert Hunter of Dublin and Downpatrick. He was educated at Youghal grammar school and by private tutor in Dublin. In 1838 he sailed in the 'City of Edinburgh' for Sydney, Australia, and, after a pastoral apprenticeship in the Illawarra district, in 1840 he became manager of the properties of Henry Dangar. He expanded the latter's interests and became general manager in 1856. 
Backed by savings and experience, Palmer was ready to become a squatter in his own right. Queensland was opening up to European settlement, having in 1859 become a self-governing colony. In 1863 Palmer leased Beaufort run; later he acquired Cambridge Downs and shared ownership of Gin Gin station with the McIlwraith brothers. Through the 1890s he relinquished these interests, partly through resumptions, but especially because of foreclosures. On 8 June 1865 he married Cecilia Jessie (died 31 Aug 1885), the daughter of Archibald Mosman, a merchant and pastoralist. They had three sons and two daughters. 
Palmer's interest in political and civic matters began in 1865 when, in squatter tradition, he acted as magistrate. The next year he was elected to the legislative assembly as member for Port Curtis, and in 1867-8 he was colonial secretary and secretary for public works in the 'Pure Merino' administration of Robert Mackenzie. His political interests were mainly pastoral and regional. 
In 1870 Palmer was surprised to be asked by Governor Blackall to form an administration, and in April that year, taking the offices of colonial secretary and premier, he put together a cohesive ministry. With colonial finances shaky, he initially pursued retrenchment and consolidation. By 1872, however, despite his squatter background, he was often proving as liberal as his opponents, and embarking upon progressive policies, notably manhood suffrage after six months' residence and single-member electorates. Palmer's political interests were broadening, and he sought to govern in the interests of all sectors and parts of the colony. In 1873, while premier, he introduced a private bill on state education, propounding the principles of free (through to university), compulsory, and secular education, with state funding going only to state schools. Thereby he lost the support of most conservatives, and he failed to regain the premiership after the subsequent election. 
Palmer's political principles were described by a contemporary as those of 'a radical of the Old Cobbett school' (W. Coote). Between 1874 and 1878 Palmer led the opposition, but his role as conservative leader was increasingly being assumed by Thomas McIlwraith. Palmer was elected for North Brisbane in 1878, and served in McIlwraith's ministry as colonial secretary and secretary for public instruction (1879-81). Appointed KCMG in 1881, he transferred to the legislative council that year and became president; twice he was administrator in the absence of the governor, and in 1893 he was appointed the first lieutenant-governor of Queensland. He was again acting governor in 1895-6. 
The interests of Palmer and McIlwraith were intermeshed -- through marriage, when McIlwraith married Palmer's wife's sister in 1879, and through land-holding and financial matters. In 1879 McIlwraith transferred his directorship of the Queensland National Bank to Palmer. Both were also involved in two land finance companies. This association implicated Palmer in financial scandals in the 1880s and 1890s, but he was cleared of any impropriety. Nevertheless, the financial collapse that settled upon Queensland (and the Queensland National Bank) in the early 1890s took its toll on him. 
Palmer appeared to his contemporaries as bluff, brusque, arrogant -- 'the great Mogul'; often the bully, he displayed a violent temper. Seen as a capable administrator, he behaved as the tory patrician. He died at his home, Easton Gray, Toowong, Brisbane, on 20 March 1898, and was buried quietly in the Toowong cemetery on the following day. 


@@@@@


doc= 21176


Palmer, John (1742-1818), theatre proprietor and postal reformer, was born in Bath, probably at 1 Gallaway's Buildings, the third child and only son of John Palmer (1702/3-1788) and his wife, Jane Long (1714/15-1783). His family were prosperous tradesmen in Bath, to which town his grandfather had moved, probably from Faringdon, then in Berkshire. His father ran a tallow chandlery, a brewery and maltings, and a theatre there. Palmer was educated locally at the Revd Needham's academy at Colerne and then at Marlborough Free Grammar School. In a quarrel which presaged his later disputes with authority, he opposed his family's wishes that he should enter the church and worked for a time in the brewery, before investing his energies in their theatrical concerns. On 24 August 1769 he married Sarah Mason, a widow of Clifton, establishing their family of six children in West Hall, Weston, Bath. After her death he married on 2 November 1786 a Miss Pratt, probably a relative of the Hon. J. J. Pratt, MP for Bath. 
Palmer's association with the theatre in Bath sharpened his entrepreneurial skills. With the support of Bath corporation he promoted in London an act (8 Geo. III c. 10, 1768), which secured the position of the Orchard Street Theatre by royal patent, the only one outside the capital to be thus protected. The prologue delivered by Palmer in celebration of this victory is included in a collection he edited about 1770, 'The New Spouter's Companion'. On the retirement of his father in 1776 the patent was renewed in his name (patent rolls, 16 Geo. III pt iv). In 1779 a Bristol theatre was taken in hand on similar terms and the programmes of the two theatres Royal were dovetailed, with actors such as Mrs Siddons travelling sometimes daily between the two for rehearsal and performance. This experience, and Palmer's own travels and correspondence in search of talent, convinced him of the need for improved communications. The success of Bathonian Ralph Allen in the introduction of the cross-post, bypassing London, had already shown that a provincial base was no bar to great financial rewards for national endeavour. 
The essence of the scheme devised by Palmer was that the unarmed post boy with a 'worn-out hack' or small cart, should be replaced by mailcoaches, similar to the stagecoaches on the improved turnpike roads that were already completing journeys with speed and security, which meant they were sometimes the preferred but unofficial way of sending letters and packages. The mailcoaches would be equipped with a strongbox, watched over by an armed guard. Mail was to be dispatched promptly -- that from London no longer held back by government letters. The coaches contracted from private firms would travel overnight, stopping only to change horses, deal with mail bags, and meet the needs of passengers. Momentum would be maintained by an exemption from tolls and by the granting of priority over other vehicles. 
In 1782 the plan was brought to the attention of William Pitt, chancellor of the exchequer, by the Hon. J. J. Pratt. Pitt showed interest, not least because of the promise of an increased revenue, but the plan's acceptance was held up by changes in government and by the opposition of the Post Office, which feared a loss of its authority. However, in June 1784 Pitt ordered a trial run on the Bristol-Bath-London road, which was so successful that a minute was sent from the Treasury to the Post Office, requiring that every assistance be given to the introduction of the service on all major routes in England and Wales. On Palmer's initiative most of this was accomplished by the end of 1785, and he then visited Scotland in 1786, France in 1787, and Ireland in 1788, to explore the extension of the service by land and sea. 
The reforms were welcomed by the public but the fact that Palmer had greater support from the Treasury than the Post Office led to problems, especially as the tasks arising from his appointment as surveyor and comptroller-general, which included arranging contracts with innkeepers and training staff in new duties, were undertaken on the basis of a verbal agreement with Pitt. Palmer had understood he would receive 21/2 per cent of the increase of the Post Office revenue and an annual salary of $1500, but instead found himself making a personal investment in the reform of a government institution with respect to which his powers and rewards had not been properly defined. Not until August 1786 was Palmer's dire financial position relieved when the Post Office agreed to appoint him on the terms noted, and to employ the guards, sorters, and others he had been financing, though the measures were not fully retrospective. His position was confirmed in July 1789, but to his dismay he remained under the jurisdiction of the postmasters-general, then lords Walsingham and Chesterfield, whose authority he continued to flout. They referred to him in private correspondence as 'the Dictator' (Clear, 100). A dispute early in 1792, in which his previously trusted assistant, Charles Bonnor, gave evidence of manoeuvres against the postmasters-general, led to Palmer's suspension. However, his departure was eased by the pension of $3000 per annum from April 1793, granted by William Pitt in recognition of the importance of his work. 
Despite these battles, Palmer had managed not only to reform the national system for the collection and delivery of mail, but also to improve some antiquated procedures within the Post Office. His stay was short but some of his appointees, such as Francis Freeling, became influential figures there. Palmer's claim for recompense was not met fully, but in 1813 (53 Geo. III, c. 157) an award of some $50,000 was made. The approval of the people had meanwhile been shown by the striking of tokens and medals, the presentation of silverware, and the granting of the freedom of eighteen towns and cities. 
Palmer continued to be notably active in the civic life of Bath. He had been elected a common councilman in 1775 and he became a Bath improvement commissioner in 1789. In 1791 he promoted a silver cup for horse racing. After the ending of his postal activities, Palmer increased his local responsibilities, becoming a Bath turnpike trustee in 1793, an alderman in 1795, and mayor of Bath in 1796 and 1809. He gave silver cups to the Bath Volunteers in 1805. In addition, he served as Bath's member of parliament from 1801 to 1807, in the whig interest. He lived in Bath at 25 Circus and 9 Laura Place and in London at Upper Gower Street; his wife died in Weymouth in 1807. He took the Chiltern Hundreds in 1808 and his son Charles was elected in his place. He died in Brighton on 16 August 1818 and was buried in the abbey church of Bath, with civic honours but without the expected public monument. 
His eldest son, Charles Palmer (1777-1851), army officer and politician, was born on 6 May 1777 at Weston, Bath. He was educated at Eton College and at Oriel College, Oxford, and then served in the army, being appointed an aide-de-camp to the prince regent in 1811 and promoted major-general in 1825. He married Mary Elizabeth, daughter of John Thomas Atkyns of Hunterscombe House, Buckinghamshire, and niece and coheir of John Atkyns Wright, MP for Oxford. He represented Bath as MP in the whig interest from 1808 to 1826 and from 1830 to 1837. A radical reformer, he gave strong support to the 'Reform Bill', attending rallies in Bath and publishing a 'Speech on the State of the Nation' (1832) on the occasion of the bill's third reading. His brothers John and Edmund served in the navy. He succeeded his father as proprietor of the Bath theatre, and was a large vine-grower in the Gironde. He died on 17 April 1851. 


@@@@@


doc= 21177


Palmer, Charles John (1805-1882), antiquary, only son of John Danby Palmer (1769-1841), a merchant, and Anne (died 1819), daughter of Charles Beart, of Gorleston, Suffolk, was born on 1 January 1805 at Great Yarmouth, where the family had lived since the early sixteenth century. Palmer was educated at a private school at Yarmouth, and in 1822 was articled to Robert Cory, an attorney, under whom he had previously served for two years, in order to qualify to become a notary public. He was admitted an attorney in June 1827, and practised at Yarmouth until he was forced to retire owing to ill health. 
Palmer's father had served as mayor in 1821 and 1833 and he followed the family tradition of civic service. He was elected to the common council in 1827 and was mayor-elect in 1835, but the passing of the 'Municipal Corporations Act' prevented him from taking office. He held a seat in the reformed corporation as a representative of the south ward. In 1854 he was installed as mayor, and was re-elected the following year. He also served as deputy lieutenant for the county of Norfolk. He was anxious to promote Yarmouth as a watering-place and instigated the Victoria Building Company and the Wellington pier, acting as solicitor to both schemes. He also took a prominent part in the establishment of the assembly- and reading-rooms and the Yarmouth Public Library, and was on the restoration committee for the parish church. In 1830 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. Palmer married Amelia Graham, daughter of John Mortlock Lacon, on 11 February 1840, but they had no children. 
Palmer's antiquarian interests centred upon the town and people of Great Yarmouth, stimulated by the presence there of other antiquarian scholars, such as Dawson Turner and his employer Robert Cory (who had himself compiled notes towards a history of the town), and by his own civic loyalty. His earliest work, a study of the house in which his family had lived since 1809, 'The history and illustrations of a house in the Elizabethan style, the property of John Danby esq.' (privately printed, 1838) was followed in 1847 by an edition of a sixteenth-century manuscript history of Great Yarmouth, 'A Booke of the Foundacion and Antiquitye of the Towne of Greate Yermouthe'; Palmer attributed the manuscript to Henry Manship the elder but it has since been shown to have been the work of Thomas Damet, the town clerk. Palmer was a moving force behind the record committee, which was established by the corporation to bring some order to that body's archives; this involvement no doubt contributed to his subsequent publications for which he is best remembered: 'The History of Great Yarmouth, by Henry Manship' (1854), which he edited; 'The History of Great Yarmouth, Designed as a Continuation of Manship's History of that Town' (1856); and 'The Perlustration of Great Yarmouth, with Gorleston and Southtown' (3 vols., 1872-5), which he rightly regarded as his most important achievement. Palmer took the reader through every street of the town, recounting the history of the buildings and the family history of all who lived there. A mine of anecdotal detail and information for the local historian, the 'Perlustration' is a testament to Palmer's deep affection for the town. 
Palmer's other works were considerably briefer and included 'Remarks on the Monastery of Dominican Friars at Great Yarmouth' (1852), 'Memorials of the Family of Hurry, of Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, and of New York, United States' (privately printed, 1873), and 'Palgrave Family Memorials' (privately printed, 1878). He also published a number of pamphlets relating to local affairs in which he was involved, such as the construction of the railway between Norwich and Yarmouth. Palmer died at his home, Villa Graham, Great Yarmouth, on 24 September 1882. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 21178


Palmer, Charlotte (b. c.1762, d. in or after 1834), writer and schoolmistress, lived most of her life in Hendon, Middlesex. Little is known of her life, although much of her writing was instructive, springing from her teaching experience, as she stated she had 'taught Writing to young Ladies above nine years' (Lantz, 239). Her first published work, however, was an epistolary novel in five volumes, 'Female Stability, or, The History of Miss Belville' (1780). In the preface she claimed it had been written by a sister who had died, and was published unrevised. On the title-page the author is called the late Miss Palmer, perhaps referring to this sister. Certainly there is evidence that Charlotte Palmer was still living after this date. In 1791, for instance, appeared 'Letters on several subjects from a preceptress to her pupils who have left school addressed chiefly to real characters'. More characteristically didactic, it treats such subjects as dress, choice of books, and clandestine marriage. This book, and 'A Newly-Invented Copybook' (1797), were intended for use by male tutors, and the latter work was prefaced by a carefully worded and politic apology: 'I hope I shall not be considered as having encroached on an Employment belonging to the opposite sex, nor as endeavouring to diminish their superiority' (Lantz, 240). 
Charlotte Palmer's other works are 'Integrity and Content: an Allegory' (1792) and 'It is and it is not: a Novel' (1792). Another work attributed to Charlotte Palmer, which appeared in Newberry's 1800 catalogue list, was 'Three instructive tales for little folk: simple and careful, industry and sloth, and the cousins'. 
With another sister, Charlotte Palmer ran schools near London, teaching writing and grammar. In 1805, however, one school was in debt for over $200, and she was imprisoned. Her application for assistance to the Royal Literary Fund was successful, and it made her small payments for some years. When released she ran a day school and also had a private stall in a bonnet shop. Her last communication with the Royal Literary Fund is dated 12 March 1834. 


@@@@@


doc= 21179


Palmer, Edward (c.1555-1624), antiquary, was born in Upper Lemington, Todenham, Gloucestershire, one of the three children of Giles Palmer, esquire, and his wife, Muriel Field. In the 1540s Leland described the 'Four Shire' stone sited on land belonging to Edward's grandfather; the latter's son acted as Leland's informant, suggesting a family tradition of antiquarian interest. Edward appeared in the list of students of Magdalen Hall, Oxford, in 1572. He was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1575 where his fellow students included the antiquaries Henry Ferrers of Baddesley Clinton, Warwickshire, and Richard Carew of Antony, Cornwall. He married a kinswoman, Muriel, the daughter of Richard Palmer of Compton Scorpin, Ilmington, Warwickshire. Three sons and four daughters of the marriage were alive in 1624. The Palmers were closely linked to the Overburys, Edward being Sir Thomas Overbury's uncle. 
Edward Palmer's interests were predominantly numismatic. Upper Lemington and Compton Scorpin lay either side of the Fosse Way, and Roman coins were often ploughed up in the surrounding fields. Some of these coins Palmer bestowed on Camden, who calls him 'an industrious Antiquary' ('Britannia', ed. Gibson, 240). Fuller writes that 'Great [was] his store of Coins, Greek and Roman, in Gold, Silver, and Brasse; and greater his skill in them' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 387). As so often with antiquaries drawn from among the county gentry in this period, Palmer published nothing and his collections were dispersed after his death. When Wood included an account of Palmer in his 'Athenae Oxonienses', the latter's collections were already lost. A wider interest in scholarship is evidenced by his purchase of an island in Virginia for the purpose of setting up an academy; he died before the scheme was accomplished. At the time of his death Palmer was living in London. His will, which shows him to have been a wealthy man (able to make bequests totalling more than $1000 and owning property in New England as well as Virginia), was written on 22 November 1624 and proved on 15 December. His wife had predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 21180


Palmer, Edward Henry (1840-1882), orientalist, was born on 7 August 1840 in Green Street, Cambridge, the only son of William Henry and Mary Palmer. His father kept a private school in Cambridge. Left an orphan in infancy, Palmer was brought up by an aunt at Cambridge, where he attended the Perse School. As a boy he spent much time with Gypsies, and acquired a fluency in Romani and a knowledge of Gypsy life and ways. On leaving school, at the age of sixteen, he became a junior clerk to Hill and Underwood, wine merchants, of Eastcheap, London. He learned to speak French and several Italian dialects fluently by mixing with native speakers living in London and his success made him a firm upholder of this informal, conversational method of learning languages. His evenings were often spent at the theatre, where he formed a lifelong friendship with Henry Irving; or else in mesmeric experiments, in which he exhibited extraordinary powers. 
In 1859 Palmer developed grave symptoms of pulmonary tuberculosis and returned to Cambridge prepared to die, but suddenly recovered. While convalescing he published poetry and wrote a farce which was performed at the Cambridge Theatre in 1860. Towards the end of 1860 he met Saiyid Abdullah, teacher of Hindustani at Cambridge. The two became friends and Palmer began to study oriental languages. His progress in Persian, Arabic, and Hindustani was phenomenally rapid. 
Some fellows of St John's College discovered Palmer's gift for languages and by their influence he was admitted as a sizar there in October 1863. He matriculated in November 1864 and in 1865 was awarded a foundation scholarship. He graduated BA in 1867, with only a third class in the classical tripos, and proceeded MA in 1870; but his main energies as an undergraduate were given to oriental studies. During this period he catalogued the Persian, Arabic, and Turkish manuscripts of King's College and Trinity College (1870), and also of the university library. His catalogues were considered by Arberry ('Oriental Essays', 1960) still to be useful to scholars, although their method was antiquated. Palmer also wrote in Persian and Urdu for the 'Oudh Akhbar' and other Indian newspapers, also becoming a recognized expert in Hindustani. He published 'Oriental Mysticism: a Treatise on the Sufiistic and Unitarian Theosophy of the Persians' (1867), founded on the 'Maksad-i Aksa' of 'Aziz ibn Mohammad Nafasi, preserved in manuscript at Trinity College; and translated (1865) Thomas Moore's 'Paradise and the Peri' into Persian verse. He was a member of the French Societe Asiatique and of the Royal Asiatic Society. 
Palmer was elected to a fellowship at St John's College on 5 November 1867. The fellowship gave him time to pursue his studies and visit the East. He had in 1867 unsuccessfully sought the post of oriental secretary to the British legation in Persia and in 1869 he was chosen to join the survey of Sinai, for the Palestine Exploration Fund. His principal duty was to collect from the Bedouin the correct names of places on the Sinai peninsula. He thus came for the first time into contact with Arabs, learned to speak their dialects, and obtained an insight into their modes of thought and life. In the summer of 1869 he returned to England, but left again on 16 December for another expedition. This time he and Charles Frederick Tyrwhitt-Drake walked alone the 600 miles from Sinai to Jerusalem, identifying sites and searching vainly for inscriptions. They explored for the first time the Desert of the Wanderings (Tih), and many unknown parts of Edom and Moab, and accomplished much useful geographical work. 'En route' Palmer made many friends among the Arab sheikhs, among whom he went by the name of 'Abdallah Efendi. The travellers went on to Lebanon and to Damascus, where they met Captain Richard Burton, who was then consul there, and with whom Palmer struck up a friendship. They returned home in the autumn of 1870 by way of Constantinople and Vienna. 
A popular account of these two expeditions was written by Palmer in 'The Desert of the Exodus: Journeys on Foot in the Wilderness of the Forty Years' Wanderings' (2 vols., 1871, illustrated with maps and engravings; reprinted, 1977); he also published an article in the 'British Quarterly Review' (1873) on the secret sects of Syria, while the scientific results of the second expedition were detailed in the Palestine Exploration Fund's 'Journal' of 1871, and included in 'Special Papers Relating to the Survey of Western Palestine' (1881). Although he took no further part in the expeditions of the Palestine Fund, he devoted much time and interest to the work of the society. In 1881 he transliterated and edited the 'Arabic and English Name-Lists of the Survey of Western Palestine' -- some 10,000 place names -- and assisted in editing the 'Memoirs' of the survey (1881-3). He also wrote, with Walter Besant, a close friend and later his biographer, a short history of Jerusalem, 'Jerusalem, the City of Herod and of Saladin' (1871; new edn, 1888), a book which Arberry considered still of value. 
Palmer returned to Cambridge, where he studied, wrote, and lectured for the next ten years. In 1871 he failed in his bid for the Adams professorship of Arabic, but was appointed the lord almoner's professor of Arabic. The post was worth only $40 10's'. a year, but it enabled him to retain his fellowship though married, and on the day after his appointment, 11 November 1871, he married Laura Hanbury Davis (died 1878), to whom he had been engaged for several years, daughter of Thomas H. Davis of Grantchester. They had two daughters, and a son who died in infancy. In 1873, in consequence of the creation of the triposes of oriental languages, Palmer's salary and his workload increased considerably. In addition he was one of the interpreters to the shah of Persia during his visit to London in 1873, and wrote an account of it in Urdu for a Lucknow paper. He published a 'Concise Dictionary of the Persian Language' (1876; 2nd edn, 1884), of which the English-Persian counterpart was edited from his notes after his death by Guy Le Strange (1883). It was a useful work for beginners although by 1960 largely superseded. 
Palmer's verse translation of 'Poetical Works of Beha-ed-din Zoheir of Egypt' appeared in two volumes (1876-7) but the third volume, of notes, was never published. The work was admired by contemporaries, not least as it was the first translation of the entire works of any Arabic poet. It was Palmer's most serious work but he laid himself open to charges of unscholarliness, as he chose to make free with the verse in an attempt to catch its spirit. His 'Koran' (1880) was the best-known of his works, being reprinted numerous times throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. It is immature and hastily written, and has the opposite fault from that of his other, too free, translations in its literal, often word-for-word rendering although it, too, had its admirers. His 'Arabic Grammar' (1874), like everything he did, broke new ground in Europe, by explaining and illustrating Arabic inflexion, syntax, and prosody in a method used by the Arabs themselves. Among his other writings were a 'Simplified Grammar of Hindustani, Persian, and Arabic' (1882; 2nd edn, 1885) and two little books on Jewish history and geography, written for the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (1874). 
Besides these, Palmer revised a Persian 'New Testament' for the Bible Society; examined, in 1881-2, in Hindustani for the civil service commission; assisted Eirikr Magnusson in translating Johan Ludvig Runeberg's 'Lyrical Songs' from the Finnish (1878); edited Pierce Butler's translation of A. G. Oehlenschlager's 'Axel og Valborg' from the Danish (1874); joined Charles Godfrey Leland and Janet Tuckey in producing 'English Gipsy Songs in Romany, with Metrical English Translations' (1875); edited the first six volumes of Trubner's 'Simplified Grammars'; wrote the articles 'Hafiz' and 'Legerdemain' for the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'; and developed a marvellous talent in conjuring. Originally with a view (soon abandoned) to Indian practice, he was called to the bar in 1874 at the Middle Temple, and even went on the eastern circuit for two or three years, taking briefs occasionally. 
With his eclectic talents and interests Palmer found himself out of sympathy with university life. The death of his wife, after a long illness, in 1878, unsettled him although he married again on 26 June 1879. His second wife was Augusta Marghereta Elisabeth, daughter of Count von Langa of Poland. Palmer grew tired of college life and lectures and in 1881 abandoned his lectures; retaining only the professorship, with its nominal salary, he began life as a journalist on the staff of 'The Standard', where he acted as leader writer on social and general topics, until his departure for Egypt on a secret service mission on 30 June 1882. 
Palmer was sent by Gladstone's government to attempt to detach the Arab tribes from the side of Arabi Pasha, the nationalist leader, and to use his influence, backed by English gold, with the sheikhs of the Bedouin, to secure the immunity of the Suez Canal from Arab attack, and provide for its repair after possible damage by Arabi's men. On his arrival at Alexandria, on 5 July 1882, he received instructions to proceed to Jaffa, thence to enter the desert and make his way to Suez, talking to the principal sheikhs 'en route'. As 'Abdallah Efendi, Palmer rode his camel through the desert, armed and dressed in the richest Syrian style, giving handsome presents to his old acquaintances among the Tiyaha, and securing their loyalty to the khedive rather than to Arabi. Palmer reported that he had: 'got hold of some of the very men whom Arabi Pasha has been trying to get over to his side; and when they are wanted I can have every Bedawi at my call, from Suez to Gaza... I am certain of success. (journal to his wife, in Besant, 270ff.)' After three weeks' disappearance in the desert Palmer joined the British fleet at Suez on 1 August. The next day he was in the first boat that landed for the occupation of Suez, and was engaged in reassuring the non-combatant inhabitants. He was appointed interpreter-in-chief to her majesty's forces in Egypt. His work among the Bedouin was approved by Admiral W. Hewett in Egypt and by the first lord of the Admiralty (Lord Northbrook), and Palmer himself was convinced that, with $20,000 or $30,000 to buy their allegiance, he could raise a force of 50,000 Bedouin to guard or unblock the Suez Canal. On 6 August $20,000 was placed at his disposal by the admiral; but Lord Northbrook instructed that Palmer was initially to spend only 'a reasonable amount'. In fact on the night of 19-20 August the British troops occupied the canal zone, which had always been their primary objective, so promptly and effectively, that the Bedouin were largely irrelevant: but they gave the invaders no trouble, and this may have been due to Palmer's presents and influence. The bulk of the money which was to have secured their more active support never reached them, owing to the tragic fate which overtook Palmer. On 8 August he set out to meet the leading sheikhs to arrange the final terms of their allegiance. In accordance with Lord Northbrook's instructions, he took with him only $3000 in English gold for this purpose, to begin with. He took a naval officer, Flag-Lieutenant Harold Charrington, as a guarantee of his official status. Captain William John Gill RE, the traveller, also accompanied him, with the intention of turning aside and cutting the telegraph wire which crossed the desert and connected Cairo with Constantinople. Two servants attended them, besides camel-drivers; and 'Meter Abu Sofieh', who claimed to be a prominent sheikh, joined the party, as a guide and protector. Heading for Nakhl, Abu Sofieh led them into an ambush on the night of 10-11 August. They were made prisoners and their baggage was plundered. There was at the time an order out from Cairo for Palmer's arrest, dead or alive; but it is probable that the original motive of the attack was robbery. On the following morning, 11 August, the prisoners were driven about a mile to the Wadi Sudr, between al- 'Arish and Nakhl, and shot, Palmer being the first to die. The facts were ascertained only after an inquiry by Colonel Charles Warren RE, who was sent out by the government on a mission, which ended in the conviction of the murderers. The fragmentary remains of Palmer, Gill, and Charrington, identifiable only by their clothes, were brought home and buried in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral on 6 April 1883. Richard Burton wrote a long account of his journey to investigate Palmer's murder, but it was never published. 
Palmer was by all accounts light-hearted and good company, a fine linguist but ill-suited to the academic life or careful sustained scholarship. His journals to his wife suggest that he was thoroughly enjoying his new role as a secret agent and he appears to have revealed the details of his mission to his friend and biographer Besant before setting out: the seriousness of the task in which he had become embroiled is shown not by his excited accounts of his exploits but by the sordid brutality of his death. His end attracted both widespread sympathy but also controversy in Britain and Egypt. 


@@@@@


doc= 21181


Palmer, Eleanor, Lady Palmer (1718x20-1818), society beauty, was probably born at Ambrose Hall, co. Dublin, the second daughter and coheir of Michael Ambrose, a wealthy brewer of co. Dublin, and his wife, the daughter of Richard Archbold. Little is known of her early life. It was recorded that she was 'gifted with exquisite beauty, and possessed of considerable mental acquirements' (Webb, 4). Philip Dormer Stanhope, fourth earl of Chesterfield, during the period of his viceroyalty in Ireland (1745-7), was a great admirer of hers and was said to have called her 'the most dangerous papist in Ireland' (GEC, 'Baronetage', 5.390). It was observed she was 'constantly in the viceroy's company and attended all state ceremonies' (Gerard, 21). Despite her constant appearance with Chesterfield it was noted that she 'guarded her reputation, keeping well within the limits of platonic friendship' (ibid., 22). It is difficult to know exactly how influential Palmer was on the politics of the period. Her beauty and wealth provided her with an entree into society and political contacts were made in this context. 
On 10 October 1750, at St George's, Mayfair, Westminster, Eleanor married Roger Palmer (died 1790?) of Castle Lackin, co. Mayo, and Kenure Park, co. Dublin. He was a member of parliament for Jamestown from 1761 to 1768, and for Portarlington from 1769 to 1783. The couple had three sons: Francis, who died in his father's lifetime; John Roger (died 6 Feb 1819); and William Henry (died 29 May 1840). Palmer was created a baronet on 29 May 1777, and died probably in 1790. In the later years of her life Lady Palmer lived in lodgings in Henry Street, Dublin. She was acquainted with many of the leading figures of the day. She knew the poets Byron and Thomas Moore. Richard Lalor Sheil visited her in her old age and noted: 'after the ordinary formulas of civility, she placed herself in a huge chair, and entered at once into politics. She was a most vehement Catholic... Lord Fingall and the Catholic question were the only subjects in which she seemed to take any interest. Upon the wrongs to her country she spoke not only with energy, but with eloquence; and with every pinch of snuff, poured out a sentence of sedition. (Sheil, 1.137-8)' Lady Palmer died in Dublin either on 10 February 1818, 'in the full possession of all her faculties, aged 98' ('GM', 1st ser., 88/1, 1818, 379), or on 3 February 1818 in Abbey Street, Dublin, in her hundredth year, according to sources used by G. E. Cockayne when compiling his 'Baronetage'. A pastel portrait that revealed 'seductive eyes, a dazzling complexion, and an arch expression' ('DNB') was exhibited at the Dublin National Portrait Exhibition in 1872, but had been destroyed in a fire by 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 21182


Palmer, Sir Geoffrey, first baronet (1598-1670), lawyer and politician, was born in Carlton, Northamptonshire, the eldest son of Thomas Palmer of Carlton and Catherine, daughter of Sir Edward Watson of Rockingham in the same county. He matriculated as a pensioner from Christ's College, Cambridge, in December 1612, graduated BA in 1616, and proceeded MA in 1619. Admitted 'specially' to the Middle Temple on 14 June 1616, he was called to the bar on 23 May 1623. Palmer declined to serve as a reader in the spring and summer terms of 1626, and was fined. At an unknown date he married Margaret, daughter of Sir Francis Moore, serjeant-at-law, of Fawley, Berkshire. They had four sons: Thomas, who died young, Lewis (1630-1713), Geoffrey (1642-1661), and Edward, and two daughters, Elizabeth and Frances. 
Elected to the Long Parliament in 1640 for Stamford, Lincolnshire (when he was a junior member of the queen's counsel), Palmer left a career in conveyancing for high law and politics. He joined the committee to hear the petitions of the ministers of London on church government on 23 January 1641, and the committee for ecclesiastical affairs on 9 February. As a manager of Strafford's impeachment in April he gave legal opinions on points of law and made interventions on behalf of the accused's procedural rights. He advocated moderation on the articles concerning arbitrary government, and signed the protestation of 3 May in defence of the protestant religion. After an act was passed perpetuating the life of the parliament he joined Edward Hyde and Viscount Falkland in supporting the king against his new council. In July he negotiated the queen's terms for settling the banishment of priests and retaining her Roman Catholic chaplains. 
Palmer's political views changed during the debates on the grand remonstrance on 22-3 November 1641. After the remonstrance was passed in the early hours of 23 November and John Hampden moved to print it, he rose and shouted 'I do protest!' (Bruce, 128). The commotion that followed nearly caused bloodshed in the excited atmosphere of the Commons. Palmer was threatened with expulsion, but the vote against him failed. Speaking after midnight on 24 November he called the majority 'A Rabble of inconsiderable persons, set on by a juggling Junto' ('Journal', ed. Coates, 187), and was committed to the Tower, from where he was released on 8 December. After the vote authorizing the militia ordinance on 30 April 1642 he withdrew from the house and became commissioner of array for his county. 
Palmer was awarded the degree of DCL by Oxford University in 1643 and was a member of the royalist parliament which met in the city on 22 January 1644. He was one of Charles's commissioners for the negotiation of the abortive treaty of Uxbridge in January-February 1645 and a later negotiation in December of that year that was stillborn. Appointed solicitor-general on 3 November 1645, he remained in Oxford during the siege of the city. Upon its fall he had letters of composition for compounding his estates when he surrendered them on 22 June 1646; his fine was eventually set at $500 in September 1648. During the 1650s Palmer was able to practise law in London, obtaining licences to move cases and appear as a witness. He seems to have given legal advice to various peers. Committed to the Tower on 9 June 1655 on suspicion of raising forces against Cromwell's government, he was probably released in the following September. 
At the Restoration Palmer was made attorney-general on 31 May 1660, was elected bencher of the Middle Temple in the following month, and later served as its treasurer. He was knighted on 1 June, conferred with a baronetcy on 7 June 1660, was appointed serjeant in October of that year, and was active as crown legal counsel and in the preparation of prosecutions. In 1662 he was prominent in the trial of the regicides, taking depositions and handling the maintenance and discharge of the prisoners. Although Palmer was quite favourable to Lambert, Ludlow characterized him as one 'of the tyrant's bloodhounds, at the bar', thirsting for the blood of innocent lambs ('A Voyce from the Watch Tower', ed. A. B. Worden, CS, 4th. ser., 21, 1978, 315). 
Palmer became an intimate part of a circle of friends recruited by Hyde, now earl of Clarendon, from his former inn, the Middle Temple, who collaborated on enacting parliamentary legislation. In parliament he was a strong supporter of the royal prerogative and argued against compromise with opponents. He had his son Geoffrey elected MP for Ludgershall, Wiltshire, in March 1661 by forcing the sheriff to deliver the election writ to his agent there. His son Lewis was elected MP for Higham Ferrers. Palmer was briefly appointed chief justice of Chester in late 1661. An active attorney-general, he held the office until his death. He was also recorder of Boston in 1662-70, and chief justice of the common pleas temporarily in 1666. 
In 1663 Palmer edited the law reports of his father-in-law, Sir Francis Moore, which he gave to the Middle Temple Library. A volume of cases partly drawn from his own manuscript reports appeared under his judicial imprimatur as 'Les reports de Sir Gefrey Palmer, chevalier et baronet' in 1678. They consist of cases chiefly in the king's bench between 1619 and 1629, which he collected and edited as a young attorney and barrister. Published posthumously, this work set a new standard for law reports as it named the barristers and judges for each statement made. Whether Palmer did more than edit them is doubtful. 
Palmer died on 5 May 1670 at his house in Hampstead Fields, Middlesex, where his hospitality was famous among contemporaries. He lay in state at the Middle Temple and his funeral had a great train of nobles and judges to Carlton, where his remains were buried alongside those of his wife (who had predeceased him) in the parish church. Lewis, his eldest surviving son, succeeded him in the baronetcy. His rich collection of political and legal manuscripts and printed books went to his grandson Geoffrey. Palmer gave generously to the poor of Northamptonshire, Middlesex, and Rutland, and to the Hospital of the Blessed Jesus in Rutland, for which he established a charitable trust. 


@@@@@


doc= 21183


Palmer, George (1772-1853), merchant and philanthropist, born on 11 February 1772, was the eldest son of William Palmer (1748?-1821), a London merchant descended from the Palmers of Wanlip, an old Leicestershire family, and his wife, Mary ('b'. 1747), only daughter of John Horsley, rector of Thorley, Hertfordshire. After schooling at Charterhouse, he served in the navy of the East India Company (1786-99). He married Anna Maria, daughter of William Bund of Wick, Worcestershire, in 1795, and they had three sons, including the legal scholar William Palmer, and two daughters, one of whom died young. 
In 1802 Palmer entered into partnership with his father, his brother, John Horsley Palmer, and Captain John(?) Wilson as East India merchants and shipowners at 28 Throgmorton Street in the City of London. This firm was a branch of one of the first and most successful private agencies in India. Founded by Sir John Palmer in the 1770s, it had a large sailing fleet and was greatly respected. As was the custom at that time, the house of Palmer in India had associate partnerships: Palmer and Horsley (later Palmer, Mackillop & Co.) in London, and William Dent & Co. in China. In the late 1820s Palmers suffered an unprecedented bankruptcy brought about by speculation in indigo; debts were well over $400,000. Many houses went down with Palmers, but the London branch was not seriously affected. 
George Palmer appeared in public life in London in 1831, when he combined with other shipowners to set up a lobby for the shipping interest. With his experience in naval and merchant shipping, he was well suited to chair the provisional committee. After two years of negotiation with owners in London and the outports, the foundation was laid, and Palmer was chosen to be the first chairman of the General London Ship Owners' Society when it was launched in 1833. It soon became an influential and lasting national institution. 
At the same time Palmer was engaged in two matters of global importance. He chaired the provisional committee set up to form and establish rules for a new Lloyd's register of shipping. Under his guidance, the new register emerged in 1834 as a model for shipping all over the world. The next task was to find a standard mode of measuring the capacity of vessels. Some of the principles proposed by Palmer were incorporated by the Admiralty in the 'Tonnage and Measuring Act' in 1835. 
Having unsuccessfully contested South Shields in December 1832, Palmer entered parliament for South Essex in 1836 on the death of the incumbent and held the seat until 1847. As befitted an MP of the Conservative tendency, he fought against what he saw as power being taken from the parishes to the centre, the 'cloven hoof' that would deprive individuals of their liberty; but he could not bring himself to take Peel's side when the abolition of the corn laws was debated. His main concern, however, was safety at sea. He chaired two parliamentary inquiries on shipwrecks, and in 1845, against strong opposition, pushed an amendment through that finally settled the law prohibiting timber-laden ships from carrying deck cargoes. 
Palmer never forgot the narrow escape he and his crew had from drowning in 1788 in eastern waters; he took a keen interest in the Royal National Lifeboat Institution and in his later life was its vice-chairman for twenty-five years. His own design of a lifeboat was in use until 1858. The institution honoured him with its gold medal a few weeks before his death. He died on 12 May 1853 at Nazing (later Nazeing) Hall, the family home near Epping. 


@@@@@


doc= 21184


Palmer, George (1818-1897), biscuit manufacturer, was born at Upton Farm, Long Sutton, Somerset, on 18 January 1818, the eldest of three sons and a daughter (another son died young) of William Palmer, a farmer, and his wife, Mary, daughter of William Isaac, a Dorset tanner. Both families were Quakers of long standing, Mary Isaac being the first cousin of Cyrus and James Clark, founders of C. and J. Clark, shoemakers at Street, Somerset. 
After William Palmer died prematurely in 1826, his energetic widow gave up farming in order to train her sons for various trades or professions. George received his education at Sidcot School, near Weston-super-Mare, leaving at the age of fourteen to be apprenticed to an uncle as a miller and confectioner. His ambition was to mechanize the production of biscuits, then made by hand. In 1841 he therefore went into partnership with his cousin by marriage, Thomas Huntley (1802-1857), owner of a Reading firm, founded in 1822, which sold high-quality biscuits over much of southern England; the firm then became Huntley and Palmers. With the technical help of a Reading engineer, William Exall (1808-1881), Palmer in 1846 invented the first continuously running biscuit machinery in the world, which was set up at a factory in Kings Road, Reading. On 17 January 1850 he married Elizabeth Sarah Meteyard (1825-1894), daughter of Robert Meteyard, a Quaker druggist at Basingstoke; they had six sons and four daughters, of whom two sons and a daughter did not survive infancy. 
When Thomas Huntley died in 1857, annual turnover of the company was $125,000, as against $2700 in 1841, profits having risen from nil to $18,000 over the same period. George Palmer bought out Huntley's son and took into partnership his own brothers, Samuel and William Isaac Palmer, the former managing the London office and the latter running the factory. Despite all his business commitments, George Palmer took an active part in public affairs. From 1850 onwards he was a Liberal councillor in Reading; he served as mayor in 1857-8, and later became an alderman. In 1878 his Quaker friend, John Bright, persuaded him to stand for parliament, and he was elected MP for Reading, serving until 1885. After a maiden speech which supported the granting to women of the vote, he remained very largely a silent member, but his advice on industrial matters was widely sought. In 1885 he stood as a Liberal for Newbury and was defeated; he did not seek election again. 
As early as 1873 Palmer owned 2000 acres of land in Berkshire and neighbouring counties, and subsequently added 2800 acres, including Marlston House near Newbury, which became his country retreat. In 1874-5 the second generation of Palmers -- three sons of George, including George William Palmer (1851-1913), and four of Samuel -- became partners in the business, which justifiably claimed to be the largest biscuit firm in the world. About a quarter of its output went overseas, its global reputation being enhanced by successive medals won at international exhibitions, most notably those at Paris in 1867, 1878, and 1900. At home the firm became a kind of national institution after a local bishop had praised its biscuits for conveying 'a savour of the quiet fireside and of the social board', 'The Times' responding with a bland leader (3 October 1883) and 'Punch' with a gentle cartoon (13 October 1883). 
Palmer was of medium height, and rather rugged in appearance, with a bushy beard, and a tight-lipped expression, perhaps inherited from his formidable mother. He occasionally indulged in devastating outbursts of temper, as when two employees approached him for a rise in wages. Yet he willingly accepted his responsibilities as a paternalistic businessman. Until the firm grew too large in the 1860s, he knew every operative by name; he maintained a sick club with a part-time doctor, a library, and a schoolmaster for the boy employees. He and his bachelor brother, William Isaac Palmer, helped factory hands in need, paying for the funerals of those who died in their service, and providing cash or coal tickets as necessary. To the town of Reading he was generous, presenting to its citizens the 49 acre Palmer Park and the Thames-side Kings Meadow. He also made donations to Reading University College, Reading School, the Royal Berkshire Hospital and, less predictably, several Anglican churches. It was said that his practice of handing out half-crowns to all and sundry turned Reading in his lifetime into a magnet for beggars from all over the kingdom. 
In 1891, the golden jubilee of his partnership, he was given the freedom of Reading, a statue of him being erected in the town's main shopping street. That year he refused a baronetcy, and with typical candour made it clear that such an honour would yield him neither comfort nor satisfaction. His last years were darkened by bereavement: he never recovered from his wife's death in 1894, and he suffered from increasing debility. He died of a stroke, at The Acacias, his house in Reading, on 19 August 1897, and was buried at the Quaker burial-ground, Church Street, Reading. That year, the turnover of the company was more than $1.25 million, representing 23,000 tons of biscuits, and profits were $165,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 21185


Palmer, Sir Henry (d. 1559), soldier, was the second son of Edward Palmer (died 1516) of Angmering, Sussex, and Alice, daughter of John Clement of Ightham Mote, near Sevenoaks, Kent. His younger brother, Thomas Palmer, also entered military service, while their sister Katherine Palmer became abbess of Syon. Palmer was one of those younger sons to whom a successful career in royal service offered substantial rewards. Palmer's chosen path was military: by 1528 he was serving as a spear in the Calais garrison. In the late 1530s he successfully sought the patronage of Thomas Cromwell, receiving the keeping of Guines Forest near Calais and the bailiffship of Guines in 1540. Palmer's association with Cromwell and Archbishop Cranmer's commissary in Calais, Sir Thomas Butler, attracted accusations of evangelical sympathies. Palmer survived the fall of Cromwell in 1540, and the capture of Boulogne four years later offered him further opportunities. After the town's fall Palmer was knighted by Henry VIII on 30 September 1544. The following year he was master of the ordnance and a member of the town's governing council. Palmer, however, was critical of the defence of Boulogne and was dismissed from his post at the Old Man bulwark amid unfounded accusations of cowardice. 
By 1536 Palmer had married Jane, daughter of Sir Richard Windebank of Guines, with whom he had three sons. In the early 1550s he acquired lands in east Kent, including Wingham College near Canterbury, and in 1554 sat in parliament for the borough of Bramber in Sussex. Given his possible evangelical links and his family's association with John Dudley, duke of Northumberland (he was arrested on the duke's fall but pardoned in October 1553), it seems unlikely that his election was due to the influence of Bramber's overlord, the third duke of Norfolk. 
Palmer's military exploits continued under Mary I and by 1556, now aged '60 years and above' (TNA: PRO, SP 69/8/510), he was back in Calais. He was captured at the fall of Guines in 1558 and held ransom by the seigneur de Cipierre, governor of Orleans. Although pledges to redeem him were forthcoming, he died apparently intestate in captivity on 15 January 1559; in the fighting he had suffered a severe leg wound which necessitated amputation. His place of death is unknown. His property passed to his son, Thomas Palmer. 


@@@@@


doc= 21186


Palmer, Sir Henry (c.1550-1611), naval commander, first appears in the queen's service at sea off the coast of Flanders in 1576, which indicates that he was probably born about 1550. He was literate, but there are few other indications of his upbringing; he may, like Francis Drake, have been apprenticed to the sea. From 1580 he was a commissioner for the maintenance of Dover harbour, and was probably the Henry Palmer, esquire, who was a commissioner for concealed lands in Kent in 1581. He served under the earl of Leicester in the Netherlands, and was knighted by him in 1586, an honour that was followed by a grant of arms in the same year. In 1587 he was commanding a squadron in the narrow seas, and in 1588 was captain of the 'Antelope' (300 tons) against the Armada, when he is described as the third in command under Lord Henry Seymour. It was he who obtained and organized the fireships that caused such consternation to the Spaniards off Calais, and he played a conspicuous and gallant part in the battle of Gravelines which followed. When most of the fleet was stood down on 27 August, Palmer remained in service and commanded the winter guard over the following months. 
In July 1589 Palmer was again commanding in the channel, and in September was given the responsibility of escorting the troops that Elizabeth sent to the aid of Henri IV against the Catholic league. Further sea service is recorded twice in 1591, and he was still involved with harbour works at Dover in that year. By this time he had purchased an estate at Howletts, Bekesbourne, Kent; he first appears as a justice of the peace for Kent in 1589. His main service, however, continued to be at sea, and he took part in the blockade of Calais in 1596. This appears to have led to rumours in Spain that his head was cut off for refusing to serve against the Spaniards there; but there is no indication in the English records that he was out of favour. He appeared again upon the commission of the peace in 1593, 1594, and 1601. In July 1598 he acted as an executor for the controller of the navy, William Borough -- described as his cousin -- and he succeeded to Borough's post on 3 January 1599. He retained this position until his death, although his last recorded command at sea was in 1601. 
Palmer married twice. His first wife was Joan, daughter and coheir of Edward Isaac, and widow of Nicholas Sidley. They had at least two sons, although only Henry Palmer is known to have survived his father. His second wife was Dorothy ('nee' Scott), widow of Thomas Hernden. He died at Bekesbourne on 20 November 1611 and was buried in the parish church, leaving modest bequests to the poor of Bekesbourne and a number of neighbouring parishes. The younger Henry was granted the reversion of his father's controllership on 17 August 1611, but did not secure the position until 1632. 


@@@@@


doc= 21187


Palmer, Henry Spencer (1838-1893), soldier and surveyor, third and youngest son of Colonel John Freke Palmer of the Madras staff corps of the East India Company's army, and his wife, Jane (died 1838), daughter of John James of Truro and sister of Sir Henry James, superintendent of the Ordnance Survey, was born at Bangalore, India, on 30 April 1838. He was educated at private schools at Bath, and by private tutors at Woolwich and Plumstead, and in January 1856 was admitted to the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. He was gazetted lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 20 December 1857, and studied in the School of Military Engineering at Chatham (1857-8), and between January and October 1858 served at Portsmouth and then on the Isle of Wight. 
In October 1858 Palmer was appointed to the expedition to British Columbia under Colonel Richard Clement Moody RE. The expedition was originated by Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton, then secretary of state for the colonies, and consisted of six officers and 150 men from the Royal Engineers, who were to preserve order, which was rapidly deteriorating as gold prospectors rushed into the newly created colony, and carry out engineering works and surveys there. In British Columbia Palmer undertook a reconnaissance survey of the Cariboo gold fields in 1862, accomplished under great difficulties, and in that year it was largely due to his judgement that his party escaped massacre by the Bella Coola Indians at North Bentinck arm. The reports and maps prepared by him in connection with these surveys were published in parliamentary and colonial blue books. He also superintended the construction of roads, bridges, and other public works, including the wagon road through the canyon of the Fraser River, between Lytton and Yale. He married, on 7 October 1863, at New Westminster, British Columbia, Mary Jane Pearson, daughter of Archdeacon Henry Press Wright; they had nine children, of whom six survived to adulthood. 
At the end of December 1863 Palmer arrived back in England and the following March joined the Ordnance Survey. He went first to Southampton and then to Tonbridge, Kent, from where he surveyed the greater part of Kent and east Sussex, and parts of Berkshire and Buckinghamshire. He was promoted second captain on 4 March 1866. Under the 1867 'Reform Act' he was appointed assistant commissioner in the parliamentary boundaries commission: with a colleague, Joseph Kay, he designated parliamentary boroughs in Kent and east Sussex, and subdivided county boroughs of west Kent and east Surrey. 
At this time Palmer and a friend, the Revd Pierce Butler, of Ulcombe, Kent -- an Arabic scholar -- were planning a survey of the Sinai peninsula. Palmer persuaded his uncle, Henry James, head of the Ordnance Survey, to support the scheme and James persuaded the Royal Geographical Society and Royal Society to give financial support to a survey of the topography and a study of the geology, botany, and zoology of the region. Butler's death in 1868 did not stop the expedition, which set off in October 1868 under Palmer and C. W. Wilson. They completed their work by April 1869, despite the extremes of terrain and climate that they encountered. The two leaders edited the 'Ordnance Survey of the Peninsula of Sinai' (5 vols.), officially dated 1869 though published in 1872. Palmer returned to England in May 1869 and resumed work at Tonbridge. 
On 11 December 1873 Palmer was promoted major and in the same year he was appointed head of the expedition to observe the transit of Venus in New Zealand, for which he underwent a course of practical preparation at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich. He left England in June 1874, accompanied by Lieutenant L. Darwin RE, and Lieutenant Crawford RN, as his assistants. His work in observing the transit was highly praised by the astronomer royal in his 'Report to the Board of Visitors' (1875). Before leaving New Zealand, Palmer, at the request of the governor, George Phipps, second marquess of Normanby, undertook an investigation of provincial surveys throughout the colony, to advise how to make them more systematic and scientifically sound. His recommendations earned him the thanks of the government, and were adopted as a guide for future reforms. He helped the French to determine the longitude of Campbell Island, for which he received the medal of the Institut de France. 
Palmer returned to England in June 1875 and against his inclination, which was to continue with survey and engineering work, resumed military duty, going to Barbados in November 1875, where he was appointed aide-de-camp to the governor, Sir John Pope-Hennessy; he remained in this post through the riots of 1876 and until the governor's departure from the colony. In January 1878 he went to Hong Kong, where, in addition to his ordinary duties, he was appointed engineer of the Admiralty works and aide-de-camp to the governor, again John Pope-Hennessy. On 1 July 1881 he was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel. In the same year he designed an observatory for Hong Kong to facilitate astronomical, magnetical, meteorological, and tidal observations. The design and report were approved by the Kew committee of the Royal Society and though the scheme was adapted to reduce its cost, the observatory was built largely to his design, which became a standard guide for similar observatories. In 1882 Palmer declined to take charge of another expedition to observe the transit of Venus, but he made in that year an exact determination of the Hong Kong observatory station at Mount Elgin, Kowloon, with instruments lent to him from the American surveying ship 'Palos'. 
On 1 October 1882 Palmer was promoted regimental lieutenant-colonel, and was ordered home. On his way he stayed at the British legation in Tokyo and was asked by the Japanese government to design waterworks for Yokohama. He completed two alternative schemes of water supply, one from Tamagawa and the other from Sagamigawa. On his arrival in England in July 1883 he was appointed commanding royal engineer of the Manchester district. In the autumn of 1884 the Japanese government applied to the British government for his services to superintend the construction of waterworks in accordance with his design. Permission was given, Palmer reached Japan in April 1885, and the works were started at once. On 1 July Palmer was promoted brevet colonel, and on 1 October 1887 he retired on a pension with the honorary rank of major-general. The same date saw the successful completion of the waterworks, for which in November he received from the emperor of Japan the third class of the order of the Rising Sun; he obtained the queen's permission to wear the order. After his retirement he remained in Japan and undertook numerous important engineering works. These included water supply works for Osaka and Hakodate, harbour works for the Yokohama Harbour Company, and water supplies for Misakamura in Hiogo Ken and for Tokyo; he supervised the building of many of his works. With Uta Saito, whom he may have married about 1890, he had a daughter. He died of apoplexy at 41 Imaicho Azabu, Tokyo, on 10 February 1893, while working on a project there. He was buried in the Aoyama cemetery in Tokyo. 
A contemporary obituarist wrote that Palmer was a man of exceptionally clear, vigorous intellect, and remarkable breadth and liberality of view. His faculty of rapid calculation was of a high order, and he possessed a 'rare power of assimilating and marshalling facts' (Captain F. Brinkley, 'Japan Weekly Mail', 18 Feb 1898, cited in Higuchi, iv). He had a keen sense of humour and power of anecdote. His books 'The Ordnance Survey of the Kingdom' (1873) and 'Ancient History from the Monuments: Sinai from the Fourth Egyptian Dynasty to the Present Day' (1878) are memorable but he was perhaps most important as a journalist writing in English on Japan (his fifty-five newspaper articles are listed in Higuchi, 107-10) and those forty-eight which were published in 'The Times' did much to increase understanding of Japan among the British. 
A bust to his memory was erected in the Nogeyama public garden, Yokohama, in 1987. A full length biographical memoir by his grandson J. Higuchi was published in 2002. He also published, in 1982, a Japanese translation of his grandfather's 'Letters from the land of the rising sun' (1894). An exhibition catalogue, 'Henry Spencer Palmer -- a special exhibition of his work and designs for the water works and harbour works of Yokohama' (Yokohama, 1987) marked the centenary of one of his most important engineering projects. 


@@@@@


doc= 21595


Paul the Silent (d. c.1137), who were apparently the issue of different marriages, took over the earldom when their father died about 1126. Harald died in 1131, according to 'Orkneyinga Saga' by putting on a poisoned shirt which his mother Helga had prepared for Paul. But there was no external threat to Paul's position for some years, and he was remembered as a popular and unwarlike ruler. In 1137, however, Rognvald, the son of Magnus's sister Gunnhild, came over from Norway to claim Magnus's half of the earldom, and won support through the growing popular belief in the sanctity of his murdered uncle. Paul was captured and deposed, and seems to have died soon afterwards. The establishment of the cult of St Magnus in the islands put the earldom on a level with the Scandinavian kingdoms, each of which had produced a royal saint in the same period, or earlier. The murdered Earl Magnus became venerated throughout Scandinavia, and his fame earned for the earldom's ruling family, and for their cathedral in Kirkwall, the saint's resting-place, much meritorious renown. 


@@@@@


doc= 21619


Paulet, Sir Hugh (b. before 1510, d. 1573), soldier and administrator, was the eldest son of Sir Amias Paulet (c.1457-1538), and his second wife, Laura Keilway. Any relationship to the Hampshire Paulets, notably William, ultimately lord treasurer, was extremely distant, and does not seem to have affected his career. He entered the Middle Temple, of which his father was treasurer (1520-21), at an unknown date. He married, about 1530, Philippa, daughter of Sir Lewis Pollard of King's Nympton, Devon. 
Paulet was appointed to the Somerset commission of the peace as early as 1532, and in 1534 succeeded his father as steward to the bishop of Bath and Wells, retaining that post until his death, and passing it to his descendants. He was a commissioner for the 'valor ecclesiasticus' for Somerset in 1535. He was knighted on 18 July 1536, the day of the dissolution of the short parliament of that year, along with Thomas Cromwell. This has led to the supposition that he was a member of that parliament (and possibly also of the Reformation Parliament in its final phase), but there is no direct evidence. He led 300 men against the Pilgrimage of Grace in 1536. He became sheriff of Somerset and Dorset for 1536-7. This early rise to prominence may be due to the intimacy of his brother-in-law, Richard Pollard, with Cromwell. Paulet succeeded his father in April 1538, and in November of the same year purchased the manor of Sampford Peverell in Devon from the crown for $1000. He was picked to inspect Somerset's coastal defences in 1539, and probably as a result became a member of the short-lived council of the west in 1539-40. He was also the senior knight of the shire for Somerset in the parliament of 1539-40. He was sheriff of Devon in 1541-2, and of Somerset and Dorset again in 1542-3 and 1547-8. He distinguished himself at the siege of Boulogne by capturing the 'braye', a necessary preliminary to the assault on the castle, on 1 September 1544, and became treasurer of Boulogne for the first two years of the English occupation (October 1544 - October 1546). His administrative duties did not preclude his leading a raid to destroy the nearby small town of Desvres in June 1545. 
In 1547, on Henry VIII's death, Paulet was commissioned to put the west country in order against a possible invasion, and also, with Sir John Harington, to survey Calais and Boulogne. From 1547 he was on the Devon commission of the peace. In January 1549 he was sent to take charge of Thomas Seymour's house at Bromham, Wiltshire, when Seymour was accused of treason. He served as knight marshal in Lord Russell's army against the western rebels in the summer of 1549, and with Sir Peter Carew crushed the last remnant of the uprising. Curiously, in spite of the local connection, there seems no evidence that he was ever close to Protector Somerset. 
Somerset was governor of Jersey, and on his fall Paulet was sent in November 1549 to investigate the state of the island. He dismissed Somerset's lieutenant Henry Cornish, and reported on the fortifications. No doubt it was the privy council, grateful for his services, that persuaded the bishop of Bath and Wells to grant him a ninety-nine year lease of the manor of Chard on very favourable terms in February 1550. Paulet was appointed governor of Jersey for life on 20 March 1550. As governor he continued the policy initiated by Somerset of using church revenues to modernize the fortifications. He also attempted to enforce the Reformation, and pressed for the translation of the 'Book of Common Prayer' into French. That was not achieved until 1553, too late to take effect before the restoration of Catholicism under Queen Mary. Paulet seems to have adapted without difficulty to the new regime, and indeed appointed his conservative brother John as dean of Jersey in 1554. In contrast to Guernsey, Jersey saw no burning of heretics, although Dean Paulet tried, unsuccessfully, to assert clerical immunities against the secular authorities. Hugh Paulet did not spend all his time in Jersey. He was commissioned to settle the immigrant weavers at Glastonbury in 1551. He was recalled from Jersey urgently in 1556 as 'a man of great experience and credit in the west' on rumours of a possible conspiracy ('CSP dom.', '1553-8', 473). While in England he advised on the fortifications of Scilly, and stood by for a possible landfall by Charles V on his last voyage from the Netherlands to Spain. Outbreak of war with France sent him urgently back to Jersey in July 1557. 
From 1559 Paulet was an absentee governor, and day-to-day responsibility passed to his son Amias Paulet (c.1532-1588) as lieutenant. Hugh Paulet distrusted the French Calvinists who had taken refuge on the island, whereas Amias sympathized with them and helped them surreptitiously to introduce a presbyterian system of church government. Hugh became, briefly, vice-president of the council in the marches of Wales in April 1559 with his usual troubleshooting brief, resulting in far-reaching proposals for reform. In June 1562 he was nominated for a commission to investigate Irish revenues, but a more urgent matter intervened, the ill-fated English occupation of Le Havre. In December 1562 he was sent to join the commander, the earl of Warwick, as his special adviser, in effect, it would seem, to try to prevent looming disaster. But in July 1563 Paulet helped negotiate the surrender, when, as he had forecast, desertion by the queen's Huguenot allies, coupled with an outbreak of plague, made the situation untenable. 
Paulet spent his remaining years largely at Hinton St George, Somerset. His first wife, Philippa, died at an unascertained date. He had with her three sons, Amias, George, and Nicholas, and two daughters, Jane (who married Christopher Copplestone), and Anne. About the end of 1560 he married Elizabeth Blount, the rich widow of Sir Thomas Pope, designated after Pope's death as founder of Trinity College, Oxford. There were no children of this marriage. In 1562 Paulet added the Dorset commission of the peace to those for Somerset and Devon, and was also appointed 'custos rotulorum' for the Somerset bench. In 1571 he and Sir Maurice Berkeley were instructed by the privy council to see that suitable MPs were returned for Somerset. He was returned as a member for the county for the parliament of 1572 in which he served on several committees, most notably that on Mary, queen of Scots. He died on 6 December 1573, at Hinton St George, and was buried in the tomb he had already erected for himself and his first wife in the parish church (along with an almost identical tomb for his parents). His will, drawn up five days before his death, was largely concerned with seeing that his widow's marriage settlement was properly carried out, and with disclaiming any liability on his estate for the debts of Sir Thomas Pope or for debts arising from his service in Jersey; he claimed, indeed, to be still $1000 out of pocket over the Jersey fortifications. After his death his widow was to reveal herself a committed Catholic. She died on 27 October 1593 at Tittenhanger in Staffordshire, and was buried with Pope in Trinity College chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 21620


Paulet, Sir Amias (c.1457-1538), landowner and soldier, was the only son of Sir William Paulet ('c'.1404-1488) of Hinton St George and Elizabeth, daughter of John Deneland of Hinton St George. Paulet was brought up to support the Lancastrian cause. He was attainted after Buckingham's rebellion in 1483, and restored in 1485. He was knighted in June 1487 after the battle of Stoke. He was a country gentleman of standing who was one of the greatest landowners in his native county of Somerset. His influence in Somerset was confirmed by his active role in county government, and underpinned by his procurement of important offices in the gift of the crown and by his service to the church. He was married twice: to Margaret, daughter of John Paulet of Basing in Hampshire, and, after 1504, to Laura, daughter of William Keilway of Rockborne, Hampshire. He had four children, all from his second marriage: Sir Hugh Paulet, who succeeded him, Sir John Paulet, Henry, and a daughter, Elizabeth. 
Paulet was given his first formal appointment in local government in 1485 when for the first of three occasions he was appointed sheriff for Somerset and Dorset. The following year he was appointed JP for Somerset and thereafter, until the mid-1510s, he was regularly placed on the Somerset commission of the peace, and was briefly also JP for Devon. In 1497, he was appointed to collect fines from men and women in the west country implicated in the Perkin Warbeck rebellion against Henry VII. In 1493 he secured the highly influential post of steward of the estates of the bishop of Bath and Wells. In 1501 he was chosen as one of the gentlemen to meet Katherine of Aragon at Crewkerne as she travelled from Plymouth on her way to her marriage with Prince Arthur in London. In 1504 he was appointed by the crown as steward of the duchy manors of Stoke-sub-Hamdon and Curry Malet in Somerset. He was initially excluded from the general pardon of April 1509, perhaps as a result of debt to the crown, but was duly pardoned by Henry VIII in August. In 1513 he took part in Henry's campaign against France, commanding twenty-five men. At about this time he was called to the bar and entered the Middle Temple. He was appointed treasurer of the Middle Temple in 1520 and 1521. 
From about 1514 Paulet's involvement in the government of his county declined. He was removed from the commission of the peace for Somerset and was not again appointed to a local commission until 1523-4, when he was appointed to collect the subsidy in Somerset and Bath. Perhaps Paulet was now out of favour. George Cavendish, gentleman usher to Thomas Wolsey, notes in his biography of the cardinal that during his first period of office as sheriff Paulet ordered a then young Thomas Wolsey to be placed in the stocks in Limington, Somerset, as punishment for disorderly conduct at a local fair. Then, with his career much advanced and in a position of power, Wolsey took his revenge on the Somerset man by accusing Paulet of encouraging heretical teaching in the Middle Temple and by confining him to live in London for five or six years. Cavendish continues that it was only by placing Wolsey's badges prominently over the door of a new gateway built in the Middle Temple that Paulet sufficiently appeased the king's minister to be allowed to return home. 
Paulet died on 1 April 1538 at Hinton St George, and was buried there. 

Sir John Paulet (1453/4-1525), soldier, was the brother-in-law of Amias Paulet. He was possibly the son of John Paulet of Nunney, Somerset, and Eleanor, daughter of Robert Roos of Gedney and Irton, Lincolnshire. He married Alice, daughter of Sir William Paulet of Hinton St George, and sister of Sir Amias Paulet. William Paulet, first marquess of Winchester, was John's son. John Paulet was a commander at the battle of Blackheath in 1497 and was made KB at the marriage of Prince Arthur to Katherine of Aragon in November 1501. He died on 5 January 1525. 


@@@@@


doc= 21621


Paulet, John, fifth marquess of Winchester (1598?-1675), royalist nobleman, was the third but eldest surviving son of William, the fourth marquess (died 1629), and Lucy Cecil (1568-1614), second daughter of Sir Thomas Cecil, afterwards second Baron Burghley and first earl of Exeter. 
Paulet was probably born at the family seat of Basing House, Hampshire, and nothing is known of his early life except that he was educated at home and then kept terms, without matriculating, at Exeter College, Oxford. He enters national history with his election to the 1621 parliament for the Cornish borough of St Ives, under his courtesy title of Lord St John. He obviously pleased James I, for he was called to the Lords on 10 February 1624, in his father's barony of St John. Charles I also favoured him, appointing him to the captainship of the royal fort of Netley Castle in 1626 and to the keepership of the royal forest of Pamber when he succeeded to the marquessate on his father's death on 4 February 1629. These offices were both in Hampshire, and reinforced his position as one of the county's wealthiest landowners; but his Catholicism, coupled with the burden of debt inherited from his father, barred him from further employment. 
Winchester passed the 1630s quietly at his seat, devoting his time to rebuilding the family fortunes. He had married his first wife, Jane Savage, in December 1622; she was the daughter of another Catholic nobleman, Thomas, first Viscount Savage, and her beauty and goodness won tributes from Milton and from James Howell, who had taught her Spanish. She died of a throat infection in April 1631, having given him his eldest son and heir, Charles Paulet. In October 1633 he remarried into a grander Catholic house, by wedding Lady Honora De Burgh ('b'. 19 Aug 1610), daughter of Richard, first earl of Clanricarde and of St Albans. They had four sons, two of whom -- John and Francis -- survived to adulthood, three daughters, and the pleasures of a mutually affectionate and supportive partnership. 
The blessings of strong family support were to be needed as the English civil war broke out, finding the Winchesters still living in seclusion at Basing. They took no apparent part in the opening stages of the crisis, and their loyalties only became active in the summer of 1643, a year after the outbreak of hostilities. In March complaints had reached parliament that royalist soldiers had been given shelter and refreshment at Basing House, and in late July the marquess heard that a parliamentarian force was planning to visit, disarm, and plunder it. He attended the king and asked to have soldiers from the royal army sent to protect the mansion. Charles selected the recently raised foot regiment of the Yorkshireman Marmaduke Rawdon, and dispatched a hundred musketeers of it from Oxford, under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Peake, with an escort of horse. These arrived in the nick of time on 31 July, as the parliamentarians, led by the local activist Richard Norton, had reached the house and were being resisted by the marquess with just his servants and six gentlemen armed with muskets. The enemy withdrew, and Basing was now fortified with 141/2 acres of earthworks, strong enough to resist all but a massive battery. Rawdon became the governor with Peake as his lieutenant. 
This transformed Winchester's seat into the principal royalist fortress of northern Hampshire, covering the roads between London and the west country and thus of vital strategic importance. It was accordingly attacked as soon as parliament could bring a regional army to bear upon it, that of Sir William Waller, which assaulted it repeatedly between 6 and 13 November 1643. The garrison now numbered about four hundred; the marchioness and her ladies cast fresh shot for them out of lead stripped from the mansion, and the defences held out. By April 1644 the motto 'Love loyalty' was engraved on every window pane. It was tested in that month when Winchester's younger brother was discovered to be plotting to betray the house; he was turned out of it after being forced to hang his accomplices. The coming of summer made a sustained siege viable, and Norton opened one with the local parliamentarian forces on 11 June. It relied upon starvation, reinforced by desultory bombardment, but was broken by a relief force from Oxford on 11 September. Norton renewed it, only giving up when a detachment of the royal army approached on 20 November. The Winchesters had survived unharmed although a cannon-ball had once passed through the marquess's chamber while he lay in bed. 
The garrison was now at peace, and in May 1645, at Winchester's insistence, was turned into a wholly Catholic body. Rawdon was removed to other commands, and Peake took over a force reduced to three hundred. On 23 August it was again besieged by local forces, this time under a Dutch professional, Colonel Dalbier. He slowly weakened the defences with bombardment until 8 October, when Oliver Cromwell arrived with an exceptionally powerful train of siege guns and reinforcements which brought the besieging army to about seven thousand. The odds were now too great; Cromwell's guns blew several breaches in the outworks and walls, which were stormed before dawn on 14 October. Religious rancour gave the action a brutality unusual in this war, and between one and two hundred of the defenders were slaughtered. Winchester himself was taken unhurt, together with his most distinguished guests: Peake, the artist Wenceslaus Hollar, and the architect Inigo Jones. They were, however, stripped of their clothes by the soldiers, and the house was accidentally set on fire after it had been looted bare. The victors estimated the total value of the plunder at $200,000. 
On 15 October 1645 the House of Commons resolved that the ruins of Basing House should be demolished, and on 20 October the Lords concurred with a further resolution that the marquess of Winchester be committed to the Tower of London and his lands confiscated. The marchioness had been at the royal court at Oxford since early 1644, and was allowed to go to London to assist him, at his request, in January 1646. On 15 January the Commons allowed him a pittance from his estates, as he had now no means of income at all and was nearing starvation. On 31 January some of his lands were granted to Cromwell; $15 per week was allowed from the residue to support the marchioness and the children, on condition that the latter were educated as protestants. The sale of the rest of the estate was ordered on 25 September, although the process was still not complete by 1660. 
The marquess of Winchester apparently remained in the Tower until 7 September 1647, when he had become so ill that both houses allowed him to settle at Epsom and take the waters there. He was taken back into custody in the following spring, with the approach of the second civil war, and the Lords urged the Commons to allow him bail upon 30 June 1648, as he was again in serious bad health. The request seems to have been rejected, and in the propositions sent by both houses to the captive king on 13 October, Winchester was one of the royalists excepted from pardon. On 14 March 1649 the newly established republican House of Commons considered trying him for his life in the wake of the execution of the king and other royalist peers, and magnanimously decided to leave him in prison. This sustained animosity on the part of the MPs, especially marked in view of his utter lack of activism since 1645, may be ascribed primarily to his religion. 
He was eventually released at some point in the early 1650s and retired to an estate at Englefield, Berkshire, which had been part of his wife's marriage portion. While in captivity he had commenced the translation of French works, mostly devotional, to which he added pious introductions: Jacques Hugues Quarre's 'Devout Entertainment of a Christian Soul' (1648), Pierre Le Moyne's 'Gallery of Heroic Women' (1652), and Nicholas Talon's 'The Holy History' (1653). He continued to be vexed by financial troubles following the loss of most of his fortune, and in January 1656 petitioned Cromwell for relief after being imprisoned for non-payment of debts totalling $2000. 
At the Restoration, Winchester was restored to his estates but not compensated for his losses, although the Convention Parliament discussed an award of $19,000 on 3 August 1660 and the Cavalier Parliament resolved upon, but never implemented, one of $10,000 on 2 July 1661. This was also the year in which he was recalled to his place in the House of Lords, but on 10 March 1662 he suffered a further loss of a different kind in the death of his wife, Honora. She was buried in the church at Englefield, and a striking example of personal continuities during the period, despite political and religious divisions, is that Milton provided the epitaph for her tomb, saluting her virtues, just as he had written one for the first marchioness. 
Winchester married for the third time before April 1669; his new wife was Isabella Theresa Lucy Howard ('b'. 1644), daughter of another Catholic dignitary, William Howard, first Viscount Stafford. The union was childless, and she outlived him to die on 2 September 1691. Winchester took no further part in national affairs, save in attendance of the House of Lords, and returned to the quiet provincial life which had been interrupted by civil war. He made no attempt to rebuild Basing, but continued to live at Englefield House and to beautify and enlarge it as a new seat. His main interests were in agricultural improvement and in literature. The greatest vexation of his later years was probably his estrangement from Charles, his son and heir, who became opposed to him both in politics and religion, and was to make his own dramatic career in both. In 1663 a quarrel between them over the disposition of the family estates had already become so intransigent that it was only settled by an act of the Cavalier Parliament. The marquess died at Englefield, of unknown causes, on 5 March 1675, and was buried near his wife in the church. Another first-rank poet provided his tomb epitaph, John Dryden, who extolled the two obvious aspects of his career: loyalty and suffering. 
Winchester's portraits show a neat and handsome man with gentle and rather melancholy eyes. In his fidelity to his monarchy and his church -- at times, as in the dismissal of Rawdon, verging upon fanaticism -- he reflected a nature which was always both serious and pious. His career, however, was in the main that of a man inclined to private and provincial life, whose enthusiasms were for letters, learning, and the improvement of his property. It was his tragedy that the centre of that retired existence, his country seat, should itself have been the cause of his propulsion to the forefront of national affairs, in especially traumatic, and disastrous, circumstances. 


@@@@@


doc= 21622


Paulet, William, first marquess of Winchester (1474/5?-1572), administrator and nobleman, was born at Fisherton-Delamare in Wiltshire, the eldest of four sons of Sir John Paulet (1453/4-1525), soldier, of Basing in Hampshire and Nunney in Somerset ['see under 'Paulet, Sir Amias (c.1457-1538)], and his wife, Alice, daughter of Sir William Paulet of Hinton St George in Somerset and his wife, Elizabeth. He also had two sisters, Eleanor and Katherine Paulet. William Camden and Sir Richard Baker stated that Paulet was ninety-seven at the time of his death in 1572. Other years of birth have been suggested, including 1483 and 1488. The Somerset property is said to have come to Paulet's family through the marriage of his great-great-grandfather, William Paulet (died 1435) to the heiress Eleanor de la Mere. The family held the estate from Edward IV as parcel of the duchy of Lancaster by 1461 and the manor and advowson, formerly the property of Glastonbury Abbey, was alienated to Paulet and his wife on 1 October 1543. According to a memorial poem written shortly after Paulet's death, he was born at another of the houses that were inherited through Eleanor de la Mere, Fisherton-Delamare. His main primary residence of Basing House was acquired through the marriage of Paulet's great-grandfather Sir John Paulet (died 1437) to Constance (died in or before 1428), daughter and coheir of Sir Hugh Poynings, eldest son and heir of Thomas Poynings, fifth Baron St John of Basing. Though a cousin, John Bonville, sued for title to Basing House, the Paulets appear to have sustained their claim, as in January 1531 Paulet was granted a licence to fortify the manor and create a park, and in 1537 was able to produce legitimate title to the lands. 
Details of Paulet's early life are sketchy. Rowland Broughton's poem states that Paulet went at an unknown date from school to Thavies Inn, and then to the Inner Temple, where he eventually became an utter barrister. Though there are no records of his legal education, in an order for division of matters to be 'treated' by Henry VIII's council in February 1526, Paulet is among those given responsibilities for dealing with legal matters. By 1509 he was married to Elizabeth (died 1558), daughter of Sir William Capell, lord mayor of London in 1503, and his wife, Margaret. They had at least four sons, including John Paulet, future second marquess of Winchester ('c'.1510-1576), Chidiock Paulet ('b'. in or before 1521, died 1574), and Giles ('b'. after 1521, died 1580), and four daughters. 
Paulet appears to have made little impression on local and central politics until the accession of Henry VIII. He was named sheriff in Hampshire on 8 November 1511, after being nominated, but not chosen, in each of the previous two years. He was again appointed to the post in 1518 and 1522. He was named to a commission on 2 May 1512 in Southampton to review, muster, and certify numbers of troops going to France, and named JP for Hampshire for the first time in January 1514. He was again on commissions of muster in Wiltshire in March 1539. Lucrative and important offices began to fall his way during the 1520s, but there is no clear evidence for how, or through whom, he came to the notice of the king. He appears to have been a protege of Richard Fox, bishop of Winchester, who in 1517 wrote to Cardinal Thomas Wolsey, requesting the inclusion of Paulet in a commission for Southampton on unlawful assemblies. This is perhaps the first time Paulet was brought to Wolsey's notice. He also served as an executor of Fox's will, and his stewardship of the bishopric of Winchester probably dates from Fox's tenure. Certainly he served in this capacity from 1529 to 1530, when Wolsey was bishop of Winchester 'in commendam', and his local influence can be seen in Ralph Sadler's assurance that Paulet could secure a borough seat in parliament on Thomas Cromwell's behalf within the diocese. Paulet was knighted between 1523 and 1525 and was a member of the council from at least February 1526. The date of his knighthood remains obscure. He was styled 'Sir William Paulet' of Southampton on the subsidy roll of 2 November 1523, but subsequent use of the title is inconsistent until late 1525. His brother George Paulet named him Sir William Paulet on accounts dated December of that year ('LP Henry VIII', 3, pt 2, 3504, p. 1458). 
Paulet succeeded his father on 5 January 1525. On 3 November 1526 he was appointed, with Thomas Englefield, master of the king's wards, with power to keep lands, sell them, and appoint feudaries and officers (except in the duchy of Lancaster, the palatinate jurisdiction of Chester, and in Wales). This was the beginning of a 28-year tenure over wards, with increasing responsibilities over time. In January 1531 he was appointed surveyor-general of the possessions of royal wards, and of widows and idiots in England, Wales, and Calais. On 21 December 1534 he gained sole occupancy of the office of master, and when the court of wards was created on 26 July 1540, and later expanded to the court of wards and liveries (18 November 1542), he was appointed master for life. Such an office offered the incumbent splendid opportunities for the acquisition of rich wardships, and he acquired several during his years in office. He was returned as knight of the shire for Hampshire in 1529 and sat throughout the Reformation parliament. 
In addition to the mastership of wards, Paulet gained the office of comptroller of the royal household in May 1532, giving it up in October 1537 for the post of treasurer of the household, in which he remained until 9 March 1539. He was promoted to lord great chamberlain about 16 May 1543 and was named great master of the household about November 1545, as well as lord president of the privy council. He relinquished these latter two offices on 3 February 1550, when he became lord treasurer. Further offices granted to Paulet, which broadened his range of responsibilities, were master of woods in England and the marches of Wales in June 1541, and warden of the forests south of the Trent in December 1545. He was also one of a small coterie of men given commissions in March 1544 to sell crown lands and confiscated goods, and settle fines and leases, and also given leave to temporarily endorse bills of sale with the king's stamp, part of an effort to facilitate crown business. In May 1546 he was on a renewed commission to sell crown lands. 
Paulet spent much of his life at court. This was the making of him, according to the Elizabethan memorialist Sir Robert Naunton, who wrote that both Paulet and William Herbert, first earl of Pembroke, ran through their meagre inheritances and came to court 'where upon the bare stock of their Wits they began to traffick for themselves and prospered so well, that they got, spent and left more than any Subjects from the Norman Conquest' (Naunton, 25). Paulet was in regular attendance on Henry and still frequently present when the court was reduced in size. In a letter of 1534 to Cromwell he said that he would join the king shortly, 'as all other officers are absent' ('LP Henry VIII', 7.527). As comptroller and then treasurer of the household, his frequent attendance was necessary, but his letters reinforce the impression that Henry valued his continued presence, and that he was included in the intimate counsels of the king. Letters to Cromwell in September 1534 indicate that Paulet travelled with the court to Langley and Woodstock in Oxfordshire. He was among those who discussed commissioning ships for Ireland and sent the king's orders in the matter to Cromwell. In a letter of 9 October 1535 he informed Cromwell of Henry's wishes regarding Princess Mary. Another letter between them of 20 October passed on the king's message that Cromwell should come to court only if he had matters needing urgent attention. Paulet was among those first named by Henry as part of his 'pryvey counsell' in 1536, or the 'emergency council' named during the crisis of the Pilgrimage of Grace (1536-7). Though he was not named to the privy council that was formalized in August 1540, he still sat as judge in the Star Chamber between 1540 and 19 November 1542, on which date he was named a privy councillor. 
Paulet and other members of his family were present at many of the important ceremonial events of the Tudor dynasty. He attended the baptism of Elizabeth I on 10 September 1533 and, with his son and heir, John Paulet, was present at the baptism of Edward, prince of Wales, on 15 October 1537. His wife was among the ladies in the funeral procession of Jane Seymour on 12 November 1537, and in a book listing the late queen's jewels is the notation of a gift to her of a 'border' ('LP Henry VIII', 12, pt 2, 973/4). Paulet, along with Thomas Howard, third duke of Norfolk, made all the arrangements for Jane's funeral. Both his wife and he were appointed in 1539 to take part in the reception of Anne of Cleves. Chidiock and Giles Paulet were among several men who accompanied the body of Henry from Whitehall Palace to Windsor Castle in 1547. Paulet served as the escort for the French envoy at Edward's coronation on 20 February 1547 and was chief mourner at his funeral on 8 August 1553. On 30 September 1553 he walked in the ceremonial procession that escorted Mary from the Tower of London to Westminster Abbey, while his wife rode with the ladies accompanying Elizabeth and Anne of Cleves. The next day he carried the orb in the coronation ceremonies. 
Beginning in April 1537 Paulet was put forward several times for nomination to the Order of the Garter. On 9 March 1539 he was created Baron St John in a ceremony that also elevated Sir John Russell and Sir William Parr to baronies. A description of the ceremony recounts how it took place at Whitehall Palace after communion at the king's mass. Paulet's robes were carried by Edward Fiennes de Clinton, ninth Baron Clinton, while George Brooke, ninth Baron Cobham, and Thomas Fiennes, ninth Baron Dacre of the South, led him in to the presence chamber, where he was invested with his robes and then led to Henry to receive his patent. Sir William Kingston was granted St John's office of treasurer of the household on the same day. St John was finally nominated to the Order of the Garter on 23 April and installed on 6 May 1543. Land acquisitions, either through purchase or through royal grant, made him one of the wealthiest men in the kingdom. By 1545/6 his landed estate alone was valued as worth at least $1000 per annum. 
St John's appointment to the privy council reflects the strength of his personal relationship with Henry. In a deposition taken relative to the Pilgrimage of Grace he was named as one of a small group of councillors 'about the king', apparently those most constantly with, and trusted by, Henry, which concurs with his subsequent inclusion on the privy council ('LP Henry VIII', 12, pt 1, 1013). His intimacy, and possible influence, with Henry was certainly assumed by those outside the court. In 1546 St John was, along with Katherine Parr, Thomas Wriothesley, first Baron Wriothesley, Russell, and Sir William Paget, petitioned by Oxford University to persuade the king not to reorganize the colleges. 
With Wriothesley and Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, St John formed a triumvirate in the last years of Henry's reign which, as the nucleus of 'Council in London', was entrusted with entertaining various ambassadors, and ascertaining their opinions or transmitting their messages regarding specific issues of interest to the privy council and king. It also presented Henry's responses, messages, or instructions to the ambassadors. He was appointed to the commission of 17 June 1543 to treat for the marriage of Edward and Mary, queen of Scots. In 1546 Paget and he were entrusted with interrogating Norfolk concerning his alleged treason. St John was among those witnesses who signed Norfolk's confession in January 1547 and he sat as a judge at the trial of Henry Howard, earl of Surrey, on 13 January. St John was one of the privy councillors who were most frequently present at court and at council meetings in Henry's final years, and the king's will named him as one of the sixteen members of the regency council appointed guardians of Edward. He received a bequest of $500 in Henry's will. 
St John bore the second sword at the coronation of Edward VI. He continued to enjoy favour under the regime of his kinsman Edward Seymour (c.1500-1552), duke of Somerset and lord protector, and was reappointed to the privy council on 12 March 1547. On 26 May he was named to the quorum of the peace for every English county and 'custos rotulorum' for Hampshire. In the unfulfilled gift clause it was initially proposed by Henry that St John be promoted earl of Winchester and receive an additional land grant worth $200 per annum. This was changed to a land grant of $100 per annum instead but St John was certainly among the close circle of privy councillors and often conducted royal administration with Somerset alone. However, seeing what way things were going, when Wriothesley (now first earl of Southampton) and John Dudley, earl of Warwick, initiated the coup against Somerset, he was instrumental in toppling his kinsman on 11 October 1549. He also warned Warwick that Southampton and Henry Fitzalan, twelfth earl of Arundel, were plotting to overthrow him. St John was rewarded with promotion to earl of Wiltshire on 19 January 1550, received large land grants on 26 January, and was named lord treasurer on 3 February (having relinquished his offices of lord president and great master to Warwick the previous day). Finally on 11 October 1551 he was created marquess of Winchester in a grand ceremony in the presence of the king. At his investiture he was led into Edward's presence by Lord Parr (now marquess of Northampton) and Russell (now first earl of Bedford), with his coronet borne by Henry Manners, second earl of Rutland, his sword by Cobham, and his patent by Sir Gilbert Dethick, Garter king of arms. At the dinner following, he sat at the highest bench with Henry Brandon, second duke of Suffolk, Warwick (now duke of Northumberland), and Pembroke. Winchester was named lord steward to oversee Somerset's trial for treason on 1 December 1551 but did attempt to help the duke's heir get some of his inheritance back in 1552. He replaced Somerset as lord lieutenant of Hampshire and the Isle of Wight on 16 May 1552. He was reappointed on 24 May 1553. 
Thomas Fuller commented that Mary I and Elizabeth 'owed their crowns to [Winchester's] counsel: his policy being the principal defeater of Duke Dudley's design to disinherit them' (Fuller, 13). Certainly the imperial ambassador, Jehan Scheyve, reported that Winchester, despite his reputation for changing with the wind, was one of those who objected to the device to alter the succession, though he did sign the letters patent for the limitation of the crown on 21 June 1553. On 16 July he attempted to leave the Tower, where the privy council was gathered with Lady Jane Grey, but was forced to go back. Three days later he joined several other privy councillors in proclaiming Mary as the rightful queen. 
Winchester's career under Mary was difficult and frustrating, despite his continuing as a privy councillor and lord treasurer. Mary may have retained his services primarily due to a desire for continuity and stability. She forced him to resign as master of wards on 30 April 1554, and it has been suggested that his attempts to reorganize the exchequer, after the courts of augmentation and first fruits and tenths had been reincorporated into exchequer finance in 1554, were undertaken as much to increase his own influence over fiscal policy and administration as to reform the fiscal apparatus. He attempted to force through the reinstatement of medieval exchequer practices. He hoped this would prevent more cases of corruption. However, Mary prevented him from restoring the 'ancient course', and effectively silenced him on fiscal policy by turning his attention to the financial administration of the navy in 1557, and by appointing him 'lieutenant about our person and of shires adjoining London' on 12 April 1558, charged with mustering the queen's forces for any event. 
Under Elizabeth, who also confirmed him as lord treasurer, Winchester revived his project of reinstating ancient exchequer practice. He is credited with helping to turn the office of lord treasurer from the relatively unimportant sinecure of the early sixteenth century into the central post in royal finance of the late sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, with wide powers of patronage and control over leases, commissions, wood sales, and other revenue matters, as well as acting as adviser to the privy council on fiscal policy. Unfortunately the reforms that Winchester instituted established a dangerously loose system of accounting in which he had untrammelled control over cash flow. A sudden rush of defaults by exchequer tellers in 1571 revealed a system of personal borrowing from royal accounts in which Winchester was involved heavily. Death saved the lord treasurer from complete disgrace, but left his heir with debts of $46,000. Despite this, the second marquess was still one of the wealthiest peers, with an income of between $2000 and $3000 per annum. In the kindest view, his incompetence in this particular episode can be put down to great age and encroaching infirmity. In 1566 Elizabeth had dismissed him from performing the duties of speaker of the House of Lords, 'considering the Decay of his Memory and Hearing, Griefs accompanying hoary Hairs and old Age' ('JHL', 1.558, 629-37). The marchioness of Winchester died at Basing House on 25 December 1558 and was buried at Basing church on 5 February 1559. By summer 1570 Winchester retired to Basing House, never to return to court. He died there intestate on 10 March 1572 and was buried in Basing on 28 April. Administration of his estate was first granted to his heir on 14 June. Winchester's altar tomb is in the north chapel of Basing church, along with that of his son, John Paulet, second marquess of Winchester. 
Although Winchester was the most successful of the brothers, he was not the only one to gain fame or infamy. George Paulet of Crondall (died 1558) appears to have acted as his eyes and ears in Hampshire while Winchester was pursuing his fortunes at court. A letter to Cromwell in 1535 states that George Paulet was passing information on issues in Hampshire to his older brother. On 31 July 1537 George Paulet was appointed a commissioner for the establishment of affairs in Ireland in the aftermath of the rebellion of Thomas Fitzgerald, tenth earl of Kildare. However, in 1538 he was accused of slandering Cromwell by speaking ill of him to others, claiming the principal secretary's high place was partly due to William Paulet's influence. George Paulet was imprisoned in the Tower and his brother wrote to Cromwell asking for mercy towards him. In the following year George Paulet was accused of forming a secret confederation in Ireland, with the lord deputy, Leonard Grey, Viscount Graney, who stood accused of treason. Anthony Budgegood, a servant of Cromwell, wrote a testimonial defending George Paulet's faithfulness to the king. He claimed that Grey spoke more with George Paulet than with anybody else because he received from him 'counsel without dissimulation' ('LP Henry VIII', 13, pt 2, 43; 'LP Henry VIII', 14, pt 1, 1, p. 3). No long-term consequence came of it but George Paulet's sphere of influence retracted to the county. By 1541 he was auditor for St Swithin's, Winchester, after its conversion into a cathedral chapter, with his older brother as its steward, and in 1543 the privy council recruited him to handle matters of local business. Another brother, Richard Paulet, was a servant of Henry Courtenay, second earl of Devon and marquess of Exeter, and later became a receiver in the court of augmentations. 
Wallace MacCaffrey classed Winchester among the bureaucrats rather than the great peers of the privy council. Certainly during the French campaign of 1545 he seems to have been the efficient and indefatigable worker, caught up in the minutiae of victualling, rather than the glory of war. Despite his continued employment by the Tudors in fiscal matters, he does not appear to have been a brilliant financial manager, but rather a good administrator, one whose continuing importance was due to hard work, a willingness to address administrative issues, and the need for continuity. His correspondence with Sir William Cecil, early in Elizabeth's reign, shows a marked obsession with expense and careful husbandry, and his desire for exchequer reform apparently rose partly from his concern over better record keeping and the potential for corruption. His years as lord treasurer for Edward show that he was the expert on the day-to-day running of the exchequer rather than the policy-maker on finance. His lack of understanding of the potentially negative effects of his style of exchequer administration was largely responsible for the ignominious end of his career. 
The longevity of Winchester's career at court is even more remarkable considering his involuntary participation in some of the unhappier moments of his royal mistresses' early lives. He was one of the principals in reducing the status of Katherine of Aragon and Mary, being among those commissioned on 2 December 1533 for 'diminishing the house and order of the Princess Dowager' ('LP Henry VIII', 6.1486). In January 1536 Henry commanded him to assume the duties of organizing Katherine's interment at Peterborough in Lincolnshire, and ordered all others to obey his directions in the matter of dispersing her possessions. According to Eustache Chapuys, the imperial ambassador, Winchester was the only non-ecclesiastical 'man of mark' who attended Katherine's funeral on 29 January ('LP Henry VIII', 10, 282). Along with his heir, the earl of Wiltshire was given the unhappy task of overseeing Mary's change in circumstances, and of trying to convince her to accept such a change, which brought him into strong disfavour with the determined princess. Chapuys wrote that after one such visit in July 1534, the two men threatened 'to shut her up in her chamber' ('LP Henry VIII', 7.980). However, Winchester appears to have offered her as much sympathy as he could, as in a letter of 29 August 1534 Chapuys states that he spared Mary from following Elizabeth's litter as she travelled with her, and in fact told her that she could choose to follow or lead. He appears to have been equally kind to Anne Boleyn during her fall from power, and in Kingston's account of her meandering statements in the Tower she 'named Mr. Controler [Winchester] to be a very gentleman', unlike others who she called cruel ('LP Henry VIII', 10.797). Winchester's early involvement in Elizabeth's affairs was no less fraught. Southampton and he examined a servant of Thomas Seymour, Baron Seymour of Sudeley (b. in or before 1509, d. 1549), after the lord admiral's arrest, and Winchester was also appointed, along with Thomas Radcliffe, third earl of Sussex, to escort Elizabeth to the Tower on 18 March 1554 for alleged complicity in the rebellion of Sir Thomas Wyatt the younger. Though it was Sussex, not Winchester, who was willing to permit Elizabeth the time to write a letter to Mary begging forgiveness, she does not seem to have held that against the marquess. 
Winchester's religious views are obscure. He is generally believed to have been a Henrician Catholic, and sympathetic to Catholic interests, and he was certainly moderate in religious matters. He benefited from the dissolution of the monasteries, though Mary returned three of his manors to the bishopric of Winchester. Under successive monarchs he exhibited a willingness to adhere to religious changes without demur. He was on a commission of March 1540 'to repair to Calais, and make inquiry touching the state of religion and observance of the laws there', which the French ambassador, Charles de Marillac, bishop of Vienne, commented was due to the disruption caused by Anabaptists in that town ('LP Henry VIII', 15.316, 370). He was also among the judges who passed sentence on Anne Askew and her supporters. Pro-Catholic leanings are attributed to him, due to his lack of support for either Katherine Seymour ('nee' Grey), countess of Hertford, or Henry Hastings, third earl of Huntingdon, in the succession crisis of 1562, and his wish to await the decision of the judges. Similarly, he voted against the 'Supremacy Bill' in 1559. However, he allegedly dealt the death blow to the conservatives' chances in the power struggle of 1549 by siding with Warwick, helping to end any hopes of a return to Catholicism. Additionally, his role in begging Edward to permit his sister Mary to hear mass at Charles V's request presents him not as a defender of liberty of conscience but a willing mouthpiece for Warwick, who no longer wanted to antagonize the emperor. Winchester appears to have been primarily an extremely cautious man, whose politics and sense of survival influenced his religious scruples. He did not come out on the side of the reforming party until after Henry's death, nor did he speak up for a protestant succession at Edward's death; yet his greatest gains were made in the reign of the most reformist of the Tudor monarchs. He did have a positive genius for choosing the winning side. Sir Richard Morison, Edward's ambassador to the emperor, said Winchester 'hath a tongue fit for all tymes, with an obedience redie for as many newe masteres as can happen in his dayes', a cruel comment, but one that presumably reflects the views of some of his contemporaries ('Literary Remains', ed. Jordan, 1.ccxxvii). 
Winchester was an accomplished courtier, if not as able an administrator, though his final years as lord chancellor taint the estimation of his earlier fiscal capabilities. His greatest achievements were his rise from obscurity to great status, his magnificent building, Basing House, which was the largest private residence in Britain, and his ability to thrive under successive regime changes; his career served as an inspiration for ambitious men rather than idealistic ones. Naunton's 'Fragmenta regalia' gives Winchester's character as that of a man who 'served then four Princes in as various and changeable season' by his complacency. Indeed Naunton claimed that Winchester's reply to a friend who asked the secret of his political longevity in turbulent times was ''ortus sum ex falice, non ex quercu'' ('I was made of the plyable willow, not of the stubborn oak'; Naunton, 25). 


@@@@@


doc= 21623


Paulet, William, third marquess of Winchester (c.1532-1598), nobleman and author, was the son of John Paulet, second marquess ('c'.1510-1576), and his first wife, Elizabeth (died in or before 1552), daughter of Robert, second Lord Willoughby de Broke. Paulet entered the Inner Temple in 1546, and by 1548 had married Agnes or Anne (died 1601), daughter of William, first Baron Howard of Effingham. The marriage was unsuccessful and broke down. In addition to a son and three daughters by his wife, he had at least four sons by his mistress Jane Lambert. Attempts were made by the queen in 1578 to reconcile Paulet with his wife: she was supported by Sir Amias Paulet, he by his relative Francis Russell, second earl of Bedford. Paulet made the Lamberts executors and chief beneficiaries of his will, which his family contested amid great acrimony. 
Paulet was created knight of the Bath at the coronation of Queen Mary in 1553, served as high sheriff for Hampshire in 1560-61, as commissioner for musters and as joint lord lieutenant for Dorset in 1569, and sat as knight of the shire for Dorset in the parliament of 1571. In 1572 he was summoned to the House of Lords as Baron St John, and on 4 November 1576 he succeeded his father as third marquess of Winchester. Not satisfied with his father's will, he complained of the disposal of the family property due to the influence of his father's widow and third wife, Winifred (died 1586), daughter of Sir John Brugge, lord mayor of London. He was joint lord lieutenant of Hampshire in 1585 and in 1586 became lord lieutenant of Dorset; in October of that year he was one of the commissioners appointed to try Mary, queen of Scots. 
Paulet was a quarrelsome man, frequently embroiled in public and private disputes: he received several reprimands for his conduct from the privy council. His only literary work, 'The Lord Marques Idlenes', was printed in 1586 and reprinted in 1587: Thomas Nashe refers to it in his letter written about September 1596 to William Cotton ('The Works of Thomas Nashe', ed. R. B. McKerrow, rev. F. P. Wilson, 5 vols., 1958, 5.194-5). Dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, Paulet's book takes the form of 'sage sentences, prudent precepts, morall examples, sweete similitudes, proper comparisons, and other remembrances of speciall choise' (sig. *2'r'). These are gathered in brief paragraphs under headings relating to such subjects as children and youth, death, justice and justicers, knowledge, and love, to form a sort of commonplace book. Written in the author's later years in 'mine olde plaine fashion' while unwell and 'under the phisitians hands' (sig. A3'r'), the brief aphoristic pieces exhibit a concern with the well-being of the commonwealth and a neo-Stoic outlook. 
Paulet played a part in the defence of the south coast against the Armada and took part in the trial of Philip Howard, earl of Arundel, in 1589. In 1596 he was lord lieutenant for Hampshire, and in 1597 first commissioner for ecclesiastical causes in the diocese of Winchester. He died on 24 November 1598 at Basing, Hampshire, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 21624


Paulet, Lord William (1804-1893), army officer, fourth son of Charles Ingoldsby Paulet, thirteenth marquess of Winchester (1764-1843), and his wife, Anne (1773-1841), second daughter of John Andrews of Shotney Hall, Northumberland, was born at Amport House, Andover, Hampshire, on 7 July 1804. After attending Eton College (his name appears in the school lists of 1820), he was appointed ensign in the 85th (Duke of York's Own) light infantry on 1 February 1821. On 23 August 1822 he was made lieutenant in the 7th Royal Fusiliers; he purchased an unattached company on 12 February 1825 and exchanged to the 21st Royal North British Fusiliers. On 10 September 1830 he became major 68th (Durham) regiment of light infantry, and lieutenant-colonel on 21 April 1843, serving with the regiment at Gibraltar, in the West Indies, North America, and at home until 31 December 1848, when he exchanged to half pay unattached. He became brevet colonel on 20 June 1854, went to the Crimea as assistant adjutant-general of the cavalry division, under Lord Lucan, and was present at the Alma, Balaklava (where his hat was carried off by roundshot), Inkerman, and Sevastopol. On 23 November 1854 Lord Raglan appointed him to command 'on the Bosporus, at Gallipoli, and the Dardanelles', where the overcrowded hospitals, in which Florence Nightingale and her nurses had begun work three weeks before, needed an experienced officer in overall command. This post he held until after the fall of Sevastopol, when he succeeded to the command of the light division in the Crimea, which he retained until the allied evacuation. He was created CB (July 1855), the Legion d'honneur, and the order of the Mejidiye (third class). 
Paulet was one of the first officers appointed to a command at Aldershot camp, where he commanded the 1st brigade from 1856 to 1860, becoming a major-general on 13 June 1858. He commanded the south-western district, with headquarters at Portsmouth, from 1860 to 1865. He was made KCB in 1865, and a lieutenant-general on 8 December 1867; he was adjutant-general of the forces from 1865 to 1870, and was made GCB in 1870, general on 7 October 1874, and field marshal on 10 July 1886. After a short period as colonel 87th Royal Irish Fusiliers, Paulet was appointed, on 9 April 1864, colonel of his former regiment, the 68th, in the interest of which he never ceased to exert his influence. He died, unmarried, at his London residence, 18 St James's Square, Westminster, on 9 May 1893. 


@@@@@


doc= 21625


Peulan (fl. 6th cent.), holy man, was known in the middle ages as a famous teacher, but remains largely a shadowy figure of probable Carmarthenshire origins. His feast day is celebrated on 22 November. No explicit account of his life and deeds survives, although he is noticed occasionally in the twelfth-century lives of other Welsh saints. However, it has been argued that the first book of the 'Vita sancti Pauli Aureliani', composed by the Breton monk Wrmonoc in 884, which describes the supposed Welsh origins of St Paul of St Pol-de-Leon (sometimes called Paulus Aurelianus or Paulinus), is based in part on traditions about the Carmarthenshire Peulan whom the author sought to identify with his subject -- whether correctly or incorrectly is not certain. Although the 'Vita' begins by attempting to identify its subject with yet another Welsh saint, Paul of Penychen in Glamorgan, it immediately shifts to locate Paul's origins in Llandingad, near Llandovery, in Carmarthenshire. Following a period of study under St Illtud at Llantwit Major, he is said to have become a hermit at Llanddeusant (also in Carmarthenshire), before moving to Cornwall and eventually migrating to Brittany with his twelve disciples. The second book of the 'Vita' describes Paul's arrival on the island of Ushant off the coast of Finistere and his subsequent move inland to found the monastery at St Pol-de-Leon, of which he was ordained bishop. This apparently confuses the seventh-century Frankish saint Philibert, who might ordain, with the Merovingian king Childebert I ('r'. 511-58), who could not. 
How much of Wrmonoc's narrative, especially the exclusively Breton material, can be associated with the Carmarthenshire Peulan is difficult to determine. Some later Welsh saints' lives also preserve traditions relating to Peulan, often contradicting those given by Wrmonoc. For example, Rhigyfarch's 'Vita sancti Davidis' ('Rhigyfarch's Life', chap. 10) claims that St David spent a number of years studying under Paulinus 'the scribe' or 'teacher' on an unidentified island called 'Wincdi-lantquendi'; and it is claimed (ibid., chap. 49) that it was he who would later urge the other bishops to invite David to attend the Synod of Llanddewibrefi. This Paulinus is said to have previously been a disciple of 'Germanus the bishop', that is Germanus of Auxerre, who visited Britain in 429 and 'c'.445. This connection with St Germanus is incredible chronologically, given the approximate dates of St David's life. On the other hand, the 'Vita sancti Kebii' refers to a Peulan as a disciple of St Cybi, whom some have therefore identified with the Carmarthenshire Peulan, though this appears to be a different saint of alleged Manx origins and patron of Llanbeulan on Anglesey. Furthermore, the 'Vita sancti Teliaui' in the 'Book of Llandaff' names St Teilo among the disciples of the 'wise man' Poulinus. Whether Peulan was a disciple of Illtud, Germanus, or even Cybi, or of none of them, is impossible to determine with any certainty; and similarly, the traditions that saints David and Teilo were among his own disciples may reveal more about his later reputation as a teacher than historical fact. 
Nevertheless, that there had been a St Peulan underlying these various later notices seems probable, given the existence of a handful of dedications to a saint of that name in Carmarthenshire, including the churches of Capel Peulin and Nant-bai and a holy well known as Ffynnon Beulin all in the parish of Llandingad; and in addition, at Llan-gors in neighbouring Brecknockshire lie the churches of Llanbeulan and of Llan y Deuddeg Sant ('Church of the Twelve Saints', perhaps echoing the twelve disciples of Paul Aurelian). In Brittany, there are various dedications to Paul Aurelian, mostly but not wholly in Finistere, an area which also contains a concentration of dedications to the Brecknockshire saints of the family of Brychan. Finally, it has been argued that the Carmarthenshire St Peulan may be identifiable with the Pavlinvs, 'Preserver of the Faith, constant lover of his country,... the devoted champion of righteousness', whose grave is marked by one of the early Christian memorial stones found at Maes Llanwrthwl in Cynwyl Gaeo, near Llandovery. The location of the inscription would certainly support the identification, though if correct, it would undermine an identification with Paul Aurelian as described in the second book of Wrmonoc's 'Vita', since he is said there to have died and been buried in Brittany. 


@@@@@


doc= 21626


Paulinus (d. 644), bishop of York and of Rochester, was almost certainly an Italian by birth. He was one of the Roman monks sent by Pope Gregory the Great ('r'. 590-604) to England in 601 to support Augustine's mission ['see also 'Gregorian mission]. Gregory provided the party with a series of commendatory letters to the Frankish kings Theuderic II of Burgundy and Theudebert II of Austrasia, to their powerful grandmother Brunechildis, to King Chlothar II of Neustria, and to a number of Frankish bishops. From these, it can be deduced that the monks travelled, with possible diversions, through Toulon, Marseilles, Arles, Gap, Vienne, Lyons, Chalon-sur-Saone, Metz, Paris, and Angers. Reaching Kent by 604, they brought letters from Gregory to Augustine, to King AEthelberht, and to his wife, Bertha, together with ecclesiastical furniture, relics, and many books. In his letter to Augustine, Gregory expressed his desire that metropolitan sees be established at London and York. 
Paulinus's activities in the mission are entirely obscure until he was called upon to accompany to Northumbria AEthelburh, the sister of King Eadbald of Kent and daughter of King AEthelberht, following her betrothal to the Northumbrian king Eadwine. Bede, whose 'Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum' is the principal source for Paulinus's life, reports that Eadwine had promised to allow AEthelburh and her party the freedom to practise Christian worship. Paulinus, who must by this time have become a fluent speaker of English, was sent with AEthelburh to ensure that she and her companions 'were not polluted by contact with the heathen', whom, in addition, he earnestly desired to convert to Christianity (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 2.9). Before they left Kent, Paulinus was consecrated bishop by Justus, archbishop of Canterbury, an event which Bede dates to 21 July 625. This date is very likely to be accurate: the argument that it is six or seven years too late because Bede made mistakes in his calculation of seventh-century dates is inconclusive at best. 
Conversion of the Northumbrians had to begin with their king, but winning Eadwine wholeheartedly round to a new faith was not straightforward. Bede drew on three stories of Eadwine's conversion, probably derived from Canterbury and perhaps ultimately from Paulinus himself, which he linked together into a continuous narrative. In the first episode, which he dates to Easter 626, Bede tells how an attempt to assassinate the king, inspired by the West Saxons, was foiled, and, on the same night, AEthelburh gave birth to a daughter, Eanflaed. When Paulinus claimed that God had granted the child in response to his prayers, Eadwine promised that he would convert to Christianity, provided that God granted him victory over those who had tried to assassinate him; as a pledge of his word, he gave Eanflaed to Paulinus to be consecrated to Christ. She and eleven other members of Eadwine's household were the first Northumbrians to be baptized, at Pentecost 626. 
Although, in due course, Eadwine was victorious over his West Saxon enemies, he would not accept Christianity 'at once and without consideration' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 2.9). He no longer worshipped idols, sought to learn the faith systematically from Paulinus, and he and AEthelburh received exhortatory letters from Pope Boniface V ('r'. 619-25). But Eadwine still found it necessary 'to consult with the counsellors whom he considered the wisest' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 2.9). Bede relates that, during these deliberations, Paulinus came to the king and, inspired by God, placed his right hand on the king's head, and asked him if he recognized this sign. Paulinus thus referred to a vision that Eadwine had had before he became king, when he was in exile at the court of Raedwald, king of the East Angles. Then, at a moment when Raedwald was considering handing him over to his Northumbrian enemies, Eadwine had encountered a stranger who knew his difficulty and offered him deliverance from his enemies, a kingship of unsurpassed power, and counsel as to his salvation, in return for a promise of obedience, to be claimed in the future by the laying of a hand on his head. As Bede tells the story, the stranger was a 'spirit', but the anonymous Whitby life of Pope Gregory the Great (written between 680 and 704) identifies him as Paulinus, although there is no independent evidence for Paulinus's having been active in East Anglia. 
In reality, Paulinus, even in the guise of a divinely inspired agent, may have had less influence on Eadwine's decision than the attitude of the Northumbian aristocracy. While Eadwine declared to Paulinus his personal willingness to accept Christianity, Bede depicts, in a vivid tableau, a meeting of the Northumbrian council in the king's hall. Paulinus was asked to speak there, his task of promoting Christianity doubtless made easier by the immediate and frank admission of the pagan high priest, Coifi, that 'the religion which we have hitherto held has no virtue nor profit in it' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 2.13), and by another counsellor's characterization of the ephemerality of earthly life. Paulinus's words were sufficient to persuade the high priest to convert to Christianity, and Eadwine skilfully led him to offer to destroy his own idols. 
On Easter day, 12 April, 627, Eadwine was baptized at York in a hastily constructed church dedicated to St Peter, 'with all the nobles of his race and a vast number of the common people' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 2.14). Paulinus's see was established at York and Eadwine set about building a stone church there, of which no trace has yet been discovered. A British tradition extant in the early ninth-century 'Historia Brittonum' claims that Eadwine was baptized by Rhun, son of Urien. This statement is hard to accept as it stands, but if Rhun's father was Urien, king of Rheged ('fl'. 560-580), then his presence at Eadwine's court is at least chronologically plausible: the tradition may preserve the memory of preparatory British efforts at conversion in Northumbria. 
For Bede, Northumbria owed its conversion chiefly to Paulinus. He recounts the numerous baptisms that the bishop performed, including Eadwine's sons from an earlier liaison, Osfrith and Eadfrith, one of Osfrith's sons, the children of Eadwine and AEthelburh, and 'not a few others of noble and royal stock' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 2.14). At the royal palace at Yeavering, in the northern Northumbrian kingdom of Bernicia, Paulinus spent thirty-six days instructing converts and baptizing them in the River Glen. In the southern kingdom of Deira he baptized in the Swale, near Catterick. He also built a church in the royal vill at 'Campodunum' (possibly near Dewsbury, Yorkshire) which, however, afterwards burnt down. On one occasion he is said to have responded to a crow's ill-omened croaking by having the bird shot, and then using its death as an illustration of the futility of paganism. 
Paulinus also preached in Eadwine's satellite kingdom of Lindsey. His first convert there, according to Bede, was the 'praefectus' of Lincoln, a certain Blaecca. It was presumably through his influence that Paulinus was able to build a stone church in the city, the walls of which were still standing in Bede's day, which has been tentatively identified with the earliest phase of the church of St Paul in the Bail. Here Paulinus's status in the English mission reached its apogee. Some time between 628 and 631, as the only Roman bishop in England, he consecrated Honorius as archbishop of Canterbury after the death of Archbishop Justus. 
The Northumbrian mission came to an abrupt halt with the death of Eadwine at the battle of Hatfield Chase on 12 October 633. His realm disintegrated into its constituent parts, Deira and Bernicia, and there seems to have been a pagan reaction against the Christianity that Eadwine had promoted. For Paulinus and AEthelburh, Bede declares, 'there seemed no safety except in flight' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 2.20). They set sail for Kent in the charge of one of Eadwine's loyal retainers, Bass, and together with Eanflaed, Eadwine and AEthelburh's son Uscfrea, and Eadwine's grandson Yffi. The two boys were sent for protection to King Dagobert I in Francia. Bede has a reliable report from Canterbury that the golden cross and chalice that Paulinus had brought with him were still preserved in Kent in his own day. At the invitation of Archbishop Honorius and King Eadbald, Paulinus took charge of the see of Rochester, whose previous bishop, Romanus, had died at least six years earlier. It was probably here that he received the pallium that Pope Honorius ('r'. 625-38), not then having heard of Eadwine's death, had sent, along with a letter to the king. 
Although Bede, concerned to emphasize the role of the Augustinian mission in bringing the new faith to northern England, put a positive gloss on Paulinus's activities, it seems unlikely that Christianity struck deep roots in Northumbria during his episcopate. Its fragility is adequately attested by the pagan reaction on Eadwine's death. Although his immediate successors, Osric in Deira and Eanfrith in Bernicia, had been converted (the former by Paulinus, the latter in Ireland), both soon apostacized. Nevertheless, Paulinus did convert Hild, the future abbess of Whitby, and one of his companions, a deacon named James, remained behind in the church at York. James provided some continuity with the period in which Christianity truly flowered in Northumbria, from the time of King Oswald (died 642), for he lived into Bede's own lifetime, teaching church music at York 'after the manner of Rome and the Kentish people' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 2.20). 
Bede's description of Paulinus's appearance, though it includes topoi from other sources, may contain some authentic elements. It was relayed to him by Deda, abbot of Partney, from an account of baptisms that Paulinus had performed at Littleborough (in modern Nottinghamshire) in the presence of Eadwine. The bishop 'was tall, with a slight stoop, black hair, a thin face, a slender aquiline nose, and at the same time he was both venerable and awe-inspiring in appearance' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 2.16). 
Paulinus died on 10 October 644, his feast, under which day his name appears in pre-conquest calendars. His soul was reported to have been seen ascending to heaven 'in the form of an exceedingly beautiful great white bird, like a swan' (Colgrave, 101). He was buried in the sanctuary of the cathedral church of St Andrew in Rochester, where he was succeeded by a Kentishman, Ithamar. His body was translated into a silver shrine by Archbishop Lanfranc of Canterbury when the church was rebuilt in the 1080s. 


@@@@@


doc= 21627


Paull, James (1770-1808), trader and politician, was the son of Alexander Paul, a tailor in Perth, and his wife, Elizabeth Adam. He was educated at the University of St Andrews and then briefly trained for the law with a writer to the signet in Edinburgh before leaving, at the age of eighteen, for India to seek his fortune. By 1790 he had established himself in Lucknow as a private trader, a role in which he prospered. In 1801 he returned to England with a fortune but spectacular losses at the gaming table forced him to return to India in 1802 in order to rebuild his finances. Initially he had received the assistance of the governor-general, Marquess Wellesley, in resuming his residence in Lucknow in the face of the objections of the nawab of Oudh but Wellesley soon changed his policy and sought to have all the private traders dispersed. This change of mind by Wellesley instilled a deep-seated sense of grievance in Paull who would, after once more returning to England in 1805, spend the next phase of his life pursuing a vendetta against Wellesley. 
In May 1805 Paull purchased a seat in parliament for Newtown, Isle of Wight, largely out of a desire to further his campaign against Wellesley, and his first significant act upon being returned was to move for papers relating to Wellesley's conduct in India. From the outset Paull seems to have seen his campaign as a rerun of the impeachment of Warren Hastings in the 1780s with himself cast in the role of an avenging Burke and Wellesley as the hapless Hastings. It was an unrealistic hope. Paull was no Burke and the hopes he had of support from his contacts among the whigs and the supporters of the prince of Wales were to be disappointed. The whigs and Carlton House had initially appeared to be sympathetic to Paull's campaign against Wellesley, seeing it as a useful stick with which to beat the Pitt ministry. In some respects Paull's campaign does seem to have caused Wellesley some political and personal discomfort. Wellesley referred to 'the miserable attack of this obscure and low man' and to Paull as his 'assassin' ('Fortescue MSS', 7.337; 8.204), and expended some $30,000 on his defence but William Pitt's death in January 1806 and the formation of the 'ministry of all the talents', combining Grenvillites, whigs, and supporters of the prince of Wales in a coalition ministry, robbed Paull's attack of any chance of ultimate success, despite the fact that it dragged on in parliament until 1808. The new first lord of the Treasury, Lord Grenville, was a close friend of Wellesley and this, together with the fact that the political benefits to be had from pursuing Wellesley were diminished given that the whigs were now in government, led them to pull back from their support for Paull's campaign. This betrayal, as Paull saw it, would help to push him towards alliance with radical politicians such as Sir Francis Burdett, John Horne Tooke, William Cobbett, and Major John Cartwright, who themselves had come, for various reasons, to be disappointed in the whigs. 
It was through his friendship with William Windham that Paull had first met Cobbett in 1805 and it was through Cobbett that Paull would be introduced to such luminaries as Burdett and Horne Tooke, becoming a regular figure at the dinners Horne Tooke held at his home in Wimbledon, at which many of the leading lights of London radicalism regularly gathered. It was his involvement with these radical politicians and in particular his role in the politics of the constituency of Westminster which were to provide the most significant episodes in Paull's public life. The constituency of Westminster was something of a peculiarity in the unreformed electoral system owing to its electorate, which was both large (about 12,000) and socially diverse, encompassing the metropolitan elite as well as the tradesmen, artisans, and shopkeepers who formed the most numerous social grouping among the electorate. The death of the foreign secretary, Charles James Fox, in September 1806, who had been one of the constituency's two MPs since 1780, opened up the possibility for the independents and radicals in Westminster to exploit the peculiarities of the constituency and to try to break the aristocratic hold over the representation of Westminster. Paull was to be a central figure in this attempt. 
At the by-election which followed Fox's death the ministry put forward Lord Percy, the son of the duke of Northumberland, as its candidate. Initially it looked as though Richard Brinsley Sheridan might also stand, but the embarrassment of two government candidates for one seat was avoided by Sheridan's withdrawal. Paull was a leading figure in the attempt by certain of the radicals to find a candidate to oppose Percy, angered by what they regarded as a typical aristocratic 'job'. This attempt failed and Percy was returned unopposed in October 1806 but his success was short-lived as the 'ministry of all the talents', desirous of shoring up its parliamentary position in the wake of Fox's death, dissolved parliament in late October 1806 and called a general election. In this election the radicals would mount a much more effective challenge at Westminster in the person of Paull himself. 
Paull's opponents at Westminster in the general election of 1806 were Sheridan for the whigs and Sir Samuel Hood for the tories. Of the two it was Sheridan who had the most to fear from a challenge by Paull and it was from him and his supporters that the most sustained campaign against Paull came. In particular Sheridan, somewhat hypocritically given his own background, chose to focus on Paull's humble social origins as the son of a tailor: 'a stage from Drury Lane was brought to the hustings at Covent Garden with four tailors at work, a live goose (symbol of the tailor), and several cabbages (symbol of the tailor's meagre diet)' (Spater, 1.181). Also, a large pole with a cabbage and a smoothing iron on it and a man dressed as an ape carrying all the tools of a tailor were paraded in the constituency. This kind of vilification was repeated in some of Gillray's cartoons of the campaign, with Burdett portrayed as a goose and Paull being shown holding a giant pair of tailor's shears. Nevertheless Paull, standing as an opponent of 'oppression and corruption' (Fisher, 2.270), did well in the early days of the poll and Sheridan was able to pull ahead of him into second place only by coalescing with Hood. In the end, after fifteen days of polling Paull was beaten into third place, but by less than 300 votes: Hood polled 5478 votes, Sheridan 4758, and Paull 4481. Paull's narrow defeat by a whig-tory coalition was interpreted by his supporters as a moral victory for Paull but attempts to turn this moral victory into an actual one by petitioning against Sheridan's return were cut short by the dissolution of April 1807 which signalled another general election hard on the heels of the one of November 1806. Paull, given his showing in 1806, should have been in a strong position to take the seat but by early 1807 his relations with the other leading radicals had deteriorated. In truth, Paull's relations with the other radicals had never been easy or without their tensions: even before the 1806 election Cobbett, while approving of Paull's 'activity and zeal', had worried that he was 'too fond of the Bond Street set -- has too great a desire to live amongst the great, to aim at the only objects that can save the throne and the liberties of the people' (Smith, 2.15-16). 
The crucial breach in Paull's relations with the other radicals occurred when Paull tried, through a series of newspaper advertisements, to manoeuvre Burdett into standing as a joint candidate with himself at Westminster, possibly motivated by a belief that Burdett would pay his electoral expenses. The intricacies of the quarrel that ensued may never be fully known but Sir Francis Burdett, via a letter read out to a meeting of radicals held at the Crown and Anchor on 1 May 1807 by his brother, Jones Burdett, repudiated Paull's actions. Feeling himself ill-served by Burdett's behaviour Paull demanded satisfaction. Paull was known for his temper and had already fought a duel while in India which had left him unable to use his right arm fully. The duel with Burdett occurred on 2 May 1807 at Coombe Wood, Kingston, and on the second shot, which took place at Paull's insistence after the first shots missed, Burdett was hit in the thigh and Paull in the legbone. According to Francis Place, the leading figure on the radical electoral committee, many of Paull's supporters, in the light of his recent behaviour, had decided to abandon him even before the duel, but the duel certainly completed this process of alienation. At a meeting of radicals on 4 May 1807 at the Crown and Anchor pro-Burdett speakers were shouted down by the remaining Paull supporters but the Burdettites simply retired to another room and under Place formed a committee to return Burdett. Paull himself vacillated: two days before the poll at Westminster he withdrew but eventually allowed himself to be nominated only to withdraw again before the end of polling, in which he finished a distant last with only 269 votes, while Burdett, without any active participation on his part, topped the poll with 5134 votes, thanks to the activities of Place's Westminster committee. This crushing blow, brought on in part by his own impatience and scheming, was to mark the end of Paull's political career. The following year, after another large loss at the gaming tables and racked by pain from his various duelling wounds, Paull committed suicide on 15 April by cutting his own throat at his house, 2 Charles Street, Westminster. According to a contemporary obituary, Paull had recently been given to requesting that 'when he died, which would be soon, he trusted that his body would be conveyed back to the East Indies and blown up' ('GM', 78, 1.373). This last wish was not granted and James Paull, who despite his faults was a key figure in opening up the Westminster constituency, was interred on 21 April 1808 at St James's, Piccadilly. 


@@@@@


doc= 21628


Paulton, Abraham Walter (1812-1876), politician and journalist, was the son of Walter Paulton of Bolton, Lancashire, where he was born. His family were Roman Catholics, and he was sent to Stonyhurst College to be educated for the priesthood as a Jesuit. There his views underwent a change, and on leaving college at the age of sixteen or seventeen he was apprenticed to a surgeon named Rainforth at Bolton. His thirst for general knowledge was strong, and he began to take a deep interest in current political questions, especially that of the controversial corn laws. He began to address public meetings, and soon became a good speaker. 
Deeper involvement in the anti-cornlaw movement, in particular a brilliantly successful speech at the Bolton theatre in July 1838, induced Paulton to abandon the medical profession and take up politics. The Bolton speech was a milestone for him. Taking over from the ineffective Dr Birnie, he spoke fluently and convincingly for fifteen minutes to revive interest in the meeting and was asked to return to deliver a fuller lecture. He was soon afterwards introduced to Cobden, and at the behest of Archibald Prentice became the first lecturer for the Anti-Corn Law League. He spoke at the Manchester corn exchange and Birmingham town hall in October and November 1838 and, between December 1838 and January 1839, spoke before a total of 80,000 people on a missionary tour in Lancashire. However, his suspected Chartist sympathies and frequent desire to address a wider radical agenda meant this and subsequent lecture tours (in London and Scotland) were frequently counter-productive to the league. He was removed from his lecturing post in April 1839 to edit the fortnightly 'Anti-Corn-Law Circular' ('Anti-Bread-Tax Circular' from April 1841), the earliest organ of the league and published in Manchester. This was succeeded in September 1843 by 'The League', which had its headquarters in London. 
When the repeal of the corn laws made the league redundant, Paulton returned to Manchester. In conjunction with Henry Rawson he purchased the 'Manchester Times', a newspaper representing the views of the more 'advanced section' of the Liberal Party. This paper (later amalgamated with the 'Manchester Examiner') was managed by Paulton from 1848 to 1854. 
In 1854 Paulton married Martha, daughter of James Mellor of Liverpool, and from that time he lived in London or at his country house, Boughton Hall, Surrey. In his retirement he remained interested in politics and current affairs and remained friendly with Cobden, John Bright, and other old associates. He was a man of great ability, deeply versed in political questions and the philosophy of politics, and in later years was keenly interested in physical science. His reputation was as a conversationalist of the first order. His writings, consisting mainly of newspaper articles, were not collected. 
Paulton died at Boughton Hall on 6 June 1876, leaving his widow, a son, and a daughter. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 21629


Paveley, Sir Walter (1319-1375), soldier, was the son of Sir Walter Paveley (died 1327) and Maud (1304- 'c'.1366), daughter and heir of Sir Stephen Burghersh (died 1310). As the only son of a Kentish gentleman, Paveley could have exercised some discretion in his choice of career, but his family connections left him well placed to find long and distinguished employment in Edward III's campaigns against the French. Though the existence of at least two separate branches of the Paveley family, one based in Wiltshire and the other in Kent, has caused some confusion, it is clear that Sir Walter belonged to the latter branch. Paveley's father was of Northamptonshire stock, but his wife's inheritance left him firmly established among the Kentish gentry. The family holdings were further increased by the death of his kinsman Henry Burghersh, bishop of Lincoln, in 1340. Following the death of his father in January 1327, and the subsequent marriage of his mother to Sir Thomas Aledon (or Aldon), a family friend and fellow stalwart of the Burghersh circle, little is heard of Paveley until his military career began to flower in the opening exchanges of the Hundred Years' War, though he was precociously a knight by 1335. 
Despite the problems of identification, Paveley's presence can be detected in a remarkable series of campaigns. His first recorded service was at the age of nineteen during the fitful Cambresis campaign of autumn 1338. He then served in Brittany with Bartholomew Burghersh in 1342-3 and 1345. Froissart places him (as Guillaumes Penniel) with Sir Walter Mauny at the siege of Rennes in 1342, and in Gascony the following year. Paveley subsequently enlisted in most of the French expeditions mounted before the war was brought to a halt by the treaty of Bretigny in 1360, including the crucial Crecy-Calais campaign of 1346-7, and the Poitiers campaign of 1356. 
Although Paveley was evidently an extremely experienced soldier, it is also clear that he owed his later prominence, at least in part, to a close friendship with the Burghersh family, above and beyond any kinship ties. Not only were most of Paveley's early campaigns conducted in the company either of Bartholomew Burghersh, Lord Burghersh, or of the latter's son, also Bartholomew Burghersh, but Paveley also enjoyed sufficient esteem with his baronial cousins to be involved in their personal affairs. For example, in June 1354 Paveley obtained letters of protection to travel to the Holy Land with the younger Bartholomew, who in May 1365, now Lord Burghersh, nominated Paveley as one of his attorneys as he prepared for a trip to Flanders; more significantly, in 1369 Paveley was named as one of Burghersh's executors and was left a gilt cup, a suit of armour, and some Kentish estates in the latter's will. 
In itself useful, this connection may also have brought Paveley to the attention of Edward, the Black Prince -- it can hardly be coincidental that both Bartholomew Burghersh junior and Walter Paveley appear frequently in the prince's household records, the former as an official and confidant, and the latter as a 'bachelor' with an annuity of 40 marks. It is difficult to pinpoint Paveley's initial contact with Prince Edward, but he was certainly held in high regard by the time of the battle of Crecy, where he acted as one of the prince's advisers, for which he was later rewarded with generous new year's gifts while on campaign in Normandy. Paveley's inclusion in the late 1340s among the original knights of the Garter confirms his membership of the close-knit body of aristocratic soldiers who provided the backbone of Edward III's armies ['see also 'Founding knights of the Order of the Garter]. 
Paveley died on 28 June 1375, and was buried in the church of the Blackfriars, London. With his wife (perhaps Joan St Philibert), to whom he was certainly married by 1354, he had two sons: Sir Edward, who died on 7 December 1375, and Sir Walter, who was killed in the naval expedition of 1379. Neither left any children, and their estates descended to the Aledon family. Paveley's arms, azure a cross flory or, appear in the thirteenth stall on the prince's side at Windsor. 


@@@@@


doc= 21630


Paver, William (1802-1871), genealogist, was born in 1802. Little is known of his life other than as a genealogist. He was an assiduous collector of genealogical material. In 1867 he acted as registrar of births and deaths at 4 Rougier Street, York. There was strong criticism by contemporary genealogists of Paver's method of genealogical construction. It is even suggested that some of his evidence was forged. He sought to attract attention to his collections in a pamphlet called 'Pedigrees of families of the city of York, from a manuscript entitled 'The heraldic visitations of Yorkshire consolidated'' (1842), and by a list of Yorkshire pedigrees in his possession, furnished to the 'New England Historical and Genealogical Register' for July 1857. He also issued part 1 of 'Original genealogical abstracts of the wills of individuals of noble and ancient families now or formerly resident in the county of York, with notes' (1830), the contents of which were superseded by the four volumes of 'Testamenta Eboracensia' printed by the Surtees Society. 
In 1874 Paver's extensive collections relating to Yorkshire were acquired by the trustees of the British Museum, where they are catalogued as Add. MSS 29644-29703. By far the most valuable portion of the Paver manuscripts is the transcripts of marriage licences, beginning in 1567, formerly preserved in the registry of York, as the originals have disappeared. These transcripts were printed, with notes, by the Revd C. B. Norcliffe in the 'Yorkshire Archaeological and Topographical Journal' beginning in volume 7 (1882); but regrettably Paver omitted to give the day of the month as well as the year. The licences are still in print and are essential for historians of Yorkshire. His consolidation of the Yorkshire 'Visitations' of 1584, 1612, and 1665, contains about 900 pedigrees, but is not considered an important work. Paver's son, Percy Woodroffe Paver, also an industrious antiquary, made 'Extracts from his father's Yorkshire collections', 1852 (Add. MS 29692, fol. 49); 'Extracts out of Torre's MSS at York', 1848 (Add. MS 29689); and a useful general 'Index to York collections' (Add. MS 29691). 
Paver, whose wife, Jane, survived him, died at Rishworth Street, Wakefield, on 1 June 1871. 


@@@@@


doc= 21631


Paxton, George (1762-1837), Original Secession minister, born on 2 April 1762 at Dalgourie, a village in the parish of Bolton, Haddingtonshire, was the eldest son of William Paxton, a joiner or house carpenter, and his wife, Jean Milne. Soon after George's birth his parents moved to Melrose, and then to Makerstoun, near Kelso and the Tweed. The picturesqueness of the place Paxton portrays in his poem 'The Villager'. The neighbouring laird, Sir Hay McDougal, colonel of the Scots Greys, became interested in the family, and young Paxton was educated under his eye at the parish school of Makerstoun. He subsequently went to Kelso, learning Latin and Greek, and, after a short experience as a carpenter, entered Edinburgh University, but left without a degree; in 1784 he went to Alloa to study divinity under William Moncrieff, and 'became a firm seceder'. On 17 March 1788 he was licensed to preach by the Associate Presbytery of Edinburgh, and his eloquence was at once recognized. He received calls from three churches almost simultaneously -- Greenlaw, Craigend, and the united congregations of Kilmaurs and Stewarton. By decision of the synod he was ordained to the last-named congregations on 12 August 1789, and took up residence at Stewarton. After a few years the two congregations, at the advice of Paxton, separated, and Kilmaurs was assigned to him. 
Owing to a hepatic malady, Paxton was soon forced to resign pastoral duty for seven years, and on his recovery the General Associate Synod elected him professor of divinity in 1807. He moved to Edinburgh, but his opposition to the union between the Anti-Burgher and the Burgher synods led him to resign his professorship and to his withdrawal from the General Associate Synod in 1820. He then became pastor to a body of sympathizers, who seceded with him, in a vacant chapel adjacent to the Grassmarket under Castle Hill. A new church was built in Infirmary Street, which his preaching soon filled, and he and his congregation joined with the Constitutional Presbytery of Seceders to which Dr Thomas McCrie belonged, and thus formed a new connexion styled the Associate Synod of Original Seceders, also known as the Constitutional Associate Presbytery and the Old Light Anti-Burghers. Paxton became their professor of divinity as well as continuing to minister. Despite his membership of this small sect, he was a strong apologist for established churches. Paxton took part in the controversy over the 'Apocrypha', publishing 'The Sin and Danger of Circulating the Apocrypha in Connection with the Holy Scriptures' (1828). He also published works on religious covenants (1801) and on church unity (1802), a volume of poetry entitled 'The Villagers' (1813), and 'Illustrations of the Holy Scriptures in Three Parts' (2 vols., 1819; 3rd edn, 4 vols., 1841-3). He was made honorary DD of St Andrews University shortly before his death on 9 April 1837. He was buried in the West Kirk burial-ground, Edinburgh. In 1790 Paxton had married Elizabeth Armstrong (died 1800), a daughter of a manufacturer in Kelso. With her he had two sons and three daughters. Paxton's only surviving son, George, was a doctor in India. Paxton's second wife, Margaret Johnstone, daughter of a farmer in Berwick, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 21632


Paxton, James (1786-1860), surgeon, was born in London on 11 January 1786. He was admitted MRCS in London on 16 March 1810, and graduated MD at St Andrews in 1845. 
For a time Paxton acted as an army surgeon, but in 1816 he began to practise at Long Buckley, Northamptonshire. From there he moved in 1821 to Oxford, where he had considerable success as a general practitioner. He was assistant surgeon to the Oxfordshire militia. In 1843 he moved to a practice at Rugby. A small estate was bequeathed to him for his life in 1858 by George North Robinson, surgeon of the Oxfordshire militia, at Ledwell, a hamlet in the parish of Sandford St Martin, 17 miles from Oxford. Paxton married Anna Griffin, who died in 1864, and one of his two daughters married the Revd Henry Highton, headmaster of Cheltenham College. Paxton died at his residence, Ledwell House, after a brief illness, on 12 March 1860, and was buried in the churchyard of St Martin's, Sandford. 
Paxton was a man of strong religious feelings, and was highly esteemed by his friends and patients. His writings, largely on anatomy and practical medical advice, had much success. He also edited William Paley's 'Natural Theology', in 1826. 


@@@@@


doc= 21633


Paxton, John (c.1740-1780), painter, was born in Edinburgh, the third child of John Paxton ('c'.1697-1787) of Berwickshire and his wife, Helen (died 1783), daughter of William Adams, an Edinburgh printer. John Paxton senior was chief clerk to Archibald Stewart, a rich Edinburgh wine merchant of Berwick origin, MP, and lord provost of Edinburgh at the time of the Jacobite rising of 1745. Paxton was a student at Foulis art academy in Glasgow and subsequently studied in Rome. He was one of the original members of the Incorporated Society of Artists, and signed their declaration roll in 1766. In that year he sent to their exhibition from Rome 'Samson in Distress'. In 1769 and 1770 he exhibited portraits at the Royal Academy, and in the latter year settled in Charlotte Street, Rathbone Place, London, where he had considerable practice as a portrait painter. 
Paxton continued to exhibit with the Society of Artists, of which he was director in 1775, sending chiefly portraits, but also scriptural, classical, and historical subjects. His brother Sir William Paxton, merchant and banker, must have convinced him that he would find ample and lucrative employ for his artistic talents in India. In March 1776 he asked the directors of the East India Company if he might go 'to the East Indies to provide for himself in the way of his profession' (BL OIOC). In 1777 the portraitist Catherine Read, then active in Madras, received a not very appreciative account of her colleague from one of her correspondents: 'We have now another [artist] nam'd Paxton, but he is a very indifferent hand and yet gets employment' (Archer, 471). 
Paxton painted a portrait of Signorina Zamperini as Cechina. A portrait by him of his fellow pupil James Tassie is in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery at Edinburgh. Paxton is alluded to in the fable of 'The Bee-Flower' in John Langhorne's 'The Fables of Flora' (1771). He died, unmarried, in Bombay on 19 February 1780. In 'RA Exhibitors', Graves lists further works exhibited between 1802 and 1807 by John Paxton, but these were presumably by a different artist of the same name. 


@@@@@


doc= 21634


Paxton, Sir Joseph (1803-1865), landscape gardener and architect, was born on 3 August 1803 at Milton Bryan (or Bryant) in Bedfordshire, the youngest of the eight children of William Paxton (1758/9-1810), an agricultural labourer, and his wife, Ann Rooke (1760/61-1823), who is said to have come from Whaddon Chase, Buckinghamshire. 
Joseph Paxton attended the free school at Woburn, and is said to have been a garden boy to Sir Hugh Inglis at Milton Bryan Manor. At the age of about fourteen he was placed under his elder brother John, the gardener at Battlesden, the estate of Sir Gregory Page Turner, where his father had also probably worked. He was later apprenticed for two or three years to William Griffin, the gardener to Samuel Smith of Woodhall Park, Watton, Hertfordshire, who was famous for his skill in fruit growing. In 1821 he returned to Battlesden, where he helped construct an ornamental lake of 13 acres, again under the direction of his brother. 
In 1823 Paxton's mother died and he went to work at Wimbledon House, Surrey, where the gardener was another brother, probably James Paxton. He was unsettled there and seems to have left for Lee and Henderson's nursery garden in Kensington. On 13 November that year, recommended by Samuel Smith, he was formally admitted by the Horticultural Society of London as a student gardener at the new experimental garden at Chiswick. When giving the required specimen of his handwriting he wrote that he was born in 1801, an untruth which has caused confusion ever since. The following year he was promoted to foreman in charge of the arboretum, covering 33 acres, and his weekly wage was raised from 14 to 18's'. In 1826, 'owing to some misunderstanding with the authorities of the Society' Paxton intended to go to America ('Journal of Horticulture', 446), but the duke of Devonshire intervened. The sixth duke was the landlord of the society's grounds, and, liking to stroll there and talk to young Paxton, he asked him to be head gardener at Chatsworth, his country house in Derbyshire. The duke is said to have been impressed with Paxton's bearing and general intelligence, but the deciding factor was his good manners: the duke was quite deaf, and Paxton took trouble to speak so that he could hear. 
Paxton arrived at Chatsworth on 9 May 1826 and started work on a salary of $70 per annum. Returning to his estate after an absence abroad of seven months, the duke noted in his journal: 'my new gardener Paxton has made a great change' (Cavendish, journal, 10 Dec 1826). Although hitherto hardly interested in gardening, the duke became enthusiastic. He visited nursery gardens with Paxton for the latest plants and took him on garden tours in England and Paris. In 1838 the duke became president of the Horticultural Society, and that year, accompanied by Paxton, he set off on a seven-month grand tour of Europe, visiting Switzerland, Italy, and Turkey. By degrees a close friendship arose between duke and gardener. In 1844 Paxton, by now his confidential adviser, found the means to release his employer from an accumulated debt of nearly $1 million by producing a ready buyer, the railway entrepreneur George Hudson, for two Yorkshire estates. 
On 20 February 1827 Paxton married Sarah Bown (1800-1871), whose father was a small engineer and mill owner at Matlock, Derbyshire, and whose aunt Sarah Gregory was housekeeper at Chatsworth. They were a devoted couple, Sarah having a strong character and sensible conservative outlook. 'Without a good wife', Paxton remarked many years later at the 'Punch' dinner table, 'a man can't well succeed' (Silver). Six of their eight children survived, but their only son, George, turned out feckless and unpredictable. 
Paxton's responsibilities at Chatsworth steadily increased. He was in charge of the woods in 1830 and of the roads in 1837, and by 1849 he was agent for the Chatsworth estate at a salary of $500 per annum. From 1844 he was also agent for the duke's estate at Bolton Abbey, Yorkshire, while at other properties, particularly Chiswick House, Middlesex, and Lismore Castle, co. Cork, the duke seldom made any changes without consulting Paxton. 
Under Paxton's care, Chatsworth became the most famous garden in England. Largely self-taught, Paxton always encouraged the young gardeners (who included John Gibson, Edward Milner, Edward Kemp, and George Eyles) to study and improve themselves. Among his works at Chatsworth were the pinetum (1829), the arboretum (1834-5, with plants classified according to the system of Jussieu), whose cost was entirely defrayed from the sale of timber cleared off the site, and the orchid collection. He also designed numerous greenhouses and hothouses, using for many of them his own version of the ridge-and-furrow roof. They culminated in the conservatory or great stove (1836-41), a vast glass building with a double-curved framework of laminated wood, measuring 227 by 123 feet and 67 feet high. No glasshouse on this scale had ever been built before, and the cautious duke brought in his architect Decimus Burton as consultant; however, the design and its execution were undoubtedly Paxton's alone. To make the 20 or so miles of moulded sash bar the building required he invented a steam-powered cutting machine, for which in 1840 the Royal Society of Arts awarded him their silver medal. He constructed the rock gardens (from 1843) and designed and built the emperor fountain (1844), so named after Emperor Nicholas I of Russia (who, however, failed to visit Chatsworth), which, with a jet more than 260 feet high, was the tallest in the world. No new task was ever begun without the approval of the duke, with whom in many cases the idea had originated. But when the duke saw the scale of the works necessary for the great stove and the fountain he was quite alarmed. 
Paxton's gardening was based on the published works of the Scottish encyclopaedist John Claudius Loudon. In the 'Gardener's Magazine' of July 1831 Loudon published a long criticism of the Chatsworth gardens to which Paxton replied two months later in his own paper, the 'Horticultural Register', giving Loudon a mild rebuke. But by 1835, their quarrel over, Paxton and the Scot remained close and mutually supportive friends. Paxton made other lasting friendships with the botanists John Lindley and Sir William Hooker. With the help of the latter he arranged plant collecting expeditions: to Mexico (1835), unsuccessfully, and to California (1838), which ended in disaster when a boat party including two young Chatsworth gardeners was drowned on the Columbia River. But in July 1837 his assistant John Gibson returned from Calcutta with many fine new orchids, and the greatly coveted 'Amherstia nobilis'. This much famed temple tree was taken to Chatsworth but failed to flower there. Paxton achieved notable success, however, in 1849, when the duke persuaded Hooker to send a small plant of the Amazon lily 'Victoria amazonica', which was ailing at Kew. Within three months Paxton had it flowering. It grew so rapidly that the following year he designed for it a new lily house, a rectangular glass lanthorn with horizontal ridge-and-furrow roof. In this simple building was the basic design of the Crystal Palace. 
Paxton's first work as architect was the rebuilding, from 1837, of most of the cottages in Edensor village. It seems irregular for the duke to have given this job to his gardener rather than the clerk of works, but evidently Paxton had impressed him with ideas for a model village in the ornamental and 'historic' styles illustrated in Loudon's 'Encyclopaedia of Cottage, Farm and Villa Architecture' (1833). Paxton in fact obtained designs from Loudon's principal draughtsman, John Robertson, who by 1840 was working full-time in Paxton's office and, besides Edensor, designed many ornamental houses at Chatsworth and elsewhere. 
Paxton's private work in the 1840s was in every case undertaken with the duke's permission. In 1838 he assisted John Lindley in a report on the royal gardens. In 1842 he laid out Prince's Park, Liverpool. For Sir William Jackson between 1843 and 1847 he created the much greater Birkenhead Park out of a low-lying swamp, together with designs for five ornamental lodges. In 1845-7 he laid out the cemetery at Coventry, with an Italianate lodge and chapels in the Norman and Greek styles. As landscapes these were all pioneering works that influenced public park design throughout the nineteenth century. When F. L. Olmstead designed Central Park, Manhattan, his principal example was Birkenhead Park. Paxton also received commissions from a number of private patrons, notable among which was Burton Closes, near Bakewell, Derbyshire, a gentleman's villa in early Tudor style, with conservatory, lodge, and grounds, which he built for his stockbroker John Allcard; the interior and decoration, carried out by John Gregory Crace, was partly designed by Pugin. All of the above buildings were designed by Robertson, who some time after 1847 was replaced in Paxton's office by George Henry Stokes (1826-1871), a young architect whose name appears first in connection with the Coventry cemetery. 
Although his education had been meagre, Paxton developed remarkable fluency in writing and public speaking. His first essay in publishing was the 'Horticultural Register', a monthly magazine for practical gardeners, which at first he edited with Joseph Harrison (the gardener at Wortley Hall, near Sheffield). It ran for five volumes (July 1831 through 1836), the format and admittedly much of the content taken from Loudon's 'Gardener's Magazine'. Being considerably cheaper and easier to read than the latter, it took away much of Loudon's readership. Paxton's next monthly magazine, 'Paxton's Magazine of Botany', ran for sixteen years (1833-48) and was very popular. In both magazines he described many of his plants and innovations at Chatsworth, though, curiously, he never wrote about the great stove. 'Paxton's Flower Garden', his last magazine, was edited with John Lindley for three years (1850-52). In 1838 he published a little book, 'The Cultivation of the Dahlia', a work he had actually begun in 1825; it was translated into French and German, with introductions by Jussieu and Alexander von Humboldt, and into Swedish. In 1840 he published 'The Pocket Botanical Dictionary', which he had compiled with Lindley. 
Also in 1840 Paxton, with Lindley, Sir C. W. Dilke (1810-1869), and William Bradbury, founded a weekly newspaper, the 'Gardener's Chronicle'. Paxton's actual part in it was small because the duke expressed a 'great objection to your being connected with a newspaper' (Paxton archive, letter 91). But apparently owing to the considerable success of the 'Chronicle', the duke made no objection in 1845 when Paxton and Bradbury founded the 'Daily News', a newspaper intended to be the Liberal rival to 'The Times'. Paxton himself raised $25,000, half of the initial capital. Edited by Charles Dickens, the first issue appeared in 21 January 1846, but it was a disaster. Dickens quit after three weeks and was replaced by Dilke's father (1789-1864); the paper survived, but for many years any profit was small. The staff of 'Punch' magazine (owned by Bradbury and Evans) helped with the opening issues: John Lemon, Douglas Jerrold, and John Leech were among his intimate friends. Paxton, a welcome guest at the legendary 'Punch' dinners, was the only outsider allowed into their jovial, Bohemian circle. It has been said that he supported 'Punch' financially. 
From about 1842 Paxton became increasingly rich. This seems likely to have been the result of speculation in railways, in which he had been an early if modest investor. George Stephenson rented Tapton House, Chesterfield, in 1838, when working on the North Midland Railway, and being both a neighbour and a keen gardener he became Paxton's close friend and, through Stephenson, Paxton met George Hudson. At the height of the railway mania of 1845-6 frantic letters between Paxton and Sarah, his wife, were chiefly concerned with share prices. The 'List of Subscribers' to the railways, which was published for 1845 and for 1846, shows Paxton to have subscribed $35,000 and $101,750 respectively. He was a director of certain railway companies, including the Furness Railway, the Midland Railway, and, where he was particularly active, the Matlock Railway, which passed just south of Chatsworth. 
Paxton's involvement with Prince Albert's Great Exhibition came about almost by chance. The exhibition was due to open on 1 May 1851, but less than eleven months before that date the building committee had not yet completed their design for the building in Hyde Park. On 7 June 1850 Paxton, in London, happened to tell a friend, John Ellis, that he had an idea for it; the same day Henry Cole at the Board of Trade said that the committee might still consider a new design. Paxton's drawings, which were presented on 21 June, were based on the as yet uncompleted lily house at Chatsworth, but extended in three dimensions: the building was to cover 19 acres, the roofs rising in great steps to provide galleries at two levels. The posts and trusses of this huge greenhouse were to be of iron; the floors, window sashes, and roof structure were of wood. Paxton immediately opened negotiations with the contractors, Messrs Fox and Henderson of Smethwick, and with Chance Brothers, who had supplied glass for the great stove. His design, published in the 'Illustrated London News' on 6 July, was reluctantly approved by the committee on 26 July, partly on its merits but also because the contractors had given the lowest of all the tenders. One of the many advantages of Paxton's design was rapid construction, on account of the use of dry components and the standardization and prefabrication of every part. Yet it was chiefly through Charles Fox's determined efforts that the building was handed over to the exhibitors by 1 February 1851. 
Paxton's Crystal Palace (so named by Douglas Jerrold in 'Punch') instantly turned public hostility towards the exhibition into excited anticipation. The 'Illustrated London News' followed its progress week by week. Paxton's ferro-vitreous building was a novelty both in functional design and in modular construction; aesthetically too it proved to be more interesting than was expected. It won two council prize medals, one for the design and one for the construction. Paxton and Fox were awarded knighthoods, and to Paxton, who in order to lower the tender had waived his fee, Prince Albert gave $5000 out of exhibition profits. But the architectural establishment, vociferous in 'The Builder', was indignant that a gardener had succeeded where they had failed, and pointed out that in choosing Paxton's late design the commission's action was altogether irregular; that although Paxton was the designer there was no architect, since the technical part, detailed drawings, and execution were left entirely to the contractor; and that the design breached the competition rules, which disallowed galleries and forbade the use of wood and other combustible materials. 
Before the close of the exhibition Paxton was campaigning for the retention of the Crystal Palace as a winter garden. The public generally were in favour of keeping it in Hyde Park, but the prince wished the building moved, and on 29 April 1852 parliament voted for that. Immediately the directors of the London, Brighton and South Coast Railway floated a company to buy the materials and re-erect the building at Penge Park, near Sydenham, Kent, to be open for the recreation and instruction of the public. Although he was not actually a director of the company, Paxton was indispensable to the whole scheme. Assisted by the contractor John Henderson he redesigned the building, supervised the winter garden, and laid out the terraced garden and park. The initial capital was $500,000, and in anticipation of high dividends the enterprise was heavily oversubscribed. But after two years the estimate was greatly exceeded, partly owing to the expenses of the building but, more culpably, because of Paxton's ambitious water gardens, which were intended to excel those at Versailles. The whole extent was depicted in a panoramic drawing by James Duffield Harding, exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1854 (Royal Institute of British Architects, drawings collection, London). The final estimate was $1,300,000. Share prices fell disastrously, but at the turbulent shareholders' meetings it was not Paxton but the directors who were held to blame. The Crystal Palace Company never in fact recovered from his extravagance. 
If the Crystal Palace was an investor's nightmare, it was a great success with visitors. Queen Victoria was enchanted and opened the building, with the winter garden, historic courts, and sculpture, on 10 June 1854; the water gardens she opened on 18 June 1856. In order to attract crowds, the gardens were bedded out with high colour, a scheme reviled by William Robinson and others of the 'natural' gardening school. But in spite of bankruptcies and other vicissitudes, until the fire of 30 November 1936 Paxton's creation at Sydenham filled the contemporary need for a vast concert hall, exhibition palace, and open-air theatre for every kind of great public show. In 1857, and then triennially from 1859, Handel festivals were held in the central transept. 
In 1851 Paxton had expected to lead a ferro-vitreous revolution in building construction, but it did not happen. In 1851 he designed a modestly sized crystal palace for New York, and in 1862 a much larger one with three domed transepts for St Cloud, Paris, intended for the 1865 Paris Exhibition, but neither was built. From 1853 he occupied Rockhills, a Regency house at the north end of the Crystal Palace, which the company gave him free of rent for his lifetime. 
Paxton continued his architectural career alongside work at the Crystal Palace, building Mentmore, Buckinghamshire (1850-55), a grand country house in the Elizabethan style of Wollaton Hall, Nottinghamshire, for Baron Mayer Amschel de Rothschild; and for Baron James de Rothschild the larger Chateau de Ferrieres (1853-9) near Paris, which was generally acknowledged to be the finest of French nineteenth-century chateaux. From 1849 the duke of Devonshire took a renewed interest in his Irish property, Lismore Castle, co. Cork. In 1850 Paxton rebuilt the ruined hall (with decorations by Pugin and Crace) and later the buildings on three sides of the courtyard. Paxton's architectural assistant, G. H. Stokes, married his eldest daughter, Emily, in 1853, and became his architectural partner. They had London premises, and by 1859 had settled at 7 Pall Mall East. 
Paxton had many interests, and at the select committee on metropolitan communications in June 1855 he submitted his solution to London's traffic congestion, which was a 'girdle', or ring road, to link up the stations City and Parliament, lined on either side by shops, residences, and an atmospheric railway, all covered by an iron and glass roof. This visionary idea, for which a perspective drawing known as 'The Great Victorian Way' survives at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, raised much interest, but the eventual solutions to the traffic problem were the Metropolitan Railway and the Victoria Embankment. During the Crimean War, Paxton organized thousands of the workmen who had finished at the Crystal Palace to go to the Crimea, to be an Army Works Corps and build roads. 
A Liberal in politics and a member of the Reform Club since 1847, Paxton was returned unopposed in November 1854 as one of the two members of parliament for Coventry, a seat which he retained until his last illness. In the house he spoke only occasionally, but with effect, particularly in 1860, when he moved for and subsequently chaired the select committee on the Thames Embankment. It was largely owing to Paxton's exertions that the Embankment was built shortly afterwards, combining London's low level sewer, the Metropolitan Railway, and a new thoroughfare. 
During Paxton's frequent and long absences business at Chatsworth continued, with Lady Paxton supervising the wages and estate books. After the duke's death in 1858 Paxton had to resign his position at Chatsworth, his place being taken by a cousin of his wife, John Gregory Cottingham. The gardener's house at Chatsworth, which had been enlarged several times, was kept by the Paxtons for their lifetime. With time now to spare, Paxton was increasingly involved with railway contracts, principally with his friends Thomas Brassey and George Wythes. He had interests in railways in Spain, Mauritius, India, and Argentina. In order to survey the Bilbao and Miranda Railway he went with Brassey to Spain in three consecutive autumns (1859-61). 
Paxton was a fellow of the Linnean Society (1831); honorary fellow and vice-president of the Horticultural Society; member and vice-president of the Royal Society of Arts; associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers (1851); and a knight of the Russian order of St Vladimir (1845). In stature he was short and he became stout. A flattering engraving after Octavius Oakley, published by Paxton on 1 May 1851, shows him with characteristic long hair, quiff, and whiskers -- still a dandy, with white trousers and hat. A marble bust by Edward Wyon (1864, Royal Horticultural Society, London) shows him, though only sixty, to have greatly aged. 
Paxton's health had deteriorated because of the difficulties with the Sydenham Crystal Palace. Early in 1863 he collapsed, probably from a heart attack, and he never really recovered. His last professional work was to lay out the park at Dunfermline, Fife, which he and Stokes surveyed in September 1864. He died on 8 June 1865 at Rockhills, where Mr and Mrs Gladstone were among his last visitors. He was buried at Edensor on 15 June and left a personal estate valued at just under $180,000. 
Paxton 'rose from the ranks to be the greatest gardener of his time, the founder of a new style of architecture, and a man of genius, who devoted it to objects in the highest and noblest sense popular' ('The Times', 9 June 1865). Of his energy and enterprise there is no question. His skill with plants was equalled by a keen eye for the picturesque, which is evident at Edensor village, in the siting of great houses, and in his public parks. He was a natural engineer for whom no task seemed insuperable. His genius was evident while the great stove and the Crystal Palace were yet standing, but his glasshouse technique was short-lived. The ridge-and-furrow roof was virtually obsolete by 1870. The ferro-vitreous building, apart from winter gardens, had few successors until the twentieth century, when many architects found in the 1851 Crystal Palace a model of functional and modular structure. In architecture, again self-taught, Paxton was competent but unexciting, and his achievement depended largely on his relationship with the duke of Devonshire. He relished adulation, but his integrity has never been in doubt. Popular and universally respected, he had a strong gift for friendship, and for long afterwards many people recalled his kindness. 


@@@@@


doc= 21635


Paxton, Peter (d. c.1711), physician and writer on politics, was admitted to the degree of MD 'per literas regias' at Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1687. His name does not appear in the admission-book of Pembroke College, and he may have come from Oxford for an 'ad eundem' degree. In 1704 he was known to be living in Beaufort Street, London. Apart from his writings, nothing more is known of Paxton's life. In 1701 he published 'An Essay Concerning the Body of Man', which traced all diseases to the fluids in the body. This was followed by 'The Grounds of Physick Examined' in 1703. Paxton's next three works were on political topics. 'Civil Polity' appeared in 1703, 'A Discourse Concerning the Nature, Advantage, and Improvement of Trade' in 1704, and 'A Scheme for Union between England and Scotland' in 1705. Paxton went on to produce two more medical works: 'A Directory Physico-Medical' (1707) and 'Specimen physico-medicum', which was published posthumously in 1711. 


@@@@@


doc= 21636


Paxton, Stephen (bap. 1734, d. 1787), musician and composer, was baptized on 27 December 1734 at St Oswald's, Durham, the son of Robert Paxton. He gained his early musical training as a cathedral chorister until his voice broke. He spent the greater part of his life in London, and the earliest reference to his activities as a cellist in the metropolis dates from 20 April 1756. On 5 June 1757 he was elected a member of the Royal Society of Musicians. He married Martha Hunt (died 1808) at St James's, Piccadilly, on 4 July 1771. His first published work appeared about 1772; his seven opuses included cello and violin duets, cello solos, glees, and lessons for cello and bass. He is listed as one of the four principal cellists at the first Handel memorial festival in 1784 and also played in 1786 and 1787. He performed principal parts at oratorio meetings, and Charles Burney praised his 'full and sweet tone' (Burney, 'Hist. mus.', 4.677) on the cello, combined with his 'judicious manner in accompanying the voice' (ibid.). On 21 March 1780 Paxton was elected a 'privileged member' of the Noblemen's and Gentlemen's Catch Club. Four pieces by him gained gold medals: the serious glees 'How sweet! How fresh!' (1779), 'Round the hapless Andre's urn' (1781), and 'Blest pow'r, here see' (1784), and the catch 'Ye Muses, inspire me' (1783); 'Come, oh come, ethereal guest' (1785) won a 5 guinea prize. Many of Paxton's glees are included in 'Ladies' Amusement' (1791, vols. 1 and 2) and in Warren's 'Collection of Catches'. He also composed and performed religious music, and was associated with the Sardinian chapel. He sold his music from his house, 29 Titchfield Street, London, and in music shops. Paxton died at Brompton Row, London, on 18 August 1787, aged fifty-two, and was buried in St Pancras churchyard. A requiem mass was held in his honour at the Sardinian chapel on 2 September; it is possible that he was a convert to Roman Catholicism. In his will, dated 2 May 1785, he counselled his widow 'to do Charitable Acts to my more distant Relations and to the Poor in General'. It was noted in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for September 1787 that his 'exemplary virtues and universal charity are ornaments that will make his memory ever respected' ('GM', 1st ser., 57/2, 1787, 837). 
One of Paxton's brothers, 


@@@@@


doc= 21637


William Paxton (1725-1778), born on 8 February 1725 at Durham, was based in Durham throughout his life and was chorister and then lay clerk at the cathedral. He too was a cellist and composer of glees, and to him has been ascribed the glee 'Breathe soft, ye winds', which appears in Stephen's collection. William's six entries in 1779 and two in 1780 to the Catch Club were put forward by Stephen; two of his canons gained prizes, 'O Lord in thee' (1779) and 'O Israel, trust in the Lord' (1780). He was buried at Durham on 7 May 1778. 


@@@@@


doc= 21638


Pay, Henry (d. 1419), shipmaster, of Poole, Dorset, acquired a considerable reputation in the early fifteenth century because of his exploits in the seas off the south and west coasts of England. His enemies, especially those from Castile, bluntly called him a corsair, but at times he may well have been acting on his understanding of royal policy which only resolutely condemned attacks on the goods and ships of friendly aliens. 
Acting with a small squadron of balingers and barges, the swift manoeuvrable vessels used for this kind of action, Pay was involved in 1402 in the capture of a Bremen ship with a rich cargo of Mediterranean goods including Valencian saffron, dates, and some barrels of 'prime sack'. In the next two years he seemed to prey particularly on Spanish vessels from Bilbao laden with iron bars, though in 1404 a mule, two silver girdles, and rich robes worth a total of 5000 nobles were also in the cargo. He seems often to have scoured the seas in the company of ships from Dartmouth and Kingswear, being on one occasion, in March 1404, the master of a barge belonging to the redoubtable John Hawley from the same town. His exploits sometimes show an element of bold daring; there is a chronicler's story of how Pay himself was boarded at sea by some Norman seamen and overpowered. The English crew were tied up on deck and their captors went below to look for booty, having first removed their armour because it was a very hot day. Pay and his men managed to free themselves and in their turn overpowered and killed their erstwhile captors in the hold. With his own vessel and the Norman prize Pay then sailed up the Seine showing French flags and burnt several small ships before escaping safely to the open sea. 
The Castilians were more in awe of Pay than any other English raider; the chronicler of the exploits of Don Pero Nino describes his master's expedition in the channel in 1406, when he raided English coastal towns. They were particularly keen to attack Poole because it was known to be the base of the fearsome Arripay who had carried off the crucifix from St Mary of Finistere. The Castilians landed outside the walls of Poole and managed to get into the town, burning much property including a warehouse full of naval stores. Pay's brother was killed in the confused fighting, but Pay himself was not there. In 1404 the king had commissioned him to go to sea to 'provide for the destruction of the king's enemies' ('CPR', '1401-5', 457). In 1405 he was with Lord Berkeley off Milford Haven operating against a French squadron which was supporting Owain Glyn Dwr's rebellion. They managed to take fifteen French vessels including that taking the seneschal of France to Wales. In 1406 Pay was again in the channel, this time with the ships of the Cinque Ports, and took a large number of French ships suspected of trying to get supplies to the Welsh. In view of the ambiguous attitude of the crown to these actions in the channel at this date it is not surprising that Pay seems to have ended his career with an appointment as water bailiff of Calais with a royal pension. He died at Faversham, Kent, on 25 March 1419 and was buried in the north transept of St Mary of Charity, Faversham. 


@@@@@


doc= 21639


Paye, Richard Morton (bap. 1750, d. 1821), artist, was baptized on 14 June 1750 at Botley, Hampshire, the son of John Paye and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Morton. Virtually nothing is known of Paye's early life, though he worked as a chaser from youth, perhaps a family occupation. In 1773 he first appeared in London at lodgings in Leicester Fields, from where he sent his first exhibits to the Royal Academy -- two oil paintings and four wax models. His small-scale models earned comparison with those of George Michael Moser, with Paye possessing more of the 'spirit of sculpture and less of the French flutter' ('Library of the Fine Arts', 3, 1832, 96). Yet none of these works can be identified today. A two-year gap from 1775 to 1777 suggests some time away from the capital, but there is no record of travel to Italy, as one might expect of a young artist of this date. From 'c'.1778 to 1783 Paye resided in London at 26 Swallow Street, then the main thoroughfare between Piccadilly Circus and Oxford Street. 
Paye attracted the patronage of the younger son of the famous doctor Percival Pott, the Revd Joseph Holden Pott, who bought 'A Girl Sewing' (possibly 'A Fancy Head'; exh. RA, 1773). This early work exemplifies Paye's interest in 'fancy pictures', everyday scenes featuring children, treated in the manner of old masters such as Rembrandt and Murillo, much in fashion in the late eighteenth century. In 1783 in 'An Engraver at Work' (exh. Society of Arts, 1783; Upton House, Warwickshire), Paye depicted himself engraving a portrait of Pott's father, after Nathaniel Dance. A candle-lit scene, it well illustrates his reputation as a painter of chiaroscuro effects in the manner of Joseph Wright of Derby. His greatest bid for critical attention came when he showed this painting and nine others at the Society of Arts in 1783. By 1784 Paye had moved to 37 Broad Street, Golden Square, London. It is not known when he married, but his wife's maiden name may have been Hayward and his expanding family acted as models for his child-focused subjects. 
Another early patron was Dr John Wolcot, the satirist with the pen-name Peter Pindar, who, after falling out with John Opie in 1783, turned his attention to Paye. The two men associated for about a year, perhaps sharing lodgings and profits from picture sales, but the arrangement failed when Wolcot accused the artist of 'obstinacy, ingratitude [and] not following his advice in the pursuit of his studies' (D.). A complete break occurred when Paye exhibited 'Portrait of a Sulky Boy' at the Royal Academy in 1785, arguably his masterpiece (Sothebys, 10 November 1982), but calculated to anger Wolcot as it was a public display of the writer's supposed illegitimate son. 
Paye's skill and originality reputedly prompted Sir Joshua Reynolds to invite him to mix in Royal Academy circles, but his diffidence prevented him from doing so. It is hard to reconcile this shyness with the subtle irony and humour evident in the artist's chosen area of specialization, the behaviour of children engaged in a common activity. Paye's inventive compositions and subjects also often featured identifiable locations in London, as in 'Boys Throwing Snowballs' (exh. RA, 1784; engraved 1785), set under the portico of St George's, Hanover Square, and 'Boys Playing at Marbles' (engraved 1786) set in the environs of Westminster School. Most of Paye's child subjects were issued as engravings in pairs, tapping into the growing market for prints at home and in France. 
Paye exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy and once at the Free Society in 1783 and at the Society for Promoting Art and Design in Liverpool in 1787, with later appearances at the Society of Arts and the British Institution, showing more than seventy-five paintings. Yet only a fraction are known, chiefly through engravings, and fewer still are located now. He also painted portraits (for example, Richard Brinsley Sheridan, exh. RA, 1789) and history paintings. Stylistically, Paye graduated from a tightly defined precision in early portraits (reminiscent of Henry Walton's works) to the dramatic lighting effects of 'An Engraver at Work', to a later broader style. As a stylistic chameleon, Paye produced works destined to be misattributed. In the 1820s one of his major paintings, 'The Miraculous Increase of the Widow's Oil' (also known as 'The Widow's Cruse'), appeared with an art dealer as a work of Velazquez, and it was acknowledged as such by leading painters of the day, until a friend of Paye recognized the artist's family as the models. 
Critical favour eluded Paye, with the style of his works in the 1790s considered 'woolly', and 'his execution slovenly' (D.), as in 'The Boy Exulting over his Golden Eggs' (exh. RA, 1795; engraved 1796). However, he intended these more quickly executed genre subjects primarily as designs for engravings, then his main source of income. Paye enjoyed close relations with many of the best engravers of the day, including J. R. Smith and John Young, his greatest friend and supporter. In 1795, his final bid for success at the Royal Academy resulted in a display of seven paintings, hurriedly finished, as reported by Joseph Farington (Farington, 'Diary', 2.327, 18 April 1795); later in the year he did not receive a single vote when seeking election as an associate member, at the age of forty-five. Paye's fortunes then declined, with only infrequent appearances in exhibitions. He produced a design for a competition for a monument to Lord Nelson in 1807 while suffering with rheumatic fever and later suffered a stroke. John Young appealed to the Royal Academy on behalf of Paye 'now labouring under a stroke of Palsey, and in very poor circumstances' (ibid., vol. 11, 26 Jan 1812), and with the support of the president, Benjamin West, Paye received 20 guineas as a charitable gift. He carried on as an artist until at least 1815 when, according the catalogue of the British Institution's annual exhibition, he showed 'The Gout, or, A Lecture on Patience' which 'he painted with his left hand, after losing the use of the right by a paralytic fit'. 
Towards the end of his life Paye resided with his daughter, Elizabeth Anne Briane, a successful miniaturist, at Queen Anne Street, London. He never progressed as far in his career as his early talents promised due to a 'retired disposition' and 'almost total exclusion from contemporary intercourse' (D.), and died in obscurity in December 1821. 


@@@@@


doc= 21640


Payn, James (1830-1898), novelist and journal editor, was born on 28 February 1830 at Rodney Lodge, Rodney Terrace, Cheltenham, the second son of William Payn (1774/5-1840) and his wife, Harriet. His father, who was clerk to the River Thames commissioners, a justice of the peace, and also sometime treasurer for the county of Berkshire, lived at Kidwells, near Maidenhead, Berkshire, and kept the Berkshire harriers. James Payn's elder brother was General Sir William Payn (1823-1893), who served in India. As a young boy James Payn was introduced to country pursuits by his father and had to go hunting twice a week, but he preferred to read. His father died in 1840 when Payn was ten, and his mother took charge of his upbringing, but little else is known of her. 
Payn went to a preparatory school which he did not enjoy as he 'hated lessons of all kinds' (Payn, 'Literary Recollections', 6), preferring to read 'works of the imagination'. Despite this loathing of school, he was popular, as he invented stories for his contemporaries. He left and went, as his brother William had done before him, to Eton College, in the summer of 1842. He did not take kindly to the fagging system or the bullying and disliked Latin and Greek. The rejection of an article for the college magazine dented his enthusiasm for writing. His stay was short: Eton College archives record that he left at Christmas of the same year. Payn, however, recalls that he left 'after a year or so' when he had been nominated for the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and was sent to one of the academy preparatory schools at Woolwich. This was a 'crammer' and he resented the system that allowed him no time for reading. In his 'Literary Recollections' he refers to the school as 'Messrs. Hurry and Crammem's' and some years later used this experience in his novel 'The Foster Brothers' (1859). He passed third for the academy and entered Woolwich in September 1846. His stay here was also short and he left owing to ill health in August of the following year. It was decided that Payn was to go to a private tutor in Devon prior to going up to Cambridge, as his father had wished him to enter the church. His stay in Devon was more conducive to his literary and scholastic interests than had been any of his previous educational establishments. 
Payn was admitted as a pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 27 June 1849, graduating in 1853. He had an eventful university career, being president of the union in 1852, and a member of various societies, but he still had no enthusiasm for formal education. He was on good terms with the scholar William George Clark, and George Brimley (1819-1857), the college librarian. While at Cambridge Payn published his first poem, 'The Poet's Death', in 'Leigh Hunt's Journal' (15 March 1851). He also published at his own expense his first volume of poetry, 'Stories from Boccaccio and other Poems' (1852), which was well reviewed by George Brimley in 'The Spectator'. Payn's university education and his acceptance in print led him to turn to literature as a career. In 1853 he published an article based on his experiences at Woolwich ('Gentleman cadet', 'Household Words', 9 April 1853, 231), which later led to a lasting friendship with Charles Dickens. The article was not well received by the governor of the Royal Military Academy, who complained to Dickens, as editor of 'Household Words', that the writer could not possibly have been a cadet at Woolwich. Payn continued to contribute to 'Household Words' for a number of years. 
After leaving Cambridge, Payn married Louisa Adelaide Edlin ('b'. 1830/31) on 28 February 1854 and they moved to Rydal Cottage, Ambleside. Among their neighbours were Mary Russell Mitford and Harriet Martineau. Payn had been introduced to Miss Mitford by his father and she introduced Payn to Harriet Martineau. Both writers encouraged him to further his literary career and through them he met Matthew Arnold, William Allingham, Arthur Clough, and Thomas De Quincey. Payn's early works show the influence of Dickens in characterization and plot, his 'Stories and Sketches' (1857) being a good example. He greatly admired Dickens -- the three-volume 'Mirk Abbey' (1866) is dedicated to him -- but he soon branched out into his own style and range of subject matter. His experiences of living and walking in the Lake District resulted in 'Leaves from Lakeland' (1858), 'Furness Abbey and its Neighbourhood' (1862), and the illustrated two-volume 'Lakes in Sunshine' (1867). 
Payn had now begun to contribute to 'Chambers's Journal' and was invited to become co-editor by the novelist Leitch Ritchie in 1858. This required a move to Edinburgh but the Payns did not take to the city nor the Scottish sabbath and in 1861 moved to London, where Payn continued as sole editor of 'Chambers's Journal', a position he had held since 1859. His first successful novel was the two-volume 'Lost Sir Massingberd: a Romance of Real Life' (1864) which like so many of his works appeared first in serial form, in this case in 'Chambers's Journal'. It is claimed that the journal's circulation was increased by 20,000 copies as a result. The story concerns the disappearance of an unsavoury uncle, Sir Massingberd, whose body is finally found trapped in the hollow of an oak tree. Payn was grateful to the novel as 'it attracted the attention of some of my masters... among them was my friend Wilkie Collins' (Payn, 'Literary Recollections', 242), to whom he dedicated 'Gwendolyn's Harvest' (1870). Dickens, too, praised the book. 
Despite being a close friend of Robert Chambers (1802-1871) Payn resigned the editorship of 'Chambers's Journal' in 1874 (Leslie Stephen says he was dismissed) as he could not work with Robert's brother William (1800-1883). In 1874 he was invited by Leslie Stephen to become reader for the publishers Smith, Elder, a post he held for about twenty years. 
Payn's greatest literary success was the two-volume 'By Proxy' (1878), set in China, in which the hero, Captain Conway, gives himself as the proxy victim for execution in place of his convicted, thieving friend Pennicuik. Needless to say in such a sensation novel, Conway somehow escapes death and returns later to England to put matters right. This novel, together with 'Lost Sir Massingberd', established Payn as a popular, but minor, novelist. Although he was never to repeat the success of 'By Proxy', he continued to produce novels using exotic locations and plots, with good characterization. In the earlier two-volume 'Murphy's Master' (1873) he removes some undesirable characters from the story by introducing a sinking island, a fanciful idea which later occurred in real life. He was also a good short-story writer and in one of the stories, 'The Fateful Curiosity' in his three-volume collection 'High Spirits' (1879), his predictions include air-conditioning, a twice daily postal service from Australia, and even the channel tunnel. He contributed to numerous journals, including the 'Westminster Review', 'Longman's Magazine', 'Nineteenth Century', and a weekly article in the 'Illustrated London News'. 
In January 1883 Payn succeeded Stephen as editor of the 'Cornhill Magazine', when Stephen resigned to edit the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. Payn was to have a great influence as editor: he increased the amount of light fiction at the expense of literary essays, reduced the size of the journal, and the price from 1's'. to 6died, with the introduction of a new series in July 1883. During his editorship he was a great supporter of rising young writers and he published Conan Doyle (to whom he dedicated his mystery novel 'The Disappearance of George Driffel', 1896), Henry Seton Merriman, Stanley Weyman, Rider Haggard, and F. Anstey, among others. Payn was closely involved with the Society of Authors founded by Walter Besant in 1884 to promote the rights of authors, especially in relation to copyright and overseas contracts. 
Payn's strength was that he knew his limitations as a writer and worked within those limits. He could tell a good story with many ingenious twists and turns, and sometimes with bizarre locations, and he had a good eye for detail and characterization. He was a prolific writer, producing forty-six novels and eight collections of short stories and many essays. His plots ranged from the Gothic to the melodramatic and included comic and adventure situations, some of the latter being in the vein of writers such as Rider Haggard and Kipling. He knew what the public liked and was successful in catering for their tastes, although this is not to say that he wrote for that reason. All his novels were serialized before publication in book form, the majority in 'Chambers's Journal' and the 'Cornhill Magazine'. He also produced two volumes of memoirs, 'Some Literary Recollections' (1884) and 'Gleams of Memory' (1894). Payn is probably now known more for his verse on buttered toast than his novels: '
I had never had a piece of toast 

Particularly long and wide, 

But fell upon the sanded floor, 

And always on the buttered side. 
('Oxford Dictionary of Quotations', 1992, 370)' Frank Anstey describes Payn as 'tall, thin, and rather angular, he had a sharp high voice, there was a kindly twinkle behind his spectacles, and he was a brilliant and amusing raconteur' (F. Anstey, 'A Long Retrospect', 1938, 111). Leslie Stephen, who had known Payn since Cambridge, described him as an unaffected person with 'a remarkable skill in constructing ingenious situations' ('DNB'). He seems to have had a happy marriage resulting in at least nine children, mainly girls. His third daughter, Alicia Isobel, became the first wife of George Earle Buckle, the editor of 'The Times', though she died the same year as her father. 
Chronic rheumatism forced Payn to resign his editorship of the 'Cornhill' in March 1896. He spent the last years of his life housebound, although his friends, with whom he used to play whist every afternoon at the Reform Club, would come to him for a game. But his health continued to fail and he died on 25 March 1898 at his home 43 Warrington Crescent, Maida Vale, London, and was buried on 30 March 1898 at Paddington old cemetery, Kilburn. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 21641


Payne, George (1781-1848), Congregational minister, was born at Stow on the Wold, Gloucestershire, on 17 September 1781, the youngest son of Alexander Payne (1748?-1819), a cooper, and his wife, Mary Dyer (1742/3-1814) of Bampton. His father, who was initially an Anglican, became a Baptist after hearing the sermons of Law Butterworth of Bingworth, and in 1783 became the Baptist preacher to the church of Walgrave, Northamptonshire, where he served for thirty-three years. Two years later, in June 1785, he baptized his own wife, and he was ordained on 6 July. Along with Fuller and Carey he was a founder of the Baptist Missionary Society. 
George Payne went to school at Walgrave, and subsequently at the Northampton Academy. He entered Hoxton Academy to study for the Congregational ministry in 1802, and on 13 April 1804 he was elected, with Joseph Fletcher, Glasgow scholar on the Dr Williams trust. The two proceeded to Glasgow University together. Payne graduated MA in the spring of 1807, and returned home, marrying, on 30 October 1807, a daughter of Alexander Gibbs, a corn factor, and member of the Scottish church in Hoxton. He acted for a year as assistant minister to Edward Parsons of Leeds. On 28 August 1808 he accepted an invitation to become George Lambert's permanent coadjutor at Fish Street, Hull. After ending his engagement at Hull on 14 June 1812, Payne was ordained at Edinburgh on the following 2 July, and took charge of a congregation of seceders who had divided from James Alexander Haldane in March 1808 after his rejection of infant baptism. This body met in Bernard's Rooms, Thistle Street, Edinburgh, until a new chapel was built in Albany Street. It was opened on 2 May 1817, and here Payne ministered until 1823. While in Edinburgh he contributed to Congregational literature and assisted in the foundation of the Edinburgh Itinerant Society and the Congregational Union of Scotland, of which he was joint secretary from 1812 to 1816. 
In April 1823 Payne left Scotland to become theological tutor of the Blackburn Independent Academy, the precursor of the Lancashire Independent college (later Northern College), Manchester; for his first two or three years in Blackburn, Payne also acted as pastor to a Congregational church which met in Mount Street. On 18 November 1829 he received the degree of honorary LLD from the University of Glasgow on the occasion of the publication of his 'Elements of Mental and Moral Science'. In July 1829 he left Blackburn to become theological tutor to the Western Academy, which had just moved from Axminster to Exeter. In 1836 he was chosen as chairman of the Congregational Union of England and Wales. In 1844 he preached the eleventh series of the Congregational lectures initiated by the committee of the Congregational library in Bloomfield Street, Finsbury; his course of eight lectures was published in the following year. In January 1846 the Western College (as it was now known) was moved from Exeter to a site between Devonport and Plymouth. In April 1848 Payne visited Scotland as the delegate from the Congregational Union of England and Wales. 
Payne's writings prove him to have had a genuine gift for metaphysical speculation. He wrote, apart from sermons and short tracts, eleven books, of which the most significant were 'Elements of Mental and Moral Science' (1828), 'Lectures on Divine Sovereignty, Election, the Atonement, Justification, and Regeneration' (1836), and 'The Doctrine of Original Sin, or, The Nature, State, and Character of Man Unfolded' (1845). Payne died on 19 June 1848 at Devonport, after preaching at Mount Street Chapel there. He was buried on 27 June at Emma Place Chapel, Stonehouse, in the grave of his wife, who had died on 25 October 1847. 


@@@@@


doc= 21642


Payne, George (1803-1878), racehorse owner and gambler, was born at Northampton on 3 April 1803, the elder son in the family of two sons and two daughters of George Payne of Sulby Hall, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Mary Eleanor, daughter of Ralph William Grey of Backworth House, Northumberland. Payne's father was fatally shot in a duel on Wimbledon Common on 6 September 1810 by a man named Clark, whose sister he had allegedly seduced. Payne was educated at Eton College from 1816 to 1822 and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1823 but indulged his sporting tastes so freely that the college authorities, after much patient deliberation, requested him to leave the university. He came of age in 1824 and took possession of the family seat, Sulby Hall, and the Northampton estates, with a rent roll of $17,000 a year. In addition, he took up the sum accumulated during his minority, amounting to about $300,000. This income proved incapable of keeping pace with his extravagance, however, which was apparent when, as sheriff of Northamptonshire in 1826, he met the judges with an unparalleled display of opulence. 
Payne's great sporting love was horse-racing. He owned horses from 1824 to 1878 and attended meetings throughout England, in later years dressed in a black frock coat and a checked gingham neckerchief. Although his black and white racing colours, the famous 'magpie jacket', were familiar sights on racecourses, his only victories of any importance were with the purchased filly Clementina, which won the One Thousand Guineas in 1847, and with Glauca, which won the Cesarewitch. His reckless gambling proved to be his undoing. He would sometimes back as many as twenty horses in a race for a big handicap, and still miss the winner. He also spent nights at the card table, and was among those who in the winter of 1836 accused Henry William, twenty-first baron de Ros, of being a card sharp. During the resulting libel action, on 10 February 1837, when Payne appeared as a witness, his character was attacked by Sir John Campbell, who described him as a 'professional gamester... [who] started as a dupe [but] soon crystallized into something worse', although Campbell subsequently made an apology ('The Times', 11 and 13 Feb 1837). He squandered his patrimonial inheritance, and Sulby Hall also passed from his hands, together with two other large fortunes which he had subsequently inherited from relatives. From 1835 to 1838 and again from 1844 to 1848 he was master of the Pytchley hounds. 
Payne lived a useless life but was honourable and without malice. After being seized with partial paralysis he died, unmarried, at his London home, 16 Queen Street, Mayfair, on 2 September 1878. The prince of Wales and many friends from the racing world were present at his burial, at Kensal Green, on 6 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 21643


Payne, Henry (d. 1705?), writer and Jacobite conspirator, was a member of the Payne family of Medbourne, Leicestershire, but although he was born before the civil war he was not the Henry Payne baptized at Medbourne on 29 December 1636. Through his mother he was related to Jane Goodwin ('bap'. 1618, died 1658), second wife of Philip Wharton, fourth Baron Wharton, and he had an elder (?) brother, William. Bred a protestant, he claimed to remember Gilbert Sheldon preaching absolutism before Charles I, probably in civil war Oxford. According to a hostile but well-informed 1680 biographer he received little formal education, was apprenticed to a dealer in female clothes, and spent time in Clerkenwell House of Correction for impregnating 'Lucrece', the maidservant. After becoming a servant with the Nevills of Holt, a recusant family owning lands in both Leicestershire (where they had largely supplanted the Medbourne Paynes) and Essex, he eloped with Alice Nevill (died 1684), apparently daughter of Henry Nevill (died 1665). Payne thereafter assumed his wife's name with or instead of his own; and for some years advantageously left it unclear whether he was Anglican or Catholic. He was and is therefore sometimes confused with the political philosopher Henry Neville (died 1694) or the Jesuit Edward Scarisbrick alias Neville -- or his own nephew by marriage. By 1681 Alice was 'miserably poor' ('Calendar of Treasury Books', 7.387) and abandoned by the Nevill family for testifying to a Jesuit loan to them; for that reason she received 12's'. a week royal bounty until her death. The couple had a daughter, Ursula. 
In the 1660s Payne was a theatrical prompter. In 1670, when Lord Berkeley of Stratton became a pro-Catholic lord lieutenant of Ireland, Payne was secretary to his Catholic, and corrupt, private secretary, Sir Elisha Leighton. He played a leading and profitable part in the high-handed intrigues which alienated the city of Dublin, and had a faction appoint him its London agent. After returning to England, Payne furnished the duke's company with three fairly successful plays. 'The Fatal Jealousie', appearing before August 1672, and licensed on 22 November, was a domestic tragedy in bad blank verse, with echoes of Shakespeare and Hobbes and some skilful twists of plot. A swashbuckling comedy, 'The Morning Ramble', written in nine days, was acted in early 1673. 'The Siege of Constantinople', a tragedy acted in 1674 and published in 1675, depicts a Shaftesbury-like chancellor who sets two royal brothers disastrously at odds: Payne visibly admired James, duke of York. With its profits Payne financed a voyage to Jamaica to sell coffee, chocolate, and indentured female servants. He supported Sir Henry Morgan's faction, was arrested by the governor, Lord Vaughan, returned home, and in 1677 furnished Vaughan's successor, the earl of Carlisle, with a useful description of affairs there and suggestions, which included obtaining the slave trading contract for the Spanish Caribbean colonies. 
Perhaps inspired by his friend Edward Coleman, Payne became involved in domestic political intrigues: the Green Ribbon Club's first surviving record is a resolution that 'Mr Nevil the Pretended Politician' was a papist (Magd. Cam., Pepys Library, MS 2875, 465). He confidently bought and furnished a large house on credit; but the Popish Plot permanently ruined his finances. On 16 December 1678 Payne was arrested with his manuscript poem 'To the Glorious Martyr Edward Coleman Esq.'. Examined by the House of Lords and privy council, he claimed, despite the sentiments it expressed, to be a protestant. He was tried for treasonable practices and imprisoned in the king's bench. There he became deeply involved in the obscure Catholic intrigues which culminated in the Meal-Tub Plot. He worked for the countess of Powis, and with Mrs Elizabeth Cellier until they quarrelled. The perjurer Thomas Dangerfield claimed that Payne was the Catholic party's main propagandist, writing, among other pamphlets, 'Some Reflections upon the Earl of Danby' accusing the latter of involvement in Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's murder, but that, when temporarily bailed, he preferred the theatre to writing polemics. He was presumably freed by June 1680, when he was one of the defence witnesses ready but not called at the trial of the earl of Castlemaine, who described him as a protestant. 
In early 1680 the penny post was first established. Payne was perhaps the least likely of the four persons who claimed to have originated the idea, but Titus Oates denounced it as Payne's invention and therefore intended for papist plotting. His brother William Payne, a chancery clerk, was convicted and fined in June 1682 as part author of a pamphlet claiming that Godfrey had committed suicide. 
By 1685 Payne had found a new patron, George Villiers, duke of Buckingham, who though a former exclusionist shared his concern for religious toleration and the theatre. Buckingham's 1685 pamphlet 'A Short Discourse', which started the campaign for toleration under James II, began as a 'letter' to Payne, who defended it against attackers in 'The Persecutor Expos'd', criticizing the Church of England as isolated among the protestant churches, yet claiming absolute right to persecute. He claimed that he had never cringed either to 'the Vain Applause of the Eternally mistaken Rabble' (preface) or to great men. The pamphlet, opposing current government policy, presumably provoked the warrants for treasonable practices issued against him on 16-17 June 1685. After Buckingham's retreat to Yorkshire, Payne supplied him with political newsletters, tried to get his last play staged, and used his yacht for smuggling, to relieve his own desperate finances. Ostentatious Catholic piety won him a receivership of fines in the court of common pleas in April 1686. He collaborated with William Penn in an effort to bring Buckingham back into politics to check the earl of Sunderland's dangerous policies. In March 1687 he accused Sunderland before James of treasonable correspondence with William of Orange, but could not produce sufficient proof. 
Following Buckingham's death in April, that summer Payne's creditors (perhaps encouraged by Sunderland, though other courtiers assisted him) put him into the Fleet prison. He nevertheless replied to the marquess of Halifax's 'Letter to a Dissenter' in 'An Answer to a Scandalous Pamphlet', and probably to Pensionary Fagel's 'Letter'. This was now part of a government sponsored campaign, but Payne received little further reward. Aphra Behn dedicated a novel to him in 1688. Gilbert Burnet called Payne: 'the most active and dextrous of all King James's agents, who had indeed lost the reputation of an honest man entirely; and yet had such arts of management, that even those who knew what he was were willing to imploy him. ('Bishop Burnet's History', 4.61)' On the revolution he made his Fleet prison chambers a centre of Jacobite and Catholic intrigue. A raid in October 1689 revealed that he was writing the most effective Jacobite pamphlets and corresponding with many important figures. 
Payne's greatest success was in Scottish affairs. When Sir James Montgomery, a leader of the presbyterian 'club' parliamentary opposition, reached London in September 1689, disaffected and suspicious, Payne inserted between him and William's favourite the earl of Portland a double agent, who fermented Montgomery's suspicions that Portland was seeking to frame him on a false charge of treason, and drove him into genuine conspiracy. This brought him directly to Payne, who, 'so far imposed upon him as to pretend he could, with... [James] and the Court of France, dispose of money, forces and titles of honour as he pleased' (Balcarres, 51). The club and Scottish Jacobites were to restore James through parliament, with English support from both tories and whigs, which Payne would help organize. Another whig turned Jacobite, Robert Ferguson, became a close ally. Records of later interrogation reveal that the government suspected that Payne had effected a temporary escape or release from prison in order to travel to the Netherlands and encourage disaffected Dutch republicans. 
In early 1690 Payne, who now faced prosecution for treason, did escape. Arriving in May on the Scottish borders disguised as a merchant he stayed in a house in Annandale of the earl of Annandale, Montgomery's fellow conspirator, and wrote asking both men if he should come to Edinburgh. In mid-May, however, local people, including Annandale's uninformed servants, seized him and sent him to Edinburgh, hastening the collapse of the Montgomery plot. On 4 August the council received an order to torture him and other captured agents, but initially Jacobite death threats prevented this. Annandale's confession later that month provided firm evidence against Payne, and in mid-November William again ordered rigorous torture. Its legality was dubious, since Payne was English and captured after only four days in Scotland; the interrogation was virtually all on his English activities. On 10 and 11 December 1690 he was tortured, ultimately with both the boot to one leg and thumbscrews until his life seemed in danger, without confessing anything. He begged afterwards to be exiled to the Netherlands or Germany, and the council urged William either to try him or to return him to England. William instead kept him close prisoner in Edinburgh Castle, though dysentery endangered his life, until the council in late July allowed him open prison. Jacobite propaganda in England used this as proof of William's tyrannical intentions, while Payne's steadfastness helped to discredit and prevent future use of judicial torture. 
Somehow Payne from his cell organized a Jacobite network of agents and sympathizers (including his relative Philadelphia Wharton, widow of the lord president, Sir George Lockhart), which sent information and advice to James at St Germain, and even to the pope. During the April 1692 invasion scare an outside plot for his escape was exposed, which the government suspected to be a cover for seizing Edinburgh Castle. Payne expected death, but was merely transferred in May to Blackness Castle and in November as close prisoner to Stirling Castle. 
In December 1692 Payne wrote to St Germain advocating a speedy invasion, and requesting James secretly to recommend Lord Stair's son for town clerk of Edinburgh. Secretary James Johnstone, head of the presbyterian faction in the government, intercepted this and exploited it to get endorsement of the presbyterians' recent gross rigging of Edinburgh burgh elections. Payne was caught drafting a reply to William King's famous propaganda book on the Irish protestants. When Johnstone's opponents in the 1693 parliament, assured by the Jacobites that Payne's letter and related intercepts were forged, imprudently challenged him, he proved them genuine, published them for members' information as 'Nevil Payn's Letter', and stampeded parliament into voting huge taxes for troops to oppose a non-existent invasion threat. On 13 May the lord advocate raised an indictment against Payne for high treason. Johnstone planned to end the session on 13 June 1693 by trying and making an example of him, since, although the letter's meaning was obvious, its use of codenames invalidated it as evidence in the regular courts. Payne secretly warned leading peers, particularly the commissioner, the duke of Hamilton, that although 'he would accuse none... he was resolved he would not die, and he could discover enough to deserve his pardon' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 4.212). Those not frightened for their own safety were, like Hamilton, alarmed for that of close relatives. On 15 June a majority voted to remit the prosecution to the justiciary court. 'In a word he owes his safety to the dimensions of his crime' wrote Johnstone (Thorp, 378). 
On 28 June 1693 Payne was transported to close confinement in bleak Dumbarton Castle. His petitions for release, stressing his age, ill health, and ruinous debts incurred to subsist in prison, made to the council and the 1698 parliament, obtained only a transfer to Stirling Castle in July 1695, and a payment to support him from April 1696. In July 1699 he requested liberty to leave the castle for 'ane experiment for river navigation, whereby safer, larger and swifter vessels may be made... than any now in use' (Thorp, 379). He was allowed half a mile outside under guard. A letter mentions that the boat would go against wind and tide at a mile an hour, suggesting a primitive steamboat. 
Finally, heeding advice that the issue of Payne's long imprisonment without trial might cause trouble in parliament and that anyway he was a liar unworthy of the government's notice, William included him in a general order for the release of prisoners which arrived on 4 February 1701. On presentation of his petition Payne was immediately discharged. 
Payne crossed via England to St Germain, but too late. Following James II's death in September 1701 his son's established ministers soon curbed the unconventional supporters he had attracted. Within a fortnight a Quaker was in the Bastille for repeating an indiscreet, and inaccurate, remark by Payne. Payne presented a memorial to James III (James Stuart, the Old Pretender) in January 1702, urging a rising to exploit William's unique unpopularity and showing distrust of the French and Jacobite ministers, but this got him nowhere. Payne probably died at Paris in 1705. 


@@@@@


doc= 21644


Payne, John (d. 1507), bishop of Meath, was educated in the Dominican convent, Oxford. He became a doctor of divinity, and professor of theology in the convent, and was subsequently elected prior provincial of the Dominicans in England. On 17 March 1483 he was provided to the bishopric of Meath, having originally been granted custody of the temporalities on 15 February, and he was consecrated on 4 August following. A close ally of Gerald Fitzgerald, eighth earl of Kildare, and, like most of the palesmen, a staunch Yorkist, Payne became a leading supporter of Lambert Simnel after he landed in Ireland in the winter of 1486-7. He preached the sermon at Simnel's coronation in Christ Church, Dublin, on Whitsunday (24 May) 1487, but after the battle of Stoke he was among the first to make his peace with Henry VII. 
In July 1488 Payne escorted the king's commissioner, Sir Richard Edgcumbe, sent over to pacify Ireland, from Malahide to Dublin, where he acted as an intermediary between Edgcumbe and Kildare. At Edgcumbe's instance, he published in Christ Church the papal bull excommunicating all who took part in the revolt, with the pope's absolution and the king's pardon to all who returned to their allegiance. After Payne's pardon, dated 25 May 1488, had been delivered, he was sent by Kildare and the council on a mission to court, where he apparently accused his metropolitan, Octavian de Palatio, archbishop of Armagh, of complicity in the revolt. The king rewarded him, but he was unsuccessful in a bid to secure a grant of the chancellorship. 
According to James Ware, Payne was noted for his hospitality and alms-giving. In 1489 he assisted at a provincial synod in St Mary's Church, Ardee, arbitrating between rival claims by Tomas O Bradaigh and Cormac Mag Shamhrain to the bishopric of Kilmore. At the provincial synod at Drogheda in July 1492, however, a violent scene occurred when Payne called Primate Octavian, who had summoned him to answer certain charges, a tyrant. Octavian formally protested against his suffragan's disobedience. Payne apparently remained loyal during the Warbeck conspiracy, but at the great council at Trim in September 1493 he was bound over in 200 marks to observe certain articles tending to peace and good rule. He attended the provincial synod at Drogheda in July 1495, and the text of the resultant pastoral letter which Payne issued to his clergy still survives. 
By then, however, Payne's relations with Kildare had broken down. Probably in 1494, after a fray, the earl pursued the bishop into a church and took him prisoner, only releasing him on a peremptory command from the king. When the two were at court in 1496, Payne denounced Kildare's conduct to the king, reportedly saying, 'All Ireland cannot rule yonder gentleman'; to which Henry allegedly replied, 'Then he is meet to rule all Ireland' ('Book of Howth', 180). Payne was nevertheless appointed keeper of the rolls after his return from England, on 3 October 1496. He died on 6 May 1507, and was buried in the Dominican church of St Saviour, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 21645


Payne, John (d. in or before 1648), printmaker, was by far the finest native-born engraver working during the reign of Charles I. His earliest plates, the portraits of Hugh Broughton and William Whitaker of 1620, are very much in the manner of Simon de Passe, whose pupil he very probably was. Payne's fifty-three known plates, which bear dates between 1620 and 1639, and most of which are portrait frontispieces or title-plates to books, vary widely in quality. The worst are no better than those of many contemporaries, but the best, such as the portrait of Sir Benjamin Rudyerd of 1632, are outstanding. His masterpiece is the two-plate profile view of the ship 'Sovereign of the seas', which measures nearly 3 feet across. It was made in 1637-8 to celebrate the ship's launch, and was commissioned by its builder, Peter Pett. The print was praised by John Evelyn and an impression was acquired by Samuel Pepys on 31 January 1663. It was accompanied by a pamphlet by Thomas Heywood, 'A true description of his majesties royall and most stately ship called the Soveraign of the seas' (1638), the text of which praises Payne and reveals that he was then living by the postern gate near Tower Hill. 
On the evidence of a fellow engraver, John Sturt, George Vertue recorded that Payne loved drinking and was careless of his affairs, and that his irregular way of life resulted in his early death. Charles I had intended to appoint him royal engraver (presumably in succession to Robert van Voerst, who had died in 1636), but Payne had neglected to take up the invitation. Thomas Rawlins printed an epitaph to him in an appendix, entitled 'Calanthe', to a volume of meditations, 'Good-Friday' (1648), where Payne was described as 'lately deceased'. This serves as a 'terminus ante quem' for his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 21646


Payne, John (d. 1787), bookseller, was established in Paternoster Row, London, at least by 1745, working first alone and then in partnership with Joseph Bouquet until early 1752. From 1753 to 1758 Payne gave his address as 'Pope's Head in Pater noster Row', then simply as 'Pater noster Row', and from about 1765 'The Feathers, Pater noster Row'. Payne was sufficiently known to Samuel Johnson to be invited to join a club formed by Johnson in winter 1749, meeting every Tuesday evening at the King's Head in Ivy Lane near St Paul's, and later known as the Ivy Lane Club. It was through his friendship with Johnson that Payne published William Lauder's 'Essay on Milton's Use and Imitation of the Moderns in his 'Paradise Lost'' (1750), to which Johnson contributed. Lauder -- Scottish Latin scholar, schoolmaster, and armchair Jacobite -- had been working since at least 1745 to prove that Milton had plagiarized 'Paradise Lost', suggesting that the epic bore a strong resemblance to works of certain neo-Latin writers. When John Douglas discovered that portions of the passages of the neo-Latin writers quoted in the 'Essay' were, in fact, passages from 'Paradise Lost' translated into Latin, he exposed Lauder's forgeries in 'Milton vindicated from the charge of plagiarism brought against him by Mr. Lauder and Lauder himself convicted of several forgeries and gross impositions on the public' (1751). It was clear to both Johnson and Payne that something had to be done to salvage their reputations. Payne and Bouquet placed an advertisement in the newspapers and wrote 'A new preface' apologizing for the imposition on the public and attempting to explain how they had been deceived. Johnson wrote a 'New postscript' in which further disclaimers were made, which, like the 'New preface', was printed separately to be inserted in unsold copies and to be distributed to those who had already bought copies. The friendship between Payne and Johnson does not appear to have been damaged by this episode and would continue to the end of Johnson's life. Early in September 1784, a few months before his own death, Johnson wrote to a mutual friend about Payne (who was then ill) remarking, 'poor Payne... I should count his death a great loss' ('Letters of Samuel Johnson', 389-90). 
Payne published Johnson's 'Rambler' essays (1750-52), as well as the 'Adventurer' essays (1752-4) edited by John Hawkesworth, another member of the Ivy Lane Club, with contributions by Johnson. Later Payne was responsible with others for starting the 'Universal Chronicle, or, Weekly Gazette'. To the first number Johnson contributed a two-part essay explaining first what the paper hoped to accomplish and second the responsibilities of those who write for such publications. In the second number of 15 April 1758 appeared the first 'Idler' essay, a series for which Johnson produced all but twelve of 104 essays published during the next two years. 'The Life of Harriot Stuart' (1750), the first novel of Charlotte Lennox, a person whose career Johnson was eager to advance, was another publication of Payne's. Payne also published his own writings. In 1758 he wrote and published 'New Tables of Interest', with a preface by Johnson, followed by 'A Letter Occasioned by the Lord Bishop of Gloucester's 'Doctrine of Grace'' (1763), 'The Ground and Nature of Christian Redemption' (1769), 'Letter to a Modern Defender of Christianity' (1771), and other works on religious topics. 
Payne had been elected to the service of the Bank of England in 1744, and he became deputy accountant in 1773 and accountant-general in 1780, before retiring on 30 June 1785. Throughout the period when he worked for the bank he maintained involvement with various aspects of the book trade: his hours at the bank allowed it and the low salary necessitated it. Payne died unmarried at Lympstone, near Exeter, on 10 March 1787, where he had probably been living since 1785. He had a brother, Henry, who was a bookseller in Pall Mall, London. 
Payne has been confused with another 


@@@@@


doc= 21647


John Payne (fl. 1762-1800), author and compiler, who was admitted a freeman of the London Stationers' Company by redemption on 7 December 1762. He went into partnership with the bookseller Joseph Johnson about July 1768 but in early January 1770 a fire destroyed most of their business and the partnership dissolved. Payne moved to Marsham Street, Westminster, and turned author and compiler, often under assumed names, such as George Augustus Hervey and William Frederic Melmouth. Among his works are 'The naval, commercial, and general history of Great Britain, from the earliest times to the rupture with Spain, in the year 1779' (1780-83), 'Universal Geography' (1791), 'An Epitome of History' (1794), 'Geographical Extracts' (1796), and 'A Concise History of Greece' (1800). He was noted as being resident in King Street, Cheapside, in 1782 and in Pentonville in 1800. 


@@@@@


doc= 21648


Payne, John Willett (1752-1803), naval officer and royal official, was born on 23 April 1752 at St Kitts in the Leeward Islands, the second son of Ralph Payne (died 1760), chief justice of the island, and his second wife, Margaret, 'nee' Gallwey, of St Kitts. His brother was Ralph Payne, later Baron Lavington. He was educated at Dr Brackyn's academy in Greenwich, where he formed a lifelong friendship with Hugh Seymour Conway. In spring 1767 he entered the Royal Naval Academy, Portsmouth, where he spent two and a half years before joining the frigate 'Quebec' (32 guns). 
Early in 1770, in the West Indies, Payne moved to Rear-Admiral Man's flagship, 'Montague'. He came home in the sloop 'Falcon' (18 guns) in 1773 and, after five months as midshipman in the 'Egmont', sailed for the Guinea coast, Jamaica, and Antigua with Commodore Thomas Collingwood in the 'Rainbow' (44 guns). After returning to England about January 1775 he was again on the books of the 'Egmont' when he passed his lieutenant's examination on 10 May. 
On 26 December 1775 he sailed with Sir Peter Parker in the 'Bristol' (50 guns) to Charlestown, and took part in the attack on Sullivan's Island. At New York he became Vice-Admiral Lord Howe's aide-de-camp in the 'Eagle', until he gained his first commission on 9 March 1777 as second lieutenant of the frigate 'Brune' (32 guns), under the eccentric Captain James Ferguson, who became Payne's firm friend. Early in 1778 he moved to the 'Phoenix' (40 guns) and was with Howe's squadron at Sandy Hook in July and off Rhode Island in August. 
After rejoining Howe's flagship for a while, and then, it seems, commanding the 'West Florida' (14 guns), Payne returned to England in the 'Roebuck' (40 guns), and on 19 April 1779 was appointed first lieutenant of the 'Romney' (50 guns). He was rapidly promoted by Commodore George Johnstone, through the influence of his half-brother Ralph, to commander of the 'Cormorant' sloop on 6 November 1779 and then on 8 July 1780 to captain of the 'Artois', a captured French frigate. The following month he was caught up in a minor diplomatic row between Britain and Portugal over allegations of his having pressed Portuguese subjects when lying in the Tagus. 
In August 1781 Payne took command of the frigate 'Enterprize' (28 guns), cruising on the Jamaica station. In December 1782 Admiral Hugh Pigot gave him the 'Leander' (50 guns), and near Guadeloupe on the night of 18 January 1783, while escorting a convoy, he came across a hostile ship which he chased and fought a two-hour engagement with. The identity of the other ship was never established, but it appeared to be a 74. Out-gunned, the 'Leander' was very heavily damaged, but repulsed attempts at boarding, and Payne was rewarded for his gallantry with command of the 'Princess Amelia' (80 guns), in which he returned home at the end of the war. 
Shortly after this Payne became acquainted with George, prince of Wales, and there began between them what the prince later described as 'an old and steady friendship of upwards of twenty years standing' ('Correspondence of George, Prince of Wales', vol. 4, no. 1780). In August 1785 Payne accompanied Lord Northington on the grand tour, visiting Paris, Geneva, Turin, Rome, and Naples. On his return in March or April 1786 he became the prince of Wales's private secretary and keeper of the privy seal, and subsequently also comptroller of the prince's household. He was elected MP for Huntingdon from 9 May 1787 on the recommendation of Lord Sandwich, who owed him money; he held the seat until 1796. In October 1787 Payne was appointed captain of the 'Phoenix', but he does not appear to have got near the sea in that command. 
Throughout the crisis of November 1788 to February 1789 caused by George III's porphyria, Payne was very active in dealing on the prince's behalf with the supporters of a regency, especially Richard Brinsley Sheridan and Lord Loughborough. As a close friend, Payne also joined in the prince's ribald entertainments: at one masquerade, for example, 'Jack Payne... was dressed as a young lady... [and] chaperoned by Mrs Fitzherbert [the prince's secret Catholic wife]' (Molloy, 2.209). On another occasion, a disrespectful reference to the queen is said to have drawn from Jane, duchess of Gordon, the reproach: 'You little, insignificant, good-for-nothing, upstart, pert chattering puppy, how dare you name your royal master's royal mother in that style!' (ibid., 2.240). During July and August 1791 he was in France on the prince's business, and in October he was appointed (in addition to his other duties) auditor and secretary of the duchy of Cornwall. 
The outbreak of war in 1793 seems to have interrupted Payne's search for a little country 'cottage' with a few acres of paddock; and from May he commanded the 'Russell' (74 guns) in Howe's fleet. Fourth in the line, the 'Russell' played a distinguished part in the battle of the Glorious First of June (1794), boarding 'L'Amerique', and 'our brave Captain [Payne, who] had many narrow escapes' ('Naval Chronicle', 33), was one of those awarded a gold medal. Naturally, it was 'little Jacko Payne' ('Correspondence of George, Prince of Wales', vol. 2, no. 895) in the 'Jupiter' (50 guns), who was entrusted with the flotilla sent to Cuxhaven to bring the prince's future bride, Princess Caroline, to England between February and April 1795. Lady Jersey's scheming, and Payne's disapproval of the prince's conduct towards the princess, however, caused a rift between the two men, and in July 1796 he was formally dismissed from all his posts in the prince's service. 
That summer Payne took command of the 'Impetueux' (80 guns) which, as 'L'Amerique', he had played a part in capturing two years before; and for three successive summers he led squadrons cruising the Western Approaches. In poor health for some years, this last command brought on a severe illness which compelled him to resign. 
Reconciled with his old friend in January 1799, and a rear-admiral since 14 February, Payne became treasurer of Greenwich Hospital in August, following the prince of Wales's personal appeal to William Pitt on his behalf. In November, 'The Times' reported that Payne was to live in a house which the prince had bought and furnished for that purpose, next door to his own, Carlton House. He died, however, probably at the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich, on 17 November 1803, and was buried at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 25 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 21649


Payne, Joseph (1808-1876), educationist, was born on 2 March 1808 at Bury St Edmunds. Details of his early life are obscure but his parents, Joseph Payne and Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Leader, were not wealthy. On the occasion of his own marriage in 1837 Payne's father was described as a builder. About the age of fourteen Payne came under the influence of a teacher called Freeman; he became an ardent student of the classics and English literature and determined on teaching as a career. In 1830, while teaching at a private boys' school run by John Gowring in the New Kent Road, London, he wrote a 56-page pamphlet entitled 'A compendious exposition of the principles and practice of Professor Jacotot's celebrated system of education'. This attracted considerable attention and he became tutor to the children of David and Elizabeth Fletcher who lived in Camberwell. The tutorial class became a school and early in 1838 Fletcher and Payne established the Denmark Hill grammar school in a substantial house reputedly built by Sir Christopher Wren for Prince George of Denmark. On 28 December 1837 Payne married Eliza Dyer (died 1875), daughter of the Revd John Dyer, secretary of the Baptist Missionary Society. The ceremony took place at the parish church of St Giles, Camberwell. The Paynes lived at Grove Hill House in Camberwell, where Eliza, herself an accomplished teacher who had spent some years in Paris, continued to keep a girls' school. Two sons, John Burnell and Joseph Frank Payne, and a daughter, Mary Eliza, were born while the Paynes were at Denmark Hill; another son, William, was born after their move to Leatherhead. 
In January 1845 Payne opened a new boys' school, known as the Mansion grammar school, at Leatherhead in Surrey. Unlike Denmark Hill House, which was demolished in 1873, the Mansion still stood in the 1990s, housing the Leatherhead branch of the county library. Payne's new foundation was another private establishment, attended principally by boarders, with fees of between 40 and 60 guineas per year. In the 1851 census fifty-one resident pupils were listed: their ages ranged from eight to sixteen years. The success of the school was shown by the examination performances of its pupils, particularly in the Oxford local examinations, and in 1865 Payne was invited to give evidence to the Taunton commission, as was the then headmaster of the Denmark Hill School, Charles Mason. Payne's evidence indicates that the curriculum at the Mansion grammar school was wide-ranging: for example, there was a laboratory and lessons were given in practical chemistry. The discipline was mild, indeed Payne dispensed with corporal punishment. While at Leatherhead the Paynes worshipped at the Congregational church, where Payne was appointed to the lay office of deacon in 1846. 
Payne's first advertisements for his Leatherhead school advised that 'he advocates no exclusive system, but aims to adopt the most valuable features of all, combining with the solid instruction of the Old Grammar School a liberal infusion of sound mathematical and scientific knowledge'. His continuing commitment to broad learning was shown by the curriculum plan for a middle-class school for boys aged between eight and sixteen which he produced in 1866. For the first two years pupils would study reading, spelling and writing, history and geography, French, word and object lessons, and arithmetic. For pupils aged ten to twelve, English grammar, botany, and physics would be added. Latin would be introduced at age twelve, together with German, mathematics, English literature, and physics. Chemistry would be added in the final two years. 
In 1863, after some nineteen years of strenuous devotion to the school, Payne retired from Leatherhead and lived at 4 Kildare Gardens, Bayswater, London. His later years were spent in a flurry of activities. In 1868 his reputation as a writer of textbooks was enhanced by the publication of 'Studies in English Prose', and there were further editions of 'Studies in English Poetry' (1845) and of his best-known work, 'Select Poetry for Children' (1839). This collection of poems for children aged between six and twelve, and intended for both 'schools and families', received its final revision and enlargement in the eighteenth edition of 1874. Payne's standing as a scholar was confirmed by work in the field of philology, and he was chairman of the council of the Philological Society in 1873-4. 
Payne was a fierce critic of many elements of English society and of education. His criticisms of boys' public schools centred upon their custom and corruption, their inefficient teaching and limited curricula, and received powerful expression in an article on Eton published in the 'British Quarterly Review' in 1868. His attack on elementary schooling centred upon the ethos engendered by the revised code of 1862 which, he believed, cast a blight upon all who came under its aegis: children, teachers, and inspectors. In 1872, in two papers delivered to meetings of the Social Science Association, Payne deplored the low standards of pupil attainment, and attributed these to a system which was 'mechanical in conception, mechanical in means, mechanical in results'. 
But, though a critic, Payne was essentially a reformer with a firm belief in the power of education to transform individual lives and society. His campaign to improve the quality and status of the teaching profession began in 1846 as a founder member of the College of Preceptors. In the following year he became an examiner for the college's teachers' examinations in the theory and practice of education. He was vice-president of the college between 1862 and 1868, and also served at this time as vice-president of the Scholastic Registration Association. In December 1872 the council of the College of Preceptors invited Payne to become its first professor of the science and art of education. An inaugural lecture was given on 30 January 1873 and during that year Payne delivered three courses: ten lectures on the science of education, twelve on the art of education, and ten on the history of education. Of the seventy students who attended the first course, sixty-four were women. A second series of lectures was given in 1874, and a third in 1875. 
Payne believed that the principles of a science of education were still scattered across many fields of knowledge -- ethics, history, logic, philosophy, physiology, psychology. One of his major aims, therefore, was to bring these into a more coherent whole. Much of his inspiration in this work came from his own experiences as an autodidact and from his observation of the natural learning processes of young children. Accordingly he argued that educators should not only be proficient in the subjects they had to teach, but should also be well informed about their pupils, and about pupils in general. They should understand the basic principles of learning and teaching. The art of the teacher was to make formal schooling a progression and refinement of natural education, and to equip learners with the desire and ability ultimately to teach themselves. Historical study was important for the good (and bad) examples it provided of the science and art of education of former times. 
A second element in Payne's reforming zeal was his commitment to the development of educational opportunities for girls and women. He argued that 'The mind has properly no sex... and consequently there must be a similarity of instruction of both sexes' ('Transactions of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science, 1865', 1866, 362). He was a friend and collaborator of such pioneers as Beata Doreck and Frances Buss, both of whom became members of the council of the College of Preceptors. From 1872 Payne served as chairman of the Women's Education Union, and he was also one of the original shareholders of the Girls' Public Day School Company and chaired its council in 1872. Other offices held by Payne in the 1870s included membership of the council of the Social Science Association, and of the committees of the Kindergarten Association and of the Froebel Society. In 1875 he chaired the foundation meeting of the Society for the Development of the Science of Education. His interest in kindergarten methods led him to Germany, and a report on his tour of German schools in the autumn of 1874 was published posthumously in 1876. 
Payne was described by his contemporary and colleague, W. B. Hodgson, as 'a dark-looking, broad-browed man, of short stature' who spoke 'with unusual clearness, force and accuracy of expression' ('Journal of the Women's Education Union', 4, 1876, 86). On 12 October 1875 Eliza Payne died of enteric fever and Payne, himself unwell, found it necessary to give up his lecture course. In December 1875 he resigned the professorship. On 30 April 1876 he died at 4 Kildare Gardens, Bayswater, of Bright's disease of the kidneys. The death certificate was signed by Joseph Frank Payne, who was to become one of the most famous medical men of his day. In his will Payne bequeathed $200 to the College of Preceptors for the endowment fund for a professor of education, and $50 to Thomas John Barnardo or the treasurer of the East End Juvenile Mission. A codicil gave Herbert Quick first choice of fifty books from his library, while others of his educational books were left to the College of Preceptors. The remainder of his estate was divided equally between his two surviving sons, Joseph Frank and William. The former produced two edited collections of his father's lectures and writings: the first, 'Lectures on the Science and Art of Education', was published in 1880; the second, 'Lectures on the History of Education', in 1892. Payne had been a great admirer of the society and education of the United States and several editions of the first of these volumes were produced there. 


@@@@@


doc= 21650


Payne, Peter (d. 1455/6?), Wycliffite and Hussite heretic, was born at Hough on the Hill, near Grantham, Lincolnshire. According to Thomas Gascoigne (died 1458), he was the son of a Frenchman and his English wife. He is referred to variously in the sources as Clerk or Freyng, and in Bohemia often as Engliss (Englis). 
Peter Payne was first induced to read John Wyclif's books at Oxford, where he started to study shortly before 1400, by his fellow student Peter Partridge (died 1451), later chancellor of Lincoln Cathedral and Payne's adversary at the Council of Basel. Partridge, in turn, claimed that Wycliffite ideas reached the notorious Sir John Oldcastle (died 1417) through Payne, an assertion supported independently by Robert Holbech, Oldcastle's excommunicated chaplain. Thomas Netter (died 1430) later claimed that Payne, the most outspoken Wycliffite at Oxford, had once cried off from an arranged public debate with himself about pilgrimages, the eucharist, and mendicancy. Payne had become MA by 5 October 1406. At that time he managed somehow to have the university seal affixed to a letter affirming that Wyclif was upright of life, outstanding in his exposition of scripture, and never condemned for heresy. Gascoigne was to claim later that Payne simply stole and misused the seal, so as to persuade the dissidents in Bohemia that all England, with the exception of mendicant friars, held the same beliefs as they did in Prague. This possibility cannot be excluded; at any rate, Payne met two Bohemian scholars, Mikulas Faulfis and Jiri of Kninice, who returned home with the letter in 1407. It was published in Prague in early January 1409 by Master Jeronym Prazsky, whom Payne may have met in England. There are also good reasons to assume that Payne acted as intermediary in the correspondence between Jan Hus, Richard Wyche, and Sir John Oldcastle between 1408 and 1413. 
From 1408 Payne rented White Hall, Oxford, for 28's'. 4died p.a. In 1428 the imprisoned Lollard Ralph Mungyn attested that, although Payne propagated Wyclif's ideas at Oxford, London, and elsewhere, he evaded official investigation for a long time. Indeed, he even managed to succeed the excommunicated Lollard William Taylor as principal of St Edmund Hall next door as late as 1410. There is a strong probability that either he or Taylor wrote the extensive treatise (in English, despite its title) 'Tractatus de oblacione iugis sacrificii' (BL, MS Cotton Titus D.v). On the other hand, he had nothing to do with another text, 'De versione Bibliorum' (Vienna, Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek, MS 244). Payne was summoned before a commission dealing with persistent Wycliffites in the university in autumn 1410. Archbishop Thomas Arundel of Canterbury (died 1414) showed some benevolence and accepted him as orthodox on 6 November. Belatedly Payne may have been ordained by Bishop Robert Hallum of Salisbury (died 1417) as subdeacon and deacon in February and April 1412. His tenure of the White Hall was terminated against his will in October 1412, but he still paid his rent of 30's'. for St Edmund Hall for that year. However, shortly afterwards -- in August 1413 at latest -- when Oldcastle was arrested, Payne left both Oxford and England, probably to avoid prosecution. 
Before Payne finally settled in Bohemia, his travels took him first to the Rhineland and to Deutach in Alsace where a young Waldensian emissary, Friedrich Reiser, met him in the house of his father, Conrad. Though sources about Payne's stays in Germany and perhaps also in Switzerland are unreliable, they do show a web of close connections between nonconformist in religion and mostly undercover centres across much of Europe. It was hardly a coincidence that Payne reappeared in Germany in 1418 or 1419, living in the house of a Nuremberg merchant named Hans von Plauen. Payne did not meet Jan Hus, head of the Bohemian reform movement, personally. This suggests that he arrived in Prague only after Hus's fateful departure for the Council of Constance, that is, after 11 October 1414. Payne aroused the interest of Prague reform circles by his very first known intervention in Bohemia, when he demanded reception of the eucharist by the laity 'sub utraque specie' (that is, the receiving of both bread and wine), as against the Catholic practice of withholding the chalice. He is likely to have written this polemic against the priest Havlik, Hus's successor in the Bethlehem Chapel, in February 1415 (Krmickova, 148-64). He took part in current debates in the university with a series of minor contributions such as his treatises against oath taking, 'De iuramento' (Bartos, 'Literarni cinnost', 96, no. 2), and on Wyclif's orthodox veneration of images, 'De ymaginibus' (Nechutova, 326-33); his defence of predestination, 'Tractatus de predestinacione'; and perhaps also by his assertion of the inevitability of all that happened in this world, 'De necessitate absoluta evenientium'. Payne's rejection of oath taking is close to the position of Lollards and Waldensians, and he does not differ substantially from mainstream reform opinion on other questions. The delay of his registration as a master of arts at Prague until 13 February 1417 may have been caused, among other reasons, by the fact that his main Prague contacts were with German nonconformists around Nikolaus von Dresden of the Black Rose Hall. His appointment as examiner in the winter semester of 1417 may have prompted him to compose a mnemonic device for his students, the so-called 'Dicta' (Bartos, 'Literarni cinnost', 98, no. 6). 
Payne returned from a visit to Nuremberg just in time to witness the stormy onset of the Hussite revolution in Prague. His opponents had assumed that he was still abroad, but when Master Mikulas Stojci made a public attack upon his defence of Wyclif's realist philosophy, Payne surprised him by announcing a date when he would stand up for that position. The confrontation, arranged for late April 1420 (Sedlak, 'Drobne texty', 114-15) failed to take place, because Prague had to face the threat of the first Catholic crusade against Bohemian revolt. The authority of Payne, as an English Wycliffite and defender of utraquism (that is, of the administration of the eucharist in both kinds, bread and wine), was now so great that the city of Prague chose him as one of its ambassadors to King Sigismund ('r'. 1419-37) at the beginning of May 1420. Any optimism was dashed by the ultimatum delivered to them at Kutna Hora (Kuttenberg). Nevertheless, a path to talks with orthodox Catholic theologians was then opened by the victory of Hussite troops over the crusaders on 14 July 1420. Payne is very likely to have participated, but first he appeared in what would be his future role as a go-between and impartial adviser on 5 August 1420, when he deliberated with the representatives of the Old Town of Prague over the twelve articles submitted as an ultimatum by the radical Hussite Tabor brotherhood. Evidently he performed well as a diplomat, for the towns of Prague nominated him in the embassy that was to offer the crown of Bohemia to King WLadysLaw of Poland. On his return Payne found himself in agreement with the leading Hussite theologian, Jakoubek of Stribro, when both presented arguments against a radical Prague preacher, John Zelivsky, in a congregation held in the Caroline College on 11 November 1421. Three days later Payne was elected to the Hussite consistory in Prague, in which he may have remained active until 1434. 
Payne is then out of sight for more than a year, until his reappearance as an adviser to the lay arbiters in controversies between Prague and Tabor clergy at Konopiste Castle in June 1423. It is doubtful whether he did then contribute, as has been suggested, the two polemical treatises, 'De corpore Christi', defending the eucharist theology of the Taborites against his Prague colleague, Jan of Pribram (Sedlak, 'Taborske traktaty', 21-7), but he may, by his text, 'Tripes', have defended three of Wyclif's theses on the eucharist against Pribram. The assumption that Payne went for a second time to Poland as an envoy from Prague in March 1424 is unfounded; he has been confused, as on other occasions, with Matej of Hnatnice, also nicknamed 'Engliss'. 
In 1425-6 the Prague Hussite alliance had to cede primacy of power to the radical brotherhoods of the Taborites in southern Bohemia and the 'Sirotci' ('Orphans') in eastern Bohemia. Payne remained in Prague, but he faced opposition from conservative masters, and especially from Jan of Pribram, who launched a wholesale attack on the Wycliffite foundations of Hussite doctrine in 1426. Pribram decided to play the nationalist card against Payne, with whom he disputed at Christmas 1426 and again during Lent from 5 March 1427. He and his partisans denigrated Payne for his English origin, a position also reflected in a contemporary verse-composition in which the Devil lets Payne slip into Bohemia, taking from his homeland 'rights unwholesome for the Czechs'. Wyclif's undoubtedly awkward theology of the eucharist, one that many Hussites rejected outright, surfaced time and again in the polemics, and even Payne, in his brief 'Confessio' of April 1427, preferred not to take an unequivocal stance. However, not long afterwards a popular rebellion purged Prague of all university conservatives, including Pribram. 
In August 1427 the retreat of a crusader army under the papal legate, Cardinal Henry Beaufort (died 1447), from the west Bohemian castle of Tachov undermined the position of the local Catholic alliance, which agreed to hold a debate involving clergy from both sides. With Beaufort's consent the Catholics nominated Master Simon of Tisnov, while the Hussite position was to be defended by Payne. The disputation began at Zebrak Castle on 29 December 1427, but swiftly collapsed for lack of agreement over rules of engagement. It was to be almost a year before those advocating a peaceful solution to the Bohemian crisis prevailed at King Sigismund's court, and then only because he faced war on two fronts. For the negotiations that followed Payne was elected principal speaker of the Hussite delegation, possibly at the diet at Cesky-Brod on 1 January 1429, notwithstanding the widely differing attitudes of some leaders in the Hussite alliance. The choice of Payne was a recognition not only of his abilities, but also of his prudent occupation of a place between the moderate and radical Hussite theologians. 
After a minor clash the official meeting between the delegation and Sigismund was rescheduled from Moravsky-Krumlov to Bratislava, and opened on 5 April 1429 with speeches by Sigismund and Prokop Holy ('Prokop the Shaven'), the head of the Bohemian embassy. Then came Payne's turn. He argued that the Hussites' struggle was against all tyrants and for the sake of the law of God, not for their own glory. Very little was required to end the conflict; it all depended on Sigismund. If he could but see his way towards changing his policy, he would receive that most famous kingdom of Bohemia, setting free the truth, and would secure the allegiance of both the communities of Prague and of Bohemia ('Petri Payne', 88). But all too soon the talks fell into deadlock over the problem of establishing arbitration in the conflict concerning the Hussites' four articles -- administration of communion in both kinds; free preaching of God's word; ecclesiastical abandonment of secular property; abolition of public mortal sins. Attempts to make progress were blocked by powerful hardline groups on each side. Even a second meeting with Sigismund at Bratislava in July failed to achieve any significant results. 
Payne is unlikely to have taken part in this second phase of talks because he was needed for the diets and other proceedings in Prague. Master Jan Rokycana, successor to Jakoubek of Stribro (died 1429), sought to reconcile his university colleagues who had been forced out of Prague two years before. Jan of Pribram, who had returned home, renewed his assault on the ideas of Wyclif and his chief local adherent, Payne. An intense and highly sensitive disputation between the two lasting several days in September and October 1429 was attended by large numbers of the public. In their verdict on 20 October the eight referees ordered both masters to submit their arguments in writing, stop denigrating each other, and hold their fire until 4 June 1430. Payne duly produced the texts of both his disputations (Bartos, 'Literarni cinnost', 103-4, nos. 13, 14); Pribram refused and left Prague once more. 
At the end of December 1429 Payne is recorded as participating in business concerning the Caroline College in Prague, where he had become one of the masters, with a prebend in the collegiate chapel of All Saints -- a position he may well have secured much earlier. Between 1432 and 1434, however, he was living in the Slavonic abbey called Emmaus in the New Town, perhaps because of discord within the college. Payne, like Pribram, felt the need to prepare his polemics carefully, just as he later prepared for his public debates with the theologians of the Council of Basel. With three or possibly even more assistants he completed a list and index of all Wyclif's writings by 1432 or 1433 at the very latest. This enabled the compilation of thematically specific anthologies, facilitating the work of scholars down to the present day. 
The Wycliffite Peter Engliss was rated highly by the Taborites and so, at their instigation, the Hussite diet at the beginning of 1431 elected Payne to take part in a new embassy to the Polish king. Negotiations opened at the royal castle of Wawel on 19 March, but failed as a result of the irreconcilable theological positions of the two sides. As soon as the embassy returned, a major Hussite synod assembled in the Caroline College on 30 April 1431 to try to harmonize the conflicting positions of the Prague and Taborite clergy before the forthcoming negotiations with envoys from Basel. This purpose was not achieved, but one consequence of the synod was to give a spur to the doctrinal merging of east Bohemian and Prague Hussitism. Payne himself drew closer to the centrist group of the utraquist consistory in Prague. 
Hopes for swift reconciliation between Hussite Bohemia, the Catholic church, and King Sigismund blossomed after the failure of a fourth crusade against the Hussites in August 1431. At the end of September the Council of Basel agreed to a public hearing for a Hussite embassy, and sent its official invitation to Prague on 15 October. The provincial diet met in February 1432, agreed to accept, and nominated a large delegation for preliminary talks at Cheb (Eger). Although Payne was among the Prague clergy chosen, the young and vigorous Master Jan Rokycana was clearly establishing himself among the Hussite leaders. As well as pronouncing upon matters of protocol, the Cheb provisions declared that the law of God, the practice of the early church, and the doctrines of the church fathers were to be the impartial 'judge' over the imminent talks. (Payne, at least, would come to show his trust in these criteria as agreed.) A diet at Kutna Hora in August and September selected the embassy to Basel; Payne was of course among the representatives of Prague and its university. 
The council's speakers had been marshalling their arguments for some time, whereas their Bohemian opponents looked more for a simple victory for holy truths. It is not clear whether the defendants of each of the four articles were actually selected at the Kutna Hora diet or perhaps shortly afterwards. But, whatever the arrangements, quarrels broke out as soon as the Bohemian embassy reached Basel. This did not directly affect Payne himself, to whom the defence of the fourth article, concerning poverty of the clergy, seems to have been assigned back in Prague. Payne made his first public appearance as a speaker for the Hussite delegation on 13 January 1433, when he demanded in vain the transfer of the debate into the cathedral, and the public announcement of dates for each individual presentation. Payne spoke quite often thereafter, both on behalf of the embassy and for himself. Contemporary witnesses attest to the lively response aroused by his ironic and sarcastic formulations, though a number of the council's participants claimed to have difficulties with his English pronunciation of Latin. 
Payne's turn to defend his assigned article came on the morning of 26 January 1433 ('Petri Payne', 1-40). After only a few introductory words he submitted an unequivocal formulation. Both human and divine law, and the precepts of the fathers (who deployed actual examples from the 'New Testament'), prohibited Christ's true clergy from holding any secular possessions or worldly power. Putting forward four premises, Payne defined the notions of 'possession', 'domination', 'law', and 'clergy', quoting numerous extracts from the 'Old' and 'New' testaments and from the fathers, in evidence. The next morning, the 27th, Payne continued with more extracts from the fathers and from more recent theologians. In the final part of his speech, on the morning of Wednesday 28 January, he buttressed his interpretation by recourse both to resolutions by early church councils and to the 'Decretum Gratiani'. In conclusion Payne summarized his arguments, criticizing the charges against Wyclif and Hus, and asked those present to agree to the worldly disendowment of the church in the interest of all. None the less, in the course of a subsequent debate within the Bohemian delegation, Payne yielded to strong pressure and accepted a compromise demanding only the divestment of superfluous possessions, and that only from clergy individually culpable. A paragraph on the evangelical poverty of the early church, which he added to his original text in its written version of 4 February 1433, thus acquired the character of a hardly enforceable moral appeal. 
The whole of February was taken up by the responses of the council's speakers, with only brief respite. Payne followed them all intently and interjected frequent comments, attacks and questions on behalf of himself and his remaining friends. His own designated opponent, Juan Palomar, archdeacon of Barcelona and papal auditor, began his reply on 23 February and tried to turn Payne's own weapon, biblical citation, against him. A rumour also spread through Basel the following day that an English embassy, which had just arrived, had brought with it accusations by the crown against Payne. This threat may have been nullified by the council's safe conducts to the leaders of the Bohemian delegation; when Palomar resumed his reply to Payne on 27 and 28 February, he assumed a perceptibly more civil attitude towards him. 
March was reserved for the counter-replies of the Bohemian advocates. The planned departure of the embassy induced some cardinals and bishops to offer these Hussite theologians incorporation into the council. The latter chose Payne to discuss the offer, but on 12 March as the climax to an embittered confrontation he declared why it was unacceptable. Returning to his formal task, in his replication to Palomar (31 March - 1 April) Payne refuted his opponent's objections painstakingly and step by step. However, with rumours against him still circulating, he asked Cardinal Giuliano Cesarini for an opportunity to defend himself publicly before the whole council. He was allowed to do so three days later, but was then accused formally both of heresy and of treason against Henry VI by John Keninghale (died 1451), the Carmelite provincial of England, and Peter Partridge, chancellor of Lincoln and his sometime friend. Payne denied the charges calmly, and was defended strongly by others of the Bohemian embassy. The two English envoys made their accusations again on the following day, 7 April, just as Palomar was about to respond to Payne's theological refutation. None the less, the disputation went on, hotly debated, until 9 April, Palomar conceded elements of truth in his opponent's arguments but yielded nothing in his final rejection of Payne's reasoning. The council was still very eager to keep the Bohemians at Basel, but the delegates refused all blandishments and set off for home on 14 April. 
Payne naturally assumed a major role in continuing negotiations with the council, both at Prague and Basel. Besides other tasks Payne had to ask the councillors of the New Town of Prague on 27 May 1433 to suppress any activities offensive to the council's envoys, while during the June diet of the same year he was among a group of authoritative Hussite theologians including Rokycana and a Taborite bishop, Mikulas of Pelhrimov, who held learned debates with the embassy. In the diet of November and December that year he even had to face threats from conservative Prague masters, and the Caroline College witnessed such uproar that the provincial governor had to summon armed guards. In a session on 18 November Payne called in vain for unity, for on another occasion he was to denounce the council's envoys openly, claiming that they would really prefer to throw all Hussite clergy of any sort into a sack. In its efforts to subvert the Hussite movement the council now received crucial assistance from the former's right wing, which, in alliance with the Catholic nobility, defeated the troops of the radical Hussite unions in the battle of Lipany on 30 May 1434. According to a later report Payne himself was captured; certainly, if no more reliably, rumours of his death or imprisonment soon circulated as far away as London. If he was imprisoned, it cannot have been for long, because at the end of October 1434 a provincial diet nominated him as sole referee in debates between Prague and the Taborite clergy. 
Here Payne faced a dilemma. At heart he undoubtedly wanted the embryonic Taborite church to retain its Wycliffite character. On the other hand, he surely realized that the only way out of crisis was through the unity of the whole calixtine party, so called from its demand for access to the chalice -- 'calix' -- at the eucharist. Small wonder, then, that he kept postponing his arbitration. He had moved some time earlier to the town of Zatec (Saaz) in western Bohemia, from where he visited Prague for official business. Not even in Zatec, however, could he escape the attentions of conservative forces, now gathering strength as they sought to restore the old order. King Sigismund dared not deliver him to the Council of Basel but he did try to bring him and the Taborite radical Vaclav Koranda to submit fully to the rule of the church. Payne refused on 15 April 1437 at the Caroline College, whereupon Bishop Philibert of Coutances pronounced him the source of all errors in Bohemia, and Sigismund (soon to die) expelled him formally as a foreigner from all his lands. Payne's long-standing clerk and companion, John Penning, was arrested a week later and interrogated on the 28th. 
It is not known where Payne sought refuge before his return to the colony of German and other nonconformists in Zatec. It may have been in one of the towns of the Taborite union, perhaps Klatovy. It was among people from there that he was arrested by a Catholic noble, Burian of Gutstejn, in October 1438. A search of his personal possessions uncovered material concerning negotiations with Poland, which may indicate that Payne was now engaged in a campaign against Sigismund's successor as king of Bohemia, Albrecht II of Habsburg. Burian hoped for a very substantial reward from England for this capture, but Henry VI wanted to transfer any cost to the papacy, as his secretary, Bishop Thomas Beckington, informed Eugenius IV ('r'. 1431-47) on 18 May 1440. Oxford University, asked for its opinion by the king, sent a message of praise to Burian but assured him that the English crown had no intention of paying a ransom. Thus disappointed, Burian changed course completely, and later in 1440 accepted 12,000 Bohemian groschen from the Taborite towns for Payne's release from Rabstejn Castle. 
In the early 1440s Payne challenged his old foe, Jan of Pribram, in a treatise in which he took up again the question of the eucharist. Pribram came back at him as strongly as ever, complaining to the burgesses of Zatec of Payne's persistent adherence to errors of doctrine, and offering a wager of 6000 groschen on a disputation with him at any Christian university, or, failing that, at Prague before the masters and the land diet. In fact it was Pribram himself who evaded a disputation with Payne in the course of a synod at Kutna Hora in July 1443, perhaps because it had elected Payne, together with Master Vaclav of Drachov, as its president and correspondent to the general synod that followed. The Taborites took Payne's side, protesting against Pribram's slurs and, later on, accused him of having deliberately spoken in Bohemian during the Prague synod of January 1444 so that Payne could not understand him. By a historic irony, the final verdict of the provincial court of justice, against the creed of the Taborite clergy, on 31 January 1444, relied heavily upon Payne's own assessments of 1427 and 1436. 
Nothing further is heard of Payne for a full eight years. Although it is tempting to identify him with the 'Constantinus Anglicus' who was in Constantinople as an ambassador of the utraquist consistory in 1451, there is no convincing evidence. His last public appearance in his adopted homeland was in September 1452, when he had to pronounce a judgment against Taborite doctrines for a third time. Yet when the fortress at Tabor capitulated to the provincial governor, Jiri of Podebrady, on 1 September 1452, one of its conditions was that Jiri should recognize as a religious authority a special commission of which Payne was a member. Now an old man, Payne may indeed have ended his days as an adviser to the calixtine archbishop, Jan Rokycana. A rather unconvincing report dates his death to 1455 or 1456; he is presumed to have died in Prague. 
Master Peter Payne was among those nonconformist scholars of the later middle ages who strove to achieve tangible reforms in the practices of the church and of lay religion. From his student days in Oxford he stood firm to the doctrines of John Wyclif and spent his life in promoting and defending them in both his homelands. In Hussite Bohemia he offered himself many times over the years both as a brave and respected arbitrator in the severe doctrinal disputes within the domestic streams of reform, and also as an impressive envoy to the Catholic world and an advocate of those four articles of Prague that tried to bridge the internal chasms. His literary bequest, though relatively slim, is an honest reflection of the often dangerous life of this dedicated intellectual reformer; his defence at Basel of the Wycliffite and Hussite stance on clerical poverty is no mean epitaph. 


@@@@@


doc= 21651


Payne, Sir Peter, 'de jure' third baronet (1763-1843), radical, was born at Blunham House, Bedfordshire, in February 1763, the third son of Sir Gillies Payne, second baronet, of Tempsford, Bedfordshire. His grandfather Sir Charles (died 1746) had inherited from his wife a large property in St Kitts, West Indies, and had been created a baronet on 31 October 1737. 
Sir Gillies Payne (died 1801) was high sheriff of Bedfordshire in 1771. He formed in his youth a liaison with Maria Keeling, daughter of a farmer at Potton, Bedfordshire, but delayed marriage with her until the death of his mother in 1761. Peter was the first child born subsequently. Nevertheless on the death of his father in 1801 he allowed his elder brother, John, to succeed to the title, and, when John died two years later, acted as guardian to his young children. It was not until 1828 that Payne, having vainly offered to submit his claims and those of his brother's heir to a court of arbitration, was induced to allow the matter to be raised incidentally in the chancery suit 'Glascott v. Bridges'. In the course of the trial Sir John's widow made affidavit that she and her sister had burned the marriage certificate of Sir Gillies, but evidence brought forward convinced the court of its existence, and Sir Peter was declared the eldest son born in wedlock. This decision was however reversed by the lord chancellor in January 1829, and an issue was directed to be tried as to the legitimacy of John and Peter Payne. The question never again came before the courts, but during his lifetime Sir Peter's claim to the baronetcy was acknowledged. He refused, however, to register himself as a baronet. 
Payne was educated at Hackney and at Queens' College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1784 and MA in 1787. A handsome youth, though delicate, he took an active part in field sports, was a captain in the Bedfordshire militia, and was a deputy lieutenant for the county for more than half a century. In politics he was a strong whig, and he exerted much political influence in the midlands. In 1810 he published two pamphlets, entitled respectively 'England the Cause of Europe's subjugation, Addressed to the British Parliament', and 'The Character and Conduct of British Ministers in War and Negotiation Illustrated by Facts'. In 1812 he attacked Pitt and attempted to convict Wilberforce of inconsistency in 'Mr. Pitt the grand political delinquent; with a dedication to the solemnisers of his birthday, and an address to Wm. Wilberforce, esq., M.P'. In the same year he issued at Birmingham, under the pseudonym 'Philagathos', 'Seven short and plain letters to the inhabitants of Birmingham on the leading points connected with the orders in council'. 
Payne was intimate with the political reformer Major John Cartwright, for whom he stood bail when Cartwright was charged with sedition in August 1819. Among other friends were Sir Herbert Taylor and Dr Samuel Parr. In 1819 Payne published at Birmingham a 'Letter to Lord Erskine in Defence of the Whigs'. On 5 May 1831 he was returned, with Lord Tavistock, as a whig member for Bedfordshire, but he retired at the dissolution in December 1832. He printed at Bedford in 1832 a pamphlet advocating repeal of the corn laws. He was also a strong opponent of the slave trade, and an advocate of higher education for women. In favour of the latter cause he wrote a pamphlet, which was published in 1811, under the title 'Trial between the governess of a ladies' boarding school and the mother of a pupil committed to her charge'. 
Payne married, in August 1789, Elizabeth Sarah, the only daughter of Samuel Steward of Stourton Castle, Staffordshire; they had two sons and four daughters. She died on 12 April 1832. Their grandson, Charles Robert Salusbury Payne, claimed the baronetcy in 1893, but the claim was not recognized. Sir Bernard Burke, after giving particulars of the separate claims in the editions of his 'Peerage and Baronetage' between 1868 and 1878, thenceforth ignored the title. Foster's 'Baronetage' of 1882 relegates it to the appendix 'Chaos'. Payne died at Blunham House, Bedfordshire, on 23 January 1843. 


@@@@@


doc= 21652


Payne, Ralph, Baron Lavington (1739-1807), politician, was born in the parish of St George, Basseterre, St Kitts, on 19 March 1739, the second and only surviving son of Ralph Payne (died 1763), chief justice of that island, and his first wife, Alice, the daughter and heir of Francis Carlisle of Antigua. His father was descended from a wealthy St Kitts family which had originally come from Lavington in Wiltshire. After being educated in England at Christ's Hospital, Payne returned to his native island, where he was at once elected a member of the house of assembly and unanimously voted speaker. 
In 1762 Payne was again in England, and he then made the grand tour of Europe. Like William Beckford he became a successful representative of the political and social prominence of the wealthy absentee West Indian planters in Britain. On 1 September 1767 he married, at St George's, Hanover Square, Frances Lambertine Christiana Charlotte Harriet Theresa (died 1830), the daughter of Henry (sometimes called Frederick Maximillian), Baron Kolbel, of Saxony, a general in the service of the Holy Roman empire. She had arrived in England with the Princess Joseph Poniatowski, sister to the king of Poland, and was a friend of Queen Charlotte. Payne made useful contacts through his wife, but it was an unhappy marriage, for which he was blamed, not least in a satirical verse by Sheridan. Finding her mourning the death of a pet, he quipped: '
Alas! poor Ned 

My monkey's dead! 

I had rather, by half, 

It had been Sir Ralph. 
('Memoirs of... Wraxall', 3.411)' After his marriage Payne entered politics, and was returned to parliament for the borough of Shaftesbury, a seat he held from 1768 until 1771. He was a political weathercock, always voting with the government and switching his party allegiances accordingly. He was a close friend of Lord Mansfield, whom he defended in his maiden speech as a seconder of Blackstone's motion against Wilkes (2 February 1769). His speeches and correspondence were absurdly verbose. His cultivation of refinement and his obsession with etiquette similarly verged on the ridiculous, even by the standards of the age. Horace Walpole speculated that this exaggerated style was developed during youthful appearances at amateur dramatics. It may also have reflected the ambition of a colonial outsider for acceptance in metropolitan society. Nevertheless, Payne possessed considerable charm and was one of the most celebrated hosts in London. 
On 18 February 1771 Payne was created a knight of the Bath at St James's Palace and in the same year was appointed captain-general and governor-in-chief of the Leeward Islands, where he had inherited a considerable estate from his parents. The colony was not a particularly desirable post because its division among several islands made it expensive and difficult to administer. After a devastating hurricane in 1772 Payne became the first governor in over half a century to tour all the islands in the colony. He was a patron of the artist Thomas Hearne, who painted some of the few contemporary landscapes of the Caribbean. One of these (in the Victoria and Albert Museum) features the arrival of Payne at the capital town of St John's in a coach-and-six with a military honour guard against the background of the court house and guard house. 
Payne was a successful governor, despite the fragility of colonial politics in the Caribbean on the eve of the American War of Independence. Although the 'Virginia Gazette' claimed that his inaugural speech to the island legislatures was written by Lord North, the colonists petitioned for his continuance in office on his departure in 1775. He received a sword set in diamonds by the unanimous vote of the assembly of Antigua. His popularity was helped by his native origins and because he allowed himself to be co-opted by the planter elite, with whom he avoided any confrontation. 
Payne returned to England, where he re-entered political life. He sat for Camelford in Cornwall from November 1776 to 1780, and for Plympton, Devon, from 1780 to 1784. His attendance in parliament became irregular, perhaps because of the disastrous economic consequences of the American revolutionary wars for the British Caribbean. From June 1777 until the suppression of the office in 1782 he was a clerk of the board of green cloth. 
After the American war Payne became a supporter of Fox. His house in Grafton Street became known, through his love of hospitality and the personal attractions of his wife, as the favourite resort of the whig leaders. He joined Brooks's Club, sponsored by Fox, on 2 August 1784 and the Whig Club on 16 January 1787. His expectations of office were frustrated by the rise of Pitt, however, and he left England for an extended tour of the continent in 1788. With the support of the prince of Wales he contested the borough of Fowey in 1790, but there was a double return in which the decision went against him. After this disappointment he wavered in his attachment to the whigs and seceded from the Whig Club. On 15 August 1793 he gave a 'considerable dinner' at his house, at which Pitt was a guest. It was at one of his dinner parties that Henry Dundas and Lord Loughborough plotted the alliance of the duke of Portland and Pitt. His change of allegiance was induced by declining profits from his sugar estates in the Leeward Islands. He was well rewarded by his new political patrons: he was created Baron Lavington in the peerage of Ireland on 1 October 1795. The same month he was returned to parliament for New Woodstock, which he continued to represent until 1799. He made no speeches and did not vote on the abolition of the slave trade. 
In February 1799 Lavington was reappointed governor of the Leeward Islands, and later the same year was sworn of the privy council. He arrived at Antigua on 12 August 1801 and remained there until his death, at Government House, on 3 August 1807. He was buried the following day on his plantation, Carlisles, and an elaborate marble monument was erected to his memory by the island legislature in the church of the parish of St John's in Antigua. He died childless and almost destitute, and the legislature voted $300 per annum to his widow, who died at Hampton Court Palace on 2 May 1830. His career mirrored the meteoric rise and downfall of absentee sugar planters in Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 21653


Payne, Robert (d. 1593), writer on agriculture and entrepreneur, probably came from Nottinghamshire. Nothing is known of his family or his early life. He was the author of a single folio containing miscellaneous information for farmers and landowners, 'The Vale Mans Table: Herein is Taught... howe to Drain Moores', dated 16 November 1583. Payne adopts a jovial tone, acknowledging that some might mock his efforts, but asserting that his methods are fail-safe, dispensing advice on how to measure woods from a distance, use a compass, drain bogs and wet moors, as well as providing a table of years from the reign of William the Conqueror onwards. There is also a poem which criticizes ineffective citizens who let ground lie fallow and fail to benefit their fellows, and a plea that the work be sold at 6died, not 2's'. 6died, as Payne had discovered booksellers charging, indicating that there may have been an earlier edition. Payne gives his address as Paines End. 
Payne was patronized by Sir Francis Willoughby in the late 1580s and was engaged in projects to grow woad and produce jersey wool for stockings in Nottinghamshire. It was probably through Willoughby's connections with Phane Becher, a London businessman who had settled in Cork, that Payne was sent over to Munster with a view to preparing the way for twenty-five of his neighbours to follow afterwards. Payne obtained a freehold of 600 acres on the Munster plantation and began to investigate the possibility of establishing an ironworks in Kinalmeaky, which would have been overseen by an English manager, and would have used the woods that Willoughby had bought in the area. Payne appears not to have been the most scrupulous of businessmen and there was friction between him and Willoughby over the stockings project. 
Payne's most significant work, a treatise entitled 'A brife description of Ireland, made in this yeere 1589, by Robert Payne, unto xxv of his partners, for whom he is undertaker there' (1589), may have been written to entice his fellow workers in Nottingham to join in a similar project in Ireland. Payne's short treatise is a piece of colonialist propaganda designed to persuade English men and women that life in Ireland was better than they could expect in England. It was perhaps modelled on the example of Thomas Harriot's 'Briefe and True Report of the New Found Land of Virginia' (1588), which had served a similar purpose (Harriot was included in the census of the plantation on 12 May 1589). Nevertheless it contains many useful and probably accurate eyewitness observations of Irish life, schools, agriculture, diet, society, and town life. There is also an important reference to the influence of Bartolome de las Casas's writings in the British Isles. The 'Brife Description' was evidently popular enough to be reprinted with some additions in 1590. Payne gives his address as his house at 'Poynes-End'. 
Payne was made agent for Becher in Kinalmeaky in 1590, but was dismissed in 1591 when faulty accounts and other financial irregularities were discovered. In 1592 he was imprisoned in London at the behest of Phane Becher, and died in 1593. 


@@@@@


doc= 21654


Payne, Roger (bap. 1738, d. 1797), bookbinder, was born at Eton, where he was baptized on 8 December 1738, the second of the five children of Thomas Payne, bookbinder (died 1759), and Elizabeth Godwin (died 1762). Shortly after his birth the Paynes moved to Windsor, but they were back in Eton by November 1747. 
Payne and his younger brother Thomas took over their father's binding business after his death in May 1759. They worked for Walter Bowman in whose account for 1759 and 1760 they are mentioned as bookbinders in Eton. In 1761 Bowman refers to 'Roger Payne of Windsor', but in the following year he is again mentioned as 'Roger Payne of Eton'. A 1757 Birmingham Virgil is signed 'Eton. Bound by R. Payne'. It was presented by Henry Sleech to his pupil P. Bouverie in 1764 and is now at Cambridge University Library. Only a few bindings of Payne's Eton period are known. Both Roger and his brother Thomas are still mentioned as bookbinders in Eton in 1765 and they occur in the 'Nugae Etonenses' of 'c'.1766. About this time Roger Payne went to London, where, according to Dibdin, he worked for a few years for Thomas Osborne, bookseller of Gray's Inn (died 1767). Though Payne does not mention Osborne in his bills or letters, he does refer to another bookseller, Samuel Baker of York Street, for whom he bound a copy of Edmund Spenser's 'Faerie Queene' in 1772. In the late 1760s and early 1770s Payne was probably working independently in Leicester Square, having been set up in business by his namesake (but no relation) Thomas Payne, bookseller in Castle Street, Mews Gate. It is clear from several files and letters that Payne worked for Thomas Payne, paying off (some of) his debts. 
Payne was joined in London by his brother Thomas and the brothers worked together, probably most of the time and certainly up to 1796. They both worked for A. M. Storer MP (died 1799) and there are several fairly plain bindings signed by Roger and Thomas, probably dating from the 1770s, in Storer's library (now at Eton College). Another patron of Roger Payne during the late seventies was Michael Wodhull (1740-1816). An early binding for him covers a copy of Giordano Bruno, 'De progressu et lampade venatoria logicorum' (1587), bought by Wodhull in 1778 for 2's'. 6died and bound by Payne for 4's'. 6died (B. Quaritch, Catalogue 166, Jan 1897, 195). 
Both David Wier and his wife appeared to have worked for Payne. Mrs Wier, who apparently was a capable mender and restorer as well as 'an excellent hand at ruling red... lines on prayer books' (Jaffray, 4.182), was, according to Dibdin, 'pretty constantly and most successfully employed' (Dibdin, 517) by him, probably before 1774, while her husband (according to the same source) worked for Payne from 1777. The partnership was not a happy one -- 'Wier happened to be as fond of ''barley broth'' as his associate... They were always quarrelling' (ibid., 515) -- and they parted company. 
The bookseller John MacKinlay (died 1821) also provided Payne with work. Throughout the 1790s Payne worked for the Revd C. M. Cracherode (1730-1799), whose library, now in the British Library, contains well over thirty books bound by him between 1790 and 1798. A 1694 Cambridge Euripides, bought in 1794, has Payne's bill (BL, C19.e.3). Another of Payne's patrons whose library is also in the British Library was the Hon. Thomas Grenville (1755-1846). He served many distinguished book collectors of the time, such as Topham Beauclerck (1739-1780), the author William Beckford (1759-1844), John Dent MP (1750?-1826), Colonel Stanley (died 1818), the topographical author Sir Richard Colt Hoare (1758-1838) for whom Payne worked from 'c'.1795 to 'c'.1797 and for whom several bindings with their bills survive, and, best known of all, Earl Spencer (1758-1834), whose library is now in the John Rylands University Library, Manchester. Payne worked for him both directly and through the bookseller Thomas Payne, and Lord Spencer's 1480 Lascaris (JRL 7319) was bound by 'The Book-binders Roger and Thomas Payne' in dark blue straight-grain morocco. Several of Payne's bindings for Lord Spencer have either manuscript notes or bills, and several more are mentioned in the bookseller Thomas Payne's book bills to Lord Spencer, preserved at Althorp. 
Roger Payne's bills and letters frequently describe in some detail the work carried out, and their tone is on the whole one of self-satisfaction and pride in his craftsmanship, as well as a justification for his prices. From these it is clear that he himself did some repair work, as well as doing both the forwarding and the finishing, and that, contrary to popular belief, he did not cut his own tools. He did, however, pay some attention to matching the tool design with the subject of the book in question. He also worked according to a pattern which, at least in some cases, was either specified or approved by the future owner. His typical and best-known bindings were usually in brown russia; red, blue, or green straight-grain morocco; or smooth olive morocco, frequently with purple or brown end-leaves and tall green headbands. Many have leather joints and doublures consisting of a leather frame and a paper centre panel. He used mainly small, naturalistic tools and most of the typical bindings of the 1790s have very elaborately tooled spines, frequently with two or three panels lettered, and the date of printing nearly always in Roman numerals. He was an excellent craftsman and, notwithstanding his reputation for a fondness for strong drink and his self-confessed ill health, his finishing was first rate. He charged his physician, Dr Benjamin Moseley, a special price out of obligation for the latter's professional services and several letters and bills exist in which reference is made to his health and to the doctor's orders and 'Learned Advice'. Nevertheless, his health deteriorated and his last work, the binding of Homer's 'Iliad' on vellum (Venice, 1504) for Lord Spencer, remained unfinished. 
The original watercolour drawing of Payne in his workshop is preserved with R. Gough, 'Account of a... Missal... for John Duke of Bedford' (London, J. Nichols for T. Payne, 1794) (Shawyer and Haywood, 2.2715); it was used by Sylvester Harding for his well-known etching made for Thomas Payne, a proof of which is in the British Museum, and a smaller engraving by William Angus illustrates Dibdin's 'The Bibliographical Decameron' (1817). In these portraits he looks tall, thin, and unhealthy, with sunken cheeks and hollow eyes. His verse in praise of barley-wine accompanying the bill to Mr Evans for binding Barry's 'Wines of the Ancients' (Dibdin, 509), his household accounts as quoted by Thomas Payne's son (ibid., 508), and other near-contemporary accounts suggest his intemperate habits, and in an undated letter to Dr Moseley, accompanying his copy of Fortunius Licetus, 'De Monstris' (Amsterdam, 1665), he describes himself as 'at times having been hardly able to stand to work without very great pains nights & Days even 30 Years since & upwards'. 
Payne died, unmarried, on 20 November 1797 at his home at Duke's Court, St Martin's Lane, and was buried six days later in the churchyard of St Martin-in-the-Fields at the expense of his old benefactor Thomas Payne who, according to J. Nichols, had supported him financially for the last eight years of his life (Nichols, 3.736-7). 


@@@@@


doc= 21655


Payne, Thomas (1716x18-1799), bookseller and publisher, was baptized on 26 May 1719 in Brackley, Northamptonshire, the younger son of Olive or Oliver Payne, and his wife, Martha. His obituary and epitaph ('GM', 1799) variously describe him as being in his eighty-second year and aged eighty-two at the time of his death suggesting that he was born between 1716 and 1718. From 'c'.1732 he was an assistant to his elder brother Olive (sometimes Oliver) Payne, a bookseller at Horace's Head, Round Court, opposite York Buildings in the Strand, London, who is said to have begun the practice of publishing regular catalogues of his stock. Following his brother's bankruptcy in March 1739 Thomas took over the business and issued his own catalogue in February 1741. In 1745 he married Elizabeth Taylor (died in or before 1775), the sister of T. Taylor, a bookseller in Castle Street near the Mews Gate, Leicester Fields. In 1750 Payne succeeded to the business and premises of his brother-in-law, which were rebuilt in an L-shape. Thereafter his shop became known as the Literary Coffee House, from the many notable authors and collectors who frequented his salerooms. 
After 1755 Payne steadily prospered both as a publisher and as a bookseller, and his name is to be found, together with those of other booksellers, on the imprints of many hundreds of works in all subjects. He was particularly involved in the publication of Richard Gough's enlarged 1789 edition of Camden's 'Britannia', having financed all the engravings in return for the bulk of the copies of the new edition. However, he is primarily remembered as an antiquarian bookseller and for his part in disposing of the collections of many notable antiquaries and book collectors. Between 1755 and 1790 he issued annual (and on occasion semi-annual) catalogues of not fewer than 200 pages, most of which are listed by John Nichols in 'Literary Anecdotes' (3.655-60). Among the many notable collections he sold were those of Francis Peck, Ralph Thoresby, Benjamin Kennicott, and Francis Grose. He also visited Palgrave, Suffolk, in 1768 where he purchased many of the most valuable works from the library of Thomas Martin. Payne's success appears to have been based upon his shrewd purchases, together with a growing reputation among his customers for fair dealing, resulting in his widely known sobriquet Honest Tom Payne. 
Thomas and Elizabeth Payne had two sons and one daughter. The elder son, also named Thomas Payne (1752-1831), was in partnership with his father from about 1776 and took over responsibility for the business when his father retired to Finchley in 1790. His daughter, Sarah (1759-1832), married Admiral James Burney on 6 September 1785. 
Payne is also known for his charitable works, notably his support of the impoverished and unrelated bookbinder Roger Payne for the last eight years of Roger's life, and paying for his burial. Payne also supported other members of his family in financial difficulty. 
Payne died on 2 February 1799 at Finchley, and was buried there on 9 February alongside his wife and brother. His obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' describes him as 'warm in his friendships as in his politicks, a convivial cheerful companion', and refers to his 'character of an honest man to the last' ('GM', 1799). Dibdin describes him in his 'Bibliographical decameron' as 'a sterling example of genuine British integrity. There was neither pomp, nor parade, nor knavery, nor vehemence, nor violence, in any thing he said or did' (Dibdin, 436). The poet William Hayley likewise presented Payne's son with an epitaph in verse which was subsequently published in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. 
Payne should not be confused with his two contemporary London namesakes: the bookseller at 14 Duke Street and the bookbinder of 24 Charlotte Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 21656


Payne, Thomas (1752-1831), bookseller, was born in London on 10 October 1752, the eldest of the four children of Thomas Payne (1716x18-1799), bookseller and publisher, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Taylor (died in or before 1775). He was educated by M. Metayer in Charterhouse Square, London, and trained in modern and classical languages to equip him for the family business. He entered into partnership with his father in 1776, and succeeded him in 1790. 
The original L-shaped premises at Mews Gate, Castle Street, London, acted as a coffee house and bookshop. It rapidly became too cramped for the many men of letters -- including Charles Lamb -- who visited and 88 Schomberg House, Pall Mall, was acquired. Schomberg House soon became widely recognized as a popular literary centre. Payne traded alone after his father's death in 1799 and then took into partnership his apprentice Henry Foss in 1813. The business was renamed Payne and Foss, though Charles Lamb playfully called it 'Pain & Fuss' ('Early Diary of Frances Burney', 2.130-31). 
In 1817 Payne became master of the Stationers' Company. By 1820 his poor health meant that he had to give up travelling in search of books. Previous successes had included large collections from the libraries of Dean Lloyd, the Revd Henry Homer, and the last keeper of the seals of France, M. Chretien Francois de Lamoignon, as well as the Borromeo collection of novels and romances. Such acquisitions meant that moving to the larger 81 Pall Mall became necessary in 1821. 
Payne retired in 1825 and was succeeded by his nephew John Payne, but Payne and Foss continued until 1850. John Payne and his wife, Sarah Burney, then retired to Rome, where they spent their remaining years in the company of such distinguished figures as Cardinal Antonelli. 
Thomas Payne died at 81 Pall Mall on 15 March 1831, after an attack of apoplexy on the 8th. He was buried in St Martin-in-the-Fields on 24 March 1831. At the time of his death he was considered the father of the London booksellers. 


@@@@@


doc= 21657


Payne, William (1649/50-1697), Church of England clergyman, was the son of William Payne of Hutton, Essex. He attended Brentwood Free School, Essex, before being admitted sizar at Magdalene College, Cambridge, in May 1665, aged fifteen. He graduated BA in 1669, proceeding MA in 1672. On 6 July 1671 he became a fellow at Magdalene, and remained so until 1675 when he married Elisabeth Squire, daughter of the vicar of St Leonard, Shoreditch. He was ordained deacon at Ely on 19 March 1671 and priest at Peterborough on 22 September 1672. In 1673 Payne was appointed rector of Wormshill in Kent, to which he added the parish of Frinsted in the same county the following year. In June 1681 he became rector of St Mary, Whitechapel, and quickly established a reputation in London as a fine preacher. Owing to his interest in experimental philosophy he was also in that year admitted as a fellow of the Royal Society. He was granted a DD by Cambridge in 1689. 
Payne's first works, published between 1685 and 1688, were a series of tracts against Catholic doctrines such as the adoration of the host, communion under one kind, and the celibacy of priests. All these tracts went through several editions and were subsequently collected in Edmund Gibson's 'Preservative Against Popery' (1738). Following the revolution of 1688 Payne, a latitudinarian, strongly supported the so-called 'Comprehension Bill' introduced into parliament in 1689. Thomas Long, however, was undoubtedly speaking for the majority of the clergy when he denounced the bill in his pamphlet 'Vox cleri' (1690). In 'An Answer to 'Vox cleri'' (1690), Payne replied that far from bringing schismatics into the church comprehension would make dissenters friends; that it was a good thing for the church to make alterations 'as she thinks fit, whether the Dissenters propose or agree in them or not' (p. 7); and that those high-churchmen who threatened to go to Rome were putting too much stock in things indifferent. 
Payne also became engaged in the controversy surrounding the oath of allegiance to William and Mary imposed in 1689 upon all beneficed clergy. Those who refused and were deprived of their livings were scathing in their denunciations of those clergy, like Payne, who had been preachers of the doctrine of non-resistance under James II and who were now supporters of the new monarchs. Payne published a defence of himself in 1691 entitled 'An answer to a printed letter to Dr William Payne, concerning non-resistance and other reasons for not taking the oath'. While admitting that he had indeed preached non-resistance, he had not considered 'if any unseen and extraordinary Case should ever happen to be an exception against it' (p. 18). In the extraordinary case of King James positive law had had to give way to the 'greater Law of Necessity' (p. 10). 
Possibly in reward for his support for royal policy and legitimacy after the revolution, in 1689 Payne was appointed lecturer at St Mildred Poultry, London, and chaplain-in-ordinary to William and Mary. In 1690 he was given a commission under the great seal to be visitor-royal over all London churches that were exempt from the jurisdiction of the bishop of London. Its purpose was to suppress clandestine marriages, especially in the notorious centres of St James, Duke's Place, and Holy Trinity Minories. More profitably for Payne he was authorized to appoint his own registrar and issue marriage licences for these places. However, in 1695 Archbishop Tenison and Bishop Compton of London complained of the threat that Payne's commission posed to episcopal jurisdiction and pointed out to the lords justices that he was abusing his position -- and depriving the crown of the revenue due to it under the 'Marriage Duty Act' -- by issuing blank licences. The patent was revoked, and Payne failed in his attempts to bargain some compensation for his loss of income, which he estimated at $500 per annum. In 1694 Payne was installed as a prebendary of Westminster. 
Payne was also the author of 'Family Religion' (1691) and 'A Discourse of Repentance' (1693). A collection of his sermons, 'Discourses upon Several Practical Subjects' (1698), was published posthumously by Joseph Powell. During the last two years of his life Payne preached a series of sermons on the Trinity in defence of William Sherlock. These sermons were published in 1696 under the title 'The Mystery of the Christian Faith and Oft-Blessed Trinity Vindicated'. Payne was working on a book on the subject when he died in London on 20 February 1697. He was buried in St Mary, Whitechapel, four days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 21658


Payne, William (1760-1830), watercolour painter, was born on 4 March 1760 in London, the son of William Payne (1730-1794), and his wife, Eleanor Vardon ('fl'. 1728-1796). His father was a hop and coal merchant residing in Westminster, but was originally from Burwash in Sussex. In 1778, two years after he had first exhibited at the Society of Artists of Great Britain, Payne obtained a post as a draughtsman in the Board of Ordnance at the Tower of London, where he was instructed by the chief drawing master, Henry Gilder, a protege of Thomas Sandby. In 1783 he was sent to Plymouth to survey the defences of Plymouth Dock (now Devonport): he spent the next six years mapping the coastal redoubts and making watercolours of the area. By 1786 his technique had advanced far enough for him to send drawings to the Royal Academy. In Plymouth, on 5 February 1785, he married Jane Goodridge ('fl'. 1763-1818); three of their eight children were born there. 
Although working initially with the reed pen in a manner close to Paul and Thomas Sandby, Payne invented a number of devices which he used throughout his career. These included dragging colour with the side of the brush, reinforced by striations (parallel lines), to denote broken ground, and vigorously drawn loops of foliage. He also used for his foregrounds a grey pigment -- still known as Payne's grey -- a compound of Prussian blue, lake, and yellow ochre, which he had first employed in 1783 for a map of redoubts on Maker heights. With neatly applied colours he recorded the local topography, enlivened by well observed figures, thus attracting the praise of Sir Joshua Reynolds for some quarry views (exh. RA, 1788-9; Stourhead, and priv. coll.). By 1790 he had decided to pursue a career as an artist and drawing-master in London. He now adopted a looser style, which pupils could more readily copy, working with brush outlines (sometimes split, for foliage) rather than the pen, and he made more use of Payne's grey, adding indigo (unfortunately a colour subject to fading) and reddish hues to his pictures. He created landscapes, usually in a small format, with rocks or trees as a framing device, in which peasants converse or seafarers -- some of them smugglers -- haul on ropes or load contraband onto pack-horses. 
Payne's work was highly admired and he soon became the most fashionable drawing-master of the day. He numbered some professional artists among his pupils, including his eldest son, William Robert (who achieved little success), and John Glover, but he was more sought after as a teacher by aristocratic amateurs. As a result, a craze for manufacturing Payne-like landscapes became a feature of the fashionable London scene. After 1790 he ceased to exhibit for nineteen years and travelled in search of picturesque material to the west country and south Wales (from 1791), and later to the Isle of Wight, the Lake District, and north Wales. Although his pictures still commanded high prices when he started exhibiting again, upon joining the Old Watercolour Society in 1809, within a decade his popularity had declined, as new artists emerged. He attracted one important commission in 1818 from John Trower, an amateur artist, to work up some of Trower's Italian views, but his use of heightened pigments in body colour in the 1820s was hardly successful. The large oil paintings of this period (including a self-portrait now in the Castle Museum, Nottingham, showing a somewhat stern, bespectacled figure) display the same mannered devices. 
Payne's innovations, however, had advanced the boundaries of watercolour technique. His initial popularity and extensive teaching practice contributed greatly to the burgeoning interest in watercolour, both as a social accomplishment and as a serious field for collectors. He died in 1830 at his home, 49 Upper Baker Street, Marylebone, Middlesex, and was buried on 12 August at Marylebone parish church. Examples of his work are in the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, the City Museum and Art Gallery, Plymouth, the Royal Albert Memorial Museum and the West Country Studies Library in Exeter, and the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut. 


@@@@@


doc= 21659


Payne, William Henry Schofield (1803-1878), actor and pantomimist, was born on 25 June 1803 in the City of London the son of William and Alice Payne and was apprenticed to Isaac Cowen, a stockbroker. When he was in his eighteenth year he ran away, and joined a travelling theatre company on the Warwickshire circuit, and rose to play small parts at the Theatre Royal, Birmingham. After returning to London he studied under Joseph Grimaldi and Jack Bologna at Sadler's Wells Theatre, and then obtained an engagement at an East End theatre. In the following year, 1825, he migrated to the Pavilion Theatre, where he remained until 1831, and established a reputation for his hilarious characterization of barons and villains, as well as clowns. He was particularly admired for his skill as a mime artist. At Christmas productions he represented the clown, with Miss Rountree, afterwards his wife, as Columbine. The couple had four children, Harriet Farrell, Annie, Harry (1833-1895), and Frederick (1841-1880), all of whom took to the stage. On 26 December 1831 Payne made his first appearance at Covent Garden Theatre in the pantomime 'Hop o' my Thumb and his Brothers', by Charles Farley, in which he played Madoc Mawr, the Welsh ogre. He and his family played at Covent Garden for several decades, and his son Harry merited the distinction of principal clown at the theatre after the death of Richard Flexmore in 1860. In 1832 Payne senior was still more successful in the pantomime 'Puss in Boots', in which his character was Tasnar, chief of the Long Heads and No Bodies. 
During his long career Payne played many parts, ranging from pantomime to tragedy. He was harlequin to Joe Grimaldi's clown at Sadler's Wells in 1827, he was Dandy Lover to young Joe Grimaldi's clown, and made a capital clown himself. He acted in tragedy with Charles Young, Charles Kemble, James Wallack, and Edmund Kean, and on Kean's last appearance (as Othello, Covent Garden, 25 March 1833), it was Payne, then acting Ludovico, who carried him off the stage when he was unable through illness to finish the part. He also figured prominently in grand ballet with Pauline Leroux, Cerito, Carlotta Grisi, the Elsslers, and other dancers of note, and played in state before George IV, William IV, Victoria, Napoleon III, and the Empress Eugenie. 
In 1841 Payne was still at Covent Garden, and filled the role of Guy, Earl of Warwick, in the pantomime produced at Christmas. On 31 March 1847 he opened at Vauxhall Gardens in a ballet with his wife and his sister Annie Payne. In 1848 he was engaged by John Knowles for the Theatre Royal, Manchester, and here he remained for seven years, increasing the annual run of the pantomime from its usual 24 nights to 100, and making 'Robinson Crusoe' so attractive that it was given on 125 consecutive nights. After leaving Manchester he appeared with his sons at Sadler's Wells in the pantomime of 'The Forty Thieves' at Christmas 1854. The Payne family was also frequently seen at the Standard Theatre, the Crystal Palace, and other places. Payne, who was widely regarded by colleagues as a respectable man, died at Calstock House, Beach Street, Dover, on 18 December 1878. A writer in 'The Spectator' said: 'The last true mime has departed in the person of W. H. Payne'. 


@@@@@


doc= 21660


Smith, Robert Payne (1818-1895), orientalist and theologian, was born in Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire, on 7 November 1818, the only son and second of four children of Robert Smith (died 1827), a land agent, and his wife, Esther Argles Payne, of Leggsheath, Surrey. The Smiths and the Paynes were both old but impoverished families of gentry. He attended Chipping Campden grammar school, and was also taught Hebrew by his gifted eldest sister, Esther. In 1837 he obtained an exhibition at Pembroke College, Oxford, where he studied classics, in which he graduated with second-class honours in 1841, and oriental languages. He gained the Boden Sanskrit scholarship in 1840 and the Pusey and Ellerton Hebrew scholarship in 1843; the same year he became a fellow of his college and was ordained deacon, then priest a year later. He was a popular classics tutor but later left Oxford and undertook successively the curacies of Crendon and Long Winchendon, Buckinghamshire, and of Thame. In 1847 he accepted a classical mastership at the Edinburgh Academy. From 1848 he was also the incumbent of Trinity Chapel, Dean Bridge, Edinburgh. In 1850 he married Catherine (died 25 Jan 1894), second daughter of the Revd William Freeman of Langley; they had two sons and four daughters, one of whom, Jessie Payne Smith, married the orientalist David Samuel Margoliouth and became a noted orientalist herself ['see 'Margoliouth, Jessie Payne]. In 1853 he left Edinburgh to become headmaster of the Kensington proprietary grammar school. In London he resumed his oriental studies, learning Arabic and working on the Syriac manuscripts in the British Museum, with the encouragement of William Cureton. 
In order to spend more time on Syriac, and because Kensington did not suit his wife's health, Payne Smith accepted in 1857 an assistant sub-librarianship created for him at the Bodleian Library, Oxford, even though this involved a drop in salary from $1000 to $300. He gained the respect of Syriac scholars throughout Europe after he published Cyril of Alexandria's commentary on 'St Luke's gospel', in Syriac (1858) and English (1859), and a translation, 'The Third Part of the 'Ecclesiastical History' of John, bishop of Ephesus' (1860), which Cureton had edited in Syriac. But his main task as sub-librarian was to catalogue the 205 Syriac manuscripts then in the Bodleian; he completed the catalogue in 1864. His work on these publications made him aware of the need for a better Syriac dictionary, and in 1860 he began work on his 'magnum opus', the 'Thesaurus Syriacus', which occupied him for the rest of his life; the first fascicle appeared in 1868. He incorporated into it the unfinished work of several earlier Syriac lexicographers, including S. M. Quatremere, G. H. Bernstein, and Frederick Field, who had handed on their papers to him for this purpose; he also utilized the numerous Syriac texts published in Europe at this period and every other available source. The eventual result was a major monument of lexicography, running to 2258 folio-size pages, and started a new era in Syriac studies. 
Payne Smith also began to write on controversial theology, favouring the conservative evangelical side. This led to an unexpected improvement in his fortunes, when his friend Francis Jeune, bishop of Peterborough, who had been master of Pembroke, persuaded him to send a copy of his sermons vindicating 'The Authenticity and Messianic Interpretation of the Prophecies of Isaiah' (1862) to Lord Shaftesbury, who was so impressed that he influenced the prime minister, Palmerston, to appoint Payne Smith regius professor of divinity at Oxford and rector of Ewelme in 1865. He was made DD in the same year, and in 1869 he delivered the Bampton lectures, published as 'Prophecy: a Preparation for Christ' (1870). As regius professor he played a leading part in establishing the new honour school of theology, and was one of the first examiners in 1870. In January 1871 he resigned the chair to accept Gladstone's offer of the deanery of Canterbury. As dean he was noted for his successes both in improving the cathedral services and in the repair and modernization of its fabric, which had been damaged by fire. 
Payne Smith had been a delicate child, but cured this at Oxford by taking up rowing and riding, and remained active well into old age. His other outdoor pursuits were walking and gardening. Originally influenced by the Oxford Movement, after 1845 he became a moderate evangelical, and was made one of the Simeon trustees, a group which sought to promote by securing appointments for its members. In 1873 he went to the USA to take part in conferences organized by the Evangelical Alliance in New York. He was respected on all sides for his broad sympathies and genial temper, and was held never to have made an enemy, despite his involvement in some of the most heated ecclesiastical debates of the time, serving as he did on the 1867-8 ritual commission and on the 'Old Testament' revision committee from 1870 to 1885. At Canterbury he endeared himself to nonconformists and even Roman Catholics by making the cathedral more accessible to their use. In politics he began as a strong liberal and ended a conservative, but was always concerned to improve social conditions, especially education. He helped to found both Wycliffe Hall, Oxford, of which he remained chairman of council until his death, and the South-Eastern College, Ramsgate, and was active in setting up the church schools in the Canterbury area that were named the Payne Smith schools in his memory. He was also a founder member of the Palaeographical Society (1873). 
Payne Smith died at his deanery on 31 March 1895 and was buried on 3 April in St Martin's churchyard, Canterbury. He had lived to publish nine fascicles of his great Syriac dictionary; the final one was seen through the press (1901) by his second daughter, Jessie, and her husband. Jessie also brought out an abridged version, entitled 'A Compendious Syriac Dictionary' (1903), and a 'Supplement to the 'Thesaurus Syriacus'' (1927). Another daughter, Mary, wrote a memoir of her father's life, which she prefixed to his final work, 'Sermons on the Pentateuch' (1896). 


@@@@@


doc= 21661


Paynell, Thomas (d. 1564?), translator, was a canon of Merton Priory, Surrey. In April 1538 Merton Priory was surrendered to the crown and Paynell received a pension of $10. Wood says that Paynell, who was descended from an ancient Lincolnshire family, the Paynells or Paganells, was educated at St Mary's College, the Austin canons' college at Oxford, where Erasmus had been welcomed by Prior Richard Charnock in 1499. Paynell should probably be identified with Thomas Paynell, priest, born near Bothby Paynell in Lincolnshire, who in his will, dated 10 March 1559 and proved on 22 March 1564 (Emden, 'Oxf.', 438), in which he left his books to St John's College, Oxford, is described as rector of Cottingham, Yorkshire, a post to which he was presented on 24 October 1540. This Paynell in addition became rector of All Hallows, Honey Lane, London, on 31 August 1545. His predecessor there was Richard Benese, who like Thomas Paynell the translator was a canon of Merton. There is evidence that the rector of Cottingham had been educated in Paris (Stevenson and Salter, 135). One of the books in St John's is inscribed 'Sum Paynelli, Anthonii Belashezi et amicorum' (ibid.). This points to an identity with a Thomas Paynell who accompanied Christopher Mount on a mission directed by Thomas Cromwell to the protestant princes of Germany since there is a familiar letter from Henry Malet priest to Dr Bellises, Cromwell's servant, passing on a commendation from Paynell to Bellises. Paynell, the translator, was chaplain to Henry VIII and orator to queens Mary and Elizabeth. He was an Erasmian who was able to accommodate himself to the successive Tudor regimes. He remained however loyal to Thomas More, associated his arms with those of the Throckmortons, and requested a traditional Catholic burial. 
John Bale said of Paynell that if monkish superstitions had not got in his way he was a man born to help those around him as can be deduced from his writings (Bale, 'Cat.', 754). In fact the most obviously useful of Paynell's works were written in the period when he was still an Austin canon. 'The Regimen Sanitatis: this Boke Techynge al People to Governe them in Helthe' (1528) was a translation of the commentary of Arnald de Villanova on the poem of John de Mediolano which had been written for William of Normandy. A 'temperate and moderate diete prolongeth man's life' is the keynote for a survey of the properties of all foods and drink, of remedies as 'for parbraykynge on the sea' and of the psychology of illness. It has a clear analytical table of contents with careful instructions on how to locate a page. It was reprinted throughout the century and as late as 1634. The success of this book caused his publisher Thomas Berthelet to prompt Paynell to translate Ulrich von Hutten's 'De morbo Gallico' (1533). The German religious reformer's book established 'guaiacum' as the new cure for syphilis, attacked traditional religious remedies, such as pilgrimages, and professional doctors intent only on making money. It promoted simple cures and self-administered medicine. The core of the book is an onslaught on luxury. 'A Muche Profitable Treatise Against the Pestilence' (1534) is a good general survey of the causes, preventions, and cures for plague. It includes affordable cures for the poor and readvertises Hutten's cure for syphilis. In his final year as a canon at Merton, Paynell wrote the preface for a work of his fellow canon Richard Benese. 'This Boke Sheweth the Manner of Measurynge of All Manners of Lande' (1537?) was a timely book when so much land was changing hands, and an interesting one for a canon regular to write. Paynell in his preface argues that the mechanical arts such as carpentry and masonry are the basis of modern civilization; that God created the world 'by nombre, weyght and measure', and that geometry and astronomy are one. 
Paynell's translation of Agapetus's advice to the emperor Justinian ('The Preceptes Teachyng a Prynce or a Noble Estate his Duetie', 1532?) is addressed to William Blount, Lord Mountjoy, friend and tutor of King Henry and a man who helped bring Erasmus to England. The reader is told that 'he who knoweth himself shall knowe god, he that knoweth god shall be likened to god' (section 3); that the rich man suffers from his abundance as does the poor from his scarcity and so the rich must give to the poor (section 15). In 1533, while still an Austin canon, Paynell translated Erasmus's 'De contemptu mundi' with its conclusion that the monastic life can be lived outside the monastery, and in 1559 at the beginning of Elizabeth's reign Erasmus's 'Complaint of Peace' with its emphasis on the rights of the common man. 
Paynell's translation of Constantinus Felicius Duratinus's 'Conspiracy of Catiline' (1541) carried a more authoritarian message. The translation converted what had been an exercise in Ciceronian Latin into popular history with contemporary colouring. The destruction of Catiline is Henry's God-given justification for punishment of his own rebels. This translation was republished in 1557 during Mary's reign with Alexander Barclay's translation of Sallust's history of Jugurtha which Paynell claimed to have corrected (but see Bennett, 132). This part of the work was dedicated to Lord Montague 'who hathe at all tymes, and against all the rabblement of heretyke sustained... the catholyke faith'. 
Traditional forms of religious text had been dedicated to Mary as princess by Paynell: 'A Compendious and a Moche Fruytefull Treatyse of Well Livynge... written by S. Bernard', published in 1545, and an anthology of carefully selected biblical passages, 'The Piththy and most Notable Sayings of al Scripture', published in 1550. In 1558 he offered her a translation of Cuthbert Tunstall's Latin prayers. Perhaps his most significant activity during Mary's reign was his indexing of the English works of Thomas More. The index reads like an attack on reformed religion: 'Apostles dyd institute to pray for the dead', 'Apostles sayd masse before any gospell was written', and approvingly 'Why the clergy doth not suffer the Byble to be had in Englyshe'. Yet by 1561 Paynell had translated a work by Nicolas Harape as 'The Ensamples of Vertue and Vice, Gathered Oute of Holye Scripture' and addressed it to Elizabeth. There the reader learns that 'we oughte to have great reverence unto holye scripture which God himself did wryte, deliver and teache' (chap. 26). However the recommendation of poverty and the ideals of the early church (chap. 74) underline a consistency in Paynell's social concerns, which are illustrated also by his translation of Vives's 'The Office and Duetie of an Husband' (1553). 
Besides other extant works of Paynell described by Pollard in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' there are two works mentioned by Wood and twelve by Bale which are no longer extant. A list of the books, including manuscript notebooks, bequeathed by Paynell to St John's College, Oxford, can be found in Emden (728-30). Disappointingly they shed little light on the work of Paynell the translator. 
Paynell's ability to straddle the religious divide is demonstrated by his manuscript commonplace book (Salisbury MSS, Cecil papers, 5.332) which contains among much else 'The exposytone uppon the psalme 127 by the famus and lerned doctor Martyne Luther of Wyteberge translated owt of Latyne in to Englyshe by Thomas Paynell Esquyre' and twelve lines of poetry on Thomas More (McConica, 139-40). 
The starting point for any reassessment of Thomas Paynell is a letter of A. F. Pollard in the 'Times Literary Supplement' (26 Feb 1931, 156), replying to a provocative, but informative, letter of H. E. Salter which appeared in the same journal (12 Feb 1931, 116). In this letter Pollard virtually repudiated his article in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' and called for a new edition of the dictionary. He now identified five or possibly six Thomas Paynells. Noteworthy are a father and son of this name who were respectively protector and pupil of Robert Barnes. Coincidentally Barnes's fellow martyr Thomas Gerrard was Benese's predecessor at All Hallows. Benese was the appointee of Henry VIII, but Gerrard was, like the translator Paynell, the appointee of the Grocers' Company. Another Thomas Paynell was a cousin of the translator and bailiff of Boston. Their family had founded the house of Austin canons at Drax. Pollard drew attention in this letter to his commonplace book at Hatfield as an important source for future investigations of Paynell. 


@@@@@


doc= 21662


Paynter, David William (bap. 1791, d. 1823), writer, was baptized on 4 March 1791 in St Ann's parish, Manchester, the son of Richard Walter Paynter (died 1811), attorney, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Wittmall. He was educated at the grammar school there, and was intended for the medical profession, but much preferred poetry and the drama. He became closely associated with James Watson, a local literary character, with whom he frequently figured in the magazines and newspapers as Corporal Trim, while Watson called himself Uncle Toby. In 1820 he edited Watson's literary remains, under the title of 'The Spirit of the Doctor', to which he appended some of his own fugitive pieces, including letters from Lancaster Castle, where he was for some time a prisoner for debt. Paynter's 'The Muse in Idleness' (1819) was the subject of a sarcastic review, 'Manchester poetry', published by James Crossley in 'Blackwood's Magazine'. 
In the introduction to his best-known play 'King Stephen, or, The Battle of Lincoln' (1822) Paynter describes his efforts to get his productions put on the stage. After they had been declined by several managers he collected a company of his own, and brought out 'King Stephen' at the Minor Theatre, Manchester, on 5 December 1821. He died at Manchester on 14 March 1823 and was buried at Blackley, near that city. He had married in 1813, and left children. After his death his tragedy 'The Wife of Florence' was staged as a benefit for his widow and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 21663


Paynter, William (1637-1716), college head, was born at Trelissick in the parish of St Erth, Cornwall, and baptized on 7 December 1637, the son of William Paynter or Cambourne, from Antron in Sithney, and Jane, the sixth child of Richard Keigwin of Mousehole. He was thus a kinsman of John Keigwin, the Cornish scholar. He matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, on 29 March 1656, having been admitted as a poor scholar in February of that year. On 3 July 1657 he was elected to a fellowship of the college. He graduated BA in 1660 and proceeded MA in 1663 (incorporated at Cambridge in 1664), BD in 1674, and DD in 1695. 
In 1669, on the grounds that Paynter had been elected to one of the fellowships earmarked for candidates from Devon, Arthur Bury, the college rector and a devout Devonian, suspended Paynter's fellowship, together with those of several other Cornishmen. In spite of this rebuff, in 1685 Paynter gave $100 to Exeter College. The same year he faced scandal when a child was laid at his door in college and was claimed to be his; it was later revealed that a disaffected undergraduate, John Jago, expelled by Paynter for debauchery, had tried to wreak revenge. It was not until 1686, having been appointed to the college living of Wootton, Northamptonshire, that Paynter actually vacated his fellowship. 
Paynter married twice. Although the date of his first marriage is uncertain, it was possibly about the time of his appointment to Wootton rectory; his wife was Mary (1657-1695), daughter of John Conant who had been rector of Exeter College during the interregnum, and his wife, Elizabeth. She was the widow of Matthew Poole MD of St Giles', Northampton. When probate was granted on Poole's will, on 15 March 1690, Mary was already married to Paynter. Mary died on 7 May 1695 and was buried at Wootton near her children, William and Elizabeth. On 16 May 1695, at Preston in Northamptonshire, Paynter married Sarah, daughter of Francis Duncombe of Broughton in Buckinghamshire. 
On 15 August 1690, on the deprivation of Arthur Bury, Paynter was elected by a depleted fellowship to the rectorship of Exeter College. Bury appealed to the court of the king's bench which granted him management of the college until a definite decision on the legality of Bury's dismissal was made. The decision of the bench divided the Exeter fellowship; both Bury's supporters and his opponents attempted to run the college. The 'great Exeter schism' resulted in double elections to fellowships and the disorder was not put right until 1694, when the House of Lords reversed the decision of the king's bench and confirmed Paynter as rector. He held the rectorship until his death, and, in 1698 and 1699, was vice-chancellor of the university. 
Paynter retained the rectory of Wootton until his death there on 18 February 1716; he was buried there on 22 February. His will was proved through the court of the university chancellor on 2 April. His second wife, who survived him, died on 22 September 1725, and was buried at Ilsington, Devon. It is not certain whether they had any children but a Mary Paynter, probably their daughter, married Philip Nanson, the vicar of Ilsington, in Exeter Cathedral in 1723. 


@@@@@


doc= 21664


Peabody, George (1795-1869), merchant banker and philanthropist, was born on 18 February 1795 in South Danvers (later Peabody), Massachusetts, USA, the third child in a family of four sons and four daughters. 
Thomas Peabody, George's father, was descended from a Leicestershire man, Francis Peboddy, a dissenter who had emigrated to Massachusetts on the sailing ship 'Planter' in 1635. His mother, Judith Dodge, was descended from the Spofford family, a dissenting family from Yorkshire, who had likewise emigrated to Massachusetts in the mid-seventeenth century. Thomas Peabody was a casual leather-worker and small-scale farmer who died in 1811, and both before and after his death the family was poor. Peabody's village schooling was limited and irregular, and came to an end at the age of eleven, when he was apprenticed to John Proctor, the owner of a country general store in Danvers. It was from this man that Peabody learned to keep accounts in a clear handwriting and to organize and discipline his daily activities. Over the next several years he changed his occupation several times: he worked on his grandfather's farm in Thetford, Vermont; he rode on horseback through Virginia, hawking goods; he clerked in the store owned by his elder brother David in Newburyport, Massachusetts; and he worked with his uncle, John Peabody, in the District of Columbia. 
Here in 1814 Peabody's luck changed. He impressed a successful merchant of dry goods in Georgetown, Elisha Riggs, and the two of them opened a wholesale warehouse for dry goods, Riggs supplying the money. The next year the partnership of Riggs, Peabody & Co. was formed in Baltimore, specializing in importing dry goods from Britain; in 1822 branches were opened in New York and Philadelphia; and in 1829, with Riggs's retirement, the firm became Peabody, Riggs & Co., with Peabody as senior partner. In 1827 Peabody had made his first business trip to Britain: ten years later, after several such visits, he settled permanently in England. 
In August 1838 Peabody bought a supply of quill pens and ledgers and opened a counting-house. He had survived the panic of 1837, responding to the early signs of trouble by contracting operations and concentrating on collecting debts, and helping other firms who were in difficulties. By now a man of substance, with capital of over $300,000 ($70,000), he could employ others to purchase the goods and sell them in the United States. Peabody was able to concentrate on the financial side of the firm, and during the period 1837-45 gradually turned himself into a merchant banker. He continued to deal in dry goods, in corn for Ireland, in rails for the USA, and in trade with China, but at the same time he increasingly spent his time financing others' foreign trade and dealt especially in American securities, for which he seems to have been the major London specialist. In short, he followed the classic development of a merchant banker in Britain: he began as a merchant, financed his own and then others' trade, and eventually gave up trade in commodities to concentrate on banking and on securities. 
By the late 1840s Peabody had decided that he wanted to build up his firm as the leading American house in London -- the centre of the American trade and for Americans in that trade. He needed correspondents in America, firms with whom he could maintain close connections as sources both of information and business; new types of business were required, and the support of a partner was essential. Building up a network of correspondents, Peabody subsequently moved into railway financing and the export of rails to America, and in 1854 he took a new partner, the American J. S. Morgan, with whose help he would achieve his ambition. Morgan thus joined the premier American house in London, though not yet the premier house in the American trade, a position contested by Baring Brothers and Brown, Shipley & Co. Arranged in an American manner, with current American newspapers laid out on the table, the offices were intended to be a centre for Peabody's American friends while they were visiting England. Peabody was said to entertain every American who arrived at his office, supplying a letter of credit and introducing him around London, and perhaps providing a box at the opera, with a corsage for his wife; in July 1855 he remarked that he had entertained eighty Americans for dinner and thirty-five at the opera within a week. 
Peabody also provided rather more lavish celebrations, and in the 1850s he became known for sumptuous Anglo-American dinners in honour of American diplomats and other notables. During the Great Exhibition at Crystal Palace in 1851, for which the US congress had refused to support the American section, the British press criticized the American exhibits; Peabody advanced $3000 to the embarrassed exhibitors to provide for arranging and decorating the section. He also decided that a bold gesture was necessary, and he gave the first of a regular series of Fourth of July dinners: the duke of Wellington was the guest of honour. Where the duke led others followed, and these dinners were a highly publicized feature of London political life for several years. 
Meanwhile Peabody and Morgan began soliciting business belonging to other firms by charging lower commission, a very un-English activity. This substantially increased business, but the outcome was nearly disastrous, as the company was caught out by the panic of 1857: most of its American correspondent houses contracted, and in some cases failed, owing Peabody substantial sums. Peabody had to ask the Bank of England for a loan of $800,000; the bank would accept American securities as collateral only if guaranteed by residents in England. During the week it took to find these guarantors, rivals tried to force the firm out of business and Peabody 'dared them to cause his failure' (Parker, 95); but far from crashing, the firm emerged from the crisis with its credit intact. 
This favourable outcome was the signal for Peabody to withdraw from active business. He was now sixty-three, tired, and ill, troubled by gout and rheumatism, and he felt time was running out: he was increasingly preoccupied with the dispersal of his fortune. Although he had never married, Peabody had been engaged for some months in 1838 to a young American woman twenty-four years his junior, Esther Elizabeth Hoppin. He had no direct acknowledged heirs, though he had had a mistress in Brighton who had borne him a daughter, to whom he was very generous during his lifetime -- he would regularly withdraw some of his own personal securities, as much as $2000 at a time, to be realized and sent to her. However, he left them nothing in his will. Instead, he devoted the bulk of his fortune to the public good. 
Peabody's philanthropies were divided between America and England. Much of his work in America was devoted to the support of education at many levels. On his visit to the USA in 1852 he gave $30,000 to his home town to found an educational institute, and on his visit in 1857 he founded the Peabody Institute in Baltimore with a gift of $300,000; both sums were later increased. The Baltimore Institute was to provide a library, a gallery of art, an academy of music, and prizes to encourage private and public school pupils. At the same time he gave $1200 annually for gold medals to female high-school graduates in Baltimore, to encourage support for the education of women. On his visit in 1866 he gave Harvard $150,000 to found an institute of archaeology (later the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology), and he presented Yale with a similar amount towards the teaching of physical science (used to found the Peabody Museum of Natural History). Between 1866 and 1869 -- after the civil war -- he gave $2,000,000 to the Peabody Fund for Southern Education, set up in the first instance to provide for the education of newly emancipated slaves. 
In Britain Peabody's major philanthropy was centred on housing. He wanted to leave London some token of his affection for the city. He thought first of an elaborate system of drinking fountains; then he considered helping Lord Shaftesbury's 'ragged schools' for the children of the very poor. In the end, Shaftesbury convinced Peabody that it was more important to provide better housing conditions for the working classes, and in March 1859 Peabody decided that his gift would be a number of model dwellings. By means of the Peabody Donation Fund he gave $500,000 towards building houses to be inhabited by poor Londoners who had good moral characters and were good members of society. The first block was opened in Spitalfields in 1864, and it was soon followed by buildings in Chelsea, Bermondsey, Islington, and Shadwell; by 1882 the fund owned 3500 dwellings and housed more than 14,600 people, and by 1939 there were more than 8000 dwellings. In 1962 the queen mother unveiled a plaque to Peabody at another new Peabody estate in Blackfriars. Peabody was made a freeman of the City of London, the first American to receive this honour, though he turned down the offer of a barony from Queen Victoria. In 1867 the US congress conferred a gold medal on him. Popular subscription raised the funds in England to provide the statue of Peabody in the royal exchange, which was unveiled by the prince of Wales in 1869. 
In 1864 Peabody withdrew entirely from George Peabody & Co., taking much of his capital with him (his fortune amounted to something over $10 million -- more than $2 million). J. S. Morgan succeeded to the senior partnership and the name of the firm was changed to J. S. Morgan & Co.; in 1910 it became Morgan, Grenfell & Co. 
Peabody was an imposing man. He stood 6 feet 1 inch tall, was broad-shouldered, with a round face and large nose, and had blue eyes and very dark brown hair, which by his early forties he was dyeing with 'African balm'. He always liked very good clothes, and when money was no object never economized on quality. Jovial with his friends, he was formal and restrained with many members of his family, his feelings of responsibility sometimes overcoming his feelings of affection -- not surprisingly, when several of his relatives were distinctly feckless. 
The career of George Peabody is an exemplification of much that the nineteenth century found admirable. Beginning his working life honest but poor, Peabody always worked hard -- there are hints throughout his career of long hours and endless days without breaks -- and he did not spurn 'twopenny' business. He was always willing to take a risk, but by and large they were well-judged risks. Another element in his success was his knack of making useful friends, who tended to be wealthy and influential businessmen. His personal traits encouraged trust: he was personally austere while publicly generous. Although he had attended a Congregational church in his youth, he was not ostentatiously religious. Rather, he carried out the puritan doctrine of the stewardship of riches: it has been estimated that he gave away more than $8,600,000. He ended his life wealthy and respected. 
Peabody died on 4 November 1869 at the house of his friend Sir Curtis Miranda Lampson, at 80 Eaton Square, London. His funeral was held in Westminster Abbey, and Queen Victoria and the prime minister, W. E. Gladstone, jointly requested the Royal Navy to provide HMS 'Monarch', the navy's newest ironclad, to take Peabody's body back home; on the orders of President U. S. Grant, it was escorted by the USS 'Plymouth'. The American authorities received the body at Portland, Maine, and there were elaborate services there and in Peabody (as South Danvers had been renamed in 1868). The family tomb, built by Peabody for his parents and other members of his family, was situated in a thick walnut grove in Harmony Rest cemetery on the boundary between Peabody and Salem, Massachusetts. He was finally laid to rest there on 8 February 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 21665


Peach, Charles William (1800-1886), naturalist, was born on 30 September 1800 at Wansford, Northamptonshire, the son of Charles William Peach, saddler, farmer, and innkeeper, and Elizabeth Vellum. He was educated to the age of fifteen, his last three years of schooling being at Folkingham, Lincolnshire. In his youth, he participated enthusiastically in field sports. He first worked for his father, but in 1824 entered the mounted coastguard, initially at several places in Norfolk, then in Dorset and Devon, and subsequently at Gorran Haven, Cornwall, in 1834. On occasion, he had to engage in hand-to-hand encounters with smugglers. With anonymous support from the geologist William Buckland he transferred to the customs at Fowey in 1845. In 1849 he was posted to Peterhead, Scotland. From 1853 he was comptroller at Wick. He married Jemima Mabson on 26 April 1829. They had seven sons and two daughters. One son, Benjamin Neeve Peach, became a renowned member of the Scottish branch of the geological survey. 
Without formal scientific training, but with ample opportunity for studying coastal marine life and coastal rocks, Peach rapidly established a reputation as an observer and a collector. He corresponded with leading British naturalists, attended meetings of the British Association, and became a member or associate of numerous natural history societies, notably the Polytechnic Society of Cornwall and the Physical Society of Edinburgh. Eighty-six publications by Peach are listed in the 'Royal Society Catalogue of Scientific Papers'. Peach was visited in Cornwall by such notables as Alfred Tennyson. In north Scotland he became a friend and fellow worker of the naturalist Robert Dick, the 'baker of Thurso'. 
In marine zoology, Peach discovered new mollusca, encrinites, sea urchins, starfish, polyzoa, fish, sponges, and so on, and a spectacular holothurian with twenty tentacles. In 1838 he discovered obscure fossil fish remains near Polruan, and in the years following he rapidly extended his knowledge of fossil forms in areas of Cornwall previously regarded as unfossiliferous 'primitive' terrain. In 1843 he identified remains from near Polperro as Pteraspidian fish-shields. Frederick McCoy thought these were sponges but Peach was subsequently vindicated by E. Ray Lankester. 
Peach's fossil localities were reported for the benefit of other investigators, and he was always keen to share his knowledge with metropolitan scientists. His Cornish and Devon fossils were referred either to the Silurian (now Ordovician) or to the Devonian systems. He donated his large collection of Cornish fossils to the Geological Society of Cornwall and arranged the materials for them. In Caithness he investigated fossil fish of the Old Red Sandstone together with Dick. In 1853 he made an important fossil discovery in limestone on the coast near Durness, with forms that were construed as Silurian by Sir Roderick Murchison, who used the formation as a stratigraphic marker to claim the rocks of much of northern Scotland as Silurian, though today the schists there are placed in the Precambrian and the limestone is regarded as Cambro-Ordovician. Murchison and Peach undertook joint fieldwork in north-west Scotland in 1858. On retirement to Edinburgh in 1861, Peach did work on glacial geology and palaeobotany. He died at his home, 30 Haddington Place, Edinburgh, on 28 February 1886. 
Peach's work met with much approbation. He was awarded several grants, notably the Wollaston Fund of the Geological Society of London, together with medals from the Cornwall Polytechnic Society and the Neill medal from the Royal Society of Edinburgh. His work was described and praised by Samuel Smiles in his biography of Dick, and both men could be said to exemplify Smilesian ideals of self-help. 


@@@@@


doc= 21666


Peacham, Edmund (1553/4-1616), Church of England clergyman and traitor, was born in Barton, Northamptonshire. Nothing is known about his parents or early life. He matriculated at the age of twenty-one as a sizar at Christ's College, Cambridge, in June 1575. He was ordained deacon in London in 1580 and priest the following year. In 1581 he was appointed vicar of Ridge, Hertfordshire. On 15 July 1587 Peacham was presented by the noted puritan Sir Amias Paulet to the rectory of Hinton St George in Somerset; there he remained until his death in 1616. 
Peacham married Katherine Ballie ('bap'. 1576), from Devon, at Hinton St George on 26 August 1607. He was her senior by twenty-two years and the couple remained childless. He shared the puritan convictions of his patron, and conducted his ministerial duties in Somerset without any known scandal or controversy. Somewhat surprisingly this provincial cleric became embroiled in direct opposition to the policies of the government of James VI and I. Indeed, his actions and the views he expressed from the pulpit transcended the spiritual sphere of his ministerial calling. Peacham's activities brought him into conflict with the civil authorities. His intentions may have been treasonable, as he began to express more extreme ideas, or imprudent, perhaps both. As early as 1603 he was accused of preaching against the new king, the privy council, episcopate, and judiciary. On this occasion no action was taken against him, but his hostility towards the king's religious policies, including James's support for the bishops, coolness towards puritans and presbyterians, and demand for greater uniformity of worship, meant that he began to speak out against the ecclesiastical polity again in 1608. This reaction was triggered by the appointment of James Montagu as bishop of Bath and Wells. Peacham openly attacked Montagu from the pulpit, resulting in a reprimand in the consistory court. This failed to dissuade him from attacking the bishop and he continued to do so intermittently over the next six years. 
In 1614 Peacham further estranged himself from the ecclesiastical authorities by refusing to subscribe to the required benevolence, claiming insufficient means but promising to pray for the king. Meanwhile, resenting the reprimand suffered at the hands of Montagu, he circulated in private a manuscript seriously questioning the bishop's character. In December 1614 Peacham was arrested by the court of high commission on a complaint brought against him by Montagu; he was convicted of libel and deprived of his clerical orders. A search for further evidence of his writings against Montagu revealed a sermon in Peacham's hand, in which he denounced the king, and foretold his death as divine judgment for the actions of the privy council and episcopate. He also wrote that rebellion would probably ensue. James was understandably alarmed when news reached him of the sermon, which though it was never preached seemed to trigger fears of a treasonous plot. The turn of events for Peacham was certainly unforeseen, but worse awaited him, when the king attempted to secure evidence of his treason. On 19 January 1615 Sir Francis Bacon, attorney-general, Henry Montagu (brother of James Montagu), king's serjeant, and the officers of the Tower of London had Peacham tortured. During this interrogation Peacham remained silent. The recourse to torture in such a case of suspected treason was defended by Bacon, setting the legal maxim that torture could be used 'for discovery and not for evidence' ('Works of Francis Bacon', 3.114). The opposition of the Somerset gentry towards the benevolence in 1614 fuelled fears of a wider plot and the apparently ruthless interrogation of the suspect was intended to detect the extent of the threat to James. 
The critical legal issue was whether Peacham should be tried for high treason. In an attempt to clarify this matter Bacon separately consulted the judges before the indictment was made against Peacham. His words were deemed to convey treasonable intent. Sir Edward Coke, chief justice of the king's bench, dissented from this position by asserting that a written attack on the king must 'disable his title' in order to be treasonable. Coke also protested against the canvassing of the judges in the matter. The deciding factor was the king's personal desire to pursue the case, based on his continued animosity towards Peacham. 
Peacham desperately sought to stall the case against him. First he implicated Paulet, and then his patron's brother-in-law, Sir John Sydenham, who were both cleared of complicity after being summoned to appear before the privy council. Finally he suggested that the controversial sermon notes had been the work of his namesake, a contemporary writer, Henry Peacham. In July Edmund Peacham stood trial in Taunton, Somerset, charged with high treason. He was arraigned before Sir Christopher Tanfield and Henry Montagu. James sent Sir Henry Yelverton, solicitor-general, and Sir Randolph Crewe, lord chief justice of the king's bench, to conduct the case for the crown. Peacham was duly found guilty and condemned to death. On 31 August he apparently admitted writing the sermon. No evidence was ever found to substantiate a wider conspiracy against the king. The sentence against him was never carried out because it was not considered politically expedient. 
Peacham died of natural causes in gaol in Taunton on 27 March 1616. The writer John Chamberlain alleged that he left behind an even worse sermon than he had previously written; the story may be apocryphal, but it conveys a sense of the contempt shown towards him. He was certainly guilty of treason. In his disagreement with the ecclesiastical policies of James he became dangerously politicized, hardened as he was by many years of personal opposition to James Montagu. No contemporary puritan tried to defend Peacham's actions, nor did any later question the legitimacy of the proceedings against him. None of his writings have been preserved. His infamy is based on other accounts of his political views as expressed in sermons. These views crossed the boundary between church and state, and the finest legal minds of the day were called upon to protect the person of the king. Their zeal in doing so, involving the use of torture and ignoring the objections of Coke, reveal something about the climate of political fear in Jacobean England as well as highlighting the wasted and blighted clerical career of Peacham. 


@@@@@


doc= 21667


Peacham, Henry (b. 1578, d. in or after 1644), writer and illustrator, was born in the parish of North Mimms, Hertfordshire, the second son of Henry Peacham (1547-1634) and his wife, Anne ('nee' Fairclough). 
At the time of his son's birth, the elder Henry Peacham was the minister of North Mimms, but in 1578 he also obtained the living of Leverton in Lincolnshire. He does not appear to have left North Mimms for Leverton until 1595, but he then served there until his death in 1634. Before leaving North Mimms, the elder Peacham had created what was to be his enduring monument by writing 'The Garden of Eloquence' (1577), a book of rhetoric that was to become celebrated. 
The younger Henry Peacham went to school near St Albans and then in London. In 1592 he matriculated as a sizar of Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took his BA degree in 1595, proceeding MA in 1598. About this time it appears that he may have visited Modena to study music under the direction of the distinguished composer of madrigals, Orazio Vecchi (1550-1605), whom he later described as 'mine owne Master' (H. Peacham, 'Complete Gentleman', 1622, 102). From about 1600 until 1607 Henry Peacham was teaching at Kimbolton School, Huntingdonshire. He was a reluctant schoolmaster, considering such teaching unrewarding and 'one of the most laborious callings in the World' (H. Peacham, 'The Truth of our Times', 1638, 19). Nevertheless, he had grudging recourse to the profession throughout his life. 
While still at Cambridge, and at the age of seventeen, Peacham produced a work that reflected what was to be his lifelong interest in the graphic arts. This was his drawing of a scene from 'Titus Andronicus' done about 1595, commonly accepted as the earliest illustration of a Shakespeare play. In subsequent years Peacham was to produce numerous portraits and emblem plates, as well as write instructional works in the graphic arts. His 'Art of Drawing' (1606), a treatise on drawing and watercolours, was reissued in 1607, and expanded as 'Graphice' (1612). 'Graphice' was further expanded and published again in 1634 and 1661 as 'The Gentleman's Exercise', one of Peacham's most widely read works. 
About 1603 Peacham turned to another of the arts and composed the words and music of a four-part madrigal, 'Awake softly with singing, Oriana sleeping'. This was not published, but is found at the end of the third manuscript version of his emblem book based on 'Basilikon Doron' (1603). 
Peacham had begun to explore the emblem convention in the early 1600s, and his contribution to emblem literature was ultimately to be both substantial and significant. His career as an emblem writer began in 1603 when he presented a few emblems of his own composition to James I in Huntingdon on 27-9 April as the new king was making his way south. This occasion was probably the beginning of Peacham's efforts to obtain preferment at court. Between 1603 and 1610 he composed three emblem books, each of them surviving only in undated manuscript form. They are each based on 'Basilikon Doron' (1599), the king's own book of advice to his young son. The earliest, composed in 1603-4, is dedicated to Prince Henry, the two later manuscripts, probably written about 1604-5 and in 1610, are dedicated respectively to the king himself and again to Prince Henry. 
The earliest of Peacham's manuscript emblem books contains fifty-six pen-and-ink pictures (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. poet. 146), the second book has sixty-five such plates (BL, Harleian MS 6855, art. 13), and the third has seventy-eight (BL, Royal MS 12, A. lxvi). The last differs from the other two in having the plates completed in watercolour. Peacham's work as an emblem writer shows him to have been keenly aware of the symbolism of colour. The plan that he generally follows with each emblem is to base it on a quotation that he has selected from the 1603 edition of 'Basilikon Doron', interpret the picture in four lines of Latin, and add a motto, sometimes in Greek. 
Towards the end of 1607 Peacham appears to have moved to London, where his first known address was Fetter Lane. Some time before 1612 he moved again, this time to the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, where Sara, one of his two daughters, was baptized in the parish church on 27 April. Neither the name of Peacham's wife nor the dates of his marriage and the birth of his other daughter have been established. 
While at St Martin-in-the-Fields Peacham produced his most serious work to date, the emblem book 'Minerva Britanna, or, A Garden of Heroical Devises' (1612). Of its 204 emblems some sixty-two are derived from those of his three 'Basilikon Doron' emblem-book manuscripts. But 'Minerva Britanna' departs in important respects from his previous emblem works. The interpretative verse is in English, and many of the repeated plates differ in detail. Like the manuscript emblems those of 'Minerva Britanna' are generally of the kind that has been labelled 'diagrammatic'. That is, the pictures present a number of different symbols assembled together to represent a single idea. 

'Minerva Britanna' may properly be regarded as belonging to the earliest group of English emblem books. Its emblematic woodcuts are believed to be Peacham's own work. If so, his ability to conceive and execute his own designs meant that he had no need of the sometimes massive borrowing of plates to which other emblem writers perforce resorted. Although the pictures used in 'Minerva Britanna' are of no great distinction they are, for the most part, simple, direct, and wholly relevant to Peacham's needs. The accompanying verse interpreting each plate is, similarly, competent rather than graceful. Although the range of Peacham's topics is wide, very many of them are familiar. He acknowledges numerous sources and it is easy to identify others. For example, like so many of his contemporaries, he draws heavily upon Cesare Ripa's 'Iconologia' (1593) and to a lesser extent upon Spenser's 'The Faerie Queene' (1596). 
In 1612, shortly after Peacham moved to St Martin-in-the-Fields, Prince Henry, whose patronage he had so carefully sought, died. Although he was only eighteen years of age at the time of his death, the prince's accomplishments and his exciting promise were so universally respected as to make his passing a national disaster. From the flood of literary tributes to him a new kind of elegiac writing emerged. It was a genre at which Peacham was to excel and he began in this kind with 'The Period of Mourning' (1613), lamenting the prince. 
Not long after the death of Prince Henry, and perhaps in some measure as a consequence, Peacham left England in order to travel, principally in France, Germany, and the Low Countries. On this tour he clearly sought every opportunity of enlarging his already wide interests and of acquiring a substantial part of his ultimately considerable learning. 
Peacham's progress through Europe terminated at Utrecht where he 'lived at the table of that Honourable Gentleman, Sir 'John Ogle', Lord Governour of the town' ('Complete Gentleman', 195). Ogle was a man of learning, and it was said that the company which assembled at his house effectively constituted an academy. Greatly to Peacham's advantage, he and Ogle became friends. While in Utrecht with Ogle, Peacham completed 'Prince Henrie Revived' (1615), a lofty poem in honour of the birth in 1614 of Prince Henry Frederick, the son of Princess Elizabeth and the count palatine. 
It was through Ogle that Peacham gained some knowledge of military affairs. In writing of his experiences Peacham does not make it clear whether he was, himself, a fighting member of the protestant forces in the Netherlands, but he was certainly with the section of Colonel Ogle's regiment that served under the command of Prince Maurice of Nassau in the autumn of 1614. Peacham's account of events was published as 'A most True Relation of the Affaires of Cleve and Gulick' (1615). By the time this appeared Peacham was back in England, and had returned to teaching. He took up a post at the free grammar school in Wymondham, Norfolk, about 1615 and remained there until 1620. 
Peacham's sojourn in Norfolk is noteworthy for the friends and acquaintances he made and for the publication of his next substantial work, 'Thalia's Banquet' (1620), a book of epigrams. Many of the 127 epigrams are dedicated to his recent acquaintances. The composition of epigrams was not a new departure for Peacham since his first publication after his removal to London in 1607 had also been a collection of epigrams, 'The More the Merrier' (1608). Among those persons of some consequence that Peacham came to know while living in Norfolk were William Howard, the young son of the earl of Arundel, and Richard Sackville, third earl of Dorset. He was to honour both of them in print. 
By 1621 Peacham had returned to London and was teaching in St Martin-in-the-Fields. At this time he completed his 'Emblemata varia', the last of his four emblem books to survive only in manuscript. It is a much shorter work than any of the others, having only twenty emblems, none of them being used for the second time, and all of them presented with uncharacteristic economy. There is a striking absence of the marginal annotations found in Peacham's previous emblem books. The following year Peacham was living at Hoxton. 

'The Complete Gentleman' (1622), which Peacham finished after his return to London, is probably his best-known work, and it occupies a significant place in the history of courtesy literature. Its immediate inspiration was Peacham's conviction, arising from his continental tour, that the education of young English gentlemen was markedly inferior to that afforded to European gentry. By now the courtesy book was being addressed to an audience less markedly aristocratic, and although 'The Complete Gentleman' was for the use of William Howard it is clear that Peacham sought popular appeal. 'The Complete Gentleman' offers advice over a wide range of topics with humour and sagacity, and reflects many aspects of Peacham's experience. It is not surprising that he should attribute poor education to the remissness of parents, nor that he wrote with urgency about painting and drawing. Several chapters have become classic statements, like that 'Of poetry' which was to be frequently quoted as a summary of contemporary views. The learning displayed here offers ample justification for Peacham's claim 'By profession I am a Scholler' ('Graphice', 1612, sig. A2'v'). 
No later than 1624 Peacham had returned to East Anglia, and was working as a schoolmaster in Boston. At this time he produced 'An Aprill Shower', the elegy on Richard Sackville, earl of Dorset. Although Peacham had enjoyed Lord Dorset's benevolence it was apparently not for long, and, now, once more, an untimely death deprived him of a patron. It is not clear how long Peacham's teaching appointment in Boston extended, but in 1632 he was given a temporary post at Heighington Free School, Lincolnshire. 
In 1629 Frances Rich, countess of Warwick, invited Peacham to design for her a monument to be erected on her death in Snarford church, Lincolnshire. It was a task for which Peacham's talents were admirably suited; but Lady Warwick changed her mind, and the plan remained unused. In his elegy for her, 'Thestylis atrata' (1634), Peacham writes of the 'many favors' that he had received from her. If these words are more than conventional it appears that death had yet again robbed him of the patronage he so obviously desired. The ten years between 1624 and 1634 which Peacham spent in East Anglia were relatively unproductive. But to this period there does belong the appearance in 1627 and 1634 of the important second and third editions of 'The Complete Gentleman' and the 1634 edition of 'The Gentleman's Exercise'. 
After concluding his period of teaching at Heighington School in 1635 Peacham appears to have returned, once more, to London. The final years of his life are obscure. He has recorded that some time during this period he was 'exercised in another calling' ('Truth of our Times', 1638, 41), though its nature is unknown. But there was a recrudescence of his creative energy, and between 1636 and 1642 he published ten prose works. Most of these might be described as pamphlets, and their variety -- from comic to polemic -- has led to the speculation that Peacham was existing in poverty and making a living with his pen. 
As a comic writer Peacham began with 'Coach and Sedan' (1636), an exuberant piece of humorous writing cast in the form of a dialogue in which various modes of transport are considered. In a more serious vein he produced 'The Truth of our Times' (1638), fundamentally an unembittered recollection of a lifetime's disappointments. Stylistically, this is among the best books Peacham ever wrote in prose, and he appears to have had especial affection for the work. 'The Worth of a Peny' (1641), essentially a simple exhortation to thrift, was one of Peacham's most popular pieces (ten editions appearing in the seventeenth century alone). With the approach of civil war Peacham, a man of royalist and Anglican sympathies, joined in the current religious controversy with a polemic, 'The Duty of All True Subjects' (1639), that makes his position clear. He deplores the zeal of those who would reform the monarchy and the church, and continued this theme with three more pamphlets in 1641 and 1642. 
One of the happiest aspects of Peacham's life in these final years was his collaboration with Wenceslaus Hollar, the great Dutch engraver. Hollar had been brought to England by the earl of Arundel in 1636 and employed in creating a pictorial record of various objects in Arundel's celebrated collection of works of art and antiquities. All told Hollar and Peacham collaborated in producing six pictorial engravings with accompanying text by Peacham. The first of these, done in 1637, was an engraving of Giulio Romano's 'Seleucus and Son' to which Peacham provided accompanying Latin verse. This was their only joint product that was based on an item in Arundel's collection. The others depict a view of Greenwich (1637), a diptych of Richard II and the Virgin Mary (1639), a broadside emblem 'En surculus arbor' (1641), a satirical work (1641?), and the interior of the Royal Exchange (1644). 
The precise date and place of Peacham's death have not been satisfactorily established. Although there are some contemporary references, the evidence they provide is conflicting. It seems most likely that he was still alive when Hollar's engraving of the Royal Exchange, to which he contributed Latin and English verse, was published in 1644. 


