@@@@@


doc= 21668


Peachell, John (1628/9-1690), college head, was the son of Robert Peachell of Fillingham, Lincolnshire. He was educated at Gainsborough School and on 1 August 1645, at the age of sixteen, was admitted a sizar of Magdalene College, Cambridge, where his tutor was John Dacres. Peachell's mother was aunt of the incumbent master, Edward Rainbow, and he undoubtedly came to the college by this connection. On 2 May 1646 he was admitted a scholar on Lady Warwick's foundation; he matriculated in that year and graduated BA in 1649. On 18 March 1650 he was elected and admitted a fellow on Smith's foundation, and on 3 January 1652 was elected to a Spendluffe fellowship. In 1653 he proceeded MA, and was incorporated at Oxford in the same year. On 3 November 1656 he was elected to a perpetual (founder's) fellowship, to which he was admitted on 6 November. On 20 September 1660 his fellowship was confirmed; he then temporarily resigned to allow the restoration of those ejected under the Commonwealth, on the understanding that he would recover his place and seniority when a vacancy occurred. 
Peachell was a popular tutor, his pupils including his successor as master, Gabriel Quadring, and the Hon. Clotworthy Skeffington, son of one of James II's most resolute opponents. Echoes of puritanism can be discerned in Peachell's letters, but he was drinking Charles II's health three months before the Restoration. Pepys (a Magdalene contemporary) records this and other meetings with Peachell, though he eventually felt ashamed to be seen with the red-nosed ('though otherwise... good-natured') don (Pepys, 'Diary', 8.199). In 1661 Peachell took the degree of BD. From 1663 to 1681, by the presentation of Sir John Cutts, he was rector of Childerley, Cambridgeshire. On 18 November 1667 his cousin Rainbow, now bishop of Carlisle, made him his archdeacon and a canon of his cathedral; these dignities were resigned by March 1669. Peachell also held the Cumberland livings of Great Salkeld (1667-8) and Stanwix. In 1679 he was appointed master of Magdalene by the earl of Suffolk, the hereditary visitor; his admission took place on 12 August. In the following year he took the degree of DD. In 1681 he exchanged his rectory of Childerley for that of Dry Drayton, Cambridgeshire. 
In 1686 Peachell was elected vice-chancellor of Cambridge University, and in this capacity was faced with James II's command of 7 February 1687 that an MA be conferred on a Benedictine, Alban Francis, without the customary oath. When the king's letter was formally read on 21 February, the senate decided that the vice-chancellor should not confer the degree, and Peachell wrote to the duke of Albemarle (the chancellor) in the hope that the king would withdraw his contentious demand. Peachell also wrote anxiously to the bishop of Ely, Pepys, and others. On 11 March the senate advised the vice-chancellor to resist a further royal order, and unsurprisingly on 9 April the university authorities were summoned before the ecclesiastical commission. Peachell led the delegation, which made its first appearance on 21 April. He at once asked for time to submit a written deposition, which was allowed. On 27 April he was questioned by Lord Chancellor Jeffreys, and gave a convincing display of amentia. In this there may have been some artifice, for Peachell was well connected, and not so innocent of worldly affairs as he claimed. But his bumbling performance made easy work for the lord chancellor, who showed the Cambridge men's case to be unsound in law and precedent. Peachell was adjudged responsible for the university's flagrant disobedience, and on 7 May was dismissed from his vice-chancellorship and suspended as master (though the college quietly continued his emoluments). The Francis issue was forgotten as the larger controversy over Magdalen College, Oxford, developed. On 24 October 1688 Peachell was restored to his mastership by the king's order; his term as vice-chancellor would have by then in any case expired. A month earlier Pepys had offered him a naval chaplaincy; on 27 September Peachell replied that thirty years ago he had 'a little itch to such a service', but no longer ('Letters and the Second Diary', 195). 
Peachell died, unmarried, in 1690, supposedly after trying to keep sober for four days, and was buried in his college chapel. The college cook, Peter Betson, administered his estate. Peachell's most useful work was in soliciting funds for the new building which would form Magdalene's second court, and where Pepys's library would eventually be housed. 


@@@@@


doc= 21669


John Peachie (fl. 1683), physician, who was an MD of Caen and extra licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians (26 July 1683), was not the same person as above. To this other Peachie has been ascribed, on slender evidence, a series of short tracts, published from 1672 to 1695, on various exotic botanicals, with titles of the form: 'Some Observations Made upon the... Written by...'. 


@@@@@


doc= 21670


Peacock, Sir Barnes (1810-1890), judge, was the third son of Lewis H. Peacock (died 1839), a solicitor and messenger to the great seal, of 38 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London. On 29 January 1828 he was admitted at the Inner Temple, but postponed his call to the bar until he had practised for several years as a special pleader. He was called on 29 January 1836, joined the home circuit, and was soon considered a sound lawyer. 
Peacock made his chief reputation as one of the counsel for Daniel O'Connell in his August 1844 appeal to the House of Lords, and a technical objection he suggested led the majority of the Lords to allow the appeal. He stated that the indictment contained numerous counts and several separate charges, and that some of the counts had been held bad in law. Yet on this indictment, and on good counts and bad counts indiscriminately, one general verdict and judgment had been given. This was in accordance with a practice which, however slovenly, was common and supposedly valid, but the House of Lords declared it a wrong practice, and that a judgment so given could not stand. 
Despite this success Peacock did not become a QC until 28 February 1850; he was elected a bencher of the Inner Temple on 10 May the same year (reader, 1864). From April 1852 to April 1859 he was legal member of the supreme council of the viceroy at Calcutta, in succession to Drinkwater Bethune, and there, in the preparation of various codifying acts, he proved his quality as a jurist. Agreeing with 'the spirit of the age' (Ambirajan, 108) in 1853 he presented a bill, subsequently passed, to repeal usury legislation. He wrote an important minute on Oudh, advocating complete annexation. In 1859 he succeeded Sir James Colville in the chief justiceship of the supreme court in Calcutta, and was knighted by patent on 26 May. He held the post, the duties of which were modified in 1862 on the constitution of the high court, until 1870. 
Peacock's belief in 'laissez-faire', property rights, and the classical economists was expressed in his 1862 key judgment on rents and 'Act X' of 1859 in 'James Hills v. Ishwar Ghose' when, citing Malthus, he ruled that the landowner should profit through rent from increased land value. He assumed zemindars were absolute proprietors and ryots only tenants at will. His judgment was a 'bombshell', a blow to the government policy of protecting the ryots, and was much criticized. Sir Henry Maine wrote of 'Peacock's principle of rackrent' (Ambirajan, 122) and a later historian has alleged that it was 'utterly devoid of any understanding of the sociological realities of the Bengal peasantry' (ibid.). However, Peacock's judgment was reversed by the 1865 verdict of the full bench in 'Thakoorannee Dossee v. Kashi Prasad Mukherjea' (the 'Great rent case'), which ruled that rents could be increased by landlords only to the extent of the movement of the price level. 
Peacock was indefatigable in moulding the practice of his court as an appellate tribunal, and for eighteen years, with remarkable vigour, worked in the plains of India with only one furlough. In 1870 he resigned and returned to England, where, in June 1872, he was appointed under the 1871 act a paid member ($5000 p.a.) of the judicial committee of the privy council. There his knowledge of Indian customs, his industry and accuracy made him especially useful. He was sitting to hear appeals only three days before his death. 
Peacock married twice: first, in 1835, Elizabeth (died 1865), daughter of William Fanning; and second, in 1870, Georgina, daughter of Major-General Charles Lionel Showers CB. He was slight and short, an indifferent speaker, but had exceptional memory and application. He died from heart failure at his home, 40 Cornwall Gardens, Kensington, London, on 3 December 1890. He was survived by his second wife. 
Peacock's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 21671


Peacock, Dmitri Rudolf (1842-1892), philologist, was born on 26 September 1842 at the village of Shakhmanovka, district of Kozlov, in the government of Tambov, Russia, the son of Charles Peacock, estate manager, and his wife, Concordia, 'nee' Schlegel. He was educated at a school in England, and afterwards at the University of Moscow. On 25 October 1881 he was appointed vice-consul at Batumi, which had become more important since its annexation by the Russians. He became consul on 27 January 1890. Travellers in the Caucasus found a warm welcome there. 
Peacock probably owed his appointments to his familiarity with the Russian language: few foreigners were better acquainted with the languages and customs of the Caucasus mountain peoples, with whom he established such friendly relations that he was admitted into their remotest strongholds. His expeditions led to the publication of 'Original vocabularies of five west Caucasian languages' -- Georgian, Mingrelian, Lazian, Svanetian, and Abkhazian ('Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society', 1877, 145-56). Up to that time no contribution on these languages had appeared in English, and, unsurprisingly, it was not without errors. It was still considered an important enough work, however, to merit reprinting as a pamphlet in 1888, when the author's name was given as Demetrius R. Peacock. 
On 14 October 1891 Peacock was appointed consul-general at Odessa, but had only been in residence a few weeks when he became ill, probably from Caucasian fever, the marshes which surrounded Batumi being very unhealthy. He died on 23 May 1892 at the Hotel de Londres, Odessa, and was buried in the British cemetery there. He left a widow, Tatyana, 'nee' Bakunin, and three sons and three daughters; they were living in 1894 at Dyadino in Russia. Peacock was a man of rare attainments, but left little that showed his abilities. According to the 'Levantine Herald', as quoted by 'The Athenaeum', he wrote a book on the Caucasus which was not approved by the Foreign Office. His widow promised to publish it, but it is not known whether it ever appeared. 


@@@@@


doc= 21672


Frederick Barnes Peacock (1836-1894), was educated at East India College, Haileybury, entered the Bengal civil service, and landed in India in February 1857. He was employed in the revenue and judicial department, became registrar of the high court in May 1864, was president of the committee on the affairs of the king of Oudh, officiating secretary to the board of revenue in 1871, a magistrate and collector in 1873, commissioner of the Dacca division in 1878 and of the Presidency division in 1881. He was admitted at the Inner Temple on 16 April 1866 and called to the bar on 9 June 1880. In 1883 he was appointed chief secretary to the government of Bengal for the judicial, political, and appointments departments, an acting member of the board of revenue in 1884, and an actual member in 1887, and in 1890 he was made a CSI (21 May) and retired. He died on board the 'Britannia', off Sicily, on 14 April 1894. 


@@@@@


doc= 21673


Peacock, George (1791-1858), mathematician and university reformer, was born on 9 April 1791 at Thornton Hall, Denton, near Darlington, co. Durham, one of eight children and the youngest of five sons of Thomas Peacock, perpetual curate and schoolmaster at Denton. He attended Sedbergh School and then, at the age of seventeen, Richmond School under the mastership of James Tate, formerly a fellow of Sidney Sussex College, a moulder of numerous outstanding Cambridge students, and a staunch whig. Having stood at the head of his class at Richmond, in the summer of 1809 Peacock read with John Brass, a Trinity undergraduate who was to become the sixth wrangler of 1811. Peacock was admitted as a sizar at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 21 February 1809 and matriculated in the following Michaelmas Term. In 1810 he won one of the Bell scholarships dedicated to needy sons of clergymen, and in 1812 he was awarded a college scholarship. The following summer he read mathematics with Adam Sedgwick, later to become Woodwardian professor of geology. Like Peacock, Sedgwick was a whig in politics and a strong supporter of reform in the university, and the two were to enjoy a lifelong friendship. Peacock graduated as second wrangler and second Smith's prizeman in 1813, became a fellow of Trinity in 1814 and received his MA in 1816. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1818, and joined the Astronomical Society in 1820 and the Geological Society in 1822. He was also ordained priest (1822) and gained a DD (1839). He was a mathematics lecturer at Trinity from 1815, a tutor from 1823 to 1839, and Lowndean professor of astronomy and geometry from 1837 until his death. 
As an undergraduate Peacock was a founding member of the Analytical Society (in 1812). The society dedicated itself to importing into Cambridge, and developing, continental pure analytics, mainly from France. Enamoured with the French, it denigrated the fluxional notation and the easily intuited fluxions and fluxional mixed (applied) mathematics derived from Isaac Newton, who was revered as the embodiment of Cambridge mathematics and English culture. In an era dominated by fear of the French Revolution and Napoleon, the clerics who ruled Cambridge, primarily the heads of colleges, were suspicious of French mathematics, and doubted the motives of the reformers. In this atmosphere the Analytical Society accomplished little. However, in 1816 Peacock joined two of its leaders, Charles Babbage and John Herschel, in translating a French calculus textbook by S. F. Lacroix. In 1820, the trio published a book of examples to illustrate the theoretical calculus, in acquiescence to the Cambridge tradition of teaching by means of exemplification, as opposed to the French method of teaching via abstract principles that had earlier been advocated by the Analytical Society. This tactic of gaining influence through partial accommodation with the educational traditions of Cambridge was largely devised by Peacock. Supplemented by the collection of examples, the Lacroix translation, while updating Cambridge mathematics, also fitted into the Cambridge curriculum; consequently, the two publications had an immediate and long-lasting influence. 
Peacock also ventured reform as moderator of the tripos. In the 1817 tripos, to the dismay of the Cambridge traditionalists, he stressed pure analytics. He also introduced the continental notation for differentiation. Even though he translated the foreign notation into the fluxional notation at the bottom of his papers, his employment of dy/dx raised an outcry against French mathematics from the university traditionalists to the point that Peacock feared some official proceedings against him. Peacock furthermore contrived to limit the 'viva voce' portion of the tripos to allow more time for printed problem papers, in hopes of rewarding mathematical talent rather than memorization of standard bookwork. This endeavour failed when, under pressure from older members of the university, the other moderator and the examiners deserted Peacock. Likewise, they adhered to the traditional mathematics, much to the chagrin of Peacock who believed this vitiated any effect his own papers might have had. In the end, though historians almost universally point to Peacock's examination papers of 1817 as effecting the 'analytical revolution', Peacock himself concluded that they accomplished nothing. 
In the tripos of 1819 Peacock and his fellow moderator, Richard Gwatkin, who had also been a member of the now defunct Analytical Society, again employed the continental notation, and from this point it became the norm at Cambridge. However, peeved by the students' lack of physical knowledge, Peacock decided to introduce a large dose of traditional mixed mathematics into the 'viva voce' examination. He rationalized his retreat on the grounds that Gwatkin had forged ahead, and also on the grounds of political expediency: he hoped that his actions in 1819 would appease the powers that be whom he had alienated in 1817. He had been influenced by Jean-Baptiste Biot, the French physicist, who, while visiting Cambridge in 1818, had asserted that the French erred in neglecting Newton's 'Principia'. In the same vein, Peacock pondered working Newton's optics into his college lectures. In mathematics education he was, from the start, a reformer who sought a middle ground between the traditionalists and the radical analysts, and he maintained this position of compromise: thus in the 1850s he argued for curricular emphasis on mixed mathematics, the maintenance of the older intuitive approach, and the suppression of excessive abstract analytics. 
Peacock, like the French-based mathematician J. L. Lagrange, and like an older Cambridge reformer, Robert Woodhouse, urged founding the calculus by algebraically developing the successive derivatives of a function as the successive coefficients of the function's expansion in a Taylor series. He rejected limit theory-based calculus, be it that of Newton, of Lacroix in the textbook that he helped translate, or of Augustin Cauchy, the French mathematician who inspired the 'rigorous' foundations for the calculus as it would develop on the continent. He urged the Taylor series foundation, not because he thought it more rigorous -- he thought all foundations could be made rigorous -- but, rather, because he believed it to be more intuitively clear than limit-based formulations. In an 1833 report on analysis to the British Association for the Advancement of Science, Peacock noted Cauchy's insistence that only convergent series were legitimate and reviewed numerous convergency tests, but he rejected the necessity for these limit-based concerns in pure analysis. In his 1830 'Treatise on Algebra' (enlarged and revised edn, 1842-5), which he dedicated to Tate, Peacock provided his vision of analysis as formal algebra, a vision which reflected ideas of Woodhouse, Babbage, and other Cambridge mathematicians. Although this work earned Peacock renown as one of the founders of abstract algebra, here, as in his pedagogical predilections, he did not elude the intuitive, as recognized by his contemporaries and by modern historians. 
Underlying Peacock's stake in intuitive mathematics was his interest in physical science. From 1816 to 1824, he was the primary mover in the building of the university observatory in opposition to some of the oligarchy. In 1819 he partook in the founding of the Cambridge Philosophical Society and became its vice-president (1831 and 1840) and president (1841-2). In 1830 he declined to sign a petition in support of John Herschel's candidacy for the presidency of the Royal Society during a campaign for the professionalization of British science organized by Charles Babbage. Moreover, as a member of the society's council, he worked closely with the duke of Sussex, the whig brother of the king, after the duke defeated Herschel in the presidential election. 
In 1829 Peacock was the leading member of a syndicate charged with planning a university complex which included a substantial science centre. Although by February 1831 the senate had authorized financing for one half of the structure, including most of the science complex, a feud broke out between Peacock and another advocate for the structure, William Whewell. The feud lead to a scurrilous pamphlet war and caused the senate to question the proposals. The result was a decades-long delay in building the complex. None the less, upon being appointed to the Lowndean professorship by a whig government, Peacock gave well-attended lectures on practical astronomy in contrast to his predecessors in the chair who had given no lectures in the previous sixty-seven years. He also tendered lectures on pure mathematics, but these attracted no audience. 
In 1843, five years into serving as a member of the commissions for restoring the standards of weight and measures which had been destroyed in the burning of the parliament building, and four years after having been appointed dean of Ely (1839) by a whig government, Peacock turned the astronomy lectures over to the Plumian professor of astronomy and experimental philosophy. He retained the Lowndean chair as a sinecure for the rest of his life. However, he sustained his interest in science, as witnessed by the fact that he continued writing a biography of Thomas Young, the natural philosopher who promoted the wave theory of light. Peacock published the biography and two volumes of Young's works in 1855. 
In 1841 Peacock published 'Observations on the Statutes of the University of Cambridge', an advocacy of academic and political reform of the university and colleges based upon a whig interpretation of history. However, Peacock's ability to effect reform diminished when, later in 1841, a tory government appointed the Conservative Whewell to the mastership of Trinity, arguably the most powerful post in Cambridge and, not surprisingly, a position which Peacock, like Whewell, considered the summit of his ambition. Peacock gained the co-operation of Whewell in establishing a board of mathematical studies to rein in the anarchy of successive moderators and examiners expanding the tripos without approval of the senate, and he used his membership on the board, a consequence of his being Lowndean professor, to implement this restraint, but he had not the leverage within Cambridge to force political reform. However, whig governments appointed Peacock, Sedgwick, and Herschel to a royal commission of inquiry at Cambridge in 1850, and Peacock to a royal statutory commission for Cambridge in 1855. Although he died before the latter commission finished its work, through these commissions Peacock was able to initiate many reforms in the university and colleges, despite the vehement opposition of Whewell and other conservatives. 
As dean of Ely, Peacock threw himself into the restoration of Ely Cathedral, both in directing the restoration and in raising funds. He was a prolocutor of the lower house of the convocation of Canterbury from 1841 to 1847 and from 1852 until 1857, when failing health prompted his resignation. He also brought about improvements in the city of Ely's drainage system and fostered the education of the middle and lower classes. In addition to his other ecclesiastical appointments, from 1847 onwards he was rector of Wentworth, near Ely. 
In 1847 Peacock married Frances Elizabeth, daughter of William Selwyn, a QC and Cambridge graduate from Trinity. He suffered declining health over the ensuing decade, and he died, childless, on 8 November 1858 at 16 Suffolk Street, Pall Mall, London. He was buried in the Ely cemetery. In 1866, his widow married W. H. Thompson, whose tutor Peacock had been; Thompson had led the agitation for reform from within Trinity during the time of the parliamentary commissions, and a whig government, upon Whewell's death, appointed him master of Trinity shortly before the marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 21674


Peacock, George (1805-1883), naval officer, was born at Navy House, Exmouth, Devon, on 9 June 1805, the second son of Richard George Peacock and his wife, Elizabeth Sanders. His father, a former master in the navy, then a merchant shipowner, took the boy from Dawlish grammar school, aged thirteen, to be his apprentice. Having served in the Mediterranean and Brazil, rising gradually to command a ship on a voyage to the Pacific, in 1828 Peacock joined the navy as second master on the 'Echo', the first regularly commissioned steamship in the service, to survey the lower Thames. He was ordered to the West Indies in the 'Winchester' in 1829, and was appointed acting master of the 'Magnificent' in March 1831. 
After exchanging to the 'Hyacinth' he surveyed the harbour of San Juan de Nicaragua (San Juan del Norte) and suggested a route across the isthmus from San Juan to the Pacific. He also recommended Victor Cove (Colon) as the terminus of a railway across the isthmus of Panama. Fifty years later Comte Ferdinand de Lesseps acknowledged his debt to Peacock's survey in his own direction of the cutting of the Panama Canal ('Western Times', 23 June 1882). 
In 1835, as master of the 'Medea' in the Mediterranean, he surveyed the isthmus of Corinth, marked the line of a possible canal, and presented his chart and plans to King Otho of Greece. In 1882, when work on the Corinth Canal began, King George of Greece honoured Peacock with the royal order of the Redeemer. 
As master of the 'Andromache', Peacock surveyed, buoyed, and beaconed the harbours of Charlottetown and Three Rivers, Prince Edward Island, in 1838. After applying unsuccessfully to be appointed to a ship going to the First Opium War, he 'became disgusted with the Royal Naval service... having been badly treated by the Admiralty generally 'for want of influential political friends'' (his italics) and on 14 February 1840, 'reluctantly and respectfully' resigned his commission (Lpool RO, Pea 3/4). 
Offered a post by the Pacific Steam Navigation Company, Peacock superintended the building and equipment of the 'Peru' and the 'Chile'. In overall command of the expedition, he took them, the first steamships ever to navigate the Strait of Magellan, to the Pacific coast. From 1840 to 1846 he was the company's marine superintendent there, during which time he 'laid down Buoys -- erected Beacons -- built a Lighthouse -- surveyed Harbours -- opened and worked Coal-mines -- discovered new Guano-beds -- suggested Railways -- rendered valuable services occasionally to her Majesty's Cruisers -- and... in the face of a thousand unlooked for difficulties and perplexing annoyances, succeeded in establishing Steam Navigation under the Flag of England along the coast of Five Republics... from Chiloe to Panama; and brought from Valparaiso to Panama... the 'first' regular Mails. (Peacock, 7)' In 1848 Peacock became dock master, subsequently superintendent, of Southampton docks. In the same year he formed a company, Peacock and Buchan, for the manufacture of his patented anti-fouling paint for iron ships. He was able proudly to claim that numerous iron sailing ships had returned from India and the west coast of South America 'after an absence of from TEN to FOURTEEN MONTHS with PERFECTLY CLEAN BOTTOMS' (pamphlet appended to G. Peacock, 'A Treatise on Ships' Cables'). 
Peacock was an indefatigable inventor. Aged seventeen he invented and fitted a screw propeller to the longboat of his father's brig 'Fanny'. Between 1828 and 1876, he invented, among many other things, an invulnerable floating battery, a refuge buoy beacon, and Peacock's Synovia, a lubricating preparation for ships' engines. He devised a method of making fresh water from condensed sea water on steamships. Despite its successful use for many years on steamships he served in, the Admiralty scorned the idea. In 1839 someone pirated and patented the system with a few small changes, receiving praise and pecuniary reward from the government: 'Such are the Laws of Patent!' wrote Peacock in disgust (Lpool RO, Pea 3/32). His most charming invention was the Nautilus Bathing Dress of 1828, for 'Swimming in Safety with Decorum'. One of these garments, the top half inflatable by means of a nozzle, Captain Peacock carried always with him at sea, keeping it under his pillow at night. In 1879, it was put into manufacture, and he had himself photographed modelling both front and rear elevations. A sense of the ridiculous does not seem to have been among the captain's many estimable qualities. 
In 1858, feeling 'desirous of ending his days... with some honourable acknowledgement of his services' (Peacock, 12), he petitioned the Admiralty to reinstate his name on the list of masters of 1835 -- but in vain. In 1860 he commanded an unsuccessful expedition, under the patronage of Napoleon III, to look for nitrates in the Sahara. 
Peacock published several pamphlets, among them 'Official Correspondence', relating to his naval career (1859), 'Handbook of Abyssinia' (1867), 'A Treatise on Ships' Cables' (1873), 'The Resources of Peru' (1874), and 'Notes on the Isthmus of Panama and Darien' (1879). Peacock's wife, Jane, died in December 1878; his three sons also predeceased him. It was at Ashfield House, Holly Road, Fairfield, near Liverpool, the home of his only daughter, Jane Ash, wife of Henry Cookson, that he died on 6 June 1883. He was buried in the family vault at Starcross, Devon, three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 21675


Peacock, James (d. 1653), naval officer, was a native of Ipswich, and probably the son of James Peacock of that town, mariner, who was listed in 1617 and 1629 as a younger brother of Trinity House. The younger James Peacock appears to have begun his career as a merchant captain and is mentioned as captain and part owner of the 'Dragon' collier which served parliament in 1642-5, but may then have been dropped, possibly because it had proved to be a 'heavy sailer' ('The Humble Remonstrance of Andrewes Burrell', Thomason Tracts). He was commander of the 5th-rate 'Warwick' in 1646 and in 1647 commanded a squadron of five ships in the North Sea. He was then promoted to the new 4th-rate frigate, the 'Tiger', which between October and December patrolled the waters around the Isle of Wight while the king was confined in Carisbrooke Castle. 
During the second civil war in 1648, when much of the parliamentary fleet revolted to the king, Peacock remained loyal to parliament. He took an important part in the siege of Colchester, helping to capture Mersea Island Fort and defeating a sally aimed at recapturing shipping in the river. He then joined the earl of Warwick in the Thames, was present at the confrontation with the royalist fleet and helped blockade it in Goree later in the year. 
During 1649 Peacock again commanded the 'Tiger' and a small squadron in the North Sea, capturing at least three prizes. He also had to suppress a mutiny over pay, for which a naval official held him partly to blame, accusing him of being 'too uxorious' and of 'lying ashore with his wife' (Worcester College, Oxford, Clarke MS 4/4/18). In 1650 the 'Tiger' went with Blake to Portugal in pursuit of Prince Rupert. Peacock's predatory instincts were again in evidence when he captured a Portuguese man-of-war under the guns of Fort St Julian. The last mention of the 'Tiger' was on 22 July, suggesting that Peacock had returned home with Badiley's squadron just before Rupert's escape. On 17 January 1651 he and his crew were paid a gratuity for their good service, which probably related to the capture of the privateer the 'Crowned lion', and he was also awarded a gold medal and chain to the value of $50. In February 1651 he sailed for the Mediterranean with the squadron under Captain Edward Hall. There are no direct references either to Peacock or the 'Tiger' during the expedition and he was back in Tilbury Hope on 1 October. He then returned to his old beat in the North Sea, among other things convoying $80,000 to the army in Scotland. 
Peacock was still in command of the 'Tiger' when the First Anglo-Dutch War broke out. His ship was among those in the Downs on 7 June and he was commended by Blake for his capture of a Flemish privateer three days later. His assignment to North Sea convoy duties once more makes it unlikely that he was present at the battles of Kentish Knock and Dungeness but his capture of twenty prizes made a great impression and he was promised command of a squadron to be sent to the Mediterranean although, in the event, the expedition was abandoned. The respect with which he was by now held was demonstrated by his selection as one of six officers who drew up a revised fleet plan after Dungeness. In the subsequent reorganization he was assigned to the newly launched 3rd-rate frigate, the 'Rainbow', and made vice-admiral of the White squadron. On the first day of the battle of Portland, 16-18 February 1653, the White squadron was the last to engage and so Peacock missed the heaviest fighting. Shortly afterwards he was one of three officers chosen to present a petition for the adequate compensation of the widows and orphans of officers and seamen killed in battle, and the provision of proper facilities for the sick and wounded. After Portland he shifted his flag to the 'Triumph' and fought in her at the battle of the Gabbard on 2-4 June 1653 where his casualties amounted to only one killed and two wounded. His luck ran out at the last battle off Scheveningen on 29-31 July, however, where he was mortally wounded, dying a few days later, about 4 August. He left a widow, Mary, and five children, to whom parliament voted $750 vested in Ipswich trustees and to be paid there. 


@@@@@


doc= 21676


Peacock, James (1735/1738-1814), architect and surveyor, was for over forty years assistant clerk of works to the City of London. Nothing is known of his early life, although, according to Sir John Soane, Peacock became acquainted with George Dance the younger soon after Dance's return from Italy in December 1764. From then on the two formed a professional alliance which remained uninterrupted until Peacock's death; their abilities were complementary, with Peacock supplying the skills of surveying and estimating to Dance's abilities as a designer. 
In December 1771 Peacock was appointed assistant to Dance, who had succeeded his father as clerk of works to the City of London in 1768, on Dance's recommendation and at his expense, although this arrangement was altered in 1776, when Peacock was given a salary by the corporation of $52 10's'. He was also employed by Dance in his private practice. Peacock's only independent work of importance was the stock exchange in Capel Court, which was built to his designs in 1801-2 but reconstructed by Thomas Allason in 1853-4. He also carried out repairs to St Anne and St Agnes, Gresham Street, in 1781-2, and to St Stephen Walbrook in 1803-4. 
More remarkable than his architectural works was Peacock's prolific output as an architectural theorist, an inventor, and a social reformer. His architectural publications have a radical, semi-satirical attitude to design and practice. The most important of these was 'Oikidia, or, Nutshells', published under the anagrammatic pseudonym of 'Jose Mac Packe, bricklayer's labourer' in 1785. At a time of a growing interest in the picturesque and increasingly elaborate exhibition drawings at the Royal Academy, Peacock recommended clients to commission strictly symmetrical plans for small villas with plain facades, and scale models complete with furniture instead of drawings and do-it-yourself estimates. These were the 'nutshells': 'the first and elementary principles of design' (p. 2). He repeated his mainly mathematical approach to architecture in his final publication, 'Subordinates in Architecture' (1814). The anonymous 'Essay on the Qualifications and Duties of an Architect', published in 1773, may also have been by Peacock (Harris, 366-7). As an inventor he published 'A Short Account of a New Method of Filtration by Ascent' in 1793, promising Londoners an inexhaustible supply of pure soft water from the Thames and neighbouring rivers. 
Peacock was also interested in economic and social problems, and wrote a number of short treatises on these subjects. His 'Outlines of a scheme for the general relief, instruction, employment, and maintenance of the poor' was published in 1777 and is described by him as 'an imperfect and crude performance' in another tract entitled 'Proposals for a Magnificent and Interesting Establishment' (1790). In 1789 he published 'Superior Politics' and in 1798 'The Outlines of a Plan for Establishing a United Company of British Manufacturers'. All of these tracts set forth, with various modifications, Peacock's main project of: 'giving protection and suitable incitement, encouragement, and employ to every class of the destitute, ignorant, and idle poor who shall be healthy, able to work, and willing to conform... to such... regulations as the company shall enact, and which are intended to be of mutual benefit and advantage to the company and the workpeople, and eventually so to society at large.' Peacock died on 22 February 1814 at 17 Finsbury Square, a house where he had lived for some years and 'which he apparently built for himself' (Papworth). His former residence was at Coleman Street Buildings. Little is known of his personality but in his edition of Chambers's 'Treatise on Civil Architecture' (1875) Joseph Gwilt paid a tribute to Peacock's 'virtues and moral excellence', which 'will be honoured as long as the memory of his surviving friends remains sound' (Colvin, 'Archs'., 745). He was buried in the back cemetery of St Luke's, Old Street, where his headstone (now demolished) records that he died 'in the seventy-sixth year of his age' (Papworth), although according to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', he was in his seventy-ninth year. 


@@@@@


doc= 21677


Peacock, John Macleay (1817-1877), poet and Chartist, was born on 21 or 31 March 1817 at Kincardine, Perthshire, the seventh of eight children of William Peacock, seaman (his mother is unrecorded). While his family was young Peacock's father was lost at sea, and the struggle for existence became severe. No formal education is recorded, and Peacock was sent to work at the age of nine, first at a tobacco factory, and afterwards at some bleaching works. Ultimately he was apprenticed as a 'rivet laddie' on Clydeside, and boilermaking became his trade. Commercial fluctuations, and a strong natural disposition to travel, took him in the course of his lifetime to many parts of the world. As a young man he must have lived and worked in co. Cork, and the province of Cadiz in south-west Spain, as well as on Tyneside, Clydeside, and other shipbuilding centres in Scotland and England. Peacock was in the best sense self-taught, and his travels did much to broaden his knowledge and shape him as a clear and original thinker. 
In both politics and religion Peacock was always radical. He was an active participant in the Chartist movement, and was sent as a delegate to the national convention in London (he published a 'Conventional Hymn' in the 'Northern Star', 2 March 1839). He was elected a commissioner of the movement in May 1848. Afterwards, for many years, until his death, he was an energetic secularist. Peacock married and settled in Birkenhead in the 1850s (his wife's name is unrecorded), and for many years he worked at Lairds iron shipbuilding works, Birkenhead, where the 'Alabama' was built; but this did not prevent him from openly advocating the cause of the north in the American Civil War. Dismissed for his militancy, Peacock began publishing poetry in the 1860s as an alternative occupation. Physically he was delicate, and, his occupation being arduous, his health failed in middle life; thenceforward he only earned a precarious income, chiefly as a news vendor. He died in Glasgow, where he was then living, of heart disease on 4 May 1877; he was survived by his wife. 
Peacock's poetry was highly valued by his friends and contemporaries. In Birkenhead, at the Shakespeare tercentenary (1864), he was considered the most fitting person in the town to plant the memorial oak tree. He wrote stirring and incisive political verse, as well as Scottish dialect material, contemplative verse, poems on topical events, and poems on shipbuilding and the industrial landscape. Three volumes of his poems were published in all: 'Poems and Songs' (1864), 'Hours of Reverie' (1867, which went into a second edition in the same year), and a selection of 'Poems' (1880). The best of his work is in the 1867 and 1880 volumes (copies of which are held in Birkenhead and Manchester reference libraries). His work is also part of the Koehler collection of Minor British Poets in the University of California at Davis. 


@@@@@


doc= 21678


Peacock, Lucy (fl. 1785-1816), bookseller and children's writer, was probably born in London, where she kept a shop in Oxford Street. Although little is known of her life, it is likely that she was married, as the publisher's imprint on some of her works states that they were 'printed for R. and L. Peacock'. Her children's books were published for the most part anonymously. Among the earliest of these was 'The adventures of the six princesses of Babylon in their travels to the temple of virtue: an allegory' (1785), of which five editions were printed, and which was 'dedicated, by permission to her Royal Highness the Princess Mary'. It was followed by 'The Rambles of Fancy, or, Moral and Interesting Tales' and 'Friendly Labours' in 1786. In the following years Peacock contributed similar moral tales to the 'Juvenile Magazine', and other periodicals. Among her publications were the allegorical narrative 'The Knight of the Rose' (1793); 'The Little Emigrant: a Tale' (1799); and 'Emily, or, The Test of Sincerity' (1816). 'The Visit for a Week' (1794) was her most popular work, running into nine editions. Typically didactic, it deals with the visit of two children to their aunt, who teaches them that learning can be exciting, with her discourses on many varied topics. 'The Visit' was translated into French in 1817 by J. E. Lefebvre. 
Peacock also translated from the French 'Ambrose and Eleanor, or, The Adventures of Two Children Deserted on an Uninhabited Island' (1796, 1812), an adaptation of 'Fanfan et Lolotte'; Veyssiere de La Croze's 'Grammaire historique' (1800); and 'Abrege chronologique de l'histoire universelle' (1807). Many of her works were reprinted in America. 


@@@@@


doc= 21679


Peacock, Thomas (d. in or after 1581), college head, was the son of Thomas Peacock, burgess of Cambridge (died 1541), and his wife, Alice (died 1546/7), and was born in Holy Trinity parish, Cambridge. He was elected to a fellowship at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1533/4, graduated BA that year, MA in 1537, and BTh in 1554. He should not be confused (as in the 'Dictionary of National Biography') with the Thomas Peacock who was active as a stipendiary priest in Ipswich in the 1530s and 1540s, as the Cambridge Peacock was active in college and university life throughout this time, and was not ordained until Mary's reign. Of conservative religious opinions, he was among the 'appellants' at St John's who unsuccessfully objected to the managerial regime of the college's evangelical master John Taylor in 1542. Peacock's mother died over the winter of 1546-7, and left him a house and two tenements in Cambridge. In 1547 he took up a fellowship at the newly founded Trinity College (joining several other refugees from St John's). Trinity, then under the mastership of John Redman (himself a former Johnian), was still loyal to the conservative traditions of the institutions it had swallowed up, King's Hall and Michaelhouse. During the royal visitation of the university in 1549, Peacock was identified by the protestant visitors as one of a group of hardline papists at Trinity, where there was 'such a nest of them as the like cannot be espied within the realm' (TNA: PRO, SP 10/7/10, fols. 39-40). Once Redman himself had been induced to subscribe to the 'Book of Common Prayer' (apparently with some reservations), resistance collapsed. Peacock appears to have remained at Trinity throughout Edward VI's reign, notwithstanding the increasingly uncongenial doctrine and liturgy of the Church of England. 
The accession of Queen Mary in 1553 must have come as a great relief to Peacock, and certainly did his career no harm. It was only now that he finally took his BTh and entered holy orders. He also found considerable preferment at the hands of the bishop of Norwich, Thomas Thirlby (himself a native of Cambridge, from the same parish as Peacock, namely Holy Trinity), who made him his chaplain and gave him a canonry at Norwich in 1554. When Thirlby was translated to Ely later that year, he took Peacock with him, collating him to the rectory of Little Downham in 1555 and to a canonry at Ely in 1556 (in place of that at Norwich). In his capacity as Thirlby's chaplain, Peacock assisted at the trial for heresy of William Wolsey and Robert Pygot at Ely, preaching (on '1 Corinthians' 5) at their burning on 16 October 1555. Peacock clearly had continuing links with Cambridge University: on 1 April 1555 he signed the articles which bound the university to Roman Catholic doctrine; and during Cardinal Pole's visitation of the university, he preached before the visitors at Great St Mary's on 11 January 1557, 'inveighing against heresies and heretics as Bilney, Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, etc' ('Acts and Monuments', 8.266). In January 1558 Thirlby presented him to the rectory of Barley (near Royston, Hertfordshire). 
In the autumn of 1557, Peacock was elected president of Queens' College, Cambridge, where his tenure was brief and controversial. In March 1559 a dispute over fellowship elections became so embittered that both parties wrote to the university's chancellor, Sir William Cecil, in an attempt to have their position vindicated. Although the quarrel was over the implementation and interpretation of the statutes regarding elections, the underlying issues seem to have been both personal and religious. The minority appealing against Peacock suggested that the president and his supporters were rushing through improper elections in order to get people into the college ahead of the imminent restoration of protestantism. In a coda to this accusation, the dissidents charged him with paying $10 over the odds for a piece of land purchased for the college from a friend of his supporters among the fellowship, one Thomas Leete. Refusing to subscribe to the royal supremacy, which was restored by Queen Elizabeth in 1559, Peacock was stripped of his ecclesiastical preferments, although by resigning the presidency of Queens' in May he avoided the indignity of expulsion. Thereafter it might have been thought that he lived out his life obscurely in Cambridge, as in 1563 he made a grant of 20's'. a year to the churchwardens of Holy Trinity parish, and in October 1581 he gave $20 to the city corporation to support a monthly dole for prisoners in the Tolbooth. However, he makes one remarkable appearance out of the shadows. A letter written in 1567 by none other than Nicholas Sander, a leading Catholic refugee on the continent, indicates that Thomas Peacock was one of four English priests who met the grand inquisitor in Rome in 1564 and personally received from him faculties to reconcile schismatics to the Roman Catholic church. Peacock certainly returned to Cambridge thereafter, but it is not known what use, if any, he made of these special powers. He left no will, so his donation to the city in 1581 may well have represented the disposal of his worldly goods, and he probably died soon afterwards. 


@@@@@


doc= 21680


Peacock, Thomas Bevill (1812-1882), physician, was born at York on 21 December 1812, son of Thomas Peacock and his wife, Sarah Bevill, who were members of the Society of Friends. When he was nine he was sent to the boarding-school of Samuel Marshall at Kendal, where he remained until apprenticed in 1828 to John Fothergill, a medical practitioner in Darlington. In 1833 he went to London to read medicine at University College; he also attended St George's Hospital. In 1835 he became a member of the College of Surgeons and a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries. He then travelled to benefit his health, twice visiting Ceylon, and studying for a time in Paris. He spent 1838 as house-surgeon at the hospital at Chester, and in 1841 he went to Edinburgh, where he obtained an MD the following year. In 1844 he was admitted as a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians of London, and in 1849 he was elected assistant physician to St Thomas's Hospital. In 1850 he married Cornelia Walduck (died 1869); there were no children. In the same year he was elected a fellow of the College of Physicians, and in 1865 he delivered the Croonian lectures there, entitled 'Some of the causes and effects of valvular disease of the heart'. A dispensary which he began in Liverpool Street, London, eventually became the Victoria Park Hospital for diseases of the chest. 
Peacock lectured at St Thomas's Hospital, first on materia medica and then on medicine. He was one of the founders of the Pathological Society of London in 1846, and a frequent contributor to its 'Transactions'. He was its secretary in 1850, vice-president in 1852-6, and president in 1865 and 1866. In 1848 he published 'On the Influenza or Epidemic Catarrh of 1847-8', and in 1866 the treatise, 'On Malformations of the Human Heart'. These, with his Croonian lectures of 1865 and his 'Prognosis in Cases of Valvular Disease of the Heart' (1877), are his most important publications. Peacock was a candidate for the fellowship of the Royal Society in 1877 and 1878 but would not allow himself to be nominated again. However, the College of Surgeons gave him a gold medal in recognition of his valuable additions to their museum. 
Peacock was fond of travelling, and visited North and South America as well as the Mediterranean. He lived at 20 Finsbury Circus, London, an area popular with many physicians in the second quarter of the nineteenth century. Peacock had an attack of left hemiplegia in 1877, but recovered from the paralysis, and saw patients and attended at the Pathological Society. In 1881 he had a mild attack of right hemiplegia, from which he also recovered. On 30 May 1882, while walking in St Thomas's Hospital, he collapsed and was carried into a ward where he died without having recovered consciousness. He was buried in the Quaker burial-ground at Tottenham, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 21681


Peacock, Thomas Love (1785-1866), satirical novelist and poet, was born on 18 October 1785 at Weymouth, or Melcombe Regis, Dorset, the only child of Samuel Peacock ('c'.1742- 'c'.1793), a London glass merchant, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Love (1754-1832), daughter of Thomas Love, a retired master in the Royal Navy. His parents, who were married at St Luke's, Chelsea, on 29 March 1780, both came from nonconformist families in the west of England: on his father's side Independents in Taunton, Somerset, on his mother's side Presbyterians in Topsham, Devon. Little is known of his father, who apparently lived apart from his wife and son, and died in reduced circumstances, leaving them three small annuities, all of which successively failed or expired. His mother was a strong-minded woman who encouraged her son in his literary pursuits. According to family tradition, 'he often said that, after his mother's death, he wrote with no interest, as his heart was not in the work' (Nicolls, xxvi). 
In 1791 Sarah Peacock took her son to live near her parents at Chertsey, and early in 1792 she sent him to a private school kept by John Harris Wicks at Englefield Green, where he remained for six and a half years and distinguished himself from his schoolfellows. 'The master was', he later recalled, 'not much of a scholar; but he had the art of inspiring his pupils with a love of learning, and he had excellent classical and French assistants' ('Letters', 2.446). During his holidays at Chertsey the boy would listen to the reminiscences of his sailor grandfather, who had lost a leg in Rodney's great victory over De Grasse off Dominica on 12 April 1782. After being removed from school before his thirteenth birthday, presumably because his mother could no longer afford the expense, Peacock was entirely self-educated, eventually acquiring, by dint of steady application, a degree of erudition seldom found outside a university, including a thorough mastery of the Greek, Latin, Italian, and French languages. By February 1800 he was employed as a clerk for Ludlow, Fraser, & Co., merchants in the City of London, and in the same month he won an 'extra prize' from the 'Monthly Preceptor, or, Juvenile Library' for his first publication, a verse 'Answer to the question: 'Is history or biography the more improving study?'' While it is not clear how long his employment lasted, he apparently lived with his mother on the firm's premises at 4 Angel Court, Throgmorton Street, until about 1805. A miniature by Roger Jean shows him at this time as a handsome young man with dark blue eyes, a Roman nose, a high forehead, and a profusion of curly brown hair. Peacock continued to write occasional verse throughout his years in London, and his first volume, 'Palmyra, and other Poems', was printed by Thomas Bensley and published by W. J. and J. Richardson late in 1805, though postdated 1806. The rare octavo half-sheet containing his comic ballad 'The Monks of St. Mark' was privately printed by Bensley in the same format, presumably about the same time (the date at the end of the poem, 'September, 1804', being that of composition, not of printing). Some time in the next year or so Peacock met Thomas Hookham junior and his brother Edward Thomas Hookham, who offered to become his publishers and to supply him with books from their father's extensive circulating library in Old Bond Street. Other close friends of his early years included William de St Croix of Homerton and Thomas (Ignatius Maria) Forster of Lower Clapton, another remarkable autodidact, with whom he sometimes corresponded in Latin. 
For several years after the publication of 'Palmyra', Peacock's resources appear to have been just sufficient to enable him to live semi-independently as a poet and scholar. Always a sturdy pedestrian, he made a solitary walking tour of Scotland in autumn 1806, visiting many of the romantic scenes that had recently been popularized by Walter Scott. In the following summer, while living with his mother at Chertsey, he became engaged to a young woman named Fanny Falkner, but the engagement was broken off through the interference of one of her relations, and she died the following year, after marrying another man. His lasting memory of their love was later enshrined in his lines on 'Newark Abbey, August 1842, with a reminiscence of August 1807' ('Fraser's Magazine', November 1860). In May 1808 he obtained an appointment as secretary to Sir Home Riggs Popham aboard HMS 'Venerable' in the Downs. Although he regarded the ship as a 'floating Inferno', he remained in the position for almost a year to please some friends -- probably his two maternal uncles in the navy -- who thought there was a prospect of its 'conducing to advantage' ('Letters', 1.25). After leaving the 'Venerable' in April 1809, he decided to expand a poem on the Thames that he had written at sea into what eventually became 'The Genius of the Thames', published by the Hookhams in spring 1810. To gather material for the work, he traced the course of the river on foot from its source to Chertsey, stopping for a few days at Oxford. At the beginning of 1810 he went to north Wales, where he took lodgings for almost fifteen months at Tan-y-Bwlch, near Maentwrog, Merioneth, in the Vale of Ffestiniog, which he described as 'a terrestrial paradise' (ibid., 1.43). Here he developed a strong attachment to the Welsh landscape and a lasting interest in Welsh traditions. His letters to Edward Hookham and Thomas Forster provide glimpses of the young poet pursuing his course of solitary study, exploring the local scenery, and occasionally falling in or out of love. They also reveal that he had long since rejected Christianity as 'a grovelling, misanthropical, blood-thirsty superstition', and had more recently embraced philosophical scepticism as 'a complete Academic' (ibid., 1.57, 62). One of the two young women who interested him at this time was his future wife, Jane Gryffydh (1789-1851), daughter of the parson at Maentwrog, but he left north Wales in April 1811 without declaring his feelings, even though he thought her 'the most innocent, the most amiable, the most beautiful girl in existence' (ibid., 1.64). 
Peacock may have been called home by an impending financial crisis, for within a few months his mother was forced by creditors to sell her furniture and leave Chertsey. With the assistance of friends, they were able to take up residence at a cottage in Wraysbury, where new creditors were soon clamouring for payment. Through the good offices of the Hookhams, Peacock's most pressing wants were relieved by grants from the Literary Fund in December 1811, May 1812, and June 1813. However, his despondency was serious enough to give Edward Hookham 'reason to dread that the fate of Chatterton might be that of Peacock' ('Letters', 1.91). Peacock himself responded to the crisis by producing a new poem, 'The Philosophy of Melancholy', and a heavily revised 'second edition' of 'The Genius of the Thames, Palmyra, and other Poems', published in February and April 1812. With encouragement from James Grant Raymond, the acting manager of the Drury Lane Company, he also wrote three farces -- 'Mirth in the Mountains' (lost), 'The dilettanti', and 'The Three Doctors' -- none of which was performed on the London stage. Efforts to obtain pupils for a small educational establishment likewise failed. His only literary success during this period was a 'grammatico-allegorical ballad' for children entitled 'Sir Hornbook, or, Childe Launcelot's Expedition', which appeared late in 1813, with a title-page postdated 1814, and ran through five editions in as many years. Despite his financial difficulties, he continued his classical studies and translated a number of passages from Greek tragedies. His Aristophanic Greek anapests on Christ may also have been written at this time. In the early autumn of 1812 he visited Tunbridge Wells with Thomas Forster and made a two-week walking and sailing tour of the Isle of Wight with Joseph Gulston of Englefield Green, while in the following summer he paid a second visit to north Wales, returning to London by way of Bath. His cousin Harriet Love later described him as having been during this period of his life 'a sort of universal lover, making half-declarations to half the young women he knew' ('Works', 1.civ). 
It was in the hope of obtaining private assistance for his friend that Thomas Hookham junior introduced Peacock to Shelley in November 1812, and it was partly to relieve Peacock's distress that Shelley invited him to stay at Bracknell in September 1813 and then to join him and his wife Harriet and her sister Eliza on a journey to the Lake District and Edinburgh. 'At Bracknell' Peacock later recalled: 'Shelley was surrounded by a numerous society, all in a great measure of his own opinions in relation to religion and politics, and the larger portion of them in relation to vegetable diet. But they wore their rue with a difference. Every one of them adopting some of the articles of the faith of their general church, had each nevertheless some predominant crotchet of his or her own, which left a number of open questions for earnest and not always temperate discussion. I was sometimes irreverent enough to laugh at the fervour with which opinions utterly unconducive to any practical result were battled for as matters of the highest importance to the well-being of mankind; Harriet Shelley was always ready to laugh with me, and we thereby lost caste with some of the more hot-headed of the party. ('Works', 8.70-71)' Peacock's attitude of amused detachment may have disturbed the Bracknell circle, but it did not prevent him from quickly becoming Shelley's closest friend and most trusted adviser. Shelley's marital crisis of July 1814 put him in an awkward position as a friend to whom both husband and wife turned for advice and consolation. Although Peacock was one of the few friends who remained loyal to Shelley after his elopement with Mary Godwin, his obvious partiality for Harriet made his relationship with Mary difficult. If Peacock's rationality and scepticism stood in sharp contrast to Shelley's impetuosity and enthusiasm, the two poets nevertheless shared many of the same ideals, and their mutual influence benefited both. Peacock's 'Sir Proteus: a Satirical Ballad', published under the pseudonym P. M. O'Donovan in March 1814, reveals a new interest in literary politics that may be one of the first signs of Shelleyan influence. On the other hand, his fragmentary romantic epic 'Ahrimanes' -- written in Spenserian stanzas and originally projected as a twelve-canto narrative of two lovers involved in a struggle between the Zoroastrian principles of good and evil -- clearly anticipates Shelley's 'Laon and Cythna'. Meanwhile Peacock's personal fortunes reached their nadir in January 1815 when he was arrested for debt in Liverpool, after running off with a supposed heiress who turned out to have nothing. In the spring he considered emigrating to Canada and taking Marianne de St Croix, who was apparently willing to marry him despite her knowledge of his indiscretion with the heiress. 
After Shelley reached a settlement with his father in May 1815 and began to receive an annuity of $1000, he allowed Peacock a regular income of $120 a year, until it was rendered superfluous by his India House appointment. In return, Peacock acted as Shelley's agent in business matters: paying bills, negotiating with creditors, and finding houses. It was presumably Shelley's allowance that enabled Peacock and his mother to settle at Marlow, where he could enjoy his lifelong passion for boating on the Thames. At the end of August he accompanied Shelley, Mary Godwin, and Charles Clairmont on a boating expedition up the Thames to Lechlade, and on the way up, at Oxford, he restored his vegetarian friend's health with his prescription of 'Three mutton chops, well peppered' ('Works', 8.99). Peacock spent much of winter 1815-16 at Bishopsgate, near Windsor, reading Greek with Shelley and Thomas Jefferson Hogg, who became a lifelong friend. It was Peacock who proposed the often misconstrued title for Shelley's 'Alastor, or, The Spirit of Solitude'. In the following summer Shelley wrote Peacock several long travel letters from Switzerland, two of which he published in revised form in 'A History of a Six Weeks Tour' (1817). After Harriet's suicide in December 1816 Peacock was one of those who advised Shelley not to delay his marriage to Mary Godwin. In March 1817 Shelley moved into a house at Marlow that he took partly to be near Peacock, and for the next twelve months the two writers saw each other almost daily. During this period Peacock became acquainted with Leigh Hunt, John Keats, James and Horace Smith, and other liberal writers. In December he participated with Charles Ollier in the revision of Shelley's 'Laon and Cythna' for reissue as 'The Revolt of Islam'. Early in 1818 he unsuccessfully proposed marriage to Claire Clairmont, who was living with her daughter Allegra as a member of Shelley's household. After Shelley's departure for Italy in March, Peacock not only continued to act as his business agent but also read the proofs of the 'Rosalind and Helen' and 'Prometheus Unbound' volumes and tried to get 'The Cenci' accepted for performance at Covent Garden. Shelley again chose Peacock as the recipient of his long descriptive travel letters from Italy, and their correspondence continued until Shelley's death in July 1822. As Shelley's executor Peacock was involved for several years in complex negotiations with Sir Timothy Shelley's solicitor, William Whitton, to secure financial support for Mary Shelley and her son Percy Florence. Shelley's will could not be proved until after Sir Timothy's death in 1844, when Peacock finally received two legacies totalling $2500. 
Peacock's years at Marlow were the most productive period of his literary career as well as the period in which he discovered his true gift for satiric fiction. 'Headlong Hall', the first of his stylish and witty conversation novels, was an immediate success on its publication in December 1815, with a title-page postdated 1816. 'Melincourt' -- a more overtly political satire in which the civilized orang-utan Sir Oran Haut-ton is elected MP for the rotten borough of Onevote -- also attracted a good deal of attention when it appeared in three volumes in March 1817. The fragmentary tale known as 'Calidore' was probably written in the spring or summer, along with 'The Round Table, or, King Arthur's Feast', a second children's book, published without date in the autumn. 'Rhododaphne, or, The Thessalian Spell', the last and best of Peacock's long poems, was finished in November and published in February 1818. Shelley immediately wrote an enthusiastic review of 'Rhododaphne', which was sent to 'The Examiner' but never inserted. 'Nightmare Abbey' was written in the spring and published in November 1818, in an attempt, Peacock told Shelley, 'to bring to a sort of philosophical focus a few of the morbidities of modern literature and to let in a little daylight on its atrabilarious complexion' ('Letters', 1.152). Shelley may have been surprised to find himself caricatured in the book, along with Coleridge and Byron, but he nevertheless 'took to himself the character of Scythrop' ('Works', 8.497). Peacock's Marlow journal for July-September 1818 records the writing of his unfinished 'Essay on fashionable literature' as well as the genesis of 'Maid Marian', which he intended to make 'the vehicle of much oblique satire on all the oppressions that are done under the sun' ('Letters', 1.156). This satiric romance of the twelfth century, based on the popular ballads of Robin Hood, was nearly finished when it had to be laid aside at the end of the year. Unlike his early poetry, Peacock's first three novels found an appreciative audience. 'Headlong Hall' reached a second edition in 1816, and a third in 1822; 'Melincourt' was translated into French in 1818, and 'Nightmare Abbey' into German in 1820; all three books were reprinted in America, along with 'Rhododaphne'. 
About the beginning of January 1819 Peacock went to London to embark on his thirty-seven-year career in the examiner's office of the East India Company. His candidacy had been brought forward the previous autumn by his old friend Peter Auber, who was then assistant secretary of the company. Because he had no experience with Indian affairs, he was given several weeks to study for a special examination on systems of land revenue collection. The resulting paper, 'Ryotwar and Zemindarry settlements', is said to have been returned with the compliment 'Nothing superfluous and nothing wanting' (Nicolls, xxxvii). His provisional appointment as assistant to the examiner at an annual salary of $600 was approved by the court of directors in May 1819, as part of a larger experiment to open the higher posts in the examiner's office to outside talent. At the East India House he showed great skill in drafting dispatches, and his appointment was confirmed in April 1821 with a salary rise to $800. His subsequent career was one of steady advancement, at first in the shadow of James Mill, who was appointed at the same time, and who brought his son John Stuart Mill into the office in 1823. When James Mill became assistant examiner in April 1823, Peacock's salary was raised to $1000, and when Mill succeeded William McCulloch as examiner in December 1830, Peacock became a senior assistant to the examiner at $1200. In February 1836, with Mill seriously ill, Peacock became assistant examiner at $1500, and in July, a month after Mill's death, he was appointed examiner at $2000 -- a salary that remained unchanged until March 1856, when he retired on a pension of $1333 6's'. 8died and was in turn succeeded by John Stuart Mill. Through James Mill he became acquainted with almost all the leading philosophical radicals, including Bentham, with whom he is said to have been 'extremely intimate -- dining with him 'tete a tete', once a week for years together' (Sir M. E. Grant Duff, 'Notes from a Diary, 1851-72', 1897, 1.60). He also influenced the careers of Henry Cole and John Arthur Roebuck by introducing them to John Stuart Mill. 
With his prosperity virtually assured, Peacock took a house at 17 (later 18) Stamford Street, Blackfriars, in June 1819 and turned his thoughts to marriage. Despite his having had no contact with Jane Gryffydh for more than eight years, he proposed by letter in November 1819, and they were married at Eglwys-fach, Cardiganshire, on 22 March 1820. For the first few years the marriage seems to have been happy, and four children were born to the couple during the next eight years. But after the death of their second daughter, Margaret Love, in January 1826, Jane is said to have been 'inconsolable' and to have developed some kind of mental illness that left her 'a complete invalid', unable to 'attend to the care of their children, or undertake the troubles of housekeeping' (Nicolls, xxxix, xli). In 1823 Peacock had taken a cottage for his mother on the Thames at Lower Halliford, and in 1826 he took the adjoining cottage and turned the two into a comfortable country residence, where his mother looked after the children until her death in October 1832. To supply Margaret's place in the family, he informally adopted Mary Ann Rosewell, whose family lived in the neighbourhood, and who strikingly resembled the dead child. His epitaph for Margaret's tombstone in Shepperton churchyard caused a quarrel with the rector, who objected to the opening line: 'Long night succeeds thy little day'. 
After his India House appointment and marriage, Peacock's literary work became more sporadic. His ironic essay 'The four ages of poetry', in the first and only number of 'Olliers Literary Miscellany' (1820), provoked Shelley to write 'A Defence of Poetry'. 'Maid Marian' appeared in March 1822, with a prefatory note explaining that all but the last three chapters had been written in the autumn of 1818 -- before Scott made Robin Hood a character in 'Ivanhoe'. J. R. Planche's operatic adaptation, 'Maid Marian, or, The Huntress of Arlingford', with music by Henry Bishop, opened at Covent Garden on 3 December 1822 and enjoyed a successful run with Charles Kemble as Friar Tuck and Anna Maria Tree as Maid Marian. Peacock's tale was translated into German in 1823 and into French in 1826 and again, more satisfactorily, in 1855. In 1823 Peacock met the Welsh antiquary and lexicographer William Owen Pughe, and in 1824 he joined the Cymmrodorion, or Metropolitan Cambrian Institution. During the financial panic of 1825-6, he wrote his 'Paper Money Lyrics' but suppressed them to avoid offending James Mill. After Mill's death he permitted Henry Cole to publish some of them in 'The Guide' and privately to print an edition of 100 copies, with a few other poems, in July 1837. His satiric romance 'The Misfortunes of Elphin', based on legends of sixth-century Wales, appeared in March 1829, and 'Crotchet Castle', containing a romantic interlude in Merioneth, followed in February 1831. 'Elphin' includes, as 'the quintessence of all the war-songs that ever were written', the rollicking 'War-Song of Dinas Vawr', which begins: '
The mountain sheep are sweeter, 

But the Valley sheep are fatter; 

We therefore deemed it meeter 

To carry off the latter. 
('Works', 4[1].89)' 
'Crotchet Castle' contains the Reverend Doctor Folliott's trenchant satire on the 'march of mind', as represented by the 'learned friend' (Lord Brougham) and the 'Steam Intellect Society' (the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge) (ibid., 4[2].13). But for all their satiric brilliance, neither of these new works seems to have enjoyed the same degree of success as the four earlier tales. Peacock was one of the original contributors to 'Bentley's Miscellany', edited by Dickens, and in April 1837 'Headlong Hall', 'Nightmare Abbey', 'Maid Marian', and 'Crotchet Castle' were reprinted, 'with corrections, and a preface, by the author', as no. 57 in Bentley's 'Standard Novels' series. All Peacock's journalistic writing appeared in liberal or radical publications. He was induced to contribute four articles to the Benthamite 'Westminster Review' under John Bowring's editorship, four more to John Stuart Mill's short-lived 'London Review', and one to the whig 'Edinburgh Review'. Always a lover of opera, he also wrote opera criticism for the 'Globe and Traveller', edited by his friend Walter Coulson, and for 'The Examiner', owned and edited by Albany Fonblanque. 
As one of the two highest permanent officials in the East India Company's home service, Peacock was an able administrator but never exerted the sort of powerful influence over Indian affairs that James Mill did. He had serious reservations about the utilitarians' programme of reforming Indian institutions along European lines, and the fundamental cast of his intelligence was practical rather than theoretical, sceptical rather than doctrinaire. It is entirely in keeping with his practicality that his most notable achievements as an India House official should have been in the burgeoning field of steam navigation. Peacock began to study all aspects of the subject in 1829 and quickly became the company's acknowledged expert in the field. From 1831 to 1833 he collaborated with James Henry Johnston in making arrangements for the steam navigation of the Ganges. His queries about Egyptian and Syrian routes to India stimulated Francis Rawdon Chesney to explore both between 1830 and 1832, and he drew up the original plans and budget for the Euphrates expedition led by Chesney in 1835-6. Although he favoured the Euphrates route, he also advocated the employment of larger and more powerful steamers for the Red Sea route. To this end he supervised the design and construction of the 'Atalanta' and the 'Berenice', the first vessels to steam the whole distance to India, and later the purchase and refitting of the 'Semiramis', then one of the most powerful vessels in the world. An early proponent of iron ships, he often worked closely with the Birkenhead shipbuilder John Laird and his brother the African explorer Macgregor Laird. As clerk to the company's secret committee, he not only procured river steamers for the Indus, the Euphrates, and the Tigris, but also supervised the design, construction, fitting, and trials of a new class of iron war-steamers with movable keels for both river and sea service. These were his 'iron chickens', whose names -- 'Nemesis', 'Phlegethon', 'Pluto', 'Proserpine' -- and distinguished service in the First Opium War of 1839-42 led him to characterize them as 'the Infernal Flotilla dispatched against the Celestial Empire' ('Letters', 2.269, 279). His visionary scheme of placing British steamers on the Aral Sea and the Oxus and Jaxartes rivers in central Asia prompted the fatal mission of Arthur Conolly to Khiva and Bukhara. While much of his evidence before parliamentary committees in the 1830s dealt with steam navigation, he also defended the company in 1834, when he resisted the claim of James Silk Buckingham to compensation for his expulsion from India, and in 1836, when he repelled the attack of Liverpool merchants on the Indian salt monopoly. 
It was through his work as examiner and clerk to the secret committee that Peacock became an intimate friend of Sir John Cam Hobhouse, afterwards Lord Broughton, who was president of the Board of Control from 1835 to 1841 and from 1846 to 1852. From 1840 onward he spent many of his holidays at Erle Stoke Park, Hobhouse's country house in Wiltshire, where he met many distinguished Victorians, including Disraeli, Thackeray, and Macaulay. In the summer of 1843 he began to commute daily from Lower Halliford to the India House, reading Homer and Aeschylus in Greek in his corner of the railway carriage, and thereby confirming his opinion 'that the march of Mechanics is one way, and the march of Mind is another' ('Letters', 2.279). Soon he gave up his house in Stamford Street, moving his London quarters first to 22 John Street, Adelphi, and afterwards to 1 Torrington Street, Russell Square. In 1841 his only son, Edward Gryffydh, went to India as a midshipman in the Indian navy but returned the following year on a medical furlough. Two years later Peacock obtained a clerkship for him in the examiner's office. In January 1844 Peacock's eldest daughter, Mary Ellen, married Lieutenant Edward Nicolls, who drowned two months later while in command of HMS 'Dwarf' in Ireland. In August 1849, after five years of widowhood, she married George Meredith, then an ambitious young poet with no obvious prospects. Her sister Rosa Jane and her brother Edward also married before the end of the year. While Peacock is said to have disapproved of all three of these 1849 marriages, he remained an indulgent father and tried to help the Merediths through years of financial struggle and emotional turmoil. He does not appear to have been particularly disturbed when Mary Ellen finally left Meredith in September 1857 for their painter friend Henry Wallis, who later acknowledged paternity of the son she bore the following spring. Wallis painted an informal portrait of Peacock in January 1858, but a photograph taken in the previous year by Maull & Co. provides a more satisfactory likeness of the writer in his old age. 
Peacock's wife died on 23 December 1851 at Southend-on-Sea, and some time in the following year he proposed marriage to Claire Clairmont's twenty-seven-year-old niece Pauline, who 'looked daggers at the dear old man' ('Clairmont Correspondence', 2.551). It was apparently through his connection with the Merediths that he returned to literary work in the early 1850s, after having published nothing new since 1838. George's first volume of 'Poems' was published in 1851 by J. W. Parker & Son with a respectful dedication to Peacock, and Mary Ellen was commissioned by the Parkers to produce a revised edition of William Kitchener's 'The Cook's Oracle', a task in which she enlisted her husband and father as collaborators. Both of the Merediths occasionally contributed to 'Fraser's Magazine', edited by their friend John William Parker junior, and Peacock's hand is evident in an article entitled 'Gastronomy and civilization', published in December 1851 over the initials M. M. The following year Peacock's own scholarly series of 'Horae dramaticae' began to appear in 'Fraser's'. His Greek lines on an East India Company whitebait dinner were privately printed in 1851, and his little book of scatological Latin epigrams on a statue of Sir Robert Peel in 1854. About 1851 he undertook an edition of Aeschylus's 'Supplices' that he worked at sporadically for many years but never finished. After his retirement from the India House, his contributions to 'Fraser's' became more frequent. The most notable of these were his 'Memoirs of Percy Bysshe Shelley' (1858, 1860), which were followed by some 'Unpublished letters' (1860) and a 'Supplementary notice' (1862). Although often asked to write a life of Shelley, he had always refused because he did not want to revive old gossip by discussing his friend's marital affairs; but eventually he saw a need to correct the accounts published by others, especially those of Thomas Medwin and Thomas Jefferson Hogg. His insistence that Shelley was not separated from Harriet when he fell in love with Mary, as Lady Shelley implied in her 'Shelley Memorials' (1859), led to a bitter quarrel with Sir Percy and Lady Shelley, in which Richard Garnett publicly took up their cause. The last of Peacock's novels, 'Gryll Grange', was serialized in 'Fraser's' in 1860 and reprinted as a book in February 1861. In comparison with his earlier tales, the characters are more lifelike while the satire is at once more mellow and more idiosyncratic. His last published work was a translation, 'Gl'inganati, the Deceived: a Comedy Performed at Siena in 1531, and Aelia Laelia Crispis', which appeared in August 1862. Of the later works that remained in manuscript, the most characteristic are a reminiscence of 'The Last Day of Windsor Forest', possibly intended for 'Fraser's', and 'A Dialogue on Idealities', apparently written for Lord Broughton's daughter Charlotte Carleton. 
After his retirement, Peacock rarely left Halliford except for his visits to Lord Broughton, which continued until 1860. For most of his adult life he had espoused the philosophical doctrines of Epicurus, but if he hoped to find tranquillity in his old age, he was doomed to disappointment. His wife's death had thrown him into a profound depression, and his spirits were even more severely shaken by the deaths of his two surviving daughters -- Rosa Jane in October 1857 and Mary Ellen in October 1861. Even after the last and bitterest of these losses, he struggled to regain his equanimity and managed to find solace for a time in educating the sixteen-year-old Clari Leigh Hunt, who came to live with him shortly after Mary Ellen's death. Early in 1863 his health and spirits declined markedly, and for the next three years he saw few visitors except Thomas James Arnold. His death was apparently hastened by the shock of a fire that broke out in his house toward the end of 1865. In this crisis he retreated to his library and exclaimed to the local curate, who was urging him to take refuge elsewhere, 'By the immortal gods, I will not move!' (Nicolls, li). The fire was extinguished, but his already fragile health was badly shaken. He died in his sleep at Lower Halliford, Middlesex, on 23 January 1866 and was buried six days later in the new cemetery at Shepperton. The cause of death was certified as 'climacteric'. In a brief will dated 22 October 1864, he left his entire estate, valued at under $1500, to his adopted daughter 'May' Rosewell, who remained to nurse and comfort him to the end. His son, who was sufficiently provided for by an East India Company pension, survived him by less than a year. Peacock's library was sold at Sothebys on 11-12 June 1866. 
Peacock's friend Thomas Taylor the Platonist always called him 'Greeky Peeky' (Nicolls, xxxviii), and it would be hard to find any prominent contemporary figure, other than Taylor himself, who identified as completely as Peacock did with the life and ideals of the ancient world. He embraced the teachings of Epicurus as 'the noblest philosophy of antiquity' and considered the Epicurean doctrine of pleasures and pains to be the ultimate source of Bentham's principle of general utility, or 'the greatest happiness of the greatest number' ('Moore's 'Epicurean'', 'Works', 9.67, 46-9). In true Epicurean fashion, Peacock's tastes and pleasures were simple, like those of the Reverend Doctor Opimian in 'Gryll Grange': 'a good library, a good dinner, a pleasant garden, and rural walks' ('Works', 5.19). Although many of his friends were writers, he disliked literary society, despised literary gossip, and tried hard to avoid notoriety -- all the more so on account of the scandals involving Shelley and Byron. Even within his own family he was extremely reticent about his private affairs, and his reserve led some of his acquaintance to suspect him of coldness. Yet he was by all accounts a delightful companion, with a ready wit, a powerful memory, and a large fund of amusing anecdotes. In the words of Sir Edward Strachey, he was 'a kind-hearted, genial, friendly man, who loved to share his enjoyment of life with all around him', and was 'self-indulgent without being selfish' (Strachey, 22). Hobhouse found him, both in his private life and in his official capacity, 'a man of most scrupulous probity -- and generous & just in all his dealings' (MS journal, 8 Jan 1847). 
Peacock was remarkable not only for his acquirements as a self-educated scholar but for his range and versatility as a writer. Most of his early verse tends to confirm Shelley's observation that his friend was 'a nursling of the exact & superficial school in poetry' ('Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 2.126). However, his genuine poetic gifts are evident in a few personal lyrics, in the best of the songs scattered through his novels, and in 'Rhododaphne', which influenced Keats and won praise from Shelley, Byron, and Poe. Peacock's satiric tales fall naturally into two types -- the conversation novels and the satiric romances -- both of which stand well outside the main traditions of the English novel, offering little to the ordinary reader in the way of plot or character development. With their curious mixture of poetry and prose, fantasy and reality, abstract theory and common sense, they have clear affinities with the ancient genre of Menippean satire and evidently belong to the class of satiric fiction in which 'the characters are abstractions or embodied classifications, and the implied or embodied opinions the main matter of the work' -- a class in which he placed 'the fictions of Aristophanes, Petronius Arbiter, Rabelais, Swift, and Voltaire' ('French comic romances', 'Works', 9.258). 
It is not easy to deduce Peacock's own opinions from his fictional dialogues, in which he told an admirer he had 'endeavoured to be impartial, and to say what could be said on both sides' ('Letters', 2.425). Nowhere is the difficulty more apparent than in the running contrast between past and present that provides the central theme of his fiction. Because he so often satirizes the present in contrast with an idealized past, he has sometimes been mistaken for a reactionary and a pessimist, especially in his later years. But if a man is known by his associates, it must surely be significant that Peacock's friends were, almost without exception, either advanced liberals or radicals, though some of them became considerably more conservative, as he did, after 1830. When he satirized reformers in 'Crotchet Castle' and 'Gryll Grange', it was due in part to the fact that their views had become the new orthodoxy, for he was by nature a contrarian in politics, telling Henry Cole that the 'predominant opinions of a community' were 'always a lie and a Tyranny' (MS journal, 8 April 1831). The general tendency of his satire remained liberal and progressive, even if he could not resist ridiculing his contemporaries for their complacency and their willingness to measure progress by advances in technology rather than by real improvement in the quality of physical, mental, and moral life. Robert Williams Buchanan, who visited Peacock in summer 1862, recognized that his negative stance was fundamentally an ironic pose: 'The pessimism which appears everywhere in his books was the daily theme of his talk; but to understand it rightly we must remember it was purely 'satiric' -- that, in truth, Peacock abused human nature because he loved it' (Buchanan, 244). 
Peacock's reputation rests mainly on his seven novels, which have never been popular but have always found numerous admirers among readers with serious interests in literature and ideas. After suffering a marked decline in the late nineteenth century, his literary stock rose steadily in the twentieth. In the early twenty-first century he is widely regarded as the most distinctive prose satirist of the Romantic period and one of the most perceptive commentators on English intellectual life in his time. 


@@@@@


doc= 21682


Peada (d. 656), king of the Middle Angles, was the son of Penda, king of the Mercians, and perhaps of Penda's queen, Cynewise. At some point, probably in the early 650s, his father created him 'princeps' ('ruler') of the Middle Angles, who would seem to have been a collection of minor tribes living in the area of the east midlands which lay between the two powerful kingdoms of East Anglia and Mercia. Penda had been battling for control over this region for much of his reign, and the establishment of his son as ruler over the Middle Anglian peoples may mark a final triumph. It seems probable that Peada ruled as a sub-king under his father's authority. He applied to Oswiu, king of the Northumbrians, for the hand of his daughter, Alhflaed, which was granted on condition that he and his people accepted Christianity. Partly swayed by the advice of his close friend and brother-in-law, Oswiu's son Alchfrith (married to Peada's sister Cyneburh), and partly by the preaching which he heard at Oswiu's court, Peada agreed to convert. In 653 he and the nobles accompanying him were baptized by Finan, bishop of Lindisfarne, on a Northumbrian royal estate named Ad Murum ('by the wall'), so called from its proximity to Hadrian's Wall and usually identified as Wallbottle in Northumberland. Returning to his kingdom, Peada brought with him four priests, Cedd, Adda, Betti, and Diuma, who began the conversion of the Middle Angles. At the battle of the River 'Winwaed' in 655 Oswiu routed the Mercian forces, killed Penda, and temporarily took control of his kingdom. As Oswiu's son-in-law, Peada was treated leniently and was established as king of the Mercians living south of the Trent, perhaps in an attempt to foster Mercian support for the new regime. But at Eastertide in the following year he was murdered, allegedly through the treachery of his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 21683


James Peak (c.1730-c.1782), who may have been the son of James and Elizabeth Peak baptized at St Sepulchre, Holborn, on 2 May 1731. Intermittently between 1761 and 1771 he showed engravings with the Society of Artists, giving an address in Fleet Street and then 'At Mr Perrin's, Watchmaker, facing St Clement's Church'. He produced etched views and prints in a great variety of genres, although predominantly landscape. For Boydell he worked on plates after Claude, George Smith of Chichester, Richard Wilson, and Pillement. His name appears as both Peak and Peake in the original exhibition catalogues and even on published prints. He is believed to have died around 1782. 


@@@@@


doc= 21684


Peake, Richard Brinsley (1792-1847), playwright, was born in Gerard Street, Soho, London, on 19 February 1792, the eldest son of Richard Peake, a native of Staffordshire, and his wife, Ann. His father being under-treasurer and (from 1811 to 1815) treasurer of Drury Lane, the theatre was in Peake's blood from the very beginning. His middle name arose from his father's long professional association and friendship with Richard Brinsley Sheridan. Although Peake was apprenticed to the engraver James Heath from 1809 to 1817, he appears to have spent some time, certainly between 1812 and 1813 (and probably longer), assisting his father in his financial duties at the theatre. His first published piece was an illustrated work on French costume (1816), but the following year he began writing for the English Opera House, with the sketch 'The Bridge that Carries us Safe over' and a neatly turned farce, 'Wanted, a Governess'. Slowly Peake began to make his name as a writer of farces with two further pieces at the same theatre -- 'Amateurs and Actors' (1818) and 'A Walk for a Wager, or, A Bailiff's Bet' (1819) -- but his graduation to Covent Garden with 'The Duel, or, My Two Nephews' (1823) and a melodrama, 'Presumption, or, The Fate of Frankenstein' (1824), partly based on Mary Shelley's novel, opened up further opportunities, including commissions for Drury Lane. He continued to write for the minors (particularly the English Opera House and the more prestigious Adelphi), but he also became a regular writer at the patent theatres, where he was valued for his dependability. At Covent Garden he almost rivalled Planche in the number of new pieces written. About 1825 he married Susannah Snell; and in January 1826 Anna, the first of at least six children, was baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. 
Like many of his colleagues, Peake tended to work best when he had in mind one particular performer for the principal role. John Liston, for example, who was probably the best low comedian of the period, was much acclaimed in the part of Sir Hippington Miff in Peake's farce 'Comfortable Lodgings, or, Paris in 1750' (Drury Lane, 1827). Similarly, at the English Opera House in the mid-1820s Peake wrote for Charles Mathews senior, culminating in 'Before Breakfast' (1826), which was one of the author's most successful plays, performed no fewer than thirty nights in its first season. Indeed Peake later blamed Mathews's subsequent absence from the company for the decline in his success rate at that theatre. He seems however to have resumed his partnership with Mathews at the Adelphi from 1829 onwards: he is said to have written most of Mathews's famous one-man shows, known as 'at homes'. 
In the early 1830s Peake was a fairly prominent flag-waver for the dramatic profession in the movement for changes in the law relating to dramatic copyright and was one of the first members of the newly formed Dramatic Authors' Society in 1833. But he was in a minority among playwrights giving evidence at the 1832 committee in believing that he was '[u]pon the average' fairly remunerated for his work ('Select committee on dramatic literature', 193). At best a five-act comedy such as 'The Chancery Suit' (Covent Garden, 1830) made him $200, but $100 was more usual for a shorter piece. He also wrote regularly for Madame Vestris at the Olympic in the early 1830s, including the drama 'The Climbing Boy, or, The Little Sweep' (1832) and the farce 'In the Wrong Box' (1834). Soon after the Lyceum (formerly English Opera House) reopened after a fire in 1834, Peake, while continuing his dramatic writing, took on the treasurership, thus filling for over a decade, until his death, the self-same position which his father had had at Drury Lane. 
In the late 1830s and 1840s Peake also began to publish in the periodicals, beginning with a piece entitled 'The Toledo Rapier' for 'Bentley's Miscellany' in November 1839. Almost all his work in this respect, apart from a very few pieces for the 'New Monthly' and 'Ainsworth's Magazine', was for Richard Bentley's journal. It provided vital extra cash, even if Bentley was a slave-driver. In August 1840 Peake wrote to confirm that he was 'now fully employed in [Bentley's] service; I have written nowhere else' (BL, Add. MS 46650, fol. 106). His alliance was predicated on the somewhat misplaced confidence that Bentley would secure him a regular income. In fact, Peake was often reduced to special pleading for his fees. In the following month, after the transmission of another batch of material for 'Bentley's Miscellany' and the final chapters of the Colman family 'Memoirs', Peake wrote: 'I have not been idle -- but I am poor -- if my mind is to be at ease, for the exercise of my imagination and pen, I must have my pocket comfortable' (ibid., fol. 126). His 'Memoirs of the Colman family, including their correspondence with the most distinguished personages of their time' (2 vols., 1841), probably Peake's most substantial achievement, combined theatrical knowledge with a personal note stemming from his friendship with George Colman junior. Although occasionally lacking in connecting material -- partly because Bentley continually harried him into producing copy before he was entirely ready -- it is still an important source of reference for theatrical historians. 
Peake also wrote a light-hearted history of cockney sports under the title 'Snobson's 'Seasons'' [1838] and a three-volume novel 'Cartouche, the Celebrated French Robber' (1844). A comedy entitled 'The Title Deeds', one of several pieces written for the Adelphi in 1846-7, produced in June 1847, was probably his last play. His unexpected death on 4 October 1847 left his widow and their large family, according to 'The Times', 'in very difficult circumstances'. Peake was a popular and respected figure in theatrical circles and his untimely demise evoked much sympathy and concern, resulting in the launch of a public subscription and a benefit performance to alleviate the immediate financial distress of the family. 


@@@@@


doc= 21685


Peake, Robert (c.1551-1619), portrait and decorative painter, was born into a Lincolnshire gentry family. The son of William Peake, he was first recorded on 30 April 1565, upon his apprenticeship to the London goldsmith Laurence Woodham. If this took place at the customary age of fourteen, Peake must have been born about 1551. On 21 May 1576 he became a freeman of the London Goldsmiths' Company, which seems to indicate an unusually protracted apprenticeship, but in that and the following year he was working as a 'paynter' for the office of revels, preparing for the Elizabethan court festivities from Christmas through to Candlemas (2 February). He was paid for similar work in 1578 and 1579. From 1585/6 until about 1599 he rented a tenement in Green Dragon Court, in the Holborn Cross precinct of St Sepulchre's in the city of London. 
The back of a portrait, 'Unknown Military Commander' (1593; Yale U. CBA) is inscribed: 'M.BY.RO./PEAKE'. This work has been used as a touchstone to attribute other works to Peake, notably ones that bear a similar form of lettering to that employed for the date and sitter's age on the front of this portrait. The diverse nature of the handling of these portraits suggests, however, that more than one hand was involved. Moreover, the script in question has been found on works painted after Robert Peake's death, such as the portrait of two children, 'Lady Margaret and Lord John Russell', dated 1623 (priv. coll.). It is possible that these works are attributable to Peake's son William Peake (c.1580-1639) ['see under 'Peake, Sir Robert (c.1605-1667)]. In 1598 Peake was among the artists working in Britain listed by Francis Meres in his book 'Palladis tamia'. His earliest known portrait of Henry, prince of Wales (Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York), is dated 1603, the year in which Henry's father ascended the English throne as James I. The prince is portrayed as if on the deer-hunting field with a young companion, Sir John Harington. This image was probably originally paired with a portrait of Henry's sister, 'Princess Elizabeth' (NMM), which bears the same date. As no payments for either portrait are recorded in the royal accounts, they may have been commissioned by Harington's father, John, first Baron Harington of Exton, who with his wife was entrusted from 1603 onwards with the full-time care and education of the princess. A similar but later portrait of the prince with the young Robert Devereux, third earl of Essex, also by Peake, is in the Royal Collection. 
About 1605, as a churchwarden of St Sepulchre's, Peake was one of eighteen signatories of a petition to the earl of Salisbury (Hatfield House, Cecil Papers 197/88). Jointly with John de Critz the elder, he was appointed serjeant-painter to James I in June 1607, being paid $12 for 'sundry pictures by him made' for James's queen, Anne of Denmark, in 1606/7. Throughout this decade Peake seems to have produced a number of portraits of Prince Henry, which suggests that he acted as the prince's official portraitist. Between Easter and Michaelmas 1610, with the painter-stainer Paul Isaacson, Peake worked at Woolwich on the decoration of Henry's warship the 'Prince royal'; his tasks included painting 'diverse histories' (presumably narrative pictures) in the cabins. In 1611 Peake published an English edition of Sebastiano Serlio's 'The Firste Booke of Architecture', which he dedicated to the prince. This had been translated from a Dutch version made after the original Italian, and the title-page stated that it was to be sold at Peake's 'shop neere Holborne conduit, next to the 'Sunne Taverne''. In 1612 he was paid for 'twoe great Pictures of the Prince in Armes at length sent beyond the seas' (Strong, 'Henry, Prince of Wales', 114), and it must have been at about this date he painted what can be considered his masterpiece, the immense, idiosyncratic 'Henry, Prince of Wales, on Horseback' accompanied by the naked, elderly, winged figure of Time (priv. coll.) which reflects the great hopes invested in the energetic, art-loving prince, who was to die of typhoid in late 1612. For his funeral 'Mr Peake thelder Paynter' was allocated mourning cloth (Auerbach, 133). Also in 1612, Peake was paid $20 for three 'pictures' for Henry's younger brother, the future Charles I, and was mentioned by Henry Peacham in his book on painting and drawing 'The Gentleman's Exercise'. The following year Peake was paid $13 6's'. 8died for a fine full-length portrait of Prince Charles, commissioned to mark the young heir's visit to Cambridge, and still in the possession of the university. In 1616, a warrant was issued to pay Peake $35 for three further portraits of Charles. 
At the end of his life Peake seems to have moved to the Old Bailey precinct, London. He died there in 1619 and his will of 10 October was proved six days later. Peake's wife was Elizabeth, daughter of William Beckwith, prebendary of St Paul's Cathedral. Two sons are mentioned: William Peake whose son was Sir Robert Peake (c.1605-1667), and Luke Peake, described in the will as 'ungoverned' and who is thought to have died before 1634. Peake's grandson, Sir Robert Peake, became a print publisher and a devoted royalist, knighted by Charles I at Oxford in 1645, and died vice-president of the Honourable Artillery Company. 


@@@@@


doc= 21686


Peake, Sir Robert (c.1605-1667), printseller and royalist army officer, was the grandson of Robert Peake (c.1551-1619), principal painter to Henry, prince of Wales, son of James I, who in 1607 granted him the office of serjeant-painter which he held jointly with John De Critz. In 1611 the elder Robert Peake published a translation of Serlio's first book of architecture from his shop at Holborn Conduit where he evidently conducted a business in importing books and prints. On his death in 1619 the shop passed to his son 
On William's death in 1639 his son Robert -- the subject of this article -- inherited and continued the business. He published most of the finest British prints of the early 1640s, among them sixteen by Faithorne, Edward Pierce's set of friezes of 1640 (the earliest English ornament prints), and Wenceslaus Hollar's three-quarters-length 'Seasons' in 1641. In a letter to Samuel Pepys written in 1690, John Evelyn remembered that Peake was the dealer 'who had the most choice' of prints in London (H. C. Levis, 'Extracts from the Diaries and Correspondence of John Evelyn and Samuel Pepys Relating to Engraving', 1915, 84). 
At the outbreak of civil war in 1642 Peake joined the royalist army. In July 1643 he arrived at Basing House as lieutenant-colonel under the marquess of Winchester, and served with distinction during the long siege, being knighted by Charles I at Oxford on 27 March 1645. A 'box of brasse graven plates' was found among his possessions when the house fell in October that year ('Mercurius Britannicus', no. 101). He was first imprisoned at Winchester House, and then in Aldersgate, before being exiled for refusing to take the oath of loyalty to Cromwell. His associate Thomas Rowlett restarted the print business. Most of their plates were subsequently acquired by the publisher Thomas Hinde, and later by Peter Stent. 
It is not known where Peake went abroad or when he returned to England. After the Restoration he became vice-president and leader of the Honourable Artillery Company, and was so well known that a broadside panegyric was published after his death in London in 1667. He was buried in St Sepulchre's on 2 August. His will shows that he was a wealthy man who had wished to spend $500 on his funeral, but that the great fire of 1666 had consumed his houses and tenements on Holborn Conduit so that he had had to reduce the sum to $200. 


@@@@@


doc= 21687


Peake, Thomas (1771?-1837), barrister and law reporter, was the only son of Thomas Peake of Lleweni, Denbighshire, and his wife, Martha, daughter of Robert Coventry. His father, who practised as an attorney at Lincoln's Inn, held office as a side-clerk in the exchequer office of pleas between 1792 and about 1801. Peake was admitted to Lincoln's Inn as a student on 13 February 1788 and was called to the bar on 6 February 1796. His practice included work as a special pleader. He was a member of the Oxford circuit and of Worcester and Stafford sessions. 
In 1795 Peake published a collection of annotated reports of 'nisi prius' cases in the court of king's bench covering the period 1790-94. Three editions of this popular work were produced, the last in 1820. The chief justice, Lord Tenterden, commended Peake's reports as being 'remarkably correct'. He added, 'I went the same circuit and was in the habit of taking notes. On many occasions I have compared the cases, and I know his to be particularly accurate' (Manning). 
In 1801 Peake published 'A Compendium of the Law of Evidence'. His aim, declared in the preface, was to produce a book 'which should be a companion on the circuit; always at hand, and ready for immediate reference'. Five editions in all appeared between 1801 and 1822. The popularity of the 'Compendium' was not confined to practitioners. It won praise even from Jeremy Bentham, the radical critic of English law, who applauded the clear dividing line drawn between principles of evidence on the one hand and, on the other, rules of law governing proof in relation to particular causes of action. With characteristic robustness Bentham declared that existing works dealing with evidence by Lord Chief Baron Gilbert and Sir Francis Buller were, in comparison with Peake's work, 'like the drivelings ['sic'] of an old woman in her dotage' (Bentham, 7.341). The 'Compendium' was also popular in America, where several editions appeared in the early decades of the nineteenth century. 
On 21 January 1800 Peake married Eleanor (1773-1866), daughter and heir of James Budgen, an alderman of the City of London. There were five sons and three daughters of the marriage. The eldest son, Hugh Budgen Peake ('b'. 1803), was called to the bar by the Middle Temple and practised at Worcester. The second son, Thomas Peake jun. (1805-1837), was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn. He produced in 1829 a compilation, with his own annotations, of additional cases recorded by his father between 1795 and 1812. 
In February 1820 Peake was created a serjeant-at-law. He died of heart disease on 17 November 1837 at Chalfont St Peter, Buckinghamshire, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. An armorial window and a brass to his memory were placed at Henllan church, Denbighshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 21688


Pearce, Sir Edward Lovett (1699?-1733), architect, was born probably in 1699 or a little earlier, the son of Major-General Edward Pearce, first cousin to Sir John Vanbrugh. His mother was Frances, daughter of Christopher Lovett, lord mayor of Dublin in 1676-7, and his wife, Frances O'Moore, a descendant of Rory O'Moore of Laois. Almost nothing is known of his childhood, though a commission was purchased on his behalf in 1707. He is next heard of as a cornet in 1714 in the regiment of his father, and later, at the age of about sixteen or seventeen, in Morris's dragoons, a regiment with predominantly Irish connections which was disbanded in 1717. Both his father and his uncle General Thomas Pearce (later his father-in-law) were much involved in Irish affairs, and though the family had property at Witlingham, near Norwich, and perhaps elsewhere in England, Pearce probably spent some time in Ireland. Edward Pearce died in 1715, the year after his son's cornetcy. Direct evidence of his contact with his kinsman John Vanbrugh is still to seek. But the indirect evidence in the collection of architectural drawings formerly at Elton Hall, Huntingdonshire, is overwhelmingly strong, as are the Vanbrughian affinities in much of Pearce's own architectural work, in particular the use of corridors formed of chains of small domed compartments, chimney-stacks pierced by arches above the roof-line, and cylindrical corner-turrets. 
In 1722-3 Pearce made the grand tour, perhaps as a protege of the abortive New Junta for Architecture, a short-lived group associated with the third earl of Shaftesbury and comprising Robert, first Viscount Molesworth, and his son John, Sir George Markham, and the architects Thomas Hewitt and Alessandro Galilei. Like others, Pearce visited Nimes, Florence, Bologna, Turin, Venice, and perhaps Rome. He made copious notes, on the spot, in his copy of Palladio's 'Quattro libri' of 1601 (now in the library of the Royal Institute of British Architects), was in contact with Alessandro Galilei (also a protege of the junta), and did commissions for William Conolly, the speaker of the Irish House of Commons. He returned to England, or perhaps Ireland in 1724. Two years later, on 26 March 1726, Vanbrugh died. Pearce himself is reported in 1726 as being 'at Death's door' with an 'Inveterate Cholick' but, by 1728, as having 'become a very healthy person' thanks to a 'milk and vegetable diet' (Perceval MSS, BL, Add. MS 47030). Although he is referred to as 'Captain Pearce', it seems likely that his military character was totally occluded by ill health and by the practice of architecture. 
Pearce married, probably some time in the mid-1720s, his cousin Anne Pearce (died 1749), with whom he had four daughters. For the next eight years until his premature death, he had so many architectural works in hand, mostly in Ireland but a few in England, that many -- if not most -- of them must have been proceeding simultaneously. Few of them are securely dated, although the south front of Drumcondra House, Dublin, for Marmaduke Coghill, his earliest recorded work on a private house, belongs to 1727. Certainly attributable to Pearce are: Bellamont Forest, co. Cavan, for Charles Coote, a compact Palladian villa with four formal elevations; Cashel Palace, co. Tipperary, for Archbishop Theophilus Bolton, with a brick entrance front and a plainer garden front in ashlar stone; 9 Henrietta Street, Dublin, for Thomas Carter, the master of the rolls, a close transcript of Mountrath House, Great Burlington Street, London; 10 Henrietta Street, for Luke Gardiner; and Christchurch deanery, Dublin (dem.), an ingenious block of three separate dwellings expressed as one. So is Summerhill, co. Meath (burnt 1921; dem. 'c'.1957), a vast house with a giant order, towered wings joined to the centre with two-storey links, and arcaded chimney-stacks in the Vanbrugh manner. Other highly probable attributions include: Woodlands, Santry, co. Dublin, a centrally planned square villa with central tower-lantern; Gloster, Shinrone, King's county; Cuba Court, Banagher, King's county (dem.); and the garden house at Kilmainham, co. Dublin. In a number of cases, the owners of the buildings were related to the architect. Some English concerns must be mentioned, notably a large scheme for a palace at Richmond for King George I, a long gallery at Ashley, Surrey, for Lord Shannon (now dispersed), and probably the saloon at 12 North Audley Street, London, for Colonel Ligonier. 
Work had already begun on the great house of Castletown, co. Kildare, built for the speaker of the Irish House of Commons, William Conolly, when Pearce set out for Italy. There is reason to suppose that the elevations of the main house had been supplied by Galilei, and still better reason to credit the entrance-hall and the long gallery in its original form to Pearce, as well as the colonnades and wings. A drawing exists for the entrance-hall, while the colonnades show strong affinities with the parliament house and the style of the wings is subtly contrasted with that of the pre-existing facade of the main block. Purchased by Desmond Guinness in 1967, it became the headquarters of the Irish Georgian Society. This prior connection between Pearce and the speaker must surely account for the young architect's being chosen to design the new parliament house, over the head of Thomas Burgh, the sitting surveyor-general. Later, when Burgh died in December 1730, Pearce was appointed to succeed him in 1731; he was knighted in March 1732 and received the freedom of Dublin in April 1733. Pearce's design for the house was accepted in 1728 and the first stone was laid on 3 February 1729. Parliament sat in it in October 1731, and building was completed under Pearce's successor, Arthur Dobbs, before 1735. Before the building was finished, but when it was already in occupation, parliament paid public testimony on 13 December 1731 to the skill, diligence, and probity of the architect. Besides being the first building expressly designed for the housing of a bicameral legislature, it was a very original conception, embodying the most up-to-date architectural thought of the time. Though added to by James Gandon and others, it is externally intact and retains some notable interiors, especially Pearce's House of Lords chamber, and the domed corridors which surrounded the House of Commons. 
Pearce was MP for Ratoath from 1727, and successfully promoted an act in 1729 to regulate the building industry and the size of bricks. A scheme to employ infantry to make a canal from Newry to Lough Neagh was instituted by him. A theatre which he designed was built in Aungier Street, Dublin, but was demolished soon afterwards. Pearce died on 16 November 1733, at his home at The Grove, a house on the estate of Lord and Lady Allen of Stillorgan, for whom he had prepared a grand scheme for the Palladianization of their house, and for the garden. The work on the house was not carried out, but that on the garden was, and the substantial grotto and other works survive, along with the large obelisk intended as a mausoleum for Lady Allen. He was buried in old Donnybrook graveyard, Dublin, on 10 December 1733. 
Pearce was by far the most considerable architect to work in Ireland before the arrival of James Gandon: the parliament house alone would entitle him to this primacy. Richard Castle (or Cassels), whom he employed as his assistant and had perhaps also brought to Ireland, took over his practice after his death, especially with respect to country houses. The printing house in Trinity College, built by him in the year after Pearce's death, may well be Pearce's design. Through him a developed Palladian manner, with Vanbrughian overtones, was diffused throughout Ireland. His role in Ireland is closely analogous to that of the earl of Burlington in England, though there is little evidence of any direct connection. 


@@@@@


doc= 21689


Pearce, Nathaniel (1779-1820), traveller, was born on 14 February 1779 at East Acton, Middlesex. Incorrigibly unruly, he was sent to boarding-school at Thirsk, Yorkshire; twice apprenticed to London tradesmen, he twice ran away to sea, the second time joining a naval vessel. In May 1794 he was captured by the French, but eventually succeeded in escaping; he then served on various naval and merchant ships, meeting many adventures round the world. Having survived a shipwreck off Cape Town, he served some years in the 'Lancaster', under Admiral Sir Roger Curtis, going under the name of Clark, his mother's maiden name. While invalided in a hospital in Bombay, he accidentally fatally injured a guard, and, escaping, joined the 'Antelope', an East Indiaman under the orders of Viscount Valentia to map the African coast of the Red Sea. To avoid a return to India he deserted at Mocha in 1804. He was obliged to profess Islam, but soon regretted it, and, on Valentia's return to Mocha, begged for rescue. 
In June 1805, Valentia sent his secretary, Henry Salt, on a mission into Abyssinia, to establish friendly relations with Ras Welled Selasse of Tigre. Pearce, who accompanied Salt, was asked by the ras to enter his service. Several times, court intrigues and Pearce's own outspoken nature set the ras against him, but eventually his proven loyalty and courage made him a secure favourite. In 1808 he married Turinga, the half-Abyssinian daughter of a Greek, Sidee Paulus. In 1810 he escorted Salt's second mission into Abyssinia, acting as his interpreter. Another Englishman, William Coffin, remained to join the ras's service, and he and Pearce lived and fought side by side until the death of the ras in 1816 brought rival chiefs to battle over the succession. 
In October 1818 Pearce and Turinga fled Abyssinia for Egypt, where Salt was now British consul-general. As servant to John Fuller and the Revd William Jowett, Pearce journeyed up the Nile, reaching Wadi Halfa. He became steward of Salt's consulate in Cairo, and was employed by Jowett to translate parts of the 'New Testament' into Tigre, for the Church Missionary Society. Turinga died in May 1820 and Pearce was to return to England, the record of his naval desertion erased through the mediation of influential well-wishers. But, while awaiting a passage at Alexandria, he succumbed to a bilious fever and died on 12 August 1820. At his particular request, he was carried to his grave at the Greek convent in Alexandria by six English sailors. 
Fuller wrote of Pearce: 'He was a man of superior intellectual powers, of great observation and able to communicate his thoughts in an original and vigorous style... He was altogether an extraordinary character. Great warmth of temper and an unbounded spirit of enterprise were the sources of all his errors. His good qualities were courage, activity, intelligence and zeal in the service of his employers. (Fuller, 259)' Salt wrote: 'His memory... will be forever held in respect by all who knew his sterling worth, and who admire an honest heart joined to a true English spirit' (Halls, 2.159). Pearce's journals were published in 1831 as 'The Life of Nathaniel Pearce' (2 vols.). 


@@@@@


doc= 21690


Pearce, Samuel (1766-1799), Baptist minister, the son of William and Lydia Pearce, was born at Plymouth on 20 July 1766. His father was a silversmith; his mother died when he was a child, and he was brought up by his grandfather until he was seven or eight. He studied at the Baptist college, Bristol (1786-9), and in 1790 became minister of Cannon Street Baptist Church, Birmingham. There he laboured successfully until his death. On 2 February 1791 he married Sarah, daughter of Joshua Hopkins, a widower and a businessman of Alcester, Warwickshire. He wrote a number of affectionate love letters to his bride-to-be. 
Pearce was one of the founder members of the Baptist Missionary Society, founded on 2 October 1792, which he passionately supported throughout his short life, assisting the society in various ways. He was disappointed to be turned down for missionary service, having studied Bengali for that purpose. He wrote several hymns which were included in nonconformist hymnals. He was a man of outstanding spirituality and wrote in a letter of 9 May 1791 to his friend William Steadman, 'I want to walk with God as Enoch walked' (Fuller, 8). Physically he was never very robust, and he died from tuberculosis on 10 October 1799 in Birmingham, where he was subsequently buried; his wife survived him by less than five years. 


@@@@@


doc= 21691


Pearce, Thomas (fl. 1725-1756), legal writer and lawyer, is a figure about whom nothing is known apart from his publications. The earliest of these was 'The Laws and Customs of the Stannaries in the Counties of Cornwall and Devon' (1725). Two other works were devoted to elucidating the office and duties of JPs (1754 and 1756). Another publication, 'The Poor Man's Lawyer, or, Laws Relating to the Inferior Courts Laid Open', appeared in 1755. Pearce has been confused with Thomas Pearse (died 1743), MP for Weymouth and Melcombe Regis, but it is clear the two men were different. 


@@@@@


doc= 21692


Pearce, Sir William, first baronet (1833-1888), engineer and shipbuilder, was born at Brompton near Chatham in Kent on 8 January 1833, the son of Joseph George Pearce. His early education is unknown, but he trained as a shipwright and naval architect at the Chatham Dockyard under Oliver Lang. His skill was recognized in 1861, when he was given responsibility for superintending the construction of HMS 'Achilles', the first iron-clad ship built in the naval dockyards. His experience in the new construction material brought him the position of Lloyd's surveyor on Clydeside in 1863, then the centre of the new iron shipbuilding industry. 
Within twelve months Pearce was appointed manager of Robert Napier's shipyard to replace John Elder, who had set up in independent business with Charles Randolph. His influence on this great yard was immediate, designing pathbreaking, fast, transatlantic liners for the Compagnie Generale Transatlantique. His opportunity to become more than a manager came in 1869, when John Elder's early death set his widow and partners in search of a new associate. Pearce's proven skills in design and management were recognized as what was needed, and he joined John Ure, J. L. K. Jamieson, and Mrs Elder as partner and manager in the reconstructed enterprise now named John Elder & Co. The company had a fine reputation for its development work on the compound marine steam engine, and under Pearce this was enhanced further in 1874 when A. C. Kirk, working at the company, developed the triple expansion engine, which was to become the workhorse of the world's merchant navies for the next half century. 
Pearce embarked on a rapid development of the markets served by John Elder and pushed out in three directions. In designing ships for the transatlantic route he emphasized speed, and to enhance his company's reputation he cultivated the idea of the Blue Riband for record crossings. He wagered his ships would break existing records, and they did, attracting for his company many new orders, especially from Nord Deutscher Lloyd and Cunard. He applied the same psychology to the fast, cross-channel steam packets, guaranteeing and achieving a crossing time of one hour each way between Dover and Calais. His third market direction was to establish the Govan shipyard as a naval builder, and he succeeded in attracting orders for hulls and engines in the 1870s as naval construction was extended to counter the expansion of Bismarck's new fleet. 
Pearce's partners, Ure and Jamieson, retired in 1878 leaving him in command of what was then among the foremost shipbuilding concerns in the world, the Govan shipyard occupying over 70 acres, and employing as many as 5000 operatives. He built for the largest shipping lines, including the Pacific Steam Navigation Company, the New Zealand Shipping Company, and the British and Africa Steam Navigation Company. Pearce was a major shareholder in the first two of these, and was also chairman of the Guion Steamship Company, and of the Scottish Oriental Steamship Company. 
As a leading Clydeside employer, Pearce became a commissioner for the Govan burgh, an honorary colonel of the second volunteer battalion of the Highland light infantry, and, as a mason, became provincial grand master of Glasgow. In politics he was a Conservative, and was elected as the first MP to represent the Govan division of Lanarkshire in 1885; he represented the constituency until his death. In 1886 he converted his company to limited liability status, taking the name of the Fairfield Shipbuilding and Engineering Company, of which he was chairman. In 1887, on Queen Victoria's jubilee, he was created a baronet, but enjoyed his new rank only briefly. He died suddenly at his home at 119 Piccadilly, London, on 18 December 1888, his heart weakened by the stress and high pressure of his work; he was survived by his wife, Dinah Elizabeth Socoter, and his only son, William George Pearce, who succeeded to the baronetcy. He was buried on 22 December in Gillingham, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 21693


Pearce, Zachary (1690-1774), bishop of Rochester, was born on 8 September 1690 in the parish of St Giles, High Holborn, the son of Thomas Pearce (1666/7-1752), a wealthy distiller who retired at the age of forty to Little Ealing, Middlesex. Zachary was educated first at a private school in Great Ealing, then at Westminster School. He was elected a queen's scholar on 12 February 1704 and remained at Westminster until he was nineteen. The school liked to keep able boys as long as possible and Pearce attributed his linguistic and philological skills to this long initiation. He matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 8 June 1710, became a scholar in 1711, and graduated BA in 1713-14. In his early years at Cambridge he indulged himself in some humorous writing, contributing a fanciful account of a silent club to 'The Guardian' in 1713 and an essay on quacks to 'The Spectator' in 1714 under the pseudonym Ned Mum. In 1716 he published a scholarly edition of Cicero's 'De oratore' which established his academic reputation. He dedicated this to the lord chief justice, Thomas Parker, who prevailed on Richard Bentley, master of Trinity, to award him a fellowship of the college that year. 
Bentley agreed to this only on Parker's assurance that he would soon appoint Pearce to a benefice. Having proceeded MA that year, Pearce was made a deacon on 22 December 1717 and ordained priest on 8 June 1718 by William Fleetwood, bishop of Ely. On the appointment of Parker (by then Lord Macclesfield) as lord chancellor on 12 May 1718, Pearce became his household chaplain, and was instituted rector of Stapleford Abbots, Essex, in December 1719, and on 10 March 1720 rector of St Bartholomew by the Exchange, the most valuable living in the City of London in the lord chancellor's gift. Macclesfield also persuaded Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle, to make Pearce one of the king's chaplains after Newcastle had noticed Pearce saying grace at a dinner and remembered they had been at school together. Pearce was a royal chaplain from 1721 to 1739. He celebrated his progress and acknowledged his background by his marriage in February 1722 to Mary (1702/3-1773), daughter and heir of another wealthy Holborn distiller, Benjamin Adams. Pearce stated that they lived together happily for fifty-one years, although none of their children survived early infancy. 
Meanwhile Pearce's career continued its advance. Macclesfield presented him to the living of St Martin-in-the-Fields on 10 January 1724, and the grateful Pearce dedicated his Greek edition of 'De sublimitate' by Longinus to him later that year. 1724 also saw Pearce receive a Lambeth DD from William Wake, archbishop of Canterbury. When Macclesfield was impeached in 1725 Pearce lost a good patron, but remained faithful to the person, attending his trial every day, and afterwards retained his friendship and dined regularly with this 'great and good man' (Pearce, 'Commentary', 1.xvi). He soon acquired new patrons: another old Westminster schoolboy, the politician William Pulteney, who became earl of Bath in 1742, remained a close friend and patron for forty years and left Pearce an emerald ring in his will; William Clayton, from 1735 Baron Sundon, MP for Westminster from 1727 to 1741, was a parishioner at St Martin-in-the-Fields and Clayton's wife, Charlotte, introduced Pearce to Queen Caroline who, shortly before her death in 1737 promised him the next deanery. When the deanery of Wells fell vacant in 1739 Pearce applied to Sir Robert Walpole, but Walpole needed to reward political allies in the borough of Wells and left the deanery unfilled until the death of the dean of Winchester. Pearce was then instituted dean of Winchester on 1 August 1739 and Wells received its necessary political appointment. 
Pearce was a scholar who did not search out controversy, but engaged in it when required in his earlier years. When Francis Atterbury, bishop of Rochester, was committed to the Tower of London on a charge of high treason for his support of the Jacobite succession, Pearce published two letters 'To the Clergy of the Church of England' (1722), in which he denounced the bishop as a man 'full of ambition' ('Letter', 5) who sought to replace the present royal family with 'one grown up under the very Wing of the Papal See' (Pearce, 'Letter', 8); he defended the government action as 'reasonable and necessary' ('Second Letter', 15). Echoing Swift's comments on Bolingbroke, Pearce denounced the tory ministers of Queen Anne during 1710-14 as 'Persons who retired from the Guidance of the Realm, to the loose and lascivious Pleasures of a Mistress's Bed; and rose in the Morning to a Council of State, from the jolly Noise of the Glass and Bottle' ('Second Letter', 24). Soon, he moved from this vigorous support of whig orthodoxy to the defence of traditional Christian doctrine. In 'The Miracles of Jesus Vindicated' (1729) Pearce attacked Thomas Woolston's series of discourses on the miracles, and in 'A Reply to the Letter to Dr Waterland' (1731) he challenged Conyers Middleton's 1731 attack on Daniel Waterland's 'Scripture Vindicated' (1730), accusing Middleton of seeking to weaken the authority of Moses. His attack in 1733 on Richard Bentley's new edition of 'Milton's 'Paradise Lost'' (1732) was a strictly literary work in which he opposed Bentley's 'imaginary emendations' ('Commentary', 1.xxxiii). He was an acquaintance of Sir Isaac Newton and discussed Newton's 'Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms Amended' with the author shortly before Newton's death in 1727, and then attended his funeral. 
Pearce's concern for orthodoxy and order within the church led him in 1756 to refuse George Whitefield permission to preach in Long Acre Chapel, but Whitefield ignored the prohibition and wrote a series of long letters of personal justification to Pearce suggesting 'France and Rome and Hell might be the common butt of our resentment' (Pearce papers, WAM 64773). Pearce was resolute in his opposition and soon a raucous mob outside the chapel regularly drowned Whitefield's words with the 'unhallowed noise' (Pearce papers, WAM 64775) of drums, copper furnaces, clappers, marrowbones, and cleavers. Whitefield threatened to publish the correspondence if this 'premeditated rioting' (Pearce papers, WAM 64777) continued and Pearce warned him it was illegal to publish the letters of a peer without permission. But the clamour ceased and Whitefield begged Pearce 'to accept my hearty thanking for stopping the noise that used to be made, since I hear it was owing to Your Lordship's admonitions' (Pearce papers, WAM 64778). However, despite this conciliatory act, Pearce remained hostile to the irregular activities of enthusiasts and evangelicals. In 1769 he reproved Sir Sidney Stafford Smythe for attending Selina Hastings, countess of Huntingdon's chapel in Tunbridge Wells and so encouraging 'great Irregularities with regards to the Discipline and good Order & Government of the Ch. of England' (Pearce papers, WAM 64547-8). Two years later, he described the design of the Feathers tavern petitioners as 'a wild, dangerous and impractical one... of a most mischievous nature' (Pearce papers, WAM 64474). 
Although an anonymous critic in 1743 described Pearce as 'a Court-Clergyman, a Hunter of Preferments; a man who is for obtaining a Mitre, by Methods which ought in Justice to exclude him from a Curacy' ('A Letter to Dr Z. Pearce', 18), in the memoir Pearce later wrote of his own life between 1710 and 1768 he portrays himself as a reluctant careerist who never sought high office. There is a degree of independent evidence to support this. In an age when most clerics' letters to their patrons are fulsome, Pearce's are concise and businesslike, at times almost terse. In 1746 he assured John Potter, archbishop of Canterbury, that he was financially secure and had no desire for a bishopric. Nevertheless he was offered Bangor in 1748. He declined and was summoned by Newcastle, who told him that although he could not hold the deanery of Winchester 'in commendam' with Bangor, he could retain St Martin-in-the-Fields. Pearce declined again and was summoned to Lord Chancellor Hardwicke, who asked him 'If Clergymen of learning and merit will not accept of Bishopricks, how can the Ministers of State be blamed, if they are forced to fill them with others less deserving?' ('Commentary', 1.xxiii), whereupon Pearce consented and was consecrated on 21 February 1748. Much of Pearce's reluctance was due to the remoteness of Bangor. On 26 January 1748, hearing of the death of Robert Butts, bishop of Ely, and presuming there would be a vacancy 'in one of the English Bishopricks now held by a Bishop educated at Cambridge', he had written to Newcastle begging 'that, instead of having my election to Bangor confirmed, I may be appointed to such English Bishoprick as shall become vacant' (BL, Add. MS 32714, fol. 111). In 1747 Thomas Secker claimed to be afraid to meet Mrs Pearce after his role in the Bangor appointment which forced her 'to quit the place [Winchester] she is so fond of' (Pearce papers, WAM 64681). 
When Pearce's father died on 14 August 1752 he inherited his large fortune and three years later he told Archbishop Thomas Herring he wished to resign Bangor and enjoy a private life. With one exception, he had made annual visits to his remote diocese since his consecration, but now his health was poor. In a letter of 17 August 1752 Pearce complained to Herring: 'I went thro' many difficulties to get to this place, and many more have I undergone in my Visitation of my Diocese since my arrival here, by reason of bad roads and bad weather' (BL, Add. MS 32420, fol. 77). Herring, who had been at Bangor himself, sympathized about the remote country, dilapidated palace, and dangerous roads, and remembered experiencing 'on Horseback... the Terrors of those ugly stretches' (Pearce papers, WAM 67575). In his commonplace book, Pearce mocked both Welsh spelling and sobriety with the single word 'ddrrunnkq' (Pearce papers, WAM 64896, fol. 18). Herring had little difficulty persuading him to move from Bangor to Rochester, which see was traditionally held together with the deanery of Westminster. Pearce was duly installed as dean of Westminster on 15 April and bishop of Rochester on 9 July 1756. However, this was his final move; when the see of London became vacant in 1761 he resisted Lord Bath's urging to seek further promotion, and in 1763 he made a genuine effort to resign both his bishopric and his deanery. After a long correspondence with Thomas Secker, archbishop of Canterbury, about the legal precedents for a bishop resigning, both men agreed resignation should be made to the king, not the metropolitan. In an interview with the young king Pearce explained that, at seventy-three, he was too old for the job and wanted to devote his remaining years to devotion and study, wishing 'to have some interval between the fatigues of business and eternity' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 3.109). The king agreed, but his ministers were anxious about the implications of such a precedent on their control of the system of preferment, and the royal permission was withdrawn. In 1764 Pearce's patron Lord Bath suggested he resign just the deanery and so 'get rid of the troublesome part of your preferment, & preserve the honourable part of it, which you may do with very little trouble' (Pearce papers, WAM 64724). The church hierarchy was anxious lest the link between Rochester and Westminster be broken. Thomas Newton, bishop of Bristol, begged him not to separate the bishopric and the deanery, pointing out how convenient the dean's house was for attending the House of Lords. However, five years later, the king did agree to his resignation of the deanery of Westminster. 
On 1 October 1773, at Greenwich, Pearce confirmed around 700 of the laity, but the effort was too much for this 83-year-old man. The next day he was unable to speak and he never regained his former powers of easy articulation. His wife died on 23 October 1773. His paralysis increased; almost unable to swallow, he languished through months of lingering decay and died at his family home in Little Ealing, Middlesex, on 29 June 1774. His chaplain remembered him as tall of stature, venerable in appearance, and softly spoken. A sympathetic obituary claimed 'he was never puffed up with the general applauses of the world, but of a humble deportment' ('GM', 1st ser., 45, 1775, 421), while another remembered his 'regularity of life, tranquillity of mind, and simplicity of diet' ('GM', 1st ser., 46, 1776, 406). His extensive library contained the works of Rabelais and Rochester and two editions of Petronius's 'Satyricon', and his commonplace books reveal a man with a keen sense of humour, who was no prude; one holograph entry records that a 'Judge reprimanded a man who had ravish'd a Girl for picking sticks of his hedge, but was brought in not guilty at his trial; Sir, says he, you must leave off these practices, or you won't have a stick left in your hedge. (Pearce papers, WAM 64896, fol. 11)' Pearce was buried next to his wife in the church at Bromley, Kent, close to the palace of the bishops of Rochester. He left his library to the dean and chapter of Westminster and his manuscripts to his chaplain; he endowed an almshouse in Bromley, Westminster Hospital, and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, and built a registry for the records of the bishops of Rochester; his fortune was inherited by his brother, William Pearce of Abingdon Street, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 21694


Peard, George (bap. 1594, d. 1644/5), politician, was baptized on 28 July 1594, eldest child of John Peard ('bap'. 1565, died 1631), mayor of Barnstaple, and his wife, Julian (died 1642), daughter of Roger Beaple, merchant of Barnstaple. He had four brothers and six sisters. He was admitted to the Middle Temple on 23 June 1613 and called to the bar on 30 June 1620. Barnstaple retained him as one of its counsel from 1628 and he practised in both Devon and London. He was unmarried and lived with his mother when he was in Barnstaple, where both of them refused to pay ship money in 1639. 
Peard was appointed deputy recorder of Barnstaple in 1640 and represented the town in parliament. He attended almost daily in the Short Parliament and spoke frequently, especially against ship money, which he termed an abomination. He traced the historical background of the principle of no taxation without representation and argued that the judges overstepped their function in their decisions on it. In the Long Parliament he continued his attacks on ship money and the judges, especially Lord Keeper Finch, and was commissioned by the Commons to examine whether pressure had been put upon the judges by the crown. Over religious affairs he was outspoken against the recent canons, especially the etcetera oath, and was on the Commons committee to prepare the charges against Archbishop Laud. He was one of Pym's close supporters and moved to have the charges brought against Strafford, a motion Pym seconded. Later he was chairman of the grand committee of the house for the bill of attainder against Strafford when, with the doors locked, he reported on the result of the division. Peard was among the originators of the protestation and in December 1641 proposed the printing of the grand remonstrance. 
With the outbreak of civil war Peard received the permission of the Commons to remain in Barnstaple, where he organized the fortifications and contributed to their cost. He was on the town's council of war, meeting daily in the guildhall, and had become the recorder by 30 May 1643. After the royalist success at Stratton some citizens of the besieged city of Exeter opened negotiations with the commissioners of the royal army and these were extended to include Barnstaple. Propositions were sent to the council of war at Barnstaple but suppressed on Peard's advice. When news of this leaked out thirty-six leading citizens wrote to the mayor and council of war to demand a town meeting to consider them. This was rejected on Peard's motion and the letter burned by the hangman. Now some members of the corporation sought terms and reassurances from Prince Maurice and only 'the petulancy of Master Peard (that prudent, learned and comely Gentleman)' ('Mercurius Aulicus', 29 Aug 1643) delayed Barnstaple's surrender, which was agreed on 2 September. Peard still advised resistance and fomented opposition, which led to his arrest and imprisonment in Exeter. He became very ill and died in Barnstaple some time between 9 June 1644, when he added a codicil to his will, and 15 March 1645, when Richard Beaple's will was proved. He was buried in St Peter's, Barnstaple. 


@@@@@


doc= 21695


Peard, John Whitehead (1811-1880), army officer, born at Fowey, Cornwall, in July 1811, was the second son of Vice-Admiral Shuldham Peard and his second wife, Matilda, daughter of William Fortescue of Penwarne. He was educated at the King's School, Ottery St Mary, Devon, and at Exeter College, Oxford (matriculated 4 March 1829, BA 2 May 1833, MA 17 November 1836). A youth of 'great stature and extraordinary muscular strength', who at nineteen years of age weighed 14 stone, he was described as possessing 'the shoulders of a bull'. As stroke of the college boat, he was famous on the river, and during the town-and-gown rows of his undergraduate days his height and skill in boxing reputedly made him an object of terror to the roughs. In 1837 he became a barrister of the Inner Temple, being called on the same day with Sir F. H. Doyle, who described Peard's draining on a gaudy day in hall a loving-cup holding about 2 quarts of wine. 
He married at East Teignmouth, Devon, on 7 June 1838, Catherine Augusta, daughter of the Revd Dr William Page Richards, formerly headmaster of Blundell's School, Tiverton; she survived him. For some time he went the western circuit, but life at the bar may have been too dull for him, and from 1853 to 1861 he was a captain in the Duke of Cornwall's rangers. 
During his frequent visits to Italy Peard had been affronted by the brutality of Neapolitan officials and, largely as a result, he in 1860 joined the forces of Garibaldi, with whose aims he had become thoroughly sympathetic, enlisting as a volunteer in the Cacciatori delle Alpi volunteer corps. When Garibaldi made his expedition to Sicily he was joined by Peard, who distinguished himself by his gallantry and indifference to danger at the battle of Milazzo (20 July 1860), and at its conclusion was raised to the rank of colonel. He accompanied Garibaldi's forces on their advance to Naples, and was appointed to command the English legion. Despite his undeniable bravery he was a mediocre commander, and the legion gave much trouble before its eventual disbandment. For his services he received from Victor Emmanuel the cross of the order of Valour, and became known in England as Garibaldi's Englishman. 
On the retirement of Garibaldi to Caprera Peard returned to England and lived quietly. When Garibaldi visited England he fondly paid a visit to his old comrade at his house at Penquite, on the Fowey River, on 25-27 April 1864, and there was a touching reunion between the two. Peard was a JP and deputy lieutenant for Cornwall, and he served the office of sheriff in 1869. He was also a prominent freemason, becoming past grand master of Cornwall on 26 August 1879. He died at Trenython, Par, on 21 November 1880, from the effects of a paralytic stroke, and was buried in Fowey cemetery on 24 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 21696


Peard, Shuldham (bap. 1761, d. 1832), naval officer, third son of Captain George Peard RN, was born at Penryn, Cornwall, and was baptized at the church of St Gluvias, Penryn, on 29 October 1761. At the age of ten he was entered on the books of the 'Fly', and afterwards on those of the 'Racehorse', as an able seaman. He probably first went afloat in 1776, in the 'Worcester', with Captain Mark Robinson; he was afterwards in the 'Martin' with Captain (afterwards Sir William) Parker, and in the 'Thetis' with Captain John Gell on the Newfoundland station. In 1779, having been sent away in command of a prize, he was taken prisoner and taken to Cadiz. After his return to England, he passed his examination on 6 April 1780, and on 26 April was promoted lieutenant. In June 1780 he was appointed to the 'Edgar', one of the Channel Fleet, and continued in her until February 1782, taking part in the relief of Gibraltar in April 1781. From 1785 to 1790 he was in the 'Carnatic', guardship at Plymouth; in 1790-91, during the Spanish armament, he was in the 'Princess Royal', flagship of Rear-Admiral Hotham, at Portsmouth, and was again in the 'Carnatic' in 1791-2. In January 1793 he went on the 'Britannia' to the Mediterranean with the flag of Hotham, and on 30 January 1795 was promoted to command the 'Fleche'. 
On 5 May 1795 Peard was posted to the 'Censeur', and in July was appointed to the 'Britannia' as second captain. From her, in January 1796, he was moved into the 'St George' (98 guns), which he still commanded on 18 January 1797, when, as the fleet was leaving Lisbon, she got on shore, had to cut away her masts, and was left behind disabled, while the fleet went on to fight the battle of Cape St Vincent. The ship afterwards rejoined the flag off Cadiz, and was still there in the beginning of July, when a violent mutiny broke out on board. Peard, with his own hands, assisted by the first lieutenant, seized two of the ringleaders, dragged them out of the crowd, and had them put in irons. His daring and resolute conduct cowed the rest, and they returned to their duty; but the two men were promptly tried, convicted, and hanged on 8-9 July. Of Peard's conduct on this occasion his commander-in-chief, St Vincent, thought very highly, and years afterwards wrote, 'his merit in facing the mutiny on board the St George ought never to be forgotten or unrewarded' (Tucker, 408). 
In March 1799 Peard commissioned the frigate 'Success' for the Mediterranean, and on his way out, when off Lisbon, met and was chased by the Brest fleet. He, however, escaped, and joined Lord Keith off Cadiz on 3 May, in time to warn him of the approaching danger. In the following February the 'Success' formed part of the squadron blockading Malta, and on the 18th she had a large share in the capture of the 'Genereux', hampering her movements as she tried to escape, and raking her several times. On 9 February 1801 the 'Success' was lying at Gibraltar, when a strong French squadron, under Rear-Admiral Ganteaume, passed through the straits. Peard conjectured -- correctly -- that they were bound for Egypt, and, thinking that Keith ought to be warned, he immediately followed, hoping to pass them on the way. He fell in with them off Cape Gata, but was prevented by calms and variable winds from passing, and, after a chase of three days, was overtaken and captured. From the prisoners Ganteaume learned that the route to Egypt might be full of danger to himself, and turned aside to Toulon, from where Peard and his men were at once sent to Port Mahon for an exchange of prisoners. 
On Peard's return to England he was appointed, in June 1801, to the 'Audacious' (74 guns), in which he joined the squadron at Gibraltar under Sir James Saumarez (afterwards Lord de Saumarez), and took part in the actions at Algeciras on 6 July, and in the straits on the night of the 12th. The 'Audacious' was afterwards sent to the West Indies, and was paid off in October 1802. In 1803 and during the war Peard commanded the sea-fencibles on the coast of Cornwall. On 5 July 1814 he was superannuated as a rear-admiral, but was restored to the active list on 5 July 1827, and advanced to vice-admiral on 22 July 1830. He was twice married. His second wife was Matilda, daughter of William Fortescue of Penwarne, Cornwall; they had two sons. His elder son, Captain George Peard RN, died in 1837; the younger, John Whitehead Peard (1811-1880) was 'Garibaldi's Englishman'. Peard died at Barton Place, near Exeter, on 27 December 1832. 


@@@@@


doc= 21697


Pearl, Cora (1835?-1886), courtesan, was the second daughter of the six children of Frederick William Nicholls Crouch (1808-1896), a composer, and his wife, Lydia Pearson, a singer. Her date and place of birth are disputed, as she is believed to have forged her birth certificate, giving the date as 23 February 1842, and the place as Caroline Place, East Stonehouse, Plymouth. It seems likely that she was actually born in London in 1835, the family moving to Plymouth about 1837. Her father, whose most successful composition was 'Kathleen Mavourneen', deserted his family in 1845 and emigrated to the United States in 1849. In 1847 she was sent to a convent school in Boulogne, where she acquired an imperfect command of French. Having returned to England in 1856, she claimed to have been seduced by a diamond merchant in London, and assumed the name Cora Pearl. By 1858 she had returned to France, and engaged in a series of liaisons with notable men in Paris, including Achille Murat, Victor Massena, the prince of Orange, the duc de Mornay, and Gustave Dore. The longest of her 'affaires' was with Prince Napoleon ('Plon-Plon'), who provided her with a house in the rue de Chaillot, known to her admirers as 'Les Petites Tuilleries'. She also entertained the prince of Wales on one of his many visits to Paris. Ostentatious and vulgar, she had neither modesty nor restraint; nor did she have any great liking for men, whom she exploited ruthlessly. For a time her taste in clothes and furnishings set the fashion in Paris, her horses and carriage being particularly admired. She was not considered beautiful, having red hair and a round face, from which she acquired her nickname, 'La Lune Rousse', but her figure was accounted exceptional. She had a reputation for offering adventuresome sex to her clients. She made her only stage appearance as Cupid in Offenbach's opera 'Orphee aux enfers'; for her debut the theatre, the Bouffes-Parisiennes, was filled with her admirers, including many members of the Jockey Club; but on the twelfth night she was hissed and never returned to the stage. She also had literary ambitions, a story appearing under her name in 'Ficelles Litteraires' in 1868. She herself is recognizable in Ouida's novel 'Puck' (1870). 
On the outbreak of war in 1870, Cora Pearl left France for London, but, being refused admission to the Grosvenor Hotel, she returned to Paris where she converted her house into a hospital, tore up her sheets for bandages, and spent large sums of money on the care of the wounded which she hoped, vainly, to recoup from the commissioners. Her lover at this time was Alexandre Duval, the son and heir of a successful butcher and restaurateur, who was reputed to have spent his entire fortune, in the region of 17 million francs, on her. When his money was gone, she dismissed him, and he shot himself, although not fatally, in her house. The resulting scandal caused her to be expelled from France for a time. Despite the large amounts of money that passed through her hands, by 1873 she was in financial difficulties and was obliged to sell her house and its contents. Her last years were lived in increasing poverty, supported by regular but inadequate contributions from members of the Jockey Club. Virtually destitute, she began writing her memoirs, and, following the example of her professional predecessors, Harriette Wilson and Teresia Constantia (Con) Phillips, sent round advance notices to her former clients offering to omit their names in return for payment. The resulting narrative, which used false, but recognizable names, disappointed the prurient in its lack of detail. It was accepted for publication by Jules Levy, and was issued four months before her death. She died from cancer, at 8 rue de Bassano, Paris, on 8 July 1886, and was buried in the Batignolles cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 21698


Pearman, William (b. 1792, d. in or after 1825), singer, was born at Manchester of poor but respectable parents. He entered the navy as a cabin-boy, but, having been wounded in the leg at the battle of Copenhagen, retired with a pension from the service. He then made some unsuccessful attempts to become an actor, and appeared in London at Tooting and at the Sans Pareil Theatre (from October 1819 the Adelphi) in the Strand, and with W. C. Macready's company at Newcastle. He went on to achieve success as a singer of Charles Dibdin's nautical songs at Sadler's Wells Theatre in London. John Addison gave him lessons, which enabled him to take leading singing parts in provincial theatres, including those at Bath and Bristol, and Macready engaged him once more at Newcastle as leading vocalist in musical drama. 
On 7 July 1817 Pearman made his debut at the English Opera House as Orlando in the comic opera 'The Cabinet', which was a great success. Other roles in light opera included Captain Macheath in 'The Beggar's Opera', which was judged to be the best on the stage. In 1819 Pearman was retained at Drury Lane for secondary parts (John Braham taking the leads), and in 1822 at Covent Garden; however, his voice and style seem to have been ineffective in a large house. His best effort there was said to be the imitative song 'Ne'er shall I forget the day', in the opera 'Clari, or, The Maid of Milan', composed for him by Sir Henry Bishop. In September 1824 he distinguished himself as Rodolph in one of several altered versions of Weber's 'Der Freischutz' at the English Opera House, a role he repeated at Covent Garden. 
Pearman's natural voice, soft or veiled in tone (Oxberry describes it as 'smothered'), did not reach beyond E, although he could force a G. His falsetto was sweet when audible, but it was not possible for him to sing many tenor songs in their original key. He was also unable to make use of the trill, and in 1825 he was taking lessons from an Italian singing teacher. He was a small man, about 5 feet 3 inches tall, but well proportioned. His complexion was 'sallow; his hair and eyes dark; and the 'contour' of his countenance decidedly foreign' ('Oxberry', 151). His manner was so graceful that his lameness (due to his injured leg) was scarcely evident. He was a good-humoured man whose talent as an actor was widely recognized. Oxberry hints at Pearman living beyond his means, and also mentions that he 'married, some years since, the daughter of a small inn-keeper. The temper of our hero is not exactly of a nature to render the marriage state happy; and he who has been the victim of tyranny in his youth, too frequently becomes a tyrant in his turn. ('Oxberry', 152)' Nothing is known of him after 1825. 


@@@@@


doc= 21699


Pears, Steuart Adolphus (1815-1875), schoolmaster, was born at Pirbright, Surrey, on 20 November 1815, the seventh son of the Revd James Pears (1777/8-1853), headmaster of Bath grammar school, and brother of Sir Thomas Townsend Pears. Pears was educated at Bath under his father, and was elected scholar of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in 1832. After graduating BA in June 1836 with a second class in 'literae humaniores', he was elected fellow of Corpus, remaining in residence until 1838. He then became tutor to Lord Goderich (the first marquess of Ripon), of whom he took charge until 1842. In 1839 he gained the Ellerton theological prize for an essay entitled 'The Conduct and Character of St Paul', and in 1841 the Denyer theological prize for an essay entitled 'The Divinity of Our Lord'. He was ordained deacon in 1839 and priest in 1842. In 1843 he was sent abroad by the Parker Society to search the libraries of Zurich and other places for correspondence relating to the English Reformation. In the course of his researches he discovered a number of original letters in Latin from Sir Philip Sidney to his friend Hubert Languet, which he translated and published on his return (1845). During 1844 and 1845 he was in residence at Oxford as dean of Corpus Christi College. In 1846 he was appointed fellow and tutor of Durham University, and in 1847, at the age of thirty-two, assistant master at Harrow School under C. J. Vaughan. In December 1847 he married Catherine Temple (died 'c'.1866), the elder daughter of Temple Chevallier, professor of mathematics and Hebrew in Durham University. He took the degrees of BD in 1846 and DD in 1851, when he published the sermons he delivered at Harrow, following these in 1852 with 'Remarks on the Protestant Theory of Church Music'. He remained at Harrow until 1854, when he was elected headmaster of Repton School. At the time there were about fifty boys in the school, many of them village boys; the schoolhouse contained only two or three classrooms, and there were two boarding-houses. 
Under Pears Repton achieved the standing of a leading public school. Influenced by the example of Rugby School during his period under Dr Vaughan, a pupil of Thomas Arnold, he instigated and helped to finance the building of a chapel following the celebration of the tercentenary of the school in 1857. At about the same time he built a boarding-house. Over the next few years, he built classrooms, fives-courts, and a library; and several other boarding-houses were erected during his headmastership. In 1862 the Repton School football rules were drawn up, and the first cricket fixture with Uppingham School was held in 1865. Pears published several school sermons, including 'Short Sermons on the Elements of Christian Truth' (1861), 'Sundays at School: Short Sermons Preached in Repton School Chapel' (1870), and various addresses, including 'Mind and Body: and Moral Influence' (1855). He gave evidence in 1865 to the schools inquiry commission, chaired by Lord Taunton, when he indicated a commitment to the traditional curriculum and a scepticism towards the teaching of science. He attended the first Headmasters' Conference, held at Uppingham in 1869, and subsequently ensured that the new scheme for the constitution of Repton, agreed with the endowed schools' commissioners in 1874, secured its status as a first-grade school, catering for boys aged ten and over. 
One of Pears's most distinguished pupils, William Sanday, recalled his 'spare rather tall figure' and 'his distinguished, somewhat worn and aquiline features'. He had a grave, almost austere, manner, and a natural dignity and authority, which did not need to be reinforced by corporal punishment (Macdonald, 174-5). The strain of seeing through the new constitution told on his health in the years following the death of his wife ('c'.1866), and he resigned the headmastership in 1874. On his retirement, pupil numbers had risen to nearly 300. Pears was shortly afterwards presented by the president and fellows of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, to the living of Childrey, Berkshire, where he died on 15 December 1875. A fine speech-room, named after him, was subsequently erected at Repton in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 21700


Pears, Sir Thomas Townsend (1809-1892), army officer in the East India Company, born on 9 May 1809, was the son of the Revd James Pears (1777/8-1853), headmaster of Bath grammar school, and the brother of Steuart Adolphus Pears. He went to Addiscombe College in 1823, was commissioned lieutenant in the Madras engineers on 17 June 1825, and, after the usual Chatham course, sailed for India in late 1826. He was employed in the public works department, and became a superintending engineer as early as 1828. 
Invalided to England in 1834, Pears returned to India overland through Persia in 1836, and was appointed commandant of the Madras sappers and miners. He was promoted second captain on 15 September 1838. In 1839, while still commanding his corps, he was appointed chief engineer with the field force employed in Karnal. After this expedition, which resulted in the capture of the fort and town of Karnal, and of the nawab, Pears was dispatched as field engineer with the force in China, and took part in the capture of the island of Chushan in 1840. 
In 1841 Pears was appointed commanding engineer with the army in China under Sir Hugh Gough, and greatly distinguished himself. In Gough's dispatch of 3 October 1841, reporting the capture of the city of Tinghai (Dinghai), he stated that 'the scaling-ladders had been brought up in most difficult and rugged heights by the great exertions of the Madras sappers, and were gallantly planted under the direction of Captain Pears, who was the first to ascend'. After the capture of the fortified city and heights of Chapu (Zhapu), Pears was again mentioned for placing the powder bags which blew in the defences of a fort where a desperate resistance was offered. With the exception of the attack on Canton (Guangzhou) and the bombardment of Amoy (Xiamen), Pears was present as commanding engineer in every action of Gough's China campaign of 1841-2. He was repeatedly mentioned in dispatches, and at the close of the war was made brevet major on 23 December 1842, and CB. 
On Pears's return to Madras he was employed in the public works department, as superintending engineer at Nagpur, and in various other responsible situations, chiefly in the inception and development of the railway system. From 1851 to 1857 he was the consulting engineer for railways to the government of Madras. He was then appointed chief engineer in the public works department for Mysore, and was the trusted adviser of Sir Mark Cubbon. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 1 August 1854, and colonel in the army on 1 August 1857. He retired on a pension on 8 February 1861 with the honorary rank of major-general, but, on his arrival in England, was offered, unsolicited, the appointment of military secretary at the India Office in succession to Sir William Baker. 
When Pears took office under Sir Charles Wood (afterwards Lord Halifax) the duties were formidable and delicate, following the military reorganization after the abolition of the East India Company. Vested interests, often extravagantly asserted, had to be defended against often unreasonable attacks. Pears gained the trust of the ministers under whom he served -- Sir Charles Wood, Sir Stafford Northcote, the duke of Argyll, and Lord Salisbury. The organization at home for the Abyssinian expedition of 1867 was entrusted to him, and Sir Stafford Northcote wrote to him expressing the highest appreciation. On 13 June 1871 he was appointed a civil KCB. He retired in 1877. 
Pears had married, at Madras, on 31 December 1840, Bellina Marianne, daughter of Captain Charles Johnston of the Madras army. They had seven children, of whom six survived him. His eldest son, in the Bengal civil service, collector of Budaun, died at Allahabad in 1883. His second son, Major T. C. Pears, Bengal staff corps, became political agent at Alwar, Rajputana. 
Pears's wife died at Putney on 17 January 1892. Pears died at his residence, Eton Lodge, Upper Richmond Road, Putney, on 7 October 1892, and was buried in Mortlake cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 21701


Pearsall, Richard (1698-1762), Independent minister, was born and baptized at Kidderminster, Worcestershire, on 29 August 1698, the son of Nicholas and Anne Pearsall. Little is known of his early life, but it is said that his sisters Hannah and Phoebe encouraged him in faith. After Hannah married and became Hannah Housman, he published extracts of her diary in 1744 under the title 'The Power and Pleasure of Divine Life'. Phoebe, who was married to Joseph Williams of Kidderminster, was a correspondent of Philip Doddridge; her diary was published by the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. Richard grew up under the ministry of John Spilsbury and was educated at a dissenting academy at Tewkesbury under Samuel Jones. Joseph Butler and Thomas Secker were among his fellow students. 
In a letter dated 18 December 1718 Pearsall wrote that he was setting out as a candidate for the ministry. He was ordained at Bromyard in Herefordshire in 1721, and succeeded Samuel Philips (died 1721), whose daughter Anna he married at Avebury, Herefordshire, on 8 December 1724. They had two daughters. In 1731 he moved to Warminster in Wiltshire, where the church had divided after a dispute over charges of Arianism. From 1747 until 1762 he was minister of the Independent church at Taunton, Somerset. He conducted his last baptism in July 1762 and died at Taunton on 10 November 1762. 
Pearsall was a keen correspondent, and wrote to Philip Doddridge, George Whitefield, and James Hervey among others. His friendship with Hervey may have encouraged him to attempt to write verse, and one of his poems was published in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (March 1736). After his death, under the title 'Reliquiae sacrae' in 1765, Thomas Gibbons published a deathbed letter that Pearsall had written to his congregations, together with 'Meditations on selected passages of scripture and sacred dialogues between a father and his children'. In addition to a few tracts, sermons, and letters Pearsall published contemplations on the ocean, harvest, sickness, and the last judgment (1753), which ran to several editions, and 'Meditations on Butterflies: Philosophical and Devotional, in Two Letters to a Lady' (1758). 


@@@@@


doc= 21702


Pearsall, Robert Lucas (1795-1856), composer and antiquary, born at Clifton, Bristol, on 14 March 1795, was the son of Richard Pearsall, a former army officer and amateur musician, and his wife, Elizabeth Lucas, a descendant through her mother, Phillippa Still, of John Still, bishop of Bath and Wells. His mother had him privately educated with a view to a legal career. She also encouraged his musical talent; a cantata, 'Saul and the Witch of Endor', which he composed at about the age of thirteen, was privately published. 
On 23 August 1817 Pearsall married Marie Henriette (or Harriet) Elizabeth Hobday, the daughter of William Armfield Hobday and Elizabeth Dorothy, 'nee' Ivory; they had at least one son and two daughters. Pearsall was called to the bar in 1821, having kept terms at Lincoln's Inn, and was active as a barrister on the western circuit for four years, during which time he contributed regularly to a number of periodicals, including 'Blackwood's Magazine'. In 1825, however, he went abroad, ostensibly for the sake of his health, and pursued his passions for music, history, heraldry, and genealogy. His earliest extant compositions date from this period: a minuet and trio in B[flat] is dated 14 July 1825 at Willsbridge House, the family's seat near Bristol. At about the same time the well-known 'Duetto for [Two Cats]' (the last two words are represented on the title-page of the first edition by a drawing of two cats), which has sometimes been attributed to Rossini, was published by Ewer and Johanning under the pseudonym G. Berthold; the piece exists in Pearsall's autograph, and Edgar Hunt has persuasively argued that he was the composer of the work. For four years Pearsall studied music with Joseph Panny in Mainz, where he became interested in the Cecilian movement and composed a number of Latin motets in the 'strict style'. 
In 1829 Pearsall revisited Willsbridge, leaving his family in Germany, but returned to the continent the following year and, for the sake of his children's education, settled in Karlsruhe, which remained his principal residence for the next twelve years. During this time, however, he travelled widely, pursuing his antiquarian and musical interests. In Munich in 1832 he met Caspar Ett (1788-1847), from whom he learned to transcribe early musical notation; in Vienna he formed a lasting friendship with the musicologist Raphael Georg Kiesewetter (1773-1850); and in Nuremberg he investigated a mode of torture known as 'the kiss of the virgin', which he described in 'Archaeologia', 27 (1838), 229-50. In these years he wrote a number of works with orchestra, including 'Die Nacht eines Schwarmers' (1834), a 'ballet with songs', which was performed in the theatre he had built at his Karlsruhe residence, and the overture 'Macbeth', with witches' chorus (1839). 
On the death of his mother in May 1836 Pearsall returned to England, where he remained until he sold Willsbridge a year later. In January 1837 he was a founder member of the Bristol Madrigal Society, by which many of his early madrigals, based on Thomas Morley's ballets, were performed. The success of these pieces encouraged him to write further madrigals and partsongs, some for many voices. 'The Hardy Norseman' and 'Sir Patrick Spens', in ten parts, and the eight-part settings of 'Great God of love' and 'Lay a garland on her hearse' were considered to be 'amongst the finest specimens of English part-writing' ('DNB'). His arrangement of the old melody 'In dulci jubilo' (for eight solo voices and five-part chorus in his original version) is still a favourite Christmas song. It is on these compositions, though few are currently performed, that his significance as a composer principally rests; however, Pearsall himself considered his 'Requiem' to be his finest work. Among his literary works at this time was a booklet, published anonymously in Karlsruhe, entitled 'A few remarks on the position of the baronets of Great-Britain and the other branches of the British gentry, compared with that of the lesser nobility both at home and abroad, by a traveller', of which a considerably enlarged version was published in London the following year. It was reissued several times. His other writings included an article in German on the origin and history of the English madrigal, which he contributed to the 'Zeitschrift fur Deutschlands Musik-Vereine' in 1842. 
In that year Pearsall bought the castle of Wartensee on Lake Constance, Switzerland, which had previously belonged to his old teacher Schnyder von Wartensee, and at about the same time he separated from his wife. Apart from a short visit to England in 1847, he lived at Wartensee, restoring the castle and entertaining distinguished musicians, writers, and archaeologists until 1854, when he transferred ownership of the castle to his wife and son and took up residence in nearby St Gallen, Switzerland. During these years he continued to devote himself intensively to musical, literary, and artistic activities, making translations into English verse of Goethe's 'Faust' and Schiller's 'Wilhelm Tell', writing several treatises on church music which he did not publish ('Observations on chanting', 'Musica sacra Gregoriana', 'Psalmodia: an essay on psalm tunes'), helping to edit the old St Gallen hymnbook, which was published in 1863 as 'Katholisches Gesangbuch zum Gebrauch bei dem offentlichen Gottesdienste', and assisting in illustrating Hefter's 'Geschichte der Gerathschaften des Mittelalters'. In 1856 he became ill and moved back to Wartensee, where his wife cared for him until he died, apparently of a stroke, on 5 August 1856. Three days before his death he was received into the Roman Catholic church by his friend the bishop of St Gallen. He was buried in the chapel of Wartensee Castle on 12 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 21703


Pearse, Edward (c.1633-1673), clergyman and ejected minister, matriculated as a servitor from St John's College, Oxford, on 10 April 1652 and graduated BA on 27 June 1654. Of his parents it is known only that his mother's name was Anne and that she survived her son. On 27 June 1657 Edward Pearse was appointed Sunday morning preacher in the parish of St Margaret's, Westminster, and on 31 December that year his salary was increased by 50's'. a year; he was appointed lecturer at Westminster Abbey on 20 May 1658. After his ejection in 1660, Pearse's whereabouts are not certainly known. 'A Beam of Divine Glory... whereunto is Added The Soul's Rest in God', published posthumously in 1674, contained 'Mr Pearse's last letter To my dearly beloved friends, to whom, by the providence of God, I have some years last past preached the Everlasting gospel'. Perhaps his ministry was at or near Hampstead, for it was from there that the author signed his letter on 3 October 1672, during his last illness. He died, probably from tuberculosis, aged about forty according to Calamy, after the drafting of a codicil to his will on 21 March 1673, and before the grant of probate on 5 June following. In his will Pearse gave his wife's name as Grace and left provision for a daughter Sarah, aged less than ten years. 
Pearse has previously sometimes been confused with Edward Pierce (1630/31-1694), Church of England clergyman, but neither Edward Pearse nor Edward Pierce appears to have been related to 


@@@@@


doc= 21704


Pierce, Edward (1630/31-1694), Church of England clergyman, was born in Wales; the names of his parents are as yet unknown. He joined the predominantly Welsh membership of Jesus College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 7 December 1650, graduating BA on 10 March 1655 and proceeding MA on 25 June 1657. He received Anglican ordination when he was ordained priest by Thomas Morton, bishop of Durham, in August 1659. He may have become rector of St Michael, Crooked Lane, London, in the late 1650s (as Anthony Wood's fitfully accurate account claimed), but if so his career soon moved to Northamptonshire under the patronage of the wealthy City merchant and Northamptonshire landowner, Sir John Langham of Crosby Place, Bishopsgate and Cottesbrooke, Northamptonshire. Pierce acted (but was never formally instituted) as vicar of St Sepulchre's, Northampton, between 1660 and 1663 and in December 1662 was instituted to the vicarage of Duston. He resigned the latter the following year when he became rector of Aldwincle All Saints and rector of Cottesbrooke. His first wife, Lucy, was buried at Cottesbrooke on 21 June 1665; within the year, on 17 May 1666, Pierce married Elizabeth Langham (1632/3-1705), niece of his patron, Sir John. Pierce and his second wife had two sons and five daughters, of whom one daughter died in infancy. 
Pierce's writings began with an account of the fire of 1675 at Northampton and ended with another work spurred by local circumstances, 'Christ Alone our Life' (1691), a sermon preached to the prisoners condemned at Northampton assizes in September 1690. His most significant engagement with contemporary debates came in the early 1680s with a series of anonymous works written against the persecution of dissent. His 'The Conformists Plea for the Nonconformists' was first published in 1681 and went through two more editions over the next two years; Pierce expanded on its theme in three further pleas, the second and third published in 1682, the fourth in 1683. Pierce urged that nonconformists should be accorded toleration and insisted that they were not responsible for the execution of Charles I in 1649. Richard Baxter's 'Apology for the Nonconformists' Ministry' appeared in 1681, and Pierce's corresponding assertions earned him the reputation, especially among ecclesiastics, of a dangerous, treacherous controversialist. Most notably, the court preacher Robert South was referring to Pierce when he denounced in a sermon 'all the Pleas and Apologies for the Nonconformists (tho' made by some Conformists themselves)' as 'senceless and irrational' (South, 6.33, 63). 
Anthony Wood in 'Athenae Oxonienses' partly confused Pierce with the ejected minister Edward Pearse (d. 1673) and ascribed works to the former written by the latter. The men were not only effectively namesakes, given the interchangeability of spellings in the seventeenth century (though both the one work that he published under his own name and his will make clear that Pierce was how the Anglican clergyman spelt his own name) but shared a publisher, Jonathan Robinson. 
Pierce's position in 'The Conformists Plea' and its sequels mirrored his own practice as pastor. In December 1687 Pierce explained to Richard Baxter how, despite his personal opposition to separation, he 'never discouraged any of my people from hearing any NonConformist minister'. Ever since he had come to Cottesbrooke he had 'ventured upon known hazzards, in point of tendernes' towards those of his parishioners uneasy at some of the rites of the Church of England: in all those years he had never worn the surplice when administering communion and he had often omitted the sign of the cross during baptism. 'I allwayes... preached the great things of Christianity, & never medled with dissents', he wrote and described his care in regulating admission to communion: the unworthy he turned away, while new communicants were admitted after due instruction and 'upon declared Confession to walk according to their Baptismal Covenant'. By late 1687 Pierce had become concerned with the spread of separatism among nonconformists; in his parish 'the late yeares of Tory-prosecutions' had weakened his attempts to keep his nonconformist parishioners in communion with the Church of England and strengthened the appeal of local separatist preachers (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.293). In his fervently devout will Pierce chose to identify himself in terms which emphasized what he shared in common with other protestant pastors rather than what separated him from some, and described himself not as a clergyman of the Church of England but rather as 'the most unworthy minister of the Gospell of God my Saviour' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/423, fol. 234'r'). 
Pierce died on 2 September 1694 at Cottesbrooke rectory, aged sixty-three, and was buried in the chancel of the church two days later. His widow, Elizabeth, who died on 4 August 1705, aged seventy-two, was buried in the same grave. Pierce was succeeded as rector of Cottesbrooke by his eldest son, John. 


@@@@@


doc= 21705


Pearse, Thomas Deane (1741/2-1789), army officer in the East India Company, was the son of Captain Thomas Pearse RN and his wife, Martha Purvis. After training at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, Pearse was appointed a fireworker in the Royal Artillery and saw service at St Malo and Cherbourg (1758), Martinique and Guadeloupe (1759), Belle Ile (1761), and Havana (1762). He was appointed second lieutenant on 24 October 1761, and first lieutenant on 3 February 1766. In February 1768 he transferred to the East India Company service, becoming major in the Bengal artillery on 2 September 1768, lieutenant-colonel on 30 October 1769, and colonel on 22 January 1781. In 1775 he took command of the Bengal artillery, to which he introduced many reforms, confiding to a friend that he was 'astonished at the ignorance of all who composed [the corps]' (Buckle, 31). It had become clear from early campaign experience in India that British armies needed substantial field artillery in order to balance the invariably greater numbers of opposing Indian armies with greater firepower. In Pearse's time the Bengal artillery was expanded from five companies in 1770 to an independent brigade of a European regiment and three Indian battalions of over 3000 men by 1778. 
Pearse was high in the favour of Warren Hastings, the governor-general, and acted as Hastings's second in his duel with Philip Francis on 17 August 1780. In 1781, at the height of the Second Anglo-Mysore War, between Madras and Haidar Ali of Mysore in the Carnatic, Hastings decided to send a detachment of five regiments of sepoys and a detail of field artillery from Bengal to relieve the Madras presidency at Fort St George, and gave the command to Pearse. This provoked strong protests from infantry colleagues who believed that, as in the royal army, commands should not be given to artillerymen. The detachment proceeded south from Bengal near the coast on its march through Orissa and the Northern Circars and, having reached the vicinity of Madras in July 1781, it joined the Madras field army under the commander-in-chief, Sir Eyre Coote. During the ensuing arduous warfare in which they were engaged until the end of the war in June 1783, the Bengal corps, under Pearse, attained a lasting reputation for its actions in the battles of Polillur (27 August 1781) and Sholinghur (27 September 1781) against Haidar Ali, and in the attack on the French lines at Cuddalore near Fort St David (13 June 1783), the last being one of the first occasions on which European and Indian troops fought one another at bayonet point. 
Some 2000 veterans of the original 5000 Bengal troops returned to Bengal with Pearse early in 1785, where they were congratulated for their services by Warren Hastings in person; Pearse was later awarded a sword of honour. He was made second in command of the Bengal army in July 1787. During his command of the Bengal artillery, Pearse had transformed an ill-equipped, poorly managed corps into a thoroughly professional force capable of filling the major role required of it. His wider interests were revealed by his foundation of a school to teach his men to read. In 1785 he contributed a paper entitled 'Two Hindu festivals and the Indian sphinx' to the Asiatic Society of Bengal; it was subsequently published in Dublin in 'Dissertations and miscellaneous pieces relating to the history and antiquities... of Asia, by Sir W. Jones... and others' (1793). Pearse was married to an Indian, Panna Purree (died 1820). He died on the River Ganges near Serampore, Bengal, on 15 June 1789. 


@@@@@


doc= 21706


William Pearse (bap. 1626, d. 1691), clergyman and ejected minister, who was born at Ermington, Devon, and baptized, probably at Ermington, on 26 January 1626, the son of Francis Pearse of Ermington. He attended school at Plympton St Mary and studied at Exeter College, Oxford, from 1649 to 1652. On 7 December 1655 he was admitted as vicar of the sequestered living of Dunsford, Devon, and he was ordained on 15 September 1659 by presbyters at Wolborough. After his ejection in 1660 Pearse returned to Ermington and rented Stretch-leigh Barten, 'being well skilled in Husbandry' ('Calamy rev.'). In 1669 Pearse succeeded as minister to the congregation which met at Tavistock Abbey, home of the earl of Bedford; he preached at the abbey for some nineteen years. At an unknown date he married. His wife's name was Mary, and they had at least two sons, Francis and William, and four daughters, Mary, Elizabeth, Agnes, and Damaris. In April 1672 he received a general presbyterian licence as of Dunsford, but he met with much official harassment: 'Six times a Year the Bailiff came to Stretch-leigh-house, to warn Mr. Pearse and his Wife, with his Son and Daughters, to appear at the Assizes at Exeter, to answer for Riots... and not obeying the Laws' (ibid.). Pearse moved to London, but found that it, too, was dangerous for dissenters. On 21 January 1683 the authorities raided Stephen Lobb's meeting-place and 'seiz'd one Mr. Pearse and one Marmaduke Roberts both Preachers, who were both committed to New Prison' (ibid.). By 1690 Pearse had returned to Devon, where he acted as co-pastor with Thomas Palke at Ashburton. He was instrumental in building a meeting-house in the town and signed his will there on 2 April 1690. William Pearse died at Ashburton on 17 March 1691 and was buried in the town. 


@@@@@


doc= 21707


Pearson, Alexander, Lord Southall (d. 1657), judge, was the son of Alexander Pearson, an Edinburgh merchant and bailie who represented the burgh at conventions of estates and parliament, and his wife, Bessie Eiston. He graduated from the University of Edinburgh in 1605 and was admitted advocate, acting as counsel for Lord Balmerino in his trial in 1634. He married Christian (died 1659), daughter of William Rigg of Carberry, on 1 June 1615, the mother of his son and heir, William, also an advocate. 
Pearson played a prominent role in public affairs during the covenanting era. He was one of the committee appointed to examine the authenticity of the registers of the kirk in 1638 and, in March 1649, was one of the eight lords of session nominated to replace those purged for their support of Charles I. He was also named one of the committee for the revision of the laws and acts of parliament, a commissioner for the plantation of kirks, and one of the visitors of the University of Edinburgh. He sat as lord of session until the supremacy of Cromwell in 1651, and in October 1653 he was appointed a commissioner of judicature by the English parliament. In 1654 he was conjoined, with Sir John Hope of Craighall, as judge of the high court; but, according to Nicoll, he was 'not comparable to Sir John nather in judgement nor actioun' (Nicoll, 122). In November 1655 Pearson was continued an extraordinary judge. He died at Edinburgh on 12 May 1657. 


@@@@@


doc= 21708


Pearson, Anthony (bap. 1627, d. 1666), Quaker administrator, was baptized on 7 January 1627 at Cartmel Fell, Lancashire, the son of Edward Pearson. He may have studied law in London, though his name does not appear in the records of the inns of court. After becoming Sir Arthur Hesilrige's secretary in 1648, he was appointed judge advocate at Newcastle the following year to try officers and soldiers in northern garrisons for lesser offences, and clerk and registrar of the committee for compounding. He acquired the manors of Aspatria and Allerthwaite, Cumberland, in May 1650; Ramshaw Hall, near West Auckland, co. Durham, shortly thereafter; Marrowlee, Northumberland, in March 1653, and other estates seized from the marquess of Newcastle and Sir Thomas Riddell. He also managed Hesilrige's estates. On 10 February 1652 the committee for compounding appointed him sequestration commissioner for co. Durham, and the following month he became a JP for Cumberland and Westmorland. By 1652 he had married Grace, daughter of Thomas and Grace Lamplough of Ribton Hall, Cumberland. 
George Fox described Pearson as 'a great persecutor of ffreindes' ('Journal of George Fox', 1.108), but at the sessions in Appleby, Westmorland, in January 1653 he was moved by the testimony of James Nayler. On a visit to the home of Thomas and Margaret Fell, he met Fox, and he also received letters from Howgill and Margaret Fell urging him to become a Friend. In a missive to the latter dated 9 May 1653 he described his spiritual condition, seeking guidance from Fox and Nayler. Although he had considered himself a devout man, he now likened his state to that of a battered vessel, devoid of pilot or rudder. 'All my Religion was but the heareinge of the Eare, the beleeveinge and talkeinge of a god & christ in heaven or a place at a distance I knowe not where' (Swarthmore MSS, 1.87). He was probably convinced in the ensuing weeks, for Thomas Aldam and Richard Farnworth held meetings at his house in early June, and Nayler visited him in July, holding a meeting at which hundreds became Quakers. Pearson took his wife to meet Fox at Bootle, Cumberland, and subsequently travelled with Fox to Carlisle, where he and Gervase Benson defended Fox when the latter was imprisoned. On 3 October 1653 Pearson wrote an address 'To the Parliament of the Common-Wealth of England', placing responsibility for persecution on parliament, listing three dozen Quakers who had been persecuted in Yorkshire, Cumberland, and Westmorland, denouncing those responsible as tyrants, and disparaging 'the broken Cisterns of Universities and humane Studies' (p. 7). 
Pearson may have been the 'A. Peirson' who was serving in Scotland as a commissioner for the administration of justice in December 1653, and he was still active as a sequestration commissioner in April 1654. In March 1654 he welcomed Fox to Ramshaw Hall, which became the base of Quaker operations in Durham, and in May he helped establish the first monthly meeting in Durham. Shortly thereafter he went to London, where he and Howgill were concerned about relations with Ranters. In 'A Few Words to All Judges, Justices, and Ministers of the Law' (acquired by the bookseller George Thomason on 16 July 1654), he denounced the use of oaths, capital punishment, and compulsory tithing, adding that if tithes must be collected, they should be used to relieve the indigent and eradicate poverty. On 16 July he met with Oliver Cromwell, telling him that the civil wars had been for the benefit of the spiritual 'seed', that the protector had been chosen to overthrow oppression, and that the law prohibiting the disruption of church services was unjust. When he also attempted at the meeting to convert Cromwell's associates, Cromwell dismissed him, prompting Pearson to conclude that the lord protector was neither honest nor tender-hearted. When Pearson found Londoners difficult to convince, particularly 'rude savage apprentices and young people and Ranters', he advised Fox to send only mature Friends to London in search of converts (Barclay, 13). In September 1654 he met with John Wildman and other dissidents, but he apparently had no interest in opposing the protectorate. The following month he obtained an order for Aldam's release from York prison after meeting with the attorney-general, the treasury commissioners, the barons of the exchequer, and Cromwell. 
Pearson and Aldam then mounted a concerted effort to obtain the release of other Friends. In April 1655 they wrote to Cheshire magistrates, protesting their treatment of Quakers, and in May, Pearson, Aldam, and Benson presented Cromwell with documents concerning imprisoned Friends. Pearson and Benson continued to collect information about Friends in northern England who had been prosecuted for refusing to remit tithes. During the ensuing months he travelled in Wales, Shropshire, Cheshire, Yorkshire, and Lancashire, where he was briefly incarcerated at Manchester. With Major-General Charles Worsley presiding, on 4 March 1656 he, Audland, Alexander Parker, Thomas Lawson, and others engaged in a debate with ministers at Preston. Tension with other Quakers, however, occurred as early as May, when William Caton chided Pearson for failing to assist Scottish Friends purchase a meeting-house in Edinburgh, and in July Lancelot Wardell accused him of preventing the publication of a document about the persecution of Durham Quakers. In a lengthy dispute with Wardell over finances, he had the support of Margaret Fell and George Taylor. He reported the notorious trial of Nayler, with whose convictions (though not actions) he concurred, to Fox in November. More controversy erupted in May 1657 when John Lilburne, now a Quaker, accused Pearson of conveying the title to some of Lilburne's property to Pearson's wife, Grace. 
During the spring of 1657 Pearson supported the creation of a fund to support Friends who travelled in the ministry. He and Howgill nominated Quakers throughout England and Wales to serve as treasurers, a post he and George Adamson undertook for Durham. His principal work, 'The Great Case of Tythes', appeared in 1657 and reached a third edition two years later, with four more following in the eighteenth century. His examination of tithing among the biblical Jews and in the history of the church persuaded him that they were not required by divine law, equity, monarchical grants, parliamentary statute, or the rights of those who had purchased impropriated tithes, though he supported compensation for improprietors. The termination of tithing, he argued, would stop ceaseless lawsuits, provide incentives to raise more crops, and relieve the people of an oppressive burden. Immanuel Bourne offered a rebuttal in 'A Defence and Justification of Ministers Maintenance by Tythes' (1659). 
In the late 1650s Pearson helped establish Quaker business meetings in the north and was active on behalf of persecuted Friends, attracting the attention of George Monck in Scotland, who was concerned by his proselytizing. With Fox, Pearson conferred with the aldermen of Newcastle in 1657, and early the following year he arranged a meeting between Fox and Sir Henry Vane at Raby Castle, but the latter would have ousted Fox as 'a mad man' had Pearson not been present ('Journal of George Fox', 1.314). On 24 June 1658 Pearson, Aldam, and forty-one others endorsed the establishment of a fund to support Quaker missions. The same year Pearson and nineteen others submitted a declaration to the council of state defending Quaker tenets, seeking the release of 115 imprisoned co-religionists, and protesting against high legal fees, lengthy delays, and attorneys' greed. 
Amid the unsettled conditions in 1659, Pearson and fifteen others signed 'A Declaration of the People of God', including a list of potential JPs, among them Pearson, who had been removed from the commission of the peace by 1657. On 22 June he and Caton told Fell they were hopeful that parliament might undertake needed reform, and five days later Pearson and nineteen others presented parliament with a petition against tithes bearing 15,000 signatures. Because of Pearson's growing involvement in politics, once again as an associate of Hesilrige, Howgill shunned him in August. Although appointed a militia commissioner that month, he reportedly refused to wear a sword, yet he disarmed royalists and reputedly would have raised men to help John Lambert suppress Booth's rebellion had local JPs and commissioners not been reluctant. With other Durham Friends he signed a letter in October expressing concern about Fox's plan to establish quarterly sessions based on counties and proposing that funds raised by meetings be used to assist all needy Friends, not just those engaged in ministerial activities. 
The government received a report in June 1660 that at least 100 Quakers met almost nightly at Ramshaw Hall, and that Pearson had recently received a substantial shipment of knives and daggers, but he was not arrested until December 1661, when he went to London in supposed violation of a proclamation banning cashiered soldiers from within 20 miles of the city. Suspected of maintaining contacts with dissidents in Scotland, he denied the accusation and likewise insisted he had not commanded troops at the time of Booth's insurrection. On 9 January he renounced his self-described religious excesses ('the Chymericall Notion of those giddy tymes'), averred that he had always befriended the king's servants and sequestered clergy, and claimed that his change of heart had occurred many years earlier through the influence of Sir William Darcy when it was 'neither seasonable nor serviceable to discover it' (TNA: PRO, SP 29/49/27). As proof of his sincerity, he had voluntarily returned the estates of Newcastle and Riddell, surrendered his weapons, and pledged allegiance to the king. After his release on 16 January 1662, he offered advice to the government on 2 July 1663 concerning trade between England and Scotland. He was appointed under-sheriff of Durham by Bishop John Cosin on 2 March 1664, and in 1665 he was involved in a dispute over Cosin's appropriation of Vane's personal estate. After embracing the Anglican faith, Pearson died, probably in Durham and from the plague, on 23 January 1666, and was buried the next day at St Mary-the-Less, Durham. On 26 September 1673 his widow married the Quaker James Hall of Monk Hesleden, Durham. 


@@@@@


doc= 21709


Charles Buchanan Pearson (1807-1881), born at Elmdon, Warwickshire, graduated BA from Oriel College, Oxford, with a second class in 'literae humaniores' in 1828. He took orders in 1830, and in November 1838 became rector of Knebworth, Hertfordshire, where he became friendly with the first Lord Lytton. Besides a paper entitled 'Hymns and hymn-writers', contributed to 'Oxford Essays for 1858', and 'Latin Translations of English Hymns' (1862), he published 'Sequences from the Sarum Missal, with English Translations' (1871), and 'A Lost Chapter in the History of Bath' (1877). He was a competent hymnist. His wife was Harriet Elizabeth Pinkerton; they had two boys. He died at home, 2 Catharine Place, Bath, on 7 January 1881, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 21710


Pearson, Charles Henry (1830-1894), politician in Australia and writer, was born on 7 September 1830 in the principal's house, Church Missionary Institution, Islington, London, the fourth son and the tenth child of the Revd John Norman Pearson (1787-1865) and his wife, Harriet, daughter of Richard Puller, a merchant banker. One of his brothers was the judge Sir John Pearson. Until the age of twelve he was tutored at home by his exacting, ambitious, and puritanical father, then attended Rugby School from 1843 to May 1846. He was removed from the school after clashing with his form master G. E. L. Cotton, and was privately tutored for four months before in 1847 entering King's College, London. There he became a disciple of Frederick Denison Maurice and highly valued the teaching of Professor John Sherren Brewer. While acting as a special constable on 10 April 1848 at a Chartist demonstration, he contracted a chill, which had a bad and lasting effect on his health. He matriculated as a commoner from Oriel College, Oxford, in 1849, obtained a scholarship at Exeter College the following year, and was in the first class in the 'literae humaniores' examination in 1852. He graduated BA in 1853 and proceeded MA in 1856. From boyhood he knew French, and while an undergraduate he studied German, Czech, Italian, and Swedish; he was a founder member of the Essay Society, a small society for intellectual discussion, and was president of the Oxford Union Debating Society in 1852-3. Intending to practise medicine, he read anatomy and physiology at Oxford for about two years after taking his degree, while also acting as a private tutor. In 1854 he was elected a fellow of Oriel, and soon after, being attacked by pleurisy, gave up his intention of becoming a physician, on the advice of his doctors. In the following year he was appointed lecturer in English literature, and shortly afterwards professor of modern history, at King's College, London. In 1861 he published 'The Early and Middle Ages of England' and during the following two years edited the short-lived 'National Review'; he also contributed to the 'Saturday Review'. Believing that his broad-church religious opinions were not in harmony with those of the authorities at King's College, he proposed to the principal, the high-church Dr Richard William Jelf, that he resign his professorship, but was persuaded by Jelf to retain office, and did so until 1865. 
For several years Pearson spent his vacations in Europe, studying foreign languages. In 1859, on the eve of the emancipation of Russia's serfs, he summarized the impressions of a long journey in 'Russia: by a recent traveller: a series of letters, originally published in 'the Continental Review'' (reissued with a new introduction in 1970). In 1863 he risked his life to obtain first-hand knowledge of the Polish insurrection against Russian occupation. His account of 'The insurrection in Poland', which was sympathetic to the Poles, was published as a supplement to 'The Spectator' on 12 September 1863, as a pamphlet under the pseudonym 'A Recent Traveller', and issued in Paris by the Polish diplomatic agency as 'Un Anglais en Pologne'. 
In 1864, after Britain had failed to act on Poland's behalf and Oxford had passed him over for the Chichele professorship of history, Pearson set off for South Australia, where he tried farming at Melrose, some 200 miles north of Adelaide. Although he thrived in the warm, dry climate and learned to respect the 'primitive democracy' of the local community, he was driven to England in 1866 by severe drought. In 1867 he defended the political stability of Australian democracy in 'Essays on Reform'. The following year he brought out a revised two-volume edition of his history of England 'during the early and middle ages' and lectured on history for the new North of England Council for Promoting the Higher Education of Women. In 1869 the first edition of his pioneering 'Historical Maps of England, during the First Thirteen Centuries' was published, and he contributed a historical essay to Josephine Butler's 'Woman's Work and Woman's Culture' (1869). 
In 1869, after visiting the United States and Sweden, Pearson began lecturing on modern history at Trinity College, Cambridge, but two years later, finding his eyesight suffering, and disappointed in the quality of his students, he returned to his South Australian farm via the United States and the Pacific, writing articles 'en route' for the London 'Spectator'. His health was again strengthened by his new mode of life. On 10 December 1872 he married, at Gawler, South Australia, Edith Lucille, daughter of Philip Butler of Tickford Abbey, Buckinghamshire, and Yattalunga, One Tree Hill, South Australia. Pearson was then forty-two, his bride twenty. At first the couple lived happily on his farm, where he worked at 'English History in the Fourteenth Century' (1876). But his wife could not bear the very hot summers, and in 1874 they moved to Melbourne, where Pearson lectured on history at the university and founded a debating society whose members included Alfred Deakin, John Quick, and Henry Bournes Higgins. He resigned this post in 1875, and was appointed foundation headmaster of the Presbyterian Ladies' College, the first girls' school in Australia to match the leading boys' grammar schools in offering permanence, imposing buildings, and a large student body and boarding house. To inaugurate the college he gave a lecture on 'The higher culture of women', afterwards published as a pamphlet. He had not, however, given up his interest in politics. Fearing that most of the land of Victoria was falling into the possession of a few very wealthy proprietors, and aware that a newly formed Liberal Party was about to contest a forthcoming election, he proposed the progressive taxation of large estates at a 'monster meeting' held in Melbourne on 19 February 1877. He was thereupon asked to resign the headmastership, since his views on the land question were anathema to many of the college's supporters, who now saw him as a 'class traitor'. With a daughter aged two and a second child soon to be born, he now became, as Deakin wrote, 'a leading figure in one of the fiercest campaigns of party warfare waged within the Empire in this century' ('Daily Chronicle', 28 May 1900). 
Ironically, although the Liberals won a landslide victory on 11 May 1877, Pearson was allotted a virtually unwinnable seat by party managers, who were unhappy with his free-trade views. As compensation he was given a royal commission to report on public education in Victoria; his report of March 1878 covered all levels of education and provided a blueprint for many future developments. He was in the same year elected member of the legislative assembly for Castlemaine, a safe Liberal seat. In 1879 he accompanied Graham Berry on his unsuccessful mission to England to request the intervention of the home government to prevent future deadlocks between the houses of the legislature. He was re-elected for Castlemaine in 1880, and was minister without portfolio or salary in the Berry administration (1880-81), concerning himself with constitutional reform, with carrying an act 'to amend the law relating to the University of Melbourne', which, among other things, guaranteed equal rights for women, and with boarding out the 200 children housed in unhygienic state industrial schools. 
When the Berry government was 'in articulo mortis' Pearson was offered the agent-generalship of Victoria, but having previously criticized such appointments felt obliged to decline it. He did, however, accept an honorary trusteeship of the Melbourne Public Library, Museums and National Gallery, and in this capacity in 1882 worked effectively to secure the foundation of the Melbourne Working Men's College. He failed, however, to carry his proposal to open the Public Library, Museums and National Gallery on Sundays. 
In 1883 Pearson was elected for the East Bourke boroughs, for which he sat until the general election in April 1892, when he did not contest the seat. On the formation of the Gillies-Deakin coalition government in February 1886 he became minister of education, a post he held until November 1890. From 1878 until taking ministerial office in 1886 his principal source of income came from writing leading articles and literary reviews for the Melbourne 'Age' and its weekly, 'The Leader', both of which were owned by David Syme. Some 650 anonymous articles written by him from August 1880 to February 1884 had a wide influence on public opinion generally, and particularly in campaigns in which he was involved in his various public capacities. 
As minister of education Pearson's greatest success lay in scientific and technical education. He led the government to more than double the grant for the teaching of science and technology, enabling not only the expansion of new technical colleges and established schools of mines, but the building of new chemical, biological, and mechanical laboratories in the university. He also established scholarships to enable 200 primary schoolchildren a year to proceed to independent secondary schools, expanded the state school curriculum to include more science and Australian history and geography, encouraged kindergarten teaching, and had built a fine new teachers' college near the university with residential accommodation for country teachers. In 1889 he successfully resisted a determined campaign by the National Scripture Education League to introduce 'Bible' instruction into state schools during school hours, arguing that this would be offensive to large numbers of Roman Catholic parents and teachers. An honorary LLD from the University of St Andrews in 1889 recognized his work as an educationist. 
An attack of influenza with pneumonia in 1892 led to Pearson's retirement from the assembly and to his return to England, where for a time his health was restored. Financial losses led him to accept in 1893 the post of permanent secretary to the agent-general. He contributed to some English journals, and in 1893 published 'National Life and Character: a Forecast', which attracted public attention in Britain, the United States, and Australia by its predictions first, that the so-called 'higher races of men, or those which are held to have attained the highest forms of civilization' (p. 30) would in a few decades find themselves 'elbowed and hustled and perhaps even thrust aside' (p. 85) by peoples whom they had assumed to be innately servile; and second, that in English-speaking and European countries the state would increasingly take over the traditional roles of family and church. Coming at the full tide of imperialist sentiment, this book produced the shock Pearson had expected. Theodore Roosevelt wrote to him: 'I don't suppose that any book recently, unless it is Mahan's 'Influence of Sea Power', has excited anything like as much interest or has caused so many men to feel that they had to revise their mental estimates of facts' (T. Roosevelt to Pearson 11 May 1894, Bodl. Oxf., MSS Pearson). Like Sir M. E. Grant Duff, a former governor of Madras, Roosevelt took the view that the major powers of Europe and America would go to any military lengths to consolidate their dominance of the coloured races. In Australia the book was later quoted by Prime Minister Edmund Barton in defence of the exclusion of coloured migrants and taken up as a sophisticated warning against what Deakin would call 'the Yellow Peril to Caucasian civilization creeds and politics' (A. Deakin to Richard Jebb, 4 June 1908, NLA, MS 339). A second edition appeared in 1894, and a third, posthumously, in 1913. 
Pearson died at the house of his sister-in-law, 75 Onslow Square, London, on 29 May 1894, survived by his wife and three teenage daughters. His personal estate was valued at only $511 14's'. 4died, and in 1895 his widow was granted a civil-list pension of $100. 
Widely travelled and read, with a large number of overseas correspondents, Pearson was the outstanding colonizer of ideas in Australia during the later nineteenth century. Popularly known as 'Professor Pearson', he combined a puritan determination with a gentle manner and a scrupulous respect for the traditional rules and courtesies of public debate. No one did more than he to prepare the way for what became known as the 'settled policies' of the new Australian commonwealth. 'I can candidly assure you', wrote Deakin, 'that on summing up your colonial experiences you would need to throw into the credit side of the scale an immense amount of other men's actions and words of which you have really been the parent' (A. Deakin to C. H. Pearson, 12 Aug 1892, State Library of Victoria, Pearson MSS). 


@@@@@


doc= 21711


Pearson, Edward (1756-1811), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born at St George's Tombland, Norwich, on 25 October 1756, the eldest son of Edward Pearson (died 1786), a wool-stapler at Norwich and later of Tattingstone, Suffolk, and a descendant of the family of Dr John Pearson (1613-1686), bishop of Chester. He was educated at home and then at Ipswich grammar school before matriculating from Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, as a sizar, on 7 May 1778. He earned the favourable attention of the master, Dr William Elliston, and of the college tutor, the Revd John Hey, rector of Passenham, Northamptonshire, who appointed him his curate on 26 April 1781. Pearson was ordained deacon by the bishop of Peterborough in 1781 and priest in 1782. He graduated BA after coming out sixth senior optime in the mathematical tripos in the University of Cambridge for 1782. He was awarded MA in 1782 and BD in 1792, and was elected fellow of Sidney Sussex and college tutor in 1788. In 1786 he won the Norrisian prize in the University of Cambridge for his essay 'The Goodness of God as Manifested in the Mission of Jesus Christ'. Pearson was appointed to curacies at Cosgrove and at Strutton and, in 1788, at Pampisford, near Cambridge. In 1797 he married Susan, daughter of Richard Johnson of Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London. He left Cambridge in the same year and was presented by Elliston to the rectory of Rempstone, Nottinghamshire. 
Pearson began to distinguish himself as a pulpit orator and religious controversialist, first in Cambridge and then on a wider stage. His credentials as a preacher were secured by the publication in 1798 of his 'Thirteen Discourses to Academic Youth, Delivered at St. Mary's, Cambridge'. In 1807 he was appointed Warburtonian lecturer at Lincoln's Inn, and in 1810 he was elected Christian advocate in the University of Cambridge on the Hulsean foundation. His Warburton lectures were published in 1811 as 'Twelve Lectures on the Subject of the Prophecies Relating to the Christian Church'. In 1808 he was elected master of his former college and in 1811 served as vice-chancellor of Cambridge University. 
Pearson's staunchly orthodox Anglican churchmanship found expression in a prolific series of publications initially occasioned by a Cambridge academic context in which the influence of the moral philosophy of William Paley held sway. In 1800 Pearson subjected Paley's system to qualified criticism in his 'Remarks on the Theory of Morals', which he followed in 1801 with 'Annotations on the Practical Part of Dr. Paley's Work'. As Pearson explained in this work his concern was to guard younger readers 'against the errors, into which that work notwithstanding its general excellence and usefulness, has a tendency to lead them' (pp. vi-vii). Pearson next turned his attention to the threat to the established church that he perceived to emanate from evangelicalism and especially Calvinism, characterizing it as a subversion 'from within, by the revival of certain gloomy, harsh, and revolting doctrines' (Pearson, x). He was the author of a series of polemical responses to Anglican evangelical apologetics from John Overton, author of 'The True Churchman Ascertained' (1801), and the more moderate leader of the evangelical party in Cambridge, Charles Simeon. In his 'Remarks on the controversy subsisting, or supposed to subsist, between the Arminian and the Calvinist ministers of the Church of England: in a second letter to the Rev. John Overton' (1802) Pearson not only repudiated Overton's Calvinist interpretation of Anglican formularies but objected to Simeon's use of the appellation 'evangelical' as the unwarranted 'assumption of a title which, by arrogating so much to yourselves, was directly calculated to derogate from the just claims of others' (p. 6). Pearson further repudiated Anglican evangelical doctrinal claims in 'A letter addressed to the editor of the Orthodox Churchman's Magazine, containing remarks on the Rev. Mr. Simeon's sermon, entitled 'The churchman's confession'' (1806) and in his 'Cautions to the hearers and readers of the Rev. Mr. Simeon's sermon entitled 'Evangelical and pharisaical righteousness compared'' (1810). He was also a frequent contributor, from 1801, to the 'Orthodox Churchman's Magazine', an orthodox Anglican and anti-evangelical as well as anti-Catholic periodical, one of his more significant contributions being an article in refutation of David Hume's argument against miracles (vol. 12, January 1807, 15-18). 
Pearson was a firm advocate of the benefits of a national established church. His sensitivity to the threats to both the constitutional hegemony and the spiritual integrity and unity of the established church was illustrated by his published sermons and polemical treatises. Most of these writings were directly inspired by Pearson's parochial difficulties with protestant dissenters at Rempstone, especially his 'Letters to a Young Man' (1801), in which he sought to persuade a candidate for the office of parish schoolmaster in Rempstone to abandon attendance at the local meeting-house as a prerequisite for appointment to that office. His sermon 'The Sin of Schism' (1800) was published only on the insistence of William Gregory Williams, high sheriff of Nottinghamshire, that it would be beneficial because of 'the particular situation of our neighbourhood' (dedication). Pearson strove hard to persuade not only protestant dissenters but Roman Catholics to abandon what he regarded as their errors and to become reconciled with the Church of England. His anti-Calvinism and opposition to protestant dissent was matched by his anti-Catholicism, but in spite of the widely perceived threat from rational dissent and Paineite infidelity not all orthodox churchmen agreed with his argument 'that the established religion, so far as this part of the united kingdom is concerned, has less to fear from Catholics, than from almost any other sect', a view for which he was criticized in the 'Orthodox Churchman's Magazine' (vol. 13, September 1807, 223). 
While Pearson claimed to eschew party politics his defensive campaign in favour of the religious establishment involved close collaboration with Spencer Perceval, prime minister from 1807 until his assassination in 1812. It was Perceval who sought out Pearson's friendship, valuing him as 'a sincere and judicious adviser' (Pearson, viii-ix). An example of their collaboration came when Perceval, then chancellor of the exchequer, supported Pearson's proposal in the 'Orthodox Churchman's Magazine' of May 1806 for the foundation of 'a ritual professorship in Divinity' at Cambridge. Perceval offered to guarantee the expenses for five years, but the scheme foundered on the refusal of the academic authorities to adopt it. 
Pearson was scrupulous in the performance of his parochial duties at Rempstone. He instituted an evening lecture, in addition to double service, on Sundays, and also introduced weekday services for the purpose of reading portions of the liturgy. His biographer concluded that he 'seemed completely to realise the idea of a primitive pastor' (Pearson, xi). His devotional inclinations were well expressed in his 'Prayers for Families' (1797), which went through four editions. He was assiduous as a catechist and wrote 'Exhortations to the Duty of Catechising' (1805), though on his own admission the number of parishioners who presented themselves was very limited. However, his long-running feud with the evangelical party was reflected in his accusation that evangelical clergymen neglected catechizing their congregations. An indignant reviewer in the Anglican evangelical 'Christian Observer' of 1805 condemned the work for its 'gross errors and calumnious representations' (p. 750). 
Pearson, who had been of a playful, pleasant, and humorous disposition and manner, died of an apoplectic fit at his parsonage at Rempstone on 17 August 1811. 


@@@@@


doc= 21712


Eglington Margaret Pearson (bap. 1746, d. 1823)], daughter of the auctioneer and bookseller Samuel Paterson (1724-1802) and his wife, whose maiden name was Hamilton. She had been baptized on 5 November 1746 at St Paul's, Covent Garden. She was also a talented glass painter specializing in small-scale, finely detailed panels -- particularly flower and bird portraits -- for the burgeoning domestic market. Her copies of the Raphael cartoons (one of which is in the orangery of Bowood House, Calne, Wiltshire) were much admired. The Pearsons both exhibited at the Society of Artists' exhibitions in 1775, 1776, and 1777 when they resided in Church Street, St John's, Westminster. Despite very different working styles they sometimes collaborated on individual pieces such as copies of 'The Salutation' by Carlo Maratti and Guido's 'Aurora'. A collection of their small paintings on glass was sold by auction in 1797. James Pearson was still exhibiting glass as late as 1821. He painted glass for the church of St Giles Cripplegate, and for the parish churches of Battersea and Wandsworth. Margaret Pearson died on 14 February 1823. In 1837 Pearson was forced to apply to the Royal Academy for financial assistance. He died in 1838. 


@@@@@


doc= 21713


Pearson, George (bap. 1751, d. 1828), physician and chemist, the son of John Pearson, an apothecary, was baptized in Rotherham, Yorkshire, on 4 September 1751. After attending Doncaster grammar school he studied medicine at Edinburgh University from 1770 to 1774, graduating MD in 1773. He also studied chemistry under Joseph Black. After a short period at St Thomas's Hospital in London, he spent about two years in Europe. Pearson was married, and the father of at least two daughters. His eldest daughter, Frances Priscilla, married Sir John Dodson (1780-1858). Pearson became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1784, and in 1787 was appointed chief physician at St George's Hospital, London, where he lectured on chemistry, materia medica, and therapeutics. He became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1791 and was for several years a member of the council. From 1792 Pearson lectured in chemistry in his laboratory at Wilcomb Street, London, and in physic at 9 Great George Street, Hanover Square, London. 
During a visit to Europe in 1805-6 Benjamin Silliman, the American chemist and geologist, met Pearson and breakfasted with him and his family. However, he remarked that he felt 'out of place' in Pearson's company. Pearson was courteous, but apparently careless of his appearance. Silliman attended a lecture by Pearson which, he said, lasted two and a quarter hours without a break. 'There was no interval for breathing or for a gentle transition to a new subject. This mental repletion was not favourable to intellectual digestion.' He also commented on the paucity of apparatus in Pearson's lecture rooms, which he described as shabby and ill-furnished. Pearson's experiments, Silliman continued, were not well performed (G. P. Fisher, 1.144-5). 
Notwithstanding this impression, Pearson seems to have been a competent chemist. His contributions to chemistry are not much mentioned in histories of the subject, but they were not trivial. On investigating James's Powder, a popular febrifuge which had made a fortune for Robert James, he found it to be a mixture of bone ash and antimony oxide ('Experiments and observations to investigate the composition of James's Powder', 'PTRS', 81, 1791, 317-67). Extending the work of Smithson Tennant, who had shown that carbon was obtained on strongly heating powdered marble (calcium carbonate) with phosphorus, Pearson found that sodium carbonate could be similarly decomposed. By heating quicklime (calcium oxide) with phosphorus he discovered calcium phosphide, and observed the spontaneous combustion in air of the gas (phosphine) that was generated when he added water to this compound. Phosphine had been first discovered by Gengembre, an almost unknown chemist, in 1783, but as yet was little known ('Experiments made with the view of decompounding fixed air, or carbonic acid', 'PTRS', 82, 1792, 289-308). 
In 1789 Adriaan van Troostwijk and Jan Deiman had succeeded in decomposing water by frictional electricity. Pearson, in collaboration with John Cuthbertson, who had assisted the Dutch chemists and constructed their apparatus, improved on their results in being able to show more convincingly that the gases obtained were hydrogen and oxygen ('Experiments and observations made with the view of ascertaining the nature of the gas produced by passing electric discharges through water', 'Journal of Natural Philosophy, Chemistry and the Arts', 1, 1797, 241-8, 299-305, 349-55; abstract in 'PTRS', 87, 1797, 142-58). 
Most of Pearson's other writings are on medical matters, several being devoted to investigating certain body fluids which occurred as a result of disease. Undoubtedly, in the history of chemistry, Pearson's most important work was his introduction into Britain of the new systematic nomenclature (the basis of the modern nomenclature in inorganic chemistry), devised by a group of French chemists, headed by Antoine Lavoisier, the man Pearson referred to as 'the immortal, and ever to be deplored Lavoisier' (Lawrence, 311). Pearson was one of the first British chemists to accept Lavoisier's oxygen theory of combustion, in place of the current theory of phlogiston. A feature of Lavoisier's 'Methode de nomenclature chimique' (1787) was a large folding sheet which listed in adjoining columns the current names of all known substances, and their proposed new names. Pearson published a translation of this, with additions and an explanatory text. He adopted the term 'nitrogen' (from 'nitrogene', suggested by J. A. Chaptal in 1790) in preference to 'azote' ('A Translation of the Table of Chemical Nomenclature', 1794; 2nd edn with additions, 1799). 
Pearson was one of the first physicians to express approval of the initiation by Edward Jenner of vaccination. Pearson collected a number of instances of an apparent immunity to smallpox of anyone who had contracted cowpox, and published them in his 'An inquiry concerning the history of the cow pox, principally with a view to supersede and extinguish the small pox' (1798). In it he disclaimed any honour for the innovation, which he said belonged exclusively to Jenner. 
Subsequently, however, it became clear that Pearson was intent on claiming undue credit for this historic step in preventive medicine. In December 1799, he opened, without informing Jenner of his intention, an institute for vaccination, which he was to head, at 5 Golden Square. Though Pearson shortly afterwards invited Jenner, in a rather offhand manner, to be a corresponding physician, the latter resolutely refused the offer. The ensuing quarrel culminated in 1802 with Pearson's intense opposition to Jenner's successful petition for government compensation for loss of earnings resulting from his preoccupation with promoting vaccination. At the hearing Pearson attempted in several ways to belittle Jenner's achievement. Pearson died on 9 November 1828 as a consequence of a fall at his house in Hanover Square, London, and was buried at St George's cemetery, Bayswater. 


@@@@@


doc= 21714


Hugh Pearson (1817-1882), was born on 25 June 1817, and graduated MA from Balliol College, Oxford, in 1841. He was in the same year appointed vicar of Sonning in Berkshire, a preferment which he held until his death. He was rural dean of Henley-on-Thames from 1864 to 1874, and of Sonning from 1874 to 1876; he was appointed chaplain to the bishop of Manchester in 1870, was created a canon of Windsor in 1876, and, on the death of his closest friend, A. P. Stanley, became deputy clerk of the closet to the queen. 


@@@@@


doc= 21715


Pearson, Hugh Nicholas (1776-1856), dean of Salisbury, only son of Hugh Pearson, was born at Lymington, Hampshire, and matriculated from St John's College, Oxford, on 16 July 1796. He graduated BA in 1800, MA in 1803, and DD as 'grand compounder' in 1821. On 13 September 1803 he married Sarah Maria Elliott (1781-1858), eldest daughter of Charles and Sarah Ann Elliott of Clapham, Surrey. Pearson noted in his autobiography his attraction to her 'profile, shaded by a profusion of beautiful hair, inclining to auburn'. Both Pearson and his wife had connections with the Clapham sect of evangelicals. 
In 1807 Pearson won the prize of $500 offered by Claudius Buchanan for the best essay on missions in Asia, and his work was printed at Oxford with the title 'A Dissertation on the Propagation of Christianity in Asia' (1808). The interest thus aroused in Christian missionary enterprise in Asia prompted Pearson to undertake in 1817 his 'Memoirs of the Life and Writings of the Rev. Claudius Buchanan' (2 vols.), dedicated to William Wilberforce; and in 1834 he produced a biography of greater interest, 'Memoirs of the life and correspondence of the Rev. Christian Frederick Swartz, to which is prefixed a sketch of the history of Christianity in India'. This reached a third edition in 1839 and was translated into German by C. P. Blumhardt in Basel, in 1846. 
After ordination Pearson was curate to the evangelicals Richard Cecil and John Venn. In 1822 he was appointed vicar of St Helen's, Abingdon, with Radley and Drayton chapelries, and in 1823 he was appointed dean of Salisbury and a domestic chaplain to George IV. He resigned his deanery in 1846 and died at Sonning in Berkshire on 17 November 1856. During the last years of his life he lived mainly with his fourth son, Hugh ['see below']. 
The eldest son, 
The dean's second son, William Henley Pearson (1813-1883), assumed in 1865 the additional name of Jervis ['see 'Jervis, William Henley Pearson-]. Another son, Henry Hugo, changed his surname to Pierson ['see 'Pierson, Henry Hugo]. 
The fourth son, 
By nature excessively retiring, and undogmatic to the extreme limits of latitudinarianism, Pearson was a notable figure within the church; while, outside it, his character endeared him to people of every rank in life. He was an excellent preacher, but would not allow his sermons to be printed; and though he had an extraordinary knowledge of literature, he never dreamed for a moment of becoming an author. Much of his emotional life centred on A. P. Stanley. He frequently accompanied Stanley abroad, and was with him in Italy just before Stanley's marriage and his decision to accept the deanery of Westminster in 1863; he was present at Stanley's deathbed on 18 July 1881. He declined an invitation to succeed Stanley in the deanery at Westminster, on the ground that he wished to remain what he had always been -- a private person. He died at Sonning, unmarried, on 13 April 1882, and was buried in Sonning churchyard, on 18 April. There is a memorial to him in that church. 


@@@@@


doc= 21716


Pearson, James (c.1740-1838), glass painter, was born in Dublin but played a significant role in the revival of English enamel glass painting. He trained in the ceramics industry in Bristol but later moved to London and became a pupil of William Price the younger. His first documented commission was in 1769. His 'Christ and the Four Evangelists' (1776), after designs by John Hamilton Mortimer, survives in Brasenose College chapel, Oxford. 'Moses and the Brazen Serpent' (1781, after Mortimer) also survives in Salisbury Cathedral. Pearson produced a wide range of religious and secular works, heraldry, and ornament throughout his long career, and frequently exhibited from his own homes in London (21 Great Newport Street, Long Acre; 112 Great Russell Street) and in the Pantheon, Oxford Street. His speciality was large-scale copies of well-known paintings in which the supporting lead and iron work were skilfully concealed by complex technical means. A life-sized portrait of George III of 1793 (after Sir Joshua Reynolds) in the Stained Glass Museum in Ely Cathedral, and the east window of St Botolph, Aldersgate, of 1788 -- 'The Agony in the Garden' (after Charles Le Brun) -- are highly characteristic works. On 23 June 1768, at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Pearson married Eglington Margaret [


@@@@@


doc= 21717


Pearson, John (1613-1686), bishop of Chester, was born on 28 February 1613 at Great Snoring, Norfolk, and baptized there on 14 March. He was the eldest of the nine children of Robert Pearson (died 1640) and his wife, Joanna, daughter of Richard Vaughan, bishop of London. Robert Pearson, who came from Westmorland to Queens' College, Cambridge, as a sizar in 1587, became a fellow and MA in 1592 and DD in 1609. From 1607 to his death in 1640 he was rector of North Creake, near Walsingham, Norfolk, and from 1610 rector of Great Snoring nearby. Collated archdeacon of Suffolk in 1613, he appears from his 'Articles to be Enquired of in the Ordinary Visitation' (1639) to have been a firm enforcer of Bishop Richard Montagu's church discipline. In 1626 John Davenant -- bishop of Salisbury and formerly a fellow of Queens' with Pearson -- gave to Pearson the prebend of Netherhaven, which he eventually resigned in 1639. 
John Pearson was a king's scholar at Eton College from 1623 to 1631. He was certainly a hard-working student: one story tells of his re-lighting his candle once the rest of the dormitory was asleep and, through these midnight studies, reading 'most of the Greek and Latin Fathers of the Church' before leaving school. Initially admitted to Cambridge at Queens' College on 10 June 1631, Pearson entered King's College as a scholar the following April, matriculating the same year. He contributed two Latin poems to 'Anthologia Cantabrigiensis in exanthemate regia' (1632) on Charles I's recovery from smallpox and one to 'Justa Edovardo King' (1638). Like other poems about Edward King, Pearson's fourteen lines -- on the sea's protecting Britain and yet drowning this ornament to Cambridge -- are overshadowed by Milton's 'Lycidas' at the volume's end. He contributed another poem to 'Voces votivae' (1640) on the birth of Prince Henry. Pearson became a fellow of King's in 1635, graduating BA in 1636 and MA in 1639. Pearson's father's successor to the Salisbury prebend having died within a few weeks, Davenant chose Pearson to replace him on 30 December 1639, which obliged him to resign his fellowship on 2 August 1640. In June that year he became chaplain to Lord Keeper Finch; but Finch, implicated in Charles I's unpopular policies, was impeached in October and in December fled to The Hague. 
Through these and the succeeding troubled times, Pearson was helped by a small inheritance from his father and much more substantially by the patronage of Sir Edward Coke's family. On 27 October 1640 Coke's son Henry presented Pearson to the rectory of Thorington, Suffolk; Pearson retained his predecessor's curate, John Freeman, and continued to spend at least some of his time at King's. Towards the middle of 1643 he preached a university sermon, 'The excellency of forms of prayer', a scathing attack on the extemporarians and on the impending Westminster assembly, to which, proclaims the last sentence, 'whosoever will not freely submit his judgement... deserves no better, than -- to be counted a member of the catholic church!' ('Minor Theological Works', 2.111). Like others embarking on the Church of England's defence, Pearson had to answer both sectaries' attacks on its traditions and Romanists' attacks on its authority: in 'Christ's Birth Not Mistimed' (1649) he defended the celebration of the nativity, and in a preface to Lord Falkland's 'Discourse of Infallibility' (1651 edn) he noted Hugh Cressy's uneasiness in adopting that doctrine. 
In 1645 Pearson was in the west of England as chaplain to Goring's army, of which little remained after the battle of Langport on 10 July. He was obliged to give up the rectory of Thorington some time before 31 March 1646, at which time Henry Coke presented it to John Chunne. Henry's elder brother Robert reportedly made Pearson his chaplain, and Evelyn's diary for 1 August 1650 seems to corroborate this: 'after dinner at 'Durdens' [Robert Coke's house at Epsom], meeting my former acquaintance 'Mr. Pierson', I had good Conversation' (Evelyn, 3.15). Subsequently Pearson is said to have been chaplain to Robert's brother-in-law George, Lord Berkeley, whose funeral sermon he preached in 1658, and to his son of the same name (who inherited Durdans in 1653). On 1 May 1658 Pearson delivered in London another funeral sermon, on his contemporary and fellow Cantabrigian the royalist poet John Cleveland. This sermon, which unfortunately does not survive, 'made his death glorious' ('Clievelandi vindiciae', 1677, sig. A7'v'). 
On 17 April 1652 Evelyn heard Pearson preach in Eastcheap -- presumably at St Clement, where he heard him again on 9 March 1653. At that time, or certainly by August 1654, Pearson was one of the parishioners' voluntary lecturers, delivering the weekly sermons that led to the great book by which he is chiefly known, 'An Exposition of the Creed' (1659). Written, as he explains, for both unlearned and learned readers, 'the body of it containeth fully what can be delivered and made intelligible in the English tongue', and in the margin 'is contained whatsoever is necessary for the illustration of any part of the Creed, as to them which have any knowledge of the Latin, Greek, and Oriental languages, of the writings of the ancient Fathers, the doctrines of the Jews, and the history of the Church. (J. Pearson, 'To the reader', 'An Exposition of the Creed', 1659)' In the mid-1650s Pearson made extensive manuscript notes on the works of Aeschylus, which Thomas Stanley appropriated verbatim and without acknowledgement in his edition of 1663. The 'liveliness of perception and the keen interest in literary history' shown by Pearson's more general comments 'are no less noticeable... than his enormous learning' (Fraenkel, 1.80). His prolegomena to the Neoplatonist Hierocles's 'De providentia' (1655) and his manuscript notes on the lexicographer Hesychius are also significant contributions to classical studies, and typical in their different ways of Pearson's scholarly interests. 
In November 1652 Evelyn 'went to 'Lond': where was proposd to me the promoting of that greate Work (since accomplishd by 'Dr. Walton' ('Bishop' of Chester) 'Biblia polyglotta'), by 'Mr. Pierson' that most learned divine' (Evelyn, 3.78). Pearson is not mentioned by Brian Walton among his collaborators; he helped, however, to assemble the commentaries and tracts of the substantial collection 'Critici sacri' (1660), to which he also wrote the preface. In 1659 he wrote brief prefaces to David Stokes's 'Explication of the Minor Prophets' and to the 'Golden Remains' of 'the ever memorable' John Hales, a fellow of Eton in Pearson's schooldays. He was active once more in polemics: in 1657 he and Peter Gunning engaged 'two Disputants of the Roman Profession', and in 1660 he published two anti-presbyterian tracts against reformation of the public doctrine of the Church of England. 
In 1660 Pearson petitioned Charles II for a mandamus to take his DD, from which he had been prevented because he 'could not submit to the late irregularities' ('CSP dom.', '1660-61', 164); the degree was conferred the following year. Successive preferments now came to him: archdeacon of Surrey (presented by Charles II, 19 July 1660); rector of St Christopher-le-Stocks, Threadneedle Street, London (collated 17 August 1660); canon of Ely (collated fifth prebend 28 August 1660, first prebend 9 October 1661); master of Jesus College, Cambridge (admitted 4 December 1660). He owed the canonry and mastership to the patronage of Matthew Wren, bishop of Ely, whose funeral sermon he preached in 1667. 
Pearson was a Lent preacher at court in 1661, and when the Savoy conference opened on 15 April he was one of the assistant commissioners on the episcopal side. He participated very actively and the bishops chose him, with Peter Gunning and Anthony Sparrow, to put their case in the formal disputation at the end. Their chief opponent, Richard Baxter, recalled 'Dr. 'Pierson' was their true Logician and Disputant, without whom, as far as I could discern, we should have had nothing from them, but Dr. 'Gunning''s passionate Invectives mixd with some Argumentations: He disputed accurately, soberly and calmly (being but once in any passion) breeding in us a great respect for him, and a perswasion that if he had been independent, he would have been for Peace, and that if all were in his power, it would have gone well: He was the strength and honour of that Cause which we doubted whether he heartily maintained. ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', ed. M. Sylvester, 1696, 2.364)' The doubt about Pearson's commitment sounds like wishful thinking. 
When convocation met (initially in May 1661) Pearson among other duties took an active part in preparing a Latin version of the prayer book and, early in 1664, a standard Latin and Greek school grammar, an educational scheme that was not pursued. He and Gunning were 'the prime advisers' of the amplifications in the ordination formulae for priests and bishops (H. Prideaux, 'Validity of the Orders of the Church of England', 1688, 43). In June 1661, on the king's recommendation, Pearson succeeded Gunning as Lady Margaret's professor of divinity at Cambridge. He began his tenure with a series of scholastic lectures 'On the being and attributes of God'; the other lectures that survive, from the end of his professorship, are on the 'Acts of the Apostles'. Related to these, as part of a larger projected work, are six 'Theological determinations' of specific questions. Pearson also left some learned Latin sermons from these Cambridge years and some more topical commencement orations. None of this Cambridge material was printed in his lifetime; in the 1660s the only substantial scholarly work he published was his preface to the 'Septuagint', 1665, defending the old translators against the censure of St Jerome. 
On 14 April 1662 Pearson was translated by the king to the mastership of Trinity College, Cambridge, in place of Henry Ferne, promoted bishop of Chester. Writers on Pearson state that he never married and discount an octogenarian fellow's recollection of the master's wife at Trinity (Churton, 1.lxv, cxvi); however, a warrant for his presentation to the mastership was issued 'with dispensation for him to hold the said place, he being in a state of marriage' ('CSP dom.', '1661-2', 173). So there is reason for uncertainty. Now, if not earlier, he resigned his Salisbury prebend and London benefice, to which his successors were chosen on 9 and 22 August 1662. At Trinity, Pearson proved an obliging and conscientious master, whose college business included the composition of eulogies later published in 'Letters and Poems in Honour of the Incomparable Princess, Margaret, Duchess of Newcastle' (1676). He lived modestly and donated $250 (reckoned to be half his annual salary) to the rebuilding of St Paul's Cathedral; he also loaned the exchequer $100 'for his Majesty's service for the maintenance of the present war' ('Calendar Treasury Books', 1667-8, 161-2). On 14 March 1667 he was elected to the Royal Society, proposed by Matthew Wren, Clarendon's secretary and son of the Matthew Wren, bishop of Ely. Although a barely active member, he was on the council in 1675 and he paid his subscription regularly through the 1670s. 
In 1672 Pearson published his second great work, 'Vindiciae epistolarum S. Ignatii', written in Latin and directed primarily against the French protestant Jean Daille. The point at issue was episcopacy, which after the Restoration became increasingly central to the Church of England's apologetics. Scripture uses the words 'episcopos' and 'presbyteros' interchangeably, but Ignatius makes bishops pre-eminent. As an apostolic father -- the only one to express this view -- protestants had to take account of Ignatius. The authenticity of his letters had been vigorously debated: some, and parts of others, looked to be spurious but there seemed no way to be certain. In 1645 James Ussher found the way with two manuscripts in which the text predated the medieval interpolations. This should have settled the matter, but anti-episcopalians could not give up, because the episcopal passages were still there in the genuine letters. French protestants, harassed by Louis XIV, felt especially vulnerable. Daille, who had a considerable reputation as a learned and moderate writer, advanced sixty-six objections to Ignatius's authorship and dated the forgery about the year 300. Pearson demolishes first the external, then the internal, arguments of Daille and other anti-episcopalians. His use of linguistic evidence is especially impressive, and his ability to come up with three or four refutations of an argument anticipates the treatment of Phalaris's letters by Richard Bentley, who memorably wrote of Pearson 'the very dust of his writings is gold' (R. Bentley, 'Works', ed. A. Dyce, 3 vols., 1836-8, 2.29). Pearson anticipates Bentley also in his sense of literary history and the character of particular ages. (On one important point he corrected Ussher, who was misled by the testimony of St Jerome into thinking there were six, not seven, genuine letters.) 
According to a newsletter of January 1671 it was believed that Pearson would have one of the bishoprics then vacant; but his elevation did not occur until the end of the following year, when he was chosen for the see of Chester. As this was one of the poorer bishoprics, he was granted, like his predecessors, a dispensation to hold the rectory of Wigan, Lancashire, 'in commendam', and also to retain his archdeaconry of Surrey. Pearson was consecrated at Lambeth on 9 February 1673. For his first diocesan visitation he had printed 'Articles of Inquiry' (1674); he held a second visitation in 1677. In 1675 he issued injunctions to the cathedral clergy, dealing among other things with the performance of the choir and the cathedral school. Initially he was lenient to nonconformists but later accepted the magistrates' increasing severity. On 25 September 1683 Secretary Jenkins complained about his administration: the Thanksgiving for Charles's preservation from the Rye House plot was not performed in the archdeaconry of Richmond. Jenkins would have recalled the pro-Monmouth riots the previous September when the mob ransacked Chester Cathedral. 
In the 1670s Pearson was often in London to attend parliament and also to preach his Lent sermon at court. In his first parliamentary session the Lords considered the Commons' bill for the toleration of dissenters, and other difficult questions of religion were to follow. On 31 October 1674 Secretary Williamson wrote to Pearson as one of the bishops 'particularly pitched upon' to meet and advise the king on 'the preservation and security of the Protestant religion'. Pearson was unwell, confined to his chamber by gout, but eventually left for London on 25 November. The bishops' advice, signed by Pearson and five others late in January 1675, called for firmer measures against Catholics ('CSP dom.', '1673-5', 390, 403, 416, 437, 549-50). On 28 February 1675 Pearson ordained 'about 30 'Deacons' & 'Priests'' at St Paul's, Covent Garden (Evelyn, 4.54). He described himself as 'infirme' in his will, dated 2 January 1678, but he was present at the opening of parliament on 15 January (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/384/116). He continued to be in London when parliament met and he attended the Lords fairly regularly, up to the dissolution in January 1681. He was at the third Exclusion Parliament, 21-8 March 1681, every day. But the following year he could no more make long journeys. 
The notion that Pearson was a negligent valetudinary derives from Burnet's aspersion: 'He was not active in his diocese, but too much remiss and easy in his episcopal function; and was a much better divine than a bishop. He was a speaking instance of what a great man could fall to: for his memory went from him so entirely, that he became a child some years before he died. ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.134)' The image of senility is conveyed by Henry Dodwell's anecdote: the bishop, led into his library by an old nurse, 'held out his hands, and cried out, 'O sad, whose books are all these?'' (E. Bridges, 'Restituta', 1, 1814, 53) This condition was shorter-lasting than Burnet's 'some years' implies: Pearson's detailed 'Annales Cyprianici' introduced John Fell's 1682 edition of Cyprian, and in 1683 he was still composing his posthumously published dissertations on the succession of Roman bishops. He held an ordination service on 21 December 1684; he dictated the codicil to his will, although unable to sign it, on 18 June 1685; he performed his last institution in person on 3 September 1685; he appointed John Allen, his chaplain, archdeacon of Chester on 12 April 1686, and John Thane prebendary a week later. He died at Chester on 16 July 1686. In his will Pearson bequeathed his Norfolk property at Great Snoring and at 'Brownham' (Downham) to his brother Theophilus. He left money to other relatives and to the poor of Great Snoring and of St Oswald's parish, Chester. He had already helped his nephews, appointing Henry Dove archdeacon of Richmond, on 3 December 1678, and John Thane, who inherited most of his books and papers, Chester prebendary. 
In Chester Cathedral Pearson's burial place, modestly unmarked and forgotten near the high altar, was discovered in 1841, and his body was moved to the north transept, where a very large tomb, designed by Sir Arthur Blomfield, was raised over it in 1863. Pearson's true glory was not a matter of marble and wrought iron: he belonged, in Pepys's phrase, among 'the great Cavalier parsons during the late troubles' (Pepys, 'Diary', 8.337); his friend Evelyn reckoned him 'the most learned Divine of our Nation' (Evelyn, 4.5-6), and Burnet acknowledged him 'in all respects the greatest divine of the age' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.134). His 'Exposition of the Creed' -- clear, accurate, sensitive, and extraordinarily detailed -- remains a standard work, unlikely to be surpassed. His 'Vindiciae' effectively settled the authenticity of Ignatius's letters; indeed, when William Cureton argued in 1845 that the shorter, newly discovered Syriac version was the authentic core, one response was Edward Churton's new edition of the 'Vindiciae' (1852). Moreover, as Fraenkel writes: 'Pearson, though primarily known as a theologian, was perhaps England's greatest classical scholar before Bentley (his only possible rival being Thomas Gataker); in range of learning and critical power he is probably inferior to no English scholar save Bentley. (Fraenkel, 1.40)' 



@@@@@


doc= 21718


Pearson, John (1758-1826), surgeon, son of John Pearson of Coney Street, York, was born in Coney Street on 3 January 1758. He was apprenticed at the age of sixteen to a surgeon in Morpeth, Northumberland, from where he moved, in June 1777, to Leeds. There he lived for three years at the home of William Hey, the eminent surgeon to the Leeds Infirmary, whose biography he later wrote. Pearson travelled to London in 1780 and entered as a student at St George's Hospital to work under John Hunter. He appears to have been granted the diploma of the Company of Surgeons on 4 October 1781, when he was found qualified to act as surgeon to a regiment. In the same year he became house surgeon to the Lock Hospital at so critical a period in its fortunes that in 1782 he was appointed surgeon there, a post he held until 1818. He was also made surgeon, about this time, to the Public Dispensary, then newly founded, in Carey Street, an office which he resigned in 1809. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 24 March 1803, and he afterwards became a fellow of the Linnean Society. In 1820 he was made an honorary member of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, and he also became a member of the Royal Medical Society of Edinburgh. In 1785 he was living in Air Street, London, but he afterwards moved to Golden Square. 
Pearson appears to have been a careful surgeon with a strong scientific bias. His writings, however, are neither numerous nor important. He wrote 'Principles of Surgery' (part 1, 1788; the second part was never published). The principles are drawn up in a concise and aphoristical form for the use of students attending Pearson's lectures on surgery. His 'Plain and Rational Account of the Nature... of Animal Magnetism' was published in 1790, 'Practical Observations on Cancerous Complaints' in 1793, 'Some account of the two mummies of the Egyptian ibis' in the 'Philosophical Transactions', of 1805 (part 1, 264, and plates), and 'Life of William Hey' in 1822. He married Sarah (1763?-1826), daughter and heir of Robert Norman of Lewisham. John Norman Pearson (1787-1865) was their son. Pearson died on 12 May 1826. His wife survived him until September of that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 21719


Pearson, Sir John (1819-1886), judge, was born on 5 August 1819 at Tunbridge Wells, Kent, the son of the Church of England priest John Norman Pearson (1787-1865) and his wife, Harriet Puller. He was the elder brother of Charles Henry Pearson. He graduated BA at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, on 24 February 1841 and MA on 2 July 1844, having been called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 11 June that year. On 21 December 1854 he married Charlotte Augusta, daughter of William Short, rector of St George's, Bloomsbury. 
A diligent lawyer, but without influential connections or conspicuous brilliance, Pearson rose slowly at the chancery bar, and did not secure queen's counsel until 13 December 1866. He was elected a bencher of Lincoln's Inn in 1867 and treasurer in 1884-5. On 24 October 1882, on the retirement of Vice-Chancellor Hall, Pearson was appointed to succeed him, but without the title of vice-chancellor; he was knighted at Windsor on 30 November. 
During his brief judicial career Pearson proved a competent judge in land, patent, and company law. His decisions on the 'Settled Land Act' of 1882 did much to decide the interpretation of that important statute. He was also a member of the councils of both legal education and law reporting. Pearson died on 13 May 1886 at his residence, 75 Onslow Square, South Kensington, London, after a painful illness of some weeks' duration, and was buried in Brompton cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 21720


Pearson, John Loughborough (1817-1897), architect, was born on 5 July 1817 in Brussels, the youngest of the eleven children of William Pearson (1772-1849), topographical artist, etcher, and watercolourist, and his wife, Nancy (Ann), 'nee' Loughborough (1776-1869), who came from the Isle of Man. His grandfather Thomas Pearson, a solicitor, was a freeman of Durham. 
Pearson grew up in Durham a sharp, clever boy, fond of acting and reciting. In 1831 he started his architectural training under Ignatius Bonomi at Durham, and he continued as Bonomi's principal assistant. His study of the great northern cathedrals and abbeys at this time inspired his future architectural style. Meanwhile he was influenced by George Townsend, a canon of Durham, in whose Sunday school he served. 
Pearson left Bonomi at the end of 1841 and briefly worked for George Pickering before going to London early the next year. Here he lived for the rest of his life. He spent five months with his friend the architect Anthony Salvin, tracing from Salvin's library. In October he became Philip Hardwick's principal assistant, completing the drawings of the new hall and library of Lincoln's Inn, and executing these works. 
In 1843 Canon Townsend asked Pearson to rebuild Ellerker Chapel, at Brantingham in the East Riding of Yorkshire, to a new, Decorated Gothic design. This work, consecrated in 1844, introduced Pearson to several of Townsend's friends, all, like Townsend, influential Tractarians. Impressed with Pearson's ability, they would commission from him over the next ten years several new churches in the Gothic style, as well as schools and houses. These commissions allowed him to leave Hardwick's employment, and formed the basis of an increasingly flourishing practice. Among them were new churches in the East Riding at Wauldby, North Ferriby, and Ellerton, and the restoration of Elloughton church, and also a new church at Weybridge, Surrey, and restorations at Stow on the Wold, Gloucestershire, and Lea, Lincolnshire; for the Raikes family (to become his oldest friends) he rebuilt Llangasty Tal-y-llyn church in Brecknockshire and built a new school and Treberfydd House (1848-52). In 1849 he started work on his first London church, Holy Trinity, Bessborough Gardens, Westminster (dem.), which was greatly praised for its correct interpretation of the English 'middle pointed' (Decorated) Gothic style when completed in 1852. His restoration in 1850-52 of the Norman vault at Stow in Lindsay, Lincolnshire, which had collapsed in the later middle ages, was widely admired, and Pearson was consequently elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London. Stone or brick vaults became an increasingly common feature of his new church designs thereafter. 
Pearson had already undertaken a number of secular designs. Treberfydd House, completed in an attractively asymmetrical English Gothic style of the kind promoted by A. W. N. Pugin, was followed in 1856-9 by his second great house, Quar Wood, near Stow on the Wold, in a demonstratively French Gothic style (now extensively altered). This was prompted by foreign travel, an influence first evident following a visit to Amiens and Beauvais in 1853, inspired by the writing of John Ruskin and recorded in a small sketchbook (which, like many of his other surviving private papers, is in the possession of a great-grandson, whereabouts unknown). A second sketchbook records a journey later in the year through Belgium and up the Rhine from Cologne to Mainz. Quar Wood and the equally vigorous designs begun in 1857 for churches at Daylesford in Gloucestershire, Scorborough and Dalton Holme in the East Riding of Yorkshire, and Catherston Leweston, Dorset, are completely assured in their handling of French and Italian details, luxuriantly carved and decorated in multicoloured and patterned stone without prejudice to their underlying form. 
The design of Titsey church in Surrey followed in 1859, the year of a visit to Normandy, recorded by another sketchbook. He found there what would inspire the last elements in his mature designs, namely rib-vaulting, tall turrets, and broached spires. Pearson's second London church, St Peter's, Vauxhall, Lambeth (1860-64), was immediately noticed for its brick vaulting: this was a constructional novelty, executed as cheaply as a conventional timber roof. The church's final cost of about $8000 was only two-thirds of the cost of Holy Trinity, Bessborough Gardens, and of other similar churches then being built. Pearson's application of the classical Golden Section (about 1: 1.6) in this Gothic design, notably in the proportion of the width and height of the nave and chancel, remained unnoticed. The interior, lit by large clerestory windows, and vaulted in brick with stone ribs and arches, is truly monumental; a tall steeple and much of the proposed window tracery and rich carving were omitted to reduce costs, leaving a spare design, all the more effective for its strong massing and serene spaces. Beside the church a parsonage, an orphanage, and schools complete an impressive group of Gothic buildings, at once picturesque and original in their treatment. 
With these London works adding to his laurels, Pearson's career steadily expanded: in the East Riding of Yorkshire he sensitively restored the Norman churches at Kirkburn and Garton in the Wolds and also Riccall church; in the North Riding, the ornate Christ Church at Appleton-le-Moors follows the design for Vauxhall on a small scale, but with a timber roof. Here he again provided a vicarage and school. His friendship with the Raikes family brought him a commission for a church, parsonage, and schools at Freeland in Oxfordshire, and this was followed by a church in 1865-8 and a school at Sutton Veny in Wiltshire, which show a more serene attitude to decoration, with less of the hectic vigour that characterized his previous decade. 
Although registered as an architect with the newly founded Institute of British Architects in 1834, it was only in 1860 that Pearson was elected fellow of the now Royal Institute of British Architects, and within two years he started to play an active part as a member of its committees. At this time he met Jemima Christian (1829-1865), who had been brought up on the Isle of Man, the daughter of Henry Curwen Christian, merchant. She was related to two architects: Joseph Henry Christian (1832-1906) was her brother; Ewan Christian (1814-1895) was a cousin. They were married on 5 June 1862. Their only child, Frank Loughborough Pearson, was born on 14 January 1864. On 23 March 1865 Jemima died of typhoid fever. The young Frank was brought up on the Isle of Man with an aunt and educated at Winchester College before entering his father's office as an assistant. 
While numerous restorations and other works followed in the 1860s, Pearson's first appointment as architect to a cathedral fabric came in 1870 with Lincoln. He restored the north transept vault and strengthened the south-west tower, works that left the cathedral looking hardly touched by what was increasingly seen elsewhere as the heavy hand of the Victorian restorer. Several more cathedrals came under his control: Bristol, Canterbury, Chichester, Exeter, Gloucester, Peterborough, Rochester, and also Westminster Abbey. 
In 1870 Pearson designed the church of St Augustine's at Kilburn, which may claim to be his masterpiece. This is a wonderful amalgam of Gothic forms taken from all round Europe: a continuous nave and chancel are surrounded by aisles with a gallery set over them that supports internal buttressing, as found in Albi Cathedral, all lit by tall clerestory windows; beyond the aisles and galleries are mysterious transeptal spaces, the southern one opening into a morning chapel. Every part is linked by a great, uniting quadripartite rib-vault that adds a rationalizing element to the complex interior. Tall turrets and a magnificent steeple, inspired by examples in Normandy, are a prominent landmark. 
The Kilburn church was acclaimed. Pearson's career came into late bloom with a great series of monumental town churches begun during the next dozen years: St John's, Red Lion Square, Holborn (dem.); St Michael's, Croydon; St John's, Upper Norwood, Croydon; St George's, Cullercoats, Northumberland; St Alban's, Bordesley, Birmingham; St Stephen's, Bournemouth; St Agnes's, Sefton Park, Liverpool; and St Michael's, Headingley, Leeds. These were mostly of brick with vaulted interiors, and several of them exploit the Golden Section in their proportions. Their lofty, plain naves and chancels are often entered by way of small narthexes, incorporating baptisteries, and contrast with small, intricately designed side chapels, themselves also vaulted and treated like tiny churches in their own right. Few of their proposed towers and spires were completed: enthusiasm and funds for church building were beginning to wane towards the end of the nineteenth century. 
The earlier of these churches led to Pearson's being chosen in 1878 to design a new cathedral for the refounded see of Cornwall at Truro. Here, Pearson elected to retain the south aisle of the decayed medieval parish church as a link with the past and to serve parochial needs. This determined the layout of his cathedral and the rhythm of the bays of its choir, which rises dramatically beside it. The cathedral continues westwards as an idealized version of Lincoln augmented by many of the features developed after the tour of Normandy and now to be seen in the new town churches. Truro has the great advantage of a central tower and spire and a pair of similar west towers and spires, which dominate the city, rising above the houses at the bottom of the valley. Inside, the proportions of the Golden Section in the nave add a calm note before the vistas of columns and partly hidden spaces of the choir and the old church aisle. All these are vaulted, with quadripartite ribs to the east and sexpartite ribs to the nave, and, at a low level, an octagonal baptistery is linked into the vaulting system with a star vault of its own. The cathedral was begun in 1880, with the completed eastern parts being consecrated in 1887, the nave and crossing tower rising in 1897-1903, and the west towers being finished in 1910 under Frank Pearson's direction. The cathedral was criticized for not being Cornish enough, despite the use of local and not entirely suitable granite in its construction; it was thought too French and, with more justification, too conservative and lacking the originality of Pearson's town churches. Yet, like Sir Christopher Wren, the last architect before him to design an English cathedral, Pearson was bound to follow the desires of the church, and the church was well satisfied. Largely in recognition of this work, Pearson was presented with the royal gold medal of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1880. He also became a Royal Academician, having been an associate since 1874. 
Pearson began a design for a new cathedral for Liverpool, which he abandoned on the grounds of ill health, and another for Brisbane, Queensland, which he completed in 1887-9 and then adapted for a new site shortly before his death. This again was entirely vaulted and had central and west towers; moreover, it had more of the originality found in his town churches, and made telling use of Spanish Gothic models, as these were appropriate to Brisbane's hot climate. Pearson's son Frank further modified and simplified the design before work started in 1901 on the east parts; these were finished in 1910, and the nave and aisles, started in 1955, are now largely finished, leaving just the west end to be completed. 
These great ecclesiastical works overshadow Pearson's later houses, a varied group, ranging from the small, traditionally styled Roundwyck House at Kirdford, Sussex, Crowton vicarage (dem.) in Cheshire, and Whitwell parsonage in Derbyshire, to the Jacobean of the larger Lechlade Manor House, Berkshire, and the French Renaissance of Westwood House (dem.), Sydenham, London. In the 1890s he worked for William Waldorf Astor, designing a luxurious estate office in Tudor Gothic at Temple Place, Westminster. 
All the while Pearson was increasingly involved in controversy surrounding his restorations. While his rebuilding of the north transept front of Westminster Abbey might have been more sympathetic to its former appearance, his urgent reconstruction of Peterborough's central tower, threatened with imminent collapse, was an unavoidably desperate remedy. The repair of Peterborough's west front in the last few years of his life caused bitter controversy, mainly through the intemperate objections of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings, founded by William Morris in 1878, and the vociferous rejoinders of his supporters. Pearson avoided the clamour, but was branded a destroyer. Yet his work can now be seen as thoroughly competent. Unfortunately the problem of providing for continuing use -- or even changes in use -- while preserving the archaeological and historical record of a building, could not always be resolved, and his was the first generation to face this dilemma. His reputation suffered, despite the fertility of his art. 
Advancing years reduced Pearson's output of new designs but not its quality. While his earlier works reached completion, he designed new churches at Hove in Sussex, Thurstaston in Cheshire, Friern Barnet in Middlesex, Port Talbot in Glamorgan, and Darlington, as well as the Catholic Apostolic Church in Paddington, a cemetery chapel at Ta Braxia, Malta, and convent chapels at Wantage, Berkshire, and Woking, Surrey. The latter was his last design, completed shortly before his death, and executed by his son, Frank. Several of these last works have early Christian elements in their design, influenced by a visit to Italy in 1874 and an increasingly liberal attitude to both style and the place of Gothic in a wider appreciation of medieval architecture. Nevertheless, the old intensity remained, together with a feeling for calm, contrasting spaces. 
Pearson was short and stocky in stature. Two portraits in oil, by W. W. Ouless RA (1889; in the possession of the family) and by John Pettie RA ('c'.1880; Aberdeen Art Gallery), show his genial character and gentle, expressive eyes, smiling above a full beard and moustache. Sociable but modest, he never made his views public. His interests were few beyond architecture, to which he devoted great industry. Of over 250 major works, a third were new churches and nearly a half were restorations. Of his assistants, only W. D. Caroe achieved eminence. Pearson died at his home, 13 Mansfield Street, Marylebone, London, on 11 December 1897, and was buried in Westminster Abbey on 16 December. His son inherited his fortune of over $53,000 as well as his practice. He completed many of his father's works before his own retirement and death on 8 October 1947. 
Pearson never gained a reputation for innovation or for the strenuous promotion of his own architectural principles. These were based on a conservative tradition, but they also married classical precepts of symmetry, proportion, and order with the structural methods of Gothic; above all he saw in Gothic its potential for picturesque sublimity. Through all the developing phases of the Gothic revival he managed to remain a leader. His works may sometimes seem a trifle cold, but they reveal a consistent architectural vision, and a rare capacity for synthesis and integration. 


@@@@@


doc= 21721


Pearson, John Norman (1787-1865), Church of England clergyman, son of the surgeon John Pearson (1758-1826) and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Norman (1763?-1826), was born on 7 December 1787; he was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge (1805-9), where he gained the Hulsean prize in 1807. He then took orders, and acted as chaplain to Marquess Wellesley. He married on 11 September 1815 Harriet, daughter of Richard Puller of London and sister of Sir Christopher Puller; they had a large family. In 1826 the Church Missionary Society appointed him the first principal of its newly founded missionary college at Islington in London. In 1839 he was appointed vicar of Holy Trinity Church, Tunbridge Wells, a position which he resigned in 1853. He afterwards lived in retirement, performing occasional duties for the local clergy, at Bower Hall, near Steeple Bumpstead in Essex, until his death on 4 October 1865. His sons Sir John Pearson and Charles Henry Pearson are separately noticed. Pearson published various evangelical and anti-papal works, and in 1829 a biography of Archbishop Leighton. 


@@@@@


doc= 21722


Pearson, Sir Richard (1731-1806), naval officer, was born in March 1731 at Langton Hall, near Appleby in Westmorland, the eldest son of Richard and Hannah Pearson, and baptized on 8 April 1731 at St Michael's Church, Appleby. After attending Appleby School (about 1740) he entered the navy in 1745 on the 'Dover', and joined in the Mediterranean the 'Seaford', commanded by his kinsman, Captain Wilson. Pearson remained in her for three years, and in 1749 joined the 'Amazon' (Captain Arthur Gardiner). In 1750, seeing little prospect of promotion, he took service under the East India Company. He returned to the navy when war was imminent in 1755, passed his examination for lieutenant on 5 November, and on 16 December was promoted fourth lieutenant of the 'Elizabeth', which during 1756 was commanded by Captain John Montagu, and attached to the fleet employed on the coast of France and in the Bay of Biscay. In 1757 Montagu was superseded by Charles Steevens, who took the 'Elizabeth' to the East Indies. Pearson was present in the actions of 29 April and 3 August 1758, and that of 10 September 1759. In one of these he was severely wounded. He was afterwards first lieutenant of the 'Norfolk' with Steevens and Richard Kempenfelt, and was actually in command during a violent hurricane on 1 January 1761, owing to Kempenfelt's being disabled by an accident. It is said that Steevens was so well satisfied with his conduct that he promised him the first vacancy, and that his commission to command the 'Tiger' (60 guns) was actually made out, but never took effect, as Steevens died before it was signed. At the capture of Manila in 1762 Pearson was first lieutenant of the 'Lenox'; afterwards he returned to England in the 'Seahorse'. On 28 January 1769 he married Margaret ('bap'. 1744), daughter of Francis Harrison of Appleby. They had two daughters, and four sons, one of whom, Richard Harrison Pearson, achieved the rank of vice-admiral in the navy. 
Later in 1769 Pearson went out to Jamaica as first lieutenant of the 'Dunkirk' with Commodore Arthur Forrest, who had promised him the first vacancy. Forrest, however, died before a vacancy occurred. In August 1770 Pearson received an acting order to command the 'Phoenix', but the appointment was disallowed by Captain Robert Carkett, on whom the command properly devolved. The Admiralty, however, took a favourable view of Pearson's claims, and promoted him on 29 October 1770 to command the sloop 'Druid'. In January 1773 he was appointed to the 'Speedwell'; and on 25 June, being at Spithead when the king reviewed the fleet, he was specially advanced to post rank. In 1776 Pearson was appointed to the 'Garland', in which he went out to Quebec in charge of convoy, and for the next two years was detained for service in the St Lawrence. 
Pearson was appointed to command the 'Serapis' (44 guns) in March 1778, and later he was sent to the Baltic with convoy. He was returning in company with the 'Countess of Scarborough', a hired ship, and the trade from the Baltic, when on the evening of 23 September 1779, off Flamborough Head, he met the American privateering squadron commanded by John Paul Jones. The 'Pallas', one of Jones's squadron, engaged and captured the 'Countess of Scarborough', while Jones's own ship, the 'Bonhomme Richard', grappled with the 'Serapis', and between the two one of the most obstinate fights on record took place. It was ended in favour of the 'Richard' when the latter's consort, the 'Alliance', came under the stern of the 'Serapis' and raked her, though the fire was not effective. Pearson felt unable to withstand a second enemy, and struck his colours. The 'Richard' was on the point of sinking, and did sink a few hours after Jones had taken possession of the 'Serapis'. Jones's cruise was necessarily brought to an end; and the defence of the 'Serapis' against a nominally superior force and his protection of the convoy won for Pearson a very general approval. He was honourably acquitted by a court martial held on 10 March 1780, and was afterwards knighted and presented with the freedom of Hull, Scarborough, Lancaster, and Appleby, and presented with handsome pieces of plate by the Russia Company and the Royal Exchange Assurance Company. Pearson was an honest, brave officer, and no blame was attributable to him for the loss of the 'Serapis'. However, the 'Serapis''s part in the events of September 1779 did not merit an official reward, and should be regarded more as an encouragement to the numerous officers engaged in convoy duty. Jones's remark on hearing of the honour conferred on him was: 'Should I have the good fortune to fall in with him again, I'll make a lord of him.' In April 1780 Pearson was appointed to the 'Alarm', and afterwards he commanded the 'Arethusa'. In 1790 he retired to the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich, where in 1800 he succeeded Captain William Locker as lieutenant-governor. He died there in January 1806 and was probably buried in the hospital's vault. 


@@@@@


doc= 21723


Pearson, Richard (bap. 1764, d. 1836), physician, the son of Richard Pearson and Ann, possibly 'nee' Aris, was born in Birmingham, and baptized at St Philip's, Birmingham, on 9 June 1764. He was educated at Bishop Vesey's School, Sutton Coldfield, Warwickshire, from about the age of seven, and then at Dr Rose's school in Chiswick. His uncle was Thomas Aris (died 1761), founder of the 'Birmingham Gazette'. After the death of his parents he became, about 1779, a pupil of Thomas Tomlinson, a Birmingham surgeon and accoucheur; Tomlinson joined the staff of Birmingham General Hospital in January 1780. In 1782 Pearson was awarded the first gold medal of the Royal Humane Society for a dissertation on the clinical signs of death and suspended animation. His elder brother received the medal in London on his behalf; John Coakley Lettsom and John Fothergill were among the judges. Pearson entered the University of Edinburgh in the autumn of 1783 and gained the degree of MD on 24 June 1786. As a student he was president of the Royal Medical Society and of the Natural History Society at the university. His dissertation on scrofula was dedicated to Thomas Smith, a physician at Birmingham General Hospital and also an Edinburgh graduate, with whom he was later to work. 
After qualifying Pearson travelled in Germany, Italy, France, and Austria, for two years, in the company of Thomas Knox (1753-1840), later first earl of Ranfurley. After returning to England he became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, on 22 December 1788. Pearson settled in Birmingham, living in New Street, and in June 1792 he was appointed 'locum tenens' at the hospital in place of William Withering (1741-1799), who was already very ill; the appointment was confirmed on 17 September. Pearson's marriage to Mrs Elizabeth [?] Startin produced a son, Richard (1795-1853), later a cleric, and a daughter, Elizabeth Anne, who in 1834 married William Innes Pocock RN (1783-1836). 
Pearson resigned from Birmingham General Hospital on 19 December 1800, as did Thomas Smith, and moved to London, where he lived in Keppel Street, Bloomsbury; however, from 1803 he subscribed $2 2's'. a year to the hospital in Birmingham. On 3 February 1803 Pearson was elected FSA and became a member of the Medical Society of London, whose first paper he presented. He had moved to Reading by 1812, after which he lived briefly in Sutton Coldfield before returning in 1815 to Birmingham, where he spent the rest of his life. 
Although retired, Pearson soon became involved in the preparations by William Sands Cox in 1825 for founding a medical school in Birmingham, of which Edward Johnstone was also a major supporter. Pearson gave the first introductory lecture, at its opening. He also published on a variety of topics: 'Different Kinds of Airs' (1795), 'Inflammatory Diathesis in Hydrophobia' (1789), in which he stressed his views against the contemporary practice of bleeding, and 'The Bilious Fever of 1797, 1798 and 1799' (1799). In 'The Epidemic Catarrhal Fever or Influenza of 1803' (1804) he incorporated the opinions of provincial practitioners treating the infection and noted the depression many patients suffered as a sequel to influenza. Pearson's other publications included 'Materia medica' (1807), and works on salted fish (1812), on plague (1813), and on treatments for dropsy (1835). 
Pearson had a considerable interest in natural history and botany and introduced 'Lichen islandicus' to medicine for the alleviation of indigestion; he was an acknowledged authority on pharmacology. He was considered a sociable, convivial person, but some thought him eccentric. He died a widower at Birmingham on 11 January 1836 and was buried, at his own request, in the churchyard of St Paul's, Birmingham. In his will, made on 13 May 1834, as well as family bequests he left mourning rings to former medical school colleagues William Sands Cox and John Ingle; his medical books he gave to Dr John Eccles. 


@@@@@


doc= 21724


Pearson, Thomas Hooke (1806-1892), army officer, the son of John Pearson, advocate-general of India, was born in June 1806. He was educated at Eton College, and entered the army as a cornet in the 11th light dragoons on 14 March 1825. In November 1825 he served at the siege of Bharatpur under Lord Combermere, where he volunteered for the assault, but was not used. The cavalry served well in preventing the escape of the usurping raja and his followers. 
When Lord Amherst, the governor-general, visited Ranjit Singh, Pearson accompanied him as aide-de-camp, and received a sword from the maharaja for riding a horse that was believed to be unmanageable. He obtained a troop in the 16th lancers on 16 August 1831, and served with them at the battle of Maharajpur, where Sir Hugh Gough defeated the Marathas on 29 December 1843, and also in the First Anglo-Sikh War. At Aliwal (28 January 1846) Pearson commanded one of the squadrons which broke through an infantry square. During the latter part of that day, and at Sobraon (10 February), he was in command of the regiment; he was twice mentioned in dispatches, and received a brevet majority on 19 June 1846. In a letter written at Aliwal on 29 January 1846, Pearson said: 'I, of course led the charge, and was the first man over the enemy's entrenchments, and at no point of the whole affair had I a man in front of me' (Graham, 110). He became major in the regiment on 23 April 1847, but saw no further active service, and was placed on half pay on 7 April 1848. He became lieutenant-general on 1 October 1877, and was then retired with the honorary rank of general. He had been made a CB on 2 June 1869, and on 4 February 1879 was given the colonelcy of the 12th lancers. In 1867 he won the One Thousand Guineas, the Great Yorkshire Stakes, the St Leger, and the Doncaster Cup with his horse Achievement (died 1872). He died at his home, The Hasells, Sandy, Bedfordshire, on 29 April 1892, leaving four sons and three daughters: his wife, Frances E. A. Pearson, had died in 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 21725


Pearson, William (1767-1847), astronomer, was born at Whitbeck in Cumberland on 23 April 1767, the second son of William Pearson ('bap'. 1733, died 1795), a yeoman, and his wife, Hannah Ponsonby ('bap'. 1739). Educated from 1785 at the grammar school of Hawkshead, near Windermere, in Lancashire, he became a teacher there before leaving to reside at Lincoln, where he taught at the free grammar school and became curate of St Martin's in 1794. His first scientific interest there was mechanical, for he constructed a curious astronomical clock and an orrery, described in 1797 a new electrical machine, and in 1798 devised a satellitian, for showing the phenomena of Jupiter's satellites. A copy of this last device is in the Museum of the History of Science at Oxford. In 1800 Pearson moved to London to become a partner in Elm House School, Parsons Green, Fulham; two papers on the minor planet Ceres were dated from there in 1802. 
Pearson was one of the original proprietors of the Royal Institution, and in 1803 completed a planetarium for illustrating Dr Thomas Young's lectures. He designed and built, or had built, other planetary machines notable for their accuracy and also for being designed for use in large lecture halls. All his machines were described by him in his articles 'Orrery' and 'Planetarium' for Rees's 'Cyclopaedia'. His final machine, an orrery built in 1813, survives, as original or as a copy, in the Science Museum, London. On 10 January 1810 he was presented to the rectory of Perivale, Middlesex, and, by Lord Chancellor Eldon on 15 March 1817, to that of South Kilworth, Leicestershire. In 1811 he became owner of a large and very successful private school at Temple Grove, East Sheen, Surrey, where, having established an observatory, he measured the diameters of the sun and moon during the partial solar eclipse of 7 September 1820 with one of Dollond's divided object-glass micrometers. These skills and researches gained him the award of an honorary LLD from the University of Glasgow in 1815 and election to fellowship of the Royal Society in 1819. 
The foundation of the Astronomical Society of London was significantly due to Pearson's initiative. In 1812, and again in 1816, he made suggestions which were discussed at a meeting held at the Freemasons' Tavern on 12 January 1820. Pearson helped to draw up the rules, and acted as treasurer during the first ten years of the society's existence. On selling his school and quitting East Sheen in 1821 he moved to South Kilworth, where he lived for the rest of his life. There he erected his second observatory, first in a wing added to the rectory, later as a separate building. Among the fine instruments collected there were a 3 foot altazimuth, originally constructed by Troughton for the St Petersburg Academy of Sciences, an achromatic refracting telescope by Tulley, a transit by Simms, and a clock by Hardy. A piece of flint-glass by Guinand, nearly 7 inches across, purchased by him in 1823 for $250, was worked by Tulley into the largest object-glass then in England. 
Pearson's first notable observations at South Kilworth were of the occultations of the Pleiades in July and October 1821. The two quarto volumes of his 'Introduction to Practical Astronomy' were published in 1824 and 1829. The first was composed mainly of tables for facilitating the processes of reduction of astronomical observations, while the second gave elaborate descriptions of various astronomical instruments, accompanied by engravings of them and instructions for their use. For this publication, styled by Sir John Herschel 'one of the most important and extensive works on that subject which has ever issued from the press' (Herschel, 216), he received, on 13 February 1829, the gold medal of the Astronomical Society. To that body he bequeathed the stock and plates of the work. The second volume of 'Practical Astronomy' drew heavily on some of the sixty-three articles which Pearson had previously contributed to Rees's 'Cyclopaedia'. His articles on horology in that work were reprinted in 1970. 
In 1831 Pearson was appointed to the new board of visitors to the Royal Greenwich Observatory, on which he served until his death. In 1830, assisted by a village mathematician named Ambrose Clarke, he began the reobservation and computation of 520 stars tabulated for occultations in his 'Practical Astronomy'. The resulting catalogue was presented to the Royal Astronomical Society on 11 June 1841. On 29 October 1835 he observed Halley's comet, and in 1839 he deduced from his own determinations a value for the obliquity of the ecliptic. Some improvements effected by him in Rochon's doubly refracting micrometer were claimed by Arago, but the accusation of plagiarism was satisfactorily refuted. 
On 22 February 1796, at Retford, Nottinghamshire, Pearson had married Frances Low ('b'. 1770), the second daughter of Robert Low of Lincoln, an ironmonger, with whom he had his only child, Frances, in 1797. They are depicted with Pearson and one of his planetary machines in an oil portrait by Thomas Phillips ('c'.1810). Following his wife's death in October 1831, about 1833, in Yorkshire, Pearson married Eliza Sarah, who appears to have been a widow many years his junior; she died in 1869. 
Pearson died at South Kilworth on 6 September 1847 and was buried in the churchyard there on 13 September. A tablet inscribed to his memory in the church testifies to his example as a clergyman, a magistrate, and a benefactor. Pearson had become a wealthy man. He owned land in Leicestershire, Oxfordshire, Northamptonshire, Warwickshire, and Westmorland. He left his land to his nephew William Pearson, the eldest surviving son of his elder brother John, and $12,000 in cash went to other relatives. 


@@@@@


doc= 21726


Peart, Charles (1759-1798), sculptor and wax modeller, was born on 22 December 1759 at English Newton, Monmouth. In 1778 he exhibited three wax models at the Royal Academy, from Mr Abington's, Paulin Street, Hanover Square, and showed portraits, made exclusively in this medium until 1782. In 1781 he entered the Royal Academy Schools as a sculptor, where the following year he was awarded a gold medal for a model, 'Hercules and Omphale'. 
Some time after leaving the RA Schools, Peart went to work as an assistant to the sculptor John Charles Lochee ('b'. 1751), who was employed by Wedgwood. The great manufacturer employed Lochee to model plaques from the collection of gems at Stowe, Buckinghamshire, in 1787. Peart too was at Stowe in 1788, where he seems to have been employed, independent of his former master, by Wedgwood. In a letter written directly to Wedgwood's agent, Mr Bierly, Peart apologized for the delay in completing the modelling he had been commissioned to carry out, apparently in conjunction with the history and decorative painter Vincenzo Valdre ('c'.1742-1814), as an earlier assignment and the 'marquis's' desire to take Valdre to Ireland with him in August, necessitated that they 'work 14 Hours in a Day and which Sir, at present puts it quite out of my power to attend to anything else' (2 June 1788, Trustees of the Wedgwood Museum, Barlaston, Staffordshire). Peart, like Lochee, modelled a number of portraits for Wedgwood, including those of Lord Hillsborough and William Chambers. 
Peart showed regularly at the Royal Academy throughout his life, from 1793 from a studio in New Road, close to the chief stoneyards. His exhibits from the late 1780s demonstrate a move towards larger scale, more monumental work and included designs for monuments, allegorical and classical friezes, and portrait busts. One of his first large commissions may have been obtained through the influence of his wife, Elizabeth ('b'. 1770/71), whose sister's husband, Mr Woodcock, worked for the East India Company. The monument to Lieutenant-Colonel John Campbell (died 1784), erected in St Thomas's Cathedral, Bombay, is conventional in its design, with life-size figures of death and hope either side of an urn on a tall pedestal; the monument is signed, although the date and circumstances of the commission have yet to be established. In 1791 Peart received what was probably his most important commission, that of the monument to Joseph Moorhouse, a colonel in the company's coast artillery, who was killed at the storming of the Pettah Gate of Bangalore; his death was also commemorated in a painting by Robert Home of 1793. Commissioned by the court of directors of the East India Company, following a general order of the Madras government in 1791, the monument in St Mary's Church, Madras, comprises a sarcophagus set on lion's feet (signed and dated by the sculptor, 7 March 1791) above which a relief portrait bust of Moorhouse, set in a medallion, is raised up by a cherub to the figure of Britannia to be crowned with a laurel. 
The only other recorded monument by Peart is that to John Finch at Dudley, Worcestershire. In 1792 he carved a statue of Henry V for his home town of Monmouth (above the shire hall) and in 1793 carved a marble chimney-piece for the marquess of Buckingham's house in Pall Mall. In spite of these larger scale commissions, Peart appears to have continued to work for Wedgwood. A letter dated 14 July 1794, again to Bierly, asks the agent to remit $20 on account, as 'at this time I have been laying in a large stock of stone to save the duty, which I am called on to pay of course immediately' (Trustees of the Wedgwood Museum, Barlaston, Staffordshire). 
Peart died in 1798, leaving his widow with a young child. Farington records that in September 1799 Peart's affairs were not yet settled, but that Mrs Peart expected to receive little as he was 'much in arrears to the parish of St Pancrass having rec'd. money as Parish Officer' (Farington, 'Diary', 4.1281, 24 Sept 1799). She remarried in 1804. 


@@@@@


doc= 21727


Peart, Edward (1755/6-1824), physician and writer on science and medicine, was an MD and a corresponding member of the London Medical Society. He practised for some time at Knightsbridge, but afterwards removed to Butterwick, near Gainsborough, Lincolnshire, where he wrote on numerous scientific topics. He was chiefly known for his works on physical and chemical theory, which involved him in polemics with the critical magazines. Although an acute critic of Lavoisier's chemical theories, he failed to grasp their theoretical scope or their experimental foundations, and hence his criticisms, though ingenious, ultimately proved unsound. 
In his first work, 'The Generation of Animal Heat' (1788), Peart explained all chemical and physical phenomena by assuming the existence of four elements -- aether, phlogiston, the acid principle, and earth. In the following year these were reduced to three, two active principles, aether and phlogiston, and one fixed. As he explained in his next book, 'On the Elementary Principles of Nature' (1789), when a fixed particle is surrounded by an atmosphere of particles of aether radiating from it in straight lines, it forms an earthy (alkaline) particle; a phlogiston atmosphere produces an acid particle. All actions 'at a distance', corresponding to the phenomena of electricity, magnetism, and gravitation, were explained by means of these 'atmospheres' in Peart's subsequent works, 'On Electricity' (1791), 'On the Properties of Matter' (1792), and 'On Electric Atmospheres... [with] a Letter to Mr. Read of Knightsbridge' (1793). He used the same principles to criticize the theory of Lavoisier in 'The antiphlogistic doctrine of M. Lavoisier critically examined... [with] strictures on Dr. Priestley's experiments' (1795) and 'On the Composition and Properties of Water' (1796). Peart was also identified as the publisher of the anonymously authored anti-Lavoisian satire, 'The Sceptic' (1800). 
The least speculative of Peart's books were those on physiology and medicine, to which he turned later in his career: 'Physiology' (1798), 'Practical Information on Malignant Scarlet Fever' (1802), 'Practical Information on St Anthony's Fire' (1802), 'Practical Information on Rheumatism' (1802), 'Practical Information on Inflammation of the Bowels' (1802), and 'On the Consumption of the Lungs' (1803). In 'Animal Heat' he had revived the idea of John Mayow that animal combustion takes place in the substance of the muscle and not in the lung, as Lavoisier thought. In the same book he saw clearly that the constant temperature of animals in exercise and at rest must be due to a correlation of various functions, and investigated the matter experimentally in a somewhat rough way. He expressed the view that 'excitability of the muscular fibres is the great characteristic of life in animals' ('Animal Heat', 91). In his medical works he showed himself untrammelled by the prevailing doctrines of his day, using simple drugs, and ascribing their beneficial effects to direct action on the diseased matter. Peart declared ('On the Composition of Water', 67), 'I write for amusement at my leisure hours', and, in the preface to 'Physiology' (1798, xiii), 'I have no expectation of making converts to my peculiar views'. He seems to have made none. From his writings, and in spite of his controversies, Peart appears as a man of kindly though erratic tendencies. In 'Physiology' and elsewhere he vigorously protested against the unnecessary vivisections of his time. 
Peart died at Butterwick in 1824, probably in November. 


@@@@@


doc= 21728


Pease, Edward (1767-1858), woollen manufacturer and railway promoter, born at Darlington on 31 May 1767, was the eldest son of Joseph Pease, woollen manufacturer, and his wife, Mary Richardson. A brother, Joseph (1772-1846), was one of the founders of the Peace Society in 1817, and a supporter of the Anti-Slavery Society, for which he wrote tracts in 1841 and 1842. Edward was educated at Leeds under Joseph Tatham the elder, and at the age of fifteen was placed in the woollen manufacturing business carried on by his father at Darlington. Pease married, on 30 November 1796, a fellow Quaker, Rachel, daughter of John Whitwell, of Kendal. They had five sons and three daughters. Rachel Pease died at Manchester on 18 October 1833. 
In 1809 Pease became interested in a scheme for improving navigation on the lower reaches of the River Tees, a project which eventually bore fruit as the Stockton and Darlington Railway, linking collieries in south-west Durham with the London coastal trade in competition with established interests on the Tyne and the Wear. In 1818 preliminary steps were taken to obtain parliamentary sanction for the proposed railway, but the bill was thrown out owing to the opposition of the duke of Cleveland, near one of whose fox-covers the line was to run. In 1819 a new route was proposed, and the measure received royal assent on 19 April 1821. 
Originally the railway was only intended to carry coal, and be drawn by horses; but in the spring of 1821 Pease recruited the Tyneside colliery engine-wright, George Stephenson, as engineer to the line. Stephenson was the foremost locomotive engineer of the day and it was due to his advocacy that Pease was persuaded of the efficiency of steam locomotive haulage on the projected railway. 
Pease's role as the driving force behind the Stockton and Darlington Railway project was facilitated by his status as a Quaker entrepreneur with extensive familial contacts within the Quaker banking community in Norwich and London. Following the opening of the railway in September 1825, intermarriage within the Quaker 'cousinhood', reinforced by intra-family share transfers, resulted in the Pease family's emergence as the leading stockholders in the railway. Thus, despite its status as a publicly quoted company the Stockton and Darlington Railway soon aspired to the standing of a family-run firm. 
Pease's role as provider of capital is well illustrated in his contribution to the founding of Robert Stephenson & Co. of Newcastle upon Tyne in 1823 as a purpose-built locomotive building establishment. Of the modest initial capital of $4000, $1600 was advanced by Pease, but he also loaned Robert Stephenson $500 towards his own subscription. 
Pease retired from active business life in 1833. He spent the remaining years of his life, as a notably 'plain' Quaker, consumed with guilt about his worldly riches and worrying incessantly about his sons' business speculations. He died of heart failure at his residence, Northgate, Darlington, on 31 July 1858. His relations with George Stephenson and his son Robert remained cordial to the end of his life. 
In his 'Lives of the Engineers', Samuel Smiles described Pease as 'a thoughtful and sagacious man, ready in resources, possessed of indomitable energy and perseverance'. His diaries were edited by his great-grandson Sir Alfred E. Pease in 1907. He was buried in the Quaker burial-ground, Skinnergate, Darlington. 
The second son of Edward and Rachel Pease, 
After the passing of the 'Reform Bill' in 1832, Joseph Pease was elected MP for South Durham, and retained the seat until his retirement in 1841. He was the first Quaker member to sit in the House of Commons, and on presenting himself on 8 February 1833 he refused to take the usual oath. A select committee was appointed to inquire into precedents, and on 14 February he was allowed to affirm ('Hansard 3', 15, 1833, 387, 639). As a 'worldly' Quaker, Joseph Pease was a frequent speaker on matters of social and political reform, always avoiding the use of titles when addressing the house, and retaining his Quaker dress. 
Joseph Pease married, on 20 March 1826, Emma (died 1860), daughter of Joseph Gurney of Norwich, and their surviving children comprised five sons and four daughters. Joseph Whitwell Pease (1828-1903), the eldest son, who was created a baronet on 18 May 1882, was MP for South Durham from 1865 to 1885, and subsequently for Barnard Castle. Arthur Pease (died 1898), the third son, was MP for Whitby from 1880 to 1885, and for Darlington from 1895. 
In addition to commercial and industrial issues, Joseph Pease devoted himself to philanthropic and educational work, aiding Joseph Lancaster, and acting as president of the Peace Society from 1860. Before 1865 he became totally blind, but, with the aid of his secretary, republished and distributed many Friends' books; and in 1870 he had the 'Essays on the Principles of Morality' of Jonathan Dymond translated into Spanish, for which service the government of Spain conferred on him (2 January 1872) the grand cross of Charles III. 
Joseph Pease died on 8 February 1872 at his Darlington home, Southend, from heart disease. He was buried in the Quaker burial-ground in Darlington on 10 February. At the time of his death Pease's industrial concerns employed nearly ten thousand men in collieries, quarries, and ironstone mines. In addition he owned and directed woollen manufactories and was a leading shareholder in Robert Stephenson & Co., of Newcastle upon Tyne, numerous Teesside ironmaking concerns, and in the Middlesbrough estate. 
Edward Pease's fifth son, 
Henry Pease married, on 25 February 1835, Anna, only daughter of Richard Fell of Uxbridge, who died on 27 October 1839, leaving a son, Henry Fell Pease, MP from 1885 for the Cleveland division of Yorkshire; second, on 19 January 1859, he married Mary, daughter of Samuel Lloyd of Wednesbury, with whom he had three sons and two daughters. 
Henry Pease was chairman of the first Darlington school board in 1871, first mayor of the town, and president of the Peace Society from 1872. In the early 1860s, when negotiations were in hand for a takeover of the Stockton and Darlington Railway by the North Eastern Railway Company (NER), Pease declared his opposition to the merger, in spite of the generous terms on offer to his family as leading shareholders in the Stockton and Darlington Railway. Following the takeover, however, Pease's sensibilities were overcome by his appointment as vice-chairman of the NER board. It was in that capacity that he presided over the railway jubilee held at Darlington on 27 September 1875, at which eighty British and thirty foreign railways were represented. He was always a prominent member of the Religious Society of Friends. He died at 23 Finsbury Square, London, while attending the yearly meeting, on 30 May 1881, and was buried in the Quaker burial-ground at Darlington on 2 June. 
Schools and a library were presented by members of the Pease family to Darlington, which benefited greatly from their benevolence until 1902, when the family fortunes were destroyed irrevocably as a result of the collapse of J. and J. W. Pease, the family counting house and banker to leading industrial enterprises in the north-east of England. 


@@@@@


doc= 21729


Henry Pease (1807-1881), Quaker railway company promoter, was born at Darlington on 4 May 1807. He also entered with enthusiasm into the railway projects of his father. His principal achievement was the opening in 1861 of the line across Stainmoor, called 'the backbone of England', the summit of which was 1374 feet above sea level. It joined at Tebay the London and North Western Railway (LNWR), and was soon extended at its eastern limit to Saltburn-on-Sea. In January 1854 Pease was deputed by the meeting for sufferings, held on the 17th of that month, to accompany Joseph Sturge and Robert Charleton as a deputation from the Society of Friends to Russia. On 10 February they were received by the emperor Nicholas, and presented him with a powerful address, urging him to abstain from the then imminent Crimean War. He received them politely, but their efforts were unavailing, and Alexander William Kinglake ridiculed their action in his history of the campaign, 'Invasion of the Crimea' (1863). Pease was MP for South Durham from 1857 to 1865. In 1867 he visited Napoleon III with a deputation from the Peace Society, but their request for permission to hold a peace congress during the Universal Exhibition in Paris was rejected. 


@@@@@


doc= 21730


Joseph Pease (1799-1872), Quaker railway company promoter and industrialist, was born at Darlington on 22 June 1799. Educated at Tatham's academy, Leeds, and Josiah Forster's academy, London, he subsequently aided his father in the projection of the Stockton and Darlington Railway, in 1819 and 1820 by preparing the company's first prospectus. He emerged as an influential voice in the management of the railway in 1828, when he took the lead in projecting an extension of the line from Stockton to the hamlet of Middlesbrough further down the Tees estuary. The effect of this development was twofold: first, to undermine the dominance of Tyne and Wear exporters in the London coastal market for coal; and, second, to lay the foundations for the emergence of Teesside as an outstanding centre for the production of iron. The latter was facilitated by Pease's in numerous railway projections in the north-east of England, all of them designed to open up the heavy mineral wealth of the region. 


@@@@@


doc= 21731


Peat, Thomas (1707/8-1780), lecturer on science and almanac editor, was born at Ashleyhay, near Wirksworth, Derbyshire, the son of a farmer. He soon showed an inclination for learning, which his father tried to repress. A brother, a joiner in Nottingham, to whom he became apprenticed, gave him no more encouragement. However, Cornelius Wildbore, a master dyer, who, like the Peats, regularly attended the Presbyterian High Pavement chapel, noticed him and enabled him to obtain books. 
Peat became a writing master and teacher of mathematics, scientific lecturer, and land surveyor in Nottingham. In 1740 he was one of the principal projectors, with John Badder, William Whitehead, and others, of the 'Gentleman's Diary, or, The Mathematical Repository', an annual almanac with literary and mathematical sections on similar lines to the 'Ladies' Diary'. Both Badder and Whitehead worked as surveyors with Peat. The first numbers, from 1741, were edited by Badder and had contributions from Peat; from 1749 to 1756 he was joint editor and on Badder's death in 1756 he became sole editor until his own death in 1780. His successor was the Revd Charles Wildbore, probably the son of his early patron. Subsequently Peat became anonymous editor of the 'Poor Robin' almanac; his share in it ceased some time before his death. 
Peat used the almanacs to advertise his services. About 1743 he projected a course of fourteen two-hour lectures at Nottingham on mechanics, hydrostatics, optics, pneumatics, astronomy, and the use of globes, possibly in association with William Griffis, who published a syllabus about 1746. Peat's undated syllabus was published at Nottingham, probably after 1753; the British Library copy has a manuscript note that the lectures were originally those of Griffis. 
In 1768, when he was living at Thringstone, Leicestershire, Peat proposed to publish a map of the county from his own survey; in 1771 he removed to adjacent Swannington, and in 1779 he returned to Nottingham. He died in Nottingham, at his house in Greyfriars' Gate, on 21 February 1780, aged seventy-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 21732


Pebody, Charles (1839-1890), newspaper editor, was born at Queen Street, Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, on 3 February 1839, the son of Charles Pebody, a household servant, and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Cory. His parents moved to Watford, Northamptonshire, from where the family had originated, and Pebody was sent to the village school, being taught privately by the schoolmaster afterwards. At the age of fourteen he went to London, where he joined a lawyer's office, but soon found work as a reporter, eventually joining the staff of the 'Chelmsford Chronicle'. At the age of twenty-one he was appointed editor of the 'Barnstaple Times' and at about the same time, on 22 August 1859, he married Mary Ann Martyn, the daughter of Henry Martyn, a bank clerk from Essex. They had one daughter. 
From Barnstaple Pebody moved to Exeter as editor of the 'Flying Post', and from Exeter to Bristol as editor of the 'Bristol Times and Mirror'. In 1875, when living in Bristol, Pebody won the prize of $50 offered by James Heywood for the best essay revision of the rubrics in the prayer book. His other works included 'Authors at Work' (1872) and 'English Journalism and the Men who have Made it' (1882). 
In 1882 Pebody was appointed editor of the 'Yorkshire Post', a Conservative daily paper published at Leeds, a position he held from 1 October. During his time as editor the paper rapidly grew in circulation and influence, and by the year of his death had become one of the most important and influential local newspapers. An enthusiastic journalist, Pebody was a member of the board of directors of the Press Association and a member of the Yorkshire Newspaper Society, and was elected president of the West Riding district of the national Institute of Journalists by the working journalists of west Yorkshire at an annual meeting. 
In 1888 Pebody suffered internal pain, supposedly from gout in the stomach, but after six months' rest he resumed work and organized a new evening paper. He died at his home, Towerhurst, 20 De Grey Terrace, Leeds, on 30 October 1890, survived by his wife; he was buried on 3 November in Lawnswood cemetery. Doctors diagnosed that he died from a malignant ulcer in the stomach. 


@@@@@


doc= 21733


Peche, Richard (d. 1182), bishop of Coventry, was almost certainly the son of Bishop Robert Peche ['see under 'Limesey, Robert de], who occupied that see from 1121 to 1126. He was made archdeacon of Coventry, presumably the most lucrative of the archdeaconries of the see at that time, probably by his father, but there are no certain references to him as archdeacon before about 1140. There were obviously objections to his elevation in 1161, as the son of a priest, to the episcopate; indeed, in a famous passage concerning him, written near the end of the twelfth century, the chronicler Ralph de Diceto was moved to quote at length from Ivo of Chartres to justify the appointment of the son of a priest as a bishop. The fourteenth-century chronicle of Lichfield Cathedral, once attributed to Thomas Chesterfield, records a tradition that Bishop Richard's election met with universal acclaim. In reality this probably meant that neither the monks of Coventry nor the canons of Lichfield were actually opposed to his appointment (there had been disputes during and following the election of his predecessor, Bishop Walter Durdene). Whether Richard was a protege of the king, or merely a local man too strong to be ignored, is uncertain, but the chronicler also claims that he was elected 'voluntate regis Henrici mediante' ('by the intervention of King Henry's will') (Wharton, 1.435). The sources disagree as to whether he was consecrated, on 18 April 1161, by Archbishop Theobald, or by Walter, bishop of Rochester (died 1182); it is clear, however, that the former was so near to death at that time that he might well have been too ill to perform the ceremony of consecration. Bishop Richard's place in the Becket dispute is by no means clear: David Knowles, vexed by Richard's apparent escapism in what he perceived as the church's time of peril, wrote icily of him as a man of no consequence. It seems, however, that he was a most active diocesan, and, although this may have been initially a papal initiative, he was concerned particularly to restore the finances of the church of Lichfield. The Lichfield Cathedral cartulary contains ten relevant charters of Bishop Richard's, some in favour of the common fund, some the precentorship, and some the deanery. Richard seems to have been a man of fairly conventional piety and was remembered, erroneously as it happens, as the founder of the Augustinian house in Stafford dedicated to the memory of St Thomas, to which he retired, having become a canon, shortly before his death on 6 or 7 October 1182. 


@@@@@


doc= 21734


Pechell, Sir George Richard Brooke, fourth baronet (1789-1860), naval officer, was born in London on 30 June 1789. He was the second son of Major-General Sir Thomas Brooke Pechell, second baronet (1753-1826), MP for Downton, Wiltshire, and his wife, Charlotte (died 1841), second daughter of Lieutenant-General Sir John Clavering. He was the younger brother of Sir Samuel John Brooke Pechell. Pechell entered the navy in 1803, served in the 'Triumph' in the fleet off Toulon under Nelson in 1804, and afterwards in the 'Medusa', at the capture of the Spanish treasureships off Cape St Mary on 5 October. In 1806 he was in the 'Revenge' off Brest and Rochfort, and in 1809 in the 'Barfleur' in the Tagus. On 25 June 1810 he was promoted lieutenant of the 'Caesar', from which he was moved in 1811 to the 'Macedonian', and in 1812 to the 'San Domingo', commanded by his brother, and flagship of his uncle, Sir John Borlase Warren, on the North American station. By Warren he was appointed to the acting command of the brig 'Colibri', and afterwards of the 'Recruit', in both of which he cruised with some success on the coast of North America. On 30 May 1814 he was promoted commander, and in May 1818 commissioned the brig-sloop 'Belette' (18 guns) for the Halifax station, where he enforced the treaty stipulations on the fisheries. 
In October 1820 Pechell was appointed by Rear-Admiral Griffith to the command of the frigate 'Tamar' which, being very sickly, had come north from Jamaica, and had lost her captain and a large proportion of her officers and men. The commander-in-chief on the Jamaica station, however, claimed the vacancy, and the matter being referred to the Admiralty, all the promotions were disallowed, and Pechell returned to the 'Belette'. While in the 'Tamar' he had obtained the authority of the Haitian government for stopping piracy by vessels claiming to be Haitian, and for searching all suspected vessels. He captured a large brigantine, with a crew of ninety-eight men, and forged commissions from different South American states. On 26 December 1822 Pechell was promoted captain. 
Pechell married, on 1 August 1826, Katherine Annabella Bisshopp (died 1871), daughter and coheir of the twelfth Lord de la Zouche; they had one son and two daughters. In July 1830 he was nominated gentleman usher of the privy chamber, and in April 1831 became equerry to Queen Adelaide. From January 1835 until his death he was whig MP for Brighton, taking an active part in public affairs, and especially in questions relating to the navy, mercantile marine, and fisheries. He favoured vote by ballot and a system of national education for all sects, and voted against church rates. On the death of his brother, on 3 November 1849, he succeeded to the baronetcy, and took the additional surname of Brooke. He became a rear-admiral on the retired list on 17 December 1852, and vice-admiral on 5 January 1858. He died at his house, 27 Hill Street, Berkeley Square, London, on 29 June 1860. As his son had predeceased him, the baronetcy passed to his cousin, George Samuel Pechell. 


@@@@@


doc= 21735


Pechell, Sir Paul, first baronet (1724-1800), army officer, the second son of Jacob Pechell (1679-1750), army officer, and his wife, Jane, daughter of John Boyd, was born at Owenstown, co. Kildare, on 12 November 1724. His father, Jacob, served in the British army and adopted the war office spelling Pechell. His grandfather, Samuel de Pechels (1644-1720), sieur de la Boissade, a native of Montauban, Languedoc, France, was ejected from his estate following Louis XIV's revocation of the edict of Nantes in October 1685. In a brief narrative (printed in 'Sussex Archaeological Collections', 26.116) he related how, after the 'missionary' dragoons entered Montauban, he was imprisoned at Cahors, and in 1687 taken to Montpellier, whence he was transported to the French West Indies. He escaped from St Domingo to Jamaica in 1688 and, after many hardships, reached England that autumn. His wife escaped separately, but his mother and youngest sister remained imprisoned in France. In August 1689 he accompanied William III to Ireland as a lieutenant in Schomberg's Huguenot regiment, and in January 1690 William -- who valued Huguenot officers -- granted him a pension. He subsequently acquired the estate of Owenstown, co. Kildare, died at Dublin in 1720, and was buried in St Anne's Church there. 
Paul Pechell entered the army as cornet-en-second in the Royal regiment of dragoons (1st dragoons) on 17 March 1744. He was promoted captain in Brigadier-General Fleming's regiment (36th foot), later 2nd battalion, Worcestershire regiment, on 12 December 1746. At the beginning of 1747 the 36th embarked at Gravesend to join the army of the duke of Cumberland in Flanders. Pechell was at operations near the frontiers of Holland, which led to the battle of Lauffeld or Val, near Maastricht, on 2 July 1747. His regiment lost two officers, two sergeants, and twenty-two rank and file, and he was among the wounded. He received from the duke of Cumberland 'the greatest commendation' ('London Gazette', 27 July 1747). 
After the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle on 7 October 1748, the establishment of the regiment was reduced on its return to England, and Pechell was gazetted captain in the 3rd dragoon guards on 31 May 1751. In the spring of 1752 the regiment escorted George II to Harwich, whence the king embarked for Hanover, and for the next three years the regiment was on coast duty suppressing smuggling in Suffolk, Essex, and Devon and patrolling against highway robbers. Pechell was gazetted guidon and captain in the second troop of the Horse Grenadier Guards (later the 2nd Life Guards) on 25 November 1754, lieutenant and captain on 5 July 1755, major on 7 February 1759, and lieutenant-colonel on 20 January 1762. 
Pechell retired from the service on 24 June 1768, receiving a lump sum for his commission. He had married, on 11 February 1752, Mary (died October 1800), only daughter and heir of Thomas Brooke, of Paglesham, Essex, and they had two sons and five daughters. He was created a baronet on 1 March 1797, and died, possibly at Paglesham, on 13 January 1800. His eldest son, Major-General Sir Thomas Brooke Pechell, second baronet (1753-1826), was father of Rear-Admiral Sir Samuel John Brooke Pechell, third baronet (1785-1849), and of Admiral Sir George Richard Brooke Pechell, fourth baronet (1789-1860). 


@@@@@


doc= 21736


Pechell, Sir Samuel John Brooke, third baronet (1785-1849), naval officer and politician, born on 1 September 1785 in Ireland, belonged to a French family which settled in Ireland after the revocation of the edict of Nantes. He was the eldest son of Major-General Sir Thomas Brooke Pechell, second baronet, and his wife, Charlotte, daughter of Lieutenant-General Sir John Clavering; he was brother of Sir George Richard Brooke Pechell, and nephew of Admiral Sir John Borlase Warren. Under Warren's care he entered the navy on board the 'Pomone' in July 1796. In August 1797 he was moved into the 'Phoebe', with Captain Robert Barlow, and was present at the capture of the 'Nereide' on 21 December 1797, and of the 'Africaine' on 5 March 1800, two of the most brilliant frigate actions of the war. Barlow, who had been knighted, was next moved into the 'Triumph', and Pechell followed him, until in February 1803 he was appointed acting lieutenant of the 'Active', a promotion confirmed by the Admiralty on 1 April. In January 1806 he joined his uncle's flagship, the 'Foudroyant', and in her was present at the capture of the 'Marengo' and 'Belle Poule' on 13 March. On 23 March 1807 he was promoted to the command of the sloop 'Ferret' on the Jamaica station, and on 16 June 1808 was posted to the frigate 'Cleopatra' (38 guns), in which on 22 January 1809 he engaged the 40-gun French frigate 'Topaze', at anchor under a battery at Pointe-Noire in Guadeloupe. The battery had, however, only one effective gun, and the 'Topaze', having sustained great loss, struck her colours when, after forty minutes, the frigate 'Jason' and the sloop 'Hazard' joined the 'Cleopatra'. The disparity of force at the close of the action necessarily dimmed its brilliance, but Pechell's judgement in placing the 'Cleopatra' so as to render the enemy's fire ineffective was deservedly commended. He afterwards took part in the reduction of Martinique. In October 1810 he was moved into the 'Guerriere', but returned to the 'Cleopatra' in July 1811, and commanded her in the North Sea, on the coast of France, and at Gibraltar. 
In December 1812 Pechell was appointed to the 'San Domingo', his uncle's flagship, as commander-in-chief on the coast of North America, and in her returned to England in June 1814. He was nominated a CB in June 1815, and in July 1823 commissioned the frigate 'Sybille' for service in the Mediterranean, where, in 1824, she formed part of the squadron off Algiers, under Sir Harry Burrard Neale, and was afterwards employed in preventing piracy, or the semi-piratical attempts of the Greek provisional government, near the Morea. 
The 'Sybille' was paid off in November 1826, and Pechell, having, by the death of his father, succeeded to the baronetcy on 17 June 1826, took the additional surname of Brooke, in conformity with the will of his grandmother, the only daughter and heir of Thomas Brooke of Paglesham in Essex. He married, on 15 April 1833, Julia Maria (died 6 Sept 1844), daughter of the ninth Baron Petre. They had no children. He had no further service afloat, but from 1830 to 1834, and again from 1839 to 1841, was a lord of the Admiralty. He was in parliament as member for Hallestone in 1830, and for Windsor in 1833. He attained the rank of rear-admiral on 9 November 1846, and died on 3 November 1849. The title passed to his brother, George Richard Brooke Pechell. 
Pechell was one of the few officers of his time to recognize the immense importance of speed and precision in the aiming and firing of guns. Following the plan of Captain Philip Broke in the 'Shannon', he carried out, when in command of the 'San Domingo', systematic exercise and target practice, by which he obtained results then considered remarkable. In the 'Sybille' he followed a similar method, again with results far superior to anything before known. 
Pechell wrote a valuable pamphlet, 'Observations upon the Defective Equipment of Ships' Guns', first published in 1812 (3rd edn 1828). In combination with Sir Howard Douglas and Sir William Bowles he prepared the way for the establishment in 1830 of the 'Excellent' gunnery training ship, under George Smith. Shortly afterwards he became a junior lord of the Admiralty at the insistence of William IV, another gunnery enthusiast, and was in a position to secure the permanence of the ship in 1832. He was also influential in the decision to appoint Sir William Symonds as surveyor of the navy. Recognizing that improved gunnery alone was of limited value, he supported larger and faster ships. A royal favourite and a wealthy man, Pechell was one of the architects of the professional navy of the later nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 21737


Pechey, John (bap. 1654, d. 1718), physician, the elder son of William Pechey (died 1702), a practitioner of physic and surgery, was baptized on 11 December 1654 in Chichester, Sussex. Pechey matriculated at New Inn Hall, Oxford, on 22 March 1672, took his BA on 29 November 1675, and obtained his MA on 10 June 1678. An undated handbill of his, perhaps from the mid-1680s, advertised his move from 'Chequer-yard, near Dowgate, to Queen Street, near Cheapside', London, where he could be seen every day from nine to one o'clock, charging no more than 1's'., and offering free advice to the poor of his parish. From mid-October to mid-December 1684 he took the three-part examination of the Royal College of Physicians, and was awarded its licentiate on 22 December. On 12 August 1687 he signed a contract joining with four other licentiates of the college in a five-year lease on a property known as the Golden Angel and Crown in King's Street, London (the 'repository'), where they collected a stock of drugs and saw patients by turns. At the same time, each continued his private practice. They advertised by distributing handbills and by printing the jointly authored 'Oracle for the Sick' (1687), which contained a series of medical questions with answers: the patient could circle or fill in the appropriate answers, send in the pamphlet, and get a diagnosis and medicines in the return post. Pechey also circulated handbills saying that 'the sick may have advice for nothing. And approved medicines at reasonable rates', and giving his address as the Angel and Crown in King's Street. When the lease on the repository practice ran out, about September 1692, Pechey moved to the Angel and Crown in Basing Lane, from where he circulated advertisements for pills to cure the French pox and scurvy: the pills could be taken at any time and 'hinder no business'. He also advertised in the 'Athenian Mercury' in November 1693, and probably in other papers as well. From the start the censors of the Royal College of Physicians disliked the repository practice and its members, and from 15 November 1688 Pechey was personally named as needing to be disciplined for his advertising. The censors first warned him; when he continued to publish his announcements and refused to take down the sign over his door advertising his practice, he was fined $4. In the legal confusion following the revolution of 1688 Pechey simply refused to pay the fine. But from January 1690 to February 1694 Pechey and the censors engaged in battles, sometimes in court, over his behaviour, and unpaid dues and fines. His battles led to new attempts to discipline the members of the college generally. 
About the time that Pechey had joined the college, he had begun to translate some of Thomas Sydenham's works into English. Since Sydenham, too, held the rank of licentiate, Pechey probably met him no later than 1684, during the process of joining the college. It is probable that Pechey had the tacit support of Sydenham in publishing, in the autumn of 1686, the first part of his 'Collections of Acute Diseases', which translated Sydenham's work on smallpox and measles. The next two parts (1688) and parts four and five (1691) were also mainly translations from Sydenham; they were gathered together and issued by Henry Bonwick in 1691 with a single title page as 'Collections of Acute Diseases, in Five Parts'. This was quickly followed by Pechey's 'A Collection of Chronical Diseases' (1693), which, apart from the first chapter, was again from Sydenham. Pechey quickly followed with 'Promptuarium praxeos medicae' (1693), with chapters on diseases and their cures listed alphabetically; 'The London Dispensatory' (1694), a guide to useful medicines; and 'The Compleat Herbal of Physical Plants' (1694), which contained directions for using simples and for making compounds. In these works, published during his disputes with the officers of the college, Pechey made plain his advocacy of clinical experience. In the preface to 'The London Dispensatory', he lambasted 'the vain fictions of a sort of men, whose business it is, to make every part of [medicine] obscure and misterious'; in 'The Store-House of Physical Practice' (a rearranged translation of his 'Promptuarium', brought out in early 1695), he wrote that 'plain Practice must expect but cold Entertainment with the speculative Physician', and that 'Reason and Argument are not the true Tests of Physick, nor indeed of any thing else, when Experience, the great Baffler of Speculation, can determine the Matter'. He continued to promote the 'practical medicine' of Sydenham, and issued 'The Whole Works' of Sydenham in English (drawing on his earlier translations and adding the rest) in 1696. He continued with five more English medical collections brought out between 1696 and 1698. Almost all Pechey's works ended with an advertisement for his pills. 
In 1695 Pechey was listed as living in the parish of St Mary Aldermary, with his wife, Ann, a daughter, Ann, and two sons, Joseph and Whitlock. About Michaelmas of 1706 he moved to a corner of Robin Hood's Court, Bow Lane. He made out his will on 30 July 1718, naming a nephew, Francis, as well as the rest of the family, and was buried on 21 August 1718 in St Mary Aldermary. His eldest son later advertised that he was selling Pechey's pills from his house in Robin Hood's Court, carrying on his father's legacy. 
In all likelihood, the 


@@@@@


doc= 21738


Peck, Francis (1692-1743), antiquary, was born in the parish of St John the Baptist in Stamford, Lincolnshire, on 4 May 1692, the younger son of Robert Peck, merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth Jephson. Nothing else is known regarding his parents or his siblings. He was educated at Charterhouse School and then at St John's College, Cambridge, from where he graduated BA in 1716 and MA in 1727. His first publication, a 'hymn to the creator of the world' -- a defence of the holy scripture -- was published in 1716. He took holy orders and was ordained deacon (1715) and priest (1716) in the Church of England, becoming curate of King's Cliffe, Northamptonshire, in August 1719. In the same year he married Anne Curtis (died 'c'.1758), possibly the daughter of Edward Curtis, with whom he had three children, Francis (1720-1749), Thomas (who died in childhood), and Anne (1731-1793). In 1723 he purchased for $400 the living of Goadby Marwood in Leicestershire from Samuel Lowe MP, who was then lord of the manor and patron of the advowson. In 1736 he also obtained the prebendal stall of Marston St Lawrence in Lincoln Cathedral. 
Peck lived at the rectory in Goadby Marwood for the rest of his life, and from there dedicated himself to his pastoral duties and his antiquarian and literary studies. His principal interests were in the history and antiquities of the local area -- Lincolnshire, Leicestershire, and Rutland -- and the political and literary history of seventeenth-century England. In 1721 he published his first proposals for printing the history and antiquities of the town of Stamford, which resulted in his first major publication, 'Academia tertia Anglicana, or, The Antiquarian Annals of Stanford' (1727). As was not uncommon for such antiquarian works, Peck published all his books at his own expense. Dedicated to John Manners, duke of Rutland, it included a history of that family together with histories of the short-lived university, and the monasteries, guilds, churches, chapels, hospitals, and schools of the town. In the six years spent producing this work he ran into a vitriolic argument with 
Peck was elected a member of the Society of Antiquaries on 9 March 1732, and he corresponded with some of the leading antiquaries of his day, including Hearne, Willis, Thomas Wotton, and Zachary Grey. In 1732 he published the first section of his illustrated 'Desiderata curiosa, or, A collection of divers scarce and curious pieces, relating chiefly to matters of English history', the work for which he became best known. A second volume appeared in 1735, and his complete catalogue of discourses 'written both for and against Popery' during the reign of James II also appeared in that year. William Cole wrote of Peck: 'Had he lived longer we might have had many more curious pieces of antiquity, which he seems to have been in possession of; but the chief and great failing of this gentleman seemed to be an eager desire to publish as little in one volume as he could, in order to eke out his collection. His 'Desiderata Curiosa' is full of curious things, but he has so disjointed, mangled, and new-sentenced all of them, and what with detached books, chapters, and heads of the chapters, that, in endeavouring to be more than ordinarily clear, he has become at many times quite the reverse. (BL, Add. MS 5833, fol. 176)' Peck's chaotic and verbose style was likewise criticized by a later historian of Stamford, William Harrod, who nevertheless relied upon Peck's diligent work in 'The Antiquarian Annals of Stanford' for his own study. While Harrod considered Peck to be 'the only writer on this town who deserves the name of antiquary... I own it is the most unpleasant book of that kind I ever sat down to, merely through his ill chosen method, his abrupt departure from his subject, and his joining of long trifles, without any breaks to things of importance. (Harrod, 1.iii-iv)' In 1740 Peck published miscellaneous pieces on the lives of Oliver Cromwell and John Milton, as well as a catalogue of the several editions of Shakespeare's writings, and critical and explanatory notes. According to John Nichols, who had a more positive view of Peck's work than either Cole or Harrod, as these last were published 'at a period when that species of Criticism had not arrived to the perfection it has since attained by the united labours and genius of several successive and learned Commentators, [they] deserve particular commendation. He seems indeed to have first pointed out the mode [of criticism], which has since been successfully pursued. (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 1.513)' Thomas Seccombe in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' also described these critical notes as 'remarkable, as being perhaps the first attempts made to illustrate their writings by extracts from contemporary writers, in accordance with the method subsequently followed by Steevens and Malone'. However, Peck's off-hand attitude to historical veracity appears in an anecdote related by George Vertue, who informed Peck that the print of Milton he wished to use as the frontispiece to his book on the poet was very probably spurious. Vertue later recollected Peck's reply: ''I'll have a scraping from it however, and let posterity settle the matter'' ('Appendix to the Memoirs of Thomas Hollis', 513). When Peck's last published work appeared he still had in completed manuscript form 'no less than nine different works, but whether he had not met with encouragement for those which he had already produced, or whether he was rendered incapable of executing them by reason of his declining health, is uncertain, none of them, however, ever were made public. (F. Peck, 'Desiderata curiosa', 1759, preface, x)' Peck died on 9 July 1743, of unknown cause; the only comment comes from Stukeley, who informed Roger Gale: 'Poor Peck is dead, and made a sad exit, being not quite 'compos mentis'' (Stukeley to Gale, 6 Aug 1743; 'Family Memoirs', 80.431). He was buried in the choir of Goadby Marwood church. At his death Peck left unfinished his 'Natural history and antiquities of Leicestershire', the manuscript of which was bought by Sir Thomas Cave. It passed on to John Nichols, who made use of it in his 'History and Antiquities of the County of Leicestershire' (4 vols., 1795-1815). The five quarto manuscript volumes of his 'Monasticon Anglicanum volumen quartum' to which Hearne had referred were also purchased by Cave. They were presented to the British Museum in 1779, where they were utilized by numerous antiquaries and county historians, and subsequent editors of Dugdale. Other numerous unfinished manuscripts included the history and antiquities of Rutland; the history and antiquities of Grantham; 'The annals of Stamford' continued; a third volume of 'Desiderata curiosa'; biographical notes on the life of the seventeenth-century politician and theologian Nicholas Ferrar of Little Gidding (which formed the bulk of Peter Peckard's 'Memoirs of the Life of Mr Nicholas Ferrar', 1790) and of William and Robert Burton (author of 'The Anatomy of Melancholy'), and the lives of various other eminent local families and figures. Nichols reflected that Peck had lived 'a laborious, and, it may be affirmed, an useful life, wholly devoted to antiquarian pursuits' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 1.520). 


@@@@@


doc= 21739


Peck, James (b. 1773, d. in or after 1824), composer and music publisher, was born in London in 1773 and was perhaps (judging from several references in the 'Gentleman's Magazine') a member of a family of printers and booksellers residing at York and Hull. A musician named Peck, aged 100, died at Bath on 5 February 1784, but a connection with James cannot be established. Peck worked in London. His glee 'Kisses' was published by Preston about 1798; others, notably 'Love and Sparkling Wine' (1796) and 'Hail, Britannia', were printed by himself at Westmorland Buildings, Aldersgate Street. From about 1802 he was based at 47 Lombard Street, from where he issued most of his publications, but by December 1824 he was at 52 Paternoster Row. Among his other works, many of which were for use by the Methodist church, were 'Two Hundred and Fifty Psalm Tunes' (1798?), 'Peck's Collection of Hymn Tunes, Fugues & Odes' (1799-1800), 'Soft be the Gently Breathing Notes' (1803), 'Peck's Miscellaneous Collection of Sacred Music' (1805-15), 'The Vocal Preceptor, or, A Concise Introduction to Singing' (5th edn, 'c'.1810), 'The Flute Preceptor', 'Advice to a Young Composer, or, Short Essay on Vocal Harmony' (1811), 'Sacred Gleanings, or, Hymn Tunes Adapted for Two Flutes', and 'Peck's Beauties of Sacred Harmony, or, Vocalist's Pocket Book' (1824?). 'Peck's Pocket Arrangement, or, General Collection of Psalm and Hymn Tunes with Interludes' (3 vols., 1833?) was published by his son John Peck, the organist at St Faith's, in conjunction with another son, James Peck junior. John Peck's 'The Union Tune Book, being a collection of psalm and hymn tunes, adapted for use in Sunday schools and congregations' appeared in 1837. In 1850 James Peck's business, which John Peck had taken over, was based at 44 Newgate Street. Peck's death has not been traced. 


@@@@@


doc= 21740


Peckard, Peter (bap. 1717, d. 1797), dean of Peterborough, was baptized on 2 November 1717 at St Margaret in the Close, Lincoln, the son of the Revd John Peckard (1689?-1765) of Welbourn, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Mary (died 1786/7). In his youth he lost an arm in a shooting accident. He matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 20 July 1734, and proved to be a lively undergraduate: he was twice obliged to atone for misdemeanours by public penance on his knees in the college hall. Peckard graduated BA in 1738, proceeded MA in 1742, and became scholaris, or probationary fellow, in 1744. He was ordained deacon on 22 September 1745, and priested on 25 May 1746, by the bishop of Lincoln. On 26 February 1746 he had been instituted to the vicarage of St Martin's, Lincoln, which he held until 1750. From about 1752 to 1760 he was curate of King's Ripton, near Huntingdon. 
On 13 June 1755 Peckard married Martha (1729-1805), accounted a local beauty, daughter of Edward Ferrar, a Huntingdon attorney and descendant of Nicholas Ferrar of the Little Gidding community. In 1760 Peckard was appointed rector of Fletton, near Peterborough, through the patronage of Lord Careysfort of the local Proby family, and to the vicarage of Yaxley nearby, a crown living. This pluralism required a dispensation from Thomas Secker, archbishop of Canterbury, who disapproved of Peckard's unorthodoxy as a 'mortalist' denying any intermediate state of consciousness between death and the Judgement. Before giving his assent Secker subjected him to rigorous examination in Latin and humiliatingly exacted his signature to four articles which constituted a partial retraction. 
For a number of years Peckard combined his parochial responsibilities with those of army chaplaincy, and the 'Army List' shows him on the strength of the 16th foot from 1755 to 1766, and of the Grenadier Guards from 1766 to 1782, though he evidently held leave of absence for much of the time. In the mess he was reckoned a convivial companion. He held prebends at Lincoln Cathedral from 1774 and Southwell Minster from 1777. In 1777 Peckard vacated Yaxley and was appointed to the rectory of Tansor, Northamptonshire, which he held until 1793. From 1781 until his death he was master of Magdalene College, Cambridge. He was appointed vice-chancellor of Cambridge University in 1784, created DD in 1785, and in 1792 was appointed dean of Peterborough. He was rector of Abbot's Ripton, Huntingdonshire, from 1793 to 1797. 
While a Huntingdonshire curate Peckard incorporated in 1753 as a Cambridge MA, and became associated with the informal circle of liberal Anglican divines who helped make the university a citadel of mid-century latitudinarianism. Propagating his beliefs in a number of tracts and sermons, he covered some of his more heterodox views by a veil of prudent ambiguity or anonymity. Peckard was devout in his way, far from being a deist and bitterly critical of scoffers or sceptics like David Hume, yet his commitment to the principles of 'sola scriptura' and private judgement led him to break with contemporary orthodoxy on several dogmas, including the Trinity, which he saw as a speculative opinion grafted onto the faith by subtle Platonizers. Like some of his friends, he demanded a 'further reformation' of the church to make its teachings and liturgy more consonant with the simple rule of life set out in scripture, and thus more defensible against sceptical attack. He strongly criticized the way in which assent to doctrinal confessions ('human impositions') was made a test of orthodoxy. In 1772, however, he did not sign the Feathers tavern petition to parliament demanding an end to obligatory subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', though he warmly endorsed the principle. He was keenly interested in the last judgment -- which he believed might come in 2016 -- and in God's providential judgement of states and nations in this world. Though his theological views were never set out systematically, they can be pieced together from his various publications, particularly from 'Subscription, or, Historical Extracts' (1776). 
Peckard was strongly committed to whiggish principles of civil and religious liberty. He had a high view of natural rights, government by consent, liberty of conscience, and the need for the periodic review of human institutions. His earliest publication was a defence of the Jewish naturalization bill of 1753. By the early 1780s the focus of his political attention had moved to the anti-slavery cause, of which he became an eloquent supporter. Preaching the university sermon in Cambridge in 1784 he denounced the slave trade as a 'sin against the light of nature, and the accumulated evidence of divine Revelation' (Peckard, 'Piety', 6). As vice-chancellor in 1785 he set the legitimacy of slavery as the theme of the senior bachelors' Latin essay prize: it was won by Thomas Clarkson, who was thus set on his abolitionist career. Peckard's pamphlet demolishing notions of African inferiority, 'Am I not a Man and a Brother?' (1788), may have launched the phrase as an anti-slavery slogan. He was a patron of Olaudah Equiano, the African-born abolitionist. 
It was probably during his military service that he became a friend of Sir John Griffin Griffin, later Lord Howard de Walden, whose inheritance of Audley End gave him the right to appoint Peckard as master of Magdalene College. An advanced liberal, Peckard arrived in 1781 to head a college which had become an early haven for evangelicalism in the university. Yet the new master did not clash with the evangelical fellows. He saw eye to eye with them on the slavery issue and like them regarded the college 'not as a place of dissipation and expense but of economy and education' (Forbes, 246). Following the associationist psychology of John Locke and David Hartley, Peckard believed in the malleability of the human personality, and saw education as a vital means of social progress. Under his aegis Magdalene flourished, producing a stream of university prize-winners, missionaries, and evangelical leaders. A firm master, he stabilized the college finances, increased admissions, and maintained discipline. He was a major college benefactor, leaving lands and money to augment stipends and fund two open Ferrar scholarships in memory of his wife's family. Peckard compiled 'Memoirs of Nicholas Ferrar' (1790). 
In 1792 came Peckard's advancement to the deanery of Peterborough. His chapter grumbled at his refusal to provide them more than one annual dinner. In 1795, when old and infirm, he managed to deliver a sombre fast sermon in the cathedral, demanding peace with France and warning that the continuance of the slave trade would amplify God's present judgements on the nation. He died of cancer on 8 December 1797, having imprudently cut off a facial wen which hampered his shaving. He was buried in Peterborough Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 21741


Pecke, Thomas (b. 1637, d. in or after 1664), epigrammatist, was born at Wymondham, Norfolk, the son of James Pecke of Wymondham. His mother's maiden name was Talbot. He was educated at Norwich School, under Thomas Lovering, the recipient of one of his epigrams. He matriculated at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, on 3 October 1655; his tutor was William Naylor. He apparently left without a degree. He was admitted to the Inner Temple on 22 June 1657 and called to the bar on 12 February 1664. His uncle Thomas Pecke of Spixworth funded Thomas at university, but he withdrew his support when his nephew refused to travel to France; presumably his uncle wanted him to complete his education at a French academy (Pecke, 'Parnassi', 175). 
Pecke was a friend of Francis Osborne, the author of 'Advice to a Son', and when Osborne was attacked by John Heydon, in his 'Advice to a Daughter', Pecke replied with a pamphlet entitled 'Advice to Balaam's Ass, or, Momus Catechised' (1658). The second edition of 'Advice to a Daughter' (1659) includes a vituperative attack on Pecke, who is accused of having written 'a Dialogue of Polygamy'. This is a reference to 'A Dialogue of Polygamy', published in 1657, translated from the work by Bernardino Ochino; it bears a dedicatory epistle to Francis Osborne, and there would seem to be little doubt that Pecke was indeed the translator. 
Although Pecke was training as a lawyer, poetry was his preferred study; as he wrote in 'Balaam's Ass', 'I am none of the Greatest Stranger to Latin and English Poetry' (Pecke, 'Balaam's Ass', 12). In 1658 he published an elegy on John Cleveland, which was, according to his own account, received with plaudits (Pecke, 'Parnassi', sig. A3). In 1659 he published 'Parnassi puerperium' ('The childbed of Parnassus'), a collection of English epigrams which includes translations of Latin epigrams from John Owen and Sir Thomas More, and also of Martial's epigrams, describing the rarities to be seen at Rome. It also includes original epigrams on the twelve Caesars, and another set of epigrams in which Pecke addresses friends and mentors, or draws himself to the attention of prospective patrons. The collection is prefaced by commendatory Latin verses by Payne Fisher. Some of the poems printed as Pecke's were, in fact, composed by the printer James Cottrell, such as the epigram addressed to James Howell, who is described as the poet's adopted uncle. Pecke held that 'if a poem be good, it consists of nothing else, but various Epigrams; cemented by a dexterous sagacity' (ibid., sig. A3). Pecke also wrote satires, but in spite of his promise to publish them, they were never to appear in print. The first of Pecke's epigrams is addressed to Richard Cromwell, the lord protector; he is compared to Augustus and his father to Julius Caesar, while Pecke hopes that he will prove his Maecenas. Pecke's last publication was a 'Heroick Poem', a pamphlet of fourteen pages, published the following year, in celebration of the Restoration. There is a portrait of Pecke facing the title-page of 'Parnassi puerperium', below which Latin verses assert optimistically that he is the greatest ornament of a distinguished family whose pen will win him eternal fame. 


@@@@@


doc= 21742


Peckham, Sir Edmund (b. in or before 1495, d. 1564), administrator, was the second son of Peter Peckham of London and his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Eburton of London. His father also acquired property at Denham in Buckinghamshire, while by 1516 Edmund had married Anne (died 1570), daughter of John Cheyne of Chesham Bois in the same county. He held a succession of offices related to government finance, beginning as a clerk in the counting house; in that capacity he accompanied Henry VIII to Gravelines in July 1520. In January 1524 he was promoted to be cofferer of the royal household, with joint responsibility for payment of household expenses and keeping its accounts. His further appointment in 1526 to the position of clerk of the green cloth brought additional responsibilities in the administration of household finances. 
With promotion went rewards. Assessed in 1527 on lands valued at $126 per annum, in 1536 Peckham was granted the lease of the manors of Alford, Eccles, and Alderley, and the stewardship of Londondale, all in Cheshire, which had been forfeited that year by William Brereton. He also expanded his family's estates in Buckinghamshire when Biddlesden Abbey, dissolved in 1538, was sold to him on 1 November 1540 by Sir Thomas Wriothesley (his kinsman by marriage). His responsibilities away from court grew as well. A JP for Buckinghamshire from 1525 to 1543, and for Middlesex from 1537 to 1543, he was constable of Scarborough Castle between 1528 and 1537. On 18 May 1542 he was knighted. 
Well known to the king and his advisers, and with over twenty years' experience in the management of royal finances, Peckham merited his appointment on 19 May 1544 as high treasurer of all the mints. His promotion to this newly created post came as part of a sweeping reform of the royal mint. Committed to a major continental campaign, and already heavily engaged in Scotland, Henry VIII was eager to generate further revenues and saw the production of more coinage as a means to this end. He adopted a two-pronged policy: by covertly ordering a debasement of the currency he could create more money out of less gold and silver bullion; and by opening new mints in Durham, York, and Bristol, as well as a second mint in the Tower, between 1544 and 1546, he could greatly expand the means of production. Peckham was not directly charged with either receiving bullion or striking coin, duties which were devolved to the under-treasurers of the individual mints. Even so he is likely to have been frequently stretched, as the man with overall responsibility for supervising the personnel and running the mints during a period of frenetic production: it was later estimated that between 1544 and 1551 the mints produced debased coin worth $1,323,281 14's'. in gold and $3,015,895 2's'. 6died in silver. With the gradual abandonment of debasement in Edward VI's latter years, however, Peckham's workload at the mint is likely to have dwindled accordingly. 
On 18 June 1546 Peckham was appointed to receive the proceeds of the 'loving contribution' granted that year to the king. In his will Henry VIII bequeathed Peckham $200 and appointed him both treasurer to the executors and an assistant executor. But his religious conservatism was doubtless largely responsible for his being effectively sidelined during Somerset's protectorate. He was replaced as cofferer of the royal household by John Ryther in March 1547, and although he was briefly appointed to the privy council at the time of the autumn coup of 1549, attending meetings between 6 and 30 October, he probably owed his brief membership to Wriothesley's sponsorship, consequently losing his position when his patron fell. He remained treasurer of the mint, however, where he seems to have won admiration for his integrity. In 1553 his honesty was favourably compared with the corruptibility of others -- 'he never robbed his grace when he had all the rule of his treasure, he used not to buy silver for 4's'. an oz. and make the King pay 5's'. 4died as other false traitors did' (Brigden, 504-5). 
Following the death of Edward VI, Peckham played a key role in securing the throne for Mary. On 16 July 1553 it was reported that he and others 'of the force of the shyres of Oxforde, Buckyngham, Berks, Myddlesex', in number an estimated 10,000, had resolved 'to mershe forth towards the Palaice of Westminster' ('APC', '1552-4', 293). This threat from the west put pressure on an increasingly nervous council and prevented Northumberland from summoning reinforcements from London. On 29 July Peckham was sworn a councillor, a position he retained until the queen's death. In October 1553 and November 1554 he was returned to parliament as one of the knights of the shire for Buckinghamshire. His experience as a senior financial officer also brought him employment at the heart of Mary's government. At the end of 1553 a reorganization of government finance led to Peckham's being appointed on 5 December to receive and disburse all the revenues of the crown, an appointment which gave him effectively a treasurer's role until autumn 1555. In spring 1554 he was additionally commissioned to receive the issues of sales of crown lands. Not surprisingly, his involvement in the day-by-day working of the mint seems to have become increasingly nominal. For his services he was granted a life annuity of $60. He may have lost ground, however, as a result of the treason of his son Henry Peckham, executed in July 1556 for his involvement in the Dudley conspiracy. 
Following Mary's death Peckham ceased to be a privy councillor, but he again remained treasurer of the mint. In his will, drawn up on 12 May 1563, he made austere provision for 'my body and vile carcas which is but earthe and duste', but showed himself essentially Catholic by leaving 20 marks 'unto my poore neighbours of Denham to praye for my soule' (will). To 'my welbeloved wife Anne Peckham' he left $500 and a life interest in Denham manor, and to his sons George Peckham and Robert Peckham $100 apiece; George, who may have been specially favoured as the father of Sir Edmund's grandsons, was granted the reversion of Denham. There were also bequests to servants and friends, and $40 'to be bestowed in dedes of charitie'. Peckham died on 29 March 1564 and was buried in Denham church on 18 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 21743


Peckham, Sir George (d. 1608), colonial adventurer, was the third son of Sir Edmund Peckham (d. 1564) of Denham, Buckinghamshire, former high treasurer of the mint, and his wife, Anne (died 1570), daughter of John Cheyne of Chesham Bois. In 1554 he married Susan, daughter and heir of Henry Webbe; she died in childbirth, aged seventeen, on 11 December 1555. He had with his second wife two sons, Edmund and George. His Roman Catholic faith was not an impediment to early advancement. Knighted in 1570, he was sheriff of Buckinghamshire from 1572, and several orders in council relate to the duties he discharged in that office. The circumstances by which he came to be interested in colonial projects are obscure, but his name appeared with those of Sir Humphrey Gilbert, Sir Richard Grenville, Christopher Carleill, and eighteen others in a 'supplication of certen gentlemen in the west partes for a newe navigacon' of March 1574 (TNA: PRO, SP 12/95, 63). Although it was Gilbert alone who in 1578 received letters patent 'to discover, settle and exploit such remote heathen and barbarous landes countries and territories not actually possessed of any Christian prince', Peckham was one of the adventurers who financed his first attempt to found an English colony in North America. He saw a potential solution to the plight of English Catholics in the establishment of settlements which, while remaining loyal to the English crown, would be sufficiently remote to avoid the crippling financial penalties imposed upon recusants. Gilbert's voyage of 1578 was entirely unsuccessful, although neither he nor Peckham was discouraged. But Peckham was diverted from the project for a time by his imprisonment in 1580 for harbouring Catholic priests. 
Released in March 1581, Peckham immediately busied himself in assisting the preparations for Gilbert's second expedition, for which he secured the advice of the noted polymath John Dee and the colonial propagandist Richard Hakluyt. In April 1582 it was rumoured that he intended to sail in the voyage. In fact, as preparations proceeded, it was agreed that the Catholic group of investors, led by Peckham and Sir William Gerrard, would set out on their own expedition to claim and independently settle some 8.5 million acres of land assigned to them by Gilbert, half of which represented Peckham's personal investment. In June 1582 articles of intent regarding their expedition were drafted, for which Martin Frobisher and Sir Richard Bingham were named as potential commanders. The project was sufficiently attractive to interest a number of non-Catholic subscribers. In June 1583 Sir Philip Sidney, who had acquired from Gilbert assignments of 3 million acres on his own behalf, joined these to Peckham's. 
Gilbert's death at sea in September 1583 was a severe blow to the Western planting movement. Furthermore, the Spanish crown and a number of powerful English Catholic exiles appear to have put pressure upon Peckham and others to abandon the project entirely: the former because it implicitly violated Spain's claims of exploitation of the New World, the latter because large-scale Catholic emigration from England would have represented 'de facto' recognition of the 'Acts of Supremacy and Uniformity'. Lacking Gilbert's reputation, Peckham had difficulty in securing further investment, though Sir Francis Walsingham assisted with a letter of recommendation. In a bid to spur interest in the project, Peckham published his 'True reporte, of the late discoveries... by that valiant and worthy gentleman, Sir Humfrey Gilbert' on 12 November 1583. Dedicated to Walsingham, it presented the arguments in favour of the project: in effect, presenting the voice of Gilbert from beyond the grave. It provided justifications for intercourse with 'savages' and justified the queen's right of title over them, examined the benefits arising to England from the establishment of colonies, and confirmed the vast profits to be had by any who might invest therein, concluding: 'Let us therefore with cheerefull mindes and couragious hearts, give the attempt, and leave the sequell to almightye God' (Hakluyt, 8.89-131). 
Though a cogent plea for funds, the 'True Reporte' failed to excite sufficient interest, and once the queen had forbidden Sidney to sail upon the intended expedition its abandonment was inevitable, leaving future initiatives on American colonization to Adrian Gilbert and Walter Ralegh, who inherited Sir Humphrey's patent rights. Soon afterwards, in 1584, Peckham was in prison once more for some offence relating to his Catholicism. From a financial perspective he appears to have suffered severely from his commitment to the project, and from the penalties incurred by his continuing religious nonconformity. In 1595 at least part of his Denham estate was surrendered to the crown to meet his debts, but he retained possession of unspecified properties there. There is little information on his latter years. He died before 21 June 1608, probably in modest circumstances. 
Although his career was marked by the failure of English Western planting, Peckham is regarded as one of the most active, if not innovative, proponents of Elizabethan expansionism. His 'True Reporte' was the first published work specifically to address the prospects for, and requirements of, English colonies in the New World. He was survived by his son George, who co-invested with his father in Gilbert's scheme. 


@@@@@


doc= 21744


Peckham, Henry (b. in or before 1526, d. 1556), conspirator, was born by 1526, having been old enough to marry in 1547; he was the second of four sons and two daughters of Sir Edmund Peckham (d. 1564), administrator, of Denham, Buckinghamshire, and his wife, Anne (died 1570), daughter of John Cheyne of Chesham Bois, Buckinghamshire. Sir Edmund Peckham was a leading administrator in the exchequer and the royal household, and treasurer of the mint from 1544 to 1564. Henry Peckham's younger brother was Sir George Peckham. Peckham's early life is poorly documented, but he probably received some education, like his elder brother, Sir Robert Peckham (died 1569), who attended Gray's Inn in the 1530s. Peckham was described in 1550 as 'the king's servant'. He married Elizabeth ('c'.1530-1602), daughter of Robert Dacres of London and Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, and niece of Sir Anthony Denny and Sir John Gates, by a licence dated 6 November 1547. She and her uncles may have converted Peckham to protestantism. Apparently he lived at Denham or at his father's house at Blackfriars, London, though he acquired lands in Cornwall, Devon, Gloucestershire, Hertfordshire, and Sussex. Peckham was elected MP to Edward VI's last parliament in March 1553, sitting for the borough of Chipping Wycombe, Berkshire, perhaps with help from his father or from John Dudley, duke of Northumberland. He opposed Northumberland's attempt to place Lady Jane Grey on the throne in July 1553. 
Peckham's career under Mary I is curious. His Catholic father and brother Robert became privy councillors, and both represented Buckinghamshire in parliament, Edmund in October 1553 and November 1554, Robert in April 1554. The protestant Henry was re-elected from Chipping Wycombe to the parliaments of October 1553, April 1554, and 1555. He supported 'true religion' against the restoration of Catholicism in Mary's first parliament. Yet, serving under his father during Wyatt's rebellion in February 1554, he defended Ludgate against the rebel advance on London, and Mary rewarded him with the manors of Wishanger, Gloucestershire, in 1554, and Tring, Hertfordshire, in 1555. However, he complained that she had 'given him but one hundred marks a yere and taken away four' (Loades, 'Two Tudor Conspiracies', 213). During the parliament of 1555 he was part of the opposition group, led by Sir Anthony Kingston, which met at Arundel's tavern in November-December and formulated a conspiracy against the crown. 
Henry Dudley and his supporters were hostile to Mary's husband, Philip of Spain, her persecution of protestants, and the possible restoration of former ecclesiastical lands to the church. They sought backing from Henri II of France for a rising in southern England to oust Mary in favour of her sister, Princess Elizabeth, and they plotted to steal $50,000 in silver bullion from the exchequer to finance it. The conspirators met several times in Peckham's rooms at Blackfriars and considered storing stolen bullion there. Peckham involved his relatives Edmund and Francis Verney and John Bray, second Baron Bray, and boasted that he could raise a host in Buckinghamshire. He also persuaded Edward Lewkenor to obtain a copy of Henry VIII's will to prove that Mary was a usurper. However, Peckham was among the first group arrested and sent to the Tower of London on 18 March 1556. Indicted on 29 April, he was tried with John Danyell in the Guildhall on 7 May. According to the Venetian ambassador, Giovanni Michieli, it seemed at first that Peckham might be reprieved because of his father's influence and his own past service. His brother claimed that Henry had joined the conspirators only as a spy, and certainly his confessions of 9 May led to accusations that he had betrayed his fellow prisoners. However, Mary insisted that Peckham and Danyell suffer the full penalty of hanging, drawing, and quartering 'by reason of the small fruit derived from her past indulgence' (Loades, 'Mary Tudor', 336). Michieli claimed that they made 'a Godly and Catholic end'. Perhaps because there were demonstrations in favour of executed conspirators, Peckham and Danyell were the last to die, on 7 or 8 July. The value of the property Peckham forfeited as a traitor is unknown. Mary allowed his widow to keep Tring for life; subsequently she married John Blount of London. 


@@@@@


doc= 21745


Pecham, John (c.1230-1292), archbishop of Canterbury, presumably hailed from Patcham, Sussex, since he records that he grew up near the Cluniac monastery of Lewes, to which Patcham church had been appropriated, and was probably educated there. He was quite likely a member of the family who held land at Patcham in serjeanty from tenants of the honour of Warenne. The only certain members of the family are his brother Richard and nephew Walter, whom he made rector of Tarring and canon of his college at Wingham, and who seems to have inherited the family property. Others of the same name were prominent in the diocese of Chichester and in royal service during his archiepiscopate. 
Pecham later told a cardinal that he had been educated in France 'from tender years' (Martin, 874), which, unless it is referring loosely to his late twenties, suggests that he was in the arts faculty at Paris in the 1240s; he later wrote treatises on optics ('Perspectiva communis') and astronomy influenced by Roger Bacon, who was lecturing in Paris at that time, although the connection may have been made when both were in the Franciscan friary in the 1260s. It may have been the reputation for scientific and mathematical pursuits of the Oxford friary, where first Grosseteste and then Adam Marsh lectured, that drew Pecham back to England and into the Friars Minor about the early 1250s: Marsh tells of the conversion in a letter to a friend, in which he describes Pecham as 'scholaris', implying that he had not yet proceeded to his MA. Pecham's 'Canticum pauperis' seems to be an autobiographical account of his own conversion, from the abandonment of bodily and worldly pleasures for learning, whose various branches he then tries in turn, before coming to rest on theology and its Franciscan exponents, with their complete renunciation of material things for the love of Christ. Marsh had gone down such a road before him, and may have been the old counsellor consulted by the 'pauper' in the 'Canticum'. 
After spending his noviciate at Oxford, Pecham returned to Paris about 1257, and remained there until 1272, continuing his studies in theology to the doctorate under Bonaventure's pupils, and in 1269 becoming regent master in theology and lector at the friary. Pecham's reputation was high enough for him to be termed 'doctor ingenuosus' in the next century, and he was heavily plagiarized by his pupil Roger Marston, through whom Duns Scotus drew on his work. His output, particularly his lectures and disputations ('quaestiones' and 'quodlibeta'), and commentaries on Lombard's 'Sentences' and some books of the 'Bible', covered the range of intellectual concerns of the later thirteenth-century university, in particular grappling with the question of how far Aristotle could be successfully integrated into a Christian theological scheme. Following Bonaventure, Pecham subordinated all learning to theology, just as he directed all human activity to the imitation of Christ through asceticism. For Pecham all thought had a typically Franciscan focus on the love of God, seen for instance in his adherence to the Augustinian doctrine of the direct divine illumination of the intellect. 
Pecham thus came to lead the conservative Augustinian theological position against not only the Averroists, but also Thomas Aquinas, who returned to Paris in 1269 for a second regency at the Dominican friary. Pecham was the Franciscan spokesman during the Averroist crisis which flared up in Paris in 1269-71, exposing the differences between the older theology and Aquinas's more thorough integration of Aristotle. In particular Pecham led the attack on Aquinas's doctrine of the unity of substantial form in man, which seemed to suggest that the body of Christ between death and resurrection, and in the eucharist, was wholly different from the live body, since it was activated by an entirely different form in each phase. Pecham put forward the pluralist view of forms, and his own view of the intellect, in disputation with Aquinas in early 1270, and he articulated his position in various 'Quaestiones' and in his 'Summa de esse et essentia' and 'Tractatus de anima'. In the latter Pecham also asserted his typically Franciscan emphasis on the primacy of the will over the intellect (obedience being fundamental to Franciscan religious culture), through which he foreshadowed Duns Scotus. 
Pecham was also in Paris at a time of acute tension between the seculars and mendicants, which broke out again in January 1269 in an attack by the seculars on the Franciscan theory of evangelical poverty. Bonaventure (now in Paris) and Pecham co-ordinated their response in two tracts which share material, though Pecham's 'Tractatus de paupertate' is the more comprehensive. He set out to prove that Christ and the apostles practised strict poverty, and that the Franciscans were their closest imitators through physical asceticism which implanted obedience in the soul and sacrificial love in imitation of Christ crucified. Both developed arguments to justify the absolute poverty of their order, whose property was vested in the pope, as no mere legal fiction, which came to be crystallized into the 'usus pauper' in later controversies by Pecham's pupil Peter Olivi. The seculars' claim of their higher vocation through the cure of souls was denied, on the grounds that mendicants practised both ministry and the scripturally approved contemplative vocation. 
Pecham's return to Oxford by 1272 as Franciscan lector forced him to go over this ground again against the provincial of the Dominicans, Robert Kilwardby, on the eve of the latter's appointment to Canterbury. The 'Contra Kilwardby', however, couched the arguments in a caustic and bitter tone which matched the letter of Kilwardby's to which it was a reply, and thereby tended to reduce the argument to one of the relative perfection of the two orders, based on their intense competition for recruits within the university. He was presumably also in the thick of the continuing struggle against Averroism and Thomism, although none of his lectures or disputations survives from this period despite his reputation for having introduced the quodlibet to Oxford. This time Kilwardby was on his side, against his own order, although Pecham's summons to Rome to be lector at the papal university just prevented him from witnessing the archbishop's condemnation of thirty propositions, nearly half concerned with the unity of form, in March 1277. 
Pecham's other works are connected with the specifically mendicant task of training friars for preaching and pastoral work in their houses all over Europe. His sermons offer a complete commentary on the gospels and epistles for every Sunday of the year, in pithy and memorable form. They reflect Pecham's emphasis on the generosity of God's love, and the response of the human soul in attempting to become reintegrated from its fallen state and ascend back to God. He also collected biblical texts under various headings for use in sermons, surveying a large range of theological themes and schemes, in the 'Collectanea bibliorum', printed several times in the sixteenth century. Pecham wrote an office for the Trinity which remained in use until the Council of Trent, and various other hymns and poems, particularly focused on Christ as suffering and eucharistic sacrifice (notably 'Ave vivens hostia'). 'Philomela' tells the story of salvation from the creation to the passion through the last day of a dying nightingale, an analogy for the soul which is also structured by the divine office for the day, by which Pecham set much store. 
After Pecham had spent three years as lector at Oxford, his career moved rapidly: in 1275 he was elected prior of the Franciscan province in England, in which role he made his legendary walk barefoot to general chapter in Padua, a typically strict interpretation of the Franciscan prohibition of riding. His election brought him into closer contact with the king and magnates, while his appointment at Rome in 1277 additionally acquainted him with the machinery of papal administration, the four popes of his archiepiscopate, and many cardinals, to whom he lectured. It was while there that Nicholas III, having promoted Kilwardby to be cardinal of Porto, quashed the election of Edward I's chancellor Robert Burnell to Canterbury, and provided Pecham instead on 28 January 1279. 
Pecham was consecrated on the first Sunday of Lent, 19 February, and set out for Amiens in order to meet Edward I. On 23 May he was received courteously by the king and had his temporalities restored immediately, in return sending an account to the pope of Edward's negotiations with Philippe III over Gascony that put the English case. Despite the king's friendship and generosity with grants then and later, Pecham was already encountering formidable financial problems: being a friar, with no property, he had had to borrow 4000 marks from the Riccardi while in Rome, and on arrival at Dover on 4 June he found that Kilwardby had sold to the king the corn and stock on his lands, which he had to buy back for 2000 marks, and had taken valuables to the tune of 5000 marks, as well as the records of the see. Debt dogged Pecham throughout his archiepiscopate, despite the increasingly efficient management of the estates by officials and the increased revenues thus procured; in 1290 the pope granted him the first fruits of vacated benefices for three years to apply to the debts of the see, but Winchelsey still found the archbishopric heavily burdened. As well as depressing Pecham's spirit and making it harder for him to give alms generously, this also weakened his negotiating position with the king, as the first episodes of his rule were to demonstrate. 
Pecham had a clear idea of what he wanted to achieve at Canterbury, and immediately on landing at Dover he summoned the bishops of his province to a council at Reading for 29 June. There he surveyed the English ecclesiastical legislation of the thirteenth century (of archbishops Langton and Boniface, and the legates Otto and Ottobuono), which applied to England the great papal reforming programme of reviving, or creating, a Christian society throughout Europe, by ensuring that the ministers of the church were able to preach and minister effectively to the laity in every parish of the realm. 
Pecham's initial emphasis was on abuses, which distracted the clergy from their fundamental task. In particular, he claimed at Reading that he had been sent by the pope to root out the evil of pluralism, since previous legislation had not been implemented. Its aim was to prevent clerks holding more than one benefice which involved cure of souls without papal dispensation; allied problems were non-residence without dispensation, and the failure of clerks to proceed to ordination as priests. Pecham therefore initiated a new campaign of enforcement, requiring clerks to vacate all but their last-received benefice, imposing deprivation on future recipients of plural benefices, and demanding that bishops systematically investigate and list the benefices in their sees and their rectors and vicars, and report back. 
Pecham's other main addition to the previous legislation which was read out at the council concerned royal writs of prohibition, which ordered ecclesiastical judges to desist from hearing a particular case, a symptom of the tension between the two jurisdictions now more than a century old. The archbishop accepted that some prohibitions were legitimate, and therefore that some types of cases did fall to the secular forum; but overtly abusive prohibitions, interfering with spiritual jurisdiction, were to be rejected out of hand, as indeed were those that looked legitimate but which misrepresented the nature of the case. In either case, those whose intentions were malicious were to be excommunicated, and clerks were to be deprived. A further source of clerical grievance was the failure of royal ministers to co-operate in enforcing sanctions against excommunicates. 
Pecham soon ran into opposition in these efforts; on 24 October he solemnly excommunicated those who were trying to resist in many different ways the 'statutes of Reading'. His problem was that he had offended the king and his clerks, because, quite apart from their likely bias in favour of royal over ecclesiastical justice, the government depended upon pluralism and non-residence to pay and reward its clerks. A further difficulty for Pecham was that some of his bishops had been pluralists themselves, and some were still at the heart of government, notably Burnell. Pecham also compounded his offence by adding to the measures for the publication of the statutes of the council an order for 'Magna Carta' to be posted in all cathedral and collegiate churches, and renewed annually. 
Retaliation was swift: Pecham was obliged in parliament, about 10 November, publicly to withdraw the proposed publication of the charter, and three of the articles of excommunication, and to accept that none of the articles of Reading should lead to any prejudice to the king or realm. It is difficult, too, to deny entirely the possibility that the publication in this parliament of the 'Statute of Mortmain', apparently preventing the church from acquiring any more land, did not have some element of putting the archbishop in his place, although the statute had other substantial roots. Since Pecham's legislation on pluralism had the backing of a recent general council, the Second Council of Lyons, it is not surprising that Edward did not force Pecham to retract his measures in that field, but chose areas where the royal case was recognized to be stronger. But it is likely that pluralism was in the forefront of the royal ministers' minds, since they prepared at least one appeal to Rome against Pecham's strict approach, arguing the benefits to the realm of having pluralist royal clerks. 
In the absence of much co-operation from his suffragans Pecham had to conduct the campaign against pluralism himself. He did so in his visitation of his entire province, which he completed in seven years, sending lists of pluralists to the bishops and demanding that action be taken against them. He was also able to demonstrate his strength of purpose by refusing to confirm the election of the archdeacon of Winchester to its bishopric because of his pluralism, and standing firm in his resolve for two years until Martin IV nominated John de Pontoise. This made its point since both the refusal and the grounds for it were noticed by the chroniclers. On the other hand, Pecham was unable to do anything about the notorious Bogo de Clare, brother of his friend and tenant, Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester. Despite the success he had in individual cases, therefore, he failed to change attitudes to pluralism, except perhaps in prompting clerks to procure papal licences more carefully. 
On prohibitions, and in defence of ecclesiastical jurisdiction in general, the clergy were more solidly behind their archbishop. During 1280, in response to the royal request for a subsidy, they drafted a list of twenty 'gravamina', to which Edward gave verbal replies in parliament on 3 November, the day Pecham issued orders for collection of a three-year fifteenth. The articles covered a wide range of jurisdictional issues, including those mentioned at Reading, and convey the sense that the royal courts were increasingly limiting the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical, and royal officials were treating the clergy as the laity, spiritual property as temporal. After long discussions the king gave only unofficial answers, which offered reassurances of good intentions but few concrete concessions. Pecham continued to pressurize Edward by restoring virtually intact the excommunications withdrawn in 1279 to the articles of the Council of Lambeth in 1281, and afterwards he wrote to the king justifying his stance in the broadest terms. The centre of his argument was obedience to God, rather than man. It followed that ecclesiastical law was more binding than human, and secular law needed to be brought into conformity with the canons, its evil customs being abolished. The king was especially obliged to obey the church, since he derived his authority from it. A historical excursus proved that the natural condition of the church in England was immunity from the lay power, which still obtained in the Welsh church; it was only in the reigns of Henry I and Henry II that the clergy had been prevented from obeying the law of the universal church, Becket preferring death to submission. Pecham's identification with his predecessor is seen in his use of the martyrdom for his counterseal. 
It was not until the parliament of May-June 1285 that the clergy were able to force the crown to negotiate again over these issues. A list of seventeen grievances formed the basis for discussion, some covering old ground; but two developments worsened the atmosphere and put the clergy on the defensive. The 'Statute of Westminster II' evoked a further nine protests from the clergy against clauses extending royal jurisdiction into areas which the clergy argued had always been ecclesiastical. Moreover, a royal edict had limited court Christian to testamentary and matrimonial jurisdiction and cases concerning sin. On 1 July Edward ordered the clergy of Norwich to desist from hearing a wide range of cases claimed for exclusive royal jurisdiction, and instructed his justices on eyre there to investigate all breaches since the beginning of the reign and to summon offending clergy. This naturally gave rise to a further barrage of complaints, which remained unanswered. The effect of the edict would have been to deprive ecclesiastical authorities of their power to discipline their own clergy in spiritual matters and to investigate and punish cases of sin among the laity, and also of their control over ecclesiastical property. The Dunstable annalist thought Pecham led the attempt to persuade the king to withdraw this comprehensive writ of prohibition; the ringing peroration of the petition, invoking 'Magna Carta', certainly bears his stamp. 
In the middle of the following year the clergy finally won some satisfaction from the crown in the form of the writ 'Circumspecte agatis', which definitively and precisely listed the areas, beyond the testamentary and matrimonial, in which prohibition could not apply, and the processes and punishments which the church could freely use. The king's more accommodating attitude was confirmed in 1290 by the 'Statute of Consultation', which allowed ecclesiastical judges to consult the chancellor or chief justice as to whether a prohibition was valid, and to proceed if not. Pecham had won, through diplomacy rather than confrontation, significant recognition of the competence of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and the issues at stake in 1285 had to some extent been resolved. 
Archbishop and king were bound by their offices to take opposing views in principle, and often in practice, as Edward's outright refusal to allow Pecham to visit royal chapels demonstrated forcibly. Nevertheless, personally they always remained on good terms, and could just as easily adopt similar stances, as in Wales during the renewed war of 1282-3. While Pecham desired peace, he consistently put the English case to the Welsh and demanded their submission. He subscribed wholly to the view that the Welsh were barbaric and would benefit from integration into English rule, and he equally desired the assimilation of the Welsh sees into his province. He was also instrumental in persuading his reluctant clergy to grant the king a two-year twentieth in October 1283, before the subsidy of 1280 had been completely collected. Nevertheless, he preferred a peaceful solution to violent conquest, with all its inevitable sacrilege to clerical persons and property, and he persuaded Edward to allow him to set out for Snowdon on 31 October 1282. His three days with Llywelyn attempting to mediate were doomed to failure since neither side wanted peace, and Pecham renewed his excommunication of the rebels on his return to Rhuddlan. 
In the wake of the conquest, in summer 1284, Pecham visited all four Welsh dioceses, to provide an ecclesiastical parallel to Edward's settlement. He hoped to subject the dioceses entirely to his authority and to reorganize them along English lines, while also preserving their traditional immunity from lay power. He was unsuccessful in the latter aim, but successfully fought off the claim of the bishop of St David's to metropolitan status, and obtained some reparation from Edward for the spoliation and devastation of churches, in return for which he exhorted the Welsh to obedience to the English crown. But what mattered most to Pecham was a religious revival, to overcome the barbarism and ignorance of clergy and people. In attempting to realize this, he was applying his fundamental objectives for his whole province, as his more purely ecclesiastical activities demonstrate. 
Pecham applied himself to visiting all his eighteen dioceses with unremitting energy, in order to implement the programme announced publicly in councils and synods of eradicating abuses and bringing a higher quality ministry to the laity in every parish under his purview. This was most clearly announced in the canons of the Council of Lambeth, at which he laid down a detailed programme for improving the observance of the sacraments of the church by the parish clergy, especially the eucharist, baptism, and confession, and, most famously, the preaching of the clergy; in 'Ignorantia sacerdotum' Pecham provided for quarterly recitation a schematized account of the essentials of the faith. Pecham's emphasis on the right use of the goods of the church (from which so much of his campaign against abuses stemmed) is equally seen in his insistence in his injunctions of 1287 for Canterbury on the clergy's keeping up alms to the poor, maintaining their churches, ornaments, vestments, and instruments in good repair, and their careful stewardship of revenues and rights, and recovery of those lost. 
Such burning zeal, however, nurtured in the Franciscan culture of obedience and hierarchy, was bound to meet resistance from an acutely rights-conscious clergy. Another outbreak of the long-running saga between the two archbishops as to whether York could have his cross carried erect before him through the southern province was the forerunner of portentous events to come: in autumn 1279 this resulted in violence, the cross being smashed by armed men at Rochester. Nevertheless, it erupted again several times after 1285. Pecham could undoubtedly be high-handed, both in the tone of his communication and in his actions, and his suffragans were soon resisting the intrusiveness of his visitations, even if, as both legate and metropolitan, Pecham was usually on firm legal ground. There were, however, genuine issues to be clarified as to the boundaries between diocesan and metropolitical jurisdiction, particularly with respect to the court of Canterbury. Apart from procedural inconveniences caused by its central jurisdiction, these centred on testamentary jurisdiction over those leaving goods in more than one diocese (in which the archbishops were ultimately to triumph), and the hearing of appeals from courts lower than that of the bishop. At the Easter council of 1282 the bishops presented twenty-one 'gravamina' to the archbishop, who resisted their claims over visitations, but, having set up a commission to judge the jurisdictional issues, accepted many of the complaints and instructed his officials accordingly. 
Ironically, it was zealous prelates, who were strong advocates of the rights of their sees, as canon law required them to be, who were most likely to resist the ministrations of an archbishop who was equally defending the rights of his position. Godfrey Giffard of Worcester confronted Pecham again in the years that followed, but his position had been immeasurably strengthened by the fate of the only other bishop who Pecham had initially thought would be an allied reformer, his former pupil Thomas Cantelupe of Hereford. Indeed it was Cantelupe's very zeal that made him enemies, and thus necessitated archiepiscopal involvement; his first appeal to Rome took him out of the country in May 1280, leaving an official, Robert le Wyse, determined to stir up trouble against Pecham. When Pecham and Cantelupe finally met again in autumn 1281, relations seemed amicable, but the legacy of le Wyse's resistance and Pecham's reaction soon undermined them, and Pecham finally excommunicated first le Wyse, and then Cantelupe when he refused to publish the sentence. Thomas Cantelupe's death at Rome in August 1282 when appealing again, the miracles that began at his tomb when the conflict between Pecham and the bishops was renewed in 1287, and his subsequent canonization, inevitably made him seem the victim of Pecham's implacable aggression, and concealed the essential issues under the personal story. Pecham fell victim to the same trap because of his strong sense of betrayal and encirclement by the intrigues of his suffragans in England at the curia. 
The suffragans' determination to protect their rights against a Franciscan may have been stiffened by Martin IV's 'Ad fructus uberes' of 1281, which allowed friars freedom to preach and confess without the consent of bishops and which led to intense conflict between the regular and secular clergy in France. Pecham certainly encouraged such freedom, seeing the friars as a vital supplement to the ministrations of the parish clergy. His position as conservator of the privileges of his order in England, and his willingness to support particular houses of Friars Minor, certainly antagonized monks, who were required to accept enlarged mendicant premises nearby, or who became involved in quarrels over freedom of burial, one of the staple issues of mendicant controversy. Pecham's interdict on Westminster, which may in part have caused his absence from Queen Eleanor's funeral on 17 December 1290, was the result of the abbey's harbouring a Franciscan apostate. 
Pecham was thorough in including monasteries in his visitations, and he issued many sets of injunctions for correction, aimed at religious who neglected their offices and adopted secular lifestyles, so blurring the boundary between the cloister and the world through their frequent presence outside the convent, and the systematic intrusion of the laity within. As ever, he urged religious to keep their calling of worship at the centre of the picture, and to devote their resources as effectively as possible to that end: hence his opposition to the Benedictines' decision in 1277-9 to pare down accretions to the divine office, and his restoration of the full traditional 'opus dei' at monasteries he visited; hence also his attempts to replace or supplement the rule of ineffective superiors, and especially to encourage financial stability, the latter no doubt informed by his personal experience of the deleterious effects of debt on the performance of duties. His own monastery at Christ Church, Canterbury, with its centralized treasury, provided the model that he successfully encouraged others to adopt. 
Pecham's opposition to the foundation of a monastic house of study at Oxford was based on his deep suspicion of the growth of Thomism there. The Dominicans, led in Oxford by Richard Knapwell, had responded to the Franciscan corrections to Aquinas with their own 'correctoria', and were capturing the minds of the university; the reiteration of much of Pecham's old material by his pupil Roger Marston, Knapwell's Franciscan opponent, was hardly likely to stem the popularity of Thomism. Unity of form was once more the central issue, and Pecham highlighted the danger of its theological implications when he renewed Kilwardby's condemnations of 1277 on 29 October 1284, a procedure he adopted in part to fend off accusations that he was merely promoting rivalry between the orders. The Dominicans immediately reacted by appealing to Rome, and opened a campaign of propaganda which directed biting wit and furious invective at Pecham. Pecham's responses drew on his old polemical works but lacked their immediacy and fire, merely seeming uncomfortably extreme. Knapwell, in whose works eleven errors had been found, ignored citations and was excommunicated at Easter 1285, and his opinions, centring on unity of form, were condemned by Pecham and bishops Sutton of Lincoln, Swinfield of Hereford, and Giffard. Proceedings at Rome were, as ever, slow, and held up by the swift succession of popes, but the election of the Franciscan Nicholas IV in 1288 ensured that Knapwell would be silenced. In the longer run Thomism was irrepressible, but it was no mere obscurantism on the part of Pecham that prompted his deeply held opposition. 
Pecham's health was gradually failing in his later years, and the loss of various sections of his register makes it difficult to tell how far his activity was reduced; the flow of letters becomes very much sparser from the middle of 1285. He certainly only managed to visit a few dioceses for the second time, and latterly extreme moods and changes of mind, which began to alienate some of his previously loyal clerks, presaged his physical decline in the 1290s. 
Pecham did have the opportunity to apply the strictures he had imposed on other churches, particularly in the financial field, to his own foundation, when in 1287 he brought to fruition Kilwardby's project for a secular college on the archiepiscopal manor at Wingham, near Canterbury. In his statutes Pecham was characteristically careful to prescribe how the property and income of the college was to be allocated and used, and insistent on proper observance of the hours. The provost and six canons were intended to expand the archbishop's resources of patronage for his clerks, although building work was still continuing at his death. 
Pecham was able to exert himself to support the crusading project given renewed impetus by Nicholas IV, who imposed a six-year tithe on the clergy in 1290 on the basis of a new assessment, before the fall of Acre in May 1291 gave urgency to the process. Edward and other lords had taken the cross in the summer and autumn of 1290, and Pecham had started to grant crusading privileges to them. He personally presided at the council of his province of 13-16 February 1292, which the pope had ordered so that the whole church might be consulted as to how the Holy Land should be recovered and subsequently protected, and how popular enthusiasm and finance could be raised. Nicholas died on 4 April, before the council's proctors could reach him with their answers. 
Pecham's last public appearance was at the consecration of the bishops of Salisbury and Exeter at Canterbury on 16 March, and thereafter his health overcame him in a long decline, at Otford and Mortlake, where he died on 8 December, in the presence of his long-serving clerical staff and two Friars Minor. Against his own preference for the London Franciscans, he was buried on the 19th at Canterbury in a wintry and ill-attended ceremony; but he insisted that his heart should be allowed to rest with the brothers of his own order. His Canterbury tomb, of grey Sussex marble, depicts him serenely, and perhaps accurately, in oak under a canopy with an early ogee arch, surrounded by his suffragans as weepers. Apparently the product of the Westminster workshop, this may have absorbed much of the $5306 he is said to have left, for the accounts of his executors, the Franciscans of Paris, revealed only 5's'. 6died after paying for his will (now lost), including also his debts, legacies to his clerks, and his funeral. 
Pecham exhibits many of the faults and the virtues of the high-medieval churchman. At the centre of his being was devotion to Christ and the imitation of the apostles, filtered through the Franciscan tradition of complete material and spiritual poverty. He continued to style himself 'frater Johannes humilis' as archbishop, wore a shabby habit, and was said to have fasted for seven Lents annually, taking up most of the year. Various chroniclers noted and even approved of the Franciscans' juxtaposition of Nicholas IV with him as the sun and moon of the order. Moreover, those who came into contact with him also noted his kindness, sincerity, and humility, and his writing and poetry testify to his capacity for deep and tender feeling. Trivet described him as 'a zealot for his order, a notable author of poetry, pompous in manner and speech, but tender of mind and liberal of soul' ('Nicholai Triveti Annales', 300). On this basis, he rarely lost sight of his central religious objectives, whether he was realizing them through intellectual achievements as for so much of his life, or, latterly, in administering the English friars or the whole province of Canterbury itself. His archiepiscopate stands firmly in the tradition of the reforming church dating back to the mid-eleventh century, with its twin projects of transforming society through a transformed clergy. 
Some of Pecham's failures in realizing these aims, however, can equally be attributed to the strength of his devotion and to his own conviction of being right. He found difficult the transition from an order where obedience and unity were fundamental, to a diverse secular church in which persuasion and tact were necessary. In pursuing reform through the dignity of his office he too often failed to have regard for the rights of others and their churches, so that his energy became overbearing and his zeal was seen as interference. His personal kindness was too often obscured by caustic rhetoric and a sharp tongue. Hence the -- albeit partial -- obituary of the monastic 'Flores historiarum': 'his wisdom was entirely spent before his death, and in his prosperity he scorned and despised many' ('Flores historiarum', 3.81-2). While, therefore, his dedication and commitment shine out, his success seems more equivocal. If he failed on pluralism and partially over prohibitions, it is harder to measure the effect of his visitations and restoration of the Welsh church; and 'Ignorantia sacerdotum' was a gift to posterity whose fruits in the thorough Christianization of later medieval society have only recently been re-evaluated. Indeed, the future was to lie not with high-church insistence on 'libertas ecclesie' against the king, but with the patient groundwork of educating the clergy and improving the laity, those things to which Pecham quietly contributed. Now that high-medieval prelates seem to be less swimming against an inexorable tide of decline than part of a long-term process which only gradually came to fruition, representatives of their order such as Pecham may be seen in a new, and rather kinder, light. 


@@@@@


doc= 21746


Peckitt, William (bap. 1731, d. 1795), glass-painter, was born at Husthwaite, near Easingwold in the North Riding of Yorkshire, and baptized on 13 April 1731, the third of the six children of William Peckitt (1681/2-1776), fellmonger of Husthwaite and glove maker of York, and his wife, Ann (1690-1787), daughter of Thomas Hunt of Linton-on-Ouse. His grandfather and great-grandfather were also fellmongers from the North Riding, though he and his younger brother, Henry, claimed genteel origins from the medieval family of Picote of Yorkshire and assumed both a coat of arms and a crest. Peckitt appears to have helped in his father's business and to have moved with him to York before 1752 when his father had set up a glove-making business there. In the opening lines of his commission book he recorded that he began the art of painting and staining of glass at Michaelmas 1751. In 1752 he advertised in the 'York Courant' that he had set up as a glass-painter in Colliergate, York. 
Claims that Peckitt was taught by the glass-painter Henry Gyles (died 1709) of Micklegate, York, are unfounded. Nor is there support for further claims that he was taught glass painting in London by William Price the younger (died 1765), or that he was trained as a carver and gilder by his father-in-law, Charles Mitley of York. Mitley had died five years before Peckitt married his daughter Mary (1743-1826) on 3 April 1763, and twelve years after Peckitt declared himself a glass-painter. The declaration in Peckitt's trade notice that he had discovered the art 'by many experiments' was repeated in his letter to the Free Society of Artists of London in 1760. He continued to experiment throughout his fifty-five years as a glass-painter. In 1780 he patented an invention 'for blending Coloured and Stained Glass' (patents no. 1268), and by 1793 he had compiled a manuscript, intended for publication, entitled 'The principles of introduction into that rare but fine and elegant art of painting and staining of glass'. 
Peckitt's first recorded commission, in October 1751, was for armorials for the deanery at York. John Fountayne, dean of York from 1747 to 1802, remained Peckitt's greatest single patron, and employed Peckitt throughout his working life in the repair and restoration of York Minster's medieval glass. Before he died Peckitt bequeathed three glass paintings to the minster to be inserted in the south transept, alongside his 'St Peter' (1768). These were: 'Moses' ('c'.1774), 'Abraham' (1780), and 'Solomon' (1780) (York Minster). Peckitt also painted the east windows of Lincoln (1762) and Ripon (1791) cathedrals and the west window of Exeter Cathedral (1767) (all subsequently removed and fragmented in lesser windows in the respective churches). At the same time he adorned with armorial glass the deaneries and episcopal palaces of York, Exeter, Lincoln, Peterborough, and Armagh. Peckitt's early work chiefly comprised heraldic and genealogical subjects, historical scenes and portraits, dogs, horses, and animals for nursery windows. He also restored old glass. It was a secular subject for York Guildhall, 'York's Car of Justice' after Elkaniah Settle, which earned him the freedom of the city of York in 1754. Peckitt's patrons steadily increased and his work was in demand throughout the British Isles. He even secured a commission in France, probably through his connection with Horace Walpole, who turned to Peckitt to embellish Strawberry Hill following the retirement of William Price in 1760. Under that 'arbiter elegantiorum' the growth of gothick taste brought added encouragement to Peckitt and the handful of his contemporaries who practised as glass-painters. 
Peckitt's portraits on glass, such as 'William III' and 'William, Duke of Cumberland' (York City Art Gallery), were much admired and in 1761 the earl of Bute commissioned a portrait of George III. Peckitt's accomplishment in this genre is best represented by his self-portrait from his portrait in oils ('c'.1760) by Johan Schuster of Saxony (both York City Art Gallery). By contrast, his 'Presentation of Christ in the Temple' (1767) at Oriel College, Oxford, displays weak colours and poor draughtsmanship, the cartoons being executed by Dr John Wall of the Worcester porcelain factory. His west window for the chapel of New College, Oxford (1765), depicting 'Christ, the Virgin and the Twelve Apostles', was also criticized for the want of good cartoons and was subsequently removed to the side windows of the chapel and replaced in 1787 by Thomas Jervais's 'Nativity and the Seven Virtues' from cartoons by Sir Joshua Reynolds. Peckitt eventually employed two Italian draughtsmen who were among the founders of the Royal Academy, Biagio Rebecca and Giovanni Battista Cipriani. The former drew the cartoons for 'The Adoration of the Magi' (1772) and 'The Last Supper' (1771), which Peckitt painted for the Gothic chapel at Audley End, Essex. Rebecca also provided the cartoons for the 'Twenty-Four Patriarchs and Prophets' which were inserted in three windows of New College chapel, Oxford (1774). Cipriani's cartoon was used for the allegorical window of the 'Muse Presenting Sir Isaac Newton and Sir Francis Bacon to George III' (1775) (Trinity College Library, Cambridge). 
Peckitt was a modest, private person devoted to his wife, who described him as 'a kind and affectionate husband and a pious Christian' (Mary Peckitt, epitaph), and their four daughters. In his last years he began to write and in 1794 published in York a religious tract entitled 'The Wonderful Love of God to Man, or, Heaven Opened in Earth'. He died at his house at Friars' Walls, York, on 14 October 1795. His wife's last tribute to him was the execution and erection of his memorial window (1796) in the church of St Martin-cum-Gregory, York, where he was buried. 
Though much of Peckitt's work was derided and removed during the Victorian Gothic revival, he helped keep the art of glass painting alive during the eighteenth century, and contributed to the revival of an acceptable post-Reformation hagiography in the Church of England. 


@@@@@


doc= 21747


Peckwell, Henry (bap. 1746, d. 1787), Church of England clergyman and Methodist preacher, was the son of Henry Peckwell (died 1747) of Crane Street, Chichester, Sussex, of a Petworth family, variously described as a gentleman, victualler, innholder, and merchant, and Elizabeth, 'nee' Palmer (died 1769), probably his second wife, and was baptized on 29 November 1746 at St Olave's Church, Chichester. About 1765 he entered the house of Samuel Lloyd, an Italian silk merchant in London, with the intention of representing the firm in Italy, but he became a regular attender at George Whitefield's Tabernacle and abandoned plans for a career in trade in favour of the ministry. He matriculated at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, on 17 May 1770, undeterred, like other evangelically minded young men, from going to the hall despite the expulsion of six students in February 1768 for their Methodist sympathies. 
After ordination into the Church of England at Oxford in June 1772 Peckwell accepted the curacy of Winterbourne Gunner, Wiltshire, from the Revd Charles Coleman, but it was abruptly terminated after he had preached an evangelical sermon unacceptable to his patron. A curacy at St Martin's, Salisbury, lasted only slightly longer. Meanwhile Peckwell had attracted the notice of Selina, countess of Huntingdon, and soon gained a following as a popular itinerant preacher in south-eastern England within her connexion. Her influence on him was, for a while, paramount. On 23 February 1773 he married Isabella (Bella) Blosset (died 1816) of co. Meath, from a minor gentry family of French Huguenot extraction, against her mother's initial opposition, because she had been recommended to him as a wife by Lady Huntingdon as 'an instrument to help you in your plan' (letter, 10 or 11 Feb 1772, Cheshunt collection, F1/1352). In April 1774 Peckwell assumed the leadership of the chapel in the New Way, Westminster, perhaps assuming much of the cost of repairing and opening the building himself. In the same year he also began a regular preaching schedule in the Mulberry Gardens, London, and was present at the opening of another chapel in his home town of Chichester. In August he preached the anniversary sermon at Lady Huntingdon's college at Trefeca, and he spoke in chapels as well as outdoors in Brighton, Maidstone, and Tunbridge Wells. His letters are full of fervent desires to serve: 'O that I could give up all for the Lord. I am a poor Disciple and all I can say is 'I wish to follow Jesus'' (Seymour, 2.292). 
Relations with Lady Huntingdon deteriorated in 1778 when Peckwell made it clear that he would rather leave the connexion than give up the Westminster chapel, that '... he would not be under the direction of any Committee or Person whatever, that he would, if employed in the connexion, go where he pleased & stay as long as he pleased' (Thomas Wills to Lady Huntingdon, 10 March 1778, Cheshunt collection, F1/1823). Although his ample patrimony meant he needed little patronage, he eventually accepted from Lord Robert Manners (whose wife was a regular correspondent of Lady Huntingdon) the rectory of Bloxholm-cum-Digby in Lincolnshire (presented 20 February 1782), which he retained until his death. He was also chaplain to the marchioness of Lothian. 
About 1783 Peckwell travelled to Dublin. He delivered sermons at Lady Huntingdon's chapel in Plunket Street, Dublin, and other city churches and drew large congregations by dint of his electrifying preaching. Through the influence of Elizabeth Rawdon, countess of Moira, Lady Huntingdon's eldest daughter, he was permitted to preach in the chapel of the Magdalen Institution. However, his forthright sermons led to complaints from many members of this fashionable congregation. After an application was made requesting the archbishop of Dublin to curtail the spread of Methodism in the Church of Ireland, Peckwell crossed back to England. 
Peckwell's last years, spent mainly in London, were distinguished as much for philanthropy as preaching. He was a member of the Humane Society and the Society for the Relief of Persons Imprisoned for Small Debts, and in 1784 he founded an institution called the Sick Man's Friend. It aimed to relieve the sick poor of all denominations, as well as supplying instruction. He studied medicine to make himself personally adept at this work, but died on 18 August 1787 at his house in Princes Street, Westminster, from the effects of pricking his hand while making a post-mortem examination of a consumptive. Mortification had spread too far to make amputation of the swollen limb possible, and his passing was 'regretted by thousands' ('GM', 1787). He was buried in the church of St Peter the Great, Chichester, Sussex, on 23 August. Peckwell was well liked and respected for his combination of gifts. As one funeral eulogy put it: 'His heart was deeply impressed by, and had a powerful and sweet experience of those things of which his understanding had so clear a perception' (Townshend, 15). The sermons which he preached for the benefit of his charity produced as much as $400 p.a. for his widow, who died in her house in Wilmot Street, Brunswick Square, on 28 November 1816. 
Peckwell published many sermons as well as 'A Collection of Psalms and Hymns' (1774?). He had three children. His daughter, Selina Mary (named after her godmother, Lady Huntingdon), married George Grote the banker in 1793, and their son was George Grote the historian. His second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 21748


Sir Robert Henry Peckwell (bap. 1776, d. 1823), was baptized on 10 July 1776 at St Mary's Church, Marylebone. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 23 October 1792, was awarded his BA in 1796 and MA in 1799, and became a barrister at Lincoln's Inn in 1801, and serjeant-at-law in 1809. He was deputy recorder of Cambridge, and a counsel on the Norfolk circuit. In 1822 he was knighted and appointed chief justice of Calcutta, where he died, unmarried, on 1 February 1823 after exercising his office for only two months. He took his mother's name of Blosset. He published 'Cases of Controverted Elections in the Second Parliament of the United Kingdom', 2 vols. (1804-6). 


@@@@@


doc= 21749


Pecock, Reginald (b. c.1392, d. in or after 1459), bishop of Chichester and religious author, was born in Wales, probably about 1392, and as a young man was associated with the diocese of St David's. There is, however, no evidence to support the tradition that he was born at Laugharne, Dyfed. 
Pecock was a fellow of Oriel College, Oxford, by December 1414. He must have achieved the degree of BA by then, and so was almost certainly studying at Oxford during at least part of the period 1407-11 when Archbishop Thomas Arundel (died 1414) attempted to inhibit free discussion of theological issues in the university. Arundel's action was part of a strategy designed to counter the spread of heretical doctrines associated with John Wyclif (died 1384) and his Lollard followers. In 1411 fellows of Oriel were divided between support for and resistance to Arundel. In an election for provost in 1417 Pecock voted with Henry Kayll and John Martill, fellows who had supported Arundel. Also voting with this group was John Carpenter (died 1476), later bishop of Worcester and an important future ally. In 1417-18 Pecock paid for the hire of schools from Stapledon Hall (Exeter College), Oxford, probably in connection with fulfilling academic requirements for the degree of master of arts. He was awarded the degrees of MA and BTh, and is last recorded at Oriel on 31 July 1424. He received from Oxford University the degree of DTh about 1445, apparently being exempted from the academic requirements for the degree, according to Thomas Gascoigne, a full but very hostile source. In his 'Liber de veritatibus', Gascoigne described him as having had a leprous appearance that reflected his 'mental leprosy', that is, his heresy. 
While at Oriel, Pecock went rapidly through all the various stages of ordination between 21 December 1420 and 8 March 1421. His first benefice was the rectory of St Michael's Church, Gloucester, to which he was admitted on 25 October 1424 by the presentation of St Peter's Abbey, Gloucester. Possibly he resided in the rectory house in Eastgate Street. There is no evidence for the tradition in modern biography that Pecock secured the patronage of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester (died 1447), on leaving Oxford. On the contrary, it may be significant that Pecock's first benefice was in the diocese of Philip Morgan, bishop of Worcester (died 1435), who, like Pecock, was an Oxford graduate from St David's. 
Pecock resigned the rectorship of St Michael's on 1 September 1431, in order to become master of Whittington College, a London college of priests founded in 1424 by the executors of Sir Richard Whittington, mercer and mayor of London. Thereby Pecock also became rector of the church of St Michael Paternoster Royal, which was served by the college. The appointment came when the college was still in the process of foundation. The college was supervised by Whittington's chief executor John Carpenter, common clerk of London, until his death in 1442, when governance passed to the Mercers' Company. Possibly Pecock had come to his notice through the agency of his Oriel College ally, also called John Carpenter. The two namesakes were certainly associates and may have been kinsmen. It must, however, have been the London John Carpenter who oversaw and approved Pecock's appointment. 
By 1443 Pecock was a feoffee in a transaction of land associated with the foundation of a new chapel and hospital dedicated to the Virgin Mary and the Nine Orders of Angels at Isleworth, Middlesex. The instigator of this project was John Somerset (died 1454), physician and chancellor of the exchequer to Henry VI. In 1446, moreover, Pecock became a founder member of an associated fraternity whose objective was to set up a perpetual chantry for Henry VI, Queen Margaret, and the founders. Pecock's associates in this venture were prominent in court, church, and city circles, and included the influential London clerics William Lichefield and Peter Hynford (probably Hyrford), Nicholas Ashby, bishop of Llandaff, John Somerset, and John Colop and Richard Hakeday, both of whom, like Pecock, were associates of John Carpenter, common clerk. 
Despite Arundel's efforts to eradicate the Wycliffite heresy early in the century, Lollards were present in London when Pecock became master at Whittington. London may have been a centre for Lollard book production, particularly the area around St Paul's, close by Pecock's parish. Pecock was aware that the heretics circulated books among themselves, particularly the 'Bible' and theological works in English. He studied Lollard doctrine in order to refute it. Grasping the importance Lollards placed on the written word, especially on vernacular writings, he decided to try to counter the heresy by composing and circulating vernacular books of his own. This was a different strategy from that of Arundel, who had prohibited the discussion of theological questions in the vernacular, and it made Pecock vulnerable to prosecution himself. 
While he was at Whittington College, Pecock worked on some of the theological works which were to be examined at his heresy trial. He wrote part of 'The Reule of Crysten Religioun' in 1443 (New York, Pierpont Morgan Library MS 519; ed. W. C. Greet, EETS, o.s. 171, 1927). He also wrote part of 'The Repressor of Over Much Blaming of the Clergy' (CUL, MS Kk.4.26; ed. C. Babington, Rolls Series, 19, 1860) while at Whittington, and probably some or all of 'The Donet' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 916; ed. E. V. Hitchcock, EETS, o.s. 156, 1921), an offshoot of 'The Reule'. He records that he often worked on several books at once, and it is clear from the surviving texts that he was a habitual self-citer and cross-referencer. These aspects of his practice of composition make it difficult to date or even sequence his works. 
In 1441 Pecock was nominated in the will of the London John Carpenter, together with William Lichefield, to choose books for the Guildhall Library (another of the Whittington charities) from the testator's private collection. His interest in providing books for those of limited financial means is attested by the survival of his 'Poore Mennis Myrrour' (BL, Add. MS 37788; part edited in E. V. Hitchcock, 'The Donet'), a digest of 'The Donet' intended for those of modest means and education, though there is no evidence that it circulated widely. He shared these interests with John Colop, who developed a scheme for circulating books for 'common-profit'. 
Pecock's interest in the circulation of theological writings, like his own prolific output, was motivated by his conviction that reasoned expositions of Christianity in English could counter the spread of heterodox ideas in Lollard books. He may have known some Lollards personally, and may have chosen to debate with them rather than to prosecute them. In his late work 'The Book of Faith' (Cambridge, Trinity College, MS B.14.45; ed. J. L. Morison, 'Reginald Pecock's Book of Faith', 1909), he claimed to have engaged in debate with important members of the sect. He also claimed that his writings had been read by some Lollards. In 'The Repressor' he wrote that he had conducted an inquiry into personal and sexual morality among Lollards, in order to expose the hypocrisy of their claims to honest living. 
Pecock's tenure at Whittington College ended when he was provided to the see of St Asaph on 22 April 1444. The temporalities of the see were transferred to him on 8 June, and he was enthroned bishop at Croydon on 14 June 1444. Gascoigne wrote that he was promoted through the influence of secular lords. Pecock's involvement with John Somerset's foundation of a chapel under royal patronage, and his connection with John Carpenter of Oriel, also an associate of Somerset's and at one time clerk and chaplain to the king, may have provided an entry for Pecock into royal spheres of influence and thus made him a candidate for a see. 
It appears that Pecock was largely an absentee bishop, continuing to reside in London. There is no firm evidence that he visited his diocese. The bishop's palace and houses, burned by Owen Glyn Dwr in 1402, had still not been rebuilt. It appears that he continued to pursue his interests in London. These included mounting a defence of absentee bishops who (like himself) did not preach to their flocks in their dioceses. Probably in 1447, he delivered a sermon at Paul's Cross in London, arguing that prelates were not obliged to preach in their own dioceses, but that their duties did involve explicating complex points of doctrine. Afterwards he distributed his conclusions in English on this and the other contentious matter of bishops' payment of first-fruits. 
Traditionally the butt of anti-clerical criticism, absentee bishops were a particularly sensitive issue during this period, when court prelates such as Adam Moleyns (died 1450) were the targets of anti-Lancastrian action. By seeming to defend such bishops Pecock became vulnerable to popular anti-clericalism. Controversy ensued, including the charge that his conclusions were heretical, and as a consequence Pecock appeared before Archbishop John Stafford of Canterbury (died 1452), threatening to sue his opponents for defamation. A record of the statement that Pecock made to Stafford has survived as the 'Abrenunciacio Reginaldi Pecok' in the notebook of William Mede, monk at the Charterhouse at Sheen (Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 177, fols. 11-13'r'; part edited under the erroneous title 'Abbreviatio Reginaldi Pecok' in C. Babington, 'The Repressor', 2.615-9). 
Pecock explained that his motive had been to defend bishops against undue criticism. Gascoigne, keen to associate Pecock with unpopular court bishops, claimed that Pecock sent copies of his conclusions to Walter Lyhert, bishop of Norwich (died 1472), Adam Moleyns, bishop of Chichester, and the papal subdeacon Vincent Clement. Pecock said that he believed he had the support of bishops, and if Gascoigne's testimony is correct, it is possible that Pecock expected Moleyns and Lyhert to use their influence at court, and the papal subdeacon to support his defence of bishops' payments of first-fruits to the pope. 
Pecock said that he was only prepared to recognize opposition presented in academic form. Indeed, his opponents as named by Gascoigne were highly educated, graduate clerics: William Millington, Thomas Eborall, John Burbach, Hugh Damlett, Gilbert Worthington, William Lichefield, and Peter Hyrford. As well as sharing opposition to Pecock, several of them held powerful positions as rectors of London churches (Eborall was Pecock's successor at Whittington College), and some were involved with new educational and religious foundations. Pecock apparently preached on the issue again in 1449, and instigated a preaching campaign in his diocese. 
While bishop of St Asaph, Pecock continued to be associated with a network of powerful courtiers and London citizens, particularly through transactions associated with the foundation dedicated to the Nine Orders of Angels. Such connections may be sufficient to explain his provision to the see of Chichester by a bull of Pope Nicholas V ('r'. 1447-55) dated 23 March 1450. When he was enthroned as bishop of Chichester on 31 May 1450, he became one of very few Welsh clerics to hold English sees in the fifteenth century. The vacancy had arisen because the previous incumbent, Adam Moleyns, the unpopular associate of the disgraced William de la Pole, duke of Suffolk, had just been murdered. The view that William de la Pole was one of Pecock's patrons at this time was retailed later by Pecock's enemies, Gascoigne in particular. There is no evidence to support it. However, this representation of Pecock as one of a corrupt circle against whom popular feeling was legitimately strong was an important element in his downfall. 
No register survives either from Pecock's time as bishop of St Asaph or from his tenure of Chichester. The fact that the authorities later suspected that Pecock's writings might be circulating in the latter diocese suggests that Pecock may have been more involved in affairs in the diocese of Chichester than he had been in those of St Asaph. However, as bishop of Chichester, Pecock continued to write. He was at work on part of 'The Folewer to the Donet', a sequel to 'The Donet' (BL, Royal MS 17 D.ix; ed. E. V. Hitchcock, EETS, o.s. 164, 1924) about 1453, when he wrote a passage that suggests that the controversy over non-preaching bishops was still not concluded. According to Gascoigne, Pecock was brought before John Kemp (archbishop of Canterbury, 1452-4) to defend his conclusions. Gascoigne also claimed that Pecock returned to the theme in a letter to the Franciscan friar William Goddard, in which Pecock called modern preachers 'pulpit-bawlers'. 
As bishop of Chichester, Pecock attracted the suspicion of authorities outside the church, and his activities and opinions were brought to the attention of the crown. On one occasion, according to Gascoigne, an unnamed Oxford scholar, convicted of heresy, confessed to William, abbot of Abingdon, that he had learned all his heresies from Pecock, and Pecock's friends were obliged to protest his innocence to the king. In another incident, in 1456, Pecock reputedly wrote a letter to Thomas Canynges, mayor of London, that was forwarded to the king. Allegedly Pecock claimed that he and his English books had adherents among the magnates of the kingdom. His letter was thought to manifest an undermining of the faith and insurrection in the kingdom, and Pecock was expelled from the council chamber. 
John Beaumont, Viscount Beaumont (died 1460), also wrote to Henry VI about Pecock, probably in 1457. In a letter that survives in the register of Richard Asshton, abbot of Peterborough, he said that it was rumoured that the bishop of Chichester was imprinting pernicious doctrines against the faith in men's hearts, and he urged the king to demand that the archbishop of Canterbury and his fellow prelates should commission university scholars to investigate Pecock's writings. Beaumont -- appointed Queen Margaret's steward while Henry VI was suffering from a bout of insanity, Prince Edward was an infant, and the queen feared that Richard, duke of York (died 1460), might seek to claim the throne -- was probably acting in Margaret's interests. He may have thought that action against an unpopular prelate would help to restore royal authority. Pecock was an ideal target, both because he had himself attracted anti-clerical feeling, and also because he had tried to repress criticism of bishops in ways which appeared to compromise the authority and teachings of the church. In his letter to the king Beaumont represented the exceptional act of prosecuting a bishop for heresy as a measure that would devolve to the honour, authority, and long continuance of the Lancastrian dynasty. This suggests that an important motive behind Pecock's prosecution was the political one of bolstering the position of the Lancastrian dynasty. 
The process of examining Pecock's writings had begun by October 1457, by when Pecock had delivered certain of his English works to Archbishop Thomas Bourchier (died 1486). The suspect texts were English and Latin writings which had been in circulation over the previous two decades or more. Pecock declined to stand by earlier, uncorrected works that had gone into circulation, guaranteeing only those written in the previous three years. He submitted for examination nine books which had evidently been recently revised. During this process Pecock complained to Bourchier that many were preaching and teaching that the views expressed in his books were heretical. Opposition had been expressed at Paul's Cross in London and throughout the province of Canterbury, even though the case was 'sub judice'. On 22 October 1457 Bourchier issued a citation to all the clergy in his province, calling Pecock's accusers to make their case before himself, and to desist otherwise from public comment. 
The most substantial survival from the examination of Pecock's writings is John Bury's 'Gladius Salomonis', a refutation of the first book of Pecock's 'Repressor'. Bury addressed his work to Bourchier and marked it for the attention of John Lowe, bishop of Rochester (died 1467), described as the archbishop's calm and stalwart companion in troubled times. On 11 November 1457 the masters of Oxford University requested the opportunity to examine Pecock's works, and asked for inspection copies. Pecock had allegedly asked for his works to be examined by his academic equals, but the masters' request need not be seen as the public support that he may have hoped for from the university, so much as a calculation of political self-interest on their own part. In a general procession in Oxford, on 17 December 1457, Pecock's books were denounced, and perhaps even burnt, before the chancellor, Thomas Chaundler (died 1490). 
The process of examining Pecock's writings concluded with the formulation of a list of heresies which Pecock was given the opportunity to abjure. In late November or early December 1457 he appeared before Bourchier and other bishops, and admitted to and revoked his heresies and errors in a signed statement. He then made a public recantation of his heresies in English at Paul's Cross and committed his books to a fire. 
The details of the heresies vary in the sources. All copies of the recantation record two points of heresy concerning the authority of the church: that the church could err in matters of faith, and that Christians need not hold to the determinations of a general council of the church on matters of faith. Four other points, not attested in all sources, relate to the apostles' creed. These were that it was not necessary to believe in Christ's descent into hell; in the Holy Ghost; in the holy Catholic church; and in the communion of saints. A seventh point is attested in the 'Registrum abbatiae Johannis Whethamstede' only, that it was not necessary to believe in any other sense of scripture than the literal sense. John Foxe cites a point not attested in the medieval sources, that it was not necessary to believe in the materiality of the body of Christ in the sacrament. The heresies listed have the appearance of travesties of some of Pecock's statements in 'The Book of Faith', rather than being genuine points of theological heterodoxy. There is no record that Pecock attempted to contest the charges. 
It is possible that Pecock thought it advisable to accept the offer of recantation, believing that once he had abjured he would be allowed to resume his bishopric. Bourchier may have indicated as much. Indeed, after Pecock's recantation the archbishop sent John Stokes, bishop of Ely, to absolve him and restore him to his see. This was ratified on 13 June 1458 in a bull of Pope Calixtus III ('r'. 1455-8). The evidence suggests that the crown opposed his reinstatement, supporting the view that Pecock's prosecution served Lancastrian political interests. A letter sent to Bourchier in the king's name, dated 17 September 1458, claimed that the bull was contrary to the 'Statute of Provisors' and the royal prerogative. The archbishop was commanded to convene a meeting to consider the legal redress available to the crown. Thomas Bird, Pecock's successor in the see of St Asaph, Robert Stillington, a canon of Wells, Hugh Damlett, Pecock's long-standing opponent, and other doctors of divinity or law numbering about twenty in total, recommended that the king should request Pecock's removal from Chichester on the grounds that his translation to the see in 1450 had been void because he had been a heretic at that time. On 27 September 1458 the crown offered Pecock a pension on condition that he would renounce his claim to his see. If he did not, an appeal would be made to Rome. Probably Pecock refused. On 8 January 1459 Pope Pius II ('r'. 1458-64) provided John Arundel (died 1477), the king's physician and chaplain, to the see of Chichester, which was considered vacant because Pecock had been a heretic when translated to the see. 
Meanwhile the church authorities were seeking out any adherents of Pecock and copies of his works. Thomas Bourchier asked all bishops in the province of Canterbury to search for and seize any books by Pecock, and to note the names of their owners. Two of Pecock's alleged adherents, Thomas Lempster and John Harlowe, were casualties. In both cases the influence of the crown in the process against them is apparent. 
After his recantation Pecock came under suspicion of hiding his writings for posterity. In response to the concerns expressed by the crown and certain nobles and prelates, Pius II issued a mandate on 7 April 1459 ordering an investigation into the alleged concealment of the books by Pecock and others. If Pecock was found to be concealing his works he should be sent to Rome for punishment or, if it was not possible to punish him in this way, he should be deprived of all the trappings of the episcopal order. It is clear from the pope's mandate that the authorities sought to extinguish Pecock's influence by taking his writings out of circulation. 
Archbishop Bourchier issued a warning to adherents and put in hand, under the close eye of the crown, the final arrangements for depriving Pecock of the status of bishop. Pecock was sent to Thorney Abbey near Peterborough. On Bourchier's instructions he was to be assigned a private chamber and was to be allowed no visitors unless they were authorized by the king or archbishop. The only books he was to be allowed were service books, a psalter, a legendary, and a 'Bible'. He was not permitted to have writing materials. In all likelihood he died at Thorney, in or shortly after 1459. 
The attempts to eradicate Pecock's literary influence were evidently partially successful. From references in his extant writings and in the prosecution documents it appears that Pecock wrote many works that have not survived (a list of works presumed lost is provided by Green, 238-45). Apart from the six books mentioned above only a few fragments are extant: the material related to the preaching scandal in the 'Abrenunciacio Reginaldi Pecok', and extracts apparently from 'The Boke of Sygnes' printed by John Foxe, 'Commentarii rerum', 1, fols. 199'v'-200'r'. Pecock's correspondence with William Goddard is last recorded in the seventeenth century. Nevertheless, one of the most remarkable achievements of Pecock's career is the sheer volume of what has survived. Despite the zealous campaign against him, his six surviving works comprise an extant 'oeuvre' larger than that of any other identified author of original Middle English prose. 
Convicted of heresy on the evidence of his writings, Pecock became the only bishop before the Reformation to lose his see as a heretic. The explanation for Pecock's downfall has been a matter for debate. The tradition in modern historiography that he was a victim of a Yorkist plot because he was an associate of William de la Pole, duke of Suffolk, yielded to the view that the motive for his prosecution was theological rather than political. Both interpretations have been challenged in the light of Beaumont's letter and other prosecution documents (preserved in Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 789), which reveal that the impetus came from the crown. In this interpretation the Lancastrian dynasty saw the prosecution of Pecock as an opportunity to restore its royal authority by directing powerful anti-clerical feeling to its own ends. 


@@@@@


doc= 21750


Pehthelm (d. 735), bishop of Whithorn, was for some time a monk or deacon with Aldhelm, probably at Malmesbury. It was from him that Bede heard the story of a vision seen in Mercia between 705 and 709, and Bede also cites him as an authority for facts connected with West Saxon history, especially for an account of events which occurred on the spot where Hoedde, bishop of Winchester, had died. 
Pehthelm was consecrated as the first bishop of the see created by the Anglo-Saxons at Whithorn (known in Latin as Candida Casa) in Galloway, shortly before 731. He was learned in ecclesiastical law, and Boniface wrote to him in 735, asking whether a man may marry his godson's mother. Boniface had searched in vain through the papal decrees and canons for information, and asked both Nothhelm and Pehthelm if they could find the case mentioned. Boniface sent presents with his letter, including a corporal pallium. Pehthelm died in 735. 


@@@@@


doc= 21751


Pehtwine (d. 776/7), bishop of Whithorn (known in Latin as Candida Casa), was consecrated by Archbishop Ecgberht at Elvet in Durham on 17 July 763 or 764. He died on 19 September 776 or 777. 


@@@@@


doc= 21752


Pedder, John (c.1520-1571), dean of Worcester, was born in Suffolk and educated at Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1538, subsequently proceeding MA in 1542 and BTh in 1552. Having embraced protestantism, he went abroad on Queen Mary's accession in 1553. In 1554 he was at Strasbourg, and supported Grindal in his advocacy of the prayer book of the Church of England. But when, three years later, he was a member of the Frankfurt congregation, he took the side of the main body, the 'Knoxian' or Calvinistic church members, in the disputes as to discipline. 
On his return to England at Elizabeth's accession, Pedder became chaplain to Sir Nicholas Bacon, lord keeper from 22 December 1558. In that position he was very influential in recommending candidates to Bacon for lesser crown patronage. On 27 December 1559 he was installed dean of Worcester, succeeding the Catholic Seth Holland, who was imprisoned. Pedder was already prebendary of the sixth stall at Norwich Cathedral and rector of Redgrave in Suffolk, positions he owed to Bacon. He resigned Redgrave on 24 February 1560. On 26 September 1561 he was collated to the vicarage of Snitterfield, Warwickshire, and on 15 May 1563 to a prebend at Hereford, which he retained until death. He resigned his Norwich prebend on 24 February. Cecil's memoranda show that Pedder was considered for appointment as a bishop, but he was never raised to the episcopacy. 
Pedder attended the lower house of convocation in 1563 and subscribed the articles in February that year, although he also approved of and voted for the six articles propounding certain alterations in the rites and ceremonies (13 February 1563). In addition, he supported the twenty-one 'requests' in which the lower house of convocation petitioned for changes in the articles, liturgy, and discipline. 
Pedder's stipend as dean was $133 6's'. 8died at a time when the cathedral's total receipts amounted to about $1200 a year. During an investigation of abuses in 1587 the sexton, Henry Hymbleton, said that at the beginning of Elizabeth's reign the plate and jewels remaining at the cathedral were removed by Pedder and the then prebendaries 'and devided amongst them, but to what use they did employ the same' he could not tell. 'And the Copes, Vestments, and suche ornamentes were converted, some of them to the making of Cushens, and to some suche other uses belonging to the Churche, and the rest thereof converted, he knoweth not to what uses' (articles of complaint concerning church estates, 1587, Worcester Cathedral Library, MS A.25). 
Pedder died in 1571, between 7 April, when he drew up his will, and 4 May, when his successor was appointed, and was buried in the south transept of Worcester Cathedral, where a monument to his memory was later erected by Arthur Lake, dean of Worcester between 1608 and 1616. Its inscription recorded his exile under Mary and return under Elizabeth. His will shows him to have been a leaseholder of secular and ecclesiastical property on a modest scale in Gloucestershire and Worcestershire. His principal beneficiaries were his brother and sister; he also made bequests to the son and daughter of his (unnamed) deceased wife, in terms which show that she had been a widow when she married Pedder. 


@@@@@


doc= 21753


Peddie, James (1759-1845), minister of the Secession church, was born in Perth on 10 February 1759, the only surviving son of James Peddie, brewer, and his second wife, Ann Rattray. He was educated at the grammar school in Perth, spending some time with a private tutor before attending Perth Academy. At fifteen he joined a local religious society which met for prayer and scripture reading. In 1775 Peddie entered Edinburgh University, where he was influenced by the moral philosophers Adam Ferguson and Dugald Stewart. Two years later he left the university to attend the Secession Divinity Hall in Haddington where John Brown (1722-1787) had been appointed the theological tutor. Prompted by Locke's thinking on religious toleration Peddie began to question the statement from the Westminster confession of faith concerning the power of the civil magistrate in enforcing religion on society. Peddie was licensed as preacher of the gospel on 6 February 1782 and became minister of the Bristo Street meeting-house, Edinburgh, on 3 April the following year. His election came after a period of considerable controversy within the congregation which eventually divided, the minority building a second church in Rose Street in 1786. Peddie remained as minister of Bristo Street for the remainder of his life. 
In May 1795 a proposal came before the synod permitting ministers to disagree with the Westminster confession's statement concerning the power of civil magistrates in religious matters. The Enlightenment ethos, with its encouragement of the right to freedom of enquiry and conscience, led many within the Secession movement to object to civil government's association with a single form of Christian faith. Peddie and other leading theologians of the New Light school advocated this liberal view. In 1799 the synod allowed ministers and elders to adopt divergent opinions on the issue at their ordination, although a minority of Old Light supporters broke away to form the Original Burgher Presbytery until it was united with the Church of Scotland in 1839. 
In 1799 the Church of Scotland minister William Porteous accused the New Light Associate Synod of adopting principles of freedom and liberty that were influenced by the French Revolution. Peddie responded to Porteous in his 'A Defence of the Associate Synod Against the Charge of Sedition', which gained much praised from Dugald Stewart for its clarity and vigour, and as one of the 'most masterly pieces of classical sarcasm in our language' (J. Kay, 'A Review of Original Portraits and Caricature Etchings', ed. H. Paton, 2 vols., 1838, 2.352). Peddie also communicated his defence of the synod to the prime minister, William Pitt, with the effect that Henry Dundas expressed his confidence in the patriotism of these 'loyal citizens'. This defence of the synod followed several earlier publications for which Peddie had also been commended. In November 1788 he preached two sermons on the anniversary of the revolution of 1688 which praised the events of 1688-9 for delivering the nation from civil oppression, ecclesiastical tyranny, and 'popish superstition'. Both sermons were published a year later as 'The Revolution the Work of God, and a Cause of Joy'. John Erskine, leader of the popular party of the Church of Scotland, claimed that of all the commentaries on the centenary of the revolution only Peddie's 'pleased my taste' (Erskine to Charles Nisbet, 21 April 1789, in S. Miller, 'Memoir of the Rev. Charles Nisbet', New York, 1840, 196). However, Peddie's stance also put him at odds with some Anti-Burgher seceders, such as Archibald Bruce, who believed that churches should not celebrate secular events. A prolific author, Peddie's other significant titles include 'The Perpetuity, Advantages, and Universality of the Christian Religion' (1796), 'Jehovah's Care to Perpetuate the Redeemer's Name' (1809), and 'A Practical Exposition of the Book of Jonah' (1842). Between 1797 and 1802 Peddie was also an editor of the 'Christian Magazine', to which he was a regular contributor. 
In a ministry spanning sixty years Peddie served as moderator of the Associate Synod in 1789 and, following the formation of the United Secession church (1820), once more in 1825. In line with the general expansion of the secession movement, the Bristo Street congregation increased in numbers and erected a larger building in 1804. 
Although a member of a seceding denomination, Peddie was associated with many missionary, educational, and social enterprises. In 1791 he became treasurer of a fund to assist impoverished clergy in rural parishes, a position he held for forty-five years. In conjunction with Gavin Struthers, minister of the Relief church in Edinburgh, he formed the Edinburgh Subscription Library in November 1794. In the following year he supported the founding of the London Missionary Society, acting as a secretary to its Edinburgh auxiliary, as well as being a co-founder of the Scottish Missionary Society, established in February 1796 ['see 'Founders of the London Missionary Society]. A year on he established a fund to provide for widows of dissenting ministers in Scotland. In 1818 he was awarded an honorary DD by Marischal College, Aberdeen. 
Peddie was twice married: first, in 1787, to Margaret (died 1792), the eldest daughter of the Revd George Coventry of Stichill, Roxburghshire, and second, in 1795, to Barbara, a daughter of Donald Smith, lord provost of Edinburgh, with whom he had nine children, including 
James Peddie died in Edinburgh on 11 October 1845 and was buried at Warriston cemetery on 17 October. Thereafter William became the sole pastor of the congregation where, like his father, he remained for the rest of his life. In 1846 he published an edition of his father's 'Discourses', with a memoir, while himself serving as an editor of the 'United Presbyterian Magazine'. A moderator of the United Presbyterian church in 1855, William Peddie had become an honorary DD from Jefferson College, Pennsylvania, in 1843. He died on 23 February 1893 and was buried in Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 21754


Peddie, John (d. 1840), army officer, entered the army as an ensign in the 38th foot on 26 September 1805. He became lieutenant on 26 August 1807, and went with the 1st battalion to Portugal in 1808. He took part in the battle of Rolica, the battle of Vimeiro, Sir John Moore's advance into Spain, and the battle of Corunna. After serving in the Walcheren expedition he returned to Spain in 1812, and was present at the battle of Salamanca, losing his right arm. He was promoted captain on half pay on 23 September 1813, but was brought back to full pay in the 97th foot on 25 March 1824, and became a major in the 95th on 16 June 1825. After a further period on half pay, he became lieutenant-colonel of the 31st on 26 October 1830, and of the 72nd highlanders on 20 April 1832. In the same year he was made a KH. 
At the beginning of 1835 the 72nd, then quartered in Cape Town, were ordered to Grahamstown to participate in the first of the Cape frontier wars. At the end of March the British troops, under Sir Benjamin D'Urban, entered Kaffraria, and on 8 April Peddie, leaving the camp at midnight with four companies of the 72nd and the 1st provisional battalion, ascended the Izolo Berg. Having divided his forces into two columns, he attacked and routed the Kaffirs. By September operations were at an end; the Gaika country was annexed as far as the Kei (though the annexation was not ratified until 1846), and the 72nd returned to Grahamstown. A town in the newly conquered territory was named after Peddie. 
On 23 February 1838 Peddie exchanged into the 90th regiment, then stationed in Ceylon. There his health broke down, and he died at Newara Elija in August 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 21755


William Peddie (1805-1893), minister of the United Presbyterian church, who was born on 15 September 1805 in Edinburgh. William was educated at Crichton Street School, the high school in Edinburgh, and later at the university before entering the Secession Divinity Hall in Glasgow, where he was tutored by John Dick. He was licensed to preach the gospel in May 1827 and became his father's colleague at Bristo Street in October 1828. 


@@@@@


doc= 21756


Peden, Alexander (1626?-1686), preacher, was born probably in 1626, probably at Auchencloich, near Sorn, Ayrshire, the eldest son in a modestly propertied family on good terms with the Boswells of Auchinleck and other local gentry. Possibly after schooling at nearby Mauchline he attended Glasgow University between 1643 and 1648. Thereafter his movements are uncertain but he was most likely serving as schoolmaster or family tutor in different places. He was certainly schoolmaster, session clerk, and precentor at Tarbolton, 10 miles from his birthplace, during John Guthrie's ministry. In 1659 Peden passed his trials for licence in the presbytery of Biggar and Lanark, although Ayr presbytery may have been responsible for the actual licensing. It was while a probationer under the latter that a woman in Tarbolton accused him of fathering her child. The charge was exposed as false when the woman committed suicide, but Peden, who never married, may have been left scarred. 
In 1659 Peden was ordained to New Luce in Wigtownshire, where he served until ejected in 1662 for refusing to conform to episcopacy. His parting sermon, on 'Acts' 20: 31-2, lasted until midnight. He then symbolically barred the church door against an intruded successor; there was none, in fact, until after the revolution of 1688-9. Peden now took to field preaching over much of southern and central Scotland, becoming the most revered and romanticized of all the conventicle preachers. He exerted a profound hold over common folk by his oracular style, rich in vivid imagery and blunt aphorisms and elevated by a prophetic inspiration. Peden 'the prophet' combined a kind of second sight (insight and foresight together) with impassioned forewarning of imminent peril or unseen hope. His prophecies also assumed a denunciatory directness, decreeing by prediction death, or woe on specific godless individuals. 
From early 1663 Peden was a marked man. Declared a rebel and forfeited on 25 January 1666, he was excluded from the pardon of 1 October 1667 after the Pentland rising. He retreated to Ireland between 1670 and 1673, but was apprehended in June 1673 in Knockdow, Ayrshire. After trial in Edinburgh before the privy council on 26 June he was imprisoned, with some forty covenanters, on the Bass Rock in the Firth of Forth until 9 October 1677, and thereafter in Edinburgh tolbooth. Refused release to move to Ireland, he was sentenced instead to transportation to Virginia and left Scotland in December 1678, but after the sea journey to London he and others were set free when the outward bound captain refused to carry prisoners sentenced for religious convictions. After six months Peden returned to Scotland. 
In the next few obscure years Peden paid at least two visits to Ireland. In 1685 he preached his last sermon, at Colinswood on the Water of Ayr. Prematurely aged and debilitated, he found shelter in a cave on the banks of the Ayr near Sorn. Sensing approaching death, he moved to his brother's house at Auchinleck, where he died on 28 January 1686. Buried at Auchinleck church, his remains were disinterred six weeks later by government troops. Failing to hang the corpse on the gallows at nearby Cumnock, they buried it at their foot. Out of reverence for Peden the community adopted the spot as their burial-ground. South and central Scotland is dotted with sites honouring Peden's memory -- Peden's Pulpit, Peden's Stone -- and some monuments were, even in the late twentieth century, still the scene of commemorative services. Patrick Walker assiduously assembled his experiences and prophecies, although only two sermons, preached when he revisited his old parish in 1682, survive; they were published as 'The Lord's Trumpet Sounding an Alarm' (1720?). No other covenanter's name took such affectionate root among widespread localities. 


@@@@@


doc= 21757


Petroc (fl. 6th cent.), monk, was the founder of the church of Padstow and patron saint of Bodmin, Cornwall. His earliest life was probably written in Cornwall in the eleventh century; it survives in the 'Obituary' of St Meen, Brittany (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 9889). A number of texts concerning St Petroc, including a twelfth-century life partly derived from the St Meen life but containing much independent material, are preserved in the fourteenth-century Gotha manuscript compilation of British hagiographies, and an abridgement of the St Meen text was included by John Tynemouth in his fourteenth-century collection of lives of British saints (rearranged in 'Nova legenda Anglie'). Petroc is also mentioned in several Welsh manuscripts of saints' lives and genealogies. 
Unfortunately all these materials are legendary in character. They make Petroc a Welshman, son of King Glywys of Glamorgan (according to one genealogy, an uncle of St Cadog), or alternatively a son of a prince of Cornwall. The lives relate how he gave up his inheritance to become a monk, travelled to Ireland, Cornwall, Rome, the Holy Land, and India, and finally returned to Cornwall and led a life of ever-increasing solitude, abstinence, and miraculous power until his death at Treravel, near Padstow (commemorated on 4 June). An episode in which he visited a mysterious island in a glass boat recalls early Irish legend. 
Historically, the most interesting details concern Petroc's relations with two other Cornish holy men, Wethenoc and Guron, who departed from their hermitages at Padstow and Bodmin to make way for him; this may reflect the takeover of independent monasteries by Petroc's expanding church after his death rather than events during his lifetime. The earliest centre of his cult, where he was buried, was Padstow, the site of his first landing in Cornwall. His relics had been transferred to Bodmin by the late eleventh century. In 1177, according to a vivid narrative in the Gotha manuscript, they were stolen by a Bodmin canon and taken to St Meen, Brittany, whence they were restored by the intervention of Henry II. They disappeared at the Reformation but the ivory casket in which they had been kept was rediscovered in the nineteenth century and is now in Bodmin church. 
The wealth and importance of Bodmin church, and Petroc's status as co-patron of the diocese of Cornwall, caused his cult to spread more widely than those of most Cornish saints. He was the patron of many churches in south-west England, south Wales, and Brittany; already in the eleventh century his name was invoked in the litanies of Exeter and perhaps of Winchester and Salisbury, and in the middle ages his feast day was widely celebrated, eventually entering the Sarum calendar. 


@@@@@


doc= 21758


Peebles, David (fl. 1530-1576), composer, was a canon at the Augustinian priory of St Andrews until the Scottish Reformation of 1559-60. In 1571 Robart Stewart, commendator of St Andrews and a prominent reformer, granted Peebles and his spouse, Katherine Kynneir (died 1592), a charter of land within the grounds of St Andrews, suggesting that he had remained in his former monastery. According to marginalia in the Wode partbooks, as 'ane of the cheiff musitians into this land' he was commissioned by James Stewart, former prior of St Andrews, natural son of James V and future earl of Moray and regent of Scotland, to 'set thrie pairts to the tenor' of certain of the psalms in a 'plane and dulce' style thereby forgoing 'the curiosity of musike'. Perhaps as a consequence of this stricture, Peebles 'wes not earnest' to complete what he may have regarded as a menial task, but the tenacity of the prior's agent Thomas Wode was eventually repaid with an extremely accomplished set of 105 psalm settings. These form the core of the Wode partbooks. Although Wode's manuscript remained unpublished, some of Peebles's psalms appeared in Edward Millar's psalter of 1635, where he is numbered among 'the primest musicians that ever this kingdome had'. The Wode partbooks also preserve two Latin motets by Peebles. According to Wode's marginalia, Peebles had composed his elegant four-part polyphonic setting of 'Si quis diligit me' about 1530 and presented it to James V, who 'being a musitian... did lyke it verray weill'. In 1576 Robart Stewart commissioned Peebles to set a protestant Latin version of 'Psalm 3', 'Quam multi domine'. This dynamic work eloquently demonstrates Peebles's continuing acquaintance with contemporary compositional practices. He was dead by 1592, the date of his wife's will, which describes her as Peebles's 'relict' and also mentions two lawful sons, Andrew and Thomas. 


@@@@@


doc= 21759


Peel, John (1776-1854), huntsman, was born on 13 November 1776 at Park End Cottage, Caldbeck, Cumberland, the son of William Peel, a farmer and horse dealer, and Lettice Scott. In 1797 he eloped with Mary White of Uldale to Gretna in Scotland, where young couples could be married easily, quickly, and without parental consent; they were married on 18 December. It was a happy union, and of their thirteen children only one died young. Peel's love of hunting was remarkable. For fifty-five years he maintained, at his sole expense, a pack, usually of twelve couples, of hounds, and generally kept two horses. He had a faultless knowledge of the country and of hunting, and was long aided by his eldest son, 'Young John'. He was a coarse, heavy-drinking, rather selfish man, but could also be generous and passionate. 
Peel's reputation was largely attributable to the song celebrating his prowess as a hunter by his friend John Woodcock Graves. This was written during the winter of 1829, when Peel and Graves were planning a hunting expedition in the parlour of the inn at Caldbeck. A casual question from Graves's daughter as to the words sung to an old Cumberland rant (tune), 'Bonnie Annie', caused Graves to write impromptu 'D'ye ken John Peel', the five verses of which he sang to the ancient air (William Metcalfe, the choirmaster of Carlisle Cathedral, set the verses to its actual music in 1869). Graves jokingly prophesied that Peel would 'be sung when we've both run to earth'. Few songs have so firmly established themselves in popular estimation and so significantly helped to create and diffuse an image of Cumberland. 
Late in his life Peel's neighbours and friends, including Sir Wilfrid Lawson and George Moore the philanthropist, presented him with a sum of money in acknowledgement of his long services. Besides his patrimonial estate at Caldbeck, Peel acquired, through his wife, a property at Ruthwaite, on which his last years were spent. There he died on 13 November 1854, probably from a hunting injury. He was buried, and a headstone erected over his grave, ornamented with emblems of the chase, in the churchyard at Caldbeck. 
Graves, who was born in a house next to the Market Hall in the High Street of Wigton in Cumberland on 9 February 1795, emigrated to Van Diemen's Land in 1833, and settled in Hobart Town, where he died on 17 August 1886, leaving a large family. He published 'Songs and Ballads of Cumberland' and a 'Monody on John Peel'. 


@@@@@


doc= 21760


Peel, Jonathan (1799-1879), politician, soldier, and patron of the turf, the fifth son of Sir Robert Peel, first baronet (1750-1830), cotton manufacturer, and his first wife, Ellen Yates (1766-1803), and brother of Sir Robert Peel, second baronet, the politician, was born at Chamber Hall, near Bury, Lancashire, on 12 October 1799. He was sent to Rugby School in 1811, and on 15 June 1815, three days before the battle of Waterloo, he received a commission as a second lieutenant in the rifle brigade. The peace that followed prevented him from seeing service, and his subsequent steps were obtained by purchase. From 3 December 1818 to 13 December 1821 he served as a captain in the 71st highlanders, and from 7 November 1822 to 19 May 1825 as a major in the Grenadier Guards. He was a major of the 69th foot from 3 October 1826 to 7 June 1827, and a lieutenant-colonel of the 53rd foot from 7 June 1827 until he was placed on half pay on 9 August 1827. He became a brevet-colonel on 23 November 1841, a major-general on 20 June 1854, and a lieutenant-general on 7 December 1859, and sold out of the army on 4 August 1863. In 1854 he applied to Lord Panmure, the secretary for war, for permission to join the siege of Sevastopol in the Crimea; he was then a healthy man of fifty-five, but his application was refused on the grounds that he was too old. 
On 19 March 1824 Peel married Lady Alicia Jane (died 1887), the youngest daughter of Archibald Kennedy, first marquess of Ailsa, with whom he had five sons and three daughters. At the 1826 general election he entered parliament as a tory as one of the members for Norwich. He exchanged in 1831 for the more secure borough of Huntingdon, which he continued to represent until his retirement from parliamentary life at the dissolution of 1868. During his brother's second administration, in 1841-6, Peel held the post of surveyor-general of the ordnance. He was not given office in Lord Derby's first administration in 1852; but when Derby again became premier in 1858, he appointed Peel as secretary for war and a member of the cabinet -- a significant gesture towards the name of Sir Robert Peel, his former colleague and rival. Peel soon made his mark in official life, and became very popular. None knew better than he the wants of the army or more thoroughly mastered the details of the estimates. His letters to 'The Times' on military expenditure showed a thorough grasp of the statistics of the subject. He again held the post of secretary of state for war in Derby's third administration during 1866-7, but he resigned office on 2 March 1867 with lords Carnarvon and Salisbury rather than support Disraeli's scheme of reform. Throughout his political career Peel preserved an irreproachable reputation, and, although a strong Conservative, showed himself when in office a strenuous supporter of inquiries into abuses in all matters of military organization. 
Peel was noted for his devotion to horse racing and his deep knowledge of all things connected with the turf. His racing career began in 1821, when he was part owner of some horses with the duke of Richmond and Lord Stradbrooke. In 1824 his mare Phantom ran second for the Oaks to Lord Jersey's Cobweb. It was not until 1830 that Peel's name first appeared in the 'Racing Calendar' when he raced in confederacy with his relative General Jonathan Yates. Two years later he enjoyed success when his horse Archibald won the Two Thousand Guineas, and his good fortune culminated with the triumph of his Orlando in the Derby of 1844. In that race, Ionian, another of his horses, came second. This was one of the most sensational races on record, and will always be associated with the exposure of a particularly serious fraud. A horse entered as Running Rein came in first but, after Peel's appeal, was disqualified as being a four-year-old, and the race was awarded to Orlando. Mr A. Wood, the owner of Running Rein, then brought an action against Peel, as a member of the Jockey Club, for recovery of the stakes. The case was heard before Baron Alderson on 1-2 July 1844, when, Wood not producing Running Rein, a verdict was returned for the defendant. On 18 August 1851 Peel sold his stud for 12,000 guineas; but on the death of the earl of Glasgow in 1869, having been left some horses, he resumed his connection with the turf. His favourite jockeys were Arthur Pavis and Nat Flatman. In the Newmarket second October meeting of 1878 Peel's purple jacket and orange cap, familiar on English racecourses for nearly sixty years, were borne to victory for the last time by a colt called Peter -- so named after a nickname given to Lord Glasgow by his closest friends. At the time of his death, Peel's nominations for coming races numbered about fifty. 
Peel died at his seat, Marble Hill, Twickenham, Middlesex, on 13 February 1879 and was buried in Twickenham new cemetery on the 19th. 


@@@@@


doc= 21761


Peel, Sir Lawrence (1799-1884), judge in India, was born at Wandsworth, Surrey, on 10 August 1799, the third son of Joseph Peel (died 1821), of Bowes Farm, Middlesex, and his wife, Anne, second daughter of Jonathan Haworth of Harcroft, Lancashire. His father was a younger brother of Sir Robert Peel, first baronet (1750-1830), and so he was first cousin to Sir Robert Peel, second baronet (1788-1850). He was educated at St John's College, Cambridge, matriculating in Lent 1817 and graduating BA in 1821 and MA in 1824. He was admitted at the Middle Temple on 31 October 1820 and called to the bar on 7 May 1824, went on the northern circuit, and attended the Lancaster, Preston, and Manchester sessions. 
Peel was advocate-general at Calcutta from 1840 to 1842, and in 1842, on promotion to the chief-justiceship of the supreme court at Calcutta, was knighted by patent on 18 May. During 1854 and 1855 he was also vice-president of the legislative council at Calcutta. He resided in the suburbs, first at Cossipore and then at Garden Reach. He gave away in public charity his official income of $8000 per annum. He was consequently very popular and on his retirement in November 1855 a statue of him was erected in Calcutta. 
After his return to England, Peel was sworn of the privy council and was made a paid member of the judicial committee on 4 April 1856. He was elected a bencher of the Middle Temple on 8 May 1856 and became treasurer of his inn on 3 December 1866. From 1857 he was a director of the East India Company, and on 16 June 1858 was made an Oxford DCL. In January 1864 he became president of Guy's Hospital, London. He was president of the East India Association (1874). He was for some years a correspondent of 'The Times' on legal and general topics. He wrote 'Horae nauseae' (1841), poems translated and original (the latter probably juvenile), and 'A Sketch of the Life and Character of Sir R. Peel' (1860). He died, unmarried, at his home, Garden Reach (named after the Calcutta suburb), Ventnor, Isle of Wight, on 22 July 1884. 
Peel has sometimes been confused with his quasi-namesake 


@@@@@


doc= 21762


Peel, Paul (1860-1892), painter, was born on 7 November 1860 at London, Ontario, Canada, to English parents. His artistic ambitions were encouraged by his father, a marble cutter and drawing instructor, and he received his first formal training at the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts in Philadelphia. He was elected a member of the Ontario Society of Artists in 1880, in which year he left for Europe. He studied for a time at the Royal Academy before moving to Pont-Aven in Brittany where, in the first part of 1881, he produced the religious work 'Devotion'. Later that year he settled in Paris and in 1882 enrolled at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, studying under Jean-Leon Gerome. He afterwards made only occasional short sojourns in his native country. His art was entirely French in character and he was a successful exhibitor at the salon of the Societe des Artistes Francais, gaining a third-class medal in 1891 for his large picture 'After the Bath'. The previous year he had obtained honourable mention for 'Life is Bitter'. Seven of his works were included in the Colonial and Indian Exhibition in London in 1886 and the prince of Wales was among his English patrons. Peel's favourite subjects were taken from the nursery, but during the summer months he used to work 'en plein air' in the northern provinces of France. He was an excellent colourist and a master of delicate effects of light. He established a notable reputation in Europe during his brief lifetime and was elected to the Royal Canadian Academy in 1890. He died in Paris on 3 October 1892, leaving a widow and one son. 


@@@@@


doc= 21763


Peel, Sir Robert, first baronet (1750-1830), calico printer and politician, was born at Oswaldtwistle, Lancashire, on 25 April 1750, the third of the seven sons of Robert Peel (1723-1795), a dealer (or chapman) in the linen and cotton cloth known as 'Blackburn Greys', and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Howarth. About 1760 the father went into partnership with his brother-in-law Jonathan Howarth, and four years later they began a small calico printing factory at Brookside, Oswaldtwistle; William Yates, the publican of the Black Bull inn, was brought in to provide warehouse space and additional capital. The earliest success of the enterprise was the production of a simple parsley leaf design from which Robert Peel senior earned his trade nickname, 'Parsley' Peel. Young Robert gained his early commercial and industrial experience in this small concern before attending Blackburn grammar school and undergoing an apprenticeship to one of the Yates family of Blackburn. He also had some brief commercial experience in London and on the continent. 
Parsley Peel, according to his son Robert, 'possessed in an eminent degree a mechanical genius', and, seizing on a number of innovations in the 1760s, carried his firm into the forefront of development of the early English cotton industry. James Hargreaves, the inventor of the spinning jenny, was one of Howarth and Peel's weavers, so it was not long before Parsley Peel induced him to part with his secret. Arkwright was a close rival in the calico printing business, and his originality was vigorously contested by Peel and a group of other Lancashire manufacturers while they devoured what was most profitable in his new system of factory spinning, then quickly improved it. Robert Peel junior inherited his father's mechanical ability and enterprise, and had a similar way of assuming a leading role in successive innovations by means of acquisitions and partnerships. In particular, he was among the first group to buy an interest in Crompton's mule spinning technique (1780), and, through the Ainsworths of Haliwell, Bolton, he was in the vanguard of muslin making and chemical bleaching (1790). He was probably the first to apply steam power to mule spinning (1787). 
Parsley Peel is said to have given Robert $500 to start business on his own account, very likely because his most able son was restless in the family fold. In 1772, at the age of twenty-two, he started a new enterprise on the Chamber Hall estate at Bury, 8 miles from Manchester, in partnership with William Yates and his uncle Howarth. The core of the business was a calico printing works, and there were also spinning mills in the vicinity and hundreds of handloom weavers employed in the Pennine villages and hamlets roundabout. The concern was established just as the cotton industry was taking off in Lancashire, and grew rapidly. On 8 July 1783 Peel married Ellen (1766-1803), the daughter of William Yates; they had nine surviving children, six sons and three daughters. By 1784 he was employing at least 6800 people directly or indirectly. Dr Aiken, writing in 1795, reported that the fabrics made and printed were 'chiefly the finest kind of the cotton manufactory... in high request both in Manchester and London' (Aiken, 268). When the site became inadequate -- bleaching fields took up many acres round all print works at this time -- more land was acquired, then a second site was opened at Ramsbottom, just to the north of Bury. For most of the 1780s, Livesey, Hargreaves & Co. of Preston was the largest of the Lancashire calico printers, but the collapse of this leviathan of the trade in 1788 left Peel, Yates & Co. of Bury as undisputed leaders. 
Not content with this spectacular achievement, Peel found further partners to start calico printing on other virgin sites. In the later 1780s, under the impetus of Crompton's mule spinning technique, Bolton was emerging as the centre of fine cotton spinning, and the possibility of imitating fine Indian cotton fabrics (muslin) challenged the Lancashire industry. Peel was the foremost partner in an integrated spinning, weaving, and finishing operation at three sites in Bolton, in 1787. The other partners were the Ainsworths, already noticed as pioneers of muslin manufacture and then of chemical bleaching in the area. Hand-loom weavers were in short supply, so Peels, Ainsworth & Co. employed them as far away as Warrington, Burnley, Chorley, Wigan, and even Paisley in Scotland. 
The pinnacle of this tireless expansion was reached in the early 1790s, when Peel purchased an estate of 4000 acres at Fazeley, near Tamworth, Staffordshire, both to build another integrated cotton works and to satisfy his social and political ambitions. Tamworth is 70 miles from Manchester, well outside the area stimulated by the expansion of the cotton industry, and so lacked the internal economies of location, but this does not seem to have deterred Peel. The town had good communications by road and canal, adequate water power, cheap labour, and local capitalists willing to back him. Peel's net profits were said to be running at over $70,000 a year at this time, so there was no shortage of resources, at any rate for the time being. However, Peel's principal motive for this new venture was quickly revealed, for in 1790 he was elected member of parliament for Tamworth. There is some evidence of financial strain at points in the later 1790s -- particularly the closure of Peel's Bank in Manchester in 1793 -- but by this time the entrepreneur was so rich that his position must have been virtually impregnable. 
'Peel was to calico printing what Arkwright was to spinning: a man of iron frame and mind, possessing great mercantile talent and application' (Potter, 10), a quality much rarer in the industrial revolution than its early historians assumed. Like Arkwright, he 'introduced among his operatives that order, arrangement and subdivision of employment which form the marked characteristics of the factory system... he insisted on a system of punctuality and regularity which approached the discipline of military drill' (Taylor, 1.6). But, perhaps most important of all, he had that keen sense of market opportunity that has been recognized as the common characteristic of all the outstanding entrepreneurs of the industrial revolution in Britain. English calico printing was established three-quarters of a century before Peel launched out in business, and was in high repute in Europe and America throughout the eighteenth century. Peel's policy was evidently the assiduous cultivation of the popular market, at first by copying London designs and undercutting the metropolitan prices, then by adoption of the new machinery and factory system which Lancashire pioneered. 
In politics, as in industry, Peel learned much from his father, and drew on his family's status and authority in the cotton trade -- Parsley Peel having appeared at the head of several Manchester-based agitations in the 1780s. Although Arkwright and his partners had secured the repeal of the 'Calico Act', the industry still laboured under a heavy excise duty, so the younger Robert Peel and his friends took up the cause of freedom from taxation. It was in this cause that he entered parliament and supported William Pitt, whom he regarded as an enlightened protector of industry. 
However, Peel's political career is remembered principally for his promotion of the 'Health and Morals of Apprentices Act', effectively the first British factory legislation. By the end of the century Peel employed more than a thousand pauper apprentices, children sent from distant parts of England to work on routine tasks in the spinning factories. Having so many other matters to attend to, the partners delegated the supervision to overseers who were sometimes less than adequate; there were scandals at Radcliffe mill (1784) and following a report from the Birmingham overseers about children sent to Lancashire (1796). Peel had the candour to admit the excessive hours worked and his neglect of juvenile employees. The letter-books of Edward Smith Stanley, MP for Preston, show the Lancashire manufacturers' angry opposition to Peel's act, so that his success displays his sincerity and determination as a reformer. 
Peel was created a baronet in 1800 following his firm's $10,000 donation to the voluntary contribution against French invasion (1797) and his raising of six companies of militia soldiers at Bury (1798). The bankruptcy of the Howarths (former partners) in 1799 and of Peel, Wilkes, Dickinson and Goodall (the London branch of Peel's Bank) in 1806 evidently terminated any further expansion that Sir Robert had planned for his business. From this period he began to run down his industrial interests, mainly by sale (or gift) to competent managers and other connections. By the end of the Napoleonic War only a few peripheral members of the Peel family retained an interest in textiles. On 17 October 1805 Peel married Susanna, the daughter of Francis Clerke; there were no children of this union. She died in 1824. Peel had a serious illness that same year and a relapse in 1830. He died on 3 May 1830 at Drayton Manor, the house he had built near Tamworth, and was buried next to his first wife in the vault of Drayton Bassett church on 11 May. Of Sir Robert's nine surviving children, five, including William Yates Peel and Jonathan Peel, became MPs, two daughters married MPs, a son became a dean in the Church of England, and a daughter married a clergyman who later became a dean. His heir, Sir Robert Peel, was prime minister in 1834-5 and from 1841 to 1846. His youngest son was Laurence Peel ['see under 'Peel, Sir Lawrence], MP for Cockermouth from 1827 to 1830. 


@@@@@


doc= 21764


Peel, Sir Robert, second baronet (1788-1850), prime minister, was born on 5 February 1788 at Chamber Hall, Bury, the third child and the eldest boy among the eleven children of Sir Robert Peel, first baronet (1750-1830), printed calico manufacturer, landowner, and MP, and his first wife, Ellen Yates (1766-1803), who was the daughter of one of his two partners, Haworth and Yates. Two sisters died in infancy. Three sisters and five brothers survived, and all married. Peel was only two when his father bought a property in Tamworth and entered parliament as the member for the borough in 1790. 
Peel showed an aptitude for his first lessons, taken with the rector of Bury, the Revd James Hargreaves, and may have preferred the schoolroom to the streets, where his red hair and curls exposed him to insult. Peel was eight when his father took possession of Drayton Manor, Tamworth, in 1796, and ten when the family moved in. He brought with him a Lancashire accent, traces of which could be detected in his speech throughout his life. At Drayton, he received his lessons from the Revd Francis Blick. Out of school, he had the run of the park. He learned to ride, but preferred to exercise on foot, with a gun, rambling and rough shooting. In 1800, when he was twelve, his father, a supporter of government, was made a baronet. In January 1801, when Peel was already beginning to grow tall, he was sent away from home to board at the Revd Mark Drury's house at Harrow School. He had been there two years, and was fifteen, when his mother died. Years later, he said that he had misspent his time at Harrow, and reminiscences tell of long excursions through the countryside with his guns, which he kept at a nearby cottage. But Latin and Greek came easily to him, and his schoolfellows ran to him for help with their translations and verses. In 1804 Byron and Peel declaimed together, Byron taking the part of the judicious Latinus, which allowed him -- he was lame -- to sit down, and Peel that of the impetuous Turnus. Peel left school at Christmas 1804, and resided for some months at his father's London house in Upper Grosvenor Street, attending lectures at the Royal Institution and listening to debates in the House of Commons. It is said that Pitt himself asked Sir Robert who the young man was, and led him into the chamber. 
Peel spent the summer of 1805 at Drayton studying mathematics with the Revd R. Bridge, a senior wrangler from Cambridge, before going up to Oxford in October. At Christ Church, Oxford, his first tutor was Thomas Gaisford and his second Charles Lloyd, the future bishop of Oxford, with whom Peel continued to correspond about church and state until Lloyd's death in 1829. Peel's closest friend was Henry Vane, son and heir of Lord Darlington, and later duke of Cleveland. Peel expanded at Christ Church. Cricket is mentioned, and rowing, and he dressed for effect. He entered his name for (oral) examination in both 'literae humaniores' and mathematics in November 1808. In the weeks leading up to the examinations he overworked, could not sleep, and talked of withdrawing. The day before the exams he played tennis. Peel did not disappoint his examiners, or his audience. He was the first person ever to be placed in the first class in both schools, and his performance became legendary. 
Peel did not follow his father and grandfather into the family business, and within a few weeks of his coming of age in February 1809, his father used his influence with the Portland ministry to secure him a seat in the House of Commons. There was a vacancy at Cashel, a corrupt borough with a couple of dozen voters. A deal was arranged by Sir Arthur Wellesley, and Peel was elected on 14 April. He took his seat straight away, but did not speak until 23 January 1810, when he was invited to second the reply to the king's speech. Acceptance signified allegiance to the ministry, and Peel took a patriotic line, urging resistance to Napoleon, support for Sir Arthur Wellesley's renewed campaign in the Peninsula, and confidence in British commerce. Four months later Lord Liverpool, the secretary of state for war and colonies (and another Christ Church man), offered Peel his first post as an under-secretary. Peel took charge of departmental correspondence with the colonies -- everything, he said, from Botany Bay to Prince Edward Island. As his chief sat in the upper house, he was also called upon to answer questions in the House of Commons. His departmental and his parliamentary skills, his administrative abilities, and his authority as a speaker thus grew together. Lord Liverpool found Peel an official house, and here he began to entertain. It was in this period, rather than at school or university, that his enduring friendships were formed, with Henry Goulburn and John Wilson Croker. 
In May 1812 Liverpool became prime minister and invited Peel to join the Irish administration as chief secretary. Peel held the post for six years -- the longest tenure in the nineteenth century -- and served three lord lieutenants, the duke of Richmond, Lord Whitworth, and Lord Talbot. Nothing in Peel's upbringing gave him the historical imagination to question the legitimacy of British rule in Ireland, and he cheerfully joined a regime which was locked into reliance upon penal laws and the protestant ascendancy. As chief secretary he was required to attend to business upon both sides of the water. In Ireland he stage-managed the election of sound protestants to parliament in 1812 and 1818, and persuaded Whitworth to dissolve the principal -- and far from revolutionary -- organization representing Catholics, the 'Catholic board', in 1814. In London, where politicians were, in the eyes of the administration in Dublin, embarrassingly soft about Catholic claims for political rights, he opposed every proposal for relief. Peel delivered an outspoken expression of the case against the Catholics in 1817 ('Hansard 1', 36.404-23). Catholics owed allegiance to a foreign power, he was not prepared to erect the influence of the pope into 'a fourth estate', and he tied his belief in the future of the Union to his faith in the exclusive principle. What religion suggested was confirmed by political economy. Ireland was, in Peel's opinion, a primitive and backward land, and at this stage in his career Peel appears to have felt that in the long run the best hope for the country was that popery was something which a more prosperous people would grow out of. In the meantime Peel had to cope with the secret societies, the intimidation, and the crimes which resulted from the alienation of seven-eighths of the population. Like other chief secretaries he called for troop reinforcements, and renewed an 'Insurrection Act' (in 1814, 1815, 1816, and 1817). More promisingly, he declared that he would always prefer an army of police to an army of soldiers, and established a new Peace Preservation Force, controlled by the government in Dublin. In 1817 he responded to a famine by the procurement of food and the distribution of money. 
As chief secretary Peel proved his capacity to serve the lord lieutenant as 'his friend, his adviser, [and] his representative in parliament'. But the office had also begun to shape his life in other ways. His conduct in Ireland brought him the sobriquet Orange, bestowed by Daniel O'Connell, and led, in 1815, to a challenge to a duel, which did not take place, in Ostend. Peel was to carry with him for ever after a settled dislike for the great Irish patriot and all his ways. Peel's antagonism to Catholic claims for relief secured him the invitation, brought by Charles Lloyd, to stand, in preference to George Canning, for one of the two Oxford University seats in 1818. Peel was elected, but he had, perhaps, allowed himself to be miscast. His protestantism ran deep. But he acknowledged that Ireland had been misruled in the past. He had found the tools with which he was constrained to work -- a jobbing aristocracy with a 'vortex of local patronage', and loyalist associations -- distasteful, and he had spoken out in favour of the protestant ascendancy because he had been called upon to govern Ireland 'circumstanced as Ireland now is'. 
For six years Peel took but one real holiday, in 1815, when he met Wellington in Paris, heard from his own lips how the battle of Waterloo had been fought, and went on to stay with the duke of Richmond in Brussels and view the ground where the victory had been won. Peel left Ireland in August 1818 (he never went back), and did not rejoin Lord Liverpool's administration until January 1822. In the meantime he chaired a committee considering the expediency of requiring the Bank of England to resume paying gold, on demand, for its notes, and in due course he drafted the report and introduced the bill embodying the committee's proposals. The evidence taken before the bullion committee in 1811 had shown that the over-issue of paper currency since the suspension of cash payments in 1797 had resulted in a depreciation of the pound and a rise in the price of gold. The question was, did this matter? In 1811 the house had decided that the answer was yes, but not while there was a war on, and Peel himself had voted against resumption. Post-war experience persuaded him that over-issue also led to speculation, crises, unemployment, and political unrest. Now Peel thought the committee's first responsibility was to protect the public creditor, who was morally entitled to be repaid in the coin which he had lent and not in a depreciated one. The committee moved swiftly into a consideration of the when and how (Peel's favourite ground), the accumulation of a reserve of gold, and the successive steps by which, starting with the larger notes, paper was to be made convertible into gold bullion, at the current price of $4 1's'. 0died the ounce (1 February 1820), at $3 19's'. 6died (1 October 1820), and at the 'ancient and permanent standard of value' $3 17's'. 10 1/2died (1 May 1821), until finally all notes, however small, were to be exchanged for $3 17's'. 10 1/2died in specie (1 May 1823). In thus rounding up the theoretical complexities of an issue, and giving effect to the solution he favoured in the clauses of a durable act of parliament, Peel was to have no equal. 
It is not clear whether, when he left Ireland, Peel had already fallen in love with Julia Floyd (1795-1859), the daughter of General Sir John Floyd, who was, when Peel arrived in Ireland in 1812, the second in command of the military forces, and his first wife, Rebecca Juliana, daughter of Charles Darke, a merchant in Madras. Julia had been born in India, and like Peel she had lost her mother (in 1802). She and her stepmother, Lady Denny, were entertained at the chief secretary's house in Phoenix Park. Peel, we are told, was unusually attentive to them when, in 1817, they left Dublin for London. When Peel himself returned to England in 1818 he wondered whether Julia 'would be able to abandon her gay fashionable world for the severer climate of a professional politician's wife. 'You are my world', she replied disarmingly' (Gash, 'Mr Secretary Peel', 257). They became engaged in March 1820, and were married on 8 June. During the next twelve years, while Peel rose towards the top in politics, seven children were born: Julia (1821), Robert Peel (1822), Frederick Peel (1823), William Peel (1824), John Floyd (1827), Arthur Wellesley Peel (1829), and Eliza (1832). In London, they lived in a new house designed by Robert Smirke and built in 1824 at 4 Whitehall Gardens. Here, in a specially commissioned long gallery, Peel hung his collection of Dutch and Flemish paintings. These were purchased, with assistance from his father and advice from David Wilkie, in a period when the European salerooms were still busy following the upheavals of revolution and restoration, and included Hobbema's 'The Avenue, Middelharnis' and Rubens's 'Chapeau de paille'. Whenever Peel found himself alone in London he wrote to Julia every day, and no breath of scandal has ever attached to his name. 
In 1820 and 1821 Peel refused offers of a place in the cabinet as president of the Board of Control. But on 17 January 1822 he rejoined the administration as home secretary, a post he was to hold until Lord Liverpool suffered a stroke in 1827, and again, under the duke of Wellington, from 1828 to 1830. As home secretary Peel's primary responsibility was for law and order, and here he distinguished himself from other contemporary reformers by his ability to see the process whole and to attend to all aspects, from the formulation of the criminal law and the mechanics of policing, through indictment, trial, and sentencing, to punishment on the scaffold, in prison, and in penal colonies. 
Contemporaries gave Peel credit for reducing the number of offences which carried the death penalty. But there was no fall in the number of executions, and the most striking achievement of his period at the Home Office, and perhaps of his whole career, was the consolidation of the criminal law. He began in 1823 where his predecessor, Lord Sidmouth, had left off, with the law relating to prisons. The following year he attended to the laws relating to transportation, and began to coax the Scottish judges towards a reform of Scottish criminal law. In 1825 he consolidated eighty-five laws relating to juries into a single act. In 1826 he proposed to consolidate the laws relating to theft. Out of 14,437 persons in England and Wales charged with various crimes in the course of the previous year, 12,500 (at least) had been accused of theft, which was the most important category of crime. Consolidation was needed because, year by year throughout the eighteenth century, specific acts (he cited the stealing of hollies, thorns, and quicksets) had been made into crimes instead of species of acts. There were now ninety-two statutes relating to theft, dating from the reign of Henry III, and Peel sought to unite them in a single statute of thirty pages. Upon this occasion his attempt to reduce the law to a single act proved to be too ambitious, and the bill emerged, finally, as four separate acts in 1827. 
Peel's talents were never more apparent than in this labour of consolidation. In 1824 a select committee had recommended that consolidation and amendment should be kept distinct. Peel decided that they were not separable. He interpreted consolidation to mean the collection 'of dispersed statutes under one head' followed by the rejection of what was 'superfluous', the clearing up of what was 'obscure', the weighing of 'the precise force of each expression', and 'ascertaining the doubts that have arisen in practice and the solution which may have been given to those doubts by decisions of the courts of law' ('Hansard 2', 14.1236). Where he found any gap 'through which notorious guilt escapes' (he instanced the theft of stock certificates in the funds which was not at that time an offence), he would remedy it (ibid., 14.1222-3). In Peel's hands, then, a consolidating act was a reforming act which incorporated case law and supplied omissions. As he turned from one aspect of the law to another, Peel circulated drafts of his consolidating bills among the judges, and took pains to win their support, flattering Lord Eldon with a bag of game (which perhaps he had shot himself). He succeeded because nine-tenths of criminal law was statute law, which judges loved to criticize, and one-tenth, only, common law, the anomalies of which judges might seek to preserve. 
On 9 March 1826 Peel's method of presenting a case came to maturity in his great speech on theft ('Hansard 2', 14.1214-39). There was an apology (a preference really) for a topic which could 'borrow no excitement from political feelings' and might appear 'barren and uninviting'. There was a reference to a hypothetical fresh start ('if we were legislating de novo, without reference to previous customs and formed habits'). There was a glance at more radical proposals for 'rapid progress, which is inconsistent with mature deliberation', and a promise that, if he was allowed to have his way, there would be 'no rash subversion of ancient institutions' and 'no relinquishment of what is practically good, for the chance of speculative and uncertain improvement'. His own proposals were then presented as a middle way 'between the redundancy of our own legal enactments and the conciseness of the French code'. Finally he avowed his ambition to leave behind him 'some record of the trust I have held', and to connect his name with 'permanent improvements' to the institutions of the country. 
So long as Lord Liverpool was prime minister Catholic emancipation remained an open question, and Peel, who as home secretary had overall responsibility for the administration in Ireland, continued to act as the protestant champion in the House of Commons. But the issue was beginning to pass out of control, both at Westminster and in Ireland. In 1825 the pro-Catholics won the annual vote in the House of Commons. Peel offered to resign, but was told that his resignation would bring Liverpool's government down. Understandably, he was unwilling to terminate the career of the statesman who had given him his first step up the ladder, and he allowed himself to be persuaded to continue. In 1826 there was a general election, and early in the following year Liverpool suffered a stroke. When the succession passed to George Canning, the leader, since 1822, of the Catholic party within Liverpool's administration, Peel (and others) did resign, and when Canning, too, died in August 1827 and was succeeded by Lord Goderich, Peel remained out of office. Early in 1828, when Goderich's administration collapsed and the king invited the duke of Wellington to form a government, Wellington asked Peel to return to the Home Office and to take the lead in the House of Commons. 
At the Home Office, Peel resumed consolidating where he had left off. In 1828 he dealt with the law of offences against the person, reducing it from fifty-seven acts to one, and in 1830 he turned the twenty-seven acts relating to forgeries punishable with death into a single statute. Even more important in his eyes, he began at last to make progress with the police. In 1822 a committee had refused to recommend any reform. In 1828 Peel secured a new inquiry into the police of the metropolis, and the following year he was able to legislate. He had already given an indication of the way his mind was working when he praised the small force of full-time professional magistrates and constables established in London in 1793. But this efficient superstructure rested upon a complex of autonomous parochial and district watches. In St Pancras alone there were eighteen different night watches, many of which had no authority to intervene in a brawl on the other side of the street. Peel resolved to create a unified body under the control of the home secretary and paid for out of a general rate. The new force started patrolling the streets on 29 September 1829. They were not there to carry out sophisticated criminal detective work, but to restrain the thousands of vagrants, thieves, prostitutes, and drunks who tried to beg, steal, earn, or expend a living upon the streets of the capital, and to keep order. Peel's 'vigorous preventive police' carried truncheons but not firearms, and their secret (or innovatory) weapon was their military discipline. This 'unconstitutional' police force, as it was called in the Chartist petition, was bitterly resented, and there were many assaults upon policemen at first. But a force of just over 3000 men won control of the streets. The thin blue line penning vice back into the rookeries and shielding gentility from coarseness was a huge step up from the parish constables and night watchmen. In sterner times of supposedly revolutionary turmoil, it was also a reassuring step down from the use of soldiers and the risk of bloodshed. Like so many of Peel's reforms this one lasted. Fears of the police developing into a secret police on the continental model proved to have been exaggerated, and hostility to the very idea of an efficient police force ebbed away. By the mid-century the policeman's image was becoming a friendly, neighbourly one, and constables were being called 'bobbies' or 'Peelers' after their founder Robert Peel. 
In the meantime, as leader of the House of Commons, Peel was obliged to grapple with the Catholic question. In 1827 the protestants had won the annual vote in the House of Commons. The following year, when the protestant dissenters and the Roman Catholics, in effect, came to terms, the government was heavily defeated on a motion for the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts', and it was defeated again on a motion for Catholic emancipation. The first defeat was easy to deal with -- Wellington and Peel gave way and brought in a bill of their own. The second was compounded by the rise of the Catholic Association and the defeat of Vesey Fitzgerald, a popular protestant landlord and government minister, by O'Connell, who was not eligible to take his seat, at a by-election in co. Clare. The protestant ascendancy had collapsed, and emancipation was now imperative. The only question was whether it should be undertaken by the king's present ministers or by a new political combination. Once again Peel offered to resign, and once again he was persuaded to stay. That decision taken, he offered to vacate his seat for Oxford University. His friends renominated him, but at the end of February he was defeated in a poll by Sir Robert Inglis by 609 votes to 755, and the government had to ask Sir Manasseh Lopes to vacate his pocket borough at Westbury in Peel's favour. Peel was aware, then, when he rose on 5 March 1829 to introduce the cabinet's bill to emancipate the Catholics, that he would be asked why he saw 'a necessity for concession now, which was not evident before'. He answered that it was the condition of Ireland. '[The protestant] Reformation in Ireland' had hitherto 'made no advance', and after twenty years he was convinced that 'the evil' was 'not casual and temporary, but permanent and inveterate'. The time had come when less danger was to be apprehended from 'attempting to adjust the Catholic Question, than in allowing it to remain any longer in its present state'. 'I yield... unwilling to push resistance to a point which might endanger the Establishments that I wish to defend' ('Hansard 2', 20.728-80). He ignored O'Connell, and saved face by announcing that the details of the measure had not been discussed with the Roman Catholics themselves. Catholics were to be allowed to enter both houses of parliament and to hold any office except regent, lord chancellor, and (more strangely) lord lieutenant of Ireland. In return Peel asked the Irish to accept the disfranchisement of the 40's'. freeholders and a reduction of the electorate. The government did not ask for any control over the appointment of Roman Catholic bishops, because no British government, Peel said, could enter into negotiation with the court of Rome. 
The bill passed, but it split the tory party, and politics were never to be the same again. Peel had spent his formative years in parliaments where ministers relied for their majority upon the sweetening effects of royal patronage, and where, for want of such influence, the opposition was weak. It was a situation in which a secretary of state could devote the greater part of his day to his department, and one in which, when he had framed a measure, he could come before the House of Commons with a reasonable expectation that he would prevail. Now, the ultra-tories began to mutter that a more popular parliament would never have passed an emancipation act. Their disaffection helped the whigs back into the mainstream of politics, and parliamentary reform became a practical issue. Between 1826 and 1830 Peel himself had been willing to transfer the two seats taken away from Penryn to Manchester. But he had acquiesced in the Lords' refusal to enfranchise any large town. Now, in 1830, reform motions were already being debated by the old parliament before George IV died in June, and new elections were held in July and August. The year was a watershed in Peel's personal as in his public life, for his father died on 3 May, and Peel became the second baronet, inherited the property at Drayton Manor (which, together with his dividends from the funds, brought him an income of $40,000 p.a.), and succeeded his father as the member for Tamworth, which he continued to represent until the end of his life. Wellington and Peel met the new parliament without any increase in strength. The ministry could not make overtures to the ultra-tories, and the followers of William Huskisson did not welcome the advances made to them. Peel felt that he was in a false position, and he was scarcely on speaking terms with the duke. When the ministry was defeated in a vote on the new civil list, on 15 November 1830, he was glad to go. He had been in office for fourteen of the past eighteen years, and he was wounded by charges of 'ratting' on the Catholic question. 
In the course of the next two years -- while a government headed by Lord Grey introduced a reform bill, called another general election, and sought to persuade William IV to create peers in order to carry their bill through the House of Lords -- Peel was obliged to learn a new role, as leader of an opposition. He did not, at first, find it easy. In March 1831 he was appalled by the magnitude of the whig scheme, and on 9 April he was actually on his feet, and had lost his temper, when black rod arrived to summon the Commons to hear the announcement of the dissolution of parliament. During the election which followed, Peel's house in London had to be protected by the new Metropolitan Police, and Peel himself had to be stopped by his friends from becoming involved in a duel with Sir John Hobhouse. When the excitement over the bill moved on from the Commons to the Lords, Peel surprised Lord Harrowby and the waverers by saying that he would prefer the bill to pass by a creation of peers (whose effects, he believed, would be temporary, because the newly created peers would not remain radical for long) rather than a threat to create peers (which might establish a precedent for permanent revolution). 
In May 1832, when ministers resigned, Peel declined the king's invitation either to form or to join a new administration. The bill, he thought, should be passed by the men who had introduced it. Once the bill became law, Peel accepted it as the settlement of a great question, and demonstrated confidence in the future by commissioning Robert Smirke to design him a new mansion, complete with every modern convenience of heating and plumbing, at Drayton. There it became a tradition for the family to lunch off silver and dine off gilt. Thither Peel transferred many of his British paintings. These included portraits, commissioned from Sir Thomas Lawrence, of his political colleagues Liverpool, Canning, Huskisson, Wellington, and Aberdeen -- canvases to inspire him during the parliamentary recesses when he was considering how to block any further increase in popular power at the expense of the traditional institutions, crown, church, and aristocracy. At first the instruments to hand for this defensive warfare were weak. There were about 150 tories, only, of all kinds, returned at the general election in December 1832, and the party in the House of Lords was not his to control. Peel felt his way. Sitting for Tamworth, he had no experience of how respectable a contest in a newly enfranchised large borough might be, and he shared many of the ultra-tories' fears for the constitution. But he avoided making any premature attempt to reunite the party, and he waited for the tories to gather round him on his own terms. In the meantime he was fortunate. The whigs began to fall out with their radical allies, and among themselves. This gave Peel the opportunity to step in and save the moderate whigs from the extremists, and in this way the new Conservatism was born. 
In July 1834, when Grey resigned, the king invited Peel to coalesce with Melbourne. But that was impracticable. Melbourne became prime minister, and when autumn came Peel took Julia and his elder daughter to Italy. They were in Rome when William IV dismissed Melbourne, and the duke of Wellington advised the king to send for Peel (and agreed to act as caretaker until Peel arrived). The king's messenger reached Rome on 25 November, and Peel was back in London on 9 December and kissed hands the same day. He never doubted that he must accept the commission -- it had, in effect, been accepted for him, and refusal would injure the crown. The whig dissidents, Sir James Graham and Lord Stanley, were not yet ready to join Peel, whose cabinet could not then differ much from the duke of Wellington's cabinet in 1830. But Peel took the office of chancellor of the exchequer for himself, and he found new blood for junior offices -- Gladstone, Sidney Herbert, and Praed. The ministry could not survive in the existing House of Commons, and Peel asked the king to dissolve parliament. 
Next, Peel found an imaginative way of communicating with the electorate. The Tamworth manifesto was addressed to his own constituents, but it was distributed to the national newspapers and published on 19 December 1834. Peel appealed, in inspired words, 'to that great and intelligent class of society... which is far less interested in the contentions of party, than in the maintenance of order and the cause of good government'. He promised 'a careful review of institutions, both civil and ecclesiastical' and 'the correction of proved abuses and the redress of real grievances'. It did not take him long to show that this was no mere rhetoric. For his own part he found religiosity almost as distressing as impiety, and avoided religion as a topic of conversation. But he valued the church as an institution, and he persuaded the bishops to embrace an ecclesiastical commission, which would enable the church to reform itself and save it from its enemies. Hopefully this would atone, among the ultras, for his actions in 1829. Simultaneously, ministers let it be known that they were willing to consider the whole range of dissenters' grievances. In the elections which followed, early in 1835, Peel's supporters won 290 seats and became the largest single party in the House of Commons. It was not enough to give them a majority, and Peel was surprised by the skill with which Lord John Russell persuaded the whigs, the radicals, and the Irish to combine against him. First, they threw out the former speaker. Next they carried an amendment to the address. But the margin was small, Russell dared not take up Peel's challenge to move a motion of no confidence, and Peel gained time in which to introduce his 'Irish Tithe Bill'. In the first week of April, Peel was defeated three times, and on 8 April he resigned. In the space of four months the king had elevated Peel into the leader of the party of resistance, and Peel had earned high praise. He had not been able to pass his own measure, but he had stayed in office long enough to get his opponents committed to the (unpopular) appropriation of the surplus revenues of the Irish church to the education of all classes of Christians. The contest thus begun, across the floor of the House of Commons, between Peel, with his tall stature, huge frame, and uneven, slightly wobbly legs (caught even better in 'Political Sketches' by H. B. than in the portraits at age thirty-seven by Sir Thomas Lawrence, at fifty by John Linnell, and at fifty-six by F. X. Winterhalter), and the diminutive Russell, was to last, with many changes of fortune, to the end of his life. 
For six years between 1835 and 1841 Peel showed a wonderful patience waiting for the whig ministry to perish, and for the premiership to return to him unencumbered by any debt to any man. At first he was extremely apprehensive. Party feeling reached a new peak in the summer and autumn of 1835. Inside parliament, Peel was afraid lest the tory peers, by challenging the government's 'Municipal Corporations Bill', bring about their own destruction. The reform was an inescapable postscript to the 'Reform Act', and he wanted it out of the way. He tried, as he expressed it in 1838, to 'diminish the risk and deaden the shock of collisions between the two deliberative branches of the legislature'. He lent his aid to see the bill safely through the House of Commons and onto the statute book, and then passed the recess reading Guizot's history of the French Revolution. The following year he continued to proclaim selective opposition. But he was happy to see the House of Lords block every whig measure for Ireland (tithe, corporations, poor law). Outside parliament he continued to develop the theme of the new Conservatism -- in a speech in the City in May 1835, and in Glasgow (where he had been elected lord rector of the university) in January 1837. 
Party and its organization was something Peel felt ambiguous about. He was not in love with parties, and he regretted the high profile of party warfare after 1830, which demanded more frequent attendance in parliament and took ministers away from their offices. But he did well what he had to do. He selected the chief whips, Sir George Clerk in 1835 and Sir Thomas Fremantle in 1837. He directed Lord Granville Somerset to operate -- to the extent that the constituencies would allow it -- a central clearing house for parliamentary candidates. He encouraged F. R. Bonham (a frequent visitor to Drayton) to brief him about the state of the electorate, and he reminded his supporters in the constituencies that 'the battle of the constitution must be fought in the registration courts'. At the general election of 1837, following the death of the king, the party won another twenty-three seats in the English counties. This left the whigs dependent for their majority upon O'Connell's Irish members. It was an inconsistency in Peel that, having sat for an Irish seat himself, he now thought it unconstitutional, almost, for the course of the United Kingdom to be determined by Irish votes when they were not to his liking. But it was a prejudice shared by Graham and Stanley, who joined forces with Peel in 1838. Even after the whigs abandoned the appropriation clause in 1838, Peel denounced their plan for the state to construct the main lines of railway in Ireland (1839), and confined the 'Irish Municipal Corporations Act' (1840) to almost the narrowest possible compass. 
Whatever Peel gained in popular franchises in 1837 he lost, for the time being, with the accession of Queen Victoria. Melbourne had a hold upon her affections, and a partisan whig for a queen was a novelty. Peel kept Conservative spirits up with another speech in May 1838 at the Merchant Taylors' Hall. In 1839, when the whig majority fell to five upon a proposal to suspend the constitution of Jamaica, and the ministry resigned, Peel was unable to take Melbourne's place because the queen would not grant him the expression of confidence for which he asked -- the dismissal of some (the queen thought he demanded all) of the whig ladies of the bedchamber. Peel could have forced the issue, but given his respect for royalty he preferred to yield and allow Melbourne to carry on. The ministry was weak, but Peel still lacked the means to topple it, and in the following year, when the Conservatives essayed a motion of no confidence, it was emphatically defeated. Peel did not exploit the ministry's difficulties over Canada. 
In 1841 the whigs addressed themselves to the budget deficit. In trying to take politics onto new ground, they proposed to reduce the duties on sugar, timber, and corn. Peel made sport with them by drawing a picture of the chancellor of the exchequer 'seated on an empty chest, by the pool of bottomless deficiency, fishing for a budget', and defeated them upon sugar. He then moved a vote of no confidence which was carried by one vote on 4 June 1841. At the general election which followed, 'every Conservative candidate', J. W. Croker said, 'professed himself... to be Sir Robert Peel's man', and all turned on the name of Sir Robert Peel. The whigs campaigned upon a small fixed duty on corn. Peel skilfully avoided pledging himself to any particular course of action about the corn laws or anything else. The Conservatives won a majority of about 76. In the English and Welsh counties they won 137 out of the 159 seats. In the English and Welsh boroughs they took almost as many seats as the whigs, 165 to 176. In Scotland the Conservatives held 20 out of the 30 county seats, but two only of the 23 borough seats. In Ireland, where they made some gains, they held 43 out of 105 seats. 
The whigs met the new parliament towards the end of August and were ejected. The queen, who was now guided by Prince Albert, made no difficulty about the bedchamber, and on 30 August Peel at last became prime minister upon his own terms. Or so it seemed at the time. But in fact, for all his attempts to modernize the party and to broaden its appeal to the industrious middle classes, he was more dependent than ever upon the country squires. Analysis of the borough seats shows that Peel's success was concentrated in the small English boroughs, with fewer than 1000 electors, and that in the large English boroughs, with more than 2000 electors, he had actually won two fewer seats -- 15 to his opponents' 43 -- than in 1837. The triumph and the tragedy of the ministry of 1841-6 were written into the results. 
Peel appointed Sir James Graham to the Home Office and Aberdeen to the Foreign Office. Goulburn became chancellor of the exchequer, and the earl of Ripon president of the Board of Trade (with Gladstone as his junior). Thus far, everything was under Peel's control. Graham acted as his lieutenant, Peel himself took responsibility for explaining Aberdeen's conciliatory conduct of foreign affairs to the House of Commons, and Goulburn and Ripon, survivors of the governments of the 1820s, both turned, by long habit, to Peel himself for advice. Stanley, who took the colonies, was more independent, and he was given early promotion to the House of Lords in 1844. Ellenborough became president of the Board of Control, and then, a month later, governor-general of India. The forward policy which he adopted towards Afghanistan and China, the annexation of Sind, and the conquest of Gwalior were not much to Peel's taste. Among the less-effectives, Knatchbull (paymaster-general) represented the ultras, as he had in 1835, and Buckingham was offered a place (lord privy seal) as a spokesman for the agricultural interest. 
Peel's first objective was to restore the authority of government. Throughout the 1830s, the whigs (as he saw it) had allowed their policies to be suggested to them, and their measures to be amended, by their radical and Irish supporters. This was dangerous. Ministers should be seen to be in charge. It was imperative to put the political pyramid back the right way up again. Legislation should be prepared by ministers, with deliberation. Considered measures should then be respected as the work of professionals, and they should be seen to pass without amendment. Peel would exercise power upon his own 'conception of public duty', and he took pride in never having proposed anything which he had not carried. 
Peel had now to grapple with the problem which had faced his predecessors, the recession, which had begun in 1838 and would not go away. He had come to power in the middle of structural changes in the economy, which led many to question whether the country had taken a wrong turning. Would manufacturing towns ever be loyal? Was poverty eating up capital? Was it safe to depend upon imports for food and raw materials? Could the fleet keep the seas open? Or should government encourage emigration and require those who remained behind to support themselves by spade husbandry? These were the 'condition of England' questions which Peel faced, together with the phenomena which rode upon them, Chartism and the agitation to repeal the corn laws. In accordance with Peel's governmental ethic, he did not introduce emergency measures in haste in the autumn of 1841. He and his cabinet spent the autumn and winter of 1841-2 taking stock, and then brought forward proposals fit for the hour. 
Land, as Peel's supporters reminded him, was the historic basis of the constitution. It was a 'permanent' interest which appreciated in value with cultivation. Commercial capital, by contrast, put down no roots and might be taken to another country, while manufacturing capital depreciated with use. But commerce and manufactures had borne Britain to its pre-eminence in the world. Writing to J. W. Croker on 27 July 1842, Peel agreed that one might, if one 'had to constitute new Societies', 'prefer Corn fields to Cotton factories', but 'our lot' was cast ('Sir Robert Peel: from his Private Papers', 2.529). The decision had already been taken in Peel's father's or in his grandfather's day, and there could be no turning back now. What was wrong with the economy was not that population had outrun capital, but that the power of production had overtaken the capacity to consume. The way to 'remove the burden which presses upon the springs of manufactures and commerce' was to make Britain a cheap country to live in ('Hansard 3', 61.460). 
In 1842, then, Peel was addressing himself through the fiscal system to the health of the economy and to the morale of the nation as a whole. He resolved to redistribute the tax burden by reducing duties upon articles of mass consumption and reintroducing the income tax which had been abolished after a back-bench revolt in 1815. Reducing duties would help to get the nation back to work and take the momentum out of the Chartist movement. Peel did not recognize the political aspirations of the Chartists, and (unlike his father) he would never himself propose statutory restrictions upon the hours of labour. But he understood hunger, and he wanted thoughts of 'sedition' to be forgotten 'in consequence of greater command over the necessaries and minor luxuries of life' ('Hansard 3', 87.1048). Imposing a peacetime income tax would demonstrate that the British state was an equitable one, in which burdens were placed (despite the warnings of political economists who identified income as the source of savings and the route to capital formation) upon those best able to bear them. 
These measures had to be sold to a party which was still solidly protectionist. Accordingly, in 1842, grain was singled out for separate treatment and dealt with first, and on 9 February Peel announced a thorough revision of the sliding scale of 1828 -- to make it more defensible. Then, on 11 March, when he introduced the budget -- which he did himself (the complaisant Goulburn stepping aside) -- he began by making much of the deficit. Having worked up a sense of urgency he explored and rejected alternative remedies (lower expenditure, increased duties, and the 'wretched expedient' of borrowing). Finally he came to his own plan. An income tax of 7died in the pound on incomes over $150 p.a. was to be imposed for three years. This would turn the deficit into a surplus. With that surplus Peel proposed to undertake 'a complete review, on general principles, of all the articles of the tariff'. No duty should ever again be prohibitive. Imports were to be categorized (the word 'consolidated' was not mentioned but might not have been out of place) into raw materials, semi-finished articles, and manufactured products, which were not to pay more than 5 per cent, 12 per cent, and 20 per cent respectively. Duties were reduced on 750 out of the 1200 articles in the tariff ('Hansard 3', 61.422-76). It was Peel's finest hour; the crisis of the century was met by the fiscal reform of all the centuries. The budget brought the resignation of the duke of Buckingham, and Peel recalled that 'these changes... were not effected without great murmuring and some open opposition to the Government on the part of many of its supporters' ('Memoirs', 2.100-01). But in fact it was a wonderfully ambiguous measure. He had rationalized the tariff: he had taken a step towards free trade. He could still move in either direction. 
In 1843 it appeared that the best way to save Canada from a future invasion by the United States was to try and interest the farmers in the American mid-west in selling their grain to Britain. The 'Canada Corn Act' granted wheat shipped from Canada a privileged position in the British market (above other colonies), and nobody could doubt that the greater part of all the wheat which would come down the St Lawrence would have originated in the United States. In 1843 the protectionists in the party scarcely knew what to make of the 'Canada Corn Bill'. They feared the consequences of opening the door to American grain, but they wanted to retain Canada, and the bill was introduced by Stanley who was known to sympathize with their own views. 
The 'Bank Act' of 1819 had imposed upon the Bank of England the duty of honouring its notes in gold if asked to do so. In normal times the bank's customers did not wish to exchange their notes for gold, and in 1819 Peel had believed that the bank could be trusted to decide how many more notes it would be prudent to put into circulation than it had gold to back. Upon several occasions since, when speculation was rife and sound management was called for, the bank had still been increasing its note issue when prices were rising and gold had already begun to leave the country. The Bank of England, then, paid too little attention to the state of the foreign exchanges, and the English country banks, which had about one-quarter of the circulation, paid none. The result was that the collapse, when it came, and the consequent business failures and distress were all the greater. Here was another factor bearing upon the condition of England question. Peel determined to end the discretion allowed to the bank. If gold was leaving the country, notes must be withdrawn from circulation until prices fell, British goods became attractive to foreign buyers, and gold returned to the country again to pay for them. 
The bank's charter had been renewed in 1833. But there was a break clause, and Peel waited until he could move in and place note issue under statutory control. By the act of 1844 there were to be no new banks of issue. Existing country bank issues were frozen at their present levels, and no bank which gave up issuing its own notes would ever be allowed to resume. Note issue would imperceptibly become concentrated in the hands of the Bank of England. The bank itself was to be separated into a banking department and an issue department -- the first free, the second regulated. Notes to the value of $14 million -- the minimum amount needed if the business of the country was to continue -- might be issued, backed by securities (the credit of the British government). Beyond that amount notes were only to be issued when there was gold in hand to back them, and the figures were to be published every week. The act had interesting overtones. It was a vindication of the right of the state to interfere with powerful interests, and, in a period when other monopolies were being swept aside, it established a new one. It has been criticized in detail for paying too little attention to other negotiable instruments such as cheques and bills of exchange and to the bank's role as lender of last resort, but it was a marvellous demonstration of Peel's command of an abstruse subject, and the act (which applied to England and Wales and was followed the next year by comparable measures for Scotland and Ireland) did help to reduce the severity of crises and lasted until 1914. 
In other ways 1844 was not such a good year. There was a dispute with France over Tahiti which necessitated an increase in the defence estimates. The ministry was defeated by Lord Ashley, a tory paternalist, on the ten-hours issue, and by Philip Miles on its proposals to revise the sugar duties (with their complicated links to the issue of slavery). Both defeats were reversed by the threat of resignation. The tactic was sufficient unto the day, but it helped to accumulate resentment for the future. Then, in 1845, matters began to come to a head. The income tax was about to expire. But the economy was now in a position to benefit from another virtuous circle of tariff reductions, and Peel chose, once again, to introduce the budget himself, on 14 February. He renewed the income tax for another three years explicitly in order to enable him 'to make a great experiment' in reducing other taxes, 'the removal of which will give more scope to commercial enterprise, and occasion an increased demand for labour'. Customs duties were to be abolished on 430 articles which provided 'the raw materials of our manufactures'. The excise duty on glass was abolished too. Peel believed that the result of this 'extension of industry and encouragement of enterprise' would be 'the benefit of all classes of the community, whether they are directly or indirectly connected with commerce, manufactures, or agriculture' ('Hansard 3', 77.455-97). But the distinguishing mark of this budget was abolition not rationalization. Peel had dropped the mask, and now appeared as a convinced free-trader. What, then, would happen to the corn laws? Nothing, perhaps, in that parliament, had it not been for Ireland. 
Ireland lay athwart Britain's transoceanic trade routes. Peel dared not contemplate a repeal of the union, and in 1841 he invited an ultra-protestant, Earl De Grey, to become lord lieutenant. In thus signalling his determination to reverse the Irish policies of Lord Melbourne's administration Peel reignited the repeal movement. The government succeeded in banning a monster meeting at Clontarf in 1843, but an attempt to prosecute O'Connell failed. Realizing his mistake, Peel changed tack in 1843, and appointed the Devon commission to investigate the problems of Irish land tenure. The following year he began to send Ireland what Disraeli termed 'messages of peace', replacing De Grey with Heytesbury and passing a 'Charitable Bequests Act' (to enable Catholics to bequeath money for the support of their clergy). In 1845 he passed a bill to establish three Queen's colleges, which would offer a university education to the Irish middle classes, and attended to the condition of the Roman Catholic college at Maynooth. Ireland could not be governed unless the priests preached obedience to the powers that be. If the British government did not see to the repair and upkeep of the seminary, then the priests would go abroad for their training, and who knew what they would preach then? Peel proposed to increase the existing grant to Maynooth, which had been paid for half a century, from $9000 to $26,000 p.a., to make a non-recurrent advance for new buildings, and to place the cost of repairs and maintenance upon the board of works. It was a small price to pay for the chance of peace in Ireland. But it led to Gladstone's resignation from the cabinet, it jarred nerves frayed by the 'betrayal' of 1829, and it roused protestants throughout the United Kingdom to a frenzy. The connections between protestants and protectionists in the Conservative Party were close: the bill was passed; but 148 Conservatives voted for the measure, 149 against. The government was saved by whig votes. So much for not consenting to hold office on sufferance. Peel's party was already in an ill humour, then, before the potato harvest failed in the wet summer of 1845, and Peel and his ministers met in the autumn to consider what to do about the corn laws. 
Peel said later that 'in the interval between the passing of the 'Corn Bill' in 1842, and the close of the Session of 1845' the opinions he had 'previously entertained on the subject of protection to agriculture had undergone a great change', and that 'many concurring proofs' had demonstrated to him that 'the wages of labour do not vary [he meant fall] with the price of corn' ('Memoirs', 2.101). In 1844 he found himself unable to answer the arguments used by Cobden, and in 1845 he agreed with Graham, who said that, following the failure of the potato, 'the Anti-Corn Law pressure' would become 'the most formidable movement in modern times' ('Sir Robert Peel: from his Private Papers', 3.224). Peel did not think it would be possible to suspend the corn laws and then reimpose them again afterwards; he did not think it would be wise to put the issue to the electorate, and on 15 October he wrote to inform Lord Heytesbury that he was considering 'the total and absolute repeal for ever of all duties on all articles of subsistence' (ibid.). His cabinet were not convinced of the necessity. Meeting followed meeting and still they could not agree whether to maintain, modify, suspend, or abolish the law of 1842. On 26 November the 'Morning Chronicle' published Lord John Russell's 'Edinburgh letter', announcing his conversion to total and immediate repeal, and on 4 December Peel asked his cabinet to agree to a phased extinction of the corn laws over a period of eight years. Stanley warned him that this would break up the ministry, and on 5 December Peel decided to resign. In the ensuing two weeks, Stanley himself declined even to try and form a protectionist government, and Lord John Russell failed to form a whig one. Peel was not sorry to be required to carry on. He was always inclined to suppose that if a thing was good to be done it would be better done by himself. Now he believed that, with the elimination of the only possible alternatives, he would resume power 'with greater means of rendering public service' than he would have enjoyed had he 'not relinquished it' ('Memoirs', 2.251). Others were more aware of the shame of abandoning their own law of 1842 and the likely effect upon the party. The ministry was recalled upon the understanding that it would propose a repeal of the corn laws. Wellington expressed the view that 'a good Government for the country' was 'more important than Corn Laws or any other consideration' (ibid., 2.200). Stanley and the duke of Buccleuch were the only members of the government who refused to return, and Peel brought Gladstone back into the cabinet as colonial secretary, though he had no seat in the Commons. 
Peel introduced the bill to repeal the corn laws on 27 January 1846. In order to allow the landed interest time to prepare for the change the laws were to be abolished in three years' time, on 1 February 1849, after which all imported grains would pay only a 'nominal' registration duty of 1's'. a quarter. In the meantime new scales of duty were to operate. Colonial grains were to be admitted at 1's'., and foreign maize, too, was to be admitted at 1's'. Other foreign grains were to pay duties ranging between 4's'. and 10's'. according to the price. Nobody got what they wanted. The Irish did not secure the suspension appropriate to their emergency, partly, perhaps, because Peel had already arranged for the government to buy maize on their behalf. The landowners lost their protection, and were offered cheap drainage loans by way of compensation. The Anti-Corn Law League did not win total and immediate repeal, but was, in effect, made an offer which it could not refuse. The Conservative Party split: Lord George Bentinck arose to lead the protectionists, and on 7 February the second reading found 112 Conservatives supporting Peel and no fewer than 231 following Bentinck in voting against the government's bill. The rancour was unbelievable, and from February to June the ministry was supported by whig and radical votes. The bill received the royal assent on 25 June, and the following day the whigs combined with the protectionists to defeat the government's 'Coercion Bill' for Ireland. In his resignation speech on 28 June, Peel widened the breach with his former supporters by giving the whole credit for repeal to Richard Cobden, who was in their eyes no better than a demagogue. He ended with a prayer that he might 'leave a name sometimes remembered with expressions of goodwill in the abodes of those whose lot it is to labour, and to earn their daily bread by the sweat of their brow, when they shall recruit their exhausted strength with abundant and untaxed food, the sweeter because it is no longer leavened by a sense of injustice. ('Hansard 3', 87.1055)' 

Peel felt worn out. For twenty years he had been troubled by deafness following a mishap with a gun. In 1843 he had been the intended victim of an assassination which cost the life of his secretary, Edward Drummond. Above all there was the incessant work. There was so much more to do now than there had been in the 1820s, and Peel had shouldered responsibility for the operation of every department. He knew his back-benchers had found him cold, aloof, and unresponsive. He knew also that many tories, who had come to terms with Catholic emancipation and one betrayal, would never forgive him two. But he, too, felt let down. He had fought the battle for the squires stoutly until 1844. But he had received little support in the House of Commons from them, and being expected, for the sake of party, 'to adopt the opinions of men who have not access to your knowledge, and could not profit by it if they had, who spend their time in eating and drinking, and hunting, shooting, gambling, horse-racing, and so forth' was 'an odious servitude' to which he would not submit (Peel to Lord Hardinge, 'Sir Robert Peel: from his Private Papers', 3.474). He never wished to hold office again, and he showed little inclination to lead the ninety or so Peelites who were returned at the general election of 1847. He remained a favourite with the royal family, and, while still holding his distance, gave a general kind of support to Lord John Russell who succeeded him. In 1847 he was consulted about a possible suspension of the 'Bank Charter Act'. In 1848 he laid a finger on the defects in the 'Encumbered Estates Act' for Ireland. In 1849, when corn prices were low and Lord John was considering reverting to a fixed duty, Peel joined in a council at Woburn which stiffened the whigs' resolve to defend the free-trade policy. On 28 June 1850 he spoke against the government in the Don Pacifico debate. The following day, he was thrown by his horse at the top of Constitution Hill. He fell face downwards, and the horse then trampled on his back, causing internal injuries. He was carried home to Whitehall Gardens, and several long and very painful days later, on 2 July, he died. On 3 July the Commons adjourned on the motion of Joseph Hume and Gladstone, and on 4 July the house again adjourned after formal tributes had been paid. Lord John Russell, as prime minister, offered a public funeral, but Goulburn, on behalf of the Peel family, declined it, Peel having earlier in the year declared his wish to be buried in the churchyard of Drayton Bassett beside his mother and father. The interment took place in a private ceremony on 9 July. Upon that day, in an exceptional expression of national mourning, the mills in the great northern towns stopped work, shops closed, and in the ports ships' flags flew at half-mast. Peel had left firm instructions, Lord John Russell told the Commons on 12 July, that his wife and family were to accept no titles or rewards for his services. Julia Peel died on 27 October 1859 and was buried beside her husband. 
The Peelite wing of the Conservative Party was gradually absorbed, between 1846 and 1859, into the Liberal Party. In his budget speeches of 1853-4 and 1860-66 Gladstone spoke of continuing and completing the free-trade policies of Sir Robert Peel. Within the family, Peel's second son, Frederick, entered parliament as a Liberal in 1849; his eldest son, the third Sir Robert, who succeeded to the representation of Tamworth, served for four years as Irish secretary in Palmerston's Liberal ministry of 1859-65; and his youngest son, Arthur Wellesley, began his political career as Liberal member for Warwick in 1865. It has therefore sometimes been suggested that Peel had all along been in the wrong party. But this is to ignore the fact that Peel himself, with his background, perceived no contradiction between manufacturing interests and tory principles. To portray him as a Liberal 'manque' overlooks his abhorrence of whig principles, and his contempt for the whigs' levity and carelessness in government. It overlooks, too, the extent to which Peel's supporters and the Peel dynasty did not so much choose to be Liberal as have Liberalism thrust upon them. 
Historians have often professed to see continuity between the Conservatism of the Tamworth manifesto and the Conservatism of subsequent generations. Certainly, a reverential attitude to crown, church, and aristocracy may be said to link Peel with Lord Salisbury, and even with Stanley Baldwin. But Salisbury still referred unforgivingly to Peel as the man who had betrayed his party twice, and other Conservative leaders who conceded that one of Peel's two changes of course might have been a principled one did not agree which one. Catholic emancipation ceased, after a generation, to be an emotive issue, but protection and free trade continued, as Balfour and Baldwin found, to divide the Conservative Party. Far into the twentieth century, the party related more easily to the pragmatism and balance of the 1842 budget than it did to the capitulation of 1846. The shade of the supreme workman, who dominated the parliamentary debates of his age, found no assured resting place among succeeding generations of Conservatives. 
In the 'Dictionary of National Biography' Peel's grandson G. V. Peel wrote that in an age of revolutions Peel alone had had 'the foresight and the strength to form a conservative party, resting not on force or corruption, but on administrative capacity and the more stable portion of the public will'. Certainly Peel re-educated the party after the debacle of 1831-2, and returned it to power in 1841. The case is strong, but the question then remains, why did Peel, in 1845-6, follow a course which led to the destruction of the party he himself had made? Peel explained that his 'earnest wish', during his tenure of power, had been 'to impress the people of this country with a belief that the legislature was animated with a sincere desire to frame its legislation upon the principles of equity and justice' (Gash, 'Sir Robert Peel', 590). When he perceived that 'it was impossible to reconcile the repeal of the Corn Laws by me with the keeping together of the Conservative party', he had 'no hesitation in sacrificing the subordinate object' (Peel to Aberdeen, 19 Aug 1847, 'Memoirs', 2.322). Here, he was not to be disappointed, and he rose in the affections of the people in proportion as he lost the favour of his party. While members of one sectional interest, tory landowners, draped their prints of Peel with crepe or turned them to the wall, and those of another, at the heart of the Anglican university establishment, unforgivingly made sure that Peel's portrait never hung in his college dining hall, the nation's felicitous passage through the year of revolutions, 1848, showed that thoughts of the dissolution of our institutions were indeed being lost, as Peel had hoped they would be, amid the enjoyment of prosperity. Two years later, when Peel died, 400,000 working men contributed 1died each to a memorial fund, used to buy books for working men's clubs and libraries. 
Peel's 'Speeches' were published in four volumes in 1853, an imperfect edition but one which has never been replaced. Peel's 'Memoirs', covering the three episodes he was most sensitive about -- Catholic emancipation, the acceptance of the king's commission to form a ministry in 1834-5, and the disintegration of the Conservative Party during the corn law crisis in 1845-6 -- were published by Philip Stanhope (Lord Mahon) and Edward Cardwell in 1856-7. But plans for an 'official' biography hung fire. Peel's intimate, J. W. Croker, was the obvious choice. But he died in 1857 with nothing accomplished, and the commission passed first to Goldwin Smith and then to Edward Cardwell, both of whom gave up. In 1871 seventy-seven paintings from Peel's collection were sold to the National Gallery for $75,000, and Peel's reputation as a connoisseur was established. In 1891-9 C. S. Parker published three volumes of extracts from Peel's papers, which allowed Peel and his correspondents to speak for themselves, but offered little interpretation or evaluation. In the meantime various lives appeared -- at least a dozen in the half century between 1850 and 1900. These were all based upon the readily available sources, and none was more authoritative than the article in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. No more could, perhaps, have been said, until Peel's papers were deposited in the British Museum in 1922. Even then many years passed before the first full-length case for the consistency of Peel's actions, the purity of his motives, and the scale of his achievement was at last made in Norman Gash's two-volume biography (1961, 1972), a portrait so favourable that it has already led to less flattering revisions -- by Boyd Hilton and V. A. C. Gatrell especially. 


@@@@@


doc= 21765


Peel, Sir Robert, third baronet (1822-1895), politician, eldest son of Sir Robert Peel, second baronet (1788-1850), the prime minister, and his wife, Julia, 'nee' Floyd (1795-1859), daughter of Lieutenant-General Sir John Floyd, first baronet, was born in London on 4 May 1822. His brothers included Sir Frederick Peel, Sir William Peel, and Arthur Wellesley Peel, first Viscount Peel. Peel was 'small, dark, almost foreign-looking, and volatile' (Gash, 176). Throughout his life he was blamed for lacking the 'gravitas' which his father and the Peelites so especially praised in public life. He went to Harrow School in February 1835 and matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 26 May 1841, but did not take a degree (unlike his father, whose double first was legendary). Entering the diplomatic service, he became an attache to the British legation at Madrid on 18 June 1844. He was promoted to be secretary of legation in Switzerland on 2 May 1846, and was charge d'affaires there in November 1846. After succeeding his father to the baronetcy on 2 July 1850, he entered the Commons as Liberal Conservative member for his father's former constituency, Tamworth, on 19 July 1850 and held it until 1880. 
On 24 April 1854 Peel was shipwrecked off the coast of Genoa in the steamboat 'Ercolano', and only saved his life by swimming ashore. From 29 March 1854 to 1859 he served as a captain in the Staffordshire yeomanry. In March 1855 Lord Palmerston, who had been foreign minister while Peel was in the diplomatic service, appointed him a junior lord of the Admiralty. Henceforth he was regarded as a Liberal, and his persistent advocacy of the liberation of Italy fully justified this view of his political opinions. Palmerston liked Peel's jaunty manner and became his chief political patron. In July 1856 Peel acted as secretary to Lord Granville's special mission to Russia at the coronation of Alexander II, but on 5 January 1857, during a lecture delivered at the opening of the new library at Adderley Park, near Birmingham, he spoke discourteously of the Russian court and the court officials. The lecture was severely commented on by the Russian and French press, was the subject of a parliamentary debate, and caused great annoyance to the English court. Nevertheless, on Palmerston's return to power, Peel became, on 26 July 1861, chief secretary to the lord lieutenant of Ireland and a privy councillor. Together with Thomas Larcom, he operated an effective system of active surveillance which curbed the early efforts of the Fenians. But this was accompanied by an over-genial public persona and an anti-Catholic stance which estranged Cardinal Cullen and the priesthood and led to the disaffection of Irish Roman Catholic MPs with Palmerston's government. Peel lacked the will or ability to develop a land policy of the sort increasingly expected by Irish Liberals. On Palmerston's death he was succeeded in the Irish secretaryship by Chichester Fortescue, and he did not again hold office. On 5 January 1866 he was created GCB. 
Peel continued to sit for Tamworth as a Liberal, but was often a severe critic of Gladstone's government of 1868-74. In 1874 he for a second time christened himself a Liberal Conservative; and during the Eastern question debates of 1876-80 he supported the Conservative government's policies. He did not stand for Tamworth at the general election in 1880, but unsuccessfully contested Gravesend as a Conservative; after 1880 his voice was often heard on Conservative platforms, denouncing the action of the Liberal administration in Egypt and Ireland. 'The Times' of 8 May 1880 published his letter recounting the offers from various governments of honours and offices which he had refused. On 21 March 1884 he was elected at a by-election as Conservative member for Huntingdon. When that borough was disfranchised, he was, in November 1885, returned for Blackburn. However, on the critical division on the second reading of the 'Home Rule Bill', on 7 June 1886, he abstained from voting, thus shocking his tory colleagues. He was the only Conservative MP who by supporting home rule balanced the flow of Liberals into Conservatism. At the general election in July 1886 he unsuccessfully contested the Inverness burghs against a Liberal Unionist. Subsequently, with characteristic impetuosity, he threw himself into the home-rule campaign as a supporter of the Irish demands, and at a by-election in 1889 came forward as a candidate for Brighton in the home-rule interest. He was hopelessly defeated, and his political career came to a disappointing close. 
From about 1856 Peel was extensively engaged in racing under the name of Mr F. Robinson; and later on he had an establishment at Bonehill, near Tamworth, where he bred horses. He added to his father's fine collection of pictures and drawings, which included the well-known 'Chapeau de paille' by Rubens, but his extravagance and declining financial position forced their sale to the National Gallery in March 1871 and, in June 1884, the sale of much of the Drayton estate, excluding the manor house, though he ceased to live there. Peel married, on 13 January 1856, Lady Emily Hay, seventh daughter of the eighth marquess of Tweeddale. They had a son, Robert (the fourth baronet), and three daughters. Lady Emily left her husband and lived in Geneva (she later moved to Florence and died in April 1924). On 9 May 1895 Peel was found dead, from haemorrhage of the brain, in his bedroom at 12 Stratton Street, London. He was buried at Drayton Bassett parish church on 16 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 21766


Peel, Sir William (1824-1858), naval officer, third and favourite son of Sir Robert Peel, second baronet (1788-1850), prime minister, and his wife, Julia, 'nee' Floyd (1795-1859), daughter of Sir John Floyd, was born on 2 November 1824. His brothers included Sir Robert Peel, third baronet, Sir Frederick Peel, and Arthur Wellesley Peel, first Viscount Peel. After private school and Harrow School, Peel entered the navy in April 1838 on board the 'Princess Charlotte', carrying the flag of Sir Robert Stopford as commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, and was present at the operations on the coast of Syria in 1840. He was afterwards in the 'Monarch', and in the 'Cambrian' in China with Captain Henry Ducie Chads, returning to England in the troopship 'Belleisle' in September 1843. In November he joined the gunnery ship 'Excellent' at Portsmouth, and in May 1844 passed his examination with the greatest credit. 
On 13 May, Peel was promoted lieutenant and ordered to the 'Winchester', flagship of Rear-Admiral Josceline Percy at the Cape of Good Hope. In May, before he could join the 'Winchester', he was appointed to the 'Cormorant' in the Pacific. From her he was moved to the 'Thalia', and afterwards to the 'America', from which he carried out a secret intelligence mission to report on the Columbia/Oregon territory, then at the centre of an Anglo-American dispute. He then returned with dispatches overland from San Blas to Vera Cruz, and thence to England. In February 1846 he was appointed to the 'Devastation' at Woolwich; in May to the 'Constance' at Plymouth; and on 27 June 1846 he was promoted commander. In 1847-8 he commanded the 'Daring' on the North American and West Indies station, and on 10 January 1849 was promoted captain. 
Anticipating a period on half pay, Peel decided to explore the interior of Africa, with the hope of doing something to improve the condition of the inhabitants. In preparation he studied Arabic, under the tuition of Joseph Churi, a Maronite educated at Rome, and in September 1850 proposed to Churi that they should make a short tour to Egypt, Mount Sinai, Jerusalem, Nazareth, and Syria. They left England on 20 October, and were back by 20 February 1851. On 20 August following they left on the longer and more serious journey. They went up the Nile, across the desert to Khartoum, and on to al- 'Ubayd, where they suffered a severe attack of fever and ague. Peel returned to England early in January, and published an account of the journey, 'A Ride through the Nubian Desert' (1852). 
In October 1853 Peel commissioned the frigate 'Diamond', attached to the fleet in the Mediterranean, and afterwards in the Black Sea. He served with the naval brigade landed for the siege of Sevastopol, under the command of Captain Stephen Lushington, and repeatedly distinguished himself by his bravery. On 18 October 1854 he threw a live shell, the fuse still burning, over the parapet of his battery. On 5 November, in the battle of Inkerman, he joined the officers of the Grenadier Guards, and helped to defend their colours. On 18 June 1855 he led the ladder party at the assault on the Redan, himself carrying the first ladder, until severely wounded. For these services he was nominated a CB on 5 July, and on the institution of the Victoria Cross he was one of the first recipients. 
On 13 September 1856 he commissioned the 'Shannon', a powerful 50-gun steam-frigate, for service in China. She did not sail until the following March. At Singapore she was met by the news of the Indian mutiny, and took Lord Elgin up to Hong Kong, arriving on 2 July. Admiral Sir Michael Seymour sent the 'Shannon' back to Calcutta on July 16, with Elgin on board, together with a detachment of marines and soldiers. At Calcutta, Peel formed a naval brigade. On 14 August he left the ship with 450 men, six 24-pounder Bengal artillery guns, and two 8 inch howitzers. At Allahabad on 20 October he was reinforced by a party of 120 men, and from then on was present in all the principal operations. The coolness of his bravery was everywhere remarkable, and his formidable battery gave most efficient service: the huge guns were, under his orders, moved and worked as though they were light field pieces. On 21 January 1858 he was nominated a KCB and an aide-de-camp to the queen. 
In 1858 Peel's brigade employed six naval 8 inch guns from the 'Shannon'. Peel mounted these massive weapons, weighing 65 cwt each, on carriages locally constructed by the sailors. They provided the firepower to overcome the massive walls of Indian forts, and to keep down British casualties. 
In the second relief of Lucknow on 9 March 1858 Peel was severely wounded in the thigh by a musket bullet, which was cut out from the opposite side of the leg. Still very weak, he reached Cawnpore on his way to England, and there, on 20 April, he contracted smallpox, of which he died on 27 April, aged thirty-three. He never married. His services in the field were the highlight of the Lucknow campaigns. His men achieved unparalleled feats of arms and endurance that broke the will of the enemy. 
Peel was an officer distinguished alike for his bravery and his resourcefulness. He benefited from the rapid promotions provided for the son of a prime minister, although his father never actively solicited them; however, no one ever doubted that he was a worthy recipient. In creating a legendary Victorian hero, concentrating on his courage and tragic death, his hagiographers did scant justice to his professional skill and intellectual achievements. His death deprived the navy of one of its most brilliant officers; his career had only just begun. 


@@@@@


doc= 21767


Peel, William Yates (1789-1858), politician, was born at Chamber Hall, Bury, Lancashire, on 3 August 1789, the second son of Sir Robert Peel, first baronet (1750-1830), calico printer and MP, and his first wife, Ellen Yates (1766-1803). The future prime minister Sir Robert Peel, second baronet (1788-1850), was his elder brother. He was educated at Harrow School and St John's College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1812 and MA in 1815; he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1812 and was called to the bar in 1816. He entered parliament in 1817 as MP for Bossiney. At the general election of 1818 he was elected one of the MPs for Tamworth, alongside his father, and retained the seat until 1830, when he made way for his brother. On 17 June 1819 he married Jane Elizabeth (died 1847), daughter of Stephen Moore, second Earl Mountcashell, an Irish representative peer; they had four sons and nine daughters. 
Peel did not share his brother's ambition, and after declining office early in his parliamentary career was reproached by his father for a lack of vigour. He subsequently held minor positions as commissioner of the Board of Control (1826-7) in Lord Liverpool's administration, and then as under-secretary of state at the Home Office (1828-30), under his elder brother, in the duke of Wellington's administration. He became a lord of the Treasury (1830), an office which he also held in his brother's first administration (1834-5). He sat briefly as MP for Yarmouth, Isle of Wight (1830-31), and Cambridge University (1831-2) before reverting to Tamworth (1835-7). To the embarrassment of his brother he unexpectedly stood again for Tamworth at the general election of 1847 and was elected. He vacated the seat later that year and retired from public life, having been badly affected by the death of his wife in September 1847. He died at his home, Baginton Hall, Warwickshire, on 1 June 1858. 


