@@@@@


doc= 1354


Barclay, William (1797/8-1859), miniature painter, was born possibly in London and was also possibly the son of William Barclay ('fl'. 1764-1769), miniature painter, of Tottenham, Middlesex. He entered the Royal Academy Schools on 15 January 1820, aged twenty-two, under the title 'William Barclay Jnr'. He established himself as a miniature painter, practising in London and Paris throughout the period 1830 to 1859. 
Barclay specialized in making copies of the works of the great Italian masters in the Musee du Louvre in Paris, as well as producing portrait miniatures on ivory in the style of, but considerably weaker than, Sir William Ross. A large full-length miniature in watercolour on ivory of Dom Pedro, duque do Braganca, and Dom Luis, duque do Porto, demonstrating this affinity with Ross, was acquired by Queen Victoria in 1843 (Royal Collection). Barclay's miniature of Mrs Bacon (1836) and two miniatures of unknown sitters are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. Two of these are signed 'Barclay' in his characteristic fashion. He exhibited portrait miniatures and some copies in watercolour at the Paris Salon between 1831 and 1859, as well as at the Royal Academy between 1832 and 1856. He died in 1859, possibly in Paris. A successful miniature painter of his time, Barclay has been classified by most recent commentators as a competent but second-rank artist. 


@@@@@


doc= 1355


Barcroft, George (d. 1610), Church of England clergyman and musician, is of unknown parentage. From 1565 to 1571 he was a chorister of Winchester Cathedral. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a sizar on 12 December 1574, and graduated BA in 1578; during 1575-7 he was also a singing-man of the chapel choir. In 1578-9, despite his youth, he was admitted organist and master of the choristers of Ely Cathedral, and after a period of probation received formal appointment on 19 January 1583. In addition to his statutory duties of training the chorister boys and playing the organ at the three daily services, he undertook to take his part in the singing of the services and to train the boys in playing musical instruments. Having taken priest's orders on 30 August 1590, he was appointed in plurality to a minor canonry of the cathedral in 1592. Generous as was his aggregate annual stipend of $23 6's'. 8died, he had regular gratuities from an appreciative chapter, as well as remuneration for copying music for the choir to use. 
Barcroft was a noteworthy pedagogue. Andrew Willett, canon of Ely, remembered him particularly for the distinction of two of his pupils, the instrumentalist Thomas Jordan (chorister in 1584-7) and the composer John Amner (1593); he could have added the composers William Stonard and Thomas Yarrow (both 1596-8). Three of Barcroft's compositions have survived, all in the simpler four-voice idiom characteristic of their day. The two short anthems to prayer book texts exhibit some grace and modest skill; the paired 'Te Deum' and 'Benedictus' are rather less distinguished. Barcroft received his last chapter gratuity 'in his sickness' during the spring of 1610, and vacated both his offices, doubtless by death, between March and June 1610. 


@@@@@


doc= 1356


Bard, Henry, first Viscount Bellomont (1615/16-1656), royalist army officer and diplomat, came of an old-established Lincolnshire family, and was the younger son of George Bard (died 1616), vicar of Staines, Middlesex, and his wife, Susan, daughter of John Dudley. A scholar at Eton College from about 1628, Bard was admitted to King's College, Cambridge, on 23 August 1633, where he became a fellow in 1636; he graduated BA in 1637 and proceeded MA in 1641. His restless and roving disposition led him to travel extensively, mainly on foot, in western Europe, Turkey, Palestine, Arabia, and Egypt, where he acquired (allegedly stole from a mosque) a handsome 'Koran', which he later (on 28 May 1644) presented to King's College. He sent a detailed account of his travels to a King's contemporary, Dr Charles Mason. 
Bard returned to England about 1642, and on the outbreak of the civil war his reputation as a traveller and linguist secured him a colonel's commission, possibly through the influence of the queen, Henrietta Maria. He later told parliament 'that he had taken up arms neither for religion... nor for that mousetrap the laws, but to re-establish the king on his throne' (Bence-Jones, 187). He was knighted on 22 November 1643 and created an Oxford DCL the same year. Having gained the confidence of Prince Rupert, he was sent to Ireland, where he raised two regiments of foot. At Cheriton, Hampshire, on 29 March 1644, against orders, and 'with more youthful courage than soldier-like discretion' (Adair, 140), he impetuously charged the roundhead cavalry and his whole regiment was either killed or captured, Bard himself losing the use of an arm. After a brief imprisonment (April/May 1644) he was granted the reversion to the offices of governor of Guernsey and captain of Cornet Castle. He was created a baronet on 8 October 1644, joined the king at Oxford, and was given the command of a brigade. In 1645 he married Anne (died in or before 1668), daughter of Sir William Gardiner of Peckham, Surrey; they had a son and three daughters. 
Early in 1645 Bard was governor of Campden House, Gloucestershire; according to Clarendon he 'exercised an illimited tyranny over the whole country' (Porter, 30), ordering the constable of Kineton to be thrown into a pond. When the garrison was withdrawn in May he burnt the house to the ground to prevent its occupation by the enemy. After playing a distinguished role in the capture of Leicester on 30 May he commanded a division at Naseby with Sir George Lisle. Shortly afterwards he was appointed governor of Worcester, and on 1 November 1645 he threatened local constables who were late in paying their assessments with 'a troop of unsanctified horse (to)... fire your houses... hang up your bodies and scare your ghosts' (Whitelocke, 1.181). On 18 July 1645 Bard was raised to the Irish peerage as Baron Bard of Dromboy, co. Eastmeath, and Viscount Bellomont, co. Dublin (an attempt to latinize Ballymount). While sailing to Ireland in December 1646 he was captured by a parliamentarian vessel and brought back, a prisoner, to England. The following year he was released on condition he left the country -- possibly through the good offices of his elder brother, Maximilian, a wealthy London mercer who provided horses for the parliamentarian army, and on whom Bellomont appears to have been financially dependent throughout his life. 
Upon moving with his family to the exiled court of Charles II, where he became a Catholic, Bellomont was arrested on 12 May 1649 at The Hague and charged with the murder of Isaac Dorislaus, the Commonwealth's ambassador; the charge was soon dropped. In 1653 Bellomont was sent by the king as his envoy to Shah Abbas II of Persia, in the hope of raising money for the royalist cause from payment of an alleged debt owed to the English crown for naval aid in the capture of Hormoz (1622) and from diverting to royal use the East India Company's share of the customs at Gombroon. His journeys were, long afterwards, narrated by Niccolao Manucci, a Venetian boy befriended by Bellomont and allowed to accompany him. Travelling in disguise through Turkey and Armenia, they reached Tabriz early in September 1654. But though the shah was friendly (Bellomont named his youngest daughter Persiana) he proved dilatory over a pecuniary settlement. After more than a year at Esfahan, Bellomont left with calculated brusqueness, and on his own initiative proceeded to India to seek aid from the Mughal, Shah Jahan. He reached Surat in January 1656, but on 20 June he died, probably from heat apoplexy, at Hodal, between Agra and Delhi, where he was buried; fifteen months later his body was reburied at Agra, probably in the Roman Catholic cemetery. Anthony Wood alleged he had hoped to become grand master of the knights of Malta. 
Bellomont left his family in straitened circumstances: his widow petitioned the king for a pension in the autumn of 1660 and she seems to have been aided by his old college. Of Bard's children, Charles Rupert, his son (1648-1667) and Charles II's godson, was killed fighting the French on St Kitts; with his death the viscountcy became extinct. Frances, his eldest daughter (1646?-1708), was ('c'.1664-7) the mistress of Prince Rupert; their son, Dudley Bard (1666?-1686), was sent by Rupert to Eton College and died at the siege of Buda. Although a Catholic and Jacobite supporter, Frances later resided at the court of Hanover as a close friend of the Electress Sophia, Rupert's youngest sister. 
Bellomont was more than the heavy-handed, licentious soldier depicted by Clarendon, and a picturesque, intrepid adventurer. Manucci says that he treated him like a son, and the Dutch East India Company's surgeon at Surat found him 'very well-informed, modest and courteous' (Bence-Jones, 192). A manuscript by John Hall ('c'.1660) at King's College calls him 'a man of a very personable body and of a stout and undaunted courage' (GEC, 'Peerage', 105), and even the waspish Wood, who says he always lived 'high', pronounced Bellomont 'a compact body of vanity and ambition, yet proper, robust and comely' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.62). 


@@@@@


doc= 1357


Bardelby, Robert (d. 1332/3), administrator, was probably the son of Thomas, son of Walter Bardelby; his family took its name from Barlby, near Selby, in the West Riding of Yorkshire. Robert is first recorded in 1284, acting as attorney for a group of Yorkshiremen in king's bench. He may have acquired an ecclesiastical training as a means of rising in the service of the crown, for while in August 1286 Archbishop John Romanus of York described him as a clerk of legitimate birth and good character, holding no benefice in the diocese, in the same year he is also recorded as a chancery clerk, probably introduced by William Hamilton, who came from Brayton, a few miles from Barlby. In July 1291, by now a subdeacon, Bardelby was presented to his first benefice, Burghwallis, north of Doncaster. The means whereby he won promotion in chancery are usually undetectable, but his services were sufficiently valued for him to be excused attendance at the London hustings court in 1298, and an appearance before the archbishop of York in 1301, because he was engaged on the king's business. On 12 April 1302 he witnessed the charter whereby Roger (IV) Bigod, earl of Norfolk, made over nearly all his lands to Edward I, and by March 1303 he apparently stood first among the chancery clerks, after the chancellor and keeper of the rolls. He attended the Carlisle parliament of January-March 1307, and on 19 April took charge of the great seal immediately after the death of his friend the chancellor William Hamilton. Not surprisingly, he received rewards from the crown for his services, starting with the living of Sandhurst, Kent, in 1294, and culminating in the prebend of Dunnington in York Minster in October 1305. Others, too, saw him as a man worth cultivating -- hence, no doubt, the yearly pension of 5 marks he came to receive from the templars. 
The accession of Edward II did Bardelby's career no harm; indeed, it led to greater eminence. A feature of administrative practice during the reign is the number of occasions on which the great seal, nominally the responsibility of the chancellor, was entrusted to commissions of three or four chancery clerks. Between 12 May 1310 and 14 November 1321 Bardelby was a member of twenty-four such commissions. Twice he and colleagues had the custody of the seal for some six months, but more often they controlled its workings for only a few weeks, while on one occasion in June 1318 it was entrusted to them for just twenty-four hours. During these years Bardelby was several times named as a royal councillor; in March 1315, for instance, he was present at York for negotiations with envoys from the count of Flanders. He was a trier of petitions in parliament in 1315, 1316, and 1321, and an assessor of the fifteenth in London in 1316. A priest by 18 November 1311, he continued to add to his benefices, notably the Lincolnshire livings of Gedney and Boston (the latter in the face of some opposition) and a prebend in the collegiate church of South Malling, Sussex, all in 1311, and a prebend in the royal free chapel of Penkridge, Staffordshire, in 1314. And he added to his inheritance at and near Barlby. Perhaps he came to feel uneasy about his own acquisitiveness, for in 1316 he endowed a chantry for his soul in the London church of St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street (where he had property), and in February 1321 he founded another chantry, this time in Southwark Priory. 
On 14 November 1321 Bardelby was licensed to leave court because of illness. This may have been a turning point in his career. He never had the custody of the great seal afterwards, and although he appears to have continued to act as a chancery clerk -- he was present on 4 July 1325 when Henry Cliffe took oath as keeper of the chancery rolls -- he was not promoted to a bishopric, unlike some of his colleagues. In August 1321 he had exchanged Dunnington for a prebend in Chichester Cathedral (perhaps Henfield), and thereafter he is increasingly to be found in the south of England, and especially Sussex, where he was several times appointed to commissions and inquests. In September 1328 he was reported to be dead, and his prebend in South Malling was given to another royal clerk. But he recovered, and even acted once more as a royal commissioner. In February 1332 he was licensed to endow Chichester Cathedral with a yearly rent of 20's'. for the commemoration of his anniversary; licence was given in acknowledgement of 'laudable service in the Chancery in the reign of Edward I, Edward II and the present king, discharged at great cost to himself' ('CPR', '1330-34', 254). Bardelby was still believed to be alive on 30 June 1332, but had probably died by 18 August 1333, when another incumbent was instituted at Gedney. As an ordained clerk he had neither wife nor children. But he attended to the interests of his nephews, acting as the guardian of one during his minority, obtaining a post in the Dublin exchequer for another. It is also possible that the Robert and Hugh Bardelby later recorded in royal service were his relations, introduced into government by him. 


@@@@@


doc= 1358


Bardney, Richard (fl. 1485/6-1519), Benedictine monk and author, is probably to be identified with the 'prior studentium' (the academic superior of a college or hostel) of that name recorded at Cambridge in 1485-6, and with the Richard Barney, also 'prior studentium' and with the degree of BTh, whose name is entered in a copy of Raymond de Sebonde's 'Theologia naturalis' (Strasbourg, 1486) with the date 1490 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Douce 158). Bardney was the author of verse lives of Robert Grosseteste and of Little St Hugh of Lincoln which in 1503 he dedicated to Bishop William Smith of Lincoln. He gave a copy to the library of St Stephen's collegiate church at Westminster, from where it passed to Sir Robert Cotton's collection, in which it constituted folios 43-69 of MS Otho C. xvi. The volume was utterly destroyed in the Ashburnham House fire of 1731, but substantial extracts from the life of Grosseteste were published in Henry Wharton's 'Anglia sacra' (1691). 
Wharton had a low opinion of Bardney's work; he shortened the life by weeding out what he described as 'grosser fables and inane flourishes' (Wharton, 2.xvii), and stated that he was only publishing the residue because he could find nothing better. For more than 250 years such scholars as noticed the life at all were equally dismissive; David Douglas spoke for the consensus when he described it as 'valueless'. But first J. C. Russell in 1944 and then R. W. Southern in 1986 gave cogent reasons for believing that although he contaminated it with fables Bardney had nevertheless faithfully transmitted the essentials of a much earlier source, perhaps a life of Grosseteste prepared to support efforts to secure his canonization between about 1260 and 1310. Although it is notably lacking in names and dates, his work has the particular value of providing a plausible account of Grosseteste's deeply obscure early years, with many details not found in any other source; for Southern it is 'the only substantial medieval biography of Grosseteste' (Southern, 75). Nothing certain is known of Bardney after 1503. He may have been the Richard Bardenay charged at Bishop Atwater's visitation of Bardney Abbey on 9 July 1519 with offences that included failing to get up for matins and leaving the monastery without permission. If so, he was probably dead by 12 May 1525, when his name does not appear in a list of the Bardney monks. 


@@@@@


doc= 1359


Bardolf, Hugh (d. 1203), justice, was the son of Hugh Bardolf (died 'c'.1176), a Lincolnshire knight, and of Isabel, possibly of the Twist family of South Carlton, Lincolnshire. In 1200 he married Mabel de Limesy, daughter of Gerard de Limesy, and sister and coheir of John de Limesy (died 1193), baron of Cavendish in Suffolk. Bardolf is first recorded in attendance on the royal court at Chinon on 5 April 1181, where he attested a charter as steward, a post which he retained until the end of Henry II's reign in 1189. He acted as a royal justice almost annually between 'c'.1185 and 1203, more often as a justice in eyre than at Westminster; he sat as a justice following the king during John's early visits to England in 1200-01. He also acted as sheriff of Cornwall (1184-7), Wiltshire (1187-9), Somerset and Dorset (1188-9), Staffordshire, Warwickshire, and Leicestershire (1190-91), Yorkshire (1191-4), Westmorland (1191-9), Northumberland (1194-8), Cumberland (1198-9), Cornwall and Devon (1199-1200), and Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire (1200-03). 
Bardolf set out with Richard I on his journey to the Holy Land and was one of Richard's sureties at Messina in November 1190, but returned to England soon afterwards, and was associated in the justiciarship with the bishops of Durham (Hugh du Puiset) and Ely (William Longchamp) while the king was on crusade. He was involved, with Walter de Coutances, in the commission that was to supplant Longchamp; accordingly, he was among those excommunicated by Longchamp, but was offered pardon if he would surrender Scarborough and his counties of Yorkshire and Westmorland. In 1193, as associate justiciar and sheriff of Yorkshire, he assisted the archbishop of York to fortify Doncaster for Richard, but refusing, as John's vassal, to besiege Tickhill, was denounced as a traitor, and on Richard's return, in March 1194, was dismissed from his Yorkshire post. He was at once, however, transferred to Northumberland, and ordered to take it over from the bishop of Durham, then, on the latter's resistance, to seize it (July 1194). At du Puiset's death, on 3 March 1195, the castles of Norham and Durham were surrendered to Bardolf, who, remaining faithful to Richard, retained his counties until John's accession in 1199. From John he received the counties of Nottingham and Derby and the custody of Tickhill Castle. 
Bardolf continued to act as an itinerant justice and to sit in the royal court until his death some time before Michaelmas in 1203. He won some reputation as a legal expert, for he was one of the few justices to be mentioned by name in early texts of Glanville. He was also a financial expert, appearing from the rolls to have acted as a baron of the exchequer in all three reigns. He was escheator for the north of England, 1194-7, one of the keepers of the Jews, 1194-7, and responsible for the stannaries, 1199-1200. Bardolf held considerable property at his death, for his brother offered a $1000 fine for his inheritance; and William (III) de Briouze offered $1000 to marry his son to Hugh's widow. Hugh and his wife had no children, and Hugh's heir was his brother Robert Bardolf. 


@@@@@


doc= 1360


Bardolf, Thomas, fifth Baron Bardolf (1369-1408), landowner and rebel, was born at Birling, Kent, on 22 December 1369, the son of William, fourth Baron Bardolf (1349-1386), and his wife, Agnes (died 1403), the daughter of Michael Poynings, first Lord Poynings (c.1318-1369). His father died on 29 January 1386, and for the rest of his minority Thomas Bardolf seems to have been in the custody of his father-in-law, Ralph, Lord Cromwell, whose daughter Amice he had married by 8 July 1382. Their two daughters were both born at Cromwell's castle of Tattershall, Lincolnshire, in 1389 and 1390 respectively. In the latter year Thomas Bardolf made proof of age and had livery of his father's lands, which were centred upon Wormegay in Norfolk; however, these were much diminished by his mother's dower, and by joint settlements which gave her a life interest in other estates. On 7 September 1391 he was called to parliament for the first time, and thereafter received regular summonses. But he seems to have played little part in public affairs in England, and was appointed to very few commissions. Described by Walsingham as 'a man vigorous in arms, and in bodily shape and stature second to none in the realm' ('Johannis de Trokelowe', 402), he preferred to occupy himself overseas. In May 1392 he was licensed to go abroad. He accompanied Richard II's expedition to Ireland of 1394-5. In 1396 he was licensed to travel abroad again, and in 1397 he went overseas on the king's service, presumably to Gascony. In 1399 he once more went with Richard II to Ireland, and was robbed in Wales on his return. 
Initially Bardolf appears to have accepted the usurpation of Henry IV, and served in the expedition of 1400 to Scotland. For his part, Henry seems to have tried to gain Bardolf's support, appointing him to commissions in Norfolk, and summoning him to parliaments and councils. On 24 May 1400 he renewed for Bardolf the grant of 100 marks per annum made in 1319 by Edward II to Bardolf's great-grandfather Sir Roger Damory. But ultimately Bardolf was not to be won over to the Lancastrian cause. He may have retained Ricardian sympathies. The effect of his annuity was probably vitiated by the difficulties he experienced in obtaining his money, requiring repeated instructions to the exchequer and reissues of tallies. He is unlikely to have viewed with equanimity the new regime's use of the duchy of Lancaster estates in East Anglia to build up the crown's position there at the expense of local magnates like himself. And he evidently came under the influence of the earl of Northumberland. There may have been a connection between the Percys and the Bardolfs dating from the mid-fourteenth century, when Thomas Percy was bishop of Norwich -- at his death in 1369 Bishop Percy bequeathed a cup engraved with the Bardolf arms. But the links later became closer; when Bardolf's mother died, on 12 June 1403, she appointed Northumberland and her son to be overseers of her will. 
There is no evidence that Bardolf took part in the Percy revolt of 1403, but in 1405 he committed himself to treasonable courses. He opposed royal policy in councils held at London and St Albans, and one chronicle even makes him the instigator of the scheme of February that year for a tripartite division of England between Northumberland, Owain Glyn Dwr, and Edmund (IV) Mortimer. When in May Henry IV summoned him to campaign in Wales, Bardolf slipped away secretly and made his way north, to join Northumberland. Like the earl, he failed to support Archbishop Scrope's rising, and, following its defeat, the two men fled to Scotland. When Bardolf was formally declared a traitor in the parliament of December 1406, it was claimed that it was on his advice that the earl of Northumberland had entered into treasonous negotiations with the Scots and French. By then, however, the Scots had proved untrustworthy allies, and in the summer of 1406, after receiving warning of a conspiracy to hand them over to Henry IV, Bardolf and Northumberland fled to Wales. There they had the support of Glyn Dwr, and were able to raise a small force, but this was defeated by Edward Charlton, and they moved on again, to France and the Low Countries. Raising money by pawning their jewels, they visited Paris, but their hopes of French support were dashed by the opposition of the duke of Orleans, and they made their way to Bruges. By the end of 1407 they were back in Scotland. 
According to John Hardyng, Bardolf and Northumberland were now 'with all thair hertes fayne Thaym to submytte unto the kynge agayne' (BL, MS Lansdowne 204, fol. 207'v'). But the conciliatory mood passed, and early in 1408 they invaded England with such men as they could gather, hoping to exploit the prevailing discontent with King Henry's government to arouse a rebellion. The Scottish nobles, according to one account, waved them off with the words 'Go ahead, you have England with you' ('Eulogium historiarum', 3.411). Words and events flattered to deceive. At first the invaders met with no resistance. When they reached Thirsk they presented themselves as liberators, and called upon those who desired freedom from oppressive government to join them. Some men did enlist, and thus reinforced Bardolf and Northumberland resumed their advance. But they found their way blocked by the sheriff of Yorkshire, Sir Thomas Rokeby, at the head of the county levies, and were finally brought to battle on 19 February on Bramham Moor, near Tadcaster, where their forces were routed. Northumberland was killed, and Bardolf, severely wounded, was captured, and died later that day. Bardolf's head was sent to Lincoln, while his quarters were displayed in London, York, Bishop's Lynn, and Shrewsbury. On 13 April 1408 his remains were delivered to his widow for burial. Bardolf's heirs were his two daughters, Anne, who married successively Sir William Clifford and Reginald, Lord Cobham, and Joan, who married Sir William Phelip, who later styled himself Lord Bardolf. Many of their father's estates were at first distributed among the king's supporters, but most of them were later recovered. Bardolf's widow, secured in her dower, lived until 1 July 1421. 


@@@@@


doc= 1361


Bardolf, William (b. in or before 1206, d. 1275/6), baron, was the son and heir of Doun Bardolf of Shelford, Nottinghamshire, and Beatrice, daughter and heir of William de Warenne of Wormegay, Norfolk. He was a middle-ranking baron with a long career in royal service, who supported the baronial reformers in 1258, but took the side of the king when civil war broke out in 1264. 
After the death of Doun in 1205, and of her second husband, Ralph ('c'.1210), Beatrice married Hubert de Burgh, earl of Kent, who became guardian of her son William Bardolf following her own death in 1214. Although Bardolf had livery of his inheritance in 1215, his stepfather contrived to keep control of the honour of Wormegay until his death in 1243. Bardolf was already married to Nichola, whose parentage is unknown, when he attended Henry III on his visit to France in 1230. He commanded the expedition which captured William de Marisco and other outlaws on Lundy island in 1242, served the king in Scotland and Wales in 1244, and accompanied Queen Eleanor to France in 1254. His rewards included grants of free warren, fairs and markets in his manors, and favourable terms for the payment of his debts to the king. 
In the political crisis of 1258, however, Bardolf was one of the twelve chosen by the barons to reform the realm, and on 22 June he was appointed constable of Nottingham Castle under the terms of the provisions of Oxford. By March 1259 he had been elected to the parliamentary committee of twelve, and in 1261 he used his local influence to obstruct the work of the king's sheriff in Norfolk. He was one of the Montfortians who in December 1263 agreed to the arbitration of Louis IX on the quarrel with the king, but after the rebels were defeated at Northampton in April 1264 he joined the king and was captured at the battle of Lewes that May. He received only modest grants of the lands of rebels after the battle of Evesham in August 1265. When he died, shortly before 5 January 1276, he was succeeded by his son, also William Bardolf. 


@@@@@


doc= 1362


Bardsley, Sir James Lomax (1801-1876), physician, the son of Edward and Elizabeth Bardsley, was born at George Street, Nottingham, on 7 July 1801. He studied medicine in Glasgow and Edinburgh, and at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, where he was taught by the surgeon John Abernethy, who became a firm friend. He also spent some months studying in Paris. Bardsley graduated MD (Edinburgh) in 1823 with a thesis on rabies. Later that year he was elected honorary physician to the Manchester Royal Infirmary, following the resignation of his uncle, Samuel Argent Bardsley (1764-1850), who had been honorary physician there since 1790. 
James Lomax Bardsley, then only twenty-two years old, became the youngest man ever appointed to the honorary staff of the Manchester Royal Infirmary. From 1824 he became associated with Thomas Turner, who established the Pine Street school of medicine in Manchester. He lectured there on the principles and practice of physic, materia medica, and medical botany. These lectures, together with his 'Hospital Facts and Observations' (1830), demonstrated the breadth of Bardsley's professional expertise and sound common sense. He also wrote articles on diabetes and hydrophobia for the 'Cyclopaedia of Practical Medicine' (1833). 
Bardsley was essentially a practical man concerned particularly to advance the professional standing of rank-and-file doctors. He was active in establishing the Provincial Medical and Surgical Association (PMSA) in 1832, and five years later he gave a 'Retrospective address' at its annual meeting in Cheltenham. He remained committed throughout his life to the PMSA, which later became the British Medical Association. He left a legacy of $500 to its benevolent fund. He was president of the Manchester Medical Society in 1838, and from 1845 until 1848. He was also president of the Medico-Ethical Association in 1850, and president of the Manchester Institute for Diseases of the Ear. 
In 1831 Bardsley married Elizabeth Shuttleworth, widow of R. H. Shuttleworth. Although he retained consulting rooms in his house in Chatham Street, which he had taken over from his uncle, the couple went to live in a large house at Greenheys, Manchester. 
By the 1840s Bardsley had built up a large professional practice. In 1843 he resigned as honorary physician to the infirmary and was appointed consulting physician. He was deputy lieutenant for Lancashire and a justice of the peace. In 1853 his considerable reputation was recognized by the conferment of a knighthood. Bardsley was the first Manchester physician to receive such an honour. 
Bardsley suffered from heart disease in the later years of his life, and he gradually reduced his professional work. He died on 10 July 1876 at his house, The Orchards, Greenheys, Manchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 1363


Bardsley, Samuel Argent (1764-1850), physician, the son of James Bardsley and his wife, Felicia Stephana Browne, was born at Kelvedon, Essex, on 27 April 1764. In 1778 he entered into an apprenticeship with Benjamin Maddock, a surgeon apothecary of Nottingham. After completing the apprenticeship he studied medicine at London, Edinburgh, and Leiden, where he was a student from 1786 to 1789. He graduated MD and then practised for a short time at Doncaster, before moving to the Manchester Royal Infirmary in 1790 as honorary physician. His election to this post followed the introduction of new rules which enlarged the medical staff of the hospital. 
Through his work at the infirmary, particularly with home patients, Bardsley became active in the 1790s in campaigns for the containment and treatment of fever. As an infirmary physician he became a member of the board of health established in 1795, and in the following year he published a paper outlining his concerns for the health of children employed in cotton mills. For the children, many of whom worked long hours, Bardsley advocated the benefits of cleanliness and ventilation, and in 1801 the board of health published his 'Advice to the Poor', which again stressed the value of cleanliness and fresh air. In 1807 Bardsley published 'Medical Reports of Cases and Experiments', which contained his observations on diabetes, rheumatism, and hydrophobia. 
Bardsley played an active role in the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, acting as secretary from 1793 to 1796 and vice-president from 1797 to 1808. To this society he contributed the papers 'Party prejudice' (1798) and 'The use and abuse of popular sports and exercises' (1803). He later became involved in the Royal Institution (established 1816), attending many of the meetings and lectures even after his retirement from practice. 
In August 1823 Bardsley wrote to the infirmary to resign his appointment as honorary physician, and in the same letter he recommended his nephew, James Lomax Bardsley (1801-1876), as his successor; the latter was duly elected. After his resignation Samuel Bardsley continued to maintain an active interest in the affairs of the hospital. In 1827 he successfully opposed a proposal to increase the number of honorary infirmary posts. Two years later he became physician-extraordinary, a position he retained until his death. 
Until 1827 Bardsley continued to practise from his rooms in Chatham Street, Manchester, where he had lived since 1794. He then gave up his rooms to his nephew and moved locally to a house at Ardwick Green. Bardsley died on 29 May 1850 at Fairlight, near Hastings, while on a visit to a friend. He was buried at St Saviour's Church, Upper Brook Street, Manchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 1364


Bardwell, Thomas (1704-1767), painter and writer, lived most of his life in East Anglia and was probably born there. Talley gives three possible ancestral sources: he was probably connected to the Bardwells associated with Woodton Hall in Norfolk, but there are also claims for the Bardwells of Southwold in Suffolk; there is a possibility that his parents were James Bardwell and Dorothy Hacon, who married at Ditchingham, Norfolk, on 26 November 1702 (Talley, 93-5). 
Bardwell started in the 1720s as a decorative painter in Norfolk, and by 1732 had a thriving business in Bungay, employing at least one apprentice. In 1738 he handed over the decorative painting to his younger brother, Robert, in order to develop his career as a portraitist in oils. His first known dated painting is a conversation piece from 1736, the 'Brewster Family' (Talley, no. 114, 15d). Thereafter he established a good local clientele and may also have worked in London; in 1740-41 he produced the portraits 'John Campbell, Duke of Argyll', and 'David Garrick', newly acclaimed as Richard III at Goodman's Fields (respectively NPG and Russell-Cotes Art Gallery, Bournemouth). In 1752 he journeyed to Scotland, via Yorkshire, painting a number of portraits and some decorative work. He was back in the south by the end of 1753 and from 1759 to the end of his life thrived as a portraitist in Norwich. 
Bardwell was probably self-taught as an artist, though Talley speculates whether he might have come into contact with the Norfolk portraitists D. Heins and Thomas Page, and the London painters J.-B. Van Loo and Joseph Van Aken. Stylistically his work is in the manner of Thomas Hudson, London's most successful portraitist during the 1740s, but there are also compositional references to Van Dyck. In addition, many sitters wear the shiny 'Van Dyck' costume which was fashionable for portraiture at the time. Formats range from portrait busts to life-size full lengths. A notebook containing drawings after finished portraits has been confidently attributed to Bardwell by Ellen Miles. 
By the early nineteenth century Bardwell was remembered more as a copyist of paintings than as a portraitist ('Dictionary of National Biography', after Edwards), and he might be little known as a painter, had it not been for his book, 'The Practice of Painting and Perspective Made Easy'. Published in London in 1756 after a royal licence, it was dedicated to the earl of Rochford, whose 'Portrait with Horse and Groom' he had painted in 1741 (Brodick Castle, Arran). 'the Works of 'Van Dyck' and 'Rembrandt' are the surest Guides to Nature', wrote Bardwell in the introduction, while describing how the book arose from a private attempt to recapture the lost art of great colouring. 'It is out of these most excellent Masters, that I have established my Method:... From them I have learned the Virgin Teints, and finishing Secrets; tho' I have always applied them to practice from Nature.' He drew on many earlier authors, principally the French theorists Roger de Piles and C.-A. Du Fresnoy, but for all that it is an original thesis: the practical instructions, though presented in a traditional format, resulted from genuine study of seventeenth-century paintings in East Anglian collections, combining what he believed to be their technique with his own experience as a painter. Talley and Groen, and White, have established through analysis that he applied most of the methods to his own work. Despite a disastrous contemporary review, the book went into two pirated editions in 1795 and 1840. Edwards noted its impact on youthful painters in its day, though he doubted the validity of the section on perspective. 
Bardwell died a widower on 9 September 1767 and was buried on 11 September in the church of St Mary at Bungay. Most of his paintings remain in private collections. Public collections not cited above include the Castle Museum, Norwich; the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford; and the Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne. 


@@@@@


doc= 1365


Barenger, James (1780-1831), animal painter, was born on 25 December 1780, the son of James Barenger (1745-1813) of Kentish Town, London, a painter and glazier who exhibited a number of watercolour drawings of insects at the Royal Academy (1793-9). It is likely that Barenger trained under his father; he may also have received instruction from his uncle M. S. Barenger, an engraver, William Woollett (an uncle on his mother's side), and Benjamin Thomas Pouncey, another relative. In 1807, at the age of twenty-seven, Barenger exhibited his first pictures at the Royal Academy: 'Sheep from Nature' and 'Famous Setter', when he gave his address as Kentish Town. By 1812 he had moved to Camden Town. 
Barenger gained a reputation as a painter of racehorses, deer, and dogs, as well as sporting scenes. He exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1807 until his death in 1831 and occasionally showed at the British Institution. Among his numerous patrons was the earl of Derby for whom he painted 'Jonathan Griffin, Huntsman to the Earl of Derby's Staghounds' (1813; Tate collection), engraved by R. Woodman and published in 1823 under the title of 'The Earl of Derby's Staghounds' with the names of the principal sitters lettered below. In 1819 Barenger painted for the earl of Derby 'Jonathan Griffin, Huntsman of the Earl of Derby's Staghounds, on Spanker' (Paul Mellon collection, Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, Richmond, USA), which was also engraved. Other patrons included the duke of Grafton, the marquess of Londonderry, and the bloodstock auctioneer Richard Tattersall (1785-1859). From 1814 Barenger was said to be living near Tattersalls at Hyde Park Corner, and from 1815 onwards all his paintings were shown at Tattersalls. His works were popular with publishers of sporting literature. The eighth volume of 'British Field Sports', by William Henry Scott (1818), contains seventeen illustrations of his sporting subjects. Thomas McLean's 'The Sporting Repository' (1822) includes five plates after Barenger, and 'Annals of Sporting by Caleb Quizem, Esq. and his Various Correspondents' (1824) reproduces two engravings from his pictures by his uncle S. M. Barenger: 'Topthorn, a Celebrated Hunter' (1824) and 'Marengo, a White Charger' (of the horse that belonged to Napoleon). 
Barenger's animal paintings included prize cattle such as 'Durham Twin Steers' engraved by Charles Turner in 1817, and 'The Famous Lincolnshire Ox' engraved in 1823. In 'Evans and Ruffy's Farmers Journal' of 1811, Barenger was described as 'a well-established sporting and animal painter' and the review of the Smithfield show in 1811 recorded that 'Mr. James Barenger the artist exhibited most admirable portraits of a horse and a dog belonging to Mr Westcar' ('Evans and Ruffy's Farmers Journal', 1811). Many of Barenger's works were engraved in a large size, such as the companion prints 'Pheasants' and 'British Feathered Game' (each 171/2 x 14 in.) engraved by Charles Turner and published by Ackermann in 1810. Within the genre of animal painting, Barenger's subject range was wide, encompassing hunt scenes, horses, dogs, cattle, and game birds -- one of his best-known works in this last category being a life-size canvas of a cockfight (30 x 25 in.). He apparently bred pointers and his portrait 'Dol', engraved by John Scott and reproduced in the 'Sporting Magazine' (1826), is said to have been one of his own dogs. His own involvement in the sporting scene clearly contributed to his success as a painter. His paintings are characterized by a precise and accurate rendering of his subjects based on careful observation. Though a stiffness about his animals has been noted, this does not detract from the quality and charm of his work. There are few works by Barenger in British public collections but the Tate collection, the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, and the Harris Museum and Art Gallery, Port Sunlight, each holds one of his oil paintings. Barenger died in London on 1 October 1831 and was buried in St Pancras old churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 1366


Baret, John (d. 1578), lexicographer, became a sizar at St John's College, Cambridge, at Easter 1551, but then moved to Trinity College. He took the degree of BA in 1554-5 and MA in 1558, and became a fellow of Trinity in 1560. 
Baret's dictionary, 'An Alvearie, or Triple Dictionarie, in Englyshe, Latin and French', was published in 1574. The work was dedicated to William Cecil, Lord Burghley, and the Cambridge scholar and linguist Sir Thomas Smith, and Alexander Nowell may have assisted with its expense. Others, such as 'Maister Powle, & Maister Garth', also encouraged Baret to publish ('Alvearie', preface). Dedicatory verses were supplied by Richard Mulcaster and Arthur Golding, among others. Baret's preface mentions that he had been abroad 'for language and learning', and had also been 'conversant about the Innes of Court', where some former pupils had gone (ibid.). 
This was the third triple dictionary in English, the first having been published by John Veron in 1552 (Latin-English-French), and the second being John Higgins's revision of Richard Howlet or Huloet's dictionary (English-Latin-French). Baret's dictionary also contained a modest number of Greek equivalents. In the preface he explains that he taught Latin in Cambridge 'about eyghteene yeres agone', that is, about 1555, since the preface is dated 2 February 1574 ('Alvearie', preface). The dictionary, he claims, was compiled from his and his students' notes by inverting the order to English-Latin; it is actually largely based on Thomas Cooper's 'Thesaurus', as well as Robert Stephanus's 'Dictionarium Latino-Gallicum'. Many other minor sources have been identified. Baret seems to have been teaching in London during work on the dictionary. 
The term 'hard words' (words too learned or obscure for ordinary readers), the basis of early monolingual English lexicography, first appeared in the prefatory material of Baret's 'Alvearie'. He thought it best to concentrate on these hard words rather than familiar ones. The work has indexes and numbers for cross-reference in the main dictionary, so that the reader can find the equivalent of any Latin or French word. Baret also supplies grammatical information, gives indications of stress, and discusses spelling reform. 
In 1577, shortly before his death, Baret was admitted MD at Cambridge, though there is no known evidence that he actually practised; he is described as 'Doctor in physick' in his will (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/60, sig. 38, fol. 293'v'). Legitimizing an existing medical practice by taking an MD degree much later was, however, a common practice. 
Baret died in 1578 at some point between 6 October, when he drew up his will, and 31 October, when the will was proved, but not before revising the dictionary for a new edition, published in 1580, which considerably expanded the work, adding material from new sources, and greatly supplementing the Greek material. A dedication in this edition laments the author's recent death, and an elegiac by Mulcaster also appeared. Other contributors included Abraham Fleming and Thomas Speght. 
Baret left his estate to his brother, Richard, also his executor. There is no indication of its extent; the only other bequest was $20 to one Matthew Kenne in the event of his marriage to Baret's niece, Elizabeth. Neither wife nor children are mentioned. 


@@@@@


doc= 1367


Baretti, Giuseppe Marc'Antonio (1719-1789), writer, was born in Turin, Italy, on 24 April 1719, the eldest son of Luca Baretti (1688-1744) and Anna Caterina Tesio ('c'.1695-1735); he was baptized on the same day. His grandfather, Marc' Antonio (1656-1704), a physician from Rivalta Bormida, a small village now in the Piedmontese province of Alessandria, married Diana Maria Arcasio from the nearby town of Bistagno. They moved to Mombercelli in the province of Asti, where Luca Baretti was born on 17 October 1688. By 1692 Marc'Antonio had returned to his home town of Rivalta, where he became mayor. His son Luca studied architecture in Turin and was employed as bursar by the Turin Royal University. In 1716 Luca married Anna Caterina Tesio, a person of humble origins, and of this union four sons were born: Giuseppe, Filippo, Giovanni Battista, and Amedeo. 
As was common at the time, Giuseppe Baretti at a very young age was destined by his father for the priesthood, which would guarantee a livelihood and an education. When the boy resisted this plan it was thought that he might study to become an architect like his father, but the idea was abandoned owing to Giuseppe's extreme short-sightedness. A month after Baretti's mother died in May 1735, his father, Luca, married Genoveffa Astrua, who brought into the Baretti household Miglyna di Capriglio, her 'cicisbeo' (or male companion of the kind then customarily kept by well-to-do women), as her attendant. Disgusted by what apparently turned out to be a 'menage a trois', the young Baretti left the parental home following a quarrel and went to live with his uncle, Giambattista, at Guastalla, near Mantua, where he worked as a clerk for a local merchant. Employed in the same office was the poet Carlo Cantoni, who instilled in Baretti a love for Italian literature, especially burlesque poetry. Two years later, in 1737, Baretti returned to Turin, where for a year he attended some of the university lectures given by the professor of literature Girolamo Tagliazucchi, whom he regarded highly. 
The years 1738 and 1739 were spent in Venice, where Baretti made the acquaintance of the young Gasparo Gozzi, who was destined to become one of the chief literary figures of the period. In 1740 Baretti moved to Milan. Here he mixed with writers such as Passeroni, Tanzi, Bicetti, and Balestrieri, who soon after established the respected literary circle the Accademia dei Trasformati. While in Milan he studied Latin and made Italian translations of Ovid's 'Remedia amoris' and 'Amores', which he published more than ten years later, in 1752 and 1754. The war of the Austrian Succession began in 1740, and after returning briefly to Turin in 1742 Baretti obtained employment in Cuneo, as keeper of the stores for the city's new fortification works. However, a few days before the French and Spanish armies laid siege to the town in September 1744, he returned to Milan, from where he travelled again to Venice. Here he joined another literary circle, the Accademia dei Granelleschi, and translated into blank verse the tragedies of Pierre Corneille; these translations were published in four volumes in 1747-8. It was in Venice that his polemical nature first gained notice when, following criticism made by a quarrelsome priest, Dr Biagio Schiavo, of a sonnet that Baretti had written previously, he published in response a 'Lettera ad un suo amico', in which he ridiculed Schiavo's character, literary ability, and physical appearance. On his return to Turin, Baretti found another pretext to be controversial, this time reaching a much wider audience. His dislike of both the relatively new science of archaeology and of Giuseppe Bartoli, the professor of literature who had succeeded Tagliazucchi at the University of Turin, led him to denounce Bartoli's study of an antique diptych owned by Cardinal Quirini. In 1750 Baretti published what he entitled his 'First prattle', 'Primo cicalamento sopra le cinque lettere del signor Giuseppe Bartoli intorno al libro che avra per titolo 'La vera spiegazione del dittico quiriniano'', in which he mocked Bartoli and attacked archaeologists and antiquaries in general. Enraged archaeologists publicly denounced Baretti for criticizing a university professor who had been appointed by the king. Baretti was summoned before the president of the senate and the chancellor of the University of Turin, reprimanded, and ordered not to write any more 'cicalamenti'. In the same year he published a collection of his poems, 'Le piacevoli poesie', which were burlesque and satirical in style in the manner of the sixteenth-century poet Francesco Berni. These poems, compiled over several years up to 1750, also included attacks on Bartoli, whose lack of literary ability he criticized, but Baretti avoided the wrath of the censors by tempering his language and not referring to Bartoli directly. 
As early as 1747 in Turin, when he met Lord Charlemont during the latter's tour on the continent, Baretti had thought of travelling to England. No doubt the difficulty of living and of writing in his homeland, which he had deeply felt during the events of 1750, induced him to leave for England in January 1751. After arriving in London, he began studying English in a far more earnest fashion than he had done previously in Italy. He met another Italian from Turin, the violinist Felice Giardini, who obtained employment for him at the Italian opera for the next two years. Baretti was struck by the size of London and its contrasts, where the bustling, dirty streets were filled on the one hand with charming and attractive women, and on the other with countless beggars and petty criminals. 
Two years after his arrival in London, Baretti was introduced to the writer Mrs Charlotte Lennox, who was anxious to learn Italian in order to read Italian works, and was willing to offer lessons in English in return. Baretti promptly agreed to become her tutor, and was introduced to Mrs Lennox's circle of artists and literary friends, who included Henry Fielding, Sir Joshua Reynolds (who later painted Baretti's portrait), David Garrick, and -- most significantly for Baretti -- Samuel Johnson. Baretti's presence in the group was appealing because of his familiarity with literary academies in Italy, and for his knowledge of French and Italian literature. Baretti, for his part, saw the circle as providing access to some of the most cultured people in London and a direct link to possible publishers of his own writings. Indeed, that year, 1753, was a prolific year for Baretti. He published two booklets, both written in French, dealing with current disputes at the opera. He produced an essay, 'Remarks on the Italian Language and Writers', which, given that he had not yet fully mastered English, was probably first drafted in French and then turned into English with the help of one of his new friends. In addition, no doubt encouraged to write on the subject of Italian poetry by his English friends, and as a means of making some money, he published a 'Dissertation upon the Italian Poetry', which included a censure of Voltaire. The vocabulary, syntax, and writing style used in the 'Dissertation' clearly point to the involvement of Johnson, whom Baretti very much admired. In the years that followed, Baretti, not just because of his cultural ideals and the interest of his learned friends but also for mere pecuniary reasons, realized that one of his major roles in England was to be that of promoter of Italian language and literature, and a writer who could make contemporary Italian culture accessible to the English. In the same decade he published a bilingual collection of Italian prose and verse, entitled 'An Introduction to the Italian Language' (1755), and 'The Italian Library' (1757), which provided short commentaries on the lives and works of well-known Italian writers, as well as a brief history of the development of the Tuscan language. 
Inspired by the success of Johnson's recently published English dictionary, in the latter part of the 1750s Baretti set about compiling an Italian and English bilingual dictionary for the use of both Italian- and English-speakers. He considered Johnson's dictionary an extraordinary achievement that could dispute the pre-eminence of lexicography with that of the Florentine 'Vocabolario degli Accademici della Crusca' (1612), a volume that had been compiled not by one person but by numerous academicians. He stipulated in an agreement with London booksellers that he would revise Ferdinando Altieri's previous Italian and English dictionary (1726-7) for $200, a considerable sum. Baretti published 'A Dictionary of the English and Italian Languages' in 1760, in two volumes, with the addition of an Italian and English grammar and a dedicatory letter written by Samuel Johnson. In the preface Baretti made a virulent attack on Altieri, claiming that his predecessor's dictionary definitions awakened his 'risibility' and were evidence of his 'ignorance', and that Altieri himself 'had not the least spark of poetical fire in his soul'. One would have therefore expected Baretti to have carried out a radical revision of Altieri's previous work. The fact was, however, that the alterations and additions wrought by Baretti were, all in all, very minor. In the Italian word-list he inserted a modest selection of the additional vocabulary contained in the latest edition of the 'Vocabolario della Crusca', and on the English side he added some of the entries from Johnson's dictionary. 
Despite representing only a minor revision, Baretti's dictionary marked the death knell for Altieri's twin volumes of three decades before. Baretti's work proved extremely successful, for its author financially as well, and may be considered the most important work he published during his first stay in England. The dictionary, as the standard reference work of its kind, went through numerous reprints and revisions, some long after his death, and the last as recently as 1928. 
Flushed with the success of his dictionary, Baretti the same year took the opportunity to accompany to Italy a young aristocrat, Edward Southwell, whose intention it was to embark on the usual continental tour, travelling first through Portugal and Spain. Baretti planned to return to Italy definitively, in the expectation that there he would now achieve greater fame as an Italian writer than previously. Before his departure Johnson suggested he write a daily journal of his travels as the basis for a future publication, a request Johnson reiterated in his correspondence with Baretti while the latter was abroad. After visiting his brothers in Turin, Baretti travelled to Milan and then to Venice, where he parted from his companion Southwell, having completed his contract as his tour guide. On returning to Milan, he was introduced to the new governor, Count Firmian, who was a patron of the arts and letters, in the hope that the governor might provide him with patronage. He renewed his contacts with those who frequented the Accademia dei Trasformati, and made the acquaintance of the poet Giuseppe Parini. 
In 1762 Baretti published the first of what were to be four volumes that recounted his recent journey to the continent, giving it the title 'Lettere familiari ai suoi tre fratelli'. But following a complaint lodged with Count Firmian by the Portuguese minister in Milan, who believed that Baretti had unjustly criticized the hospitality of the Portuguese, Firmian ordered him to halt further publication. Baretti, having lost the opportunity both to obtain patronage and to publish his travel journal, moved to Venice, thinking that he might be able to complete the publication there. But the Venetian government was just as unsympathetic, and allowed him to publish the second volume in 1763 only after he had deleted any suggestion of criticism of Portugal. Although the two Italian volumes remained incomplete, they reflected Baretti's new-found maturity as a writer who demonstrated, somewhat like a modern journalist, that he was an acute observer of everyday life, able to provide vivid descriptions of the places that he had visited and the people whom he had met. 
Baretti's despondency at the difficulties that he had encountered in Italy (which was evidently heightened by an ill-fated love affair about which Johnson wrote a letter of consolation in December 1762) was alleviated by his contacts with the renowned writers Carlo and Gasparo Gozzi, whose company he assiduously frequented while in Venice. That year, in Padua, Baretti submitted to the censors a request to publish a fortnightly journal 'La Frusta Letteraria' ('The Literary Scourge') which aimed, like Addison's 'Spectator' and Johnson's 'Rambler', to evaluate contemporary customs and literature, to review books, and to condemn, as necessary, examples of bad taste. The first issue appeared in October 1763. In subsequent issues Baretti attacked archaeologists, the Venetian playwright Carlo Goldoni, the Arcadians, Voltaire, Pietro Verri and the Milanese journal 'Il Caffe', and blank verse. The journal, as an independent and iconoclastic publication, did not bow to any public authority, and did not hesitate to be critical of the art and culture of its time or to censure otherwise untouchable writers who had achieved fame and respect. For this reason 'La Frusta Letteraria' became the work for which Italians today most remember Baretti. His continued attack on writers, including the revered sixteenth-century Venetian Pietro Bembo, resulted in the journal's being suppressed by the Venetian authorities in 1765. Baretti fled Venice, and, after several months spent near Ancona, where he published his last issues of the journal (April-July 1765), he decided that he could no longer continue to write and publish in Italy. 
Baretti left Italy for England in August 1766 having made the decision to reside there permanently. In the literary environment of London, which he found much more congenial than the one he had just left, he renewed his acquaintance with his old friends, especially Samuel Johnson, who had kept up a correspondence with him during his absence in Italy. The circle had by now become the renowned Literary Club, where Baretti was introduced to Oliver Goldsmith, James Boswell, and Edmund Burke. Baretti's first publication in London was 'An Account of the Manners and Customs of Italy' (1768), written as a reply to the inaccurate and superficial description of Italian customs and manners given in 'Letters from Italy' by Samuel Sharp, published two years earlier. Unlike the negative view of Italy that he had portrayed in 'La Frusta', Baretti's 'Account' provided a more favourable picture of Italian life and culture that appealed to his Italophile British friends. The book was so popular that a second edition followed in 1769, containing an answer to Sharp's criticism of the first edition. Baretti had now established his reputation as an English writer, so much so that in 1769 the king appointed him secretary for foreign correspondence to the Royal Academy of Painting, Sculpture and Architecture. In 1768 Baretti visited France and Spain to collect more material for what would be the English edition of his 'Lettere familiari', which he had not been able to complete in Italy. 
In October 1769, while walking at the Haymarket, Baretti was struck a blow by a prostitute. Owing to the darkness and his bad eyesight he retaliated by striking her female companion. Three pimps appeared on the scene, and Baretti drew a fruit-knife that he carried and fatally wounded one of them. He was arrested and subsequently brought to trial for murder at the Old Bailey. His friends Topham Beauclerk, Sir Joshua Reynolds, Dr Johnson, Edmund Burke, David Garrick, Oliver Goldsmith, and others -- 'a constellation of genius', in Boswell's account -- rallied to support him and testified at the trial to his good character (Boswell, 419). The jury acquitted him on the grounds of self-defence. Baretti felt more than ever now that justice and his real friends resided in England. He told his old friend Lord Charlemont that 'those I had about me did their part so well that they have made me an Englishman forever' (Collinson-Morley, 222). 
In the following year Baretti published the definitive edition of his 'Lettere familiari', entitled 'Journey from London to Genoa' (1770). The work, enlarged and now in English, achieved instant success: Johnson called it one of the best travel books ever written. Baretti was now at the height of his success. He decided to pay a visit to Italy to see his brothers and to enjoy the pleasure of appearing as a famous writer, but within a year, after visiting Turin, Genoa, and Florence, he returned to England to what he now called his 'nest', unhappy with the country of his birth, which he referred to as dull, and whose people he felt were ignorant. This was his last trip to Italy. In London he returned to writing, publishing in 1772 'An Introduction to the most Useful European Languages' and in 1773, in three volumes, 'Tutte le opere di Niccolo Machiavelli'. His popular dictionary was reprinted in 1771. 
Between 1773 and 1776 Baretti became the language tutor to Hetty (Queeney), the daughter of Henry Thrale, brewery proprietor, and his wife, Hester Thrale, to whom he was introduced by Johnson. During these three years Baretti chose to live on and off at their villa at Streatham, where the Thrales were accustomed to entertaining artists, writers, and distinguished professional people. In 1775 they arranged for Baretti and Johnson to travel with them for two months to France. Mr Thrale was so pleased with the French tour that they planned another trip, this time to Italy the following year, but were prevented from leaving owing to the death of their only son, Harry. In 1775 Baretti wrote and published a collection of dialogues, 'Easy Phraseology for the Use of Young Ladies', which had been originally intended for his pupil Hetty. The relationship between Baretti and Mrs Thrale, however, became so tense in 1776 that Baretti abruptly left the house and returned to London. 
Baretti's most important work of this period was the defence of Shakespeare that he published in 1777 in response to a letter written to the French Academy the year before by Voltaire, in which Voltaire denounced his countryman Pierre Letourneur for translating and publishing Shakespeare's plays. Baretti's 'Discours sur Shakespeare et sur Monsieur de Voltaire' attacked Voltaire for his lack of appreciation of Shakespeare's artistic merit, and for his limited knowledge of the English language and therefore of Shakespeare's plays. Baretti's decision to write the work in French (a language Johnson felt that Baretti knew as fluently as English) meant that it was accessible to readers on the continent, including Italy, where the classical tradition held sway and Shakespeare's plays were still very little known. That year was also spent preparing a two-volume Spanish and English dictionary, which was published in London by Nourse in 1778. Baretti labelled it a second edition, since it was essentially a minor revision of the dictionary of Giral Delpino published in 1763. As was the case with his earlier Italian and English dictionary, the revision of the Spanish dictionary was mainly editorial -- the expurgation of previous inconsistencies and inaccuracies -- with additional vocabulary inserted primarily on the English side, where Baretti included words from Johnson's dictionary. The Spanish dictionary, too, was well received and was republished with revisions well into the nineteenth century. 
In 1779 Baretti's output continued at the same pace. That year Nourse invited him to compile an anthology of Italian letters as a language text for students of Italian. Not satisfied with those written by earlier Italian writers, Baretti chose instead to resort to letters that he himself had previously sent, or pretended to have sent, to friends and acquaintances. The resulting 'Scelta di lettere familiari fatta per uso degli studiosi di lingua italiana' provided students with a useful variety of topics, vocabulary, and writing styles, as well as a showcase for English readers of his opinions on Italian language, literature, and society, and of his own ability as a writer of Italian prose. Looking for another opportunity to earn some money, in the same year Baretti translated Horace's 'Carmen seculare' for the French musician Philidor, who set it to music and performed it with some success at the Freemasons' Hall, but then disappeared with part of the takings. Baretti had few financial resources until 1782, when he managed to obtain a government pension of $80 annually, which, coupled with the income from his published writings, would thereafter provide him with just enough money to support himself. 
Three years after her husband's death in 1781, Mrs Thrale created a scandal by marrying the singer Gabriele Mario Piozzi, who was her daughters' music teacher. Baretti's animosity towards Mrs Thrale reached its peak after Johnson's death, when she published two volumes of letters to and from Johnson, among which were passages that were offensive to Baretti. Enraged, Baretti decided to vent his anger in print, attacking Mrs Thrale in three 'Strictures' in the 'European Magazine' between May and August 1788, in which he made unsubstantiated allegations about her tyrannical behaviour and about Piozzi's background. Baretti's decision to vent his feelings in print only worsened the reputation that he had acquired in later life as combative and ill-natured. In 1789, pressed for money and with his pension three-quarters in arrears, he began revising his Italian dictionary in the hope of gaining some income, but he was taken ill with an attack of 'gout' (a contemporary term that could cover a range of maladies), and died, unmarried, in London on 5 May. He was buried in Marylebone on 9 May in a cemetery that was later cleared, so that today the site of his grave cannot be traced. His executors destroyed all the papers and manuscripts in his possession. 
Baretti claimed that Johnson was the best friend he ever had and the person to whom he was indebted for the best part of the knowledge that he had acquired. For his part, Johnson, who never managed to visit Italy, admired Baretti for his linguistic and conversational skills -- praising his English, for example, for 'its purity and vigour' -- his scholarship, and his knowledge of Italian culture (Boswell, 256). At the same time he was sensitive to Baretti's limitations, noting in 1768 that 'There are strong powers in his mind. He has not, indeed, many hooks; but with what hooks he has, he grapples very forcibly' (ibid., 395). Both writers had an overbearing and stubborn temperament; but each greatly respected the other. They enjoyed each other's company for nearly thirty years until, a year before Johnson's death, they quarrelled -- not over a profound philosophical issue but about the outcome of a game of chess. Boswell's view of Baretti, however, captured some of the less attractive qualities of the Italian: in 1766 he described him as 'so wretchedly perverted to infidelity, that he treated the hopes of immortality with brutal levity' (ibid., 357). 
Johnson's influence on Baretti's writings is indisputable. Johnson's presence can be found in many of Baretti's works, either explicitly, in the dedications and prefaces that he wrote for the Italian's publications, or implicitly, in the input of Johnson's ideas on language and literature, and in the kinds of works that Baretti chose to publish. To say, however, as Foscolo did, that Baretti simply aped Johnson, or to conclude, with a more recent scholar, that Baretti totally lacked originality (C. J. M. Lubbers-Van der Brugge, 1-3), does not do him justice. Rather, Baretti's long-term contact with Johnson confirms how much they had in common in terms of both temperament and literary tastes. The relationship assisted Baretti to mature intellectually, broadened his outlook on art and literature, introduced him to English writing and culture, and allowed him to make a living and achieve fame as an author, without having to resort to a Maecenas or patron; Johnson, similarly freed from the need for literary patronage, noted that Baretti had been the first author to receive 'copy-money' in Italy for his works (Boswell, 846). In England his publications helped to promote a renewed interest in Italian language and literature, including the works of Dante. In Italy his works encouraged the study of writings by English authors, especially Shakespeare. Of the eighteenth-century critics he is the Italian best remembered in the English-speaking world. 


@@@@@


doc= 1368


Barff, Samuel (1793?-1880), philhellene and banker, was probably born in England. In 1816 he established himself in Zante, Greece, where he became an important merchant and banker. He died there on 23 September 1880. He was probably married. 
Barff's part in the struggle for Greek independence is evidenced in the papers of contemporary philhellenes such as Church and Blaquiere. Byron wrote to him early in 1824 after witnessing his untiring activities in the cause and his generous support of Englishmen then in difficulties in Greece. Barff offered his house on Zante to Byron should ill health compel the latter to leave Mesolonghi. Barff took part in negotiating the first western loans, especially in 1824 and 1825. When Greek rivalries made it uncertain to whom the funds should be given the money was frozen on Zante in Barff's care. He was foremost in urging his friend Richard Church (then in England) to accept the office of generalissimo of the Greek forces. 
After the establishment of the Greek kingdom Barff joined George Finlay in supporting the project for setting up a bank in Greece and pressed for careful definitions of banking law. Throughout his life Barff kept himself informed on Greek political activities and pressed for governmental reform. For more than fifty years Barff, Hancock & Co. continued to provide indispensable banking services as Finlay's travel accounts and letter books show. 


@@@@@


doc= 1369


Barford, William (bap. 1719, d. 1792), Church of England clergyman and classical scholar, was the son of the Revd Thomas Barford (died 1765), rector of Chalbury, Dorset, where he was baptized on 2 September 1719. He was educated at Eton College (1730-38), and was a scholar at King's College, Cambridge, whence he graduated BA in 1743, MA in 1746, and DD in 1771. His first preferment was the vicarage of Milton, Cambridgeshire, in 1751. He became a tutor of the college, a proctor in 1761, and from 1762 to 1768 public orator, only resigning to stand for the Greek professorship, which he failed to obtain. Rector of Tilton, Northamptonshire, from 1764 to 1768, he became vicar of Fordingbridge, Hampshire, which is in the gift of King's College, in 1768. On 27 September 1764 he married Mary Hewer of Royston, Hertfordshire. In 1770 Sir John Cust, the speaker of the House of Commons, appointed him as his chaplain, but he served only one session before a new speaker, Sir Fletcher Norton, was elected and chose James King as his chaplain. Barford's friends were concerned that such a short tenure would not be rewarded by the customary preferment found for the chaplain. This incident established that the task was to be chaplain to the house, not merely to the speaker. 'The House is so much in possession of him that the Speaker cannot displace him without consulting the House' (Price, 31). 
On 9 May 1770 it was moved an address be made to the king that Barford 'be favoured with the customary recompense for his service' ('GM', 1793, 418). The fortuitous death that month of Francis Walwyn, a prebendary of Canterbury, provided a suitable vacancy to which he was installed in June. In 1773 he resigned Fordingbridge and accepted the rectory of Kimpton, Hertfordshire, and then in 1778 the dean and chapter of Canterbury living of All Hallows, Lombard Street, both of which he retained until his death. He became a fellow of Eton in 1784. 
Barford's Latin dissertation on the first Pythian ode, first published in 1751, was included in Henry Huntingford's edition of the works of Pindar, which also contains a short biography and a bibliography of Barford's writings, including Latin and Greek verses and orations written while he was public orator. In his 'New System of Mythology' Jacob Bryant pays tribute to Barford's talents and thanks him for his assistance. Barford died at Kimpton in November 1792, and was buried on 30 November in the church of Sts Peter and Paul, Kimpton. 


@@@@@


doc= 1370


Bargrave, Isaac (bap. 1586, d. 1643), dean of Canterbury, was baptized at Bridge, Kent, on 12 June 1586, the sixth son of a yeoman farmer and tanner, Robert Bargrave ('c'.1540-1598), of Bridge, and Joan Gilbert, of Sandwich. He was educated at Cambridge, gaining his BA at Pembroke College in 1607 and proceeding to Clare College for his MA (1610). He was ordained deacon and priest at Peterborough on 10 May 1612 and in October of the same year became rector of Eythorne. However, he maintained his Cambridge connections and played the part of a Portuguese pander in George Ruggle's Latin comedy, 'Ignoramus', performed at the university before James I on 8 March 1615. 
Between 1616 and 1618 Bargrave served as chaplain to his kinsman Sir Henry Wotton, the English ambassador in Venice, and became intimate with Paolo Sarpi, author of the 'History of the Council of Trent', who assured him that 'the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England were the most primitive of any in the World' ('Memoir', BL, MS Lansdowne 985, 9). On his return to England in 1618, bearing a letter of introduction from Wotton to the king, Bargrave's career prospered. One outcome of his stay in Italy was the publication in 1619 of his translation of Fulgenzio Micanzio's revealing description of the government of the Jesuit order; sixty years later this was to be revived by Titus Oates for anti-papal purposes. 
In 1622 Bargrave received the degree of DD at Cambridge and was appointed a prebendary of Canterbury Cathedral, where his brother-in-law, John Boys, was dean. In the same year he was granted the living of St Margaret's, Westminster, and became chaplain to Prince Charles, an office which he retained after the prince ascended the throne in 1625. On the death of Boys, Bargrave was able to invoke the interest of the duke of Buckingham and succeeded to the deanery of Canterbury, to which he was formally admitted on 16 October 1625. He obtained the vicarage of Tenterden in 1626 and was presented to the benefice of Lydd by 'Abbot's collation' in September 1627; he held it for only a few weeks, since William Laud, then bishop of London, succeeded in quashing his admission. 
Meanwhile, Bargrave's post at Westminster had earned him 'great esteem with the Parliament... who took the sacrament constantly at his hands' ('Memoir', BL, MS Lansdowne 985, 9). His sermons, of which several were published, displayed a marked independence. In 1623 he suffered royal displeasure for 'his sermon before Parliament... against Papery, Evil Counsellors, and Corruption' (ibid.). After Charles I's accession, however, he declared himself unflinchingly in favour of the divine right of kings, proclaiming in a sermon of 27 March 1627: 'No man hath learn'd to disobey his 'King', but he had learn'd before to disobey his 'God'' (Bargrave, 20). As dean of Canterbury he gained a reputation for being 'learned and hospitable' (Walton). He introduced musical and liturgical innovations into the cathedral services, and also put on Latin plays at the deanery. However, his dedication to Anglicanism as a middle way between extremes, and his desire for influence among his Kentish neighbours, disadvantaged him with both sides as the conflict between royalists and puritans became increasingly polarized. Archbishop Laud took the side of the members of the cathedral chapter who complained of Bargrave's partiality in the distribution of patronage. In 1635 Laud also forced a conflict by insisting that the large congregation of French Huguenots worshipping in Canterbury should conform to the ritual of the Church of England. In this case, the dean and chapter combined with the mayor and corporation in resisting the change, but the archbishop could not be dissuaded. 
Soon after the opening of the Long Parliament Bargrave faced criticism from its leaders. When the bill for the abolition of deans and chapters was introduced by Sir Edward Dering, a cousin of his wife, Bargrave increased his unpopularity there by going to the House of Commons on 12 May 1641 to present petitions against the bill from the University of Cambridge and from the almsmen, officers, and tenants of Canterbury Cathedral. 
At the beginning of the civil war, in August 1642, Colonel Edwyn Sandys, one of the rare puritan sympathizers among the Kentish gentry, whom the dean had intervened to save from an indictment for rape in his early life, marched his troop to Canterbury and attacked the deanery. Bargrave was absent, but his wife and children were cruelly treated. On hearing that the dean was at Gravesend, Sandys proceeded there, arrested him, and sent him to the Fleet prison. After three weeks' imprisonment Bargrave was released without having been brought to trial. He returned to Canterbury broken in health, and died at the deanery early in January 1643. He was buried on 25 January 1643 alongside other deans of the period in the chapel of Our Lady Martyrdom in the cathedral. In 1679 a memorial was erected above the grave by his nephew John Bargrave who was vice-dean at the time. The memorial consisted of a portrait of the dean, attributed to Cornelius Johnson, painted on copper, within an elegant marble cartouche that has been attributed to Wren's assistant, Edward Pierce. From Bargrave's marriage in 1618 to Elizabeth (1593-1667), daughter of John Dering, of Egerton, he had two sons and a daughter. Thomas, the eldest, married a niece of Sir Henry Wotton and was an executor of Sir Henry's will. His descendants continued to be lessees of Eastry Court, a former property of the cathedral, until the nineteenth century, when the male line died out. The second son, Robert Bargrave (1628-1661), travelled widely in the Mediterranean and the Middle East. 


@@@@@


doc= 1371


Bargrave, John (bap. 1610, d. 1680), Church of England clergyman and collector of curiosities, was baptized at Nonington, Kent, on 18 November 1610. His father, also named John, was the elder brother of Isaac Bargrave and had increased the family fortune derived from tanneries in east Kent by his marriage to Jane Crouch, the daughter of a prosperous London haberdasher. A year after the birth of John, his second son, he received a grant of arms and soon afterwards retired from his profession as a mercenary soldier to build the country house of Bifrons, at Patrixbourne, near Canterbury. As a younger son, Bargrave was destined to follow his uncle into the church. He attended the King's School, Canterbury, between 1623 and 1626, and proceeded in 1629 to Peterhouse at Cambridge where Isaac's close friend Matthew Wren was master. He served as college librarian between 1634 and 1636 and was admitted as a fellow in 1637. By this stage Wren had been succeeded by John Cosin, at Archbishop Laud's special behest. In the polarization of political and religious views that preceded the outbreak of the civil war, Bargrave held to the churchmanship and royalist loyalties of his Kentish connections. His uncle, as dean of Canterbury, took a lead in defending universities and cathedral chapters against the Long Parliament in 1641, and helped to rally the Kentish gentry to the king's support in 1642. Bargrave himself was caught up in the reprisals, being ejected from his fellowship in 1644. 
From 1645 until the Restoration, Bargrave chose to spend most of his time travelling on the continent. From time to time he had charge of young fellow travellers from among his Kentish and Cambridge connections. The first of these journeys, which took place in 1646-7, resulted in the first Italian guidebook published in the English language; it appeared under the name of his nephew John Raymond. The likelihood that Bargrave had a major part in this work is strengthened by the recent discovery of a manuscript journal of Bargrave's earlier French tour of 1645. Bargrave's periods of foreign residence, and particularly the four journeys to Rome that he undertook in 1647, 1650, 1655, and 1660, enabled him to collect numerous coins, curiosities, and small-scale antiquities. His subsequent comments in cataloguing them, together with his acute observations penned in the margins of a set of mounted prints of the College of Cardinals, provide innumerable piquant details about his life as a royalist exile. 
With the Restoration Bargrave resumed his ecclesiastical career, though his longest foreign journey was still to come. In September 1662, simultaneously with his appointment as a canon of Canterbury, he took charge of a royal mission to ransom Christian slaves from the dey of Algiers; the mission, successfully concluded, allowed him to add a portrait of the dey and a mummified chameleon to his collection. 
Bargrave's marriage in 1665 to Frances Osborne, 'nee' Wilde, a well-connected Kentish widow, was childless. Up to his death in Canterbury on 11 May 1680 he remained an active member of the cathedral chapter, compiling a survey of its revenues as receiver-general in 1675, and later serving as vice-dean. He was survived by his wife. Buried in Canterbury Cathedral, he had requested that the chains of one of the slaves whom he had redeemed be hung over his grave. His meticulously documented collection, housed originally in two cabinets and left to the dean and chapter in his will, has achieved a widespread reputation as the best preserved example of its kind in Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 1372


Barham, Charles Foster (1804-1884), physician, was born at Truro Vean, Cornwall, on 9 March 1804, the fourth son of Thomas Foster Barham (1766-1844), a musician and writer of independent means, and his wife, Mary Ann, eldest daughter of the Revd Joshua Morton, of Blackheath, Kent. He was the brother of Francis Foster Barham (1808-1871), Thomas Foster Barham (1794-1869), and William Foster Barham (1802-1845). He was educated privately at Penzance, at St Keverne, and at Bodmin, in Cornwall, between 1811 and 1819, and at Saffron Walden in 1819-20. He then went to Downing College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in October 1821. The following January he migrated to Queens' College, where he became a foundation scholar in May 1823. After studying medicine in Edinburgh, Paris, and Bologna, he took his MB degree at Cambridge in 1827, though he did not become MD until 1860. For four years he practised at Plymouth and at Tavistock Dispensary, and in 1832 he moved to Truro and joined the staff of the Royal Cornwall Infirmary; he was appointed senior physician in 1838, and after resigning that post in 1873 he was elected consulting physician. On 28 September 1839 he married Caroline ('b'. 1811), second daughter of Clement Carlyon MD of Truro, Barham's superior at the infirmary. 
After settling in Truro Barham joined the Royal Institution of Cornwall. He became its joint secretary in 1837, a post he held until he became its president in 1859, and over the years he contributed many articles to its report and journal. In 1856 he was sworn in as a magistrate for Truro and in 1858 he was appointed mayor. He was also consultant physician to the Truro Friendly Society, and he was president of the south-western branch of the British Medical Association for a number of years. 
Barham was interested in antiquarian and scientific researches generally. The two subjects which had especial interest for him were the health of the miners who contributed to Cornwall's wealth, and the county's climate. Many of the papers written by him on these topics are listed in the first and third volumes of 'Bibliotheca Cornubiensis' (1874, 1882). His 'Report on the Sanitary State of the Labouring Classes in the Town of Truro' appeared in 1840. In 1842 he was a sub-commissioner on the children's employment commission, and he drew up reports on juvenile employment in mines and iron foundries in Cornwall. These were printed in the reports of the commission along with the evidence he had collected. 
Barham died at his home, 11 Strangways Terrace, Truro, on 20 October 1884, survived by his wife, three sons, and four daughters. He was buried nearby, at Kenwyn, three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 1373


Barham, Francis Foster (1808-1871), transcendentalist, was born on 31 May 1808 at Leskinnick, Penzance, Cornwall, the youngest of the five sons of Thomas Foster Barham (1766-1844), musician and writer, and his wife, Mary Ann, daughter of the Revd Joshua Morton. His brothers included Charles Foster Barham, Thomas Foster Barham, and William Foster Barham. A delicate child, often confined to the house by fever, he became a voracious reader of poetry and the 'Bible'. 'From my earliest age', he later wrote, 'my mind was impressed by an intense love of the study of divinity' (Barham, 'Alist: an Autobiography', 5). In his youth he grew fit enough to ride, shoot, swim, sail, and keep animals. At Penzance grammar school, where discipline was famously severe, besides Greek, Latin, French, and mathematics he learned that 'asceticism begets energy and endurance' (Barham, 'Memorial', Introduction). Asceticism therefore became the guiding principle of his life. 
While studying under his brother the Revd Henry Foster Barham of Epping Forest, Barham acquired a taste for collecting rare books. In 1826 he was articled for five years to a solicitor at Devonport, Plymouth. There, living alone and frugally, he read for eight to twelve hours a day. Offended by the 'detestable' style and phraseology of his law books, he turned to the lives of the saints and became particularly attached to Thomas a Kempis. After he qualified in 1831 he moved to London in order to practise as a member of one of the inns of court. Ill health prevented him from obtaining clients, and he decided to engage instead upon a literary career. He later recalled that 'as a solitary student in London, very retired, pale in countenance and toil worn in body, I seemed to exist for mind alone' (Barham, 'Alist: an Autobiography', 13). Two hundred pounds invested in the 'New Monthly Magazine' procured him the joint editorship with John Abraham Heraud, the poet and dramatist. Finding the occupation 'unremunerative' (Barham, 'Memorial') he retired after less than a year, though he continued to contribute articles whose copyright he was careful to retain. Established in a comfortable boarding house in Camden Town, he dedicated all his time to reading in the British Museum: 'a great love of philology was born' (Barham, 'Memorial'). Among the languages he mastered were Hebrew, Syriac, Arabic, Persian, Sanskrit, and Chinese; 'book opened book' his autobiography relates, and so he came to theosophy, freemasonry, alchemy, and occultism: 'I gave very long and earnest attention to collecting all the secret wisdom I could from this curious department of literature' (ibid., 11). 
Prolonged study, loneliness, and lack of food -- Barham lived for weeks on bread and water -- intensified his belief in the importance of a spiritual life. His masters now were Philo; Dionysius, the pseudo-Areopagite; Tertullian; Origen; Fenelon; and William Law. They led him to a practical syncretism which strove to unite all the scattered truths of every religion without their errors -- Barham was in no doubt he could identify the errors. After very long and arduous research he at last, about 1843, discovered the supreme central doctrine and gave it the name of Alism -- A, Al, or Alah being the most ancient and universal title of the deity in Hebrew scripture. 'By Alism I meant that eternal Divinity, pure and universal which reconciled all divine truths to be found in scripture or nature, in theology, philosophy, science, or art' (Barham, 'Memorial', 12). This discovery justified Barham's fundamental optimism. He thought it would enable every living creature to attain the best possible condition according to its particular circumstances. 'Every man who labours for the advancement of piety, prosperity and peace, universal industry and generous recompense: he indeed is divine, he indeed is godlike' ('Alist: an Autobiography', 19). Barham believed, moreover, that the transformation of society had already begun under the providential administration of Sir Robert Peel. After 1843 Barham began calling himself Alist Francis Barham. Later he dropped the title Alist, but he never resumed the use of his middle name, Foster (Barham, 'Memorial', iv). 
During his fourteen years in London, Barham wrote and edited many books, among which was a new edition of Jeremy Collier's 'Ecclesiastical History of Great Britain', on which he laboured from 1840 to 1844. He lectured to institutions and set up a literary agency near Gray's Inn to deal with authors' problems. He founded a Syncretic Society 'for the advancement of literature' ('Alist: an Autobiography', 17), and a Society of Alists. He called for a return to enthusiasm, believing that, if the great religious revival heralded by his discovery of Alism were to succeed, the clergy must reform their present coldness and dullness. Among the preachers he most admired were Amos Bronson Alcott, Thomas Chalmers, and Edward Irving. He claimed to have put the Alist case to, among others, the mystic James Pierrepont Greaves, Scott, Carlyle, and Gladstone (Barham, 'Alist: an Autobiography', 9). 
In 1844, aged thirty-six, having been a lifelong advocate of celibacy, he married Gertrude (died 1869), daughter of the Revd Thomas Greenfield of Clifton, Bristol. The couple moved there, and for the next ten years Barham's time was principally occupied with the preparation of new translations of the Old and 'New Testament' in chronological order, a herculean task which he was unable to complete. As a result of his labours he suffered from constant headaches, palpitations, and hallucinations. In 1854 he moved to Bath, where he and his wife lived at 8 St Mark's Place until she died on 23 December 1869. In the last eighteen months of his life he was befriended by a neighbour, Isaac Pitman, originator of the most widely used system of shorthand, and long a follower of Emmanuel Swedenborg. Barham died of a heart attack at his home in Bath on 9 February 1871, leaving manuscripts totalling 116 lb in weight, in very small handwriting and including treatises on ecclesiastical subjects, poems, plays, and propaganda for causes including pacifism, vegetarianism, and animal welfare. He also wrote on Swedenborg's works, and penned memoirs of James Pierrepont Greaves and Samuel Taylor Coleridge. These fell to Pitman, who published less than a tenth of the whole as an example of his new method of spelling in his 'Phonetic Journal'. 
Barham's prose was as lucid and precise as his vision of the world transformed by Alism. He was persuaded that Alah, God, the saints, prophets, and angels had an actual presence and communed with kindred intelligences, but he won few adherents for his ideas. 


@@@@@


doc= 1374


Barham, Henry (1670?-1726), botanist, was descended from the Barhams of Barham Court in Kent. Little is known of his life beyond that conveyed in his letters to Sir Hans Sloane, which reveal that Barham's father, a physician, intended to give him a university education but died while his son was still young. His mother remarried soon afterwards, and the boy was apprenticed when he was about fourteen to a surgeon. He left this situation to become surgeon's mate in HMS 'Vanguard', from which he was promoted to be surgeon to another warship. Tiring of the monotony of his life, he went to Spain, then to Madras, arriving in Jamaica probably before the end of the century. According to his own account, he obtained a lucrative practice and was appointed surgeon-major over all regiments of horse in the island. 
Barham stated that after he came to Jamaica he read widely, especially books on physical matters. Despite his irregular education, and his tendency to be led astray by fantastic and utopian ideas, he undoubtedly acquired a detailed knowledge of the flora and fauna of Jamaica. In 1715 he introduced the cultivation of logwood, later a common product. Barham was a prolific correspondent of Sir Hans Sloane, who transcribed many extracts from Barham's letters relating to the medicinal properties of plants into his own copy of his 'Natural History of Jamaica'. Several specimens of Jamaican plant material went into Sloane's herbarium. 
Sloane received in 1711 a treatise, 'Hortus Americanus', written by Barham; this was later published, in 1794, with a preface attributing it to Henry Barham MD (died 1746), Barham's son. Nothing is known of Barham's wife who, according to a letter to Sloane, was still alive in 1725. Their son apparently practised as a physician in Jamaica from the beginning of the century, acquired much property on marriage, and returned to England in 1740 to settle at Staines, Middlesex. 
About 1716 Barham returned to England and settled at Great Carter Lane in the City of London. He gave some eighty American plants to the Physic Garden at Chelsea, noting with regret that fewer than half were to be seen when he visited in 1718. He also devoted himself to the rearing of silkworms and the manufacture of silk, his treatise on this subject being read to the Royal Society and published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1719. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society in November 1717, and shortly after his arrival in England was made free of the Company of Surgeons, although his hopes of obtaining the diploma of MD were not fulfilled. 
Barham promoted a scheme to mine silver in Jamaica, and applied in 1720 for the position of superintendent to a mining company formed to implement his proposals. He received the appointment on his own terms, having stated that his own business prospects were so good that he would not sacrifice them for less than $500 a year, but the enterprise was a complete failure and the one year's salary owed to him was never paid. He continued to reside in Jamaica until his death at Spanish Town in May 1726. Barham's 'History of Jamaica', which his son sent to Sloane in the hope that it might be published, remained in manuscript among Sloane's papers. 


@@@@@


doc= 1375


Barham, Nicholas (c.1520-1577), serjeant-at-law, was born at Wadhurst, Sussex, the first son of Richard Barham of Wadhurst, and his wife, Alice Cradock. His was a branch of the Barham family of Teston House, Kent, which traced its descent from Robert of Barham who entered upon the estates of his kinsman Reginald Fitzurse, one of the murderers of Thomas Becket, upon the latter's flight into Ireland. Barham's legal training began at Barnard's Inn, which subsequently sued him for dues in 1546. He was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1540, where he is said to have been called to the bar in 1542. He became an ancient of the inn on 24 May 1552, and was Lent reader in 1558. 
By 1561 Barham was counsellor to the town of Maidstone, Kent, and occupied the then conjoined offices of recorder and town clerk in succession to Henry Fisher, with whom he was returned to parliament for the borough in 1563. In 1562 Barham purchased the manor of Chillington, and Chillington Manor House in Maidstone, together with the chapel of St Faith, Maidstone, from the sons of Peter Maplesden, whose kinsman George had forfeited the manor and chapel for his part in Wyatt's rebellion. Barham's main residence, which he much improved, was the house called Digons in Knightrider Street, Maidstone, another property forfeited by George Maplesden. After Barham's death these properties were asserted to be concealed lands, upon which subject Peter Osborne wrote to Lord Burghley in July 1578 on behalf of Barham's widow, Mary (died in or after 1585), daughter of John Holt of Cheshire, with whom he had two children, Margaret and Arthur; but the lands were still in the family's hands twenty years later when Arthur Barham sold them to Henry Hall. Barham built five pews for himself and his family in the south aisle of All Saints' Church, Maidstone, covenanting in return in 1570 to bear the cost of maintenance of a window in the aisle. 
Barham was created serjeant-at-law in April 1567, joining Serjeants' Inn, Fleet Street, and was appointed queen's serjeant on 31 May of the same year. He was Sir James Dyer's principal companion as a justice of assize on the midland circuit from 1568 until his death, participating in the decision of 'R. v. Saunders and Archer' (1573), a leading case on transferred malice in murder. At the bar, in addition to his common-law practice, Barham appeared frequently in the court of chancery. He argued the case of 'Mines' ([1567] 1 Plowd. 313) for the crown, and was closely involved in the investigation of the Ridolfi plot and in the successful prosecutions arising from it: in January 1572 with the attorney-general and solicitor-general he conducted the prosecution before the lord high steward and his peers of Thomas Howard, duke of Norfolk, for treason, and in the following month with the attorney-general prosecuted Norfolk's servant Robert Higford in the court of queen's bench. 
In 1573 Barham was appointed with two others to investigate and report upon a dispute between Richard Curtis, bishop of Chichester, and certain of the Sussex gentry. He was of counsel with Christopher Herenden in his attempt in the mid-1560s to upset a chancery decree against Herenden's late brother Walter in favour of Katharine, dowager duchess of Suffolk, and her husband, Richard Bertie, who had conveyed land to Walter Herenden in trust upon their flight into Poland in the face of the Marian persecution. But Barham appears to have had puritan sympathies, for he signed a petition about 1573 for John Strowde, a Kent minister who had been forbidden to preach by the archbishop. He died at Oxford on 25 July 1577 of gaol fever contracted at the trial of the recusant bookseller Roland Jenkes during the so-called 'black assizes', which fever killed also Sir Robert Bell, chief baron of the exchequer, and a large number of others. 


@@@@@


doc= 1784


Andrew Baynton (c.1516-1564), was a scholar who threatened to cut short the family's rise by losing all its land, and left his heirs difficulties and lawsuits which lasted for four decades. Brought up at court he was educated there by the distinguished linguist John Palsgrave. After travels on the continent he entered the service of Thomas Cromwell, while in the early 1540s he served the crown on missions to France and the empire. Between 1545 and 1559 he was five times returned to parliament as MP for Wiltshire or Sussex boroughs, but his later career was dogged by financial anxieties. His father's legacies from the estate, his own debts, and perhaps hopes of further court favour, may explain why he made an extraordinary exchange in 1545, whereby Sir Thomas Seymour was to hold all the Baynton properties, and vice versa, but without security for Baynton heirs. Worse, when Seymour was executed for treason in 1549 both men's property went to the crown. The family's ruin was temporary, as Queen Mary returned his former lands to Baynton. But the latter also negotiated sales of manors to other Wiltshire gentry, including Nicholas Snell and the notorious Gabriel Pleydell. Pleydell and the corrupt Sir William Sharington appear in his will as executors, with his lands assigned to them, probably as a result of deceit or forgery. Further complications surround Andrew's marriage to Phillipa Brulet; debts to her father are mentioned in his successful suit for annulment in 1562 on the grounds of her pre-contract; his brother Edward encouraged his suit. Andrew then married Frances Lee, and they had one daughter, Anne. She did not inherit, for to keep the property in the name of the Bayntons, in 1560 he had entailed the remaining estates on his brother 


@@@@@


doc= 1966


Ralph Beilby (bap. 1743, d. 1817), engraver and businessman, was baptized on 12 August 1743 at St Margaret's, Durham, the third son of William and Mary Beilby. He was educated at Durham grammar school and was then apprenticed to his father. While he started to engrave in silver, he moved on to copper-engraving and seal-cutting upon the return of his brother Richard from Birmingham. Ralph was the driving force behind the family's move to Gateshead after his father's business folded. He set up Beilby & Co. and moved the business to Amen Corner in Newcastle upon Tyne after the trial for forgery of the well-known engraver Jameson had created a vacancy in the city. In addition to acting as the family's business brain, Ralph Beilby acquired considerable expertise in the fields of heraldry and chivalry, which made him the preferred engraver of the northern aristocracy. 
Ralph's own artistic work flourished through his collaboration with the historian John Brand, which produced the engraving of Thornton's monument plate for Brand's history of Newcastle and a plan of Newcastle in 1788. Yet he is mostly remembered as Thomas Bewick's master after the latter's entry into the Beilby workshop. Their collaboration produced, among other works, 'A General History of Quadrupeds'; however, disagreement over the fourth edition of this work led to the dissolution of the enterprise in January 1798. 
Ralph Beilby's artistic output became less prolific after his marriage on 3 December 1780 to Ellen Hawthorne (died 1833). He set up a new business with James Hawthorne, his brother-in-law, which dealt in the production of watch-glasses and clockwork. Their premises were destroyed by fire in 1806 and subsequently rebuilt, and shortly afterwards Ralph Beilby took early retirement. He remained active as a patron of the arts and was a founder member of the Literary and Philosophical Society of Newcastle upon Tyne. He died on 4 January 1817 and was buried at St Andrew's, Newcastle. 



@@@@@


doc= 2331


Jane Bewick (1787-1881) was born on 29 April 1787 at Newcastle upon Tyne. She became very active in supporting her father in his business activities, dealing particularly with publishers and booksellers during the last ten years of his life. In 1825 John F. M. Dovaston described her as: 'mistress of her father's house, which she conducts... without bustle or disturbance. She also corrects the press for his works, and looks after the getting of them up; writes his letters of business; keeping his house and shops in order. Her great delight is in his fame. (Dovaston)' She supervised the production and publication of the two posthumous editions of 'British Birds' in 1832 and 1847, and in an uneasy collaboration with her cousin, the Newcastle printer Robert Ward, edited and published her father's autobiographical 'Memoir' in 1862. At about this time she made valuable notes on her father's acquaintances and on the narrative content of many of his vignette tailpieces. Her forthright and lively character is fully displayed in her letters home when travelling to London, Edinburgh, and Buxton. Together with her sister, 


@@@@@


doc= 2333


Robert Elliot Bewick (1788-1849), engraver, Thomas Bewick's only son, was born at Newcastle upon Tyne on 26 August 1788. Always a diffident character and prone to ill health, he was brought up in the business, apprenticed between 1804 and 1810, and in 1812 made partner in T. Bewick & Son, engravers and copperplate printers, but he failed to realize his father's ambitions for him. He was a meticulous draughtsman, a skilful practical engraver more at home on copper than on wood, but he had none of his father's inventive genius, nor any head for promoting a vigorous trade for himself in later years. His work on copper is to be seen in bill-heads, book-plates, and book illustration; as a wood engraver he contributed to his father's 'Fables of Aesop' (1818) and produced a small group of blocks for the unpublished 'History of Fishes' which first appeared in his father's 'Memoir'. He made a quantity of highly finished drawings of fish which are now in the British Museum and several of which were shown in the first exhibition of the Northumberland Institution for the Fine Arts in 1822. Despite his father's despairing letter to Jane -- 'what can my Robert mean by poring constantly & stupifying himself with Perspective -- he ought never to have the pencil out of his hand' (28 June 1814, Natural History Society of Northumbria) -- he pursued his interest, and many of his perspective drawings of buildings and domestic interiors survive. His few wood engravings occasionally show the initials R. E. B., his copper engravings the full signature R. E. Bewick, and his drawings if not signed can sometimes be identified by his own captions. In her old age Jane Bewick frequently put a signature to the unsigned drawings in her care, not always accurately. 
A touching account of Robert Elliot Bewick and his 'two tall old fashioned maiden sisters' is given in William Bell Scott's 'Autobiographical Notes': 'a heavy, slouching, able bodied countryman, as I thought, about fifty-five or so, with an absent, bewildered expression of face, the snow lying white on his penthouse eyebrows... to this man I felt drawn in a singular degree, mainly by the almost reverent simplicity and diffidence of his manner, which evidently prevented him adequately expressing himself. (Scott, 2.194-6)' The account continues with a description of Robert's skilful playing of the delicate, sweet-sounding Northumberland smallpipes. Encouraged by his father, who kept a record of the costs of his lessons, music, and instruments, he was playing at an early age, and was taught by John Peacock, one of the last of the old Newcastle pipers. It is his legacy of five manuscript collections of the melodies of the time which now keeps Robert Bewick's memory alive and which has played an important part in the renewal of interest in the traditional music of north-east England. He died on 27 July 1849 at the family home, 19 West Street, Gateshead, co. Durham, as did his sisters. The burial place of the family is in the graveyard of St Mary's, Ovingham, Northumberland. 
Watercolours, drawings, and prints by Thomas, John, and Robert Elliot Bewick were given to the department of prints and drawings at the British Museum in 1882 (1882-3-11-1243-5558), and in 1884 to the Natural History Society of Northumberland, Durham, and Newcastle upon Tyne (Hancock Museum, University of Newcastle upon Tyne). 


@@@@@


doc= 2409


Bingham, John (1612/13-1689), ejected minister and classical and oriental scholar, was born at Derby, the son of Henry Bingham. After attending Repton School from 1628, he was admitted sizar at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, on 10 June 1631, aged eighteen. Having moved to Magdalene College he graduated BA in 1636. When he was twenty-six a foot he had injured as a child had to be amputated and the trauma of this prematurely turned his hair white. 
From 1640 to 1652 Bingham was master at the free school in Derby. He was an excellent classical and oriental scholar, fluent in Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Syriac, and Arabic. He published nothing under his own name, but assisted Brian Walton in the composition of the polyglot 'Bible' (1657). For many years Bingham resisted pressure to take up pastoral responsibilities within the church, finally taking on a living only after considerable persuasion. Presented by William Cavendish, earl of Devonshire, to Marston upon Dove, Derbyshire, he was formally admitted on 28 October 1656. Over the next four years he 'constantly attended on the Classis of ministers that met at Derby' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.188). On 16 May 1661 he was married at Spondon to Elizabeth Bomford of Chaddesdon. They had one son who survived them, Thomas, a mercer at Derby. 
Despite considerable enticement by Archbishop Gilbert Sheldon, a long-time acquaintance, Bingham felt unable to conform in 1662 and so was ejected from his living. The loss of such a scholar weighed heavily upon the church authorities. After the passing of the 'Five Mile Act' he moved to Bradley Hall, where for three years he 'taught several Gentlemen's sons, who Boarded with him' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.188), again a reflection of his considerable academic repute. He subsequently moved to Brailsford, where he was to remain for seven years. Here he and his family attended the parish church every Sunday morning but in the afternoon he preached at his own house 'to the numbers that was not prohibited by the 'Act [of Uniformity]''. He subsequently incurred the wrath of the local incumbent, who proceeded to have him excommunicated. This sentence outraged parishioners and supporters and Bingham sought to defuse the situation by moving his household to Upper Thurvaston in the parish of Sutton, where he remained until his death. Edmund Calamy claimed he was licensed in 1672 to preach at Hollington, though his name is not included in the list of licences issued. When he was seventy Bingham broke his arm in a fall from his horse. His latter years were marked by frail and declining health, though he maintained his scholarly pursuits. He died on 3 February 1689, aged eighty-two according to Calamy, although his university record suggests this was an exaggeration. He was buried at Upper Thurvaston, with Mr Crompton preaching his funeral sermon. 


@@@@@


doc= 2410


Bingham, Joseph (bap. 1668, d. 1723), ecclesiastical historian, was baptized on 28 September 1668 at All Saints', Wakefield, Yorkshire, the son of Francis Bingham ('b'. 1625, died in or after 1680), of Wakefield, a nonconformist, who had originally been apprenticed as a cutler. He was educated at Wakefield grammar school and matriculated from University College, Oxford, on 26 May 1684 and graduated BA in 1688. He was elected a fellow on 1 July 1689 and proceeded MA in 1691. By June 1691 he was a tutor, one of his first pupils being another native of Wakefield, John Potter, the future archbishop of Canterbury. Bingham was ordained deacon on 20 December 1691 by the bishop of Oxford, and ordained a priest on 12 March 1693. 
Bingham's promising university career was cut short following a topical sermon preached at St Peter-in-the-East on 28 October 1695 on the Trinity, in which he expounded the patristic notions of 'ousia', 'persona', and 'substantia'. It was denounced as heretical to the vice-chancellor by John Beauchamp, a fellow of Trinity, and the hebdomadal board condemned part of it as 'false, impious and heretical' (Barnard, 'Bingham and asceticism', 300). Other charges were also levelled including accusations of Arianism, tritheism, and the heresy of Valentinus Gentilis, and Bingham was denounced by Robert South as a follower of Dr William Sherlock. To avoid deprivation Bingham resigned his fellowship on 23 November 1695 and was then presented to the rectory of Headbourne Worthy, near Winchester, by Dr John Radcliffe, another native of Wakefield, who had recently purchased the advowson. From this preferment, valued at about $100 per annum, and conveniently situated near to the cathedral library, Bingham undertook his scholarly research into the antiquities of the church. Nor did his exile from Oxford curtail his appetite for controversy, for soon after his appointment to Headbourne Worthy he preached a visitation sermon on 12 May 1696 on the same subject, and returned to the subject in the following year in a visitation sermon preached on 16 September 1697. All three sermons were published as 'Three Sermons on the Trinity'. 
On 26 November 1702 Bingham married Dorothy (1672-1755), daughter of Richard and Constance Pocock of Colemore, Hampshire. They had ten children, two sons and four daughters surviving their father. In 1706 Bingham published 'The French Church's Apology for the Church of England', which 'contains a modest vindication of the doctrine, worship, government, and discipline of our church from the chief objections of dissenters, and returns answer to them upon the principles of the reformed church of France' ('DNB'). It was dedicated to Thomas Tenison, archbishop of Canterbury, who Thomas Hearne felt would 'grumble at his writings against dissenters' ('Remarks', 1.221). In 1708 the first volume of Bingham's 'Origines ecclesiasticae, or, Antiquities of the Christian Church' was published. By 1711 three volumes had been published. Bingham was then diverted into a controversy concerning lay baptism, responding to Roger Lawrence's 'Lay Baptism Invalid' (1708) with his 'Scholastical History of Lay Baptism' (1712). This was originally intended as a chapter in the 'Origines', but Bingham decided to publish it separately to refute the view that those who had not been baptized by an episcopally ordained minister lacked true Christian initiation. Bingham contended that the ancient church when she received members of other sects 'did not recognize their ordinations, but by her determination gave them the authority which they had not previously possessed' (Every, 129-30). 
In 1712 Bishop Jonathan Trelawny of Winchester collated Bingham to the rectory of Havant, near Portsmouth, which he was allowed to hold with Headbourne Worthy. In May 1713 Bingham approached the lord treasurer, Robert Harley, earl of Oxford, after hearing that Oxford, a noted patron of scholarly research, approved of his historical endeavours. After detailing his 'labouring hard at this work' almost twenty years and his financial commitment to six children and 'some poor relations that depend also entirely upon my charity', he requested from Oxford some further preferment to continue 'the work of the antiquities of the church'. His ideal was a prebend of Winchester, 'where my business chiefly lies among the books of the library' ('Portland MSS', 5.289), but realizing that this would not be possible he asked for any place that would answer his designs. However, he did not receive another living, and yet he continued to ask Oxford for patronage, including a place at Charterhouse for his son Joseph. Moreover, Bingham seems to have lost money in government lottery schemes and also in the South Sea Bubble. 
Work continued on the 'Origines', the tenth and final volume being published in 1722, Bingham telling Hearne 'he hath been twenty years about it' ('Remarks', 8.19). Bingham's aim as outlined in the work was: 'to give such a methodical account of the antiquities of the christian church as others have done of the Greek and Roman and Jewish antiquities, by reducing the ancient customs, usages, and practices of the church under certain proper heads, whereby the reader may take a view at once of any particular usage or custom of christians for four or five centuries. ('DNB')' It covered 'the hierarchy, ecclesiology, territorial organization, rites, discipline, and calendar of the primitive church' (Barnard, 'Bingham and the early church', 197), based on primary sources. 
Bingham was working on a second edition of the 'Origines', together with an abridgement, when he died on 17 August 1723. He was buried at St Swithen's, Headbourne Worthy. His undated will left $50 and half his books to each of his two sons, Richard and Joseph, $100 each to his four daughters, and $50 to his sister, Welcom. To his wife he left 'my house and yard' in Headbourne Worthy and the 'right and title' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/594, Fol. 8'r') to the 'Origines'. However, his wife appears to have ended her life in relative poverty, dying in 1755 in Bishop Warner's College for Clergymen's Widows at Bromley. The 'Origines' was translated into Latin and published by J. H. Grischovius of Halle between 1724 and 1729; a German abridgement was published in Augsburg between 1788 and 1796. 'The Works of the Rev. Joseph Bingham', edited by R. Bingham, was published in nine volumes in 1840, with a new edition in ten volumes in 1855. 


@@@@@


doc= 2411


Bingham, Margaret, countess of Lucan (c.1740-1814), miniature painter, was the daughter of James Smith MP, of Canons-Leigh, Devon, and St Audries, Somerset, and his wife, Grace. She married, on 25 August 1760, Sir Charles Bingham (1735-1799), later Baron Lucan (1776) and first earl of Lucan (1795). She started to paint miniatures about 1771, usually in watercolour on ivory and frequently signed with the monogram M. B., M. L., or M. B. L. She became an expert copyist and reproduced many miniatures by Isaac and Peter Oliver, John Hoskins, and Samuel Cooper. Horace Walpole, with whom she was acquainted, claimed that she was gifted 'with a genius that almost depreciates those masters when we consider that they spent their lives in attaining perfection; and [she], soaring above their modest timidity, has transferred the vigour of Raphael to her copies in watercolours' (Walpole, 'Anecdotes', 4.xviii, xix). There are frequent allusions to her in Walpole's letters and his praise becomes somewhat exaggerated. He writes, for example, 'Lady Bingham is, I assure you, another miracle' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 32.155) and 'They are so amazed and charmed at Paris with Lady Bingham's miniatures, that the Duke of Orleans has given her a room at the Palais Royal to copy which of his pictures she pleases' (ibid., 32.298). However, Mrs Delany, the commentator on late eighteenth-century society and court life and herself an amateur artist, was more circumspect in her assessment and in particular criticized Lady Lucan for her poor draughtsmanship: '[she] would often totally mistake the distance between one feature and another (till it was pointed out to her) and yet imitate colouring and finishing to perfection' ('Autobiography... Mrs Delany', 1861, 6.420n.). 
The consensus among recent critics is that Lady Lucan 'was not a first-rate miniaturist; her work usually betrays the amateur's hand' (Long, 280). However, many of her copies are of historic, if not aesthetic, value in providing records of original miniatures which, in some cases, no longer exist. Her miniature of John Maitland, first duke of Lauderdale, after Samuel Cooper (1774) is an example of this (Dutch royal collection). Her most significant work was the embellishment with miniatures and illuminations of a five-folio-volume edition of Shakespeare's historical plays in the library at Althorp, Northamptonshire. This monumental task took sixteen years to complete. 
Lady Lucan died on 27 February 1814 in St James's Place, London, leaving five children: Lavinia, who married George John Spencer, second Earl Spencer in 1781; Eleanor Margaret, who married Thomas Lindsay; Louisa and Anne, who both died unmarried; and Richard, second earl of Lucan, the only son and heir. A collection of fourteen miniatures by her remains at Althorp, but a large number of miniature copies by her were sold by the order of the earl of Lucan in 1922 (Knight, Frank, and Rutley, Laleham House, Surrey, 28 November 1922, lots 230-313). A collection of miniatures by Lady Lucan was sold at Christies, South Kensington, on 10 October 2000 (lots 77-101). 


@@@@@


doc= 2412


Bingham, Peregrine (1754-1826), biographer and poet, was the second son of George Bingham (1715-1800), rector for fifty-two years of Pimperne, Dorset, and Sarah Beale (died 1756). He was educated at Winchester College, before matriculating at New College, Oxford on 15 March 1771. He was admitted as a scholar there on 31 August 1772, and he proceeded BCL on 7 July 1780. He was a fellow of New College from 1774 to 1787. He became rector of Edmondsham, Dorset, on 8 January 1782, and of Berwick St John, Wiltshire, in 1817. At one time he was chaplain of HMS 'Agincourt'. 
Bingham wrote memoirs of his father, prefixed to 'Dissertations, Essays, and Sermons, by the Late George Bingham, B.D.' (2 vols., 1804). These memoirs, which are abridged in John Hutchins's 'The Histories and Antiquities of... Dorset', gave rise to a controversy between the author and the rector of Critchill which is evident in his 'Sequel or Continuation of the Memoirs' (1805) and 'An Answer to the Reply or Defence of the Rector of Critchill' (1805). Bingham also wrote 'The Pains of Memory, a Poem, in Two Books' (1811; 2nd edn, 1812). He married Amy, daughter of William Bowles; they had two sons, one of whom was Peregrine Bingham the younger (bap. 1788, d. 1864), a legal reporter and writer. Bingham died on 28 May 1826, aged seventy-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 2413


Bingham, Peregrine (bap. 1788, d. 1864), legal writer and reformer, was baptized at Radclive, Buckinghamshire, on 19 April 1788, the eldest son of the Revd Peregrine Bingham (1754-1826) and his wife, Amy, 'nee' Bowles. He was educated at Winchester College and at Magdalen College, Oxford (BA, 1810), admitted to the Middle Temple in London in 1811, called to the bar on 27 November 1818, and practised on the western circuit before becoming a police magistrate in London. He married in 1816 Eliza, daughter of James Bolton, a London attorney. There were two children by the marriage, a daughter and a son, named -- somewhat unimaginatively -- Eliza and Peregrine. 
For many years Bingham compiled law reports. Between 1821 and 1840 he was solely or jointly responsible for nineteen volumes of cases. He was the author of 'The Law and Practice of Judgments and Executions' (1815), 'The Law of Infancy and Coverture' (1816), and 'A Digest of the Law of Landlord and Tenant' (1820). His 'System of Shorthand on the Principle of the Association of Ideas' (1821) failed to win adherents. 
As a young lawyer Bingham was friendly with John Austin and Nassau Senior, both of whom had chambers at Lincoln's Inn. But the most notable and influential of his associates was the elderly Jeremy Bentham, the utilitarian philosopher and reformer. In September 1818 Bentham described Bingham as 'a newly acquired and most valuable disciple', who 'is already in possession of most of my ideas respecting morals politics and legislation', and who 'without effort becomes master of every thing as soon as he looks at it, and in a condition to preach it, and defend it, and apply it every where' ('Correspondence of Jeremy Bentham', 9.261). Bingham, for his part, wrote that Bentham's work had opened his eyes. He edited Bentham's 'Book of Fallacies', which was published in 1824, and in the same year he contributed a series of articles to the 'Westminster Review', the periodical established to propagate the utilitarian message. In these pieces he emerges as a stern critic of sentimentality, a rather tiresome advocate of precise definitions, and an enthusiast for the democratic institutions of the United States. It was small wonder that John Stuart Mill, who worked with him on the 'Westminster Review', regarded Bingham as having 'adopted with great ardour Mr Bentham's philosophical opinions' ('Autobiography and Literary Essays', 97). 
Bingham went on to be co-editor of the ill-fated 'Parliamentary History and Review', which for the three years of its life (1826-8) printed parliamentary debates with commentary from a radical perspective. As a member of the municipal corporations commission, which paved the way for the 1835 'Municipal Corporations Act', he was seen as a doctrinaire Benthamite, committed to the idea of 'scientific legislation'. There is little evidence, however, that he was influential; to the contrary, Bingham and Charles Austin, the other identifiably utilitarian commissioner, seem to have had little impact on a process that appears to have been driven primarily by party considerations. From 1840 until about 1860, Bingham was the presiding magistrate at Great Marlborough Street court, and he also held the office of recorder of Southampton. Bingham died at his home in Gordon Square, London, on 2 November 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 2414


Bingham, Sir Richard (1527/8-1599), soldier and president of Connacht, was the third son of Robert Bingham of Melcombe-Bingham, Dorset, and his wife, Alice, daughter of Thomas Coker of Mappowder in the same county. His elder brothers were Robert and Christopher; he also had two sisters and five younger brothers, Sir George, Roger, Sir John, Thomas, and Charles, two of whom, like him, served in Ireland. Richard Bingham pursued a military and naval career that took him to many parts of Europe. His earliest military adventure was apparently with Protector Somerset's expedition to Scotland in 1547. He served with the Spaniards against the French at the battle of St Quentin in 1557 and in October 1558 participated in a naval expedition against the 'out-isles' of Scotland in which William Fitzwilliam was also involved. In the early years of Elizabeth's reign he fought against the Turks with the Spaniards and Venetians under Don John of Austria. He may have taken part in the conquest of Cyprus and the battle of Lepanto (7 October 1572). In 1573 and 1574 he was in the Low Countries reporting to Sir William Cecil from Delft and Dortrecht on the conflict with Spain. Late in 1576 he accompanied Sir Edward Horsey on an abortive mission to Don John to negotiate a peace between Spain and the states general of the United Provinces. In March 1578 Queen Elizabeth granted Bingham an annuity of 50 marks in recognition of his military and diplomatic services. Later in 1578 he fought as a volunteer under the Dutch flag against Spain. He was described by Sir Nicholas Le Strange as 'a man eminent both for spiritt and martiall knowledge, but of very small stature' (Thoms, 18). 
In 1579 Bingham was sent to Ireland to assist in the suppression of the Desmond rebellion. He was captain of the 'Swiftsure' in autumn 1580 which helped in the Munster offensive under Admiral Winter against the Spaniards and Italians who had landed at Smerwick harbour to support James Fitzmaurice. Bingham took part in the massacre of the garrison at Dun an Oir on 10 November 1580 when a large number of Italians who had been offered protection were killed. After spending the winter off the Kerry coast, the 'Swiftsure' reached Bristol on 9 January 1581. In August Bingham was among those put from the Portuguese voyage by Sir Francis Drake. Bingham was still serving with the 'Swiftsure' late in 1583, being then an admiral. In September 1583 he was instructed by the queen to seize Dutch ships for debts due to her, while ostensibly working to apprehend pirates on the narrow seas. 
Following the death of Sir Nicholas Malby in March 1584 Bingham was appointed as president of Connacht to succeed him. He was knighted by Sir John Perrot in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, on 21 June 1584. A commission for martial law was issued to him on 8 July, and a commission for military government of the province was issued at the same time, Bingham being appointed commander of the forces in the field in the absence of the lord deputy. During his first year he regularly complained of his inadequate fee, which did not meet the expenses of his household. He initially regarded the Connacht presidency as the 'most painful and troublesome government in the country and the least commodious' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/111, no. 54), and thought of returning to life as captain of a small band. He sought unsuccessfully to establish himself at Roscommon Castle at the expense of Malby's heirs. But by the beginning of 1585, though still in dispute with Henry Malby, he had come to terms with his new surroundings. Having made plans to reduce the expenditure on his household, Bingham evidently realized that the provincial government could be made profitable. Still maintaining an interest in overseas military ventures, he contacted Leicester in July 1585 concerning an expedition to Flanders, but noted in the same month that he wished to continue in his office in Connacht. His initial encounters with the earl of Clanricarde were positive, and Bingham believed that the Irish of Connacht were willing to conform peacefully to English ways. Following the successful negotiation of the composition of Connacht in the summer of 1585, whereby the finances of the provincial administration were put on a sure footing and the prospects for a peaceful and increasingly Anglicized province were greatly enhanced, Bingham asserted that he planned never to leave Connacht without assurance of something better. He had leases of Boyle and Ballymote, but resented the loss of Roscommon to Henry Malby and challenged the claim of the treasurer, Wallop, to have a lease of Athlone, previously reserved for the use of the president of Connacht. In his later years in Connacht, Bingham had yearly leases of Athlone and Ballymote at rents of $54 and $16, but still complained that his predecessor had fared better. 
Bingham's reputation as one whose harsh administration goaded the Irish of Connacht into rebellion owed much to the influence enjoyed by his enemies in the Dublin government. That reputation continues despite a spirited effort by H. T. Knox to demonstrate the extent to which Bingham was the victim of personal animosities. In particular, the hostility of the lord deputy, Sir John Perrot, and within Connacht the activities of Theobald Dillon and Francis Barkeley created serious difficulties for Bingham. Although the executions which followed the Galway assizes early in 1586, and Bingham's actions against the Mayo Burkes who went into rebellion in the summer of that year, were both within the remit of his commissions, his work was censured. The massacre at Ardnaree on the River Moy on 22 August 1586 of a large number of Scots, who were on their way to assist the Burkes, earned him a reputation as a merciless governor. However, it appears to have been his military success rather than his harshness that aroused the hostility of Lord Deputy Perrot. Bingham complained to the privy council that he never thought his service against the Scots in Mayo would have earned him such hatred and disgrace with the lord deputy that he was forced to leave his charge. He claimed that Perrot's undermining of his authority had undone the good of the military successes he had achieved. 
By February 1587 the privy council had cleared Bingham of charges brought against him, finding they were maliciously brought by Theobald Dillon. In May of that year Bingham was withdrawn from Connacht temporarily for service in Flanders. He left in July, being replaced initially by Sir Thomas Le Strange and in September by his own brother George Bingham. On 11 January 1588 he married Sarah (1564/5-1634), daughter of John Heigham of Gifford's Hall, Wickhambrook, Suffolk. Bingham was restored to the government of Connacht in spring 1588, reaching Athlone in May. He involved himself in a controversy over the legitimate succession to Sir Donnell O'Connor Sligo, and in September he actively implemented the government proclamation to execute any survivors of the Spanish Armada found in Connacht. 
A new outbreak of rebellion among the Mayo Burkes in spring 1589 created renewed tension between the lord deputy and Bingham. New accusations of misgovernment were brought against him and controversy ensued when Sir Francis Walsingham, a lifelong supporter of Bingham, pointed out to the lord deputy that the men appointed as commissioners to examine Bingham's actions were his arch-enemies within the Dublin administration. By December 1589 Bingham had again been cleared of any charges of misgovernment, and for the following four and a half years governed the province in relative peace. He could not comprehend why 'I am tearmed crewell for doing her Majestie trewe service' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/170 no. 45). 
The outbreak of the Nine Years' War in Ulster created a renewed atmosphere of unrest in Connacht by the mid-1590s. When O'Donnell came to mid-Roscommon in March 1595 Bingham did not have sufficient military strength to repel him. He was eventually assigned two untrained companies and given instructions to defend Connacht. The supporters of O'Donnell considered him 'the greatest monster of all the English that were then in Ireland' (O Clerigh, 1.101). Tension with the Dublin government continued, and Bingham was summoned before the lord deputy and council in July 1596 to answer further complaints. On 23 September he departed for England, believing there was a plot by Sir John Norris to murder him. On arrival in London he was suspended from his office and imprisoned for leaving Ireland without permission, but was released in November because of ill health. On his return journey to Ireland he was accompanied by Sir Conyers Clifford, who had been appointed to replace him in Connacht, and who left him behind at Chester owing to illness. The government, realizing the depth of animosity shown by Sir John Norris and Sir Geoffrey Fenton towards Bingham, decided the trial should be before the whole council in Dublin, but in the event it seems never to have taken place. Bingham continued to enjoy favour in London, and when plans were being drawn up for the earl of Essex's expedition to Ireland, Sir Francis Bacon advised Essex to be wary of Sir William Fitzwilliam and Sir John Norris but to have special regard for Bingham's advice. His considerable expertise as a military commander was clearly valued by his supporters despite his persistent lack of subtlety in his dealings with his political opponents. Together with the elderly Richard Burke, third earl of Clanricarde, Bingham was admitted to Gray's Inn, London, on 17 March 1598, probably as a result of the ongoing patronage of Sir Francis Walsingham. 
In September 1598 Bingham left England with five thousand men to assume the office of marshall of Ireland, but he died in Dublin on 19 January 1599. His body was returned to London for burial in Westminster Abbey. A memorial to him was erected there by his former servant Sir John Bingley and a portrait painted in 1564 is in the National Portrait Gallery, London. Lady Bingham survived her husband and subsequently married Edward Waldegrave, of Lawford, Essex. She died at Lawford on 9 September 1634, aged sixty-nine, and was buried in the church there. Sir Richard evidently had no title to property in Ireland and the family's Dorset estates were inherited by Henry, eldest son of his younger brother George. 


@@@@@


doc= 2415


Bingham, Richard, the elder (1765-1858), Church of England clergyman, was born on 1 April 1765. He was son of the Revd Isaac Moody Bingham, rector of Birchanger and Runwell, Essex, and great-grandson of Joseph Bingham (bap. 1668, d. 1723), author of 'Origines ecclesiasticae'. He was educated at Winchester College, where he was on the foundation, and at New College, Oxford, where he graduated BA on 19 October 1787 and BCL on 18 July 1801. He was married at Bristol to Lydia Mary Anne, eldest daughter of Rear-Admiral Sir Charles Douglas, baronet, and his second wife, Sarah, daughter of John Wood, on 10 November 1788, by which time he was a fellow of his college and in holy orders. Richard Bingham (1798-1872) was their son. 
In 1790 Bingham was appointed to the perpetual curacy of Holy Trinity Church, Gosport; in 1796 he became vicar of Great Hale, near Sleaford, Lincolnshire, and was appointed, on 22 July 1807, in succession to his father, to the prebendal stall of Bargham in Chichester Cathedral, which position he held until his death. In 1813, being then a magistrate for Hampshire of twelve years' standing, he was convicted at the Winchester summer assizes of having illegally obtained a licence for a public house, when no such public house was in existence, and of having stated a false consideration in the conveyance of the house with intent to defraud the revenue by evading an additional stamp duty of $10. On 10 November 1813 a motion was made in the king's bench for a new trial. In spite of many affidavits to his character he was sentenced on 26 November 1813 to six months' imprisonment in the county gaol at Winchester. In an appeal to public opinion dated 23 December 1813 Bingham vehemently asserted his innocence. 
In 1829 Bingham published, by subscription, the third edition of the 'Origines ecclesiasticae' of his ancestor, adding references from the author's manuscript annotations in a private copy of his own book, and Joseph Bingham's three 'Trinity Sermons'; he prefixed the edition with a life of Joseph Bingham. The bankruptcy of the printer while the work was passing through the press caused much delay in its distribution. Bingham died at his home at Newhouse, Gosport, on Sunday 18 July 1858, and was buried on Tuesday 27 July in the vaults of Trinity Church in the presence of a very large number of his friends and parishioners. 


@@@@@


doc= 2416


Bingham, Richard, the younger (1798-1872), Church of England clergyman and author, was the eldest son of Richard Bingham, the elder (1765-1858), and his wife, Lydia Mary Anne, 'nee' Douglas. He was educated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1821 and MA in 1827. He was ordained deacon in 1821, and priest in 1822, and became curate to his father in his incumbency of Holy Trinity Church, Gosport. Here he remained for over twenty-two years. He married, on 4 May 1824, Frances Campbell, daughter of J. Barton, of Mount Pleasant, Jamaica, and took pupils. 
Bingham published by subscription two small volumes of sermons in 1826 and 1827, and in 1829 'The warning voice, or, An awakening question for all British protestants in general, and members of the Church of England in particular, at the present juncture'. He seceded from the British and Foreign Bible Society in 1831, on account of its readiness to co-operate with Socinians, and soon after published an account of the circumstances. He issued by subscription a volume entitled 'Sermons' (1835), and in 1843 'Immanuel, or, God with Us'. Twelve years later he produced the standard edition of his ancestor, Joseph Bingham, 'The Works of the Rev. Joseph Bingham, MA' (10 vols., 1855). 
In 1844 Bingham was presented by the trustees to the perpetual curacy of Christ Church, Harwood, Bolton-le-Moors; during his incumbency he lost (28 February 1847) his eldest daughter, Frances Lydia, aged twenty-one, and his youngest son. Frances Bingham had published 'Hubert, or, The Orphans of St Madelaine; a Legend of the Persecuted Vaudois' (1845), and at the time of her death left remnants which were published by her father in 1848 as 'Short Poems, Religious and Sentimental' and passed through two editions. Bingham became in 1853 curate at St Mary's, Marylebone, the rector of which was John Hampden Gurney, to whom he afterwards dedicated 'Sermons' (1858). In 1856 he became vicar of Queenborough in the Isle of Sheppey. In 1870 he retired from this living to reside at Sutton, Surrey, where he died on Monday 22 January 1872. 
Bingham was an energetic advocate of liturgical revision, and a member of the council of the Prayer Book Revision Society. In 1860 he published 'Liturgia recusa, or, Suggestions for revising and reconstructing the daily and occasional services of the United Church of England and Ireland'. He supplemented this volume by an elaborate model of a liturgy, 'Liturgiae recusae exemplar: the prayer book as it might be' (1863), with a dedication to Lord Ebury, which reflected Bingham's evangelical inclinations. Bingham also published 'The Gospel According to Isaiah' (1870) and 'Hymnologia Christiana Latina, or, A Century of Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs' (1871). 


@@@@@


doc= 2417


Bingley, William (1774-1823), naturalist and Church of England clergyman, was born at Doncaster, Yorkshire, early in January 1774 and baptized there on the 7th. He was orphaned while still very young. He was educated at a school in Doncaster, where his friends urged him to pursue a career in law, but his own inclinations were for a more tranquil life in the church. With this end in mind he matriculated at Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1795, graduating BA in 1799 and MA in 1803. He was ordained deacon at York in 1799 and became curate at Mirfield in the West Riding of Yorkshire in the same year. 
Bingley was a noted writer on botany, topography, and popular zoology. His travels in Wales while still an undergraduate formed the basis of his two-volume, illustrated, 'Tour of North Wales' (1800; 2nd edn, 1814), which includes a catalogue of Welsh plants. He returned to Wales in 1801 and afterwards issued a topographical account, 'North Wales' (2 vols., 1804). During the same period he published one of his most popular zoological works, 'Animal Biography' (1802), which went through multiple editions and was translated into a number of European languages. In a similar vein he published 'Memoirs of British Quadrupeds' (1809), and 'Animated Nature' (1814). These works gave an entertaining and palatable introduction to the basic zoological facts: 'Animated Nature', a contemporary noted, contained nothing which might 'prove offensive to the most delicate female mind' (Bingley, vii). 
Bingley served as curate of the priory in Christchurch, Hampshire, from 1802 to 1816. From 1816 to 1823 he was minister of Fitzroy Chapel (St Saviour's) in Charlotte Street, London. He was married but his wife's name is not known. His son, William Richard Bingley, published (and amended) the third edition of 'North Wales' (1839). Though Bingley continued to publish on natural history, producing, among other works, 'A Practical Introduction to Botany' (1817), he also indulged a strong taste for compilation. Among his compilative (and none too critical) works were 'Musical Biography' (1814), a series of popular biographical compilations on British characters, eminent voyagers, celebrated travellers, and Roman characters, and six volumes of travel writings designed as abridged popular versions of the accounts given by those who actually did the travelling. 
Bingley's major projected work was his county history of Hampshire. Though much material was collected he did not live to complete this, and only a small portion of it was ever published ('The Topographical Account of the Hundred of Bosmere', privately published in 1817). He died at his home in Charlotte Street, London, on 11 March 1823 and was buried at St George's Church, Bloomsbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 2418


Binham, Simon (fl. c.1350), Benedictine monk and chronicler, was probably born in East Anglia and became a member of the priory of Binham, Norfolk, one of the cells of the abbey of St Albans. He is first recorded as supporting his prior in resisting the unjust exactions of Hugh, abbot of St Albans (1309-27). After Hugh appealed to Edward II for assistance, Binham and the other rebellious monks were brought to St Albans and imprisoned, but he was later released and lived to become an influential member of the house, for in the time of Abbot Michael (1335-49) he was chosen by the chapter as one of the three receivers or treasurers of the collections made for the support of scholars and needy brethren. 
Binham's real claim to fame, however, rests on his apparent role as one in a long line of St Albans chroniclers. As V. H. Galbraith has demonstrated, St Albans was an active centre of historical writing in the later middle ages. The 'Flores historiarum' of Roger of Wendover (died 1236) and Matthew Paris's 'Chronica majora', both compiled in the thirteenth century, began the tradition of historical writing at St Albans. This tradition was not a continuous one; after the death of Paris in 1259 the scriptorium fell silent for almost a generation. Under the abbacy of John Maryns (1302-8), however, the writing of history was revised. According to Thomas Walsingham, writing about 1400, after Paris 'William Risangre, Henry Blankfrount, Simon Bynham and Richard Savage successively wrote chronicles' ('Annales... Amundesham', 2.303). Beginning in the early fourteenth century, then, several smaller texts were compiled in an effort to pick up the 'Chronica majora' where Paris had left off in 1259. William of Rishanger was apparently the author of the 'Opus chronicorum', covering the years 1259-97 (with a preface explaining events down to 1307). A continuation of Rishanger's chronicle, the 'Annals' of John Trokelowe, covers events in the period 1307-23, and Henry Blaneford wrote a brief continuation for the years 1323-4. Whether or not even these brief texts were really the work of Rishanger, he has also been credited with a history -- the so-called 'Chronica Willelmi Rishanger' -- dealing with events in the period 1259-1307. Galbraith, however, has called this attribution into question, pointing out among other things that its earliest manuscript (BL, Royal MS 14 C.vii) was written soon after 1350, by which date Rishanger was surely dead (he would have been eighty years of age in 1330). This chronicle is not without importance, as it may have been used by Walsingham in the compilation of his 'Chronica majora'. For Galbraith, therefore, this text represents 'a unique survival of historical writing at St Albans in the period between Rishanger and Walsingham' ('St Albans Chronicle', xxxv). Owing to the apparent date of its composition, this chronicle was probably written by either Simon Binham or Richard Savage, whose works have otherwise become lost. 


@@@@@


doc= 2419


Binham, William (fl. c.1374-1396), prior of Wallingford and theologian, probably came from Binham in Norfolk. There was a Benedictine priory there dependent on St Albans Abbey, and Binham became a monk in the latter house. If he was the opponent mentioned in a text by John Wyclif (discussed below), he must by the time of the composition of that tract have been a doctor of theology, presumably of Oxford University. By 1379 he was prior of Wallingford, Berkshire, another dependency of St Albans; he still held that position in 1396 when he was too sick to attend the election of a new abbot of St Albans. Nothing further is known of his career. 
John Bale states that Binham wrote a book 'Contra Vuiclevi propositiones', and for Wyclif records a 'Contra Bynhamum monachum', neither with an incipit. Binham's work does not survive; Wyclif's text is probably that which survives in a single manuscript, probably of French origin, where the adversary's name is given as William Vynham or Vymham; a second determination, there linked to the first, is found in a further three medieval copies, but, though it has been assumed that the opponent is the same, no name is given. An early Hussite catalogue gives Wyclif's opponent in the first the name of William Rynnan. From Wyclif's citations it appears that Binham had argued for the right of the clergy to civil dominion, had defended the exemption of the clergy from aspects of civil law, and had maintained the inalienability of ecclesiastical temporalities. The date of Binham's exchanges with Wyclif was probably between 1374 and the reception in England of Gregory XI's condemnation of the latter in October 1377. 


@@@@@


doc= 2420


Binney, Edward William (1812-1881), geologist and philanthropist, was born on 7 December 1812 at Morton Hall, near Gainsborough, Lincolnshire, the youngest of the seven sons and two daughters of Thomas Binney (1762-1835), landowner and maltster, and his second wife, Elizabeth Cross (died 1843) of Gringley, Nottinghamshire. He attended four schools before being sent to Gainsborough grammar school at the age of seven. He was a good scholar, excelled at sports, and delighted in observing and collecting minerals and animals during long walks in the country. Although inclined to study chemistry which, like natural history, had attracted his attention since childhood, on his brother Mordecai's advice he left school at sixteen and began to study law. 
In 1828 Binney was articled to a solicitor in Chesterfield, Derbyshire, where he continued to collect fossils, particularly from the coal measures. Here he came into contact with miners and began his lifelong appreciation of practical geology. In 1833 Binney moved to London after his refusal to abandon his whig sympathies with reform resulted in a clash with his employer. Often forced to work without remuneration, only with the help of Mordecai did he complete his legal training in London, qualify as a solicitor, and take chambers in Manchester in 1835. 
On arrival Binney joined the Manchester Mechanics' Institution, and quickly made friends with John Leigh, with whom he read his first geological paper at the Literary and Philosophical Society in 1835. In 1838 he was active in founding the Manchester Geological Society, paying particular attention to the museum which he insisted should be free to the public, especially to working men. His numerous geological works were devoted primarily to the study of the coal measures, and he contributed to the controversial debate on the origin of coal, arguing for its marine formation from vegetation growing in shallow seas. He was elected fellow of the London Geological Society in 1853 and, through his work with Joseph Dalton Hooker on coal plants, of the Royal Society in 1856. 
Although Binney's research interests were specific, his wider views on science shaped his political, philanthropic, and business concerns. Like Leigh he worked to improve the sanitary condition of Manchester, contributing to Lyon Playfair's 'Second Report... into the State of Large Towns' (1845). His geologizing in mining areas led to his proposal to Joseph Brotherton MP that women be prohibited from working in pits. Disappointed by the failure of mechanics' institutes to inspire working-class interest in science, when Binney encountered the network of pub meetings held by Lancashire working men interested in natural history he did his utmost to promote this activity. Soon after his 1842 election to the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, learning of the destitution of some artisan mathematicians and botanists, he attempted to establish a public society for 'the relief and encouragement of scientific men in humble life' ('Manchester Guardian', 13 Dec 1843). Believing that conditions imposed by the Revd Richard Parkinson concerning the morality of the recipients scuppered the aims of this proposed society, Binney administered a private subscription fund from 1844, presenting donations at an annual dinner he gave for scientific artisans. In particular, he encouraged the shoemaker Richard Buxton (1786-1865) to publish a Manchester flora in 1849 to which Binney anonymously contributed a geological preface, and defended him vigorously against competition from the botanist Leo Hartley Grindon, with whom Binney had several unpleasant skirmishes. Binney also helped the blacksmith Samuel Gibson, the radical reformer Samuel Bamford, and the electrician William Sturgeon, for whom he campaigned for a $50 government pension. 
Throughout his life Binney argued for the opening of museums on Sundays and stressed the social benefits of the practical pursuit of science by a wide range of participants. He thus opposed Owens College, founded in 1851, not for its educational aims but for the consequent exclusion of practical men and amateurs from science. He sometimes shocked others by the candid expression of his views, gaining a reputation for being a 'storm centre in Manchester scientific circles' as Francis Nicholson recalled in 'Memoirs and Proceedings of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society' (58, 1913, 9). 
Binney's career exemplified his belief in the essential connections between practical knowledge and science. He achieved enormous commercial success in collaboration with James Young and Edward Meldrum in their manufacture of paraffin from bituminous coals at Bathgate, Linlithgowshire, despite fighting several expensive legal challenges over patents. The partnership lasted from 1851 to 1864 and made a vast profit from three companies, as well as establishing the industrial foundation of the paraffin or shale oil industry in Europe, America, and Australia. 
As his wealth accrued, Binney abandoned his legal profession. On 28 August 1856 he married Mary Christiana Jones (died 1882), daughter and coheir of the Revd David Jones; they had six children. In the 1860s, in addition to his home near Manchester, he purchased an estate, Ravenscliff, on the Isle of Man, and increased his investments through mining concerns in Scotland. He suffered a stroke when travelling between Douglas and Liverpool, and died eleven days later, on 19 December 1881, at his home at 11 Spring Bank, Crumpsall, near Manchester. He was buried in the Binney family vault at the abbey church, Worksop, Nottinghamshire, on 23 December. 
Binney disliked clergy who opposed science but he claimed to enjoy a good sermon. He shunned the ostentation of polite society and was considered peculiar for enjoying the company of scientific working men. He devoted himself to institutional science in Manchester, serving as president of the Geological Society in 1857-9 and 1866-7 and of the Literary and Philosophical Society regularly between 1862 and 1881; James Prescott Joule presented a portrait of Binney painted by W. H. Johnson to the latter society. Binney was a large and imposing man, whose remarkable outspokenness was considered 'ungentlemanly & disgusting' by his enemies, but an indicator of honour, affection, and 'sterling nature' by his friends, among whom the closest were Leigh, Joule, and John Harland. As his obituarist in the 'Manchester Examiner and Times' (21 December 1881) remarked, 'he was a strong friend although a good hater'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2421


Binney, Thomas (1798-1874), Congregational minister, was born on 30 April 1798 at Newcastle upon Tyne, presumably the Thomas Benny who was baptized on 3 June 1798 at Wall Knoll Presbyterian Chapel. If so, he was the son of John Benny, who was baptized on 5 September 1759 at Wooler West Presbyterian Chapel in north Northumberland, the son of Edward and Anne Binney. John Benny was an elder in the congregation at Wall Knoll. After attending a local school Thomas Binney spent the years from 1811 to 1818 as an apprentice to a bookseller. Despite working long hours he was able to study Latin and Greek under the tuition of a Presbyterian minister, as well as exercising himself in English composition by writing in imitation of Samuel Johnson and composing poetry in imitation of 'Paradise Lost'. He left the Presbyterian church, became a Congregationalist, and in 1819 entered the Wymondley Academy, Hertfordshire. In 1823 he became minister of the New Meeting, Bedford, but left after twelve months. He received a call from St James's Street Chapel, Newport, Isle of Wight, in August 1824 and was inducted into the pastorate on 29 December 1824. At a church meeting at King's Weigh House, Eastcheap, London, on 14 May 1829 it was resolved to invite him to become minister there at a salary of $600 a year. He accepted and remained there until his retirement. 
In 1832 plans to widen the approach to London Bridge made it necessary to demolish the chapel, and a new one to accommodate 1000 people was built in Fish Street Hill at a cost of $16,000. Binney spoke at the stone-laying ceremony, and when the speech was published he added an appendix in which he included the declaration that the established church 'is an obstacle to the progress of truth and godliness in the land; that it destroys more souls than it saves; and that, therefore, its end is most devoutly to be wished by every lover of God and man' (Kaye, 67). It sparked off an animated controversy and brought instant public attention to its author. In later years he admitted that he began life as a high-Independent, but he was soon to prove himself a moderate dissenter. He certainly objected to the state establishment of religion, but he also pleaded for closer co-operation between dissenters and Anglicans, with joint communion services and exchange of pulpits, in 'The Ultimate Object of the Evangelical Dissenters' (1834), and argued in 'Dissent not Schism' (1834) that disagreement about church government was a secondary matter and nonconformity should not be construed to mean the renunciation of Christianity. Desire for closer fellowship between churches of his own denomination also led him to support the inauguration in 1832 of the Congregational Union of England and Wales, of which he was chairman in 1848. 
King's Weigh House was a church consisting of young city businessmen, members of the middle class, and a few rich people, none perhaps quite as rich as the philanthropist Samuel Morley (1809-1886). People of this kind found Binney's new style of preaching very much to their taste. In dress and demeanour he symbolized the passing of the age of the silver shoe-buckle, the knee-breeches, and the gold-headed cane. He discarded the black preaching gown. His sermons were in the main expository, although he occasionally exploited some topical item of news. They were never more than thirty minutes in his earlier years, but twice that length later. Since his voice was comparatively weak, he adopted a conversational style, eschewing rhetorical flourishes and flights of imagination, preferring to construct a clear, logical argument. He was at his best when demonstrating the relevance of the gospel to everyday life. During his last years, his preaching declined in quality and lost its early intensity. But even that did not diminish his popularity as preacher and lecturer. The founder of the Young Men's Christian Association, Sir George Williams (1821-1905), was a member of the church, and Binney was in regular demand as a lecturer in meetings of the association. His best-known lecture was 'Is it Possible to Make the Best of both Worlds?' (1853). It sold 31,000 copies in its first year and by 1856 was in its tenth edition. He pioneered the introduction of more formal liturgical elements into dissenting worship. He had bewailed the low standard of congregational singing in his introduction to the 'Weigh House Tune Book' (1843) and one of his best sermons was 'The Service of Song in the House of the Lord' (1848). He promoted the interest in liturgy by editing the American C. W. Baird's 'Chapter on Liturgies' (1856) and adding an appendix, 'Are dissenters to have a liturgy?' With these convictions he introduced at his church anthem singing, the chanting of psalms, public confession, and responsive prayers. But surprisingly he consistently opposed the introduction of an organ in his church. Among the numerous hymns that he composed, only 'Eternal light, eternal light' is still in use. 
Binney was not a learned theologian and objected to the use of technical theological jargon. He rejected the idea that Christ's death was the price paid for human sin as well as the concept of a substitutionary atonement. In fact, his thinking exemplifies the gradual disintegration of the traditional Calvinism of Congregationalists. Yet he was described by his contemporaries as an evangelical and was one of the trustees of the 'Evangelical Magazine'. He was not a political activist. Although he had strong private political convictions, he stood apart from the various campaigns that characterized dissenting activities in the Victorian era. Apart from the Congregational Union, the one organization that had his enthusiastic support was the Colonial Missionary Society, which was brought into being on 13 May 1836, and of which he was the main founder. This was inspired by the fact that many of the young men in his church were emigrating to Australia. 
Binney was twice married. His first wife was Isabella Barbara Nixon, who died in 1843. They had four sons who emigrated to Australia and died there. His second wife was Elizabeth Piper, the daughter of Thomas Piper, one of his deacons. She survived him. 
In November 1855 Thomas Toke Lynch (1818-1871) published 'Hymns for Heart and Voice: the Rivulet'. James Grant (1802-1879), the editor of the 'Morning Advertiser', attacked it as a volume containing 'not one particle of vital religion or evangelical piety' (Jones, 250). A furious controversy erupted which all but destroyed the Congregational Union. Binney was appalled and sought to restore peace by suggesting that the union should cease to transact public business and confine itself to spiritual and devotional fellowship. The controversy brought about an attack of the debility that occasionally affected him, and he visited Australia to seek better health. Again he was engaged in controversy when the bishop of Adelaide wrote to him to explain why he could not accede to the request of many prominent Australians, including the governor, to allow him to preach from Anglican pulpits. He also visited Tasmania and addressed its Congregational Union on 'The church of the future'. 
In his latter years, Binney's health deteriorated. In 1865 he was assisted in the ministry by Llewelyn David Bevan (1842-1918) of New College, London, and in June 1869 he resigned. In the following December he was presented with a cheque for $1333 as a token of appreciation for his services. He continued to preach until 1873 and lectured on homiletics at New College. By the end of 1873 he was suffering acutely from ill health. He died at his home, Doric Lodge, in Upper Clapton, on Tuesday 24 February 1874. His funeral was attended by a huge crowd. The service was held at Stamford Hill Congregational Church and the interment was on 2 March at Abney Park. 
Of Binney's eighty-two publications, most were individual sermons and lectures, of which the most significant have been mentioned. Binney was a towering figure in his time and was considered one of the leading representatives of nonconformity, as his honorary doctorates from Aberdeen in 1852 and an American university in 1861 testify, but he can hardly be considered a typical one. 


@@@@@


doc= 2422


Binning, Hugh (1627-1653), philosopher and Church of Scotland minister, was born at Dalvenan, Ayrshire, the son of John Binning, the proprietor of Dalvenan, and Margaret M'Kell, daughter of Matthew M'Kell (or M'Kail), the parish clergyman of Bothwell, Lanarkshire. Margaret M'Kell's brother Hugh M'Kail, a minister in Edinburgh, was the uncle of Hugh M'Kail, a presbyterian minister, who was imprisoned, tortured, and finally hanged at Edinburgh on 22 December 1666 for his participation in the Pentland rising. Binning's father had inherited the considerable landed estate of Dalvenan and Hugh was given a liberal education. At thirteen he entered the University of Glasgow, to study philosophy. His professors there (who included James Dalrymple, later Viscount Stair) were quickly impressed by Binning's extensive knowledge and philosophical acumen and he took his degree of MA 'with much applause' on 27 July 1646 ('Works', ed. Leishman, 2nd edn, xxxvi). He then began to study divinity, 'with a view to serve God in the holy ministry' (Howie, 202). However, when James Dalrymple subsequently resigned his post as regent at Glasgow, Binning was strongly encouraged by the Glasgow presbytery to apply for the chair. As was customary at the time, all the members of the universities in the kingdom who had 'a mind to the profession of philosophy' were invited to 'sist' themselves before the senatus to 'compete for the preferment' (ibid.). Binning and two other candidates were selected for 'trials', in the light of which the college masters favoured Binning. However, the university principal, Dr John Strang, preferred one of the other candidates -- 'a citizen's son' of competent learning and a person of 'more years' than Binning (ibid., 203). But when a member of faculty suggested an extempore public debate between the two candidates -- 'upon any subject [the masters] should be pleased to prescribe' -- Binning's opponent immediately withdrew, he and his supporters being unwilling to face 'such an able antagonist' (ibid.). Thus, in November 1646, aged only eighteen, Binning was elected regent in philosophy at the University of Glasgow. 
Despite his having very little time for preparation, Binning's lectures were by all accounts extremely well received. Famously, he is described as being among the first to try to rescue philosophy in Scotland from the 'barbarous terms and unintelligible jargon of the schoolmen' (Howie, 203). As a preacher he followed Luther's maxim 'they are the best preachers to the people, who teach them in a plain, familiar and perfectly simple way' ('Works', ed. Leishman, 2nd edn, xxx). Moreover, Binning's justification for his pedagogy was not merely pragmatic: 'Ye should remember that the Lord speaks in our terms, and, like nurses with their children, uses our own dialect' ('Works', ed. Leishman, 3rd edn, 74). 
For Binning, philosophy was the servant of theology. Hence it is reasonable to anticipate a parallel pedagogy at work in his philosophical teaching. This places Binning at the forefront of a distinctive tradition at Glasgow subsequently extended in the teaching of Francis Hutcheson and culminating in Adam Smith's lectures on rhetoric and 'belles-lettres'. He held his post with increasing influence for about three years. At the same time he continued to pursue his theological studies, and having obtained a licence as a minister he received a call to the parish of Govan near Glasgow on 25 October 1649. On 8 January following he was ordained at Govan; he resigned his professorship the following year. In 1650 he married Mary or Maria Simpson (died 1694) (sometimes erroneously given as Barbara), daughter of the Revd James Simpson, the parish minister of Airth in Stirlingshire (who has been wrongly described as an Irish minister). They had one son. Binning continued his philosophical and theological studies, but also devoted himself to his sermons and pastoral duties, with considerable success. As a preacher he regularly attracted vast crowds. When (in 1651) the church found itself split into resolutioners (who supported the king) and protesters (who opposed him), Binning sided with the latter. He then wrote and published his 'Treatise on Christian Love' -- a moving and compelling plea to Christians to overcome their differences and unite in the love of God and fellowship with one another. The 'Treatise' was highly regarded by his contemporaries and continues to be so. Binning is said to have played a prominent part in the open debate before Cromwell at Glasgow in April 1651 between the independents and presbyterians. His intellect, eloquence, and extensive knowledge of theology made him a formidable opponent in debate. A contemporary, James Durham, professor of divinity at Glasgow, famously observed 'that there was no speaking after Mr Binning' (Howie, 206). On this occasion his success in debate is said to have so embarrassed Cromwell's party of independents that Cromwell himself asked the name 'of that learned and bold young man', and when told it was Binning, Cromwell replied, 'He hath bound well indeed, but' (putting his hand on his sword) 'this will loose all again' (ibid., 205). 
That a debate before Cromwell took place at Glasgow is certain, but the precise nature of that debate cannot be conclusively established. While there is no record of the specific content of Binning's arguments on this occasion, his stance on matters political and theological was invariably pacifying and conciliatory. Indeed the use of theological and philosophical arguments to transcend the disputes and divisions of his time is definitive of Binning's work and is well exemplified both in the 'Treatise' and the later 'Heart-Humiliation'. Despite being plagued by ill health throughout his short life he was a prolific author. In addition to the texts cited above he composed several other works, including collections of lectures, sermons, and essays on the theological controversies definitive of his time. His writing is informed by his knowledge of philosophy and theology but also shows a genuine concern to communicate effectively with a non-academic audience. Though none of his works were published in his lifetime the majority were published posthumously. His 'Collected Works' exists in three editions in English and his writings were also translated into Dutch by James Coleman -- a minister at Sluys in Flanders -- and subsequently published at Amsterdam in at least four editions. 
Binning died of consumption at Govan in September 1653 and was buried in his churchyard there. His son, John, inherited the estate of Dalvenan on his grandfather's death. His part in the insurrection at Bothwell Bridge in 1679 resulted in the forfeiture of the estate and, ultimately, insolvency. In 1690 parliament rescinded forfeitures and fines for the period 1665-88, but Dalvenan was not restored to John Binning. In 1704, having obtained a patent, John Binning successfully applied to the general assembly of the Church of Scotland for approval of a single-volume edition of his father's writings. 


@@@@@


doc= 2423


Binns, Sir Henry (1837-1899), politician in Natal, son of Henry Binns (1810-1880) ['see under 'Binns family] of Sunderland and Croydon, and Elizabeth Bowron (died 1855), was born at Sunderland, co. Durham, on 27 June 1837, and educated at Ackworth and York. In 1858 Binns emigrated, arriving on 14 September in Natal, in its early days as a separate colony. He took up agriculture, and bought a property called Umhlanga (turned into a sugar estate in 1860) at Riet River, near Phoenix, Victoria county. In 1861 he married his cousin Clara, daughter of John Acutt of Riverton; they had one son. Subsequently Binns, a relative, Robert Acutt, and a friend amalgamated their estates. In 1868 Binns floated the Umhlanga Valley Sugar Estate Company in England and became its general manager; he retired in 1892. 
Binns entered public life in 1879, selected by Sir Garnet (later Viscount) Wolseley as a nominee member of the legislative council under the crown colony system. After the first elections, in 1883, he represented Victoria county until his death. In 1888 he was a delegate from Natal to the conference at Bloemfontein on a South African customs union. The inaugural union was only partial and Natal did not join. In 1890 Binns was a delegate for the extension of the Natal Government Railway to Harrismith in the Orange Free State. In December 1893 he was sent to India to negotiate Indian labour for the sugar estates, and the return of previously indentured labourers to India. 
Originally opposed to self-government for Natal, by 1893 Binns supported Sir John Robinson's policy introducing the reform; but he declined to join the first ministry under the new constitution, and so became a sort of leader of the opposition, whose duty it was, as far as possible, to support the ministry. In 1897, after the retirement of Sir John Robinson and Henry Escombe, Binns was appointed prime minister. On 5 October 1897 he became colonial secretary and minister of agriculture, but soon resigned the latter portfolio. He resolved the discontent of the Natal civil service and concluded an extradition treaty with the South African Republic. He marked the queen's jubilee by offering a monthly supply of coal from Natal for the use of the British navy. His first session of parliament began on 24 November 1897 and dealt mainly with the incorporation of Zululand and then with Binns's particular interest -- the entrance of Natal into the South African customs union, on which a conference was held in May 1898 at Cape Town. Binns was the chief delegate from Natal, a convention was settled and in compliance, on 20 May, he introduced a resolution in favour of the union into the Natal parliament. The policy was bitterly opposed, but Binns carried the enabling bill, read a third time on 30 June, through the assembly. However, his health failed on 6 July and he was unable to enter the house for the remainder of the session. He went to the Berea, returning to Pietermaritzburg in December 1898. In January 1899 he attended the postal conference at Cape Town and on 11 May was present at the opening of the Natal parliament, but he soon became ill again, and died at Pietermaritzburg on 6 June 1899. His body lay in state at the vestibule of the house of assembly and was buried on 7 June at the military cemetery, Pietermaritzburg. He was survived by his wife. 
Binns's political life was marked by his courage and persistence. He was a pungent and succinct speaker, a good critic of finance, and a sound businessman, and was instrumental in developing the sugar industry in Natal; he was also a director of the Natal Bank and of the Durban Telephone and Tramways companies. He was made KCMG in 1898. 


@@@@@


doc= 2424


Binns, John (1772-1860), radical and journalist, was born in Dublin on 22 December 1772, the second son of John Binns (died 1774), a well-to-do ironmonger active in local politics, and Mary Pemberton. In 1774 his father was lost at sea returning from a trip to England. John was educated at a common school and then at a classical academy, but when he was about ten he and his elder brother, Benjamin, left the house of their mother's second husband, George McEntegart, in Drogheda and walked to Dublin, where they were taken in by their grandfather. In 1786 John was apprenticed to a soap-boiler. 
In April 1794 the Binns brothers moved to London. For a while they lived off funds from their father's estate, then Benjamin set up in business as a plumber with John as his assistant. John made the acquaintance of Francis Place, and towards the end of 1794 he joined the London Corresponding Society (LCS). He rapidly became an influential member of the society, chairing the general committee, and on 26 October 1795 he chaired the open-air public meeting held at Copenhagen House to protest against the two new 'treason and sedition bills'. His radical activities led to involvement in debating clubs and, probably some time in 1796, he entered into a partnership with two notable radical speakers, John Gale Jones and William Wright, to manage debating rooms of their own in the Strand. Early in 1796, in an attempt to revitalize the radical movement, the LCS resolved to send delegates into the provinces to encourage similar, but struggling, societies. Binns travelled to Portsmouth to assist the local radicals, but was recalled to London when the LCS heard of a plot to press him into the navy. Shortly afterwards, in company with Gale Jones, he journeyed to Birmingham. Here, while addressing separate meetings, both men were arrested and charged with uttering seditious words. Released on bail, it was over a year before they were brought to trial. Gale Jones was found guilty at the Warwick spring assize in 1797, but never sentenced; Binns was acquitted at the following summer assize. 
In the period between his arrest and trial Binns returned briefly to Dublin. Back in London, following his acquittal, both he and his brother became involved in the shadowy organization of United Englishmen or United Britons, which linked extremist English radicals and Irish revolutionaries. Binns's own 'Recollections' is rather coy about these links and the intentions of the radicals, but information surviving in government papers, while fragmentary, suggests that John and his brother were much more deeply implicated in conspiracy and the attempts of the United Irishmen to enlist French military assistance than his own account implies. The Binns brothers were closely involved with both Arthur O'Connor, editor of 'The Press', the semi-official paper of the United Irishmen, and Father James Coigley, a Catholic priest who acted as an emissary from the United Irishmen to both France and the United Englishmen. Early in 1798 John travelled to Kent seeking to arrange passage to France for O'Connor and Coigley. On 28 February he was arrested in Margate, together with O'Connor, Coigley, and their two servants. Charged with high treason, the five were imprisoned in the Tower of London before being tried at the assizes held in Maidstone in May. Leading members of the parliamentary opposition testified on O'Connor's behalf and the government was reluctant to reveal the origins of its secret information on the United Irishmen. As a result all were acquitted, except Coigley, who had been arrested with incriminating correspondence in his pocket, and who was executed on 7 June. Although acquitted, Binns decided to lie low for a while with friends in Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire; during this period he used his mother's maiden name of Pemberton. Towards the end of 1798 he returned to London and went to work in a blacksmith's shop at St Pancras. When the government launched another attack on the popular radicals in March 1799, Binns was arrested under the suspension of the 'Habeas Corpus Act'. From May 1799 until February 1801 he was incarcerated, without charge, in Gloucester gaol. 
In the summer of 1801 Binns left England for the United States, never to return. He settled initially in Northumberland, Pennsylvania, where he began a new career as a political journalist, first with the 'Northumberland Gazette' and then with his own successful newspaper, the 'Republican Argus'. He opened a large printing house and book shop, and in 1806 he married another British emigrant, Mary Ann Bagster ('c'.1783-1852?). The marriage ceremony was conducted by Joseph Priestley, who was also resident in Northumberland. Early in 1807 Binns moved to Philadelphia, where he established another successful newspaper, the 'Democratic Press', on which he continued to work until 1829. He became an alderman of Philadelphia in 1822, and, in spite of a decline in his fortunes and the popularity of his paper, he continued to hold this position until 1844. He published his 'Recollections of the life of John Binns: twenty-nine years in Europe and fifty-three in the United States' in Philadelphia in 1854. He died there, in relative obscurity, on 16 June 1860. 


@@@@@


doc= 2425


Binyon, Edward (1828-1876), landscape painter, was born in Manchester. He painted in oils and watercolours and exhibited nine paintings, mainly of Capri and Naples, at the Royal Academy between 1857 and 1876, including 'The Arch of Titus' (exh. 1859), 'Coral Boat at Dawn, Bay of Naples' (exh. 1875), and 'Hidden Fires: Vesuvius from Capodimonte' (exh. 1876). He also exhibited at the Society of British Artists and the Dudley Gallery in London. His 'The Bay of Mentone' was frequently reproduced. Binyon died on 18 July 1876 at via Piazza 5, Capri, where he had lived for many years. He was survived by his wife, Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 2426


Biondi, Sir Giovanni Francesco (1572-1644), diplomat and romance writer, was born at Lesina (now Hvar), Croatia. His family, whose surname was Biundovic until the 1600s, was noble but of modest means. Giovanni took a law degree at Padua and, after a period in Venice, departed for Paris as secretary to the Venetian ambassador, Pietro Piruli. Here (in 1606-8) he adhered to the reformed doctrines and assembled a good number of protestant books, which the Italian historian Paolo Sarpi (with whom Biondi shared significant acquaintances such as Giacomo Castelvetro and Isaac Casaubon) was later to consult. Biondi returned to Venice and got in touch with Sir Henry Wotton, then ambassador to the Republic. Through Wotton, Biondi managed to be invited to England in 1609, where he illustrated to James I his plan 'to introduce Religion into Italy' ('CSP dom.', '1629-31', 347; Benzoni, 22). Biondi was then sent back with money to purchase and spread 'heretic' publications. His ties with England, however, were deepening: Biondi corresponded with Robert Cecil, earl of Salisbury (1609-12), and when he was sent by the Venetians on a mission to the Dauphine and Provence in 1610 he dispatched relations to England. 
Biondi went to Savoy with Wotton in March 1612, but when Prince Henry's death 'ended all hope of a Savoyan match' the Dalmatian found himself back in London without a precise occupation (cf. TNA: PRO, SP 99/10/239). Biondi had been corresponding with Dudley Carleton, ambassador in Venice after Wotton, since September 1611, and in 1613 Carleton convinced Biondi to remain in England. Wotton provided employment, taking Biondi to The Hague in 1614 and later recommending him to Sir Ralph Winwood. Probably through the latter's influence (cf. 'CSP Venice', '1615-17', 380) Biondi was appointed the king's representative at the general Calvinist assembly at Grenoble in 1615, where he worked to secure the Huguenots to the side of the prince of Conde. From about this date, Biondi seems to have been a double agent: before leaving London he had shown all 'his instructions in the original' to the Venetian ambassador Antonio Foscarini ('CSP Venice', '1613-15', 542). As late as 1633 he was described by Vincenzo Gussoni, then ambassador of the Republic, as 'an individual who continues in the confidential relations at this Court which he has always had with all my predecessors' ('CSP Venice', '1632-6', 148; also 'CSP Venice', '1615-17', 359-60). 
Whatever his ties with the Venetians, Biondi (a lifelong member of the Venetian Accademia degli Incogniti) received an English pension of 400 crowns a year from 1615, and was an envoy to northern Italy, where James hoped to create an anti-Spanish league. Being sent again to Piedmont in December 1616, he later became the duke of Savoy's sole agent in England (1617-20). Commenting on his situation, Biondi declared that he was serving 'two Masters, against the Gospel's precepts' (Benzoni, 27), although no particular recognition ever came from Savoy (as none came from Venice). He was, however, knighted by James I in 1622 and made a gentleman of the privy chamber shortly after. About 1622 he married Mary Mayerne, sister of Sir Theodore, the king's physician. 
In 1624 Biondi published the first of his baroque novels, 'L'Eromena', to be followed by two others, 'La Donzella Desterrada' (1627; the preface mentions an unsuccessful attempt to translate Sir Philip Sidney's 'Arcadia') and 'Il Coralbo' (1632). These books, which inaugurated a new phase of chivalric romance, were translated into English (1632, 1635, and 1655), French, and German. In 1626 Biondi obtained a lifelong yearly concession of $200 for himself and his wife. In 1628 he was granted exemption from all taxation. His situation in the 1630s, however, does not appear flourishing, his pension not being paid regularly. To Charles I he dedicated his historical compilation on the War of the Roses, 'L'istoria delle guerre civili d'Inghilterra' (3 vols., 1637-44), which was almost immediately translated into English by Henry Cary, earl of Monmouth (1641-4). In 1640 Biondi left England for Aubonne, near Lausanne, Switzerland, where he died in 1644 and was buried in the local church. 


@@@@@


doc= 2427


Birch, Charles Bell (1832-1893), sculptor, was born in Brixton, Surrey, on 28 September 1832, the son of the author Jonathan Birch (1783-1847) and his wife, Esther, 'nee' Brooke. At the age of twelve he became a pupil at the School of Design at Somerset House, London, where he remained for two years before accompanying his father to Berlin, where he studied at the Kurfurstliche Akademie der Kunste and as an apprentice in the studios of the renowned German sculptors Ludwig Wilhelm Wichmann and Christian Daniel Rauch. While in Germany he produced his first important work: a bust of the then English ambassador, the eleventh earl of Westmorland, which was executed in marble for Friedrich Wilhelm IV, the king of Prussia. 
On his return to Britain in 1852, Birch entered the Royal Academy Schools, where he gained two medals. In 1859 he entered the studio of John Henry Foley, whose principal assistant he was for the next ten years; while there he modelled the Arab horse in Foley's statue of General Outram, and after Foley's death in 1874 he succeeded to his studio. Birch's German education and his sympathies in art, along with his father's friendship with the Prussian royal family, initially commended him to the notice of the English court, resulting in crown prince Friedrich Wilhelm of Prussia sitting to him for a portrait bust at Buckingham Palace shortly before his marriage to the princess royal in 1858. 
Despite inspiring the admiration of the royal family, Birch's artistic progress was relatively slow until 1864, when the Art Union of London awarded him a premium of $600 for his group 'A Wood Nymph', his first really popular work, which was later exhibited in Vienna, Philadelphia, and Paris. In 1880 he acknowledged his gratitude for this premium, giving the Art Union twenty original designs illustrating Byron's poem 'Lara' which were published in 1880. 
Birch was, however, an increasingly successful sculptor in his later life, receiving many civic, political, aristocratic, and imperial commissions. He was also a frequent exhibitor at the Royal Academy in Burlington House, where his realistic and vigorous military groups were much admired, particularly 'The Last Call' (1879) and 'Lieutenant Walter Hamilton' (1880); the latter work was sent to Dublin and its popularity led to Birch being elected an ARA in April 1880. In that year, however, he also produced the work by which he is most likely to be remembered: the unfortunate bronze griffin on the Temple Bar memorial (designed by Sir Horace Jones) at the beginning of Fleet Street, London. 
Birch's portraiture was much more popular, and it included many imperial heroes; distinguished members of parliament, including Lord Beaconsfield, W. E. Gladstone, and Lord John Russell; various members of the British aristocracy; leading lights of the theatre world; and, on two occasions, Queen Victoria herself, the first statue destined for Aberdeen, the second for Udaipur in India. His work was particularly popular in Liverpool and in Sydney, Australia, where many of his statues were displayed. Alongside his successful work in marble and bronze portraiture he also worked in various other genres and with many other materials. He was commissioned to design and make a variety of silver statuettes for race cups, including an equestrian statuette of William III, ordered by the king of the Netherlands as a prize for the Orange Cup at Goodwood. Birch was also a creditable medallion portraitist, exhibited watercolours at the Royal Academy, and contributed as a draughtsman on stone and wood to the 'Illustrated London News' and other Victorian periodicals. In 1858 'CVIII Bible Pictures' was published from his designs, the first of several biblical works he illustrated for the publisher Bagster. In the early 1870s he joined in the 'New Sculptural' vogue for works in terracotta and bronze. 
Birch was considered by the majority of his contemporaries to possess good, if not outstanding, chiselling skills, and to be one of the most reliable portraitists of his generation, who was faithful to likeness and accurate in anatomy -- the prestige of whose work contributed much to the increasing reputation of the British school. His eighty-two Royal Academy sculptures ensured that his artistic reputation survived well beyond his death (at King's College Hospital, London, on 16 October 1893), though it has diminished considerably since then. 


@@@@@


doc= 2428


Birch, James (d. 1800?), sectary and prophet, was born in Wales, but nothing more is known about his early life. As a young man he moved to London, where he worked as a watch-motion maker, living in Brewer's Yard, Golden Lane, Old Street, and later in Little Moorfields. He had converted to the Muggletonians before 1 July 1759, when his name first appears in their records; his wife is mentioned on 22 July 1759. In December 1771 he wrote a verse account of his conversion and in the same year his name appears on the subscription list of 'The Saint's Triumph, and the Devil's Downfall', written by the Norwich Muggletonian John Brown. 
About 1772 Birch was responsible for a serious secession in the Muggletonian ranks. Believing that the Muggletonians had lost their sense of urgency and immediacy he sought to revive the original doctrines of John Reeve who, together with his cousin Lodowicke Muggleton, had founded the sect in 1652. To Birch the issue of 'immediate notice', which Muggleton had rejected, was fundamental, for he shared Reeve's belief that God was an interventionist who took immediate notice of human actions, and thus upheld the efficacy of prayer. In endorsing the doctrine of immediate notice Birch attracted a certain following and led a party within the sect, which had experienced previous eruptions of Reevite heresy. Only when in 1778 Birch claimed to be the new prophet of the movement after God had spoken directly to him did separation become inevitable. Birch and his 'high priest', William Matthews of Bristol, were denounced as false prophets, and their followers, the Birchites, were known as the anti-church. Ten of his own followers, led by Martha Collier, withdrew from the Birchites but, still believing in immediate notice, were rejected by the orthodox Muggletonians. 
At the height of his influence Birch led a group of between fifty and sixty followers, about thirty of whom were based in London. Most of the others lived in south Wales, particularly in Pembrokeshire. Numbers dwindled in the early nineteenth century and the Birchites had practically disappeared by mid-century; two followers were still alive in 1871. The last occurrence of Birch's name in the Muggletonian archives is in 1795, but about 1800 he published 'two strange and incoherent books', 'The book of cherubical reason, with its law and nature, or, Of the law and priesthood of religion' and 'The Book upon the Gospel and Regeneration', which, according to Alexander Gordon, 'read like the productions of a madman' (Gordon, 'Ancient and Modern Muggletonians', 52). Birch is believed to have died in October 1800, probably in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 2429


Birch, John (1615-1691), parliamentarian army officer and politician, was born on 7 September 1615, the second, but first surviving, son and heir of Samuel Birch (died in or after 1648) of Ardwick Manor, near Manchester, and Mary (died 1659/60), daughter of Ralph Smith of Doblane House, Lancashire. The Birches of Ardwick were probably a cadet branch of the Birches of Birch Hall, one of the 'Genevas of Lancashire' (Heath-Agnew, ix). John Birch's father became a presbyterian elder and county committeeman after the civil war, and the eminent Lancashire nonconformist divine Henry Newcome preached at his mother's funeral on 16 January 1660. His brother Samuel Birch (1620/21-1680) was a parliamentarian captain and later a vicar at Bampton, Oxfordshire, until being ejected in 1662. Another brother, Thomas, corresponded with Richard Baxter, held Hampton Bishop rectory near Hereford (1654-83), and became a fellow of Manchester collegiate church. 
Birch's activities before the civil war are obscure, although he would later admit to a lack of formal education. In 1633 he moved to Bristol, where he developed an extensive trade as a wine merchant. There he met his first wife, Alice (died 1675), daughter of Thomas Deane of Bristol and widow of Bristol grocer Thomas Selfe, and they had five children -- Mary, John, Samuel, Elizabeth, and Sarah. By the summer of 1642 Birch commanded a Bristol company of puritan volunteers who in March 1643 foiled a royalist conspiracy. In July a royalist assault on the city succeeded and he lost his fortune. He sold his remaining merchandise, found a commission in the regular parliamentarian army under Sir Arthur Hesilrige, and brazenly demanded that the committee of safety repay his losses. His first actions as regimental commander in December were successful at Alton and Arundel Castle and at the latter he was seriously injured and given up for dead. But he returned to lead his regiment at Alresford, the siege of Winchester, and Cropredy Bridge, and his actions were among the few bright spots in the earl of Essex's western campaign in mid-1644. Hesilrige took over his regiment and converted them to dragoons; Birch, now colonel, was given command of a regiment from Kent and was back in action by September. His regiment helped the New Model Army capture Bridgwater and Bristol, and parliament appointed him governor of Bath and then Bristol. 
Although Birch had considered resigning from the army in November 1645, the capture of Hereford on 18 December following capped his military career. Malcontents from the Hereford royalist garrison revealed to him that the walled city, which had resisted the Scots' siege, could be infiltrated. After a subterfuge of marching his troops away from the area Birch made a hard march back in the evening (several soldiers died in the snow) and hid his men. He then disguised several soldiers as a repair crew who were admitted, opened the gates, and allowed Birch's troops to pour into the city. Some 120 royalist lords, knights, and gentlemen were captured. Parliament was ecstatic and Birch was appointed governor of Hereford Castle. He earned the enmity of the dean, Herbert Croft, by opening the Hereford vicars' choral cloisters to those made homeless by his men's attack, the memory of which long rankled in the county. 
Birch continued to assist the mopping up campaign in the southern Welsh marches by besieging Goodrich and Raglan castles in June and August 1646, and he increasingly focused on Herefordshire politics. After attempting to replace Edward Harley as junior knight for the shire he retreated to Leominster to be returned to parliament in September 1646 (and was appointed high steward there in 1648). By late 1646 local feeling ran against Birch's troops, and, when he tried to quarter his cavalry on former royalists and neutrals, Edward Harley and others complained. As a result Birch planned to send his regiment to Ireland. In the tumultuous summer of 1647 his troops mutinied and briefly seized the colonel and his brother Major Samuel Birch. Soon afterwards he divested his remaining military ties and purchased the Homme near Leominster, where his family lived until 1661. 
Birch was briefly active as a presbyterian member in the Long Parliament. He was sent to Edinburgh in June 1648 to protest against the Scots' engagement with Charles I, and he let it be known that he would resist 'an evil-grounded peace' (Underdown, 89). He was purged, nevertheless, by Colonel Pride in December 1648, and was indeed among the forty-three arrested MPs and one of the last to be released in January. 
Edmund Ludlow later complained that Birch 'used to neglect no opportunity of providing for himself' (Underdown, 240), and certainly, after parliament's finance committee agreed to pay him $1050 with interest for money lent to Lord Essex in 1642, he bought church lands in his adopted shire, particularly the bishop's palace at Whitborne. But his outspokenness during the 1650s was not based on self-interest. He refused the engagement and he and his brother attended upon Charles II at Worcester in 1651 (although he left before the battle began). Later he baited the Cavalier Parliament by noting that '[w]hen I waited on the King at 'Worcester', I saw very few there besides myself' (Grey, 6.366). During the interregnum he baited local radicals and as a result was imprisoned, by his own count, twenty-one times. A letter from the radical governor of Hereford to Oliver Cromwell in 1655, after Penruddock's rising, reveals Birch relishing his role as gadfly: 'Col. Birch... in the middle of the Assizes... gave out before the judges, that the present insurrections..., did not consist of cavaliers, but a company of silly Quakers.... He also told me... that the great matter was our own jealousies, and fears. Considering this, and what we know of his carriage when the Scots were in Worcester..., I thought it my duty... to secure him, which I have done, and as his sword was taking from him, (he refusing to deliver it), said, though my sword is short now, it may be long enough within a while, (the sword hanging by his side, being a little short sword), and very angrily asked me, whether I had orders to secure him. I answered, if I have not, you will question me. He replied, yes, that I will. ('Diary of the Rev. Henry Newcome', 205n.)' James Berry, major-general of Herefordshire and Worcestershire, who secured Birch's release, noted that 'the man is popular in these parts, and he loves to be so. He is taken for a great wit, and guilty of some honesty..., but he professeth desire of peace, and settlement' (ibid.). 
Returned to parliament for Leominster in 1656 Birch was among those denied the right to take their seats. He also supported Herefordshire presbyterians in their unsuccessful election bids against more radical individuals. One memoir claims that after Cromwell's death he 'harangued' the spectators at a local horse race on 'the distractions of the state' and the need for a restoration (Bodl. Oxf., MS top. Cheshire.e.7, fol. 38). Yet the government needed his organizational skill and employed him as a commissioner of excise in 1657. He was again returned for Leominster in Richard Cromwell's parliament in January 1659. Although initially not allowed to sit he went on to become one of the most active members. He spoke forcefully for settling Richard's title and for a settlement under a single person and parliament, and against a republic and the 'Instrument of government'. His enemies claimed with little evidence both that he supported Booth's rising and that he stayed in touch with his former and anti-monarchical soldiers in London long after they were disbanded in 1660. 
Readmitted to the Long Parliament with his fellow secluded members in February 1660 Birch was appointed to the new council of state. Alongside two other individuals he was authorized by Monck to take charge of the Hereford garrison, to slight the castle and city walls, and to take the arms to Ludlow. However, local royalists resented Birch and during April, when he was returned for Leominster to the Convention (despite Edward Massey deploying his interest in the borough against him), rumours circulated that the garrison 'had not nowe beene demolished but for Coll. Birch..., from whom noe good can be expected' (BL, Add. MS 70007, fols. 76-7). But the government valued him more than they feared him, as witnessed by his appointment as a Herefordshire militia officer in May. Thereafter he briefly oversaw both the Admiralty and the disbandment of the army, and it was not the last time he bothered Samuel Pepys with 'scrupulous inquiries' into navy accounts (Ferris, 1.654). Moreover, in February 1661 he became auditor of the excise for life with a salary of $500 p.a. and worth perhaps double that. 
Birch had inserted himself uneasily into the rather insular Herefordshire squirearchy. He had spent nearly $2500 on church lands in the county, and in 1660 Richard Baxter interpreted his desire for Baxter to accept the offer of the bishopric of Hereford as a means of insuring his purchases, trusting that such a moderate figure was less inclined to demand their return. By 1670 the eventual incumbent, Bishop Croft, calculated that he had paid $2000 to 'the greedy harpy' Birch (Heath-Agnew, 117) 'to cleer ye B[isho]prick. of all incumbrances' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 147, fol. 79), and the two did not agree terms until 12 April 1672. However, his interest in Leominster had all but evaporated by the Restoration, and in 1661 he purchased Garnstone estate, just outside Weobley, and cultivated an interest in that tiny borough. At the level of local politics he was listed on the Herefordshire 'Libri Pacis' from 1660, but did not attend quarter sessions before 1666, and was to be most active from 1675 to 1680. On the national level he retreated to a safe government seat for Penryn borough in the 1661 elections. 
In the Cavalier Parliament, Birch advanced several forward-looking if unsuccessful schemes, ranging from a plan to rebuild London after the fire to bills to force landlords to sow flax and hemp to employ the poor. He also oversaw attempts to implement the act for River Wye navigation after it was passed in 1662 until well into the 1670s. However, his greatest contribution was on the subject of religion. During debate on the 'Conventicle Act' in 1663 he acted as teller for the rejected proviso on behalf of those who received the sacrament at least once every three years. He conformed, at least outwardly, to the Church of England, although he occasionally met the presbyterian Newcome, and gave one ejected minister $5 each year. Birch also supported religious comprehension. When he was called on to introduce a loosely worded bill in 1667 he prevaricated, but in early 1668 he did indeed introduce a more carefully drafted version for including moderate nonconformists within the established church. He repeatedly defended dissenters as the trading part of the nation and sought comprehension rather than toleration of separate sects and Catholics. But the Commons responded by introducing the second 'Conventicle Act' instead, and, despite his last-ditch fight against it, it passed the house. He repeatedly antagonized the Commons by his 'shameful' attack on the 'Act of Uniformity' and his comment that he 'knows not what churches are for, if they are not to be preached in' (Heath-Agnew, 140, 151). Perhaps in response to such puritan sentiments the Lords slighted him by referring to 'John Birch, Esq.' rather than his cherished army rank (ibid., 177), and he also seems to have carried on a low-key war with local Herefordshire churchmen. In 1676 rumours spread to London that he had asked his parish priest to marry him to his common-law wife of the past fifteen years, although his lawful wife still lived. In fact, Alice had died on 3 September 1675 and he did then marry Winifred (died 1717), daughter of Matthew Norris of Weobley. 
During the second half of the 1670s Birch increasingly warned about the French threat abroad and the popish threat at home. In 1674 he spoke against the Third Dutch War and in 1677 he demanded an anti-French alliance. As late as May 1679 he supposedly advised the imprisoned earl of Danby to give the Commons 'a deduction of the affairs of state from the time the Triple Alliance was broke' in 1668 ('Buckinghamshire MSS', 409). Even while he criticized court policy he worked hard building the crown's revenue; Andrew Marvell labelled him 'Black Birch' for his work on the hated excise (Heath-Agnew, 131), and anti-court pamphlets labelled him a pensioner. The Treasury commissioners were also so reliant on him to examine various accounts that Danby could not afford to dismiss him despite his anti-court sentiments. 
Birch was well primed to believe in a popish plot when the scare broke in the autumn of 1678. In early 1674 he had reminded the Commons that a Catholic priest seized in Herefordshire in 1671 had been freed, presumably, by powerful friends. He also warned against the division of 'Religion into any other rivulets than Papist and Protestant' (Grey, 2.228). On 15 April 1678 he reported to the Commons upon the mood of Herefordshire where 'they are in fear of Popery and worse' (ibid., 5.273-4). Upon discovery of the Popish Plot parliament ordered Birch to search the cellars and he complained when prayers contained 'not one word in them of the Papists, nor the Plot named' (ibid., 6.170). Yet he spoke against motions to detect Catholics because he claimed that such tests 'may turn against us another time' (ibid., 6.87-8). In April 1679 the old trooper, now returned for Weobley, feared that '[i]f the Plot had taken effect, the Army must have fallen to the next person upon the Throne' (ibid., 7.68). 
Historians have labelled Birch an exclusionist whig, but he followed a tortuous route towards supporting the 'Exclusion Bill', often wavering and toying with expedients. Although, in May 1679, Birch spoke for exclusion and urged withholding supply until the king assented, he also spoke against those attacking Lord Halifax for opposing exclusion in the Lords. By 1680, although he was heartened by the king's willingness to search for expedients, he continued to fear 'the power and strength of the Duke's party' ('An Exact Collection', 113). Finally, in the third Exclusion Parliament he at first urged a day be devoted to considering expedients and spoke in favour of 'limitations' (Heath-Agnew, 189), but two days later noted that 'where 10 were of the mind for this [exclusion] Bill a twelve-month ago, there are an 100 now that will bleed for it' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 4.1330-31). 
Birch, in his rationale for agreeing to the extra-parliamentary and extra-constitutional association, significantly shifted from attacking popery to attacking the high Anglican defence of absolute monarchy. He believed that the clergy's 'Laudean principles' had made them defend 'the King's absolute authority' in 1641 and again in 1680 (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 4.1240-41). 'Popery never can nor will grow but by absolute Government' (Grey, 8.34), he exclaimed in November 1680; and he found such a link in the southern marches in the power and crypto-Catholic clientele of the marquess of Worcester. In December 1680 and January 1681 Birch joined a chorus of local MPs who denounced the evil influence of Worcester. He drove home the point about papists in masquerade: 'Queen 'Mary' came in by Protestants' (ibid., 8.194-5). After the Oxford parliament he met the earl of Shaftesbury when the latter sought the Herefordshire members' commitment to arms. But although he organized a cabal in the county he failed to appear and backed away from commitment to radical action ('CSP dom.', '1682', 290-92). 
However, Birch's opponents at Westminster and in Herefordshire were not quick to forget his criticisms of the regime. In 1680 he was removed from the commission of peace and libels circulated against him. In early 1683 a local informant considered him to be among 'other ill-affected persons' ('CSP dom.', 'Jan-June 1683', 93-4) and he eventually lost his Weobley seat in 1685. By then Birch had retreated to the role of country squire, improving his estate and repairing Weobley church. 
In 1688 the ageing colonel roused himself to action. Although James II, in February 1687, had considered making Birch a deputy lieutenant, Birch firmly supported William of Orange. He slipped out of London and contacted Robert Harley and both joined William at Salisbury, where Birch helped convince the prince to descend upon London without first securing Oxford and presented him with a $40 subscription from the Herefordshire gentry. 
Re-elected for Weobley to the convention of 1689, Birch was amazingly active in parliament during the last two years of his life. His speeches often referred to events from the 1640s, 1650s, and 1660s -- in effect, framing his life. He prefaced his opposition to fasting on 30 January 1689 with a reference to the fight against tyranny and popery during the past forty years. He compared the Restoration Convention to that of 1689 in order to argue that drastic actions, such as excluding some members, were sometimes necessary in 'great revolutions' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 5.131). In March, during a debate on whether to insist that the monarch uphold the church as by law established, he reminded parliament of how the Scots had rebelled 'when abp. Laud would not have a hair bated of the Discipline of the Church; and what followed upon it? That brought on the war in England' (ibid., 5.203). And in June he claimed to be one of the few surviving MPs who had been in parliament when the Popish Plot 'was so clearly proved, that all England was satisfied' (ibid., 5.294-5). In December he compared the Jacobite rising in Ireland with the Irish rising in 1641. 
By April 1690 Birch admitted that he was 'an ancient man' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', col. 609, 28 April 1690), and he disappears from parliamentary debates. He returned to Garnstone, which had roughly doubled in size since he had purchased it. His eldest son predeceased him and he used his Lancashire manors to benefit his son's daughters. He himself died at Garnstone on 10 May 1691 and he was buried at Weobley church. Yet even in death the old parliamentarian trooper stirred up controversy. He had arranged for a monument to himself to be constructed in Weobley church in full military gear which not only trumpeted his parliamentarian military service but also was built so that its railings extended into the raised altarway. In 1694 Bishop Gilbert Ironside went personally to Weobley to deface the monument. The monument and inscription remain visible today (although the reinscription altered his birth date to 1626), and so do the holes where the railings were ripped out. Birch's youngest daughter, Sarah, inherited Garnstone on the condition that she marry the second son, John, of his brother Thomas. This John Birch, a successful barrister, also inherited Birch's Weobley seat, which he held almost continuously from 1701 until his death in 1735. 
Historians have long been drawn to the colourful character of Birch. His contemporaries painted him as 'immoral' (Herbert Aubrey, in Ferris, 1.660), vile (Massey), or opportunistic (Ludlow and Baxter), although Harley recalled him as his 'ancient friend and companion in arms for religion and liberty' (BL, Add. MS 70234). Bishop Burnet gave a balanced if critical judgement: 'He was the roughest and boldest speaker in the House..., [who] spoke always with much life and heat: but judgment was not his talent' (Ferris, 1.660). The next generation forgot the great Commons man, but in the Victorian era Thomas Babington Macaulay lauded 'Honest Birch' (Heath-Agnew, xi), Thomas Heywood produced a somewhat unreliable encomium of him in his edition of Newcome's diary, and in 1864 John Webb edited John Roe's military memoir of Colonel Birch. 


@@@@@


doc= 2430


Birch, John (1745x9-1815), surgeon, was the second child and only son of the three children of Thomas Birch, merchant. The family was clearly wealthy as in February 1763 Birch was apprenticed to the surgeon Thomas Smith for the substantial fee of $400. He was admitted to the Surgeons' Company in 1770 and set up practice in London, first in Essex Street, later in Spring Gardens. Birch held a number of prestigious posts: he purchased a commission as surgeon to the Horse Grenadier Guards in 1770, from which he retired on 25 April 1779; from 1784 he served as surgeon at St Thomas's Hospital; he later became surgeon-extraordinary to the prince regent. Birch was conservative in his medical opinions, and at St Thomas's he opposed the new emphasis on anatomy and dissection in its medical teaching, championed by Henry Cline jun. Astley Cooper, another advocate of the new form of training, described Birch as 'a sensual man; clever, but a bad surgeon. He had neglected anatomy, and was therefore afraid of all operations which required a knowledge of it' (Parsons, 3.37-8). Birch certainly resigned his post as lithotomist at the hospital in 1812, but this was probably due to advancing years rather than lack of dexterity. 
Birch was an avid supporter of the medical use of electricity, which he believed in many cases offered an alternative to surgery. This form of therapy enjoyed a considerable vogue in the late eighteenth century following the discovery of the electrical nature of the nerve impulse, although it never became a fully accepted part of the therapeutic armamentarium. Treatment involved transmitting electric shocks from a Leyden jar to patients seated in an insulated chair. Single shocks were applied locally to the affected part through a wooden or metal 'director', or, alternatively, multiple shocks, making up an 'electrical fluid', were drawn through the body. The idea was to stimulate weak nerves, muscles, and vessels in the body, encouraging the circulation and the flow of secretions. Birch's four publications on the topic offered no new insights but simply described cases from his private practice and his clinic at St Thomas's. He claimed to have successfully treated a wide variety of acute and chronic disorders -- weak and stiff joints, localized paralysis, fevers, skin diseases, impotence, melancholy, kidney and bladder complaints, and particularly amenorrhoea. 
Birch also revealed his conservative views in opposing the substitution of vaccination for the older practice of inoculation -- deliberate infection with smallpox. He was the most prestigious of the handful of practitioners who stood against Edward Jenner's discovery and offered some of the more moderate and reasoned arguments in a heated debate which lasted throughout the 1800s. In his 'Letter Occasioned by the many Failures of the Cow-Pox' (1805) and 'Serious Reasons for Objecting to the Practice of Vaccination' (1806) Birch argued that inoculation offered complete security, while the growing number of reported cases of smallpox after vaccination proved that the procedure was not, as Jenner and his supporters claimed, a certain preventative. Birch ridiculed the pro-vaccinators' attempts to explain away these failures as a result of vaccination with spurious cowpox. Birch also argued that the new practice was dangerous: the operation provoked acute and fatal inflammation or chronic skin complaints. The latter, Birch claimed, were unique to vaccinated children and not, as Jenner's supporters countered, pre-existing cases of scrofula. Birch was one of the few writers to point to the most serious flaw in Jenner's writings -- his failure to explain the relationship between cowpox and smallpox, and thus the mechanism by which vaccination could induce immunity. 
Birch died on 3 February 1815 at his home in New Street, Spring Gardens, London. He was buried the next day alongside members of his family in the church of St Margaret Pattens, Rood Lane, Eastcheap, where a memorial tablet was placed extolling his professional virtues and enthusiasms. 


@@@@@


doc= 2431


Birch, Jonathan (1783-1847), translator, was born in Holborn, London, on 4 July 1783. When young he wanted to become a sculptor, but in October 1798 he was apprenticed to an uncle in the City. In 1803 he entered the house of Johann Argelander, a wealthy timber merchant at Memel, East Prussia; the site of the house has been marked since 1993 by a memorial plaque. He remained there until Argelander's death in 1812, much of his time being employed in travelling in Russia, Finland, Sweden, and Denmark. In 1807 the three eldest sons of Friedrich Wilhelm III of Prussia took refuge with Argelander for eighteen months. They became enduring friends of both Birch and Friedrich Wilhelm Argelander, son of the merchant, who became a distinguished astronomer. 
In 1812 Birch returned to England and turned to literary pursuits. In 1823 he married Esther Brooke, of Lancaster. They had five children, of whom a boy and a girl survived. His son, Charles Bell Birch (1832-1893), became a sculptor. His father's friendship with Friedrich Wilhelm IV secured him several commissions. 
After many minor essays in literature Birch published 'Fifty-one Original Fables, with Morals and Ethical Index', illustrated by Robert Cruickshank (1833). The preface is signed 'Job Crithannah', an anagram of the author's name. Crown Prince Friedrich Wilhelm accepted a copy, and renewed the friendship formed at Memel. Birch then produced 'Divine Emblems' (1838), again illustrated by Robert Cruickshank, under the pseudonym Johann Albricht, A.M. (another anagram of Jonathan Birch). He sent Crown Prince Friedrich Wilhelm a copy and received in return a gold medal, of which only thirty were struck and which the prince gave to his particular friends. 
Birch then undertook a complete verse translation of Goethe's 'Faust'. The first English translation had appeared in 1823, but Birch was the first to attempt part one and part of part two. Part one (1839) was dedicated to the crown prince, who, on coming to the throne in 1840 as Friedrich Wilhelm IV, sent him the 'great gold medal of homage'. Others, however, were less favourably impressed. The 'Dublin Review' (1840) declared that 'As a translation it is bad, as a poetic translation it is worse, but as a translation of 'Faust' it is worst of all.' In 1841 Birch was elected 'foreign honorary member of the Literary Society of Berlin', the only other Englishman thus honoured being Thomas Carlyle. His translation of part of the second part of 'Faust' was published in 1843 and was dedicated to Friedrich Wilhelm of Prussia. Together the two parts of the translation have met near universal condemnation, and are now chiefly remembered for a reissue of 1886 (now very rare: a copy exists in the Beinecke Library, Yale), each page of which carried the boldly printed slogan 'Beecham's Pills'. Birch kept alive his attachment to the Prussian royal house with his two translations of Rulemann Friedrich Eylert's works on the domestic and religious life of Friedrich Wilhelm III (1844 and 1845). In 1846 Friedrich Wilhelm IV offered him a choice of apartments in three of his palaces. He chose Bellevue, near Berlin, mainly for the sake of his son's artistic studies. At the end of 1846 Birch settled in Prussia and completed his last work, a verse translation after Carl Lachmann's text of the 'Nibelungen Lied' (Berlin, 1848). While his work was still in the press he was taken ill, and he died at Bellevue on 8 September 1847. 


@@@@@


doc= 2432


Birch, Peter (1651/2-1710), Church of England clergyman, was born at Birch, Lancashire, the eighth child of Thomas Birch (bap. 1608, d. 1678), of Birch Hall in the parish of Manchester, a colonel in the parliamentarian army and MP for Liverpool, and his wife, Alice (died 1697), daughter of Thomas Brooke of Norton, Cheshire, and his third wife, Ellen Gerrard. Thomas Birch was a loyal servant of the republic in the 1650s, and to the end was a committed puritan who ensured that Birch chapel was a haven for nonconformist ministers in the 1660s and 1670s. 
Raised as a presbyterian by his father, Peter Birch was still committed to nonconformity when he began his education at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1667. Some time afterwards he left Cambridge and in 1670 moved with his twin brother, Andrew Birch, to the city of Oxford, where they lived with John Foulks, an apothecary, and studied in the Bodleian Library with a private tutor, William Assheton of Brasenose College. At Oxford, Birch declared his conformity to the established church by publicly taking the sacrament of holy communion. Dr John Fell, then dean of Christ Church, Oxford, facilitated his admission to Christ Church and the passage of his degree, urging a convocation of the university, 'That when so many run away from the church, you would think fit to encourage one who addresseth himself as free and thorough convert' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.660). Matriculating at twenty-one, on 12 May 1673, Birch was able to apply his terms of study at Cambridge to his present course of study, making it possible for him to graduate BA on 23 March 1674 and proceed MA three months later (on 23 June), soon after his move to Christ Church. He would later proceed BD (on 4 February 1684) and DD (7 July 1688). 
After graduating BA Birch remained in Oxford, serving first as a chaplain of Christ Church and preaching occasionally in the Oxford area. To Anthony Wood in December 1675 Birch was an example of how Fell had preferred 'Fanaticks and rogues... sooner than try sons of the Church of England'. Five years on, however, he recorded with satisfaction how Birch, 'a zealous man for the Church of England', 'swinged the phanaticques and presbyterians away' in the sermon that he delivered at the university church on 30 January 1681 on the fast day appointed to commemorate the execution of Charles I ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 2.332; 2.514). In June 1685, as chaplain to the militia regiment, he delivered an exhortatory sermon as news came through to Oxford of Monmouth's rebellion. He also served as curate of St Thomas's parish before being appointed rector of St Ebbe's Church (1685-6) and lecturer at Carfax. While at St Ebbe's, on 19 November 1686, Birch married his first wife, Mary (died 1688), the daughter of the poet Edmund Waller, at St Peter-le-Poer, London. Some time after this Birch was made chaplain to James, duke of Ormond. 
In 1689 Birch was appointed as chaplain to the House of Commons and as a prebendary of Westminster Abbey, being installed on 17 October of that year. He appears to have served as subdeacon and archdeacon of Westminster. Following the elevation of Thomas Tenison to the see of Lincoln, Bishop Compton of London named Birch to the rectory of St James's, Westminster, on 11 July 1692. However, Queen Mary almost immediately claimed the crown's right to appointment to the living and chose William Wake instead. Defeated in the court of king's bench in November 1694 Birch appealed to the House of Lords, who likewise decided against him in January 1695 by forty votes to thirty; the teller on behalf of Birch was the high-church earl of Rochester. Two months later, on 19 March 1695, the dean and chapter of Westminster named him to the living of St Bride's, Fleet Street, London, which he held until his death. 
Birch's published works consist of several sermons, some of which were preached before the House of Commons. The most prominent of these was preached on 30 January 1694, the sermon for the fast day appointed to commemorate the execution of Charles I. The sermon applied David's lament over the fall of God's anointed, Saul, to the death of Charles ('2 Samuel' 1: 21). The sermon, which affirmed the divine right of kings, seemed to bring into question the legitimacy of William III and Mary II. The sermon caused considerable controversy and elicited an anonymously published response entitled 'A Birchen Rod for Dr Birch', which accused Birch of impugning the honour and title of the reigning monarchs by maligning the 'defensive arms by which they made a conquest of England's affections' ('Birchen Rod', 24). The tory sentiments of the sermon and its apparent offence to the monarchs helped spark off the campaign by some whigs to abolish 30 January as a fast day, and may have contributed to the loss of St James's. 
Birch, having lost his first wife in 1688, married Martha ('c'.1653-1703), daughter of Samuel Vyner and widow of a wealthy London merchant, Francis Millington, on 24 November 1697. She died on 28 May 1703, after which the widower married Sybil Wyrley (died 1708), the daughter and coheir of Humphrey Wyrley of Handsworth, Staffordshire. She died on 12 August 1708, but this last marriage produced two children, Humphrey Wyrley Birch (1706-1747) and John Wyrley Birch (1707-1775). 
Birch's prospects for promotion improved after the accession of Queen Anne, and in 1702 Narcissus Luttrell reported the rumour that Birch was going to be appointed dean of Westminster. The following year he noted that Birch 'stands fair for the bishoprick of St Asaph, vacant by the death of Dr. Jones' (Luttrell, 5.298). Neither of these possibilities came to fruition and Birch died on 2 July 1710 and was buried in Westminster Abbey two days later. At the time of his death his two sons were left in the guardianship of his sister Deborah Birch, who was named executor in his will, dated 27 June 1710. He bequeathed his estate to his elder son, Humphrey, providing from that estate an annual allowance of $200 for his younger son, John. 


@@@@@


doc= 2433


Birch, Sir Richard James Holwell (1803-1875), army officer in the East India Company, came of a well-known Anglo-Indian family, and was the son of Richard Comyns Birch, Bengal civil service, and his wife, Frances Jane, daughter of William Rider, sheriff of Calcutta; he was a grandson of John Zephaniah Holwell, Bengal civil service (author of the famous account of his sufferings in the Black Hole of Calcutta). Birch was born in Calcutta on 26 January 1803 and educated at Cheam School, Surrey (under the Revd James Wilding). He received a commission as an ensign in the 26th Bengal native infantry in January 1821, and studied at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1823-4 before resuming his army career. His numerous relations in India ensured his rapid promotion and almost continuous service on the staff. He married at Delhi on 2 November 1831 Elizabeth Cuninghame, daughter of Sir Jeremiah Bryant (1783-1845). 
After acting as deputy judge-advocate-general at Meerut, and as assistant secretary in the military department at Calcutta, Birch was appointed judge-advocate-general to the forces in Bengal in 1841. In this capacity he accompanied the army in the First Anglo-Sikh War (1845-6), was mentioned in dispatches, and was promoted lieutenant-colonel. In the Second Anglo-Sikh War (1849) he was appointed to the temporary command of a brigade after the battle of Chilianwala. He distinguished himself at the battle of Gujrat and was made a CB in 1849; he continued to serve as brigadier-general in Sir Colin Campbell's campaign in the Kohat Pass in 1850. He then reverted to his appointment at headquarters, and in 1852 received the important post of secretary to the Indian government in the military department. He was promoted colonel in 1854, major-general in May 1858, and still held the secretaryship when the Indian mutiny broke out in 1857. His services at this time were most valuable, though he never left Calcutta, for his thorough knowledge of the duties of his office and his long official experience enabled him to give valuable advice to Lord Canning, the governor-general, and to Sir Colin Campbell when he arrived to become commander-in-chief. These services were recognized by a KCB in 1860, and in 1861 he left India. In the following year Birch was promoted lieutenant-general and retired on full pay. In 1868 he married Mary, daughter of Captain George P. Burden. On 25 February 1875 he died at Venice, aged seventy-two, his wife surviving him. 


@@@@@


doc= 2434


Birch, Samuel (1757-1841), politician, playwright, and pastrycook, was born in London on 8 November 1757. He was the son of Lucas Birch, who carried on the business of a pastrycook and confectioner at 15 Cornhill, an area of the City of London long associated with food production, the street name deriving from a corn market that once stood on the site. The business was established in the reign of George I by a Mr Horton, the immediate predecessor of Lucas Birch. Samuel Birch was educated at a private school kept by Mr Crawford at Newington Butts, and on leaving school was apprenticed to his father. Early in life, in 1778, he married the daughter of Dr John Fordyce, with whom he had a family of thirteen children. 
Samuel Birch was elected one of the common council on 21 December 1781, and in 1789 became deputy of the Cornhill ward. In May 1807 he was elected alderman of the Candlewick ward in the place of Alderman Hankey. When young he devoted much of his leisure time to study and the improvement of his literary taste; he was a frequent attendant of a debating society which met in one of the large rooms formerly belonging to the King's Arms tavern, Cornhill. In politics he was a strenuous supporter of Pitt's administration, though he vigorously opposed the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts'. He became a frequent speaker at the common council meetings. When he first proposed the formation of volunteer regiments at the outbreak of the French Revolution, not a single common councilman supported him. Subsequently, when the measure was adopted, he became the lieutenant-colonel commandant of the 1st regiment of Loyal London volunteers. The speech which he delivered in the Guildhall on 5 March 1805 against the Roman Catholic petition was published in that year and was severely criticized in an article entitled 'Deputy Birch and others on the Catholic claims', which appeared in the 'Edinburgh Review' (10.124-36). It was, however, highly commended by the king, and the freedom of the city of Dublin was twice voted him at the midsummer quarter assembly of the corporation of that city on 19 July 1805 and 18 July 1806, for his advocacy of the protestant ascendancy in Ireland. In 1807 he published the related 'Speech in the Common Council on the Admission of Papists to Hold Commissions in the Army'. 
In 1811 Birch was appointed one of the sheriffs of London, and on 9 November 1814 he entered on his duties as lord mayor. Tory though he was, he opposed the 'Corn Bill' of 1815, and presided at a meeting of the livery in common hall on 23 February 1815, when he made a vigorous attack on the intended prohibition of the free importation of foreign corn. The course he took on this occasion was commemorated by a medal struck in his honour, on the obverse side of which is the bust of the lord mayor, and on the reverse a representation of a wheatsheaf, with the legend 'Free Importation, Peace and Plenty'. During his mayoralty the marble statue of George III by Chantrey, the inscription on which was written by Birch, was placed in the council chamber of Guildhall. Almost his last act as lord mayor was to lay the foundation-stone of the London Institution in Finsbury Circus (then called the Amphitheatre, Moorfields) on 4 November 1815. In addition to his political and literary careers, Birch ran the family catering business aided by his nephew George Ring. The firm provided the catering for the lavish Waterloo Feast held during Birch's mayoralty. In 1836 Birch sold the business to the firm of Ring and Brymer who continued the catering connection as specialist caterers to Trusthouse Forte. 
Birch was a man of considerable literary attainments, and he wrote a number of poems and musical dramas, of which the 'Adopted Child' was by far the most successful. A musical farce containing in Act IV a song that became an immediate popular favourite, the play was published in 1795, the year of its first performance. It was also performed in 1796, 1797, and 1799. Birch's plays were frequently produced at Drury Lane, Covent Garden, and Haymarket theatres in the 1790s. Among his other published dramas was 'The Smugglers' (1796), a melodrama first produced at Drury Lane on 13 April 1796, and thereafter at Drury Lane in 1797, 1798, and 1799. The play was Birch's most popular melodrama and a box-office success. Birch also wrote the following dramatic pieces, which were never published: 'The Mariners' (1793), a musical farce first produced at the opera house in the Haymarket on 10 May 1793; 'The Packet Boat, or, A Peep behind the Veil' (1794), a farce first produced at Covent Garden on 13 May 1794; 'Fast Asleep' (1797), a musical farce based on James Powell's 'The Narcotic' and produced at Drury Lane on 28 October 1795; and 'Albert and Adelaide, or, The Victim of Constancy' (1798), a melodrama first produced at Covent Garden on 11 December 1798. 'Albert and Adelaide' was unfavourably reviewed as a species of pantomime and dumb show in the 'Monthly Mirror' of December 1798. C. Beeches Hogan, editor of 'The London Stage', has disputed the claim made in the playbill that the play was 'Taken from the German' and credits the source to 'The Captive of Spilburg'. In his dramatic works Birch collaborated closely with the composer Thomas Attwood who provided much of the music for his plays. 
In addition to his literary career as a playwright, Birch was also a sometime actor and writer of sermons. His varied activity was the subject of a clever skit, in which a French visitor to London meeting with 'Birch the pastrycook' in such different capacities as Guildhall-orator, militia-colonel, poet, and so on returned to France, believing him to be the emperor of London. 
Birch retired from the court of aldermen in December 1839, and died at his house, 107 Guilford Street, London, on 10 December 1841, aged eighty-four. 


@@@@@


doc= 2435


Birch, Samuel (1813-1885), Egyptologist, was born on 2 or 3 November 1813 in London, eldest son of the Revd Samuel Birch (1780?-1848), rector of St Mary Woolnoth, later a prebendary of St Paul's Cathedral and vicar of Little Marlow, Buckinghamshire, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of William Browning, of Woburn Place, London. His grandfather, Samuel Birch (1757-1841), was a dramatist and pastry-cook, and had been lord mayor of London in 1814-15. His father had a distinguished academic record, having been for many years professor of geometry at Gresham College, London. Surprisingly, therefore, young Samuel, after an early education at preparatory schools in Greenwich and Blackheath, followed by five years at Merchant Taylors' School (1826-31), did not proceed to university. 
At school Birch began his studies of Chinese, and the promise of a position in China may have led him to forgo university. He did not, however, go to China, but briefly held an appointment in the Public Record Office before becoming an assistant in the department of antiquities in the British Museum in January 1836. His initial task, to catalogue the Chinese coins in the museum, led his grandfather to comment: 'Good God, Sammy! has the family come to that?' ('DNB'). On 22 July 1839 he married Charlotte Francis, daughter of Samuel Frederick Gray, a botanist and pharmacologist. 
Chinese studies remained important throughout Birch's life, but Egyptology captured his main attention. He is best remembered as one of the first British Egyptologists. He began his Egyptological studies before he entered the British Museum, when Egyptology was in its infancy. Of British scholars, only John Gardner Wilkinson had as yet shown a proper comprehension of the ancient Egyptian language. His great work, 'The Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians', was published the year after Birch entered the museum, and it was appropriate that Birch should produce a revised edition in 1878, adding much new material. 
When Birch joined the department of antiquities it covered the whole of the ancient world, coins, the Orient, and medieval material. Birch ranged widely in all fields, as required, and his early non-Egyptological publications included: 'Catalogue of the Greek and Etruscan Vases' (1851), with C. T. Newton; 'History of Ancient Pottery and Porcelain' (1858); 'Inscriptions in the Cuneiform Character' (1851), revised by S. Birch and Sir H. C. Rawlinson; and 'Inscriptions in the Himyaritic Character' (1863). A large number of shorter articles on coins and classical and British antiquities appeared in the appropriate learned journals. 
Edward Hawkins, the benign keeper of antiquities, generously nurtured young talent, and he especially encouraged Birch's numismatic interests. In Egyptological matters Hawkins's support was crucial. From the outset of his museum career Birch's interest lay primarily in the Egyptian language, in the translation of and commentary on texts, and especially in the reading of Egyptian texts on papyri, many of which were written in the little-understood hieratic and demotic scripts. When Birch entered the museum the holdings of papyri were preserved in the department of manuscripts. Birch sought them out and in 1838 initiated their publication. Between 1841 and 1844 three large fascicles of 'Select Papyri in the Hieratic Character' appeared, with introductory remarks by Birch. This pioneering work was the first of many issued under Birch's editorship. Meanwhile, undoubtedly at his instigation, all the ancient Egyptian papyri were transferred to the department of antiquities, where they could more easily be studied by Birch, who alone had the competence to do so. He did not neglect the main collections of Egyptian antiquities in the museum, and in 1842-3 he co-operated with Joseph Bonomi and Francis Arundale in producing 'The Gallery of Antiquities Selected from the British Museum'. 
In 1844 Birch became an assistant keeper in the department of antiquities. When Hawkins retired in 1860 the department was subdivided, and in 1861 Birch became keeper of oriental, British, and medieval antiquities. In 1866, after further departmental division, he became keeper of oriental antiquities, and from then until his death he was able to concentrate his scholarly efforts on Egyptian antiquities. He continued the publication of important texts in 'Inscriptions in the Hieratic and Demotic Character' (1868) and 'Facsimile of an Egyptian Hieratic Papyrus of the Reign of Ramesses III' (1876), the latter concerning the longest known ancient papyrus. He contributed translations of many important historical texts to the series 'Records of the Past' (1874-81). In 1883 he produced an influential commentary on the important Northumberland collection, 'Catalogue of the Collections of Egyptian Antiquities at Alnwick Castle'. His articles in learned journals continued unabated, and he made important contributions to many works of others, not least the English translation of C. C. J. Bunsen's 'Egypt's Place in Universal History'. He revised the 1867 edition, including in the last volume his own translation of the 'Book of the dead', an Egyptian grammar, and an Egyptian dictionary. In these he provided the first useful working tools for English-speaking students of ancient Egypt. 
The founding in 1870 of the Society of Biblical Archaeology was largely Birch's achievement, and for the rest of his life he supported it by public lectures and by contributing regularly to its 'Transactions' and 'Proceedings'. He did not welcome the establishment of the Egypt Exploration Fund in 1882, objecting to what he called sentimental archaeology directed at a gullible public. Undoubtedly he feared the competition to his society offered by a popularly based organization mounting glamorous excavations in Egypt. His fears, if they were such, were in the end justified, and his society was wound up after the First World War. The Egypt Exploration Society (as the fund had become) continued to flourish throughout the twentieth century. 
All sources agree that Birch, in addition to being a scholar of the first importance, was a public servant devoted to his duties, and a man of extraordinary kindliness and generosity. He was free from malice and worldly ambition. He was a desk scholar who was content to work on the material in the museum, or sent to him for study. He never went to Egypt. Sir Ernest Budge, himself a young recruit into Birch's department, wrote with great affection in 'By Nile and Tigris' (1920): 'His greyish-green eyes were deep-set, and nothing escaped them, and when he was moved to mirth they laughed before the muscles of his mouth relaxed.... His gait was that of a man whose thoughts travel faster than his feet, and the length and quickness of his strides indicated with more than ordinary clearness the working of his mind at the moment. (1.20)' The epigraph on Birch's gravestone in Highgate cemetery encapsulates his modesty and fame: 'Samuel Birch D.C.L., LL.D, F.S.A., Etc., Etc., The Egyptologist'. He was much honoured for his services to scholarship. He was a corresponding member of the Archaeological Institute of Rome (1839), the Berlin Academy (1851), the Academy of Herculaneum (1852), and the Academie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres (1861). He was an honorary LLD of the universities of Aberdeen (1862) and Cambridge (1875), DCL of Oxford University (1876), and honorary fellow of the Queen's College, Oxford (1877). Among numerous foreign awards, he received from the emperor of Germany the cross second class of the order of the Crown (1874), and from the emperor of Brazil the order of the Knight of the Rose (1875). 
Samuel Birch died at his home, 64 Caversham Road, Camden Town, London, on 27 December 1885, and was buried at Highgate new (east) cemetery. He was survived by his second wife, Sarah (1839-1908), several daughters, and three sons, one of whom, Walter de Gray Birch, was an assistant in the department of manuscripts at the British Museum. His first wife, Charlotte, predeceased him by many years. 


@@@@@


doc= 2436


Birch, Thomas (1705-1766), compiler of histories and biographer, was born on 23 November 1705 at Clerkenwell, the eighth of ten children of Joseph Birch ('c'.1667-1730) and his wife, Rebecca (died 1746). In 1700 his parents had moved from Birmingham to London, where Joseph was a coffee mill maker in St George's Court, Clerkenwell. Both Birch's parents were Quakers and he was educated at the school of fellow Friend John Owen in Hemel Hempstead from 1717, and, from 1719, at that of Josiah Welby at Turnbull Street, Clerkenwell. Having sought permission not to enter the family business Birch worked from 1722 as an usher in various schools including Owen's, where he entered a three-year agreement in 1723. 
From about 1726 Birch appeared bent upon a career in the established church, abandoning his Quaker roots. He married Hannah, daughter of the Revd Cox, curate of St Botolph without Bishopsgate, in 1728. A son, Joseph, was born on 17 July 1729 but mother and son both died shortly thereafter and were buried in the cemetery of St James's, Clerkenwell. This occasioned Birch's first public literary production, a poem 'On the Death of a Beloved Wife', which appeared in the 'Whitehall Evening Post' of 15 November 1729. 
At St James's Birch was baptized on 15 December 1730, ordained deacon on 17 January 1731 and priest on 21 December 1731. In 1732 he was presented to the vicarage of Ulting in Essex through the patronage of Sir Philip Yorke, later Lord Chancellor Hardwicke. He also acted as tutor to one of the Yorke sons. (Birch's subsequent career was to depend crucially on Hardwicke family patronage.) 
In 1732 Birch was appointed to the 'General Dictionary, Historical and Critical', an expanded version of the earlier English translation of Pierre Bayle's 'Dictionnaire historique et critique'. Although he was one of three chief editors Birch undertook the vast majority of the new biographical entries in the ten-volume edition issued from 1734 to 1741. This work was not only a major achievement but also provided numerous contacts in the learned and scientific worlds from whom Birch gained help in his historical work. His election to the Royal Society on 20 February 1735 and to the Society of Antiquaries on 11 December 1735 owed much to these contacts. Separate historical works also grew out of the 'General Dictionary'. First came 'The Works of Mr John Greaves' (1737) followed by the complete collection of the works of John Milton (1738) and the massive seven-volume compilation of the state papers of John Thurloe (1742). 
Under Hardwicke family patronage Birch gained a number of church appointments: the living of Llandewi Felffre in Pembrokeshire in 1743, the rectory of St Michael Woodstrett at Epsom in 1744, and the living of St Margaret Pattens and St Gabriel Fenchurch in 1746. Birch also took up 'in absentia' the living of Debden, near Newport, Essex, in February 1761. He was elected president of Sion College in 1759. Birch neither performed onerous clerical duties nor pursued progressive preferment. As an absentee pluralist his literary employments were regarded as a fulfilment of his duties. 
From 1735 Birch was the eyes and ears of first Lord Chancellor Hardwicke and then his eldest son, Philip Yorke (later Lord Royston and second earl of Hardwicke), reporting on court proceedings and debates in the houses of parliament for his patrons as well as attending to numerous miscellaneous duties. In 1741 Philip Yorke commissioned Birch to write him a weekly letter providing news of the London scene during Philip's absences. These letters, written to within a few days of Birch's death, give a sustained account of the literary, scientific, political, and military events of the time. Birch also worked on Philip Yorke's project 'The Athenian Letters' (privately printed, 1741-3). His own historical work continued, including 'The Works of the Honourable Robert Boyle' (1744), on which much of the work was done by the Revd Henry Miles, 'Memoirs of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth' (1754), 'Lives and Characters of Illustrious Persons' (1747-52), and 'The History of the Royal Society of London' (1756-7). 
Birch served as secretary of the Royal Society from 25 January 1752 until November 1765. As part of the Hardwicke circle which exercised considerable influence in the society, Birch was placed at the hub of the London learned world. A major figure in the Society of Antiquaries, of which he had been director (1737-47), he was also an elected trustee on the newly established British Museum. Much scientific business of the day passed across his desk for the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' but Birch himself contributed only five short communications. Their topics, including a Roman inscription and an account of earth tremors, constitute a typical contribution from a scholar keenly interested in, but not primarily devoted to, natural philosophical inquiry. 
When not transcribing, collating, or compiling, Birch enjoyed convivial company. He had pursued the writer Elizabeth Carter in 1738-9 without success and so continued the life of the widower. His gift for conversation and fund of information were widely appreciated. Samuel Johnson, according to Boswell, said: 'Tom Birch is as brisk as a bee in conversation; but no sooner does he take a pen in his hand, than it becomes a torpedo to him, and benumbs all his faculties' (Hill, 1.159). There were kinder estimates of Birch as a writer, but he was undoubtedly a compiler rather than a historian. His strength was the hard graft of collection and compilation, not interpretation or stylish exposition. 
Birch died on 19 January 1766 after falling from his horse on the Hampstead Road. His friend Dr William Watson, who was called to him, diagnosed a stroke of apoplexy. Birch was buried in the chancel of St Margaret Pattens, Rood Lane, London, on 23 January 1766. He left his library and manuscripts to the British Museum and stipulated that the income from the residue of his estate be used to supplement the stipends of three under-librarians at the museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 2437


Birch, Thomas Ledlie (1754-1828), minister of the Presbyterian General Synod of Ulster, was born at Birch Grove, Gilford, co. Down, the youngest child of John Birch, linen merchant and farmer, and Jane Ledlie (1716-1791). He graduated MA from Glasgow University in 1772. He was licensed by Dromore presbytery in 1775 and ordained in Saintfield by Belfast presbytery on 21 May 1776. He married a relative, Isabella Ledlie (1760-1836), in December 1783. He was one of the most active ministers in the General Synod of Ulster with a congregation of over 900 families. Many Ulster Presbyterians had ties of kinship with the Americans. During the American War of Independence Birch considered that Great Britain had levied an unnatural war upon colonists, many of whom were his brethren. In 1784 he assisted in the preparation of an address to George Washington by the Yankee Club of Stewartstown, co. Tyrone, expressing satisfaction that the colonists had overthrown the yoke of slavery. Washington sent a favourable reply. 
A supporter of the Irish Volunteers, Birch served as chaplain to the local corps, the Saintfield light infantry. When the volunteers were disbanded, and the more radical Society of United Irishmen was founded in Belfast in 1791, he approved its aims of full parliamentary reform and Catholic emancipation, and formed the first United Irish society in co. Down in January 1792. Soon afterwards he reported to Wolfe Tone that he 'had no doubt but that the cause was spreading most rapidly' ('Autobiography of Theobald Wolfe Tone', 1.116). On Christmas day 1792 his congregation approved resolutions similar to those earlier passed by the Saintfield United Irishmen. A regular attender at synod, in 1793 Birch gave the synodical address 'The Obligation upon Christians and Especially Ministers to be Exemplary in their Lives', which was published in 1794. This was 'a commonplace address, remarkable for nothing, except for fixing on 1848 as the time for the fall of the Papacy' (Witherow, 285). The Society of United Irishmen had been a perfectly legal movement at its inception, but by 1796 it had come under suspicion from the Irish authorities as a subversive military force planning to rebel against the state. The government resorted to draconian military tactics, including flogging of suspects and burning of dwellings. Many United Irish supporters left the movement but Birch remained true to the cause. 
In 1796 some dissident members of his congregation, assisted by the Seceders, a rival Presbyterian denomination, established a second Presbyterian congregation in Saintfield. Incensed at their actions Birch penned a scathing pamphlet, 'Physicians Languishing under Disease', in which he denounced all Seceders as cheats, hypocrites, defamers, revilers, and disturbers of the peace of the church. In 1797 eleven members of his congregation were charged with attacking the dwelling of a local yeoman. While attending their trial Birch himself was arrested and charged with high treason. Released on bail to appear before the next assizes, he was acquitted after a lengthy trial. In April 1798 he was again before the courts, this time charged with having offered a bribe to a witness not to prosecute a United Irishman. At trial the person concerned withdrew his evidence and Birch was again discharged. 
The first eruption of the United Irish rising in co. Down was at Saintfield on 9 June. Birch was present in the insurgent camp at Creevy Rocks, a hill on the outskirts of the village, on 10 June, which has become known as Pike Sunday. He has been credited with preaching to the rebels, using as his text 'Ezekiel' 9: 1, 'draw near, even every man with his destroying weapon in his hand'. He was arrested three days after the defeat of the rebels at Ballynahinch, and charged with rebellion and treason. At the court martial in Lisburn his enemies confidently expected him to be condemned and executed. However his brother Dr George Birch was captain of the Newtownards yeomen and had fought on the king's side at Saintfield. Dr Birch exerted his influence with the military authorities and it was arranged that if his suspect brother agreed to exile his life would be spared. Birch assented. However he was not released immediately. He was taken to Belfast and put on board a prison ship on Belfast Lough, in company with a number of other arrested United Irishmen. He was released on 16 August 1798 and he sailed from Belfast to New York, arriving in September. Soon afterwards he published a firsthand account of the conditions prevailing in Ireland, and in the Saintfield district in particular, before and during the days of the rebellion, entitled 'Letter from an Irish Emigrant'. 
In 1799 Birch moved with his family to Philadelphia, having received a call from former members of Saintfield congregation. He failed to persuade the Ohio presbytery to admit him as a member. After further attempts in 1800 and 1801 he appealed to the general assembly, but in vain. Combative as ever, in 1804 he successfully sued the clerk of the Ohio presbytery for slander, a verdict overturned on appeal. He was eventually received by the Baltimore presbytery. He purchased a farm in the vicinity of Washington in 1804, and died at Freeport, Armstrong county, on 12 April 1828. His widow died in Cadiz, Ohio, on 25 November 1836. 


@@@@@


doc= 2438


Birch, William Russell (1755-1834), enamel painter and printmaker, was born in Warwickshire on 9 April 1755, the son of Thomas Birch, a noted surgeon, and his wife, Mary Russell. After an unsuccessful start at a Latin school he was taken in by a wealthy cousin, William Russell of Birmingham, who soon apprenticed him to the London jeweller and goldsmith Thomas Jeffreys. Six years later he left to study the painstaking art of enamel painting with Henry Spicer. 
Specializing in miniature copies after many of the leading artists of the day, including Sir Joshua Reynolds, Birch made his London debut at the Society of Artists exhibition of 1775 with two enamels of classical subjects -- one a 'Head of Psyche', the other 'Jupiter and Juno'. These were submitted from 'Mr Speaker's 11, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden' (Graves, 'Soc. Artists'). By 1787 Birch had moved to the more genteel area of Hampstead Heath. Despite having won Society of Artists' awards in both 1784 and 1785 for technical improvements in enamel painting, he evidently preferred to exhibit at the Royal Academy: between 1781 and 1794 he sent forty-one pieces to its annual exhibitions. 
About the same time Birch turned his attention to reproductive printmaking, where he was particularly successful in adapting his skills for translating larger works to a smaller scale. This can be seen in a series of thirty-six stipple engravings of landscapes which -- despite its very English subject matter -- was given the French title 'Delices de la Grande Bretagne' (1788-90). The picturesque quality of these engravings reveals Birch's own particular love of sketching tours in the countryside. Published by Dilly, Edwards, and Manson, 'Delices de la Grande Bretagne' sold for 3 guineas in boards and at 5 guineas for proof impressions. These detailed and delicate plates were successful enough to win 250 subscribers, including royal and literary figures as well as other artists. 
The turmoil of the French Revolution and the encouragement of some relatives in Maryland induced William Birch and his son Thomas (1779-1851), who later became a noted marine painter, to emigrate to America in 1794. They immediately settled in Philadelphia, where there was a thriving art market: consequently Birch began to send work to various local exhibitions, among them the Columbianum, the Society of Artists, the Pennsylvania Academy, and the Artists' Fund Society. Together with his son, he worked on an engraved series of 'Views in Philadelphia' (1800), which remains important as a unique early record of an American city. He also published two views of New York city in 1802 and a subscription series of views of country seats around Philadelphia entitled 'The Country Seats of the United States of America' (1808). Although he continued to work as a publisher and printmaker, his reputation, in America, was boosted by the nearly sixty enamels and miniatures he produced. Commissioned by a Mr Van Stapborst of the Netherlands in 1796, the most celebrated of these was of George Washington, which was thought to be a good though flattering likeness. Birch was also noted among Philadelphia connoisseurs for his large collection of European prints and paintings, which 'enriched Philadelphia's artistic resources' ('ANB', 803). Such was Birch's success that in 1812 he moved out of town to the country estate of Springland, near Bristol in Philadelphia. He died on 7 August 1834 in Philadelphia. 


@@@@@


doc= 2439


Birchensha, John (c.1605-1681?), musical theorist and teacher, was (according to Flood, 214) a son of Sir Ralph Birchensha ('c'.1565?-1622?) and his wife, Elizabeth (died after 1618). They were possibly the Raphe Byrkenshaw and Elizabeth Morall who were married at Barnsley, Yorkshire, on 15 September 1586. Ralph Birchensha was sent to Ireland by the government in 1598 as controller of musters. After his death John, whom Anthony Wood described as 'a gentile man', remained in Ireland in the household of George FitzGerald, sixteenth earl of Kildare, until the rising of 1641 (Wood, fol. 19). In Playford's 'A Musicall Banquet' (1651, sig. A4) he was listed as a viol teacher in London, though it was as an instructor of the fundamentals of composition that he won renown. Birchensha claimed in a letter to the Royal Society of London that by following his rules 'not only those, who skilfully can sing or play on some Instrument, may learn to compose but also those, who can neither sing nor play' (26 April 1664, Royal Society, letter book copy, 1.166-73). The clearest exposition of these rules is to be found in an autograph manuscript, Brussels, Bibliotheque Royale Albert Ier, MS II 4168 ('olim' 6689). To Evelyn they represented 'a mathematical way of composure very extraordinary: True as to the exact rules of art, but without much harmonie' (Evelyn, 3 Aug 1664). Pepys took a course of lessons from him which ended 'in a pet' when Pepys dared to criticize the rules (Pepys, 27 Feb 1662). Captain Silas Taylor, who brought Birchensha's ideas to the attention of the Royal Society, was a more enthusiastic follower. Thomas Salmon studied with him, on Matthew Locke's recommendation; Birchensha later wrote a preface to Salmon's 'Essay to the Advancement of Musick' (1672). A jesting allusion to his method occurs in Thomas Shadwell's 'The Humorists' (1671): 'Berkenshaw is a rare fellow, give him his due, fa la la, for he can teach men to compose that are deaf, dumb, and blind' ('Complete Works of Thomas Shadwell', 1.221). 
Birchensha gained a reputation as a savant in matters pertaining to harmonic proportion and tuning. Henry Oldenburg, the secretary of the Royal Society, described him as 'in Musica tum theoretica tum practica apprime versatus' ('very experienced both in theoretical and in practical music'; 'Correspondence', 7 June 1673). William Brouncker, Nicolaus Mercator, John Pell, and John Wallis were among the mathematicians who examined his propositions (Gouk, 61, 188). In 1662 the first of several papers from him was presented to the Royal Society, and meetings of the society on 3 and 10 August 1664 were followed by concerts of instrumental music by him, one of which was attended by Evelyn and the other by Pepys. In 1664 he published his 'Templum musicum', a translation of part of J. H. Alsted's 'Encyclopaedia'. Though never elected a fellow, he was invited on 10 February 1676 to demonstrate to the Royal Society his 'compleat Scale of Musick', a chart displaying 'all consonant and dissonant intervals suitable to musical Harmony' with their ratios in Pythagorean intonation; this was likely another version of 'his great Card of the body of Musique' which Pepys had been shown on 24 February 1662 at Birchensha's house in Southwark. His most substantial surviving theoretical work is an unpublished 'Compendious discourse of the principles of the practicall & mathematicall partes of musick' which he wrote for Robert Boyle, the brother-in-law of his former patron the earl of Kildare (autograph manuscript, Royal Society, Boyle papers, 41.1). He worked for years on a treatise, 'Syntagma musicae', which was to have summed up his ideas about the philosophical, mathematical, and practical aspects of music; subscriptions were invited in 1672, and a detailed synopsis was read to the Royal Society on 10 February 1676 (Royal Society, classified papers, XXII.(1).7), but the book itself never appeared. 
Birchensha's importance rests on his certainty, extraordinary among professional musicians, that nearly every aspect of music could be rationalized. He has been described, unjustly, as a quack; but his failure to publish 'Syntagma musicae' restricted his influence as a theorist, and his compositions, which include psalm settings and instrumental suites, seem clumsy and charmless when set beside the best English work of the period. He was almost certainly the John Birchenshaw buried in Westminster Abbey cloisters on 14 May 1681. 


@@@@@


doc= 2440


Birchington, Stephen (d. 1407), Benedictine monk and historical writer, doubtless took his name from Birchington on the Isle of Thanet, Kent. He became a monk of the cathedral priory of Christ Church, Canterbury, in 1382. In the late 1390s he was one of the priory's two treasurers; in the opening years of the fifteenth century he held the senior post of warden of the priory's manors; and in around 1404-5 he served as the prior's chaplain. He died on 21 August 1407, presumably at Christ Church, where he was probably buried. 
In the account of the Christ Church monks by the late fifteenth-century Canterbury monk Thomas Cawston, Birchington is stated to have written about the lives of the archbishops of Canterbury. From this, and from John Joscelyn's references to Birchington in his mid-sixteenth-century biographical notices of archbishops of Canterbury, Henry Wharton inferred in his 'Anglia sacra' (1691) that Birchington wrote the series of archiepiscopal lives in Lambeth Palace Library, MS 99. On the strength of similarities of style and method, Wharton thought that a chronicle of England and sets of lives of the popes and emperors in the same manuscript were also Birchington's work. 
The lives of the popes and emperors are now known to be by the French ecclesiastic Bernard Gui (1260-1331), however, and Wharton's other suggestions are countered by the fact that the chronicle ends in 1367 and the lives of the archbishops end with the accession of William Wittleseye in 1369; the life of Archbishop Simon Islep, who died in 1366, seems to have been written from personal knowledge, while the chronicle has various details about the 1350s and 1360s that only a contemporary is likely to have known. Most probably, therefore, both these latter works were written by a monk or secular clerk who was at least a generation senior to Birchington; Birchington's role was that of a continuator, and his own composition, which would have covered the late fourteenth century, does not appear to have survived. 


@@@@@


doc= 2441


Birckbek, Simon (1583/4-1656), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born at Hornby in Lancashire, the son of Thomas Birckbek. He became a student at Queen's College, Oxford, in 1600, acted as a 'serving child' and as taberdar, and graduated BA in 1604, proceeding MA in 1607. After entering holy orders about 1607 he became noted as a preacher and disputant, as well as for his extensive knowledge of the fathers and scholastics. He remained at Queen's College as a fellow and proceeded BD in 1616. The following year he was made vicar of the church of Gilling in Yorkshire, and also of the chapel of Forcet, near Richmond in the same county, by the patronage of his kinsman Humphrey Wharton. His most important work, 'The Protestant's Evidence' (1634), argued the historical continuity of contemporary Church of England doctrine, juxtaposing selections from theological writers from the first to the sixteenth centuries with extracts from Catholic teaching since the Council of Trent. Apparently valued by Selden (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.421), the work was reissued in 1657 in a revised edition with an appended 'Answer to the antidotist', responding to a critic. The 1657 edition was republished in 1849 under the editorship of John Cumming. Birckbeck published at least two other works, and retained his living until his death. He was buried in Forcet Chapel on 14 September 1656, his wife, Bridget, having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 2442


Bird, Charles Smith (1795-1862), theological writer, was the last but one of six children, born in Union Street, Liverpool, on 28 May 1795, the son of Charles Smith Bird, a West Indian merchant. His father was strongly evangelical to the point of forbidding his children to read Shakespeare. After attending several private schools, Bird was articled to a firm of conveyancing solicitors at Liverpool in 1812. His leisure time was spent at the Athenaeum reading-room in the study of theology. He returned to school at Dr Davies's, of Macclesfield, in 1815, and from there went to Trinity College, Cambridge, matriculating in 1816. As an undergraduate, he chose only fellow Christians as companions, and he was, throughout his adult life, a strong protestant. He became a scholar of Trinity in 1818, was third wrangler in 1820, and elected a fellow of his college. 
Bird was then ordained and became curate of Burghfield, 6 miles from Reading. He took a house at Culverlands, near Burghfield, in 1823. He added to his income by taking pupils, a practice he continued for twenty years. One of them was T. B. Macaulay. On 24 June 1823 he married Margaret Wrangham, of Bowdon, Cheshire. He now frequently sent contributions to the 'Christian Observer'. It was against the Irish educational measures that he wrote his 'Call to the protestants of England', later published with his poems. In 1839 Bird edited a strongly protestant monthly periodical, the 'Reading Church Guardian'; the publication languished for a year and then died. In 1840 Bird became a sort of Sunday curate to a Mr Briscoe at Sulhamstead. Having given up his house at Burghfield, he was glad to accept the curacy of Fawley, some 3 miles from Henley-on-Thames. 
In 1843 Bird became vicar of Gainsborough, to which was attached a prebendal stall of Lincoln. In this old-fashioned market town Bird passed many happy years. His course of life was regular and tranquil. Occasionally he lectured at the Gainsborough Literary and Mechanics' Institute on natural history, English literature, and other subjects of interest. In the summer of 1844 he went to Scotland, and in the next year preached before Cambridge University four sermons on the parable of the sower. About this time the proposal for the admission of Jews into parliament aroused Bird's indignation. His 'Call to Britain to remember the fate of Jerusalem', one of his longer poems, may be read with interest. In 1849 cholera ravaged Gainsborough, and Bird assiduously and bravely administered to the wants of the sufferers. 
In 1852 Bird himself suffered a severe illness. In 1859 he was appointed chancellor of the cathedral of Lincoln, and left Gainsborough. He died at the chancery, aged sixty-seven, on 9 November 1862, his wife surviving him. Friends at Gainsborough decorated the church with a painted window in his memory. He was buried in the country churchyard of Riseholme. 
Bird was an ardent entomologist, and had managed to satisfy himself that insects were almost, if not entirely, devoid of feeling; yet he would not allow any to be killed by his children until he was convinced of their rarity. He became a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1828. There is an article of his in the 'Entomological Magazine' for August 1833, and the Liverpool feather-horned 'Tinea', or 'Lepidocera Birdella', was honoured by John Curtis with his name. 
Bird published many theological pamphlets, often attacking Tractarianism and defending the Reformation. He was cautious about the revival of convocation. He also published poems and left an autobiography, edited by his son, the Revd Claude Smith Bird. 


@@@@@


doc= 2443


Bird, Edward (1772-1819), genre and history painter, was born in Cat Yard, Berry Street, Wolverhampton, on 12 April 1772 and baptized there the same day, one of the many children of a local carpenter (died 'c'.1810). After attending the free grammar school he was apprenticed at the age of thirteen as a japanning artist to the firm of Jones and Taylor at the Old Hall Works, Wolverhampton. On completion of his term he first set up as an independent artist in the town, before moving to Bristol about 1794. He later married Martha (1779/80-1846), youngest daughter of John Dodrell, a Bristol engraver. In 1797 he advertised his services, offering drawing lessons as a historical and landscape painter, but there is strong evidence that he had first been obliged to continue his trade as a painter of tea trays at the Japan and Pontypool manufactory at Temple Back, Bristol. 
A painted cartouche within a self-portrait of about 1805 (City Museum and Art Gallery, Bristol) proclaims Bird to be a portrait painter. He also undertook book illustrations which included topographical views of Bristol and, together with the Bristol marine artist Nicholas Pocock, the illustrations for William Williams's 'The Journal of Penrose, Seaman' (drawings, Lilly Library, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana). One of his earliest securely dated oil paintings, 'Falstaff' (1807; City Museum and Art Gallery, Bristol), reflects a long-standing interest in the theatre which had begun in Wolverhampton. At Wolverhampton also, Bird's first commission is said to have been a painting for a Roman Catholic chapel, and in Bristol he undertook the large altarpiece for St Paul's, Portman Square, the building of which was completed in 1794. This variety reflects both his versatility and the difficulties of working in a provincial city in the first decade of the nineteenth century. His coming success was to be of crucial encouragement to the artists, amateurs, and patrons of Bristol and to lay the foundations for the emergence of the Bristol school of artists about 1820. 
Bird himself also benefited greatly from the connections and contacts of his Bristol friends such as George Cumberland, with whom he was certainly well acquainted by 1806. Cumberland wrote of Bird that 'for some years he was the centre of a society assembled to make drawings in the evening before supper, where the greater number of members were amateurs' ('Catalogue', 16). In 1809 Bird first exhibited at the Royal Academy, showing an interior scene with an old soldier entitled 'Good News'. Hung next to David Wilkie's 'The Cut Finger' (priv. coll.), it immediately attracted attention and Bird found himself championed as the reluctant rival of an artist whom he admired. The following year the prince regent bought Bird's 'The Country Choristers' (Royal Collection) at the Royal Academy and then, with the advice of Benjamin West, commissioned Wilkie to paint a pendant which was to be 'Blind Man's Buff' (1813; Royal Collection). In 1811 Bird showed 'The Reading of the Will Concluded' (City Museum and Art Gallery, Bristol), which has much sensitive observation of human nature. He was elected an associate of the academy the following year and a full member in 1815 only six years after his first appearance. It was in 1815 that he exhibited 'The Departure to London' (ex Christies, South Kensington, 9 March 2000, lot 259), a moving and charming account of a young man's farewell to his family which is full of the incidental detail of a modest country home. More strongly coloured and subtly, if self-consciously, composed than many of his paintings, it shows that Bird's earlier debt to seventeenth-century Dutch interior scenes had been succeeded by a quotation from Jean-Baptiste Greuze (1725-1805). 
Bird's own ambitions and the circle of sophisticated amateurs that gathered around him encouraged him to attempt more elevated scenes, higher in the hierarchy of genres. The Revd John Eagles was to admit his part: 'his best scenes were those of the simple, honest dealings and ways of more humble and common life, where there was some sentiment, some moral good,... never man loved innocence for its own sake more than he. That he left this style, and attempted the grand and scriptural, was much to be regretted... And I will not refuse to take myself my portion of the blame; for I did constantly instigate him to the attempts. (Eagles, 138)' Both Eagles and his father, who corresponded with Sir Walter Scott concerning appropriate costume for the scene, were involved with 'Chevy Chase', shown at the British Institution in 1812 and purchased by the marquess of Stafford for 300 guineas. Bird was appointed historical painter to Princess Charlotte in 1813 when he also won the annual premium of 300 guineas at the British Institution for 'The Death of Eli'. Other substantial historical and religious scenes followed, culminating in an ambitious project, initiated in 1814, to paint the restoration of the Bourbon monarchy. Both 'The Embarkation of Louis XVIII at Dover' (City Museum and Art Gallery, Bristol) and 'The Landing of Louis XVIII at Calais' (Wolverhampton Art Gallery) were over-crowded with portraits, which demanded frequent and often unrewarding journeys to London. 
Bird was already plagued with ill health and in 1818 he was unable to believe in the prince regent's endlessly delayed decision not to acquire 'The Embarkation'. The earl of Bridgewater, who had already purchased 'The Landing' for 1000 guineas, could only acquire it after Bird's death on 2 November 1819. Bird had been too ill to paint throughout the year and left his wife and three surviving children heavily in debt. His friends and patrons and the Royal Academy responded promptly, contrary to the inaccurate account in 'Lives of the British Artists' by Allan Cunningham, whom Eagles justly called a 'careless slanderer' (Revd J. Eagles to Richard Smith, 6 March 1830, Bristol Reference Library, SR50 B28436). A grand funeral was held and 300 persons are said to have followed the hearse from Bird's home at 8 Kings Parade to Bristol Cathedral, where he was buried in the cloister at the foot of the steps into the transept. 
The following year a large and financially successful exhibition of Bird's work was held at the Bristol Fire Office, the first substantial retrospective exhibition to be devoted to a single artist outside London. Within Bristol Edward Villiers Rippingille (1798-1859), Rolinda Sharples (1793-1838), Samuel Colman (1780-1845), and William West (1801-1861) were all to be directly influenced by Bird's genre paintings. His importance to Bristol was broader still. His friend Dr John King (1766-1846), whose portrait Bird painted (City Museum and Art Gallery, Bristol), recalled in 1839: 'about 40 years ago the late Edw. Bird was the only artist of talent in this city. It was here that his genius developed with rapid strides; his society soon became the centre of attraction to all those who had enough of good taste... Thus was spontaneously framed a small society of art-loving friends, from which all that Bristol can now boast of artists and amateurs has descended. (scrapbook of reviews, 14)' 



@@@@@


doc= 2444


Bird, Francis (1667-1731), sculptor, was born in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. Nothing is known of his parentage. He enjoyed an exceptionally cosmopolitan sculptural education: at the age of eleven he was sent to Flanders to train, where, according to Vertue, he worked under a statuary named Cozins; he later travelled to Rome, but his movements there are unclear. When he returned to London, aged about twenty-two, he was employed in the workshops of Grinling Gibbons and Caius Gabriel Cibber. In this period he probably took a number of independent monumental commissions, most notably the monument to Dr Richard Busby in Westminster Abbey (1695). Despite his youthful successes, Bird does not appear to have regarded his continental training as complete: about 1695 he returned to Rome and spent nine months in the workshop of Pierre Legros. He made a number of other visits to Rome in his lifetime. 
Bird was back in London by 1700, and some time in 1707 he married Hester ('c'.1680- 'c'.1767), the daughter of Edward Chapman, a stone mason and contractor with a yard at Red Lion Square, and his wife, Margaret Wilcock (or Wilcox). They had five daughters and a son: Margaret (1713-1795), Clare, a Mrs Dickinson, Hester (1722-1809), Anne, and Edward Chapman ('c'.1715-1792). After his return Bird built a more sustained independent career. A sign of his rise to prominence was the award of the commission to design and carve most, if not all, of the figurative embellishments over the west portal of Wren's St Paul's Cathedral. In December 1706 his shop completed work on the great pediment, providing a scene of the conversion of St Paul of 64 feet in length. This work accorded with a fine model by the sculptor which is now preserved among the cathedral's collection of antiquities. Bird's shop continued to work on figures for the exterior of the cathedral until 1721, its master receiving a total payment for the work of $2040. 
Between 1711 and 1712 Bird's workshop produced its most publicly conspicuous work, the marble statue of Queen Anne, towering over four feminine figures symbolic of the extent of her dominion, which stood before the great western staircase to the cathedral. A Victorian copy of this monument, by Richard Belt, now stands in place of Bird's original, which has survived, much damaged, in what was once the garden of Augustus Hare at Holmehurst, near Hastings. While his shop was carving the monument to Queen Anne, Bird received his greatest funerary commission, the tomb of John Holles, duke of Newcastle (died 1711), for Westminster Abbey. This towering pile, commissioned by Henrietta, countess of Oxford, was designed by James Gibbs and featured as an engraved illustration in the latter's 'Book of Architecture' of 1728. After completing this great commission Bird took on a series of monuments in the abbey: those to the memory of Admiral Henry Priestman (died 1712), Sidney, first earl of Godolphin (died 1712), Thomas Sprat, dean of Westminster (died 1713), and Admiral John Baker (died 1716). Bird's dominance over the figurative sculpture market was even more clear in Oxford than in London. For a period between 1717 and 1721 he sustained a virtual monopoly over sculptural commissions within the patronage of that city's university and colleges. The fine figures of Dr Radcliffe (1717; University College) and Lord Clarendon (1721; Clarendon Buildings) remain among the most conspicuous evidence of the quality of his productions. 
Despite his extensive experience of continental sculpture, Bird was unable to sustain the attention of fashionable cosmopolitan society in London. Always a designer of baroque verve, he fell behind the pace of fashion in the 1720s when noted aristocratic connoisseurs demanded a more rigorous pursuit of ancient classical precedent. The end of Bird's dominance was spelt in 1720, when a wave of newly arrived Flemish sculptors, schooled in strict adherence to the antique, began to win the most prestigious contracts. He was passed over for an important Westminster Abbey funerary commission, that to John Sheffield, first duke of Buckingham: two sculptors who had recently been employed in Bird's shop, Peter Scheemakers and Laurent Delveaux, executed this work, and their ascending stars were to eclipse that of their former master. By 1722 the architect James Gibbs had transferred his favours to another recently arrived Fleming, Michael Rysbrack. Hence Bird proved capable of acquiring only the occasional grand monumental commissions, such as that to the memory of the Cavendish family at Bolsover in Derbyshire (1728). However, his monument to Dr Grabe (erected after 1727) shows that there were still opportunities for him to make use of a figure composition based on late baroque Roman formats in the context of Westminster Abbey. 
Bird was also a dealer in Italian marbles. He was appointed one of the directors of Kneller's art academy in 1711. Bird and his father-in-law, both Catholics, were forced to register their estates following the Jacobite rising of 1715. Edward Chapman died in 1729, leaving most of his estate to his daughter and son-in-law; this was of considerable value and included an estate in Windsor. At Christmas 1729 Bird suffered a serious accident: he slipped while leaving a tavern and broke his leg, which was badly set. A long illness followed, ending his career. He died of dropsy on 27 February 1731, aged sixty-four, and was buried in a vault in the church of St Andrew's, Holborn. His wife survived him and lived to the age of eighty-seven. The sale of Bird's possessions took place twenty years after his death, on 30 April 1751 at Langfords, Covent Garden, and included a considerable collection of prints, drawings, and models. His son, Edward, followed his father into the marble and stone-carving business and became one of the most notable marble dealers of mid-eighteenth-century London. E. C. Bird was, however, not able to sustain the fortunes of his family and became bankrupt in 1770, there being a sale of the entire stock of his Westminster yard on 4 April 1771. 
Bird was for about a decade between 1710 and 1720 the most prestigious figurative sculptor working in London. His obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' of 1731 celebrated him as the sculptor of 'many lofty tombs and magnificent monuments in Westminster Abbey and other places' ('GM', 1st ser., 1, 1731, 83). He may be counted one of a line of English-born sculptors who, through training abroad, succeeded in competing with the technically accomplished immigrants from Europe. 


@@@@@


doc= 2445


Bird, Golding (1814-1854), physician, was born at Downham, Norfolk, on 9 December 1814, the eldest of three sons and two daughters born to Golding Bird, a former official in the Inland Revenue who had worked for many years in Ireland, where he had married Marianne. As a child, Bird had suffered an attack of rheumatic fever and endocarditis which left him with a stooping posture and a limp. Bird and his younger brother Frederic, who followed him into the medical profession, received their early education from a clergyman at Wallingford, Berkshire. By the time they moved to a school in London, Bird was well versed in the classics and had acquired a taste for chemistry and botany, which he demonstrated by tutoring his classmates, a practice which was frowned on by his teachers. In December 1829 Bird's father apprenticed him to William Pretty, apothecary, of Burton Crescent, London, where he remained to the end of his term in 1833, meanwhile in 1832 entering himself as a student at Guy's Hospital. Bird was always an eager participant in societies and at Guy's he joined the Pupil's Physical Society where his first publication dealt with the analysis of urine. His industry and chemical knowledge caught the attention of his teachers, especially Thomas Addison and Sir Astley Cooper; the latter invited Bird to write a section on breast milk for his book on diseases of the breast. He then submitted a dissertation on pathological chemistry applied to the diagnosis of disease, which admitted him to fellowship of the Senior Physical Society. He was an outstanding student, gaining prizes for medicine, obstetrics, and ophthalmic surgery. The Society of Apothecaries awarded him a botany prize and on 21 January 1836 awarded him a licence without examination. 
Bird set up in general practice at 44 Seymour Street, Euston Square, but, possibly because of his youth, attracted few patients. He therefore took the MD at St Andrews, where residence was not required, on 24 April 1838, followed two years later by the MA. He became licentiate of the College of Physicians of London on 30 September 1840 and was elected a fellow on 9 July 1845. By 1841 he was in practice as a physician, holding appointments as physician to the Finsbury Dispensary, lecturing at the Aldersgate school of medicine, and living in the family home at Wilmington Square, Clerkenwell. He moved to a larger house at 19 Myddleton Square in preparation for his marriage on 3 March 1842 to Mary Ann Brett, sister of his friend R. Hargrave Brett. They raised a family of two daughters and three sons, moving to a larger house in Russell Square in 1850. 
From 1836 Bird had been lecturer on natural philosophy at Guy's and in this capacity he delivered the lectures which formed the basis of his 'Elements of Natural Philosophy' (1838). This popular book was acclaimed for its clear and direct style but criticized for its lack of mathematical rigour. Bird saw it through three editions; the fourth and fifth were improved by Charles Brooke, who rewrote the sixth edition in 1867. From his study of the large collection of urinary calculi at Guy's, Bird wrote 'Urinary Deposits, their Diagnosis, Pathology and Therapeutical Indications' (1844). It ran through five editions, the last edited by L. Birkett in 1857. About 1843 he was put in charge of the children's ward, leading to a series of reports on children's diseases. 
Bird also lectured on the contributions of electricity to medical treatment, using and devising a range of apparatus. Treatments generally employed either static electricity, derived from a friction machine, to electrify the skin -- the 'electric bath' -- or galvanic, where power supplied from a battery delivered a shock. Bird, a member of the London Electrical Society, sought to dissociate hospital specialized treatments from the quacks' claims for electricity as a universal panacea. He was put in charge of the new electrical treatment room at Guy's, where he investigated the value of shock treatment to relieve paralysed limbs and the action of electricity on the nervous system. His series of lectures to the Royal College of Physicians in March 1847 discussed electricity in its physiological and therapeutical relationships, showing its rational applications and linking these to the work of other reputable scientists. The lectures were published in the 'London Medical Gazette' during the year, and were well received beyond the medical world. 
Bird joined the freemasons in 1841 but left in 1853; he was also a member of the Linnean and Geological societies, and was elected fellow of the Royal Society in January 1846. He was also a corresponding member of several learned societies in Europe. Bird was an active Christian and thought of himself as both a physical and a spiritual healer. His ambition was to form a Christian Medical Association, and a resolution to this end was passed by a group of like-minded friends at his London home on 17 December 1853; he did not live to take part in the first public meeting, held in November 1854. By the late 1840s he was beginning to suffer the recurrent attacks of illness diagnosed by his brother and other colleagues as heart disease. A long holiday with his wife at Tenby, in Pembrokeshire, while it afforded him the leisure to take up his earlier interest in botany, did not effect a cure. He resigned his hospital appointments on 4 August 1853 and the following year retired from practice. He purchased an estate, St Cuthbert, at Tunbridge Wells, Kent, and stayed at Hastings while the house was being renovated, but his enjoyment of his new property was brief, for he died at St Cuthbert on 27 October 1854. He was buried at Tunbridge Wells cemetery. Bird's widow founded at Guy's Hospital the Golding Bird gold medal and scholarship for bacteriology, and one of his sons, Cuthbert H. Golding Bird, followed his father as lecturer in physiology and assistant surgeon at Guy's. 


@@@@@


doc= 2446


Bird, James (1788-1839), poet and playwright, was born on 10 November 1788 at Deerbolt's Hall, Earl Stonham, Suffolk, the eighth of the nine children of Samuel Bird (1749-1826), farmer, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Wink (1748-1837). He was educated at the local village day school, and briefly at Needham Market grammar school, after which he was apprenticed to a miller for three years. A romantic story is told from his youth, that when the fame of John Kemble, the actor, reached Earl Stonham, Bird journeyed to London to witness his performance, returning on foot and penniless. About 1814 he was in a position to hire two windmills at Yoxford, but after five years of little success as a miller he abandoned the trade and began work early in 1820 as a bookseller, stationer, and druggist. He was married in 1816 to Emma (1792-1872), daughter of George Hardacre, a bookseller from Hadleigh. They had sixteen children, of whom thirteen survived infancy. 
Before Bird was sixteen years old he had written poetry, and later he contributed some of his early poems to the 'Suffolk Chronicle', whose editor, Thomas Harral, became a close friend. In 1819 he published his first long poem, 'The Vale of Slaughden', a story of the invasion of East Anglia by the Danes. It was first issued by subscription, but its success induced a London publisher, three months after its appearance, to undertake an edition for the public. In 1820 Nathan Drake in his 'Winter Nights' (2.184-244) reviewed it at length, and claimed for Bird the same rank in literature as that attained by Robert Bloomfield. Bird's second publication was a mock-heroic poem entitled 'The White Hats' (1819), in which he humorously attacked the radical reformers. This was shortly followed by 'Machin, or, The Discovery of Madeira' (1821). In 1823 he published 'Poetical Memoirs: the Exile', set in Scandinavia, the first part of which formed a spirited imitation of Byron's 'Don Juan'; a second edition appeared in 1824. His edition of D. E. Davy's 'A Short Account of Leiston Abbey' was printed in 1823, and next appeared 'Dunwich: a Tale of the Splendid City' (1828) and 'Framlingham: a Narrative of the Castle' (1831). 'The Emigrant's Tale' (1833) was published in a volume with some 'metropolitan sketches', and other shorter miscellaneous poems. His last volume was 'Francis Abbott, the Recluse of Niagara' (1837), founded on Sir James Alexander's 'Transatlantic Sketches'. This final work also contained a second series of urban sketches. Much of Bird's early poetry indicates an intimate acquaintance with Dryden and Pope, and demonstrates the influence of Byron and Campbell, but his later work is in a more original style. 
Bird also wrote two dramas, entitled 'Cosmo, Duke of Tuscany: a Tragedy', published in 1822, and 'The Smuggler's Daughter', published in 1836. The first was performed several times at small London theatres, but the managers of the chief playhouses refused to examine it. The second was successfully produced at Sadler's Wells in October 1835. 
Bird died of consumption at Yoxford on 26 March 1839 and was buried in the village churchyard. The following year Harral published selections from his poems, which Bird himself had begun, with a memoir. His eldest child, Dr George Hardacre Bird, was married in 1842 to Mary Ann, youngest daughter of the poet Edwin Atherstone. 


@@@@@


doc= 2447


Bird, John (d. 1558), bishop of Chester, is said by John Bale to have come from an old Chester family, and to have been born in Coventry, where he joined the Carmelite friars. He incepted as doctor of theology at Oxford on 20 February 1514 and preached the university sermon on the feast of the Ascension following. In August 1516 he was elected provincial at the Carmelite chapter held in Bishop's Lynn. Afterwards, as vicar-general, he made a visitation of the province; letters of confraternity that he issued survive (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D.366). In May 1517 he attended the order's general chapter in Siena. He left office in 1519 owing to a new statute limiting provincials to a three-year term, but was re-elected in 1522 and held office until the dissolution. In 1531 he attended the trial for heresy of Thomas Bilney in Norwich. A supporter of Henry VIII's divorce, he wrote a treatise in its favour which survives. In 1535 he accompanied Bishop Edward Fox and Thomas Bedyll on their mission to Katherine of Aragon to persuade her to relinquish the title of queen. At Easter 1537 he preached before the king. 
On 11 June 1537 Bird was named as suffragan to the bishop of Llandaff, with the new title of bishop of 'Penreth' (not Penrith in Cumberland but more likely Pen-tyrch near Llandaff), and was consecrated at Lambeth Palace on 24 June. He was translated to the diocese of Bangor on 24 July 1539. Bird was involved in the negotiations for Henry VIII's marriage to Anne of Cleves, and in 1539 he accompanied Nicholas Wotton to Germany, with instructions from Thomas Cromwell to obtain her picture for the king. The following year, on 9 July 1540, he was a member of the royal commission which met in the chapter house in Westminster and declared the marriage between the king and Anne null and void. 
On 4 August 1541 Bird was translated to the newly formed diocese of Chester. In addition to facing the problem of creating a new diocesan administration, he received less from his see than any other English bishop except that of Rochester. To save money, he appointed no archdeacon but devolved some of his authority to the rural deans. He appointed a chancellor to reside at Chester and a commissary for Richmond; the men he chose had local connections, which may have helped make the new episcopal administration more acceptable to the gentry of the diocese, but they were also apt to be inefficient and unreliable. To augment his income Bird negotiated an exchange of property with the crown, but the scheme misfired, and the diocese lost the valuable Derbyshire manor of Weston while receiving in return five rectories and eight advowsons whose real value was considerably less than their nominal one. Unwisely he granted annuities to influential local people and favoured others with generous long leases of episcopal property, thereby worsening his financial position. In 1552 he was admitted to Wistaston church, Chester, doubtless to augment his income, but in the following year he still owed the crown nearly $1100 for tenths and subsidies. 
Bird had married while a bishop and so, following the accession of Mary, he was deprived of his see on 16 March 1554. He put aside his wife, and on 6 November 1554 was collated as vicar of Great Dunmow, Essex. Burnet describes an occasion in July 1555 when: 'Bird, that had been bishop of Chester, and was deprived for his marriage, did now think fit to repent, and engaged so far that Bonner made him his suffragan. He was blind of an eye; and being appointed to preach before the bishop, he chose those words for his text, 'Thou art Peter'; but whether his conscience smote him, or his memory failed, he could go no further. So, instead of matter of triumph upon the apostacy of such a man, the shame of such a dumb action turned the triumph to the other side. (Burnet, 2.789)' Bird's partial blindness seems to have been an affliction acquired in old age. In the autumn of 1555 he visited Bishop Bonner in Fulham bearing some apples and a bottle of wine as gifts. Thomas Haukes, imprisoned for refusing to have his child baptized, remembered being called into the orchard to face the two bishops, where Bird exhorted him: 'Alas, good young man! you must be taught by the church, and by your ancients; and do as your forefathers have done before you' (Foxe, 7.104). Bird died at Great Dunmow on 25 October 1558 and was buried in his parish church. 
Apart from his treatise in favour of the king's divorce, Bird's other compositions are lost: they included a homily preached at the funeral of Edmund Bury, prior of Calais, in 1523, a collection of sermons, lectures on St Paul, and a tract on justification by faith. Bale, who knew him well, commented that Bird was: 'a man of modest abilities, with a honeyed tongue, a keen disputant and not ineffective preacher' and 'a particularly handsome man,... but (to be deplored in such a man) he was rather remiss in correcting the faults of others, being swayed by his own good nature' (BL, Harley MS 3838, fols. 110'v', 41). Bird's ability to charm served him well and he was willing to adapt his views to suit successive regimes before apparently returning to Catholic belief on the accession of Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 2448


Bird, John (1709-1776), maker of scientific instruments, was born in December 1709 in Bishop Auckland, co. Durham, and baptized at St Andrew's Church there on the 27th, the son of John Bird ('b'. 1687) and his wife, Dorothy, 'nee' Nelson. She died at or soon after his birth and was buried in the same church on the day of his baptism. A commonly cited account of Bird's early years is that published by William Ludlam in his 'Introduction and Notes on Mr Bird's Method of Dividing Astronomical Instruments' (1786), where it is said that he was a weaver who, finding himself one day in a clockmaker's shop, was struck by the irregular dividing on a brass clock dial and devised a method to improve on this, becoming so skilled that it came to occupy much of his time. This story was challenged by Bird's friend of later years, the clockmaker Alexander Cumming, who annotated his copy of Ludlam's book as follows: 'Mr Bird told me himself that he was apprentice to his uncle a clothier, that a watch maker's apprentice who was a companion of his having received from his master a watch to engrave in his absence,... the apprentice after his master was gone expressing to Jack Bird that he could not engrave it... Bird told him, anyone could do it; and took the engraver and did it.' On the watchmaker's return, Bird's part was soon discovered, the outcome being that the watchmaker recommended Bird's uncle to put him to some business where his natural faculty could be applied. The years following this episode are obscure; it was 1740 before Bird emerged into the light of history. 
On his arrival in London, Bird was employed in the workshop of Jonathan Sisson, on the corner of Beaufort Buildings in the Strand, where he assisted in dividing the standard yards commissioned by the Royal Society for the comparison of English and French measures. Through Sisson, he met and worked for George Graham, and it is likely that Bird's hand was set to several instruments signed by these two famous craftsmen. By 1745 he was established in his own workshop in York Buildings, on the Strand, making machine tools and small mathematical instruments. He soon received orders to design and make large astronomical instruments for major observatories at home and abroad. He took an apprentice, William Ralph Cole, in 1746, but it is not known whether this man continued to work for him. In 1749-50 Bird constructed a transit instrument and a mural quadrant of 8 foot radius for the Greenwich Royal Observatory. This was the first such quadrant to be made entirely of brass, replacing the earlier type where a brass arc was fixed to an iron frame. Such bimetallic quadrants were cheaper and easier to construct, but had the disadvantage that the two metals expanded unequally when the temperature changed, thus distorting the frame. Bird's quadrant weighed about 8 cwt and had a double arc, one with ninety and the other with ninety-six divisions, accurately cut by Graham's method of continual bisection. It cost $300 and gave sixty-two years of valuable service. The quadrant was much admired and orders for others of the same kind arrived, from the observatories of St Petersburg (for a quadrant of 8 foot radius, delivered in 1752), Cadiz, Stockholm (delivered 1753), and Gottingen (for a quadrant of 6 foot radius, costing $260, with a 12 foot telescope, paid for by the Hanoverian king George II and completed in 1755). Many smaller moveable quadrants, telescopes, and other fine instruments left Bird's workshop destined for the private observatories of wealthy amateurs who could afford the best instruments available. 
The astronomer at Gottingen, Tobias Meyer, devised a repeating circle by which seamen could observe the stars in order to calculate their positions from Meyer's star tables. A wooden model of this circle was sent to the Admiralty and passed to Bird to make up in brass. It was tested at sea by Captain John Campbell, who found it far too cumbersome for effective use. He came back to Bird and together they devised a new instrument, based on the Hadley octant, with its scale extended to 120 degrees and made to astronomical standards. This was the first marine sextant: used in conjunction with Meyer's tables, it revolutionized navigation. 
During 1758 Bird was so unwell that he was obliged to leave London for the sake of his health. He recovered, however, and returned to his business, preparing yet another mural quadrant for the Spanish naval observatory at Cadiz, and a new standard yard for the government. In 1766 he sent in a proposal to the commissioners of the board of longitude, offering for the sum of $500 to instruct an apprentice, and occasionally other persons, in his method of making astronomical instruments, and to write an account of this method. He added that the house in which he lived was damp and out of repair, and asked if the board would build more commodious premises for him on the Surrey side of Westminster Bridge. The board debated the matter with Bird, and gave its approval. Two books were duly written and published, 'The Method of Dividing Astronomical Instruments' in 1767 and 'The method of constructing mural quadrants exemplified by a description of the brass mural quadrant in the Royal Observatory at Greenwich' in 1768, reissued as a single volume in 1785. By further order of the board a half-size wooden model of the Greenwich quadrant was prepared and lodged in the British Museum, but it is now lost. There is no record of any apprentices being bound to Bird, and he never took up the order to build himself a house on the Surrey side of the river. In November 1770 he was again ill and unable to work -- he suffered from the painful complaint of gravel -- and continued to occupy his quarters on the Strand, where from the roof he had a clear view to the south and could test his telescopes and other instruments before delivery. 
Most foreign astronomers visiting London called on Bird, to place orders or simply to discuss matters of common interest. In 1763 the astronomers Jerome de Lalande and Thomas Hornsby lunched with him after their visit to Greenwich; Benjamin Franklin, writing from London in 1768 about two instruments ordered by John Winthrop for Philadelphia, remarked that Bird did all his work with his own hands (rather than subcontract it) for the sake of greater truth and exactness, and that he was being delayed by demands from France and Russia, as well as those from Philadelphia, stimulated by the forthcoming transit of Venus. In 1771 Jean Bernoulli noted that Bird's instruments were the most esteemed, and also the most expensive, and that Bird polished his own lenses, usually a chore put out to working opticians. Also in 1771 Bird began work on his last major commission, two mural quadrants and a transit for the new Radcliffe Observatory, Oxford. Although he agreed to decline all other work, the size of the Radcliffe instruments obliged him to move to larger premises and in 1772 he took a new house in Little Marylebone Street, on the northern margin of Westminster, where he built a wooden workshop at the rear in which to divide the quadrants. It was a move for the better; Bird wrote to Hornsby, then the Radcliffe observer: 'For my own part, I wish that I had made my escape from fog and smoak some years sooner, for I find myself in much better health since I have breathed good air. I still have some remains of my old disorder but it is very moderate -- I hope it will go quite off. (Royal Astronomical Society, Radcliffe MS A1.18)' The work proceeded smoothly and on schedule, the various items being delivered as they were ready.Bird died on 31 March 1776 and was buried at St Marylebone on 6 April. He was unmarried. In his will he instructed his executors, Captain Campbell, for whom he had made the sextant, and Alexander Aubert, astronomer, to invest money for an annuity for his servant Mary Cable (died 1788), and after her death for the income to be paid to the assistant at the observatory in Oxford in perpetuity. Bird's instruments are characterized by a delicacy of figure, the result of his skill in shaping and connecting the various parts so as to achieve strength with lightness. They were much in demand in their day and are now highly valued by collectors. 


@@@@@


doc= 2449


Bird, Richard (d. 1609), Church of England clergyman and private tutor, matriculated as a sizar from Trinity College, Cambridge, in February 1565, and was elected a scholar in the same year. He graduated BA early in 1569, became a fellow in 1570, and proceeded MA in 1572. 
Bird appears later to have served as curate in or around Saffron Walden, Essex. Here, in 1576, he encountered a group of dissenters who suggested that the moral law embodied in the commandments was no longer binding. Bird sought and received the advice of John Whitgift, then the master of his college, as to the best way of replying. Despite his marriage in the same year to Elizabeth, of whom no more details are known, he maintained his connection with Trinity, proceeding BD in 1580 and serving the college as junior bursar in 1579-80 and junior dean in 1581-2. Also in 1582 he acquired the rectory of Woodchurch, Kent. 
Subsequently Bird was appointed tutor to William Cecil, eldest son of Sir Thomas Cecil, heir of the lord treasurer, Lord Burghley. On 3 November 1585, while travelling with Bird in France, the young man was reported to be attending exercises with the Jesuits, and he embraced the Roman Catholic faith soon afterwards. The conversion of the future head of a leading family was a source of grave concern, and Bird was blamed, at least by Sir Edward Stafford, the English ambassador in Paris. In January 1586 Bird wrote to Burghley that Stafford had publicly denounced him as a traitor, threatened him with a whipping, and subjected him to other indignities. Bird protested that he had endeavoured to fulfil his duties as tutor conscientiously, but had been 'robbed of the sowle of that young gentleman by wicked and treacherous men' (BL, Lansdowne MS 46, fol. 18). 
The episode was not fatal to Bird's prospects. On 21 March 1589 he was collated to the archdeaconry of Cleveland, in the diocese of York, and on 29 September 1590, on the presentation of William Woodhall of Walden, Essex, he was instituted as canon of the tenth prebend of Canterbury Cathedral. He resigned his archdeaconry on 19 April 1601. By December 1597 Bird was also vicar of Brooklands in Kent, and he held the living until his death. He was created DD in 1608. Bird died in June 1609 and was buried in Canterbury Cathedral on 19 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 2450


Bird, Robert Merttins (1788-1853), East India Company servant, was born in London on 1 September 1788, the son of Robert and Lucy Bird of Taplow, Buckinghamshire. He arrived in Bengal in 1808 as a writer and began his career as an assistant to the registrar of the court of appeal ('sadr diwani adalat') in Calcutta. He was subsequently employed in various judicial capacities in Calcutta, Benares, and Jaunpur. In 1810 he married Jane Grant Brown, daughter of the chaplain David Brown of the college of Fort William. Bird's first independent charge came in 1820, when he was appointed as judge and magistrate in Gorakhpur in the North-Western Provinces. Following the death of his wife, Bird remarried at Cape Town in 1824; his new wife was also called Jane. 
In 1829, with his appointment as commissioner of revenue and circuit in Gorakhpur, Bird's career shifted from the judicial to the land revenue sphere and this was to be of immense importance to the history of the North-Western Provinces and British India more generally. In 1831 he was promoted to the 'sadr' board of revenue on deputation, then spent a period as commissioner of the Farrukhabad division, and then rejoined the board in 1834. Bird gradually developed a remarkable knowledge of the land tenures of the country, and a formidable administrative capacity, and was soon regarded as one of the ablest revenue officers in the company's service. He was struck by the extent to which the legal framework of the existing settlement was often 'wholly distinct' from the actual situation on the ground (Mason, 1.296). 
It was Holt Mackenzie who had carefully devised a land revenue system for the North-Western Provinces, designed to preserve ancient rights (especially of village communities) with a moderate squeeze on superior landholders, but his regulation 7 of 1822 had, in practice, proved laborious and too detailed. Bird was uneasy about the difficulties that had emerged in its workings and wished 'to have each fact fixed before I found a principle upon it' (Husain, 199); he wanted to adopt a more empirical approach based on the revenue history of the villages in place of the deductive and theoretical methods hitherto used. 
In 1832 Lord William Bentinck (governor-general, 1828-35) undertook a review of the land revenue policy of the North-Western Provinces. Bird put forward a strong case for the protection of the rights of peasant cultivators linked with a fixed, but not permanent, settlement of the revenue demand. Fixed rents should not be arbitrary but should be calculated from the money rents then prevailing in the North-Western Provinces, although, in practice, rough and ready reckoning was still required; this was in place of the previous, more theoretically based method of calculating rent in the form of net produce, which involved an estimate of the average gross produce of different soils and the subtraction from it of nominal values for profits and wages. 
Bird firmly believed that the cultivators, except tenants at will, had the right to a fixed rent and that this would not infringe the rights of the superior land revenue holders (the 'zamindars', rajas, and 'talukdars') whose interests did not arise directly from the land (Husain, 199). He was equally convinced that no right of property existed between the cultivator and the monarch; he found the ideal principles (though not necessarily implementation) of land revenue settlement in Sir Thomas Munro's ryotwari system in Madras, which alone preserved, in his view, the 'pure original system of Indian revenue administration' (Metcalf, 61). 
This inevitably led Bird to favour the resident cultivators over the traditional intermediaries; he considered, for instance, the 'zamindars' as 'a host of unproductives' wasting their resources on expensive marriages and other extravagant habits (Husain, 199-200). Such criticism of the superior land revenue holders was not new in 1832, but Bird's practical zeal in pursuit of a fixed settlement with resident cultivators was. Despite his considerable awareness of the historical background of land revenue in the North-Western Provinces, he was still capable of 'passionate dogmatic assertion' when it suited (Rosselli, 259). 
When, in 1833, Bentinck revised the revenue system of the North-Western Provinces through regulation 9, Bird was chosen to oversee the task. Its implementation, therefore, bore his imprint aided by subordinates of his own choice with whom he worked closely. He also recognized the important contribution of able Indian personnel. The new settlement was intended to be simpler than that of regulation 7, setting provisional revenue demands for similar tracts and then working from the aggregate to the detail. It involved the survey of each village and the preparation of a map showing individual fields, land held in severalty and that held collectively, and a village register to record the boundaries and the rights, privileges, and liabilities that went with them; a thirty-year settlement was to be made either with individual cultivators, a landholder, or the village brotherhood (which did not necessarily include all the inhabitants), but only where such rights already existed. Bird was also careful to involve village accountants in the new method, an element of popular scrutiny was provided for, and he established a system of local self-government. While his survey was not perfect, it was much superior to anything that had gone before and was the most complete that had yet been made in India. 
Bird's energy and determination meant that the revision was completed within ten years. In that time an area of 23,000 square miles with a population of about 23 million was surveyed; in 1867 Marshman described this as 'the greatest fiscal achievement of the Company's Government' (Marshman, 3.48). By the time that Bird retired from India in 1842, the land system of the North-Western Provinces had taken on the basic shape that it was to retain until the end of British rule. The new settlement, in the event, did not just record existing land revenue practice but initiated significant social and economic changes. Through the fixing of rights and obligations land took on a market value as never before. Bird did not share Bentinck's desire to sustain a superior land revenue holding class. He wanted instead to create a more egalitarian society justified through 'a desire for the welfare of the people' and 'the greatest happiness principle' (Husain, 200). 
Bird's own view of his achievement was not straightforward. He could simultaneously argue that ryots varied from settled tenants to 'mere labourers' and yet that all shared certain rights; he could also view the result of regulation 9 as being in favour of the collective village brotherhoods and yet facilitating 'the sale of land to a degree which never existed before' (Rosselli, 259). In the aftermath of the Indian mutiny land sales were often identified as a major factor in breaking up the village community and the stability it gave; this debate of cause and effect still continues. Bird also helped form a school of administration in the North-Western Provinces which, after further moulding by James Thomason (lieutenant-governor 1843-53), played an important role in consolidating British rule in the Punjab after 1849. 
Bird retired from India in 1842 and spent the rest of his life in Britain in relative obscurity. His life and career were characterized by a strong evangelical commitment and, on returning to England, he became an active member of the Church Missionary Society and undertook much work on its behalf. He was widowed once more, and married, on 1 March 1848, Henrietta Maria Jane Grenfell, daughter of Pascoe Grenfell of Taplow. In 1853 he was called upon to give evidence before the committee of the House of Commons considering the renewal of the East India Company's charter. He died soon afterwards, at Taplow Hill Lodge, Termoham, Torquay, on 22 August 1853, making provision in his will for five sons and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 2451


Bird, Samuel (d. 1603), Church of England clergyman, was the son of Samuel Bird of Walden, Essex. He matriculated as a pensioner of Queens' College, Cambridge, at Easter 1566, graduated BA in 1569-70, and commenced MA from Corpus Christi College in 1573. In November 1573 he was elected a fellow of Corpus Christi and was admitted on 30 April following. He vacated his fellowship in 1576 and disappears from the historical record until May 1592 when he became minister of St Peter's, Ipswich, where he remained until his death in 1603. Suggestions that in the sixteen-year interim Bird was employed as a schoolmaster, in either London or Suffolk, probably result from confusion with namesakes. 
What is clear is that, not later than 1580, Bird had experienced a conversion to a godly way of life. The evidence for this appears in his first published work, 'A friendlie communication or dialogue betweene Paule and Demas wherein is disputed how we are to use the pleasures of this life' (1580), which contains a particularly strong attack upon the perils of playing cards and dice. In the preliminary 'Epistle to the Christian Reader' Bird confesses that he had 'grieved good hearts in following foolish games' and that 'it shall make more for the glorie of God, and more against this sinne, when it is cried out uppon, of him that hath had his delight therein'. The work is notable for a number of references to his time in Cambridge but gives little information as to Bird's circumstances in 1580, describing him simply on the title-page as 'Master of Art and fellow not long since of Benet Colledge', the name by which Corpus Christi was familiarly known. He speaks of having been granted 'so great leasure', and incidental references make it clear that he resided in a town either in Essex or Suffolk. Little is known of his ministry at St Peter's, Ipswich. When Bishop William Redman went on visitation in 1597, the churchwardens disclosed a catalogue of nonconformist offences: Bird did not wear the surplice, omitted the sign of the cross in baptism, permitted fathers to answer for the child in baptism, did not bid holy days and fast days, and did not perambulate. He preached on Tuesdays and Sundays but 'whether licensed or noe they knowe not' (Williams, 157-8). His punishment was reserved but his practice was matched by that of his colleagues in other Ipswich parishes at this time. 
Both 'The lectures of Samuel Bird of Ipswidge upon the 8 and 9 chapters of the second epistle to the Corinthians' and 'The lectures of Samuel Bird of Ipswidge upon the 11 chapter of the epistle unto the Hebrewes and upon the 38 Psalme' were published in Cambridge by John Legate in 1598, having been prepared for the press in the autumn of 1597. The first work, a treatise on generosity, provides evidence of Bird's close association with John Moore of Ipswich, an influential and godly alderman. The second was dedicated with praise to Edward Bacon of Shrubland Hall, describing him in the dedicatory epistle as one who had learned 'not to spende your witte and your studies and your revenewes upon haukes and dogges and gawdish apparell', accounting 'the rebuke of Christ greater riches then to enjoy the delights of sinne for a season'. Both are works of scriptural exposition in a plain style laced with pungent sayings and illustrations, and may have begun life as parish sermons or in the context of a combination lecture. 
Bird married at least twice and had five sons, Samuel, Josias, Joseph, Nathaniell, and Jonathan, and four daughters, Dorothie, Elizabeth, Sara, and Marie. His will makes mention of four stepdaughters from a later marriage. His son Samuel received an exhibition scholarship from the corporation of Ipswich to pursue his studies at Cambridge. Bird's stipend at St Peter's was a respectable $30 per annum and at his death he possessed land and a butcher's shop in Ipswich as well as a house in Haddenham. When he came to write his will on 26 July 1603, in the context of an outbreak of 'generall plauge and mortallitie' in and near Ipswich, his sole bequest was both personal and warmly evangelical. He had died by 30 November, when his will was granted probate. 


@@@@@


doc= 2452


Birdsall, John (1775-1837), Benedictine monk, was born on X27 June 1775 at Liverpool, the son of Cottam Birdsall (1743-1829), a grocer, and his wife, Elizabeth (1744-1818). His childhood was spent in Liverpool but his parents eventually settled in Richmond, Yorkshire, where they stayed for the rest of their lives. Birdsall was educated at the English Dominican school at Bornhem, in Flanders, which was closed by the incursion of the French Revolution in 1794. In 1795 he entered the novitiate of the English Benedictine abbey of Lamspringe in the bishopric of Hildesheim. He made his solemn profession there on 6 November 1796 and was ordained priest on 30 May 1801. In September 1802 he became prefect (as the headmaster was known) of the small school at Lamspringe, where his pupils included Peter Augustine Baines (1787-1843), who was later to play a crucial part in his life. He returned to England after the seizure of Hildesheim by Prussia and the suppression of his monastery on 3 January 1803. After some time at Ampleforth College, Yorkshire, where most of the Lamspringe students were relocated, he was appointed assistant priest to the Benedictine mission at Bath, where he resided from 1806 to 1809. Birdsall pursued two careers simultaneously: he was on the one hand an active missioner and builder of chapels, while on the other he acted as head of a religious congregation struggling for survival after the seemingly disastrous closure of its continental houses during the French Revolution. 
Cheltenham, a town in which population increased from 3000 to 20,000 in the first quarter of the nineteenth century, was to be the centre of Birdsall's activities for most of his active life. An attempt to establish a Benedictine mission in 1805 under Dom James Calderbank (1770-1821) had failed, and the Cheltenham Catholics had to rely on visits from the resident priest at Gloucester and, from 1807, on the ministrations of Abbe Nicolas Alexandre Cesar Robin (died 1811), an exiled priest from the French diocese of Laon, who celebrated mass in hired rooms. Birdsall was appointed to the town in 1809 and through the use of his 'peculium', the personal pension allowed to monks on the mission, and donations from family and friends, was able to open a chapel in Somerset Place on 3 June 1810. With various later extensions it had a seating capacity of some 500. Attached to it was a clergy house and, from 1827, a charity school. Birdsall's early years at Cheltenham were marked by quick and solid progress but, after 1824 with the appointment of the evangelical Francis Close (1797-1882) as curate (and from 1826 incumbent) of Cheltenham, he became increasingly involved in controversy with the established church. 'We Catholics are said to be idolaters of images,' he once remarked characteristically, adding, as he pointed to the two carved angels that flanked the altar-steps of his chapel, 'Now I gave $4.16s for those two statues, and if anybody will send me a five-pound note for the pair I'll let him have them with pleasure. 'That's' how I worship them' ('DNB'). 
Lamspringe's buildings, which Birdsall revisited in 1828 and 1830, suffered very little as a result of its closure, but its community was dwindling and scattered. Birdsall sought to revive it at Broadway, Worcestershire, where he established a mass centre in 1826. A property was acquired in 1828, the foundation-stone for a monastic house laid in 1830, and the first mass in the newly completed chapel celebrated in 1831. In his last years he spent an increasing proportion of his time at Broadway in his 'German College', conducted, as 'The Laity's Directory' (1836) put it, 'by the Gentlemen formerly of Lamspringe'. 
Cheltenham and Broadway formed the relatively stable base for Birdsall's national work. From 1814, when he was elected a definitor of the southern Benedictine province, until his death he was at the centre of the struggle for survival and identity within the English Benedictine congregation. In 1822 he was elected provincial of Canterbury by general chapter and was re-elected in 1826. In the same year he became president-general, which he was to remain until 1837. In 1829 he was pro-vicar apostolic of the western district for the ailing Bishop Peter Bernadine Collingridge (1757-1829). He received the titular dignities of cathedral prior of Winchester in 1826 and abbot of Westminster in 1830. 
The period of Birdsall's office was a difficult one. The Catholic community was coming to terms with the institutional and financial implications of emancipation. The Benedictines in their two principal centres at Ampleforth and Downside were fighting for survival, faced with dwindling numbers and the loss of many continental houses during the French Revolution. One of the most well-known Benedictines, Bishop Baines, vicar apostolic of the western district 1829-43, wanted to use the manpower and finance of his monastic congregation to create what he thought would be an effective church structure adapted to the needs of the time. He aimed to depopulate his own monastery at Ampleforth, close Downside, and transfer the rich mission of Bath to his own jurisdiction. Prior Park in Bath was to be developed as the magnificent setting for his episcopate. Birdsall's severe, headstrong, and determined personality led him to resist Baines on all levels. Baines conceded that Birdsall's election as president-general was because of his ability 'to wage war with a bishop' (O'Donoghue, 19). Birdsall 'continued throughout life', as his unsympathetic biographer Dom Athanasius Allanson put it, 'to be much opposed to the arbitrary dealings of others' (Allanson, 2.248). His ultimately successful confrontation with Baines probably saved the English Benedictines from extinction. His influence on his fellow monks was not merely defensive. 
Like Baines, Birdsall was a man of vision who gave great encouragement to those such as Dom Bede Polding (1794-1877) who were establishing the Australian mission, the great enterprise of the nineteenth-century English Benedictines. Birdsall saw the Australian mission as part of the Catholic contribution to the British empire. 'For our Island', he wrote in 1820 to Nicholas Wiseman, then in Rome, 'is in constant intercourse with all the countries of the East by means of their commercial relations, and might be made a sort of Head Quarters from which the Church would be able to exercise its authority and disperse its blessings to all around us' (Birdsall to Wiseman, 15 Aug 1829, Wiseman MSS). 
Birdsall's activities left him little time for writing, although he published 'Christian Reflections for every Day in the Month' in 1822, a translation from an eighteenth-century French original. A portrait of him, showing a solid figure in middle age, is housed at Downside. Birdsall died at the college in Broadway on 2 August 1837. A memorial tablet at Cheltenham did not survive the rebuilding of his chapel, while the inscription on his tomb in the Catholic graveyard at Broadway, or Vialta (the Roman form he used in his diary), is now difficult to decipher. 


@@@@@


doc= 2453


Birinus (d. c.650), bishop of Dorchester, was the first bishop of the see of the Gewisse, whose rulers subsequently became kings of the West Saxons. He was consecrated bishop in 634 by Bishop Asterius of Milan in Genoa on the orders of Pope Honorius and given a general brief to convert pagan Anglo-Saxons. Birinus's own ethnic identity is never stated, but the form of his name suggests that he could, like other early missionaries to the Anglo-Saxons, have been a Frank. Bede relates that when Birinus arrived in Britain he visited the Gewisse first and, finding them all pagan, decided to stay among them rather than to go further seeking others to evangelize. King Cynegils was baptized by Birinus in 635, with his overlord King Oswald of Northumbria as godfather. Subsequently Birinus baptized Cynegils's son Cwichelm in 636 and in 639 his grandson Cuthred to whom he became godfather. Another son of Cynegils, Cenwalh, who succeeded him 'c'.642, remained unconverted until after the bishop's death, which had occurred by 'c'.650. Birinus is said by Bede to have built churches and converted many people, but no detailed traditions seem to have survived to be included in his eleventh-century life, which was probably written in Winchester. The only recorded miracles are his miraculous preservation from a shipwreck on the way to Britain, when he walked on water, and the healing of a blind and deaf woman; neither contains any convincing circumstantial details. Birinus was buried at Dorchester, but was subsequently translated to Old Minster, Winchester, in the episcopate of Haedde, by which time the West Saxons had lost control of the Dorchester-on-Thames area. Birinus appears regularly in late Saxon calendars with the feast day of 3 December. His cult was revived by Bishop AEthelwold of Winchester who translated his body on 4 September 980 and he figures prominently in Winchester liturgies. In the thirteenth century the canons of Dorchester claimed that they possessed the saint's body and part of his supposed shrine survives there. 


@@@@@


doc= 2454


Birkbeck, George (1776-1841), physician and educationist, was born in Settle, Yorkshire, on 10 January 1776, the second son in the family of four sons and one daughter of William Birkbeck (1745-1805), a Quaker merchant, manufacturer, and banker, and his wife, Sarah (1750-1790), daughter of George Braithwaite of Kendal. He briefly attended Giggleswick School; then, aged eight, he went to board for six years at a Quaker school in Newton in Slaidburn, Lancashire. Following his mother's death in 1790 he lived at Hebblethwaite Hall, near Sedbergh, with a relative, Robert Foster. There he learned mathematics under John Dawson and developed a desire to study medicine. 
Birkbeck became a pupil of Dr Garnett of Knaresborough in 1792-3, from where he moved to Leeds to study pharmacy, medicine, and surgery. With this grounding he enrolled as a medical student at Edinburgh University in 1794 and joined the Royal Medical Society. He left his course in 1795-6 to study at several private medical schools in London, but returned to Edinburgh in 1796 and took his MD in 1799. With the support of Dugald Stewart, Birkbeck was appointed professor of natural philosophy at the Anderson's Institution, Glasgow, in December 1799 and began his long and distinguished career in medicine and popular education. 
A desire to provide education for the working classes led to Birkbeck offering free extra-curricular lectures on popular science, and this 'mechanics' class' became very popular. Manoeuvred into introducing a fee, Birkbeck resigned his chair in August 1804, though he revived the class in Birmingham in 1805-6, and delivered courses in Liverpool and Hull. Birkbeck had moved to Birmingham infatuated with Catherine, daughter of Sampson Lloyd of the city's Quaker banking family. They married on 15 May 1806 at Berkswell, Warwickshire, and moved to Finsbury Square, London, where Birkbeck set up a medical practice. A son, William Lloyd, was born on 3 March 1807; nine days later Catherine died. Devastated, Birkbeck immersed himself in his work. He became physician to the General Dispensary, Aldersgate Street (a novel body which treated out-patients and undertook home visits); he was admitted as licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1808; and he wrote for the 'London Medical Review' between 1808 and 1812. He also moved to 25 Cateaton Street, to be closer to the dispensary. 
As befitted a busy and successful medical professional, Birkbeck received many honours and appointments. He became fellow of the Medical Society of London in 1807, and delivered its anniversary oration in 1810. He was admitted as a member of the Medical and Chirurgical Society in 1807 and elected an honorary member of Guy's Hospital Physical Society. He joined the Edinburgh Club and the Geological Society, was elected fellow of the Astronomical Society in 1820 and, in 1823, the first president of the Meteorological Society of London. He also became closely involved with the London Institution, a body established in 1805 to diffuse science and the arts through lectures and public demonstrations of experiments. From 1820 he offered free lectures to all comers, as he had done earlier in Glasgow; and from 1822 to his death he served as manager. 
On 9 July 1817 Birkbeck married Anna Margaret Gardner (1793-1875), youngest daughter of Henry Gardner, Liverpool merchant. They had five children: Anna Margaret (1818-1863), George Henry (1820-1909), Charles (1822-4), Frances Georgina (1824-1858), and Thomas Brougham (1826-1859). The expanding family caused the Birkbecks to move to 50 Broad Street in 1822-3. 
In December 1823 Birkbeck, supported by Lord Brougham, inaugurated the London Mechanics' Institution, a metropolitan imitator of the recently formed Glasgow Mechanics' Institute, which in turn had grown out of Birkbeck's early mechanics' class. Birkbeck was invited to become the first president and in 1824-5 lent $3700 towards the cost of constructing a lecture theatre. Such middle-class patronage, encouraged by Francis Place, angered the institution's founders, the working-class radicals J. C. Robertson and Thomas Hodgskin, who wanted the institution to be an organization entirely independent of the middle class. Despite the subsequent withdrawal of Hodgskin and Robertson, the institution flourished during Birkbeck's life and, though suffering a decline in its fortunes after his death, it enjoyed a revival after 1867 as the Birkbeck Literary and Scientific Institution, and was renamed Birkbeck College in 1907, becoming a constituent school of London University in 1920. 
Birkbeck was one of the original promoters of the foundation of London University in the 1820s and worked for the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. He opposed the libel laws, campaigned against the newspaper taxes in the 1830s (joining 'the friends of liberty'), and promoted a reform of the patent laws (1827). His only party political act was to second George Grote as MP for the City of London in 1832, but he was a lifelong friend and supporter of Lord Brougham, expressing a whig-radicalism that emphasized the need for free institutions, enterprise, and expression of opinion, and delighting in particular in the introduction of the penny post. He supported moves to end colonial apprenticeship; he was a supporter of Polish independence in 1832, joining the Literary Association of the Friends of Poland; and in 1840 he helped with William Linton's petition to save the Chartists Frost, Williams, and Jones from execution. 
Birkbeck's health had been deteriorating for three years before the attack of prostatitis from which he died at his London house, 38 Finsbury Square, on 1 December 1841. His funeral took place in Kensal Green cemetery on 13 December after a thousand-strong procession from his home, headed by members of the Mechanics' Institution. He was a man of intense energy and religious conviction, given to personal abstemiousness but public generosity. A teacher rather than an originator, he was a gifted public speaker and chairman. In 1866 a family mausoleum was built at Kensal Green cemetery, into which his widow, by her will, directed that the letters of her deceased daughters, her deceased son Thomas Brougham Birkbeck, and George Birkbeck, both before and after their marriage, were to be buried with her ('The Times', 19 Nov 1875). Their eldest son, William Lloyd Birkbeck (1807-1888), became Downing professor of the laws of England at Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 2455


Birkenhead, Sir John (1617-1679), journalist and poet, was born on 24 March 1617 in Northwich, Cheshire, the sixth child of Randall Birkenhead (1581-1633), a saddler, alehouse-keeper, and chapel clerk, and his wife, Margaret, of whom little is known. John attended the free Witton grammar school. 
In 1632 Birkenhead entered Oriel College, Oxford, as a servitor. His tutor was Humphrey Lloyd; otherwise, his early university career is scantly documented. Evidently, he flourished; years later an anonymous enemy, calling him 'a Student in the Law', would backhandedly acknowledge that Birkenhead 'hath learned very well, and is become as good a Scholler as his Tutors, & Professours' ('True Character of Mercurius Aulicus', 1645, 2-3). 
In August 1636 Archbishop Laud, visiting the university, 'had occasion to have some things well transcribed, and this Birkenhead was recommended to him, who performed his businesse so well, that the archbishop recommended him to All Soules' College to be a fellow' ('Brief Lives', 1.104). In January 1637 he was admitted for his BA degree, awarded 'in absentia' the following month, when he was at Lambeth performing scribal and probably more substantive duties for Laud. 
The patronage of the archbishop -- and the circumstances and events of the looming civil war -- were to determine Birkenhead's career and forever fix his identity as an arch-royalist, as the quasi-official spokesman for king and court Mercurius Aulicus. He was granted the MA degree in 1639, by Laud's petition, and concurrently became a full fellow of All Souls. 
In 1641, parliament having committed the archbishop to the Tower, Birkenhead again took up residence at Oxford, associating with other Laudians, whose patron was Dr Brian Duppa. The most notable member of that 'knot of the choicest Oxford Wits always together' (D. Lloyd, 'Memoires', 1668, 425) was the poet and playwright William Cartwright. Those young royalists contributed prolifically to the several university miscellanies commemorating royal births, weddings, and other occasions. Birkenhead wrote poems for two such collections in 1643. 
By then, the embattled king and his court had sought refuge at Oxford, from where the doomed military effort -- and whatever else of the king's state functions remained -- were conducted. One crucial, ongoing engagement of the civil war was the struggle to win the hearts and minds of the public. At Oxford the royalist propaganda machine discovered John Birkenhead, not only a fierce loyalist but also an emerging genius at satire and polemic. 

'Mercurius Aulicus', the weekly 'intelligencer' of the king's party, and England's first official newsbook, ran from January 1643 to September 1645, with only a few interruptions -- 118 numbers in all, some 1700 closely printed pages. For the first few issues Birkenhead assisted the principal author, Peter Heylin, whose style was comparatively tame. However, from mid-1643 onward rival newsbooks recognized Birkenhead as the person responsible for the lively amalgam of factual information, witty invective, brilliant satire, and all the modern weapons in a relentless war of words: the 'inside' story, the embarrassing quotation, the 'planted' idea, the not-quite denied rumour. The various rebel factions were forced to respond with newsbooks of their own, two dozen of them, the most important being 'Mercurius Britanicus' (1643-6), whose misspelt title 'Aulicus' did not fail to deride. None, however, was able to rival Birkenhead in facile style, wit, vitriol, or even the presentation of accurate news; after all, he had the best 'sources', the king's entire bureaucracy and spy network. 
Besides the newsbooks, on which his reputation principally rests, Birkenhead also published a number of polemic and satiric pamphlets. His contemporaneous fame is attested not only by the frequency with which adversaries singled him out for denunciation or grudging praise but also by his contributions to others' publications, including prefaces to Richard Whitlock's 'Zootomia' (1654) and the 1655 edition of John Denham's 'Cooper's Hill'. 
Birkenhead's talent as a poet has perhaps been unfairly minimized, even by his modern biographer, P. W. Thomas, who did so much to elucidate the facts of his life and to define the nature of his satiric genius. Only twenty-three poems survive. Some are sophisticated creations, especially his commendatory poems, including ones for the first folio of Beaumont and Fletcher's 'Comedies and Tragedies' (1647), for his friend Cartwright's posthumous 'Comedies, Tragi-Comedies, with other Poems' (1651), and for Henry Lawes's 'Second Book of Ayres' (1655). At their best moments, those poems compare favourably with the most famous examples of their minor genre, such as Ben Jonson's on Shakespeare and Thomas Carew's on Donne. Birkenhead's tribute to Cartwright is not only his best poem, it is also the longest commendatory poem in existence, at 240 lines. Henry Lawes set several of Birkenhead's lyric poems to music. Three of those, translations from the Greek 'Anacreontea', are arguably superior to better-known translations by Birkenhead's contemporaries Robert Herrick, Thomas Stanley, and Abraham Cowley. A 240-line monody on the beheading of King Charles, 'Loyalties Tears Flowing', published twice as a booklet in the regicide year (1649), exhibits less of the satirical stridency that characterizes much of Birkenhead's writing and more a sense of controlled indignation and genuine sorrow. 
At the Restoration, Birkenhead's loyalty and diligence in the cause of the martyred king were rewarded. He regained his Oxford fellowship, and in April 1661, on the recommendation of Charles II, he was awarded a doctorate of civil law. From 1660 to 1663 he held the office of licenser of the press, a function that coincided with his editorship of the new official newsbook, 'Mercurius Publicus'. 
Birkenhead was elected to parliament from Wilton, Wiltshire, in June 1661. In November 1662 the king knighted him. The following June he became one of the founding members of the Royal Society, sitting on the committee to improve the use of the English language. His acquaintances were prominent literary figures of the age: James Shirley, Edmund Waller, Henry Vaughan, Jeremy Taylor, Henry More, John Evelyn, Thomas Sprat. In the famous coterie of Katherine Phillips, 'The Matchless Orinda', Birkenhead was nicknamed Cratander, after the title character in Cartwright's play 'The Royal Slave'. In 1668 John Dryden referred to him as 'my worthy friend' (J. Dryden, 'Essays', ed. W. Ker, 1926, 1.122). 
Never married, and childless, Birkenhead died on 4 December 1679, at his lodgings in Whitehall, after a humiliating rebuff in his attempt to hold his parliamentary seat. He was buried 'near to the School door' in the churchyard of St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', new edn, 1813-20, 3.1205). No marker or memorial remains. 


@@@@@


doc= 2456


Birket, George (1549-1614), Roman Catholic archpriest, was the son of Robert Birket and Isabel Salvin of West Brandon, co. Durham. He matriculated at Douai University in 1576 or 1577 and was ordained priest at Cambrai on 6 April 1577. On 3 February 1578 he was one of the first group of students to start the English College in Rome. He left Rome in September 1580 and arrived at Rheims on 16 October, proceeding to England on the 29th. He was staying with the Bellamy family at Harrow, Middlesex, in October 1581 but wrote to William Allen from London on 24 April 1583. He returned to Rheims before 8 August 1583 taking relics of Edmund Campion to Allen. He was still there in December 1584. 
It is not known when Birket returned to England, but when George Blackwell was appointed to govern the clergy as the first archpriest of England in 1598 Birket was appointed as one of his assistants. He took up residence with Lord Montague some time before 1605. In 1607 Blackwell took the oath of allegiance to the crown. It had been skilfully devised, it seems, by the ex-Jesuit, Sir Christopher Perkins, to trip the conscience of the Catholics. As a consequence Blackwell was removed from office and in 1608 Birket succeeded him as archpriest until his death. 
During his period of office a very articulate minority of the secular clergy, who resented what they took to be the excessive influence of the Jesuits, continued to agitate for bishops. They believed that it was Jesuit influence, especially Robert Parsons's, which was holding up a Roman decision favourable to themselves. Birket sent Richard Smith to Rome in 1609 as his agent to try once again for bishops. It was Parsons who told him how to go about it since Rome was tired of formal appeals which ignored previous directives, lacked courtesy, and viewed the Jesuits as enemies. Acting against Parsons's advice, and too little observant of protocol, Smith made no progress. Parsons and his ally Thomas Fitzherbert informed Birket frankly of Smith's errors. But Birket felt that he owed it to his agent to support him, and he told Parsons to desist from what he regarded as carping criticism and from the continuation of a correspondence which could only reflect on his own loyalty to his chosen representative. Doubtless Birket's was a difficult task trying to keep spirited and sometimes wayward steeds roughly united in drawing his coach in one direction. Smith brought the appointment of a Catholic bishop for England no nearer. It was in fact delayed until 1623; Smith followed as bishop of Chalcedon in 1624. Meanwhile in September 1610 Birket was apparently obliged to leave Lord Montague's establishment, no doubt for security reasons, but probably stayed within his orbit. 
Birket used the aliases of Hall and Lambton: his uncle was named Joseph Lambton. He enjoyed the reputation of a man discreet, hard-working, and with a considerable ability for getting along with all parties. Not until the episode of Smith's agency was there any misunderstanding with Parsons. Even then it seems to have left no grudges on either side. The report of a spy in 1580 described Birket as 'about forty years of age, short of stature, slender and lean, his face full of wrinkles, pale of colour, his beard black and thick, and cut short' (Talbot and Aveling, 209). He died on 6 April 1614. 


@@@@@


doc= 2457


Birkhead, Henry (1617-1696), Latin poet, was born in the St Paul's Head tavern, in St Paul's Churchyard, London, and was baptized on 25 September 1617, the son of John Birkhead (died in or before 1627), the tavern-keeper, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Faldoe (1596/7-1677). He was educated at Thomas Farnaby's celebrated school in Cripplegate, and became a gentleman commoner of Trinity College, Oxford, in 1633, and a scholar on 28 May 1635. He graduated BA on 13 February 1637. Shortly afterwards he contemplated moving to St Omer. His conversion, however, was brief; Archbishop Laud personally exerted his influence to bring him back, and he was elected a fellow of All Souls, Oxford, 'being... esteemed a good philologist', in 1637. Laud, on trial for his life, was to use Birkhead as an example of his own anti-popery: 'Birkhead... was seduced by a Jesuit, and brought up to London to be conveyed beyond the seas. His Friends complained to me: I had the happiness to find him out, and the blessing from God to settle his Conscience' (Pittock, 14, 38). Laud's patronage led in 1640 to an appointment in the Norwich diocesan registry. Birkhead became MA on 5 June 1641, and turned to studying law. He was a regular contributor of Latin, Greek, and English verse to Oxford commemorative collections (for example, sixty-seven iambics in 'Horti Carolini rosa altera', 1640). 
During the civil war Birkhead remained in Oxford, contributing to the English verse commemorative volume for Sir Bevill Grenvill (1643), providing an English ode for 'Musarum Oxoniensium epibateria' (1643), and writing Latin poetry on contemporary events. The execution of his patron, Laud, in January 1645 led to a heartfelt Latin ode, in irregular metre: this and other poems he published privately and anonymously under the title 'Poematia' (1645). Birkhead submitted to the parliamentary visitors in 1648, was appointed dean of arts at All Souls in 1649, and in 1654 contributed verses celebrating the peace. Having also, in 1653, begun to study medicine, he returned to law a few years later. By 1656 he felt able to acknowledge authorship of an expanded collection of his poems, titled 'Poematia'; Laud, though, could not be praised in safety, and the ode on his martyrdom was transferred to Cranmer. The volume was reissued as part of a collaboration with Henry Stubbe of Christ Church, 'Otium literatum' ('c'.1658). Birkhead displays some ingenious epigrammatic variety on a range of frivolous and serious topics, such as his limping iambics 'In ventricosum gulonem': '
Gulo, videtur ire cum Assecla, Solus; 

Ipse ut Minister, praevium sequens Ventrem: 

Dupliciter hinc Abdomini est gravi servus. 

' He translates this as 'on Dr Glut' (pp. 126-7): '
He, though Alone, seemes with his Man to strut; 

His Paunch before; as large, Behind goes Glut: 

Thus he is doubly Slave to his cram'd Gut. 

' Birkhead resigned his fellowship at All Souls in 1657, taking pains to reject any suggestion of involvement in the corruption of which the college was being accused. He practised law in London, with chambers in the Inner Temple, and in Norwich, where he prospered as registrar. He wrote an English play, 'The Female Rebellion', a tragicomedy concerned with divine right, and in 1684 arranged a reprinting (most unusually for such volumes) of the 1643 'Verses on the Death of... Sir Bevill Grenvill', dedicated to Grenvill's son, the earl of Bath. 
Birkhead appears to have married, on 6 May 1677, Jane Stevenson, housekeeper to the duke of Buckingham. Although his relations with her, like his financial affairs, were to prove complicated, his letters continue to indicate his affection, albeit from a distance -- 'Dear Soul' (1689) and 'Dear Heart' (1692), in which he mentioned 'a long impertinent story of Elizabeth of Sunderland' (Pittock, 112-13). Birkhead died on 8 September 1696 and was buried at St Margaret's, Westminster. His will offers 5's'. to sister and niece; as for Jane Stevenson: 'whom I have formerly called and written to as my wife to save her credit in the world though I was never married to her... She is of Monkwearmouth in the County of Durham. I write this in the presence of God who knowes she has been extream false and many wayes exceeding injurious to me. And therefore I bequeath her but one shilling.' Birkhead is chiefly remembered for leaving his lands 'in trust to maintain... for ever a Publick Professor of Poetry in the University of Oxford' (Pittock, 121-30). The establishment of the poetry professorship did not run smoothly: problems were caused by the confusion of Birkhead's estate, and the low salary offered ($25 was quoted, later $30) made the position little sought after. Hearne noted that 'Mr [Anthony] Alsop of Christ Church formerly made interest for the Place... but he did not stir for it now upon Account of the smallness of the Sallary, and that's the Reason too that none else mov'd for it' (31 July 1708; Pittock, 127). Alsop was probably the finest Latin poet in Oxford at the time. Joseph Trapp became the first professor: he lectured in Latin about Latin poetry, as his successors did for many years. 


@@@@@


doc= 2458


Birks, Thomas Rawson (1810-1883), Church of England clergyman and theologian, was born on 28 September 1810 at Staveley, Derbyshire, the younger son of Thomas Birks, a tenant farmer of the duke of Devonshire. The family were Baptists, and after first attending the village school and then a boarding-school in Chesterfield, Birks was sent at the age of sixteen to the dissenting academy at Mill Hill, near London, where he later became an assistant master. Funds were provided to send him to Cambridge, and in 1830 he matriculated at Trinity College, having in the same year joined the Church of England. Three years later he won a scholarship and gained the chief English declamation prize for his oration 'Mathematical and moral certainty', earning high praise from William Whewell, the master of Trinity. In 1834 he took his BA as second wrangler and second Smith's prizeman and became a fellow of Trinity. In 1843 and again in 1844 he won the Seatonian prize for religious poetry. 
Birks was ordained deacon in 1837 and priest in 1841, and for some years was tutor and then curate to Edward Bickersteth, the rector of Watton, Hertfordshire, and former secretary of the Church Missionary Society, whose memoir he compiled in 1851. In 1844 Birks resigned his Trinity fellowship to marry Bickersteth's eldest daughter, Elizabeth ('b'. 1820), and moved to Kelshall, Hertfordshire, as rector. There were eight children, of whom the eldest son, Edward Bickersteth Birks, also became a fellow of Trinity. Birks's first wife died in 1856, and on 17 May 1866 he married Georgina Agnes, daughter of Colonel Beresford and widow of Major James Douglas. He had just returned to Cambridge as incumbent of Holy Trinity Church, and soon became active in university affairs, giving 'Bible' readings for both undergraduates and more senior members and preaching before the university on a number of occasions. He was a member of the board of theological studies and in 1867-8 an examiner for the theological tripos. In 1871 he was appointed an honorary canon of Ely Cathedral. 
Throughout his ministry Birks was a scholarly and wide-ranging apologist for evangelicalism, being the author of more than fifty books and pamphlets, many of them originally delivered as lectures. He was increasingly concerned to respond thoughtfully but critically to the theological, philosophical, and scientific challenges of his day, and this sometimes led him to adopt positions at variance with contemporary evangelical orthodoxy. At Watton he engaged in a close study of biblical prophecy and, like his rector and future father-in-law, became a convinced champion of the premillennial position. He expounded his views in a series of lengthy treatises, commencing with 'First Elements of Sacred Prophecy' (1843) and 'The Four Prophetic Empires' (1844), and he edited a volume of lectures by twelve Anglican clergy entitled 'The Hope of the Apostolic Church' (1845). 
Birks was a pioneer among evangelicals in seeking to provide answers to the doubts raised by biblical critics and scientists over the authority of the 'Bible'. In 1850 he published an edition of William Paley's 'Horae Paulinae'; two years later his own 'Horae evangelicae' defended the historicity and consistency of the gospel narratives, and this was followed by 'Modern Rationalism and the Inspiration of the Scriptures' (1853), which rejected the dogma of absolute inerrancy. Even before Darwin's 'Origin of Species' had appeared in 1859 Birks was tackling some of the issues highlighted by modern science in 'The Treasures of Wisdom, or, Thoughts on the Connection between Natural Science and Revealed Truth' and 'The Difficulties of Belief in Connexion with the Creation and the Fall', both of which were published in 1855. As a riposte to 'Essays and Reviews' (1859) he wrote 'The Bible and Modern Thought' (1861), one of his most important contributions to theological debate, while in reply to J. W. Colenso and other 'Old Testament' scholars he published 'The Exodus of Israel' (1863) and 'The Pentateuch and its Anatomists' (1869). 
In common with most other Anglican evangelicals of the Victorian age Birks sought to maintain the protestant character of both the institutions of government and the established church and to warn against the inroads of Roman Catholicism and secular thought. Many of his lectures and articles in religious periodicals focused on these concerns, as did more substantial studies such as 'The Christian State' (1847) and 'Church and State' (1869), the second dealing in particular with the question of the disestablishment of the Irish church. 
During the 1860s Birks developed his thinking on the nature of redemption and eternal punishment, first in 'The Ways of God' (1863) and more especially in 'The Victory of Divine Goodness' (1867). The latter book, while rejecting both universalism and annihilationism, denied that the wicked would suffer everlasting misery, but instead asserted that God's grace and mercy would compel them to acknowledge the divine goodness as displayed in a redeemed world. In the ensuing controversy Birks was widely criticized by other evangelicals for his novel views, notably by the Free Church of Scotland theologian R. S. Candlish, to whom he replied in 'The Atonement and the Judgment' (1870). However, in November 1869 he considered it expedient to resign his position as an honorary secretary of the Evangelical Alliance, having held that office since 1850. 
In 1872, following the death of F. D. Maurice, Birks was appointed Knightbridge professor of moral philosophy at Cambridge, a position he held until his death. Followers of Maurice protested that the selection of a pronounced evangelical for this post was a retrograde step, though ironically Maurice was dismissed from his chair at King's College, London, in 1853 for teaching a doctrine of eternal punishment not unlike that espoused in Birks's 'The Victory of Divine Goodness'. His first course of lectures to undergraduates was published as 'First Principles of Moral Science' (1873), and the following year his 'Modern Utilitarianism' compared the systems of Paley, Bentham, and J. S. Mill. The evolutionary theories of Darwin and Herbert Spencer were assailed in three works: 'The Scripture Doctrine of Creation' (1872), 'Modern Physical Fatalism and the Doctrine of Evolution' (1876), and 'Supernatural Revelation' (1879). Meanwhile his literary output in other fields continued unabated. In 1874, for example, his 'Companion Psalter' appeared, containing 450 versions of the psalms (a quarter of them composed by Birks himself) and intended to supplement the hymnbooks of the day. 
A succession of strokes from 1875 onwards compelled Birks to resign from Holy Trinity in 1877, but he did not significantly curtail his intellectual endeavours until a fourth stroke in 1880 caused lasting paralysis. Birks died at his Cambridge home, 6 Salisbury Villas, on 19 July 1883, and was survived by his second wife and several children from his first marriage. He was buried in Cambridge cemetery five days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 2459


Birmingham, John (1816-1884), astronomer, was a country gentleman residing at Millbrook, near Tuam, co. Galway, Ireland, whose attention was directed to astronomy by his discovery of a remarkable new star in Corona Borealis on 12 May 1866. In 1872, at the suggestion of the Revd T. W. Webb, he undertook a revision and extension of Schjellerup's 'Catalogue of Red Stars'. In all he included 658 such objects reobserved with a 41/2 inch refractor and a magnifying power of 53. The spectra of several, as described by previous authorities, were added. This work was presented to the Royal Irish Academy on 26 June 1876, and published as 'The red stars: observations and catalogue' ('Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy', 26, 1879, 249-354). Its merit was acknowledged by the bestowal of the Cunningham medal early in 1884. Birmingham was engaged in further revising and extending it at the time of his death. 
Birmingham was unmarried, a pious Catholic, liberal, kindly, and unassuming. He possessed considerable linguistic accomplishments, had travelled in most parts of Europe, and was in correspondence with several foreign astronomers, notably with Father Secchi of Rome. He held for some time the post of inspector under the board of works. On 22 May 1881 he discovered a deep red star in Cygnus, which proved strikingly variable, and became known by his name. He published articles on meteor showers, on the transit of Venus, and on sunspots. He also wrote on the geology of co. Galway for the 'Journal of the Geological Society of Dublin'. His only separate publication was a small poetical work of a controversial character entitled 'Anglicania, or, England's Mission to the Celt' (1863). He died, after an attack of jaundice, at Millbrook on 7 September 1884. 


@@@@@


doc= 2460


Birnie, Alexander (1826-1862), journalist, was born in Moray; nothing is known about his parents. At an early age he went to England, and became a Baptist minister in Preston. During a period of major labour strikes in the town he wrote several letters to local journals, commenting on events. At some point he married and had several children. 
In 1860 Birnie walked to Falkirk, arriving in the town penniless. He eventually found employment as a painter at the town's Carron works. During this period he began to write journalistic notes, signing himself Cock of the Steeple. Following dismissal from the Carron works for intemperance, he eventually became a member of the regular staff of the 'Falkirk Advertiser'. In 1861 he started the 'Falkirk Liberal' as an organ of the feuars of Falkirk. It was published at 1/2died per copy, and printed in Stirling. It rapidly collapsed. 
Devastated by the blow, Birnie made his way to Edinburgh, apparently in the hope of finding work. On being robbed of the little money he had, he resolved to commit suicide, and made an unsuccessful attempt to poison himself with laudanum. He then set off on foot for Newcastle, all the while making daily entries in a journal. In March 1862 he was found in Morpeth, where he had lain in a stack of straw for two weeks without food or drink. He died on 25 March soon after being moved to the local workhouse hospital. In his final diary entry he requested that a selection of his articles might be published and sold on behalf of his family, but this was never carried out, although a subscription was raised for their assistance. 


@@@@@


doc= 2461


Birnie, Sir Richard (c.1760-1832), police magistrate, was a native of Banff, Scotland. After serving his apprenticeship to a saddler he went to London, where he found work in the Haymarket with Macintosh & Co., saddlers and harness makers to the royal family. Having on one occasion been called upon by chance to attend the prince of Wales, he did his work so satisfactorily that on subsequent occasions the prince used to ask that the 'young Scotchman' might be sent to him. The patronage of the prince secured his advancement with the firm, and he was made foreman and eventually a partner. Through his marriage with the daughter of a wealthy baker of Oxenford Street, London, he also obtained a considerable fortune, including a cottage with adjoining land at Acton, Middlesex. 
After his marriage Birnie rented a house in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, and immediately began to distinguish himself by his activity in parochial affairs, serving successively, as he himself said, 'every parochial office except that of watchman and beadle'. In 1805 he was appointed churchwarden, and, along with his colleague and the vicar, he established a number of almshouses for elderly parishioners in Pratt Street, Camden Town. He enrolled in the Royal Westminster volunteers, in which he became a captain. At the special request of the duke of Northumberland Birnie was placed in the commission of the peace for St Martin's parish and from this time he began to frequent the Bow Street police court, to familiarize himself with magisterial duties. In the absence of the stipendiary magistrates he sometimes presided on the bench, and with such efficiency that he was at length appointed police magistrate at Union Hall, from which he was a few years afterwards promoted to the Bow Street office, a position which he had long desired. 
In February 1820 Birnie headed the police officers in the arrest of the Cato Street conspirators. In the absence of the soldiers (who failed, as they had been ordered, to turn out at a moment's notice), he took the responsibility of making an immediate attempt to capture the band, before they were fully prepared and armed. According to a contemporary account, he 'exposed himself everywhere, encouraging officers to do their duty, while the balls were whizzing about his head'. He was greatly offended when Sir Robert Baker was appointed to the post of chief magistrate following the death of Sir Nathaniel Conant. In August 1821 at the funeral of Queen Caroline he took it upon himself to read the 'Riot Act', which Baker had thought unnecessary. His action found favour with the ministry and, when Baker resigned shortly afterwards, Birnie was appointed to succeed him and knighted. During his term of office he was held in high respect by the ministers in power and frequently consulted by them. He also retained throughout life the special favour of George IV. He died in Bow Street, London, on 29 April 1832 and was buried on 6 May in the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields. He was survived by his wife and a son and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 2462


Birnie, William (1563-1619), Church of Scotland minister, was the only son of William Birnie (died 'c'.1565) of Birnie, probably a merchant, and his wife, Margaret Fraser of Philorth (later named Fraserburgh), mistress of the mint under Mary, queen of Scots. He was educated at the University of St Andrews from 1584, graduating MA in 1588, and was subsequently a student of divinity ('c'.1592-5) at the University of Leiden. 
Birnie had returned to Scotland by 25 January 1596, at which date he was an expectant minister of the presbytery of Edinburgh. It was probably during this period that he married Elizabeth, daughter of John Lindsay, minister of Carstairs, in the presbytery of Lanark. The couple had two daughters and three sons, the eldest of whom, John, was born in 1600. Elizabeth's uncle Robert Lindsay was minister of Lanark, and on his death in December 1597 Birnie succeeded to his benefice. 
Birnie was a commissioner to the general assembly of 1602, and was appointed master and economus of the hospital and almshouse of St Leonard's, Lanark, the following year. In 1606 he accepted the office of constant moderator of the presbytery of Lanark, and as commissioner to the assemblies of 1608 and 1610 he supported the king's further plans to impose an episcopal polity on the kirk. Such support did not go unnoticed, and in 1609 Archbishop John Spottiswood of Glasgow recommended 'his Majesties favour... to Mr William Birnie... whose dispositioun your Lordship kens to his Majesties service' (Calderwood, 7.8). Birnie served on the court of high commission for the province of Glasgow from 1610, and was reappointed when the two courts were united in 1615. In 1612 his efforts were rewarded with an appointment to the benefice of Ayr, because the king had 'a mynd to prefer him also to be Deane of our Chapell Royall [at Stirling]', and 'Air is a church thereupon depending' (Botfield, 1.282). Within two years, however, James had resolved to unite the latter office with the bishopric of Galloway, and Birnie was required to surrender the deanery in return for the revenues of the vicarages of Ayr and Alloway. 
A man of many parts Birnie was the author of 'The Blame of Kirk-Buriall, Tending to Perswade Cemeteriall Civilitie' (1606), a work which deprecated interment within the kirk. He was also an athlete and swordsman of some renown, who -- besides 'being obliged many times' to step between feuding parishioners -- 'was so agile that he could make the salmon's leap by stretching himself on the grass [and] leaping to his feet' ('Fasti Scot.', 3.7). 
Inevitably, Birnie's support for royal policy attracted the ire of the presbyterian party within the kirk, and accusations that he sought preferment and worldly comforts at the expense of others were not entirely unjustified. It was certainly true that his various pensions augmented his stipend by $1000 Scots. Yet, as with the tiends of Alloway, little of the income reached his purse. Despite such criticisms Birnie was highly regarded by his congregation as a 'pleasant [and] pious' minister, who was 'charitable, even above his estate'. The elegiac notion that he 'waited on his charge with care and pains, At Air, on little hope and smaller gains' ('Fasti Scot.', 3.7) was probably a more accurate reflection of his pastoral concern and personal wealth. He died at Ayr on 19 January 1619. 


@@@@@


doc= 2463


Birrel, Robert (fl. 1567-1605), diarist, was a burgess of Edinburgh. His 'Diary, containing Divers passages of Staite, and Uthers Memorable Accidents, from the 1532 yeir of our Redemption, till ye Beginning of the yeir 1605' was published in 1798 in 'Fragments of Scottish History', edited by Sir John Graham Dalyell. There is not much minuteness in the record of events until about 1567, when Birrel probably began to keep a note of them. There is no evidence in the 'Diary' regarding the political or religious views of the writer, facts being simply recorded as they happened, without comment or any apparent bias of opinion. There is some evidence that the work was intended for publication, the writer having apparently taken some trouble to collect his facts. In the seventeenth century a considerable part of it was incorporated by Sir James Balfour in his 'Annals'. The original manuscript was deposited in the library of the Faculty of Advocates. 


@@@@@


doc= 2464


Bisbie, Nathaniel (1635-1695), Church of England clergyman, was born on 5 June 1635, the son of the Revd John Bisbie (died 1648x50), perpetual curate of Tipton, Staffordshire, and his wife, Margaret Hoo, daughter of Anthony Hoo of Bradeley Hall in the same county. John Bisbie was ejected from a prebend in Lichfield Cathedral about 1644, but by 1648 was in place as curate of Edstaston, Shropshire; at the time that John Bisbie made his will, on 30 October 1648, Nathaniel had three brothers and two sisters, as also a stepbrother and a stepmother. 
Nathaniel Bisbie was elected student of Christ Church, Oxford, from Westminster School, in 1654; he graduated BA in 1658 and MA in 1660, accumulating his degrees in divinity on 7 June 1668 (incorporated at Cambridge in 1669). At the Restoration he was presented by Sir Robert Cordell to the rectory of Long Melford, Suffolk, worth $300 a year according to Thomas Hearne. Bisbie was then, says Anthony Wood, 'esteemed an excellent preacher and a zealous person for the church of England' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.' 4.640). He married Elizabeth Wall, daughter of John Wall of Radwater Grange, Essex, in 1672, and they apparently had many children. 
Bisbie published a number of sermons, three of which were originally delivered at the assizes at Bury St Edmunds in 1681 and 1684. These were spent largely in attacking what he saw as the unholy alliance between Jesuits and puritans to undermine church and state -- a not uncommon theme in loyalist propaganda in those years. Bisbie refused to take the oath of allegiance to William and Mary, and as a nonjuror was deprived of his rectory of Long Melford in February 1690. He continued to write after losing his living and contributed two works to the controversy over Humphrey Hody's anti-nonjuror tract, 'The Unreasonableness of a Separation from the New Bishops' (1691). In 'An Answer to a Treatise out of Ecclesiastical History' (1691), Bisbie argued that Hody's reasoning would have justified obeying the usurping Novatian bishops under Constantine. He died at Long Melford on 14 May 1695, about five in the afternoon, and was buried there two days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 2465


Bischoff, James (bap. 1775, d. 1845), merchant and writer, was baptized on 15 November 1775 at Call Lane Arian Independent chapel, Leeds, the younger son of the six children of George Bischoff (1737-1812), a merchant, and his second wife, Elizabeth, the daughter of John Crompton of Gainsborough and the widow of William Whitaker of Leeds. James Bischoff's grandfather, of German extraction but born in Basel, had settled in Leeds around 1715. The family prospered in the chief centre of the West Riding wool textile industry, and in 1782 they were reckoned to be the second largest cloth export house in Leeds. 
Nothing is known of Bischoff's education and training, but he was, like so many of his forebears and members of his wife's family, occupied as a cloth merchant in Leeds at the turn of the eighteenth century. In 1802 he married Margaret, the daughter of David Stansfeld, a prosperous Leeds cloth merchant. Her maternal grandfather, Thomas Wolrich, another leading merchant in the town, had collected a notable series of statistics relating to the cloth industry in the early 1770s. Bischoff had ample access to these papers; perhaps they inspired him to begin his own tireless researches into, and defence of, the industry. He first came to public notice in 1816 with a series of letters in the 'Leeds Mercury', the 'Farmer's Journal', and the 'Gentleman's Magazine' opposing the imposition of a duty of 6died per pound on imported wool, nevertheless levied between 1820 and 1824 as a measure to relieve the distressed British agricultural sector. An advocate of free trade, he was appointed one of the deputies from the West Riding to a series of meetings in London to promote the repeal of the wool duty. He was prominent in collecting statistics to support their case, and published two pamphlets, 'Reasons for the Immediate Repeal of the Tax on Foreign Wool' (1819) and 'Observations' (1820) on the 'Report of the Earl of Sheffield to the Meeting at Lewes Wool Fair, July 20, 1820'. In 1824 the duty was reduced to a nominal 1died in the pound, and, in a move to placate the agricultural interest, exports of wool (there were very few as imports burgeoned) were allowed for the first time for centuries on the payment of the same negligible rate. In the following year Bischoff was consulted by William Huskisson, president of the Board of Trade, about a reduction of duties on foreign manufactured goods. Bischoff advocated free trade, views he again propounded in his evidence to the House of Lords committee on the British wool trade in 1828. 
By the early 1820s Bischoff was living in London, working as a merchant and insurance broker. After 1824 he was prominent in the affairs of the Van Diemen's Land Company. With a nominal capital of $1 million (10,000 shares of $100 each), and supported by several members of parliament, it was one of the many speculative companies launched in the boom of 1823-5. Bischoff was its managing director. By 1831 it had acquired 350,000 acres of good sheep land in north-west Tasmania, where Mount Bischoff is named after him. Although it seems that he had never been there, he wrote 'A Sketch of the History of Van Diemen's Land' (1832). Four years later, he published an essay on marine insurance. 
Bischoff's most important work, however, was his compilation 'A comprehensive history of the woollen and worsted manufactures, and the natural and commercial history of sheep, from the earliest records to the present period' (1842). It brought together, in two volumes, a multitude of material about the wool textile industry, especially those statistics and papers relating to his own activities surrounding the duty in wool. Together with John James's 'History of the Worsted Manufacture in England from the Earliest Times' (1857), it provides a mine of information about the evolution of Britain's premier industry and its principal raw material, wool. Bischoff's last publication was a pamphlet inveighing against foreign tariffs, originally printed as a series of articles appearing in the 'Leeds Mercury' between October and February 1843. He died on 8 February 1845 at his home, 20 Highbury Terrace, Highbury, Middlesex, leaving a family of three sons (the youngest of them was in partnership with his father) and four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 2466


Biscoe, John (1605/6-1679), clergyman and ejected minister, was born in High Wycombe, the son of Robert Biscoe (1572-1630), yeoman of High Wycombe, and his second wife, Susan Lane (died 1648?), of Northdeane in Hughenden, Buckinghamshire. He is to be distinguished from his first cousin and namesake, John Biscoe, a lieutenant-colonel in the parliamentarian army, who was MP for Amersham in the protectorate parliament of 1658-9, a colleague in exile of Edmund Ludlow, and a military conspirator against the restored monarchy. 
John Biscoe of High Wycombe attended Oxford, matriculating from New Inn Hall on 20 June 1623 aged seventeen and graduating BA on 1 February 1627. After leaving Oxford he may have served as a lecturer at St Helen's, Abingdon. According to Anthony Wood, having been educated in the principles of 'precise' religion, Biscoe 'closed with the presbyterians in time of their rebellion and took the covenant' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1198). On 16 March 1643 the House of Commons named him for the chaplaincy of St Thomas's Hospital, Southwark, in the place of the sequestered Benjamin Spencer, an appointment confirmed by the House of Lords on 23 March. The following month the Lords ordered that of the $50 or $60 per annum income of the post $30 should be paid to Spencer's wife and children, but on 16 August this was rescinded and it was ordered that Biscoe be paid the full amount. 
In 1647 Biscoe issued 'The Glorious Mystery of Gods Mercy', prefaced 'To the congregation of faithful ones, in Thomas Southwark', a work which reflects the preoccupation then prevalent with spiritual religion: love, the author wrote, 'makes heaven upon earth: they that love spiritually do dwell in God, and God in them' (sig. A4). Biscoe was still 'minister of the gospel in Thomas Southwark' when he issued 'The Grand Triall of True Conversion' with a preface by Joseph Caryl dated 7 July 1655. A dedication by the author to Thomas Andrews, alderman and president of the hospital, recalls 'your special favour and bounty to myself'. In this work Biscoe set out to unravel two mysteries, 'of iniquity working in Man's thoughts by corrupt nature', and 'of holiness working in the thoughts of sanctified persons' (Bisco, 'Grand Triall', foreword). 
On 25 November 1657 Biscoe was admitted to the vicarage of St Helen's Abingdon, in succession to John Tickell; unlike his predecessor Biscoe appears not to have sought to interfere in, or to profit from, the vicarage of St Nicholas's in the town, a living separated from that of St Helen's by a commission of 1650. He was nevertheless ejected from the benefice in 1660, a successor being instituted on 3 April 1661 on the presentation of the crown. Edmund Calamy states that he then returned to Southwark, acting as a lecturer of St George's, but was removed the following year. 
John Biscoe married twice. His first wife's name was Margaret (died 1666), and they are probably the John Biscoe and Margaret Davenporte who married at High Wycombe on 10 November 1628, a year and a half after his graduation. Margaret was surely the mother of the Samuel Biscoe, listed as the son of a minister, who matriculated at New Inn Hall, Oxford, on 6 June 1660. It seems fairly certain that after the Restoration the couple settled for some years in Uxbridge, Middlesex, where Margaret was buried on 19 September 1666. Their eldest child was Robert Biscoe, a citizen and leatherseller of London; perhaps another was Richard Biscoe or Buscold, 'a rich tanner' who in 1669 was sheltering Hezekiah Woodward, a dissenting minister, at Uxbridge (Turner, 1.90). Richard was licensed for his house there in 1672, but in the same year John Biscoe received a licence as a congregationalist preacher at his house at West Wycombe in his native Buckinghamshire. Another son, John, was living when his father drew up his will on 23 March 1675. John Biscoe the elder died in 1679 and was buried at High Wycombe on 9 June, 'to the great lamentation of the brethren' as Wood reported it (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1198). His second wife, Mary (died 1684), outlived him; she was buried, also at High Wycombe, on 7 October 1684. 


@@@@@


doc= 2467


Biscoe, Richard (1687/8-1748), theologian, of unknown parents, was educated for the nonconformist ministry at Samuel Benion's academy, Shrewsbury, from about 1706 until Benion's death in 1708, and later at Leiden University. He was ordained on 19 December 1716 at the Old Jewry meeting-house, London, by nine ministers including Edmund Calamy III, who gave the charge which was subsequently published. He was minister of the Presbyterian meeting, Newington Green, Middlesex, from at least 1714. Walter Wilson suggests he was there from 1708, presumably as assistant to John Russell who died in 1714. Dudley Ryder, the future lord chief justice, who heard him preach in October 1716 and again in December, thought him 'a very dull preacher'. 'Mr Biscoe does not become the pulpit well at all. He has a very dull manner of delivery and has a very simple air in it' ('Diary of Dudley Ryder', 355, 372). He was a non-subscriber at the Salters' Hall debate in 1719. Biscoe resigned from Newington Green on 25 December 1727, conformed, and was ordained deacon, the date of his subscription being 8 January 1728. He was presented to the rectory of St Martin Outwich, London, on 27 February. In 1729 he was admitted MA by Magdalene College, Cambridge, by royal mandate. 
Biscoe wrote to Bishop Edmund Gibson in 1733 with comments on Gibson's proposals for church reform. In 1736 he was chosen to preach the Boyle lectures, evidence of his reputation for learning, which he delivered in a series of twenty-four sermons over three years in the parish church of St Mary-le-Bow, London. He may have been the author of the 'Remarks' on Benjamin Hoadley's 'Plain Account of the Nature... of the Lord's Supper' (1735); if so he already had a reputation as a controversialist. In 1736 he was appointed to the prebendary of Ealdstreet, and collated to his stall in St Paul's Cathedral on 19 October. He published his Boyle lectures as 'The History of the Acts of the Holy Apostles... Consider'd as Full Evidence of the Truth of Christianity' (1742). It was translated into German and published at Magdeburg in 1751. According to William Orme, although the biblical critic John Lightfoot had collected a great deal of material on the same subject it was 'better digested' by Biscoe (Orme, 47-8). Philip Doddridge thought highly of the work as demonstrating 'in the most convincing manner how incontestably the 'Acts of the Apostles' demonstrate the truth of christianity' (Allibone, 'Dict.', 1.194). Biscoe was presented to the vicarage of North Weald Bassett, near Epping in Essex, on 5 April 1738 by the bishop of London. He held both his livings until his death at North Weald Bassett on 8 June 1748, at the age of sixty. He was buried in the church there on 12 June 1748. 


@@@@@


doc= 2468


Bishop, Anna (1810-1884), singer, was the daughter of Daniel Valentine Riviere (1780-1854), a drawing master of Huguenot descent, and his wife, Henrietta Thunder. William Riviere, Robert Riviere and Henry Parsons Riviere. were her brothers. She was born in London on 9 January 1810, and as a child she studied the piano with Ignaz Moscheles. In 1824 she entered the Royal Academy of Music, where she soon distinguished herself by her singing. She made her professional debut at the Ancient Concerts on 20 April 1831, and on 9 July she married the composer Henry Rowley Bishop (1786-1855), who had formerly been her singing teacher. Her reputation quickly grew, and she took a prominent part in the concerts at Vauxhall, where her husband was music director, at the Lenten oratorios, and at provincial music festivals. Her repertory consisted of sacred music and English songs, but she was persuaded by Nicholas Bochsa, the harpist with whom she and her husband toured, to extend her performances to include Italian opera. In 1839, accompanied by Bochsa, but without her husband, she undertook a provincial tour which included Dublin and Edinburgh and ended in London in July. Four weeks after their return to London she abandoned her husband and three children, and eloped with Bochsa to Hamburg. 
For the next four years Madame Bishop (as she was henceforth known) travelled widely on the continent with Bochsa, visiting all the principal towns outside France (where Bochsa, a bigamist and forger, was wanted by the authorities), including St Petersburg and Kazan, where they stayed during 1840-41; during this period she sang at some 260 concerts. Between 1843 and 1846 she sang in about twenty operas at San Carlo, Naples. She was well received by her audiences, although Verdi remained unmoved. 
In 1846 Madame Bishop and Bochsa returned to England, where she sang Isoline in Balfe's 'The Lady of Artois' to critical acclaim. The following year they went to Dublin and on to New York, where on 12 July 1847 she appeared at a private reception held in her honour. They then undertook a lengthy tour encompassing Mexico, Cuba, and California, and returned to New York in 1850. On 1 November 1852 Madame Bishop produced and sang in the first American performance of Flotow's 'Martha' at Niblo's Garden. In 1854 she was in California, and the following year in Sydney, Australia. Bochsa died there on 6 January 1856, and she went on to tour Chile, Argentina, and Brazil before returning to New York in 1858. There she married a diamond merchant, Martin Schultz, Sir Henry Bishop having died in 1855. She spent the 1858-9 season in London, then embarked on another extensive tour of North and Central America. In 1866 she left California across the Pacific, but on 19 February the ship in which she was travelling was wrecked on a coral reef; she lost all her music, jewellery, and clothes in the wreck. After a month in a small boat she and her husband reached land, and, undaunted, she resumed her tour in Manila, proceeded to Hong Kong, Singapore, China, and India, and arrived in England by way of Australia. She returned to New York, and undertook another world tour between 1874 and 1876. She finally settled in New York, where she made her last public appearance on 22 April 1883, and where she died on 18 or 19 March 1884. 
A woman of middle size, with large, lustrous eyes, Anna Bishop was one of the most popular English singers of the period. She had great technical mastery over her high soprano voice, but was a somewhat unsympathetic singer. A member of many musical societies around the world, she was extremely popular in the United States, and was one of the most widely travelled performers of the century. 


@@@@@


doc= 2469


Bishop, George (1785-1861), astronomer, was born on 21 August 1785 at Leicester. At the age of eighteen he entered a British wine-making business in London, and later became its proprietor. He expanded the business to the extent that the excise returns were said to exhibit half of all home-made wines as being of his manufacture. Bishop was not educated as a scientist; his scientific career may be said to date from his admission to the Astronomical Society in 1830. Ample and reliable means by that time enabled him to pursue the science he enjoyed. He took lessons in algebra from Augustus De Morgan with a view to reading the 'Mecanique celeste' of Pierre Laplace, and acquired, when nearly fifty, enough mathematical knowledge to enable him to comprehend the scope of its methods. In 1836 he realized a long-cherished desire by erecting an observatory near his home at South Villa, Regent's Park, London. No expense was spared in its equipment, and the excellence of the equatorial furnished by Dollond (with an aperture of 7 inches) confirmed his resolve to pursue at his observatory serious science, not mere amusement. 
Bishop employed the best observers. W. R. Dawes conducted his noted investigations of double stars at South Villa between 1839 and October 1844, when John Russell Hind took over. From the time that Hencke's detection of Astraea (8 December 1845) showed a prospect of success in the search for new planets, the resources of Bishop's observatory were turned in that direction, and with conspicuous results. Between 1847 and 1854 Hind discovered ten small planets, and Marth one, making a total of eleven asteroids dating from South Villa. The ecliptic charts undertaken by Hind to further the search were continued, after his appointment in 1853 as superintendent of the 'Nautical Almanac', by Norman Pogson, Vogel, Marth, and Talmage successively, under his general supervision. They included all stars down to the eleventh magnitude inclusive, and extended over a zone of three degrees on each side of the ecliptic. Seventeen of the twenty-four hours were engraved when the observatory was broken up on the death of its owner. 
A testimonial was awarded to Bishop by the Royal Astronomical Society on 14 January 1848 'for the foundation of an observatory leading to various astronomical discoveries', and presented to him, with a warmly commendatory address, by Sir John Herschel on 11 February. Bishop acted as secretary (1833-9) and as treasurer (1840-57) to the society, and was chosen president in two successive years (1857 and 1858), although his poor health prevented him from taking the chair. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society (9 June 1848), was also a fellow of the Society of Arts, and sat for some years on the council of University College. He published in 1852 'Astronomical Observations taken at the Observatory, South Villa, Regent's Park, during the Years 1839-51', including a catalogue of double stars observed by Dawes and Hind, with valuable 'historical and descriptive notes' by the latter, and observations of new planets and comets and of the temporary star discovered by Hind in Ophiuchus on 27 April 1848. After a long period of illness he died at South Villa on 14 June 1861. After his death the instruments and dome were removed to the home of his son George Bishop, at Twickenham, where the same system of work was pursued under the continued supervision of Hind. 


@@@@@


doc= 2470


Bishop, Sir Henry Rowley (1786-1855), composer, the son of Samuel Bishop, a watchmaker and later haberdasher, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Wigley, was born at 83 Great Portland Street, London, on 18 November 1786. His early education was at Dr Barrow's academy at 8 Soho Square. By the time he was thirteen he was working with his cousin Charles Wigley as a music-seller at 6 Spring Gardens, Charing Cross. His first publications, songs and piano pieces, were issued by this firm in the years 1800 to 1803. When he was about sixteen it was decided that he should go to Newmarket to train as a jockey, but his patron, the racehorse owner Thomas Panton, considered him better suited to the study of music and paid for a course of instruction with the successful opera composer and theoretician Francesco Bianchi. At the same time Bishop continued to compose, and his first stage work, 'Angelina', written in collaboration with Gesualdo Lanza, was performed at the Theatre Royal, Margate, on 30 August 1804. This was followed by music for a number of ballets at the King's Theatre and Drury Lane. Of these, 'Tamerlan et Bajazet', given at the King's Theatre in 1806, was so successful that Bishop obtained a permanent engagement and began to produce the adaptations, compilations, and occasional pieces that were to occupy him constantly for the next thirty years. At this period he also produced a few instrumental compositions, including the first movement of a symphony (1805) and a concertante for flute, oboe, bassoon, violin, and double bass (1807). His great success of these years, however, was his first full-length opera, 'The Circassian Bride', which was very well received at its premiere at Drury Lane on 23 February 1809; but the following night the theatre burnt down and the score was destroyed. Nevertheless, Bishop quickly rewrote portions of it for publication as 'Overture, Songs, and Duets'. Just over a month after the opening of 'The Circassian Bride', on 30 April 1809, he married one of the cast, Elizabeth Sarah Lyon (1787-1831), with whom he had two sons and a daughter. 
After a short period attempting to establish a teaching practice in Bedford the Bishops returned to London for the production at the Lyceum Theatre on 13 March 1810 of Bishop's second three-act opera, 'The Maniac, or, The Swiss Banditti', to a libretto by Samuel J. Arnold, in which Elizabeth Bishop sang a leading role. The opera's successful run of twenty-six performances secured Bishop the offer of a three-year engagement as composer and music director at Covent Garden. During the next three seasons, beginning with 'The Knight of Snowdoun', a three-act musical drama based on Scott's 'The Lady of the Lake', on 5 February 1811, he contributed or arranged varying quantities of music for a host of productions, ranging from burletta to 'operatic drama'. His compositions and arrangements were highly successful with the public and many of them enjoyed wide currency outside the theatre in publications that were issued immediately after the works had been staged. At the expiration of his initial contract Bishop's engagement was renewed for a further five years, and he continued his routine of providing whatever music was required for the theatre's productions. Among his successes at that time was his contribution to Pocock's 'The Miller and his Men', first performed on 21 October 1813 and revived with additions the following year, and the nine numbers he wrote for the same author's 'For England, Ho!', produced on 15 December 1813. During this five-year period Bishop composed or contributed to the music of some forty productions, including incidental music for 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', the first of a series of Shakespeare adaptations with which he was involved. Individual numbers from these works, such as the glees 'Our Ship in Port' ('For England, Ho!') and 'The Chough and Crow' ('Guy Mannering', 11 March 1816), gained lasting popularity. 
Despite his heavy commitment to Covent Garden, Bishop became a founder member of the Philharmonic Society in 1813, for which he composed and directed an overture in E at a concert on 26 May 1817. He also found time to compose a string quartet in 1816, though he did not publish it, and for George Thompson of Edinburgh he set Burns's 'The Jolly Beggars' in 1817. His engagement at Covent Garden continued for another six years, during which he contributed to some thirty productions, beginning with very free adaptations of 'The Barber of Seville' (combining Paisiello's and Rossini's music with his own) on 13 October 1818, and Mozart's 'The Marriage of Figaro' on 6 March 1819. Bishop later claimed that it gave him pain to incorporate his own music into these pieces, 'which only the nature of my engagement with the theatre would have obliged me to do -- and that their having been inserted into Mozart's or Rossini's operas was contrary to my opinion and wholly against my will' (Northcott, 34). Among the plays for which he provided music were adaptations of Shakespeare's 'Macbeth' and 'The Comedy of Errors' (1819), 'Twelfth Night' (1820), 'The Tempest', 'Two Gentlemen of Verona', and '2 Henry IV' (1821), and 'As You Like It' (1824), as well as the usual mixture of other plays, occasional pieces, and operas. A three-act musical drama, 'The Law of Java', produced on 11 May 1822, contained a piece, 'Mynheer van Dunck', that became especially popular as a separate number (a particular favourite with W. E. Gladstone, who used to sing it at parties). But Bishop's most lasting success was the ballad 'Home, Sweet Home', from 'Clari, or, The Maid of Milan', given its premiere on 8 May 1823; this piece was, according to the title-page of its first edition, 'composed and partly founded on a Sicilian air by Henry R. Bishop'. It was made especially popular by Jenny Lind in the second half of the century and remains one of the best-known of nineteenth-century ballads. 
In addition to his work at Covent Garden, Bishop was music director at the King's Theatre in 1816 and 1817, and in 1819 and 1820 he managed the so-called oratorios, a series of mixed concerts given in the opera houses during Lent, when the theatres were closed for stage productions. He made three visits to Paris in 1814, 1816, and 1822. From 20 January to 5 October 1820 he was in Dublin, directing performances at the Rotunda (Theatre Royal), and he was awarded the freedom of the Irish capital on 21 August. By the 1820s Bishop's music had become widely popular, and numbers from his stage works began to provide material for other musicians to compose variations, fantasias, and similar pieces; the indefatigable John Weippert based seven of his numerous sets of quadrilles on items from Bishop's celebrated operas during these years. 
Bishop's employment at Covent Garden came to an end in 1824 after a dispute over his salary. In November 1824 his adaptation of Weber's 'Der Freischutz' was given at Drury Lane, and he accepted R. W. Elliston's offer of an engagement there in the following year. His first major piece in the new house was a three-act opera, 'The Fall of Algiers', which was given its premiere on 19 January 1825. This was followed during the rest of the year by a heterogeneous mixture of pieces, similar to those he had produced at Covent Garden: incidental music to two historical dramas, 'Masaniello' and 'William Tell' (foreshadowing Auber and Rossini respectively by several years), music for an English adaptation of Goethe's 'Faust', and a 'spectacle' entitled 'The Coronation of Charles X'. The news that Weber was writing an opera for Covent Garden, where he was to direct it himself in 1826, led the management of Drury Lane to commission Bishop to write a counter-attraction, 'Aladdin', a 'romantic fairy opera', which opened on 29 April, shortly after Weber's 'Oberon'. Although Bishop took unusual care over its composition and attempted musically to meet his rival on his own ground, it did not seriously challenge Weber's opera. Further routine pieces followed before Bishop left his post at Drury Lane a couple of years later, but he continued to provide similar fare for the London stage for the next decade. From 1830 to 1833 he was music director at Vauxhall Gardens, for which he had earlier written his cantata 'Waterloo' (1826). During this period he composed a number of short dramatic pieces, in conjunction with the librettist Fitzball, for performance at the gardens, beginning with the 'vaudeville opera' 'Under the Oak', and the 'nautical burletta' 'Adelaida, or, The Royal William' in 1830, and concluding with the one-act operettas 'The Magic Fan', 'The Bottle of Champagne', and 'The Sedan Chair' in 1832. 
On 9 July 1831, shortly after the death of his first wife, Bishop married his former singing pupil Anna Riviere (1810-1884) ['see 'Bishop, Anna], with whom he had two daughters and a son. During the next few years they made several concert tours in the provinces, where Anna Bishop acquired a high reputation as a performer of sacred music and English song; they were accompanied on these tours by the harpist Nicholas Bochsa, with whom she absconded to Hamburg in 1839. 
A departure from Bishop's usual activities was the composition of his sacred cantata 'The Seventh Day', commissioned and performed by the Philharmonic Society on 3 March 1834. In this work Bishop forsook his usually Italianate style for that of Spohr, whose 'The Last Judgement' had just begun to captivate English musicians; but it was not a success. A 'scena', 'The Departure from Paradise', performed at the Philharmonic on 6 June 1836, was equally unsuccessful, notwithstanding its performance by the celebrated soprano Maria Malibran. A third sacred composition, 'The Fallen Angel', was performed as his exercise for the degree of BMus at Oxford on 10 June 1839, but it too failed to secure further performances. The texts of all three of these works were taken from Milton's 'Paradise Lost'. During the 1830s Bishop's contributions to the London theatres declined in number, and they ceased altogether at about the time of the breakdown of his marriage. His last work for the theatre, written for Covent Garden, where he had been engaged by Lucia Vestris as music director for the 1840-41 season, was the 'allegorical and national masque' 'The Fortunate Isles, or, The Triumphs of Britannia', given on 12 February 1840 to celebrate Queen Victoria's marriage. Over a period of thirty-six years Bishop had composed, contributed to, or arranged around 130 stage works; selections from some 70 of them were published, and Frederick Corder calculated that these volumes contain 48 overtures, 190 airs and ballads, 53 display songs, 73 duets and trios, 150 glees and ensemble pieces, and 340 melodramas, marches, and ballet airs. In 1840 the composer published his collected glees, trios, quartets, quintets, and choruses in eight large volumes dedicated to the 'Glee and Choral Societies of Great Britain'. 
On 1 June 1842, at Prince Albert's suggestion, Bishop was knighted, and a fortnight later he was appointed a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. In November 1841 he had been elected to the Reid professorship of music at Edinburgh University, but he resigned the chair, after having given only two lectures, in December 1843. In 1842 he became permanent conductor of the Ancient Concerts, which he had conducted periodically since 1840, and for which he provided many arrangements and additional accompaniments (twenty volumes of which survive in the British Library); he retained this post until the series was discontinued in 1848. In that year he succeeded William Crotch as Heather professor of music at Oxford. His last substantial composition was an ode for the installation of the earl of Derby as chancellor of the university, in 1853, and on 22 June 1854 he became a Doctor of Music of the university. In connection with his Oxford appointment he wrote a 'Syllabus of a Course of 6 Lectures on... Vocal Music... in the 17th and 18th Centuries', published in 1848, and left a manuscript of 'Lectures on the history of music', written shortly afterwards. At this period he often lectured on music and was much involved in arranging and editing. He edited Handel's chamber duets and cantatas for the London Handel Society and collaborated with Charles Mackay on a series of English national songs. 
During his last years Bishop was in poor health, and in March 1855 it was decided that an operation was required to ameliorate his condition. On 24 April he made his will, in which the value of his estate was given 'as not exceeding $200'. He died at his house at 13 Cambridge Street, Hyde Park, on Monday evening, 30 April 1855; a post-mortem certified that he died from 'cancer (scirrhus) of bladder and atrophy of kidney'. He was buried on 5 May at Marylebone cemetery, Finchley Road, where a monument to his memory (with incorrect years of birth and death) was later erected by public subscription. 


@@@@@


doc= 2471


Bishop, John (1664/5-1737), organist and composer, was seventy-two at the time of his death, and so was probably born in late 1664 or in 1665, quite possibly in Gloucester, where from 1679 to 1685 he was a chorister at the cathedral. Nothing is known of his parents. According to Hawkins, Bishop was a pupil of Daniel Roseingrave, but if so, it would have to have been during the period 1679-81, when Roseingrave was organist of Gloucester and not, as Hawkins says, Salisbury, which latter post he held from 1692 to 1698. 
In 1687 Bishop became a lay clerk at King's College, Cambridge, and, within a year, master of the choristers as well. In 1696 he was appointed organist of Winchester College in succession to Jeremiah Clarke, and, in June 1697, he also became a lay vicar at the cathedral. Some thirty years later, on 29 June 1729, he succeeded Vaughan Richardson as organist and master of the choristers, holding both posts, together with that at the college, until his death. Though he evidently faced a younger and better player (James Kent) in the competition for this latter appointment, it was, said Hayes, his 'age and amiable disposition', not to mention 'some misfortunes in his family', which 'inclined the Dean and Chapter to decide the contest wholly in his favour' (Hayes, v). 
As a composer Bishop is of no great interest, and much of his music (almost entirely sacred) survives only in manuscript. His most substantial work, a service in D, is to be found complete only in Christ Church, Oxford, but there are copies of the morning canticles elsewhere. A 'Sett of New Psalm Tunes' first printed in 1710 was clearly intended for parish use; reissued 'with variety of anthems' in 1722 and again in 1730, it also has a 1725 supplement containing another twelve similar pieces. His Latin graces for the use of Winchester College were published by Hayes in 1780. His only instrumental music, a set of airs and sonatas for two flutes printed for the author in December 1700, does not survive. Bishop died in Winchester on 19 December 1737 and was buried on 22 December on the west side of the college cloister, where his memorial (transcribed by Hayes) speaks of an honest and upright life, his gentle manners, and faithful service over forty years. 


@@@@@


doc= 2472


Bishop, John (1797-1873), surgeon, the fourth son of Samuel Bishop, of Pimperne, Dorset, was born on 15 September 1797 and educated at the grammar school at Childe Okeford in Dorset. It was originally intended that he should have a career in the legal profession, but this came to nothing and for many years he led the life of a country gentleman. When he was about twenty-five years old he was persuaded by his cousin, John Tucker, a surgeon of Bridport, to enter the medical profession. After a short time working with Tucker at Bridport, he moved to London and studied at St George's Hospital under Sir Everard Home. He also attended the lectures of Sir Charles Bell, George James Guthrie, and George Pearson, and he was a regular attendant at the chemistry courses which were delivered at the Royal Institution. Bishop became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1824 and an honorary fellow in 1843. He was an elected member of the college council (1849-61), and in 1852 he became president of the Medical Society of London. 
Bishop soon acquired a reputation as a careful and skilled observer. This secured him the offices of senior surgeon to the Islington Dispensary and surgeon to the Northern and St Pancras dispensaries and to the Drapers' Benevolent Institution. In 1844 he contributed a paper to the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society', on the physiology of the human voice. In the same year he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and he became a corresponding member of the medical societies of Berlin and Madrid. The Royal Academy of Science of Paris awarded him two prizes for his memoirs entitled 'The human and comparative anatomy and physiology of voice'; 'Experimental Researches into the Physiology of the Human Voice' appeared in 1836. Bishop was also the author of 'On Articulate Sounds' (1851) and 'Researches into the Pathology and Treatment of Deformities in the Human Body' (1852). These works were considered remarkable for their careful examinations and for the mathematical demonstrations given of each theory advanced. Bishop contributed the articles 'Larynx', 'Motion', and 'Voice' to Robert Bentley Todd's 'Cyclopaedia of Anatomy and Physiology'. He delivered the Hunterian oration at the Royal College of Surgeons in 1861, but was not considered to be an eloquent or fluent speaker. 
Bishop was a man of varied attainments; he was knowledgeable about continental as well as English literature, and up until a few months of his death he was deeply interested in the progress of science. In later years his health began to fail: he lost an eye, and broke an arm while trying to apprehend a pick-pocket in London's Regent Street. Bishop, who was married twice, died on 29 September 1873 at Strangeways House, Marnhull, Dorset, within a few miles of his birthplace; he left a widow, Sarah Hilton Bishop, but no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 2473


Bishop, Samuel (1731-1795), headmaster and poet, was born in St John Street, London, on 21 September 1731, the eldest son of George Bishop, who came from Hollway, near Cattistock, in Dorset, and Mary, daughter of Samuel Palmer of Southover, near Lewes, in Sussex. He was entered at Merchant Taylors' School, London, on 6 June 1743, where he was a keen and able student. In June 1750 he was elected to St John's College, Oxford, and matriculated in July. Educated under Dr Thomas Fry he was elected a fellow of his college in June 1753, and in the following April he graduated BA. Not long afterwards he was ordained curate of Headley in Surrey, and he lived either in that village or at Oxford until 1758, when he took his MA degree. 
On 26 July 1758 Bishop was appointed third under-master of his old school. He served as curate of St Mary Abchurch and then as lecturer of St Christopher-le-Stocks, both in London; he was also chaplain to John Warren, bishop of Bangor. In 1763, at St Augustine with St Faith, Watling Street, he married one of his mother's relatives, Mary, daughter of Joseph Palmer of Old Malling, near Lewes, and they settled in Scots Yard, Bush Lane, London. He rose to the second under-mastership on 11 February 1772, the first under-mastership on 12 August 1778, and was elected headmaster on 22 January 1783. He and his wife and daughter Mary ('bap'. 1763) moved to Suffolk Lane, next to the school, and he also took a house in Golders Green for the sake of his deteriorating health. He was presented to the rectory of Ditton in Kent, and on 1 March 1789 was rewarded for his long service to the school with the living of St Martin Outwich in London. 
Opinions varied on Bishop's success as headmaster. Eulogized by one pupil, Harry Bristow Wilson, in his history of the school, Bishop was portrayed as a mild, affectionate, and inspiring schoolmaster. His memorialist, Thomas Clare, wrote of his desire to avoid any unnecessary severity in maintaining discipline, but another pupil, Charles Matthews, described Bishop and his under-master, John Rose, as 'cruel tyrants' (Farr, 58-9). Matthews related how the boys threatened rebellion following a particularly vicious bout of flogging by Rose, and thereby forced Bishop to end all flogging in the school. Bishop's pupils were certainly not afraid of ridiculing him, for Matthews recorded how a favourite sport was to shoot paper darts into his oversize powdered wig so that it resembled 'a fretful porcupine' (Draper, 112). Bishop, however, was a diligent headmaster and devoted his holidays to school work. 
Bishop was a prolific and able poet but published only some of his compositions during his lifetime; they included the anonymous 'Ode to the Earl of Lincoln on the Duke of Newcastle's Retirement' (1762), said to have been prompted by the connection of Bishop's future wife's family with the duke, and a collection of Latin and English poems in the 'Feriae poeticae' (1766). The majority of his poems were published after his death as 'Poetical Works of the Rev. Samuel Bishop, A.M.' (2 vols., 1796), with a life of the author by Thomas Clare. A second edition was issued in 1800 and a third in 1802. His subjects are primarily domestic and familiar, and testify to a very contented marriage and home life. Southey said of Bishop that 'no other poet crowds so many syllables into a verse... His domestic poems breathe a Dutch spirit -- by which I mean a very amiable and happy feeling of domestic duties and enjoyments' ('Southey's Common-place Book', 4.308-9). He also wrote essays and poems for 'The Ladies Club' in the 'Public Ledger' and published a sermon on the anniversary of Henry Raine's charity. 
Bishop died on 17 November 1795, worn out by physical suffering caused by gout and water on the chest; he was buried at St Martin Outwich. He was survived by his wife, who subsequently married Bishop's memorialist, the Revd Thomas Clare, later vicar of St Bride's, Fleet Street. A volume of Bishop's sermons on practical subjects appeared in 1798. 


@@@@@


doc= 2474


Bishop, William (c.1554-1624), Roman Catholic bishop, was born at Brailes, Warwickshire, the eldest son of John Bishop ('c'.1509-1601) and Helen Onsley (died 1588). His family was armigerous and came originally from Yorkshire; they remained on the same estate at Brailes, faithful to Catholicism, until 1830. He was sent to Oxford at the age of sixteen, probably to Gloucester Hall or Lincoln College. He went down without taking a degree and is recorded next at the English seminary then at Rheims, which he left on 16 February 1579 for Rome, where he continued his studies at the English College. He was ordained in Rome in September 1581 and was then sent back to Rheims, and thence on the mission to England. 
When Bishop landed at Rye with two other priests he was immediately captured. He was able to tell the officials at the port that he was a merchant, but when asked next what he traded in he had no answer ready and was arrested. As Godfrey Anstruther comments: 'he seems to have had something of the simplicity of the dove' (Anstruther, 1.38). He was committed to the Marshalsea and was condemned to death in 1583 on the false charge of plotting the death of the queen. He certainly came very close to death at this point, but the government wished to avoid too many martyrdoms, largely to improve its relations with France, and so Bishop and a number of other priests were, in 1585, loaded into a boat and dropped off on the coast of France. He went to Paris and enrolled as a student at the Sorbonne, where he eventually took the degree of doctor of divinity. Throughout his subsequent career his ideas were strongly influenced by mildly Gallican or 'Sorbonnist' ideas, especially on matters of papal power, the independence of national churches, and the rights of the secular clergy. When the persecution in England abated somewhat he returned to resume his work there as a missionary priest, leaving Rheims on 15 May 1591. 
Bishop gradually grew to prominence on the English mission among the secular clergy, who were at this time developing a hostility towards what they saw as the excessive influence of the Society of Jesus on their arrangements in England and on the wider politics of the mission, especially in terms of the relations of Catholics with the queen. In 1598 the pope was persuaded by the Jesuits to appoint George Blackwell, a secular priest, as archpriest or head of the mission in England. This immediately inflamed a section of the secular clergy and they deputed Bishop and Robert Charnock to go to Rome to appeal against this appointment. So began the archpriest or appellant controversy, which rumbled on for the rest of Elizabeth's reign. Bishop and Charnock arrived in Rome on 11 December 1598 and were almost immediately arrested at the behest of Robert Parsons, the leading English Jesuit, who saw them as factious and unrepresentative of Catholic opinion. They were put on trial, and Bishop was now banished again, this time by the pope from Rome, with the additional exclusion that he should not return to England. Bishop was as much affected by the pope's ban as he had been by the queen's, and after the papal position on the appellants had softened he was back in England, by 31 January 1603, when he headed a list of thirteen Catholic priests who made a profession of loyalty to the queen. This was in itself an action which was part of the archpriest controversy, in that it was intended to highlight the disloyalty of the Jesuits. Despite this declaration of obedience he was arrested in England again in 1603, shortly after the accession of James I, but was soon released. 
Bishop seems to have worked largely as a missionary priest in his own area, the midlands. He was reported as being in Herefordshire in 1605, when he was staying at Trevil Park with a Francis Bishop, who was perhaps a kinsman, and in Oxfordshire in 1610. About this time a government spy described him as 'tall of stature, flaxen hair, broad-faced, somewhat pale, somewhat gross, an enemy of the Jesuits' (Anstruther, 1.38). It was during the reign of James I that Bishop wrote his five contributions to the polemical literature of the time, mainly in answer to the anti-Catholic writings of the protestants William Perkins and George Abbot. As a controversialist Bishop was thorough and disputatious, but hardly original or lively. Bishop was imprisoned for a third time in England in 1611, but refused to take the oath of allegiance, although his reason for doing so was not because he supported papal power in temporals (which in taking the oath he would have denied), but because he did not wish to alienate the pope from the secular clergy and thus strengthen the Jesuits. On his release from prison Bishop went again to Paris, where he became a member of Arras College, which was a new postgraduate society for the English secular clergy. Here his Sorbonnist tendencies were reinforced, and he continued to study and write. 
The death of the last surviving Marian bishop, Thomas Goldwell, in 1585, who in any case had not exercised his office since the accession of Elizabeth I, had left the English Catholics without a bishop. The appointment of Blackwell as archpriest, against which Bishop had struggled so hard, had been an attempt to overcome the problem. But the obvious solution was to appoint a new English bishop. When the third archpriest died in 1621 this point was successfully raised in Rome and the pope, who now favoured the English seculars, chose William Bishop as the first post-Reformation bishop to the English. Few can have had such perfect revenge on their professional rivals as Bishop, for his appointment represented the final triumph of the anti-Jesuit appellants. Bishop took as his see Chalcedon, a Greek city 'in partibus infidelium'. So started the tradition, later enshrined in English law, by which Catholic bishops avoided English sees in their titles. According to Peter Heylin the story was that the Jesuits persuaded James I to object to the pope's giving the new bishop an English title, and so it was through their jealous machinations that the curious foreign designation was adopted (Heylin, 2.96-7). In truth, however, it would have been needlessly provocative to have used an English diocese, and perhaps also geographically confusing, since Bishop's faculties extended to the whole country. The appointment, however, did not have the effect of reuniting the English Catholics, although this became clearer during the period of Bishop's successor. 
Bishop was consecrated in Paris on 4 June 1623 and set out for England on 29 July, arriving at midnight on the coast of Kent after a three-day voyage. At nearly seventy years old he then walked 13 miles until he reached a Catholic safe house. His term in office was brief. He had time to appoint a chapter and to travel around administering the sacrament of episcopal confirmation, which the country had been deprived of for so long. He also entered into conflict with the Scots, over whom his jurisdiction was at first claimed to extend. But before he could begin a projected visitation of his flock he died, on 13 April 1624, at Bishop's Court, or Hall, Essex, the home of the courtier Sir Basil Brook. He may have been buried at St Pancras, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 2475


Bisset, Baldred (c.1260-1311?), ecclesiastic, is best known for advocating the cause of Scottish independence before Pope Boniface VIII in 1301. Traditionally believed to originate in Stirlingshire, Bisset may have been related to William Biset, lord of Upsettlington, Berwickshire, who was constable of Stirling Castle in 1306 under Edward I and briefly a Stirlingshire landholder during the reign of Robert I. 
According to David Buchanan, writing in the first half of the seventeenth century, Bisset attended school in Stirling, studied philosophy at St Andrews, and furthered his studies in France. But no contemporary evidence supports such a claim, and the first reliable record places him in Bologna in 1277, when he was styled 'Dominus'; he was called 'Master' by 1284 and most probably graduated as doctor of civil law, since he was described as 'Dottor di Legge' ('Doctor of law') in 1305. 
Bisset pursued a career in the Scottish church in the 1280s. He was a canon of Caithness by August 1284, and was rector of Kinghorn in St Andrews diocese by 19 September 1289. He apparently remained in possession of the Kinghorn living until his replacement, some time between 1296 and 1301, by an English cleric, Peter of Dunwich. He learned of this while in Bologna, and appealed directly to Rome late in 1304, and by proxy at the diocesan court of St Andrews shortly thereafter. 
Before his return to Bologna, Bisset held a key position in diocesan administration as official of St Andrews, presiding over the bishop's ordinary court during the episcopate of William Fraser (1280-97). He appears in this office before October 1282 and continued to hold it until some time in 1289. During the same decade he took part in litigation between the sees of York and Durham, apparently supporting the latter. Little is known of his career during the 1290s, though he may well have taught law in Bologna. 
Bisset's most enduring legacy, however, was as spokesman for the Scottish cause at the papal curia in 1301, while John Soulis was acting as guardian for the exiled King John, who had been forced to abdicate in 1296. After Boniface VIII had addressed his bull 'Scimus, fili' to Edward I in 1299, claiming papal supremacy over Scotland, the English king, in his reply of 1301, adduced historical evidence to support his right to the overlordship of Scotland. Edward's letter included references to legendary material derived from Geoffrey of Monmouth, which inspired a reply in kind. 
The Scottish government appointed Master William Frere, archdeacon of Lothian, to lead a commission that included Bisset and Master William of Eaglesham. The three Scottish proctors worked on a reply to Edward's letter in July 1301. Three separate drafts of an informal version, known somewhat misleadingly as the 'Instructions', were composed. Two of these survive as full texts in fifteenth-century manuscripts of an appendix to John Fordun's 'Chronica gentis Scotorum' and of Walter Bower's 'Scotichronicon'. A briefer version, known as the 'Processus' ('Pleading'), also survives, though there is no evidence it was ever presented in court; in any case, Boniface reversed his previous support for the Scottish side in August 1302. 
Bisset may well have been the principal author of the 'Instructions' and 'Pleading', as a number of early Scottish chronicles suggest. The author shows himself a skilful polemicist with a good knowledge of canon and civil law and well informed about thirteenth-century Anglo-Scottish relations. To counter Edward's argument from the legendary history of the Britons, Bisset adapts a legend that traced Scottish origins back to Scota, daughter of the Egyptian pharaoh, and her husband, Gaythelos, a Greek prince. At the same time, Bisset was sophisticated enough to argue that recent history provides evidence that is more relevant and better documented than that of the remote past. 
Bisset returned to Bologna after his activities in the papal curia and was appointed vicar-general there to Bishop Hubert by April 1305. He seems to have spent most of his remaining life on the continent, where he occasionally appeared at Avignon. But he went on an embassy to Lanercost, to meet with Edward I late in 1306, after Robert I's usurpation of the throne; Bisset's purpose is unclear, but he may have sought to negotiate against Bruce's interests. Bisset's last important activity was to lead the defence of Boniface VIII in a posthumous trial in the consistory at Avignon. He was still alive on 27 April 1311, when he was mentioned in a record of Pope Clement V, and probably died soon thereafter. 


@@@@@


doc= 2476


Bisse, Philip (bap. 1666, d. 1721), bishop of Hereford, was baptized on 28 May 1666 at Oldbury on the Hill, Gloucestershire, the elder son of the Revd John Bisse ('c'.1638-1686), rector of the parish, and his wife, Joyce Gyles. He was a cousin of Robert Harley, through whose patronage he no doubt won his later promotion to the episcopal bench. His brother Thomas Bisse (1675-1731) was notable for his part in founding the Three Choirs festival. Philip entered Winchester College in 1682, where, though the college visitor later disallowed it, his family claimed for him special privileges as one of the founder's numerous kin. In June 1686 he entered New College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1690 and proceeded MA on 15 January 1694; he became a fellow and subsequently BD and DD (29 January 1706). On 13 February 1706 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. In October 1710 he was consecrated bishop of St David's, and in September 1713 he was enthroned bishop of Hereford. 
As for patronage, Bisse had already improved his position in 1704 by marrying Bridget Osborne (1661-1718), daughter of Thomas Osborne, first duke of Leeds, formerly lord treasurer of Charles II, and widow of Charles fitz-Charles, earl of Plymouth, the king's illegitimate son. Bisse was her chaplain, and perhaps for this reason news of the marriage was not published until 1706. Described as Robert Harley's 'urbane and socially-minded cousin, whose talents as a genial matchmaker for the aristocratic young were unsurpassed' (Bennett, 141), Bisse gave him, as a moderate Hanover tory, political support. As earl of Oxford and treasurer, Harley repaid this by having him preferred to his two bishoprics in 1710 and 1713 respectively. In return Bisse supported Harley, even through his impeachment, by frequent attendance in the House of Lords until at least 1719, and also by often acting as proxy for Bishop George Hooper of Bath and Wells. In ecclesiastical politics, too, like John Robinson, bishop successively of Bristol and London, and like Hooper, Bisse was a moderate in the Harleian mould. Certainly as bishop of St David's he was a prominent member of a small inner group of six tory bishops in convocation in 1710. Chosen by them to bear a message to the queen, he was noted to have managed his business so well that the queen 'was pleased to send us a message in writing' (Sykes, 1.130). In 1714 some thought that his political and ecclesiastical activity betrayed a reputation for angling, like others, for further preferment to the archbishopric of York when it fell vacant on John Sharp's death; and a contemporary noted that 'our friend the bishop of Hereford never at first desired a bishopric so much as he now does a better' ('Portland MSS', 178). 
Despite his political connections Bisse was an exemplary diocesan bishop. He undertook his episcopal duties with efficiency and care of the highest order. The articles for his primary visitation, originally planned for 1714 but postponed until 1716, displayed an unusual thoroughness. They were presented in a new format, and copied by his successors; and there were special new sections on charities, and enquiries into peculation and overzealousness of his diocesan officers. In 1718 he introduced a new investigation into the use and abuse of diocesan charitable investments. Moreover not only was Bisse enthroned in person at a time when many bishops used proxies, but he also himself regularly conducted the ordinations in Hereford Cathedral. Seven out of the eleven ordinations he undertook were held there and only one was outside the diocese -- at Duke Street Chapel, Westminster, soon after he became bishop. Furthermore he impressed many by extensively refurbishing the cathedral and the bishop's palace. He died at Westminster on 6 September 1721, and was buried in Hereford Cathedral on 11 September. His only published works were a few sermons. He may have been a political schemer and an artful manipulator of patronage, but, more important, he was a dedicated and efficient diocesan bishop. 


@@@@@


doc= 2477


Bisse, Thomas (1675-1731), Church of England clergyman and founder of the Three Choirs festival, was baptized on 6 April 1675 at Oldbury on the Hill, Gloucestershire, one of two sons of John Bisse ('c'.1638-1686), rector of that parish, and his wife, Joyce Gyles. Bisse came from a Somerset clerical family of long standing and, at times, distinction. His elder brother, Philip Bisse (bap. 1666, d. 1721), was bishop of Hereford (1713-21). Thomas entered Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in 1691, and later became a fellow; he graduated BA in 1695, and proceeded MA in 1698, BD in 1708 and DD in 1712. He was ordained deacon at Oxford on 4 June 1699. In 1715 he was preacher at the Rolls Chapel, London. 
On becoming bishop of Hereford in 1713 Philip Bisse appointed Thomas to a prebend in Hereford Cathedral and to the incumbency of Cradley and part of Ledbury. There is evidence of non-residence at least until 1716, when his Cradley churchwardens acidly noted that Bisse was always in London. But in that year his brother promoted him to the chancellorship of the cathedral and to the prebend of Colwall in place of the nonjuring John Harvey, who had been deprived of both. In the same year Bisse also succeeded Harvey as rector of Weston under Penyard, Herefordshire, where he added a brewhouse to the parsonage. He held his chancellorship, the two prebends, and all his Hereford livings until his death, but his parishes were well tended by curates in his absence. 
Besides these offices Bisse is chiefly remembered in musical circles as the instigator in 1724 of the Three Choirs festival, which survived to become the oldest musical festival in the country. Before moving to Herefordshire he had been much impressed by the annual charity services for the Corporation of the Sons of the Clergy in London (founded in 1655); these took the form of a choral service and an appropriate sermon, one of which Bisse had preached at St Paul's. On his arrival in Herefordshire he became an enthusiastic supporter of the existing occasional meetings of the three cathedral choirs of Hereford, Gloucester, and Worcester, and at Bisse's suggestion these meetings were put on a regular footing, possibly in 1716 or 1717, and certainly by 1724; each cathedral took a turn every three years, and there was a sermon in support of the orphans of clergy in the three dioceses. Nowadays the sermon is preached on the Sunday preceding the festival. 
Bisse was regarded as an eloquent preacher. Among the subjects of his published sermons are defence of episcopacy and charity schools, but perhaps the most notable are 'The Beauty of Holiness in the Common Prayer' (1716), 'A Rationale on Cathedral Worship or Choir-Service' (1720), and 'Musick the Delight of the Sons of Men', the last preached at the Three Choirs festival in 1726. He also published two Latin poems, 'Lusus poetica olim conscripti' (1720) and 'Microscopium' (1721). He died on 22 April 1731. It is not known whether he was married. 


@@@@@


doc= 2478


Bisset, Charles (1717-1791), physician and military engineer, was born at Glenalbert, near Dunkeld, Perthshire, the son of a lawyer who specialized in Scots law. He studied medicine in Edinburgh and in 1740 was appointed second surgeon of the military hospital, Jamaica. He later served on board Admiral Vernon's fleet, by some accounts as a naval surgeon and by others as surgeon of one of the marine regiments subsequently disbanded. After spending five years in the West Indies and America he returned home in 1745 owing to ill-health. 
In May 1746 Bisset obtained an ensigncy in the 42nd highlanders, then commanded by Lord John Murray, with which he served in the unsuccessful attack on the French coast near L'Orient, in September that same year. After spending the winter with his regiment at Limerick, he accompanied it to the Low Countries, where it was first engaged at Sandberg, near Hulst, in Dutch Flanders, in April 1747. Military sketches of this affair and of the defences of Bergen-op-Zoom, drawn by him, having been submitted by Lord John Murray to the duke of Cumberland, Bisset was ordered to the latter fortress to prepare reports of the progress of the siege. For his brave and skilful performance of this duty he was recommended by the duke of Cumberland for the post of engineer-extraordinary in the brigade of engineers attached to the army. Bisset served in this capacity for the remainder of the war. At the peace of 1748 the engineer brigade was broken up, and Bisset was placed on half-pay as a lieutenant. In 1751 he published an essay entitled 'The Theory and Construction of Fortifications', based on his military experiences. 
Bisset returned to the profession of medicine, and went into practice at the village of Skelton, in Cleveland, Yorkshire, where he built up a lucrative practice. In 1765 he took his MD at St Andrews University. He was the author of a variety of medical publications. In 1755 he published his 'Treatise on Scurvy', which he dedicated to the lords of the Admiralty. In this he recommended the consumption of alcohol for the prevention of scurvy, contrary to the teachings of James Lind. In 1762 he published 'An Essay on the Medical Constitution of Great Britain', a manuscript of which he presented to the Leeds Infirmary. His publication 'Medical Essays and Observations' (1766) was subsequently translated into German and Italian. 
Bisset also wrote on non-medical topics, among them politics and naval tactics. A manuscript treatise by him entitled 'Permanent and Temporary Fortifications and the Attack and Defence of Temporary Defensive Works', which is dedicated to George, prince of Wales, and dated 1778, is preserved in the British Library (Add. MS 19695). Some contemporaries, perturbed by his proficiency in both military and medical subjects, questioned the authenticity of his medical qualifications. In reply Bisset published a rejoinder in which he outlined his medical qualifications and experience. A copy of William Cullen's 'First Lines of Practice of Physic', with numerous manuscript notes by him, was preserved in the library of the London Medical Society. 
Bisset was thin in person and of weakly habit. His correspondence with Dr John Coakley Lettsom gives some insight into his character. He was married, and retired to Knayton, near Thirsk in Yorkshire, where he died in 1791. He was buried at Leake church. His wife, Ann, died on 31 August 1810, aged seventy-six. 


@@@@@


doc= 2479


Bisset, James (1762?-1832), artist and writer of verse, was born in Perth, the son of a merchant. He received his early education at a dame-school. He developed early a love of art and literature and from the age of nine began regularly to take the 'Gentleman's Magazine' with the help of pocket money supplied by an indulgent uncle. His father's business ventures were unsuccessful, and after learning writing, drawing, and accounts at Perth Academy, Bisset was sent to Birmingham, aged thirteen, to work for an older brother who was a merchant there. 
At the age of fifteen Bisset became an artist's apprentice at a japanning firm in Birmingham, where he spent five years learning the trade. After a period as a journeyman painter (he was listed in the 'Birmingham Directory' of 1785 as a miniature painter) he began experimenting on his own account, and invented a method of painting on the inside of convex glasses, which enabled him to set up his own business. He married in 1787; with his wife, Dolly, he had ten children, four of whom survived. By 1797 he was a fancy painter in New Street. In the latter premises he established a museum and shop for the sale of curiosities. He was also a coiner of medals, and was permitted to use the designation medallist to his majesty. On the title-page of one of his books he advertised medallions of their majesties and of several leading statesmen, and a medal commemorating the death and victory of Nelson. Bisset also had great facility in composing amusing and grandiloquent verses on the topics of the day; while he obtained a considerable profit from their sale, they served to attract customers to his museum and to advertise his medals. Among his earlier volumes of verse were 'The Orphan Boy', 'Flights of Fancy', 'Theatrum oceani', 'Songs of Peace' (1802), and 'The patriotic clarion, or, Britain's call to glory: original songs written on the threatened invasion' (1803). The last was dedicated by permission to the duke of York, and the presentation copy to George III with Bisset's inscription is in the British Library. One of his most notable works is his 'Poetic survey round Birmingham, with a brief description of the different curiosities and manufactures of the place, accompanied with a magnificent directory, with the names and professions, &c. superbly engraved in emblematic plates' (1800). A second edition of the 'Directory' appeared in 1808, with several additional plates, but without the 'Poetic Survey'. In 1804 he published 'Critical Essays on the Dramatic Essays of the Young Roscius'. In Birmingham he belonged to the Minerva Club, consisting of twelve members, nicknamed the Apostles, who met at the Leicester Arms to discuss political subjects. A picture of the members was painted by the Prussian artist Johann Eckstein; Bisset, as the oldest surviving member, fell heir to it. 
In 1813 Bisset moved to Leamington, where he had opened a museum, newsroom, and picture gallery in the preceding year. A 'Picturesque Guide to Leamington', enlivened by stray scraps of verse, was published by him in 1814, followed by 'Comic Strictures on Birmingham's Fine Arts and Conversaziones, by an Old Townsman', in 1829. His verses also appeared occasionally in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. He boasted that he had sold over 100,000 of his different works, and that many had reached the fifteenth and sixteenth editions. He died at Leamington on 17 August 1832, and was buried there, where a monument was erected by his friends to his memory. Bisset's collection of pictures, which included several celebrated paintings, as well as some pieces by himself, was sold by auction after his death. 
Bisset left a manuscript memoir, written in 1818 for his family, whose account both 'conveyed the ease with which the Birmingham manufacturer, endowed with skill, artistry, and technology, moved between the gentlemanly and industrial worlds' (Berg, 32), and illustrated the changing forms of male sociability in the period (Davidoff and Hall, 416-19). 


@@@@@


doc= 2480


Bisset, James (1795-1872), scholar, was the son of George Bisset and his wife, Mary Adamson. He was born on 20 April 1795 in the parish of Udny in Aberdeenshire, where his father was parish schoolmaster and headmaster of a private academy and boarding-school. James was the second son of a large family; one brother, Thomas, became vicar of Pontefract (1865-78), another, Charles, was incumbent of Upholland in Wigan (1844-81), and a third attained the rank of colonel in the East India Company's service. Bisset was well trained by his father, and then proceeded to Marischal College, Aberdeen. 
At the early age of seventeen, as a result of the death of his father, Bisset was obliged to assume all the responsibilities of schoolteaching, and of educating his younger brothers and sisters. Like his father he developed remarkable teaching ability, and his private school became celebrated. Many of the local gentry were educated by him, and several of his pupils became men of mark, among them Sir James Outram and J. C. Robertson, the ecclesiastical historian. He was aided by very able assistants; Dr James Melvin, afterwards rector of Aberdeen grammar school, and Dr Adam Thom, sometime recorder of the Hudson's Bay Company, were both members of his staff. He qualified himself for the ministry of the Church of Scotland, studying divinity at the universities of Aberdeen and Edinburgh. In 1826 he became minister of the small parish of Bourtie, Aberdeenshire. The duties of his limited parochial charge left him leisure to continue his philological studies, for he was known as an elegant Latinist. His repute as a scholar was not, however, sustained by any publication of permanent value. In 1850 the degree of DD was conferred upon him by the University of Aberdeen. 
Bisset was twice married: first, in 1829, to Mary Bannerman (died 1836), eldest daughter of the Revd Robert Lessel of Inverurie; and second, in 1840, to Elizabeth Sinclair, daughter of the Revd William Smith of Bowes. Bisset had four daughters and one son from his first marriage, and one daughter and two sons from his second. 
Bisset became an ardent politician on what was called the 'constitutional side', and ecclesiastically was a prominent figure in the prolonged conflict within and without the church courts which terminated in the founding of the Free Church of Scotland. Bisset did not support the secession headed by Thomas Chalmers, Robert Candlish, and Thomas Guthrie. In 1862 he was chosen moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. He died at Bourtie on 8 September 1872. 


@@@@@


doc= 2481


Bisset, Sir John (1774-1854), commissariat officer, was born in Perth. He served in the commissariat (the civil department, which provided the army with transport, food, and forage, and kept the stores) in Britain from 1795 to 1800, in Germany from May 1800 to June 1802, in Britain again from 1802 to 1806, in South America in 1806-7, and at the Scheldt in 1809. He was commissary-general from 31 July 1811 until 1819, when he was placed on half pay. He had charge of the commissariat of Wellington's army at a crucial period of the Peninsular War, before and after the battle of Salamanca. Bisset, who was made a knight bachelor and knight commander of the Royal Guelphic Order in 1832 and KCB in August 1850, was granted a pension of $550. He published 'Memoranda Regarding the Duties of the Commissariat on Field Service Abroad' (1846). He died at Perth, where he had resided for many years, on 3 April 1854. 


@@@@@


doc= 2482


Bisset, Peter (supp. fl. 1401), canonist, is said to have studied at St Andrews University. According to Thomas Dempster, and by other authors who followed his lead, Bisset was a professor of canon law at Bologna in 1401, and wrote treatises entitled 'De irregularitate liber unus' and 'Lectiones seriales liber unus'. But evidence, apart from Dempster's say-so, is lacking, and a death date of 1568 has also been suggested. Bisset has been confused with Pietro Bizzarri, whose 'Varia opuscula', published at Venice in 1565, show that he had recently visited Scotland and contacted George Buchanan and Andrew Melville, among others. In all probability Peter Bisset never existed, whereas there is sound evidence for the life of 


