@@@@@


doc= 21768


Peele, George (bap. 1556, d. 1596), poet and playwright, was baptized on 25 July 1556 in the parish of St James Garlickhythe, London, probably the fourth of the five surviving children of James Peele (d. 1585), clerk of Christ's Hospital, and his first wife, Anne (died 1579). By 1562 the family had moved to St Olave Jewry. In its various forms, including Pile, Pill, Piel, and Pell, the Peele family name has been traced to Devon, the north country, Norfolk, Kent, Monaco, and Normandy. James Peele was the author of two works on double-entry bookkeeping, 'The Maner and Fourme How to Kepe a Perfecte Reconyng' (1553) and 'The Pathe Waye to Perfectnes' (1569). A respected citizen and salter of London, James was also responsible for city pageants, and he was the clerk of Christ's Hospital, the second in its history, from 1562 until his death. 
From 1556 until 1571 George Peele lived and was educated in the grounds of Christ's Hospital, a charitable institution for orphans, the elderly, and the poor. In 1571 he was living in Broadgates Hall, Oxford, across the street from Christ Church where he was residing by December 1574. He took his BA (1577) and MA (1579) from Christ Church, the latter degree one year before the normally required time. His earliest literary efforts and colleagues were Oxonian. The efforts included the no longer extant translation of Euripides' 'Iphigenia'; the colleagues featured Thomas Watson (to whose verse collection, 'Hekatompathia', Peele addressed a commendatory poem in 1582) and William Gager, the Latin playwright who commended Peele's translation of Euripides in two Latin poems. Gager's poems praise Peele's classicism, as well as his mixture of sobriety and humour. They also offer a physical description of someone who might be Peele as 'strangely short of leg, dark of complexion, squint-eyed, and red-haired' ('Life and Works', 1.45). 
In 1579, the year of his mother's death, Peele was back in London at his father's house, for court documents dating from September of that year record his father's compliance with an order to have his son among other occupants removed from the premises of Christ's Hospital. Until recently, this document has been used as evidence that Peele lived a rowdy, immoral life; recent biographers prefer the explanation that James Peele was facing hard times ('Life and Works', 1.47-9). Back in Oxford, George married a sixteen-year-old girl named Anne Cooke or Christian ('bap'. 1564, died 1587?), the wedding taking place between early March and 18 October 1580. Her father's legacy produced legal disputes over property that would require the attention of the newly-weds for four years. Among the array of legal particulars assembled by David Horne (ibid., 1.50-57), one deposition given by George mentions the fact that he moved to London in 1581. 
As Gager attests, Peele had commenced his literary work at Oxford. One of his first poems, 'The Tale of Troy', was probably written after his MA but in his last years of residence in Oxford, about 1580-81. First published in 1589, this poem in couplets was based on a variety of sources, especially Caxton, and it manifests Peele's continuing interest in antiquity. 'The Tale of Troy' also inaugurates his tendency to mingle diverse genres or registers, in this case the chivalric and pastoral kinds so attractive to his contemporaries. Its focus on Trojan history would suit his audience as well, for Troy was imagined by the Elizabethans to have produced the origins of their own history. 
In June 1583 Peele was consulted on the entertainment planned for the Oxford visit of Albertus Alasco, count palatine of Siradia, Poland. Peele was living in London, where he added plays to his poetic output. Of his five extant and complete plays, 'The Arraignment of Paris' most reflects the influence of his university days. Performed before the queen by the children of the chapel between 1581 and 1584, it stages a mythological and pastoral treatment of one episode in the Trojan saga, the judgment of Paris. As in the case of his fellow Oxonian John Lyly, Peele's court drama was meant to please and praise Queen Elizabeth. It is possible that the fragmentary 'Hunting of Cupid' was another such attempt: it survives as excerpts in two miscellanies -- 'England's Helicon' (1600) and 'England's Parnassus' (1600) -- as well as in a 1609 transcription by William Drummond. 
Like his father, Peele was enlisted to devise mayoral pageants for the city of London. Two of these are extant: 'The Device of the Pageant Borne before Wolstan Dixi' (1585) and 'Descensus Astraeae' (1591), the latter composed for the installation of William Webbe. In Peele's strange afterlife as a jest-book hero, he is remembered for his expertise in the composition of masques and pageants, and spectacle of one kind or another is a feature of his two main types of literary invention in the last years of his life: occasional poems in congratulation of various dignitaries, and dramas written for the professional theatre. 
The occasions for Peele's verses included these: the departure of Sir John Norris and Sir Francis Drake on a naval mission against the Spanish ('A Farewell: Entituled to the Famous and Fortunate Generalls of our English Forces', published with 'The Tale of Troy' in 1589); the return of Robert, earl of Essex, from the Norris-Drake mission, for which Peele chooses Spenserian pastoral ('An Eclogue Gratulatorie: Entituled, To the Honorable Shepheard of Albions Arcadia', 1589); two accession days for Elizabeth ('Polyhymnia Describing, the Honourable Triumph at Tylt', 1590, and 'Anglorum feriae', 1595); and an induction ceremony into the Order of the Garter for Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland, the famous 'wizard earl' ('The Honour of the Garter: Displaied in a Poeme Gratulatorie', 1593). Like so many such occasions, these events presented Peele with challenges to the rhetoric of his praise. In celebrating the return of Essex from the Norris-Drake enterprise, Peele risked casting a negative light on the anti-Spanish mission that he had so recently lauded. The tilting ceremony behind 'Polyhymnia' was the last for the master of the armoury, Sir Henry Lee; Peele faced the challenge of praising an old order and a new. Sometimes occasions skewed the balance of Peele's poetry of praise: in the mayoral show 'Descensus Astraeae' he bestowed much more attention on the queen than he did on the lord mayor. 
In the poems as in the plays, Peele develops a variety of English verse forms, not least the newly powerful and supple blank verse. Elizabethan anthologists commonly looked to him for selections to include in their miscellanies; for instance, his poem 'The Praise of Chastity' appeared in the 1593 miscellany entitled 'The Phoenix Nest'. In quatrains rhyming 'abab', the poem seeks to prove 'by way of comparison, how great is the conquest over our affections' ('Life and Works', 1.260). If Peele indeed wrote the 'sonet' appended to some copies of 'Polyhymnia', its three stanzas of six lines each, with a quatrain of alternating rhymes followed by a couplet, show his capacity for great lyric beauty. 
Aside from some excellent lyric passages, Peele's occasional verse offers historical evidence about Elizabethan politics, patronage, and manners with little in the way of literary merit. His enduring monument was dramatic rather than panegyric. It is impossible to know with certainty when Peele's four professional plays were written or performed. But there is some consensus that 'The Battle of Alcazar' was his first ('Life and Works', 2.221-6). Acted by the Lord Admiral's Servants, it survives in its 1594 edition as well as in a handwritten plot outline indicative of a longer version of the play (BL, Add. MS 10449). But the play was probably written not long after the defeat of the Armada. Although its patriotic themes, exotic and homegrown character types, and theatrical devices are common enough in plays of his time, Peele's inventive combination of elements renders 'The Battle of Alcazar' something of its own kind. So it is with much of Peele's theatrical work: what stands out is the combination of elements, not any one element in its own right. 

'The Battle of Alcazar' divides its attention between three main groups. First there are the North African Moors whose custom of having brothers succeed one another to the throne has been transgressed by the son of one of the brothers. For English audiences, it would seem natural for a son to succeed a father according to the custom of primogeniture, and so the very premise of the play is as exotic as the setting. The transgressing son, Muly Mahamet or 'The Moor', is Peele's version of Christopher Marlowe's Tamburlaine, a passionately ambitious warrior whose fustian blank verse was lampooned by other playwrights of the time. Into the African contest for succession come two European groups of characters, each with its share of ambition if not spoken in the Moor's high-pitched pentameter. One group centres on King Sebastian of Portugal, the other on Thomas Stukeley, a renegade English Catholic whose plan to seize Ireland in rebellion against Elizabeth somehow did not prevent him from becoming a popular hero. It helps, no doubt, that he is distracted from rebellion by the prospect of glory in northern Africa. The play makes use of two spectacular stage devices: the commentary of a presenter and the foreshadowing of the dumb show. These devices are especially helpful in keeping the audience on top of a complicated plot with its strange notions of succession. But the themes of the play could not be more familiar to Elizabethan audiences: the perils of illegitimate succession, of rebellion, and of ambition. Along the way, Peele makes sure that a character offers praise for Elizabeth and her protestant nation. 
Of Peele's next two plays, 'Edward I' and 'The Old Wives Tale', the former is a chronicle play with strong anti-Spanish sentiment. It is much harder to say what, generically or tonally, the latter play is. First published in 1593, 'Edward I' was well received by Elizabethan audiences -- hardly surprising, given its fervently anti-Catholic characterization of Queen Elinor. Between August 1595 and the next July, Henslowe recorded fourteen performances of a play called 'Longshanks', very likely an alias for Peele's chronicle play ('Life and Works', 2.7-8). There was a second edition in 1599. The play's central theme of legitimate monarchy quashing rebellion in Wales and Scotland was sure to earn approval from Peele's audience. The playwright shows his liking for spectacular scenes when, as the title-page announces, he stages 'the sinking of Queene 'Elinor', who sunck 'at' 'Charingcrosse'', and rose againe at' 'Pottershith', now named Queenehith' (ibid., 2.69). More inventively, if less marvellously, Peele also writes in a range of forms, from blank verse and tetrameter couplets to prose. 
Peele's most famous and unusual play, 'The Old Wives Tale', leaves behind the lofty narrative region of the chronicle for the homely realm of the folk-tale. But with its elements of chivalric and fairy stories, the play's tone and genre are hard to measure, notwithstanding the 1595 title-page on which the play is dubbed 'A pleasant conceited Comedie, played by the Queenes Maiesties players' ('Life and Works', 3.385). The play's simplicity is made all the more deceptive by its central device: rather than simply weave together strands of action in the manner of a history play, it interrelates zones of dramatic reality. At the outermost level, two pages with allegorical names (Frolicke and Fantasticke) spend a night listening to an old, amiable, and ingenuous housewife tell 'a merry winters tale' (ibid., 3.390). The tale itself sprawls from a beautiful princess captured by a sorcerer; to her brothers and a lover who seek her in the woods; to the young man transformed by the sorcerer into, alternately, an old man and a bear, together with the young man's wife driven mad by the sorcerer; to the opposite daughters of an unhappy father, both of whom -- one ugly, the other beautiful -- must seek their fortune in a special well. This summary omits the play's most notorious character, a braggart soldier named Huanebango whose foolish pomposity is arguably based on Peele's contemporary Gabriel Harvey (Frank Hook reviews the evidence and questions the Harvey parallels: ibid., 3.311-19). But the most extraordinary feature of the play is that as the old wife tells the two pages her story in all simplicity, the characters appear before the very eyes of the threesome. As the various strands and motifs of the tale unfold before them, Frolicke and Fantasticke persist in questioning the wife about the play within the narrative within the play that they witness. 
If 'The Old Wives Tale' testifies to Peele's belief in the power of even the simplest and most familiar stories, his fourth play for the professional theatre -- 'The Love of King David and Fair Bethsabe: with the Tragedie of Absalon' -- ventures to dramatize the holy scriptures themselves. Published posthumously in 1599 but written between 1592 and 1594, 'David and Bethsabe' takes as its focus the sins of David, Ammon, and Absalon as they are set forth in '2 Samuel', sins including adultery and treachery (David), rape and incest (Ammon), and rebellion (Absalon). Like his plays based on medieval and contemporary history, Peele's biblical drama explores the ways in which divine providence corrects human propositions, a more sober and conventional sense of diverse and interlocking realities than the lighthearted yet mysterious narrative device of 'The Old Wives Tale'. Thrice excerpted in the miscellany 'England's Parnassus', 'David and Bethsabe' also contains some of Peele's best verse. 
Several other plays have been attributed to Peele, though most scholars now agree that only the fragmentary 'Hunting of Cupid' and the no longer extant 'Turkish Mahomet and Hiren the Fair Greek' can safely be credited to him. Scholars have also divided on the question of whether Peele himself acted on the Elizabethan stage, with Peele's most exhaustive recent biographer, David Horne, deciding against the playwright's acting career ('Life and Works', 1.83-7). 
It is possible that in the last decade of his life Peele was widowed in 1587 and married to one Mary Yates (or Gates) on 26 December 1591. But whatever his marital history, his financial and physical fortunes took a downward turn. On 17 January 1596 he sent via his elder daughter a presentation copy of 'The Tale of Troy' to William Cecil, Lord Burghley. In the dedication, Peele complained of a long, enfeebling illness and attributed his boldness to necessity. Burghley responded by filing the request for patronage together with others made by those supplicants least worthy of any response. According to records for the parish of St James Clerkenwell, Peele died later that year -- he was buried at St James's on 9 November 1596. 
By the end of his life, Peele still retained some measure of his identity as a gentlemanly scholar with connections to the world of Oxford. But he was far more decisively identified as a professional playwright whose home was London. The author of 'Greene's Groatsworth of Wit' (1592) placed Peele together with Marlowe and Thomas Nashe as fellow playwrights abused by the scapegrace players. In 'A Knights Conjuring' (1607), Thomas Dekker located Peele in the Elysium of poets, a paradise dominated by Chaucer and Spenser but with Robert Greene, Nashe, Marlowe, and Peele in their own circle. Dekker's scene suggests that while the four are gentleman poets to be sure, they belong together as professional writers unable to rely on 'dry-fisted Patrons' ('Knight's Conjuring', ed. Robbins, 156). But Peele's afterlife offered much more about his life than simply his beleaguered station as a professional playwright. In 'Palladis tamia' (1598), Francis Meres not only ranked Peele among the best of England's poets and tragedians, but also claimed that the Oxford wit had died of the pox. 
Meres's report of the playwright's syphilis, however, pales in comparison to the treatment of the protagonist in 'The Merry Conceited Jests of George Peele' (1607). Some ten years after Peele's death, the biggest mystery of his life commenced, namely, how he came to be made into a jest-book hero whose decadence might explain his illness and whose prodigality might explain his poverty. This George is a witty, prodigal trickster who spends his time making merry in taverns; spending money and wit with a breathless velocity; devising exploits for fun and profit; wenching like a 'lecherous animal'; and idly wasting his dramatic talent on knavery and dodges. The jests trumpet George's scholarly and literary talents: he has 'all the oversight of the pageants' and is hired to translate a Greek book into English ('Works', 2.391, 381). He is heralded as an 'excellent poet' and as a well-known playwright (ibid., 2.389). But these talents are miserably if humorously misspent with a prodigal wastefulness commonly attributed to the wittiest English writers of Peele's generation. George shows up as just such a wastrel in the character of George Pyeboard, featured in a 1607 play called 'The Puritan' and written by W. S. 
It is simply impossible to know for certain why, or how justly, Peele was chosen over, say, Thomas Nashe for the dubious honour of starring as a gentleman knave in a jest-book. For many years, at least until the twentieth-century scholarship of Thorleif Larsen and David Horne altered the case, Peele scholars tended to assume that the jest-book was essentially right about the poet. Had he not been removed from his father's house at Christ's Hospital? Had he not died of the pox? Was there not at least some fire where there was much smoke? Horne in particular, however, has retorted that the 'merry conceited jests' are virtually all conventional ('Life and Works', 1.110-26). It might be noted, too, that Peele's writings (one thinks of such unimpeachable poems as 'The Praise of Chastity') never come close to the kind of erotic satire found, say, in Nashe's 'A Choice of Valentines' or in Marlowe's translation of Ovid's 'Amores'. Whatever Peele's own proximity to the hero of the jest-book, he embodied for some of his contemporaries the perils of waste in an Elizabethan literary life begun in scholarship, offered out for patronage, and ended in the squalor of a professional playwright's meagre existence. But it is also typical of this character that he never loses the abundance and energy of his wit. 
Nothing solidifies the contemporary choice of Peele to embody the brilliance yet peril of Elizabethan poets and playwrights more than the address to him in 'Greene's Groatsworth of Wit': 'And thou no lesse deserving than the other two, in some things rarer, in nothing inferiour; driven (as my selfe) to extreme shifts, a litle have I to say to thee: and were it not an idolatrous oth, I would sweare by sweet S. George, thou art unworthy better hap, sith thou dependest on so meane a stay. ('Greene's Groatsworth of Wit', 83)' Whether or not Peele was loose in his living, it is certain that by the end of his life, his mainstay was 'so meane a stay', the actors of the Elizabethan stage. For however much praise Peele had bestowed on Drake and Norris, on Essex and Northumberland, on mayors and a queen, his appeal to Burghley demonstrates just how ignominiously a literary life in search of patronage often turned out, even for one with 'oversight of the pageants'. In 1604 Peele's old workhorse for patrons, 'The Tale of Troy', was published in a revised edition, and did him just as much good as it had done him in the presentation copy to Burghley. Thomas Nashe understood the burden of that poem: 'Others are so hardly bested for loading that they are faine to retaile the cinders of 'Troy', and the shivers of broken trunchions, to fill up their boate that else should goe empty' ('Life and Works', 1.80). 


@@@@@


doc= 21769


Peend, Thomas (fl. 1565-1566), translator and poet, whose parentage is unknown, may have been related to Stephen de la Pyend of the Inner Temple, London, and Depden, Suffolk. He was educated at Oxford (according to Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.430) and was a London barrister with a 'chamber over agaynst Sergeants Inne in Chancery Lane' (Peend, 'Fable', 2). Peend is best known for 'The Pleasant Fable of Hermaphroditus and Salmacis', a translation of part of Ovid's 'Metamorphoses' (IV.287-388), written in rhyming couplets in alternating lines of iambic octameter and hexameter. In the dedicatory epistle to Nicholas Sentleger of Eastwell, Kent, Peend dates the work to 1564 and claims to have translated additional sections of the 'Metamorphoses', but divulges that he will publish only this one tale because he has been pre-empted by another translator, doubtless a reference to Arthur Golding, whose English rendition of the 'Metamorphoses' appeared in 1565. It is, however, unlikely that Peend executed his translation in 1564, and hence before reading Golding's, because (according to Taylor) the numerous parallels between the translations suggest that Peend knew Golding's work. Peend's text concludes with a glossary (in prose) of characters mentioned in the text so 'that the unlearned myght the better understande', from which we can infer his intended audience (Peend, 'Fable', 27). To educate his readers further, the fable is followed by a moralizing poem which casts Salmacis as 'eche vyce that moveth one to ill' (ibid., 16). This interpretation leads into the final part of the composition -- a catalogue of evil, passionate women -- which forms part of the anti-feminist side of the sixteenth-century debate on women. All the examples are drawn from classical sources, except for the stories of Romeo and Juliet (ibid., 22), Aleran and Adelasie (ibid., 21-2), and Gysmond and Guistardes (ibid., 22). This last allusion attests to Peend's knowledge of William Walter's text of the same name, dated 1532, and the others to his familiarity with Matteo Bandello's remarkably popular and influential 'Novelle'. Indeed, Peend's second composition, 'The Moste Notable Historie of John Lord Mandosse', is a translation of one of Bandello's stories. Although Peend claims a Spanish source for 'Mandosse', he actually used Pierre Boaistuau's French translation (1559) of Bandello. Bandello and Boaistuau both allege a Spanish author for the tale (although Boaistuau's Spaniard purportedly wrote in Latin), and it is likely that Peend did the same to designate proximity to the original, thus lending more authority to his narrative (Bandello, 425; Boaistuau, 169). 'Mandosse' is dedicated to Sir Thomas Kemp, and is written in rhyming couplets in alternating lines of iambic hexameter and heptameter. Peend is also the author of a short poem prefixed to John Studley's 'Agamemnon' (1566). Nothing is known of his later life. 


@@@@@


doc= 21770


Peer, William (d. in or before 1713), actor and property man, whose origins are obscure, served as a property man in London in 1659-60, according to 'The Biographical Dictionary of Actors, Actresses... and other Stage Personnel in London'. His earliest known role was with the Duke's Company, Pecus in Ferdinando Parkhurst's 'Ignoramus, or, The Academical Lawyer', which was presented at court in November 1662. Peer seems to have moved to Dublin for several years following this initial engagement. William Smith Clark states that he played a servant in John Wilson's 'Belphegor' in the Dublin playhouse, Smock Alley, though 'he moved [back] to Drury Lane about the fall of 1679 and eventually assumed the post of property man there' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 82). 
Perhaps because of his duties as props man Peer played only a few roles after he returned to London, as far as we know. He played Jasper in Thomas Shadwell's 'The Scowrers' in December 1690 and then the Presbyterian parson in Thomas D'Urfey's 'Love for Money' in January 1691. When Thomas Betterton and other performers left the United Company in London in winter 1694-5, Peer followed them and continued his career at the Lincoln's Inn Fields Theatre. He is listed as dresser at the Queen's Theatre in the Haymarket in March 1708, receiving a per diem wage of 4's'. He played only one known role at this theatre, Second Ruffian in 'King Lear' in October 1706. 
Some contemporary writers believed that Peer was undeservedly relegated to small roles or kept off the stage altogether. Tom Brown's 'Letters from the Dead to the Living' addresses Peer as: 'you, who must be honest, because your ['sic'] are so poor and a Man of Merit, because you never were promoted... For you, Sir... are one of the most ancient of his Majesty's Servants, under the denomination of a Player, and yet cannot advance above the delivering a scurvy Message, which the strutting Leaders of your House wou'd do much more aukardly. (Brown and others, 65)' In a letter written probably about 1707, 'The Post-Man Robb'd of his Mail' calls this actor 'honest 'Will Pierre', who has stood the Shock of so many Turns of State, so many revolutions, and Transmigrations, without advancing beyond a Property-Man' (Gildon, 266). 
Peer died at some time before 15 June 1713, since he appears on that date in an eulogistic article by Richard Steele in 'The Guardian'. This piece offers us the most detailed information available on Peer, noting that Peer excelled in two small parts: the speaker of the prologue to the play within 'Hamlet' and the Apothecary in Thomas Otway's version of 'Romeo and Juliet', entitled 'The History and Fall of Caius Marius'. Steele states: 'It is no matter, say the Moralists, whether you act a Prince or a Beggar, the Business is to do your Part well' (Steele, 299). He further comments: 'It was an odd Excellence, and a very particular Circumstance this of 'Peer's', that his whole Action of Life depended upon speaking five Lines better than any Man else in the World' (ibid., 300). Unfortunately: 'in the Seventieth Year of his Age he grew fat, which rendered his Figure unfit for the Utterance of the five Lines abovementioned: He had now unfortunately lost the wan Distress necessary for the Countenance of the Apothecary, and was too jolly to speak the Prologue with the proper Humility. (ibid., 301)' Steele writes that this loss of his parts contributed 'to the shortning his Days', though Peer had also been serving as a property man who was required to be 'always ready, in a Place appointed for him behind the Prompter, [with] all such Tools and Implements as are necessary in the Play... 'Billetdoux', Poison, false Mony, Thunderbolts, Daggers' (ibid., 300). Steele states that the theatre does not owe him any money except that for some miscellaneous props -- 'For Hire of six Case of Pistols', 'For Blood in 'Macbeth'' -- amounting to 11's'. 1died (ibid., 301). 


@@@@@


doc= 21771


Peeris, William (fl. c.1520), chronicler, describes himself in the preamble to his only known work, a verse chronicle of the Percy family, as a clerk and priest who was secretary to Henry Percy, fifth earl of Northumberland. He has been plausibly identified with the William Pyers who in the year 1519-20 was paid 3's'. 4died by Beverley corporation for coming from Wressle to alter the text of the town's Corpus Christi play; another 7's'. were disbursed 'to make an agreement with him for transposing' that play (Goldberg, 154-5). The earl of Northumberland was Beverley's patron, while Wressle, a few miles west of Hull, was one of his principal residences. Both there and at the earl's house at Leconfield there were walls and ceilings decorated with moralizing verses. The fact that Pyers is described in the Beverley records as a poet gives plausibility to suggestions that the same hand was responsible both for the verses and for Peeris's chronicle. 
Described by Peeris as a new year's gift for the earl, the chronicle refers to the latter's daughter Margaret as married to Henry Clifford, the son and heir of the tenth Lord Clifford, and must therefore have been composed between Henry's marriage in 1513 and his father's death in 1523. It survives in a number of copies. Probably the earliest is Alnwick Castle, MS 79. Not only is this a roll whose ornamental margins (embellished with medallion busts of all the English kings between William I and a youthful and clean-shaven Henry VIII) suggest that it was prepared for presentation to its dedicatee, but it also differs from other versions in both its beginning and its conclusion. Of those later versions, British Library, Royal MS 18 D.ii, folios 186-95, forms part of a volume which belonged to the fifth earl, whose arms are illuminated on folio 162. Copies also survive in Alnwick Castle, MSS 521 (inexplicably ascribed to William Gamble) and 522, in Yale University, Osborn collection, MS fa. 19, folios 41'v'-51'v', and in Bodleian Library, MS Dodsworth 50, folios 119-128'v'. The last, which suffers from a lacuna of nineteen stanzas, was published at Newcastle in 1847 in an edition by John Besley, vicar of Long Benton in Northumberland. 
Peeris's chronicle is largely composed in seven-line rhyme royal stanzas, occasionally expanded to nine or eleven lines. In this it probably shows the influence of the fifteenth-century Northumbrian chronicler John Hardyng (a copy of whose chronicle was in the possession of the fifth earl, now Bodl. Oxf., MS Selden B. 10). Except in its earliest version, which postulates exploits 'in the lande of Perse' as the source of the family's name, Peeris's chronicle traces the fortunes of the Percys from the early tenth century down to the murder of the fourth earl in 1489. Peeris refers to a variety of written sources -- deeds, charters, and tombstone inscriptions -- as well as chronicles, but his purpose is not so much strictly historical as to celebrate the greatness of the Percy family and urge the fifth earl to maintain it. He takes a particular interest in religious foundations and donations, but is also careful to note royal and aristocratic associations. The sententious conclusion to the first version of the chronicle, urging the earl to 'liberalite' as the mean between 'prodegalite' and 'covetise', and advising him to 'Remember your progeny your excellent riall kyn', may have been excised from later copies as indiscreet, after debt and family discord brought disaster upon the Percys in the 1530s. 


@@@@@


doc= 21772


Peers, Richard (1645-1690), translator and author, was born in Lisburn, co. Antrim, the son of Richard Peers, a tanner. Young Richard became his father's apprentice, but 'being weary of that employment, gave his father the slip... obtaining a prosperous gale' to Bristol (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.290), whence his uncle sent him to a school in Carmarthenshire. He then (possibly helped by the local schoolmaster, Jeremy Taylor) obtained a scholarship at Westminster School, which was, under Richard Busby, a centre of classical learning and versification. Peers proceeded to Christ Church, Oxford (matriculated 22 July 1664), and was elected a student in 1665, at the age of twenty ('over ripe for the university' according to Wood); he graduated BA in 1668 and MA in 1671. His limited income was supplemented by working for fellow undergraduates, 'for 'twas usual with him to make the exercises of idle scholars, either for money or something worth it from the buttery book' (ibid.); the practice was not uncommon, the exercises in question probably being Latin verse 'themes'. If his college superiors knew of this activity, they are unlikely to have had strong objections. Peers published Latin verses under his own name, including a page of elegiacs for the 'Epicedia' (1670) lamenting the death of George Monck, duke of Albemarle. 
Peers also wrote English poems as a student, published as 'Four Small Copies of Verses on Sundry Occasions' (1667) and reissued, probably in the same year, as 'Poems by R. P. Student of Ch[rist] Ch[urch] Oxon.' They probably failed to fulfil Peers's hopes for fame; his colleague Humphrey Prideaux later described them as 'musty ballads' producing 'little credit' ('Letters of Humphrey Prideaux', 24). Peers addresses his academic patrons, Busby and John Fell, and offers an epitaph on a gentleman loyal to the king, who: '
Ne're followed a blind faith's fantastick guess, 

Ne're courted Faction in a 'Modish dress'. 
(Peers, 8)' The most interesting poem in the collection is the fourth (pp. 11-20), 'To the Memory of Abraham Cowley', thirty-one stanzas in the form later used for Gray's 'Elegy', of which it is a not unworthy predecessor. Cowley's ''Pindarick' Muse so bravely soar'd'; even former opponents: '
Confess him now of Modern 'Wits' the best, 

And next Immortal 'Spencer' to be nam'd. 

' Cowley's situation is described with an impressive neatness of touch: '
He from the Noise and Injuries of Court, 

Does only so to silent Groves repair, 

As half-tir'd Passengers to 'Shades' resort 

From the offensive fury of the Air. 
(stanza 27)' Peers was trusted by Dr Fell with a large share (together with Richard Reeves of Magdalen) in an important piece of work, the translation into Latin of Anthony Wood's 'History and Antiquities' (begun 1670). He was to discover a disadvantage of translating living authors: they can hit back. According to Wood (whose account, written after Peers's death, may retain some personal bias) his initial work was poor, but gradually improved 'by great diligence and observation', so that he became 'a compleat master of the Latin tongue, and what he did was excellent' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.'). The Latin edition appeared in 1674. Wood greatly resented changes that Fell and Peers had made to his text. Few translators can have endured worse relationships with their authors. Peers and Wood had fist fights in the printing house at the Sheldonian theatre, in a local cookshop, and elsewhere. Peers always lost, 'with a bloody nose or a black eye', and became afraid to meet Wood 'for fear of another drubbing'; when Peers became pro-proctor, they were both terrified to meet each other, according to Prideaux ('Letters of Humphrey Prideaux', 8-12; Madan, 299). Peers did exercise his proctorial powers on others, and was reprimanded by the vice-chancellor for 'over hasty, and in his opinion imprudent' arrests ('Letters of Humphrey Prideaux', 38). 
In 1674 Peers proposed to publish 'some seaman's journall of the Streights of Magellan', which Prideaux thought 'a very ridiculous designe', beneath a scholar's dignity; that apart, 'Dic doeth nothing but drinke ale' ('Letters of Humphrey Prideaux', 24-8). In 1675 Peers was cheated out of the living of Shrivenham, Berkshire, by Benjamin Woodruffe, who had promised to plead Peers's case while in London, and 'effectually doe his businesse for him; as accordingly he did in another sense, the next news we heard beeing that Woodruffe had it for himselfe' (ibid., 42-3). On 18 September 1675 Peers finally obtained preferment as a reward for his translation, being elected esquire bedell of arts; Wood rather churlishly claims that he would have prevented the appointment, if he had been present. Peers had previously been chosen as grammar lecturer for two years, a post his supporters exerted themselves to retain for him: their effort was wasted, when he 'indiscreetly, or rather knavishly' resigned it to a rival behind their backs, 'which hath soe much incensed the Dean that it is supposed he would turn him out at Xmas... none of us have ever since spake to him unlesse it be to obbraid him with his knavery' (ibid., 44-5). Peers created a precedent, a shocking academic sin. The bedell's post, however, proved profitable; he made 'above $200' in his first year, and eventually left his college studentship at the end of 1676 (ibid., 55). 
Peers continued to be involved in various publication projects: in 1682 he compiled a large volume on the Netherlands for Moses Pitt's 'English Atlas', and in 1684 he contributed to a translation of Nepos. Peers married 'an Oxford lady' (since marriage would ordinarily have entailed the loss of his studentship, it must have depended upon his appointment as bedell): they had a son, Richard ['see below']. Wood accuses Peers of neglecting his studies to marry and keep 'low, drunken company'; 'he enjoyed the comforts of the world', allegedly to excess, being too fat by 1687 to perform some of his ceremonial duties. Peers had been promoted to esquire bedell of physic, and on 6 July 1688 was licensed to practise medicine. According to Wood: 'in the latter end of the reign of king James II he applied his mind to the study of physic, having been secretly informed that his beneficial place was to be bestowed on a person more agreeable with the times; but fearing his bulk and fatness, which he had obtained by eating, drinking, and sleeping, would hinder his practice, he quitted that project... and was resolved, when turned out, to withdraw into the country, and teach a private school. (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.290)' From that fate he was saved by the revolution of 1688. Towards the end of his life he compiled the first list of Oxford graduates, covering the years 1659-88 (published 1689; see 'Hist. U. Oxf.' 4: '17th-cent. Oxf.', 508n.). Peers died at Holywell, Oxford, on 11 August 1690, and was buried in St Aldate's Church. 




@@@@@


doc= 21773


Richard Peers (1685-1739), clergyman and author, was born in All Saints' parish, Oxford, on 15 July 1685, the son of Richard Peers and his wife. He attended Trinity College, Oxford (matriculated, 1701; scholar, 1702; BA, 1705; MA, 1708), and was vicar of Hartley Wintney, Hampshire (1710-11), and of Faringdon, Berkshire (1711-39). The younger Peers wrote several popular religious works. His 'Character of an Honest Dissenter' was the cause of some controversy, with replies from opponents in 1716, 1717, and 1718. 'A Companion for the Aged' was reprinted many times, well into the nineteenth century. He died at Faringdon on 20 July 1739. 


@@@@@


doc= 21774


Peerson, Andrew (d. 1594), Church of England clergyman, graduated BA from Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1542, subsequently proceeding MA in 1544 and BD in 1551. Soon after graduating BA he was elected a fellow of his college; for a time he was bursar, and laid out and planted with fruit trees the fellows' garden. In 1550-51 he served as proctor, and was also auditor of the Trinity chest. He vacated his fellowship about 1552 and seems to have accepted some cure in Cambridge, from which he was ejected on 3 October 1553, early in the reign of Mary Tudor, for continuing to administer the communion in the form used under Edward VI. Not known to have gone abroad, he was probably one of many protestants, like Matthew Parker, who lived in retirement during the later 1550s. 
Following Elizabeth's accession, Archbishop Parker named Peerson his chaplain, almoner, and master of faculties, chose him to preach a sermon at the consecration on 21 January 1560 of four bishops, bestowed upon him the livings of Brasted, Wrotham, Chiddingstone in Kent, and, on the death of John Bale in 1563, secured his election to the eleventh prebendal stall in Canterbury Cathedral. Parker took a good deal of trouble to obtain this last preferment for his chaplain, and wrote to thank the queen once it had been achieved. He also recommended him for the provostship of Eton in 1561, but without success. In the convocation of 1563 Peerson sat as proctor for the clergy of the diocese of Llandaff, subscribed the articles then agreed upon, and voted against the six articles for abolishing certain rites and ceremonies. Peerson took part in preparing for press the 'Bishops' Bible' of 1568, which Parker commissioned in the vain hope that it would supplant the popular Calvinist Geneva 'Bible' published in 1560. Peerson was asked to revise the translation of 'Leviticus', 'Numbers', 'Job', and 'Proverbs'. Tanner doubtfully attributes to him 'Ezra', 'Nehemiah', 'Esther', 'Job', and 'Proverbs'. 
In 1569 Peerson was one of two commissioners chosen to visit the diocese of Canterbury, and on 4 January 1571 had a licence for non-residence. In September 1573 he entertained Burghley at his 'fine house', as Parker called it, at Canterbury; in 1575 the archbishop named Peerson one of his executors and bequeathed him a gilt cup, the gift of Elizabeth. On 30 June 1580 he was presented to the living of Hardres, Kent, but resigned it in 1582. Peerson married twice. Nothing is known of his first wife, but on 16 April 1582 he married Sarah Sampson, widow, at Sheldwich, Kent. On 1 September 1589 he received the living of Harbledown, Kent. He died early in November 1594. In his will he mentions a son, Andrew Peerson, and daughter-in-law, Joan, and their children. 


@@@@@


doc= 21775


Peerson, Martin (1571-1650/51), composer, was born at March, Cambridgeshire, the son of Thomas and Margaret Peerson. His father probably died shortly afterwards, since his mother remarried in 1573. Peerson came under the influence of the poet Fulke Greville at an early stage in his career, composing a setting of 'See, O see, who is heere come a maying' which was performed at the Highgate home of Sir William Cornwallis as part of Ben Jonson's 'Private Entertainment of the King and Queene' on May day 1604. Evidently Peerson had Catholic sympathies, for in 1606 he was cited for recusancy. In 1609 he was living at Stoke Newington. In 1613 he graduated BMus at Lincoln College, Oxford. Possibly between 1623 and 1630 Peerson was sacrist at Westminster Abbey. Certainly at some point between June 1624 and June 1625 he became almoner and master of the choristers at St Paul's Cathedral; he lived in a dwelling nearby that was subsequently condemned to demolition before the repairing of the cathedral. Alternative accommodation large enough for Peerson and the choristers under his supervision was eventually found within the petty canons' college (perhaps he was made a petty canon before this removal). 
Peerson's principal publications were 'Private Musicke' (1620) and 'Mottects, or, Grave Chamber Musique' (1630). The former, comprising secular vocal ayres (solos and duets) with viol accompaniment, is notable for its stylistic novelty, combining features of the madrigal, consort song, and anthem. The latter claims historical importance as the first known published musical collection in England to include a notated figured bass part, and is notable too for its largely melancholic idiom, in which the musical techniques (suggesting an awareness of declamatory possibilities imported from Italy) are devoted purely to the affective representation of rather sombre texts. Peerson also contributed three 'full' anthems to Sir William Leighton's 'The Teares or Lamentations of a Sorrowfull Soule' (1613) and a psalm tune to Thomas Ravenscroft's 'The Whole Booke of Psalmes' (1621). A significant number of English anthems (mainly 'verse' anthems, alternating soloists and full choir) survive in manuscript, principally in the British Library and the Bodleian Library, Oxford. They incorporate contemporary madrigalisms, including quite precisely crafted word-painting and affective use of chromatically inflected melody and harmony. Eleven Latin motets are preserved in a single manuscript (in the Bodleian Library), all lacking a treble part. Possibly Peerson's most famous compositions are the brief programmatic pieces for keyboard 'The Fall of the Leafe' and 'The Primerose' in the famous Fitzwilliam virginal book, compiled by Francis Tregian during the first two decades or so of the seventeenth century and containing music largely by Catholic composers (Peerson's keyboard music is found only in this source). There is also a small quantity of surviving music for consorts of viols, copied in manuscripts whose regional and chronological spread suggest that Peerson's work in this field enjoyed quite a wide currency during his lifetime and continued to be played after his death. These works are most impressive in their command of technical resource, featuring most prominently contrapuntal interplay between the different strands of the texture, regulated by canonic imitation. 
Peerson, who was twice married, was buried in St Faith's under St Paul's on 15 January 1651. Among his legacies he left $100 to the poor of March for the purchase of freehold land of the yearly value of $4 or $5, the proceeds to be distributed every Sunday in twopenny loaves to eight, nine, ten, eleven, or twelve poor persons. He held property in the parishes of St Giles-in-the-Fields and Walthamstow, Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 21776


Peeters, Gerard (bap. 1562?, d. 1598), author, was probably the child baptized on 20 September 1562 at Arundel, Sussex. His father may have been William Peeters of Arundel. Having been educated at Westminster School, where he was a queen's scholar, Peeters was elected in 1582, as an alumnus of that foundation, to a closed scholarship at Trinity College, Cambridge, from which he matriculated a member of Cambridge University on 13 October of that year. Despite the date of his election it was only in April 1583 that his formal admission as a scholar of Trinity College was recorded. He graduated BA in June 1586. 
In October 1589 Peeters became a minor fellow of Trinity College, advancing to become a major fellow there in May 1590, in which year he proceeded MA. The senior bursar's accounts show him receiving his quarterly fellow's stipend from 1590 to 1593. His name does not feature in these accounts for either 1594 or 1595, suggesting that he had vacated his fellowship at the end of the fourth quarter in 1593. Peeters was incorporated MA at Oxford on 9 July 1594. 
There is a long-standing tradition -- at least as old as 1861 -- that Peeters was the author of two Latin works which challenged Alexander Dickson's ideas on artificial memory as being, in Eleanor Rosenberg's words, 'impious and vain' (Rosenberg, 38 n. 23). Prominently dedicated to Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, Dickson's book was entitled 'Alexandri Dicsoni arelii De umbrarationis & judicii, sive, De Memoriae virtute prosopopoeia' (1583). The works attributed to Peeters are: 'Antidicsonus cuiusdam Cantabrigiensis G. P. accessit libellus, in quo dilucide explicatur impia Dicsoni artificiosa memoria' (1584) and 'Libellus de memoria, verissimaque bene recordandi scientia' (1584). The 'Antidicsonus' was answered by Heius Scepsius (a pseudonym for Dickson) in 'Heii Scepsii defensio pro Alexandro Dicsono arelio adversus quendam G. P. Cantabrigien' (1584), which, like Dickson's earlier tract, was dedicated to Leicester. More definitely Peeters can be said to have contributed a Greek verse to the tribute to Sir Philip Sidney by Cambridge University: 'Academiae Cantabrigiensis lachrymae tumulo nobilissimi equitis, D. Philippi Sidneii' (1587). 
The date and location of Peeters's ordination (or ordinations) is obscure. His ecclesiastical preferments all seem to have lain within the diocese of Chichester, which was largely co-extensive with Sussex. In September 1591 he was instituted to the vicarage of Poling (near Arundel) on the presentation of William Day, provost of Eton College. The following February Peeters was presented by the crown to the Lewes rectory of St Peter in Westout and St Mary in Westout. Nevertheless it is not clear whether or not this presentation took effect, not least because, although the grant passed the signet office, a docket apparently remains among the state papers (domestic) and no notice of his institution has been found. What is known is that, described as vicar of Poling and rector of St John's sub Castro in Lewes, he was dispensed in January 1593 to hold two livings in plurality on the grounds that he was chaplain to Thomas Sackville, first Baron Buckhurst. In fact Peeters's institution to the latter benefice took place, following Buckhurst's presentation, in February 1593. In November the chaplain was further instituted to the rectory of Plumpton on the presentation of one Richard Leeche. By now Peeters had exceeded the terms of his dispensation, which probably explains why he resigned Poling vicarage by 22 April 1594. Even so he was both collated and installed in April 1596 to the prebend of Hampstead in Chichester Cathedral. This preferment was not Peeters's first link with the cathedral, for the dean and chapter had in May 1593 appointed him their attorney in the matter of a livery of seisin concerning the rectory of Bedingham. His career as a prebendary began inauspiciously: failing to appear in June 1596 for the election of Anthony Watson as bishop, Peeters was declared contumacious. In May 1597 he protested for residence following the next vacancy among the residentiary canons, but died before that vacancy occurred. 
Peeters wrote his will on 12 September 1598, and was dead by 22 November, when his successor was instituted to the rectory of Plumpton. Describing himself as of Lewes, yet mentioning only his Plumpton benefice, he asked that his body be buried at the discretion of his sole executor, his wife. He made generous provision for his mother; his son, Henry; his daughter, Joan; and the child with which his wife, Elizabeth, was then pregnant. If Henry died before reaching twenty-four then $20 of his $80 cash bequest was to be delivered, within one year of his death, to the mayor and four senior burgesses of Arundel to be employed, but without diminution, for the benefit of four poor folk there. Peeters's kindred were to be given preferential treatment in this charity should need arise. Having made various other provisions he devised the residue of his estate, which included land in Lewes, to his widow. Peeters's wife, Elizabeth ('b'. in or after 1567, died in or after 1599), was one of the nine children of Dr Henry Blaxton or Blackstone (died 1606) and his wife, Joan Nunn (died 1607). Probate of Peeters's will was granted in the prerogative court of Canterbury in May 1599, when Elizabeth Peeters was still alive; her date of death is uncertain. It is not known where Peeters was buried, though it was not at Plumpton. 


@@@@@


doc= 21777


Peeters, John (1666/7?-1727?), painter, worked in England for about forty-two years, but almost all that is known of him comes from the notes of his contemporary and friend the writer George Vertue. Vertue recorded that Peeters, a relation of the marine painter Bonaventura Peeters (1614-1652), came from Antwerp, having studied under 'Eckhart an history painter a man of good esteem' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.33). No history painter of this name is now known. Peeters came to England in 1685 at the age of eighteen and was recommended to Sir Godfrey Kneller, under whom he studied and then assisted, painting draperies until 1712. Peeters also worked for other painters, 'but chiefly employed himself in drawings and the mending or repairing of damaged or old pictures., in which he was very skilful having great knowledge in the hands of several famous Italian but especially Flemish masters' (ibid.); this was presumably after leaving Kneller's studio. From his success he earned the nickname of Doctor Peeters. 
Socially and professionally Peeters seems to have been well connected with the London art world, as a member of the artists' Rose and Crown club in London. Peeters seems to have had an especially close relationship with Vertue, a fellow member of the club, who credited him with teaching him drawing, as well as giving him advice and helping him 'raise up my character' at the outset of the latter's career; Vertue even referred to Peeters as 'my grandmother' (Vertue, 'Note books', 6.32). 
Peeters reportedly suffered from gout in his later years, did not produce much work, and became poor as a result. A 'lusty man of a free open temper a lover of good company and his bottle', a satirist who was fond of punch, Peeters remained single throughout his life (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.33). Vertue recorded his death in September 1727, but there is no record to corroborate his claim that Peeters was buried in 'St Martin's Church Yard Westminster' the same month, or indeed that year (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 21778


Pegge, Sir Christopher (1764/5-1822), physician, was born at Westminster, London, the only son and one of the two children of Samuel Pegge the younger (1733-1800), barrister, antiquary, poet, and musical composer, and his first wife, Martha (1732-1767), daughter of Henry Bourne, an eminent Derbyshire physician. He entered Christ Church, Oxford, as a commoner in April 1782. As an undergraduate he simultaneously held the Fell and Boulter exhibitions worth $10 and $8 respectively. He graduated BA on 23 February 1786 and was elected a fellow of Oriel College, Oxford, in 1788. In the following year he graduated MA and BM. 
In 1789 Pegge began to practise medicine in Oxford. Opinion about his professional capabilities and achievements has varied. For example, Cox notes that while he had the ability and personality to have excelled in a fashionable part of London, he ran a 'hopeless race' in Oxford because he was in competition with two of the most popular physicians the city had ever seen, doctors Martin Wall and Robert Bourne (Cox, 132-3). On the other hand, Munk asserted that Pegge was 'for many years the leading physician' in Oxford, sharing with Bourne 'the medical emoluments of the university and neighbourhood' (Munk, 'Roll', 450). Later historians dismissed him as 'a physician of dubious distinction' (Bill, 137), or maintained that his science was 'superficial' (Vassall, 340). Pegge resigned his Oriel fellowship in 1790 in order to return to Christ Church and take up the post of Lee's reader in anatomy. His duties as reader involved the delivery of two courses of lectures per year. His lecturing style has been described as both 'spirited' and 'easy and correct' (Tuckwell, 60-1; Cox, 132-3). At first his lectures were extremely popular, and it was 'not thought to be the thing to leave Oxford without attending one course' (Gibson, 107). Subsequently, however, Pegge came to be regarded as something of a bore. In 1790 he was elected a physician to the Radcliffe Infirmary, a position he held until 1808 when the asthma from which he long suffered obliged him to reduce his workload. On 29 March 1791 he married Amy, daughter of Kenton Couse of Whitehall in London. They had one daughter, Mary, born on 26 December 1791, who married the Revd R. M. Boultbee of Merton College, Oxford. 
Pegge was awarded his DM in 1792. He became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1795 and a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1796. He delivered the college's Harveian oration in 1805, and in 1817, having moved to London, he became a college censor. In 1799, soon after the duke of York had inspected the Oxford Loyal Volunteers, in which Pegge served as a major, George III conferred a knighthood on him. In 1801 he was appointed regius professor of physic, in which capacity he gave occasional lectures on aspects of animal economy and held the mastership of a charitable foundation, the Ewelme Hospital. Otherwise he had few duties. As for the authorship of papers and monographs, medical or otherwise, he appears to have written nothing whatsoever. Such reticence stands in contrast with the records of his father and paternal grandfather (Samuel Pegge the elder), both of whom achieved formidable literary outputs. 
In his prime Pegge was 'a showy, handsome man' (Tuckwell, 60-61), with a 'fine portly figure and gentlemanly manners' ('Public Characters', 261). As regius professor he cut a somewhat absurd figure for, notwithstanding his comparative youth, he affected the old-fashioned habit of cocked hat, wig, and massive gold-headed cane, all of which were spurned by his successor in the post, John Kidd. In 1816 an increased incidence and severity of asthmatic attack led Pegge to resign the Lee readership and to take up residence in George Street, Hanover Square, London in the hope of recovering his health. He engaged in medical practice in the capital but later moved to Hastings in Sussex, again for reasons of health. The modest obligations associated with the regius professorship enabled him to retain the post even after he had departed Oxford; he had merely to make occasional appearances at the university in accordance with its statutes. In the course of one of these visits, while occupying his lodgings in the High Street, he suffered an unusually severe asthmatic fit from which he died on 3 August 1822. He was interred in the south aisle of Ewelme church. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 21779


Pegge, Samuel (1704-1796), Church of England clergyman and antiquary, was born on 5 November 1704 in Chesterfield, Derbyshire, the only child of Christopher Pegge ('bap'. 1677, died 1723/4), successively a cloth merchant in Derby and a lead merchant in Chesterfield, and three times mayor of Chesterfield, and his first wife, Gertrude (died 1709), daughter of Francis Stephenson of Unstone in Dronfield. Samuel's parents were distant cousins. Of the four branches of the Pegge family in Derbyshire, Christopher belonged to that long established at Osmaston by Ashbourne, while Gertrude was descended from Edward Pegge of Beauchief. From another branch in Yeldersley came Katherine Pegge, mother of two of King Charles II's illegitimate children, including Charles FitzCharles (1647-1680), later earl of Plymouth. 
Samuel Pegge was educated at Chesterfield and in 1722 became a scholar of St John's College, Cambridge. On the deaths of his father and the heir of his maternal grandfather, he inherited the Pegge estates in Osmaston by Ashbourne and half the Stephenson estates in Unstone. He graduated BA in 1725 and successfully applied in 1726 for a fellowship on the Beresford foundation at St John's, only to be removed in favour of Michael Burton, later vice-master, when the latter claimed founder's kin. Pegge was then regarded as an honorary fellow of the college until, on graduating MA in 1729, he was elected to a Platt fellowship. During his time at Cambridge, scholarly clubs modelled on the Society of Antiquaries were becoming fashionable. The Zodiac Club, founded in 1725, included Pegge as the original Mars among its twelve members from 1730 until he left the university in 1732. In 1730 he joined the Spalding Gentlemen's Society as a contributing member. 
Pegge was ordained a priest in the Church of England in February 1730 and the following month became curate to the Revd Dr John Lynch, later dean of Canterbury, at Sundridge in Kent. Through Lynch, Pegge became vicar of Godmersham, also in Kent, in December 1731 and this preferment prompted him to marry, on 13 April 1732, Anne Clarke (died 1746), the only daughter and heir of Benjamin Clarke of Stanley near Wakefield. Of their three children, the eldest, Samuel Pegge (1733-1800), became a barrister and an antiquary himself, the second, Christopher (died 1736), died in infancy, and the third, Anna Katherine (1735-1816), married the Revd John Bourne of Spital near Chesterfield, rector of Sutton cum Duckmanton. 
In Kent Pegge developed his antiquarian interests, collecting books and coins, corresponding with like-minded contemporaries, researching, and writing. After his wife's death in July 1746, he decided to move to his native Derbyshire and in 1747 he was nominated by the dean of Lincoln, patron of the living, to Brampton near Chesterfield. The parishioners disputed this right of patronage and repelled Pegge 'by violence' from entering the church for his induction in August 1748 (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 6.236). Despite proof later that year at Derby assizes that the Brampton parish records had been falsified to support his opponent's claim, Pegge did not take up the living. From 1749 to 1751 he was tutor to the son of Sir Edward Dering at Surrenden in Kent and did not return to Derbyshire until 11 November 1751 on his appointment as rector of Whittington near Chesterfield, where he lived until his death. Pegge exchanged Godmersham for the rectory of Brindle in Lancashire, which he held for seven years until he obtained the living of Heath near Whittington. In 1765 he acquired the perpetual curacy of Wingerworth, also near Whittington. Through Frederick Cornwallis, his diocesan bishop, Pegge became a prebendary of Lichfield Cathedral in 1757 and, additionally, in 1772 he was collated to the prebend of Louth in Lincoln Cathedral by his fellow collegian Bishop John Green. 
On 14 February 1751 Pegge was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. To the classical and theological compositions of his youth, beginning in 1727 with the publication of a Latin ode on the death of King George I, he had added a body of predominantly antiquarian writings which increased substantially during his remaining forty-five years. Pegge was said to have been the most prolific of all contributors to the journal 'Archaeologia' with more than fifty published articles and memoirs. His topics were as diverse as Anglo-Saxon jewels, the introduction of the vine into Britain, and the manner of King John's death, as well as more immediately local subjects such as bull-running at Tutbury in Staffordshire. The influence of the antiquary William Stukeley can be seen in Pegge's 'Illustration of some druidical remains in the Peak of Derbyshire' ('Archaeologia', 7/2, 19) and 'Discoveries on opening a tumulus in Derbyshire' ('Archaeologia', 9/18, 189). Between 1746 and 1795 Pegge often wrote for the 'Gentleman's Magazine', using anagrams of his name like 'Paul Gemsege' or the abbreviations 'T. Row' (the rector of Whittington) or 'L. E.', the last letters of his first and family names. He contributed seven articles to 'Bibliotheca topographica Britannia', including 'The history of Eccleshall manor' (1784), 'The Roman roads... discovered and investigated... through the... county of Derby' (1784), and 'The history of Bolsover and Peak Castle, Derbyshire' (1785). Among other major publications were his edition of Gustavus Brander's manuscript 'The Forme of Cury: a Roll of Ancient English Cookery' (1780), 'The Life of Robert Grossetete... Bishop of Lincoln' (1793), and the posthumously issued 'Historical Account of Beauchief Abbey' (1801). Manuscript collections made by Pegge included two folio volumes on Kent entitled 'Monasticon Cantianum', an account of the antiquities of Wye in Kent, and a 'Lexicon Xenophonticum', together with eight folio volumes on Derbyshire history. The latter passed to his son, who gave them to John Nichols, the historian of Leicestershire, who in turn donated them in 1809 to the College of Arms where they remain. 
On the centenary of the revolution of 1688, Pegge at the age of eighty-four preached a sermon on the history of Revolution House in Whittington where the aristocratic conspirators supporting William of Orange were said to have met. On 8 July 1791 he was created LLD by the University of Oxford while on a visit there to his grandson, Christopher Pegge, later regius professor of physic. Both a sociable companion and a conscientious pastor, Samuel Pegge died aged ninety-one on 14 February 1796 at Whittington rectory and was buried on 19 February in the church. A memorial tablet was erected to him but it did not survive the fire which destroyed the church in 1895. Although Gustavus Brander's portrait of Pegge at eighty-one was reproduced as a frontispiece to 'The Forme of Cury', Elias Needham's oil painting of him at the same age was said to have been a better likeness. 
Samuel Pegge typifies Stuart Piggott's 'uncritical and omnivorous' eighteenth-century antiquary (Piggott, 'Ancient Britons', 28), but his sometimes 'supremely ridiculous' conclusions, in the judgement of Sir John Evans, should not obscure the significance of some of his prodigious output (Evans, 7). He not only preserved historical information gathered by such earlier Derbyshire antiquaries as William Woolley, but was the first person to attempt to describe systematically the Roman road network in the county, and to publish inscriptions on lead pigs of the same era found in the Peak District. Pegge's pioneering work alerted contemporaries to the importance of topographical research, writing, and publishing and so laid the foundations for later field archaeologists and local historians, his son among them. 


@@@@@


doc= 21780


Pegge, Samuel (1733-1800), antiquary and writer, was born in Godmersham, Kent, on 21 February 1733, the only surviving son of Samuel Pegge (1704-1796), antiquary, and his wife, Anne (died 1746), daughter of Benjamin Clarke, of Stanley, near Wakefield. He went to school in Chesterfield, Derbyshire, and in 1751 matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge. In 1754 he was called to the bar at the Middle Temple. On 12 February 1759 he married Martha (1732-1767), daughter of Dr Henry Bourne, physician, of Chesterfield. They had a son, Sir Christopher Pegge (1764/5-1822), and a daughter, Charlotte Anne (died 1793). Through the patronage of the lord chamberlain, the duke of Devonshire, he was appointed a groom of the privy chamber to the king on 8 October 1762. He married second, on 1 May 1773 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Goodeth Belt. 
Pegge early acquired a considerable proficiency in music, writing many catches, glees, and songs. He was also the author of some theatrical prologues and epilogues, and of some pleasant tales and epigrammatic poems. His other publications included biographical memoirs, a memoir of his father, and several works of an antiquarian nature, including 'Illustrations of the churchwardens' accompts of St Michael Spurrier-Gate, York' in 'Illustrations of the Manners and Expences of Antient Times' (1797) by John Nichols, and two works on the royal household, 'Curialia, or, An Historical Account of some Branches of the Royal Household' (1782-1806) in five parts, the last two being edited by Nichols, and 'Curialia miscellanea, or, Anecdotes of old times, regal, noble, gentilitian, and miscellaneous, including authentic anecdotes of the royal household' (1818), also edited by Nichols. On 2 June 1797 Pegge was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He died on 22 May 1800 at Scotland Yard, Whitehall, London, and was buried on the west side of Kensington churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 21781


Peile, Thomas Williamson (1806-1882), Church of England clergyman and headmaster, eldest son of John Peile, a justice of the peace for Cumberland, was born at Whitehaven on 10 November 1806. He was educated at St Bees School and then under Dr Butler at Shrewsbury School, where he followed B. H. Kennedy as captain of the school, and in 1824 entered Trinity College, Cambridge. After gaining the Davies scholarship in his freshman's year, he graduated BA in 1828 as eighteenth wrangler and bracketed second in the first class of the classical tripos. He was also second chancellor's medallist. He proceeded MA in 1831, and held a fellowship of his college from 1829 until his marriage in 1831 to Mary (died 1890), daughter of James Braithwaite of Whitehaven. Peile was an assistant master at Shrewsbury from 1828 to 1829. In 1829 he was appointed headmaster of the Liverpool Collegiate School, and in the same year was ordained by Bishop Sumner of Chester. He was chaplain to Lord Westmorland, and in 1831 became perpetual curate of St Catherine's, Liverpool. In 1834 he moved to Durham to hold one of the first tutorships in the newly constituted university. In 1836 he was appointed by the dean and chapter of Durham to the perpetual curacy of Croxdale, near Durham, which he held with his tutorship. 
Peile was headmaster of Repton School from 1841 to 1854, when he was succeeded by Steuart Adolphus Pears. Peile began the transformation of Repton from a country grammar school into a boarding-school with the standing of a leading public school. Always known as the Doctor (having taken his DD degree in 1843), he was of 'precise and dignified appearance', disliking unconventional habits among boys and masters alike, his violent temper leading him into quarrels with the latter. He introduced the Shrewsbury practice of rewarding pupils, whose successes included ten fellowships at Oxford and Cambridge, with 'merit money'. Peile's policy was achieved at the cost of displacing local boys; a memorial to the governors on their behalf in 1844 was followed by an unsuccessful action in chancery, heard in January 1852, brought by Jeremiah Briggs, a Derby solicitor, alleging that the school was originally founded to provide a free education for the boys of Etwall and Repton. A breakdown in his health brought Peile's resignation in 1854. 
Towards the close of 1857 Peile became vicar of Luton, Bedfordshire, a large and populous parish, which he began dividing into districts. But as the task proved too great for his strength, he moved in October 1860 to the newly formed parish of St Paul, South Hampstead. This he held until 1873, when he resigned. He lived in the district until his death at his home, 37 St John's Wood Park, London, on 29 November 1882. He was buried in Buckhurst Hill churchyard on 2 December. His widow and their large family survived him. The eldest son, Sir James Braithwaite Peile (1833-1906), was an Indian civil servant; their eighth son, Clarence John Peile (1847-1900), was a barrister. 
Peile was a sound scholar, and his knowledge of the classics, especially Thucydides and the 'Greek Testament', was remarkable. His principal works were editions of the 'Agamemnon' (1839) and 'Choephori' (1840) of Aeschylus, and 'Annotations on the Apostolical Epistles' (4 vols., 1851-2). His 'Sermons, Doctrinal and Didactic' was published in 1868. Peile's 'The Church of England not High, not Low, but Broad as the Commandment of God: a Letter' (1850) was notable as one of the earliest usages of the term 'broad' in connection with the established church, though Peile himself was not an adherent of the so-called broad-church party. 


@@@@@


doc= 21782


Peirce, James (1674-1726), Presbyterian minister and religious controversialist, was the younger son of John Peirce (died 'c'.1676) and his wife, Deborah (died 'c'.1681). His parents, 'who lived in good fashion', were both members of the Bull Lane Independent Church, Stepney, under Matthew Mead; Peirce was baptized at Bull Lane on 26 July 1674. His parents both died when he was young (Peirce, 'Second Letter', 29). 
After the death of his mother, when he was about seven, Peirce was placed with his older brother and sister under the guardianship of Mead, who took him into his own house and educated him with his sons. He received his grammar education from John Nesbitt and others. Peirce then studied at Utrecht from 1689 until 1692. His thesis, 'Exercitatio philosophica de homoeomeria anaxagorea' (1692), was dedicated to Mead. At Utrecht he studied under Hermann Witsius, Melchior Leydekker, Joannes Georgius Graevius, Johannes Leusden, Gerard de Vries, and Jan Luyts. The celebrated orientalist Adrian Reland, a fellow student, was a friend until his death in 1718. He then studied at Leiden, where he attended the lectures of Jacobus Perizonius and Gerard Noodt, but he also heard Jacobus Gronovius, Johannes Marck, and Friedrich Spanheim. He was later to correspond with a number of these professors. 
On returning to England in 1695, Peirce lived with his relations in London for a while, before studying privately at the Bodleian Library, Oxford. On returning to London he was admitted a member of Mead's church (11 February 1697). For two years he preached the evening lecture at Miles Lane Congregational Church, where Matthew Clarke (1664-1726) was minister. Avoiding denominational disputes, he became well regarded by the leading Presbyterian ministers in London. They persuaded him to become minister of the Green Street Meeting in Cambridge, a mixed congregation of Presbyterians and Independents, in succession to Thomas Taylor, who had died in November 1700. They themselves contributed 'liberally for my encouragement there' (Peirce, 'Second Letter', 31). He was ordained by four Presbyterian ministers, Matthew Sylvester, John Woodhouse, John Shower, and Christopher Taylor. He must still have ranked as an Independent, for he was made a trustee of the Hog Hill Meeting on 23 January 1702. At Cambridge his scholarship appears to have made him acceptable to members of the university, and he formed a close friendship with William Whiston, who thought him 'the most learned of all the dissenting teachers that I have known' ('Memoirs of the Life and Writings', 121). During this period he read and studied much, often sitting in his study from nine at night until four or five the following morning. 
Peirce's removal to the major Presbyterian congregation at Toomer's Court, Newbury, Berkshire, probably coincided with the publication at the end of 1706 of his first major controversial work: his defence of the principles of dissent from the attack made by Edward Wells, rector of Cotesbach, Leicestershire, upon separation from the Church of England. Peirce's work 'Remarks on Dr Wells his Letter to Mr Peter Dowley', originally published anonymously, was well received by dissenters. Wells arranged for a copy of his reply to be sent to Peirce, 'for your Name and Abode, tho' Not Published by you in Print, yet is Sufficiently Published by your Friends and Acquaintance in Discourse' (Wells, 10). Peirce's 'Remarks on Dr Wells his Letter', in answer to the doctor's 'Letter from a Minister of the Church of England to Mr Peter Dowley' (1706) and 'Theses Against the Validity of Presbyterian Ordination' (1707), appeared in eight parts between 1706 and 1707 (3rd edn., 1711). Peirce's growing reputation among dissenters was enhanced by his 'Some Considerations on the Sixth Chapter' (1708) in answer to Thomas Bennet's 'An Abridgment of the London Cases' (1700) on the lawfulness of imposed ceremonies, in particular the use of the sign of the cross in baptism. Wells was provoked to publish an 'Answer to Mr Peirce's Post-Script at the End of his Considerations of the Sixth Chapter' (1708). It was the publication of the 'Vindicae fratrum dissentientium' (1710) in reply to William Nicholls's 'Defensio ecclesiae Anglicanae' (1707) that brought Peirce into national prominence as a writer in defence of the principles of dissent. Both works were published in Latin with the intention of influencing foreign protestants. After Nicholls published an English translation, 'A Defence of the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England' (1715), Peirce translated his own work, with some major alterations, as 'A Vindication of the Dissenters' (1718). 
In 1713, 'without the least seeking on my part', Peirce was unanimously chosen as one of the ministers of James's Meeting, Exeter, in the place of George Trosse, who had died in January 1713 (Peirce, 'Western Inquisition', 10). Peirce had great difficulties with the invitation. His congregation at Newbury was very unwilling to release him, not least because they feared his removal would heighten the divisions among the dissenters in the town. Anxious to avoid any personal blame, Peirce resolved to accept the decision of others. Personally, he considered the state of his health to be the main factor, though he admitted that he had kept too many late hours studying. He also acknowledged that there were greater opportunities at Exeter. Although the Newbury congregation promised to subscribe for an assistant, he feared they would soon grow weary once the danger had passed. Nevertheless, in early March the Exeter dissenters believed that he had resolved to stay. They therefore appealed to the Exeter assembly of dissenting ministers in Devon and Cornwall for its support. Despite strong pleading by the Newbury congregation, the assembly, wishing to oblige the Exeter dissenters, eventually agreed to write to Peirce urging him to accept the invitation, for the sake of his health and because 'this post is of the utmost consequence to religion in these two counties' (Brockett, 'Exeter Assembly', 97). Dr Edmund Calamy, the nonconformist biographer and historian, witnessed the efforts of the Exeter dissenters to secure Peirce. 'Never before did I see such earnestness in any people for a minister's coming among them. They talked as if they were quite undone, if he did not accept their call.... They ran to such a height' he could not help thinking that their 'peculiar eagerness and impetuosity... boded very ill' (Calamy, 2.263-4). 
At first Peirce found great acceptance and 'an extraordinary respect was paid him,... he was looked upon as the first man of the party' ('Memoirs of himself', 329). He soon displayed his ability as a controversialist. After Benjamin Read, a ministerial candidate, conformed and was persuaded that his original baptism was invalid, Peirce derided his rebaptism in 'A Caveat Against the New Sect of Anabaptists' (1714). At a time when dissent was under serious attack from high-churchmen, he published other works in defence of Presbyterian ordination. The controversy over the doctrine of the Trinity proved far more damaging to dissent. Peirce himself had held the orthodox position when he read William Whiston's 'Essay on the Revelation of St John' (1706) in manuscript in 1706. On hearing of Whiston's change of views, he wrote to him from Newbury (10 July 1708) expressing amazement that he should 'fall in with the unitarians', and referring to the 'very melancholy instance' of Thomas Emlyn, who had been imprisoned for his Unitarian views. Peirce was, however, persuaded to study the writings of the early fathers of the church, after which he found himself unable to resolve the conflicting arguments over the Trinity. The difficulties of the question impressed him greatly. As a result of his studies, Peirce came to 'despair of getting clear notions of the Trinity' which 'render'd me more averse to the study of the controversy' (Peirce, 'Western Inquisition', 8). He therefore did not read Whiston's 'Primitive Christianity Reviv'd' (1711-12) and more importantly Samuel Clarke's 'Scripture Doctrine of the Trinity' (1712) until 1713, moved by Whiston's importuning. He came to realize that the theology in which he had been bred was really Sabellian. Nevertheless, he became convinced that error on this question was not fundamental, and that 'the safest way' was to keep closely to scripture. He had therefore already dropped the common form of the doxology before going to Exeter. Whiston claimed him as a Unitarian, but while he held (with Clarke) that the Son was subordinate, he denied holding Arian beliefs. His interpretation of scripture was critical to a fault rather than positively heterodox. 
The controversy which blasted Peirce's reputation and destroyed the doctrinal accord of Old Dissent began in November 1716, when the Arian opinions of a small group of younger ministers became public as a result of the indiscretion of Hubert Stogdon, who expressed his opinions freely in private conversation with the orthodox John Lavington. Lavington, Peirce's young colleague at Exeter, chose to publish the conversation, 'and the town presently rang of it'. On 17 May 1717 Henry Atkins of Puddington, when giving the lecture at James's Meeting for Peirce, who was in London, chose to preach on the Trinity, and thus brought the controversy into the open. According to Peirce, Atkins accused some of his hearers of 'damnable heresies'. Greatly offended, Peirce tried to persuade his colleagues to have Atkins excluded from their pulpit, but they refused. By request Peirce preached on 2 June on the atonement, but his attempts by scholarly means to reconcile the new teaching with orthodoxy failed to prevent the growing divisions. About a week later John Ball, the minister at Honiton, met Peirce and told him forcefully that 'people charg'd all the business upon me' and that he had the power to prevent Stogdon from spreading his opinions. Peirce denied that anyone had been 'influenc'd by me to alter his opinion about the Trinity' (Peirce, 'Western Inquisition', 13, 30-31). 
Fearful of divisions at the next Exeter assembly, Peirce joined with Joseph Hallett (1656-1722) and John Withers on 15 July in giving Stogdon a testimonial as to his conversation and behaviour (but nothing about his opinions), and at the assembly in September he piloted John Fox, another of the younger heterodox ministers, through his examination for a licence to preach, refusing to require any 'explications' of doctrinal terms. The period of comparative calm which followed Stogdon's removal to Somerset ended as a result of Peirce's Christmas-week lecture which renewed doubts about his doctrinal soundness. In January 1718 the Committee of Thirteen, a body of thirteen lay trustees who managed the affairs of the Exeter dissenters, asked each of the four ministers to preach 'in defence of the eternal deity of Jesus Christ'. Peirce complied, and 'matters so much cooled' that the controversy was not mentioned at the May assembly. Lavington assured Peirce 'that we were now quiet' (Peirce, 'Western Inquisition', 65, 67-8). From early July Peirce was absent for six Sundays in London as was his custom, but on his return he found the controversy had been renewed. 
Alarmed at news of Stogdon's ordination and the apparent falling away of the younger ministers from orthodoxy, John Walrond wrote to William Tong, one of the leading London ministers, who called an informal meeting of Presbyterian and Independent ministers on 25 August. Their advice was not to suspect anyone without good reason, but to warn the people against any minister who should be in error. Walrond announced his determination to call for a declaration of faith concerning the Trinity at the assembly to clear the ministers of the suspicion of Arianism. Attempts were made to avoid open disputes, and Peirce and Withers accepted Walrond's invitation to meet at his house with John Ball, but many country ministers were far less charitable. On the second day of the assembly, Ball proposed that the ministers present made a declaration on the Trinity. After a debate, where feelings ran high and which the moderator had difficulty controlling, a vote decided in favour of the declaration. There was further debate over the form of words. Hallett declared his beliefs in scriptural terms, Withers was scrupulously orthodox but refused the suggested form of words, but Peirce for the first time openly declared his belief in the subordination of Christ. Both sides issued a series of pamphlets. In November the Committee of Thirteen, though they had no authority to demand it, sought assurances from the four Exeter ministers on the disputed doctrine, but received satisfaction only from Lavington; Peirce expressly declared for the subordination of Christ. The committee wrote to the London ministers on 22 November seeking advice, but the latter were reluctant to become involved in so difficult an issue and delayed their answer until 6 January 1719, when they declined to 'interpose', advising the committee to consult with local ministers. Seven ministers in the neighbourhood, including Ball and Walrond, were invited to give advice, and they met in Exeter on 19 January, and the following day visited Peirce, Hallett, and Withers. The seven ministers agreed a resolution that there were errors of doctrine and congregations should withdraw from ministers who held them, but desired a fortnight in which to consult ministers in London, Devon, and Somerset. Peirce had in the meantime written to his friends in London, including John Shute Barrington, a fellow student at Leiden, who was managing the parliamentary campaign for the repeal of the 'Occasional Conformity and Schism acts'. Because the dispute at Exeter was being used by opponents of repeal, Barrington sought to compose the differences and advised the Committee of Three Denominations (of Presbyterians, Independents, and Baptists) that any doctrinal test should be scriptural only. The three denominations decided to consult the London ministers, which by opening the dispute to public debate destroyed the doctrinal accord of Old Dissent. The London ministers met at Salters' Hall on 19 and 20 February and 3 March, and divided almost equally, one advising subscription to the Trinity, the other against subscription on principle. 
In both cases the advice arrived too late to influence the outcome in Exeter. After waiting four weeks, the seven ministers met again on 4 March and sent their original resolution to the Committee of Thirteen. On 5 March the committee asked the Exeter ministers to subscribe to the Trinity. Peirce and Hallett refused. Withers's initial declaration was not accepted, but he subsequently subscribed and escaped ejection. Without giving notice, the trustees of James's Meeting locked the doors against Peirce on 6 March. A few days later the trustees of the three meeting-houses met and decided to close them to Peirce and Hallett. On the Sunday following his ejection, Peirce preached in a private house to an estimated 300 people on 'the evil and cure of divisions', which was later published. The following year his supporters built the Mint Meeting, appointing Hallett joint minister with him. In May 1719 the Exeter assembly called for a subscription from its members. Peirce with eighteen others declined and seceded, issuing a paper on 6 May denying the charge of Arianism and making a confession in scriptural terms. 
According to Fox, Peirce never rose above the mortification inflicted upon him by his summary ejection, and he wrote numerous pamphlets in self-justification. Influential friends, such as Peter King, stood by him, but he felt deeply the loss of leadership. He moved to a country house at St Leonard's parish, in the suburbs of Exeter. The last four years of his life were the time of 'his greatest Usefulness' employed in the study of scriptures (Hallett, 'Sermon', 18). His paraphrases and notes on the epistles to the 'Colossians' and 'Philippians' after the manner of John Locke were published in 1725, and on that to the 'Hebrews' -- after Joseph (III) Hallett (1691-1744) had completed the final three chapters -- in 1727 following his death. The latter was published in Latin in 1747 by J. D. Michaelis, the German biblical critic, who regarded Peirce's scholarship highly. 
After a period of illness Peirce broke a blood-vessel in his lungs, lingered a few days in great composure, and died in St Leonard's parish, Exeter, on 10 March 1726. In his will he attested to his belief in 'one God, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ' and declared that 'my Conscience reproaches me not for the part I have acted in the Controversy concerning the Trinity' (Hallett, 'Sermon', 17). He was buried in the churchyard of St Leonard's. Benjamin Avery published a long Latin inscription which was intended for Peirce's tombstone. The cutting of it was nearly finished when the rector, Richard Gay, intervened with a prohibition. Gay also objected to an alternative, 'Here lies the reverend, learned and pious Mr James Peirce': Peirce could not be reverend since he was not lawfully ordained, nor pious because he taught errors. The eventual inscription was 'Mr James Peirce's Tomb, 1726'. His funeral sermon was preached by Joseph (III) Hallett, who had followed his father as Peirce's colleague. Thomas Emlyn was invited to succeed him, but refused. Peirce seems to have been a reserved man with the manners of a gentleman, yet humorous and even jocose with friends. His preaching was scholarly rather than inspired. Yet 'he was, without doubt, a man of great parts and learning, and as such, made a much greater figure among the Dissenters than any among them for many years before him' ('Memoirs of himself', 329). 


@@@@@


doc= 21783


Peirson, Francis (1757-1781), army officer, was born in early January 1757, the eldest son of Francis Peirson of Mowthorpe Grange in the East Riding of Yorkshire. He was educated at Warrington Academy before entering the army, at the age of fifteen, on 16 July 1772. He rose to the rank of major in August 1779, when he was appointed to the 95th regiment, which in June 1780 sailed for Jersey. At this period the Channel Islands were subjected to the constant danger of attacks from the French, who made several unsuccessful attempts to gain possession. By far the most important of these raids was that of 6 January 1781, known as the battle of Jersey, when the French, under the baron de Rullecourt, landed under cover of night and took possession of the town of St Helier, making the lieutenant-governor, Major Moses Corbet, a prisoner in his bed. Under these circumstances, the colonel and lieutenant-colonel being absent from the island, command of the troops devolved upon the youthful Peirson. Rullecourt succeeded in inducing Corbet to sign a capitulation, and the island's Elizabeth Castle was summoned to surrender, but the officer in command refused to obey the order. Meanwhile the regular troops and the island militia, under the command of Major Peirson, advanced in two divisions towards St Helier's Royal Square, then the market place, where a vigorous engagement took place, resulting in heavy French casualties. Peirson's victory was complete but was gained at a heavy price, for at the moment of victory he was shot through the heart and fell dead in the arms of his grenadiers. Rullecourt himself was mortally wounded, and most of the French soldiers were taken prisoner. Peirson, who was then just twenty-four, was interred on 10 January in the parish church of St Helier with all the honours of war and in the presence of the states of the island, who erected a monument to his memory. The government provided Peirson's father with a pension of $250 per annum, while smaller sums were granted to his three remaining sisters. His gallantry was the subject of John Singleton Copley's painting 'The Death of Major Peirson' and was commemorated by the naming of Peirson Place in St Helier. 


@@@@@


doc= 21784


Pelagius (fl. c.390-418), theologian, is said by his contemporaries of the years about 400, such as Augustine of Hippo, Prosper of Aquitaine, Marius Mercator, and Paul Orosius, to have been of British origin. Beyond that there is no information, and attempts to interpret his name as a Hellenization of the Welsh 'Morgan' or the Irish 'Muirchu' represent philological wishful thinking. The dates of his birth and death are unknown. According to Augustine, Pelagius had long resided at Rome, before he emerged into disastrous prominence. He was a layman, and although sometimes called a monk is not known to have had any connection with a religious community. His concerns were theological, together with the spiritual direction of his patrons among the Christian Roman aristocracy. His interests included biblical commentary and theological doctrine as well as moral and ascetic theology. He was particularly concerned to vindicate Christian asceticism against any imputation of Manichaeism and to prove that a sinless life is possible for a practising Christian. Accordingly, he laid stress upon the freedom of will enjoyed by the baptized believer once the guilt of sin has been remitted in baptism. It was in this context that the denial of any transmission of original sin, a doctrine apparently learned from Rufinus the Syrian (not to be confused with Rufinus of Aquileia, the translator of Origen and Eusebius of Caesarea), who resided at Rome in the reign of Pope Anastasius (399-401), constituted an essential element in Pelagius's doctrine. With this view -- a foundation article of belief for any Pelagian -- went an understanding of grace ('gratia') as being essentially a divine illumination which, following the remission of sins in baptism, enables the Christian to see what is right and then to do it by the power of his divinely created nature. Such a conception is utterly different from that of Pelagius's principal adversary, Augustine of Hippo, for whom grace was the divine aid necessary to perform every righteous action -- a belief which seemed to Pelagius to remove any element of human initiative in good works. Hence his furious outburst at Rome about 405 when he heard Augustine's famous prayer from the 'Confessions' quoted: 'Give what You command and command what You will' and declared that he could not endure such sentiments (Augustine, 'De dono perseverantiae', 20, 53). 
Among Pelagius's Roman disciples was Caelestius, an aristocrat converted from a legal career to asceticism, a more forceful personality than Pelagius, and the real apostle of the so-called Pelagian movement. In 409, when Rome was menaced by Alaric the Goth, Pelagius and Caelestius abandoned the city and went to north Africa. Pelagius, having missed encountering Augustine, soon departed for Palestine, where many upper-class Romans had fled after the sack of Rome in 410. Caelestius remained behind, to proclaim Rufinus the Syrian's denial of the doctrine of original sin, for which he was excommunicated by a Carthaginian council in 411. He left Africa and went to Antioch, where he was subsequently ordained to the priesthood. However, Caelestius's theology remained influential and Augustine began to write and preach against it, though he had, as yet, avoided any breach with Pelagius, even sending him, in 413, a friendly letter, which Pelagius subsequently employed as proof of his own orthodoxy. 
In Palestine, Pelagius was amicably received by Bishop John of Jerusalem and bitterly opposed by St Jerome, the biblical scholar and translator, then living at Bethlehem. In 415 Jerome was visited by a Spanish priest, Paul Orosius, entrusted by the African bishops with the task of making common cause with Jerome against Pelagius, to whom they imputed the doctrines condemned in Caelestius. At a diocesan synod at Jerusalem in late July 415 Orosius, when asked about Pelagius, denounced him and, in effect, invited John and his colleagues to condemn Pelagius and Caelestius because their doctrine differed from that of Augustine and Jerome. Pelagius was then invited to attend the synod and speak in his own defence. Orosius's domineering manner effectively turned the feelings of the synod against himself, so that he was able to avoid a condemnation of his own position only by successfully proposing that the whole matter should be referred to Pope Innocent I. However, on 12 September Orosius was publicly accused by Bishop John of holding that human beings are so corrupted by the fall that they cannot avoid sinning even with the help of God's grace. Orosius indignantly denied the charge, composed an apologia, and returned to Africa in January 416, there to report the failure of his mission. 
Meanwhile two Gallic bishops, Heros and Lazarus, political exiles in Palestine, brought an accusation of heresy against Pelagius which was heard at a council at Diospolis (Lod) in December 415. When it opened, however, neither of the accusers was present, and Pelagius was able to defend himself without cross-examination. Some of the charges he refuted; others, ascribed to Caelestius, he said were no concern of his. It is possible that he was disingenuous in his pleading, but the council was persuaded, and he was declared to be in communion with the faith of the Catholic church. 
When the news of Pelagius's acquittal reached Africa, supplemented by the report of Orosius, the Catholic bishops were much alarmed, since it seemed to them that African theology, in which the transmission of original sin was an article of faith, had been repudiated by two oriental synods. Augustine was particularly concerned, for he had read Pelagius's treatise 'De natura' and been shocked by its teaching. Two African councils, held in the middle of 416, denounced Pelagius and Caelestius and Pope Innocent I was persuaded to add his condemnation, which he did on 27 January 417, before dying on 27 March. His successor, Zosimus, when approached by Caelestius, decided to reopen the case, being persuaded that justice had not been done to the accused. His attempt, however, foundered on the implacable opposition of the Africans and the decision of the emperor Honorius (then residing at Ravenna) who, in a decree of 30 April 418, condemned anyone who denied the fall and ordered that Pelagius and Caelestius, both of whom he assumed to be at Rome, should be banished from Italy. Next day, 1 May, an African general council, held at Carthage, enacted a series of nine canons expressing the African doctrine of original sin in the most uncompromising terms. Under this pressure Zosimus then issued a decree, now lost, called the 'Epistola tractoria', which condemned and excommunicated both Pelagius and Caelestius. 
For Pelagius, Zosimus's condemnation meant ruin. He endeavoured to effect a reconciliation with Augustine, whom he recognized as his principal opponent, but Augustine declined to accept his declaration of faith. He was subsequently expelled from Jerusalem and found refuge in Egypt, where St Cyril of Alexandria allowed him to settle. Thereafter he vanishes from history. 
As a result of his condemnation Pelagius was, for centuries, regarded as a heresiarch of the deepest dye. Twentieth-century studies, initiated by Georges de Plinval's biography of 1943, see him rather as a would-be orthodox Christian thinker, whose system proved inadequate to meet the denunciation of Augustine and the African episcopate. Judgement is not made easier by the difficulty of identifying his authentic writings from the mass of literature emanating from Pelagian circles. One thing however is clear: there was little capacity for leadership in Pelagius's character, such as appears in Caelestius, or any great controversial ability, such as that later revealed by the Pelagian apologist, Julian of Eclanum. The Pelagians were sometimes styled 'Caelestians', and this name seems more appropriate. 
Despite his heretical reputation, Pelagius's Pauline commentaries remained popular in the middle ages, sometimes circulating under the name of his bitter enemy, St Jerome, as did his hortatory letter to the aristocratic virgin Demetrias, when she took the veil in 413. 
Pelagianism is reported to have found considerable support in Britain, requiring visits by St Germanus of Auxerre in 429 and, less certainly, between about 436 and 444 to denounce it. It has been suggested by J. N. L. Myres, John Morris, and others that the alleged Pelagian denial of grace represented, in fifth-century Britain, an attack on political 'gratia' (corrupt patronage and favour), thus understanding Pelagianism as a reforming movement in a society seeking to shake off Roman imperial decadence and to revive the traditional Roman virtues. The topic is too large to be fully discussed here. It may, however, be said that it has been powerfully criticized by J. H. W. G. Liebeschuetz (1963; 1967) and has failed to convince scholars who have studied Pelagianism as a theological system. As B. R. Rees has pointed out ('Pelagius: a Reluctant Heretic', 1988, 112), far from being, as his opponents alleged, an 'inimicus gratiae' (an enemy of 'gratia'), Pelagius's principal defence of his orthodoxy was to claim that he accepted grace in the Augustinian sense, 'not for every hour or every moment, but for each individual action of our lives' (Augustine, 'De gratia Christi', 1,2,2). He deserved better than to be condemned as a heretic as a result of prejudice and a succession of unfortunate accidents which, with better luck, he might have escaped. 


@@@@@


doc= 21785


Pelgrim, Joyce (d. 1526?), publisher and bookseller, is first heard of when, with others in the book trade, he applied to have his appearance recorded, although nothing is known of their business. In 1504 an edition of the 'Ortus vocabulorum' was printed for him in Paris. In 1506, in partnership with another stationer, Henry Jacobi, he issued a book of hours and a psalter according to the use of Sarum, and an edition of Lyndewode's 'Provinciale', at which time Jacobi lived at the sign of the Trinity, and Pelgrim at the sign of St Anne, both in St Paul's Churchyard. Under the patronage of William Bretton ('c'.1476-1526), an important merchant of the staple of Calais, who assisted them with money, they worked in partnership for a few years, having books printed for them both in the Low Countries and in France, and Pelgrim is recorded as importing several shipments of books in 1506-7. After 1508, when they had issued seven books, Pelgrim's name no longer appears in connection with the business, though Jacobi still continued at work. About 1513 the latter moved to Oxford, and opened a shop there under his old sign of the Trinity, but died in the following year. William Bretton, as a creditor, applied for letters of administration, and was represented at Oxford by his agent, Joyce Pelgrim. 
In 1518-19 Pelgrim brought two chancery suits, the first against John Petyt, bookseller. He was living in the parish of St Faith under St Paul's Cathedral, when he was assessed for the subsidy of 1523 at $13 6's'. The date of his death is not known. His will was proved in 1526, at which time he was described as of the parish of St Foster Vedast. 


@@@@@


doc= 21786


Pelham, Sir Edmund (d. 1606), judge, was the fifth son of Sir William Pelham (died 1538) of Laughton, Sussex, and Mary, daughter of William Sandys, first Baron Sandys. He was the brother of Sir William Pelham (d. 1587), lord justice of Ireland in 1579-80. He entered Gray's Inn in 1563, was called to the bar in 1574, and was autumn reader in 1588. From about 1583 he was a justice of the peace for Sussex, and in October 1597 he became a member of parliament for Hastings. He acted again as reader in 1601 and in the same year was appointed serjeant-at-law. In September 1602 Pelham replaced Sir Robert Napier as chief baron of the exchequer in Ireland. The following year he acted as a justice of assize in Donegal, the first English judge to go on circuit to the north-west of Ireland. He recorded his impressions of the visit, commenting on the multitude of people, and how they welcomed him as if he had been 'a good angel sent from heaven' (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 3.193) and begged him to return and administer justice. Like many of his contemporaries in the administration he saw the power of Hugh O'Neill as oppressive and tyrannical and he commented that even the better sort were forced to defer to O'Neill before they would parley with him. Nevertheless he was confident that a parliament would remove these difficulties, and that a better acquaintance with English justice would ensure 'the greater number will grow human and civil and merit the name of a commonwealth' ('CSP Ire.', '1603-6', 111). 
In 1604 Pelham visited England and was knighted by James I at Greenwich on 3 July. He soon returned to Ireland, and in October was on a commission inquiring into the destruction of Sir Henry Harrington's lands during the recent war. In March 1605 he went on circuit, holding sessions in co. Meath, co. Westmeath, Longford, Queen's county, and King's county. But in 1606 he became ill and it was reported that he was unlikely to recover. He sailed to England and on the return journey died at Chester on 4 June 1606. On hearing of his death Sir Arthur Chichester said he was 'a very learned and worthy judge' ('CSP Ire.', '1603-6', 522). Pelham was survived by his wife, Ellen, daughter of Thomas Darrell of Scotney. They had five sons -- Herbert, George, Edmund, Henry, and Thomas -- and three daughters -- Elizabeth, Ellen, and Phillipa. His manor at Catsfield, Sussex, was left to his wife for her lifetime and thereafter to his son and heir, Herbert. Pelham's will was proved for his widow in 1609, at which time she was in trouble for her recusancy. 


@@@@@


doc= 21787


Pelham, Frederick Thomas (1808-1861), naval officer, was born on 2 August 1808, the second son of Thomas Pelham, second earl of Chichester (1756-1826), and his wife, Lady Mary Henrietta Juliana (1776-1862), daughter of Francis Osborne, the fifth duke of Leeds. He entered the navy on 27 June 1823, and served as a midshipman aboard the 'Sybille', Captain Samuel John Brooke Pechell, in the Mediterranean. Here he was present at an attack on Greek pirates. In 1829 he passed his examination for lieutenant, and was promoted on 22 February 1830. He then served in the 'Ferret' during 1831-2 and from May 1832 until his promotion to commander, on 21 September 1835, in the 'Castor', Captain Lord John Hay, on the north coast of Spain during the Carlist War. Between June 1837 and the autumn of 1838 he commanded the 'Tweed' on the same station, and was awarded the Spanish cross of San Fernando on 9 August 1839 in recognition of his efforts. 
Pelham was promoted captain on 3 July 1840. On 26 July 1841 he married Ellen Kate (died 8 Jan 1900), daughter of Rowland Mitchell; they had four children. Between May 1847 and June 1850 he commanded the steam paddle frigate 'Odin' in the Mediterranean. In March 1852 he was appointed private secretary to the first lord of the Admiralty, the duke of Northumberland, and he remained in the post until the end of the year. He was appointed at the suggestion of Admiral Sir Hyde Parker, the senior naval lord. This was a difficult post, when the ministers were anxious to keep down the estimates and reverse the strong tide of political support for the whigs in the dockyards. It was not rendered any easier by the politics of Pelham's brother, the third earl, and his close connections with Sir Francis Baring. Pelham was on particularly bad terms with Stafford O'Brien, the political secretary. His testimony on the 1853 select committee on dockyard appointments, which investigated Stafford's handling of patronage, was remarkably circumspect. On 14 August 1853 he was appointed to the 'Blenheim', to command the Portsmouth steam reserve, and aboard the same ship took a distinguished part in the Baltic campaign of 1854, notably at the capture of Bomarsund in August, where his initiative and skill in landing a heavy gun to support the attack were commended. In November 1854 he was appointed to the new battleship 'Exmouth', but in February 1855, before she was completed, he was selected by his friend Rear-Admiral Richard Saunders Dundas for the demanding position of captain of the fleet for the second Baltic campaign. 
Pelham's experience proved invaluable to Dundas, and he directed the attack on Sveaborg (8-10 August), the major operation of the year. Others were less impressed, however. Captain Bartholomew James Sulivan, the brilliant surveying officer, attributed much of Dundas's caution to Pelham's influence. In June 1856 Pelham returned to the steam reserve. Ironically, given his experience in 1852, in December 1856 Sir Maurice Berkeley declined to have him at the Board of Admiralty, despite his ability and experience, claiming he was still connected with Northumberland and thus politically suspect. In November 1857 Berkeley retired and Pelham rejoined Dundas, now at the Admiralty under Sir Charles Wood. He left office with the ministry in March 1858. The place had been conditional on his being prepared to enter parliament, but he was not called upon to do so. On 3 March 1838 he was promoted rear-admiral. Pelham joined the new Liberal board in June 1859, now as second naval lord under the duke of Somerset and Dundas. He remained there until early June 1861, when he resigned on account of ill health. He died at 8 Waterloo Street, Hove, on 21 June 1861, and was buried at Highgate cemetery. 
Pelham's career was made by his family and political connections, and his command appointments and critical promotions were all secured under whig/Liberal ministries. His efficient conduct of operations and administration demonstrated that he had considerable ability, but he was never tested in high command. 


@@@@@


doc= 21788


Pelham, George (1766-1827), bishop of Lincoln, born on 13 October 1766, was the third son and seventh and youngest child of Thomas Pelham, first earl of Chichester (1728-1805), and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Frankland (1734/5-1813). Henry Thomas Pelham, third earl of Chichester (1804-1886) was his nephew. He was at first in the English army, holding a commission in the guards, but soon changed his vocation to the church. After he had been trained by James Hurdis at the family seat of Stanmer, near Lewes, he was sent to Cambridge, matriculating from Clare College in 1784 and graduating MA in 1787. On 14 December 1792 he married Mary, third daughter of the Revd Sir Richard Nelson Rycroft (died 1786) and his wife, Penelope, daughter of the Revd Richard Stonehewer. They had no children. 
As the younger son of a leading whig family, Pelham was quickly promoted, and his political connections gratified a lust for lucrative office which quickly became notorious. He was ordained deacon and priest in 1789, and on 28 October 1790, when he was only twenty-four, was installed as prebendary of Middleton and canon residentiary in Chichester Cathedral; he held that preferment until his death. From 1790 to 1800 he was vicar of Laughton, Sussex. In 1792 the vicarage of Bexhill in Sussex was given to him by the bishop of the diocese; in 1800 he was appointed by his family to the vicarage of Hellingly. Both of these he also held until his death. From 17 November 1797 to 1803 he was prebendary of the eleventh stall at Winchester. Hurdis, who acknowledged many good qualities in his pupil, wrote to William Cowper, the poet, that young Pelham had 'just turned of five and twenty, and is already in possession of two livings' (Hurdis, xi). 
Pelham was consecrated bishop of Bristol on 27 March 1803 in the chapel at Lambeth Palace, and at the same time received from the archbishop of Canterbury the degree of DCL. When the see of Norwich became vacant, he wrote (8 February 1805) from his house in Welbeck Street, London, to William Pitt, stating that he had heard 'from so many quarters' of his nomination for that bishopric, that he could 'no longer refrain expressing his gratitude', as it would be 'a lasting obligation'. A dry answer was immediately sent back by Pitt, that the report 'had arisen without his knowledge, and that he could not have the satisfaction of promoting his wishes' (P. H. Stanhope, 'Life of... William Pitt', 1861-2, 4.253-4). This was almost Pelham's only failure. In 1807 he was transferred to the diocese of Exeter, being installed on 28 September 1807, and holding with it the archdeaconry of Exeter and the treasurership of the cathedral, to which was annexed a residential stall. His desire for further preferment was realized in October 1820, when he was made bishop of Lincoln. Pelham was also clerk of the closet to the king. When raised to the episcopal bench he nearly went down on his knees to George III to be allowed to dispense with wearing his wig, but the king was unrelenting (A. Hayward, 'Biographical and Critical Essays', 2, 1873, 40). He was a friend of the prince regent and a regular diner and party-goer at the Brighton Pavilion in 1818. 
Pelham was the author of two sermons and a charge. He is described as urbane in his manners, punctual in the discharge of business, and impartial in the distribution of patronage. He became a byword for much that was wrong with the established church of his day. However, when he confirmed the young W. E. Gladstone at Eton on 1 February 1827, the latter noted: 'Bishop not dignified in appearance -- but went through the service apparently with great feeling and piety' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 1 Feb 1827). Pelham had, on 19 January 1827, caught a cold at the duke of York's funeral. He died of pleurisy at Connaught Place, London, on 7 February 1827 and was buried in the family vaults at Laughton in Sussex on 15 February. Mary Pelham's poor health was, fancifully, given by her husband as a reason why he should be preferred. She was said to be haughty in style, and in the palace at Exeter never rose from her seat to receive visitors. She died on 30 March 1837. 


@@@@@


doc= 21789


Pelham, Henry (1694-1754), prime minister, was born on 26 September 1694 in London, the eighth of the nine children of Thomas Pelham, first Baron Pelham of Laughton (c.1653-1712), and his second wife, Lady Grace Holles (1668/9-1700), daughter of Gilbert Holles, third earl of Clare, and his wife, Grace Pierrepont. Throughout his life Pelham was deeply attached to his only surviving brother, Thomas Pelham Holles, who was fourteen months his elder and who was created duke of Newcastle upon Tyne in 1715, after inheriting the great estate of their uncle John Holles, duke of Newcastle upon Tyne. Pelham attended Westminster School, London, and was enrolled at Hart Hall, Oxford, on 6 September 1710. Upon his father's death in 1712 he inherited some annuities and $5000, at least part of which went to youthful extravagance. At this time his brother gave him an annuity of $1000, and when he came of age in 1715 he inherited land in their home county of Sussex worth $1500 a year. During the Jacobite rising of 1715 Pelham commanded a troop of dragoons and took part in the battle of Preston (12-14 November). He then travelled on the continent, apparently to complete his education, and returned after his brother arranged his election on 28 February 1717 as member of parliament for Seaford, Sussex. The Pelham brothers were whigs, as their father had been since before the revolution of 1688. Their Pelham ancestors had held seats in the Commons since the reign of Elizabeth I. 
On 5 April 1722 Pelham was elected to represent the county of Sussex, a seat he held until his death. While his brother Newcastle on 25 May 1720 secured him the court office of treasurer of the chamber, Pelham also became close to Sir Robert Walpole; in his first speech, on 6 May, he moved an address of thanks to the king which was seconded by Walpole. Pelham would never be known as an orator, for his speeches usually were plain and to the point, filled with facts and figures relevant to the subject under debate. On 3 April 1721 he was appointed a member of Walpole's Treasury board, a rapid rise for a young politician. The Pelhams' support of Walpole in his power struggle with John, Lord Carteret, was rewarded in 1724, when Pelham was appointed secretary at war (on 3 April) and Newcastle secretary of state for the southern department (on 14 April). Pelham acted as Walpole's lieutenant in the Commons and smoothed relations between his touchy brother and the chief minister. The fact that Newcastle quickly became the third most powerful man in the administration no doubt helped Pelham's career, for he was sworn of the privy council on 1 June 1725. Pelham supported Walpole's unpopular plan to reform the excise system in 1733 but voted in 1737, in opposition to his mentor, for a scheme to reduce the rate of interest on the national debt, a goal Pelham would later achieve himself. 
On 29 October 1726 Pelham married Lady Katharine Manners (1700/01-1780) ['see 'Pelham, Lady Katharine], daughter of John Manners, second duke of Rutland, and his wife, Catherine Russell. Newcastle marked the event with a gift of land in Sussex worth $800 a year and sold him some property worth $500 a year, giving him an annual income of $2800 plus his salary from office. The marriage portion was $10,000. The couple had two sons, who, to their parents' great grief, died on 27 and 28 November 1739 of a throat infection, and six daughters, two of whom also died in childhood. Illness in a friend's family was a painful reminder to Pelham of the loss of his boys and of his daughter Lucy little more than two months later: 'These incidents renew too much in me, what I ought and endeavor to forgett but I find I never shall' (Pelham to Newcastle, 1 July 1740, BL, Add. MS 33441, fol. 4). The eldest daughter, Catherine, her childless uncle's favourite, in 1744 married her first cousin Henry Clinton, ninth earl of Lincoln, who was made Newcastle's heir. Pelham was devoted to his wife and family and favoured spending his free time in privacy with them. In 1729 he purchased Esher Place, Surrey, close by his brother's estate at Claremont, and employed William Kent to renovate the house and gardens as a country retreat for his family. When Pelham was appointed paymaster-general on 8 May 1730, he found his official residence in Whitehall deficient and had it rebuilt, his first promotion of public architecture. In 1740 he bought a house in Arlington Street, London, which he had razed, and engaged Kent to design a fine Palladian structure, now no. 22. The family moved in on 25 May 1743. On Lady Katharine's appointment as ranger of Greenwich Park in 1745, Pelham arranged an expensive major restoration of the official residence, the Queen's House designed by Inigo Jones. 
Throughout the 1730s, both as Newcastle's brother and as Walpole's confidant, Pelham was privy to policy discussions of the inner cabinet, yet he was not in the public eye. This dual privity became a vice as Newcastle's ambition and differences with Walpole over policy towards Spain grew. Pelham, assisted by their close friend the lord chancellor, Philip Yorke, earl of Hardwicke, had to conciliate between the two and even softened the language of Newcastle's official letters to Spain to conform with Walpole's view. The grateful Newcastle said: 'My Brother has all the prudence, knowledge, experience, and good intention, that I can wish or hope in a man' (Coxe, 1.40). In the face of a public inflamed by accounts of Spanish depredations on British trade and sailors, Pelham helped Walpole to win passage of the convention of the Pardo on 8 March 1739. Spain's failure to meet the agreed terms forced the reluctant Walpole to accept the need for war. Pelham continued his role of peacemaker as the ministers quarrelled over the conduct of the war, which Walpole called Newcastle's. When the expected quick victory failed to occur, the opposition, who had demanded war, began to mount damaging attacks on the chief minister in the Commons. On 13 February 1741 Pelham strongly opposed a motion for Walpole's removal, and, after Sir Robert was forced to resign, defended him in debate on 9 March 1742 over a motion for a committee of inquiry. Although he distrusted Newcastle, Walpole wanted Pelham to succeed him as chief minister. Even while he was Walpole's deputy, Pelham's affability and good character had gained him friends, and yet, despite Walpole's encouragement, he chose not to become chancellor of the exchequer in the new administration. However, in July 1742 he did become leader of the House of Commons. Pelham was a conciliator able to persuade discordant politicians to work together, his subtlety disguising his strength. When a death created vacancies in 1743, Pelham on 25 August became first lord of the Treasury and on 12 December chancellor. Walpole, now earl of Orford, congratulated him, saying: 'I do not load you with personal assurances; but I never knew a time when I thought it more incumbent upon me to exert myself in support of the government; and I rejoice, for your sake and my own, that affairs are put into your hands, where my private friendship, and my political opinion unite, in engaging me to do all I can, and call upon me to act in character. (Coxe, 1.92)' With power came great responsibility, for, in addition to the war with Spain, Britain was funding Austria's defence against Prussia and France, on which Britain declared war on 29 March 1744. Holding all the offices formerly Walpole's, and supported by Newcastle and Hardwicke, Pelham was chief minister in theory but not in fact: he lacked the approval of George II, who still favoured the German-speaking northern secretary, Carteret. The public and many members of the Commons, however, perceived a bias in Carteret towards Hanover over England, and disliked him accordingly, giving the Pelhams a lever to force his dismissal on 24 November 1744. The king was angry and unreconciled, rejecting men suggested for appointment and complaining 'he had been forced to part with those he liked' (Owen, 244). To counter the continuing influence at court of Carteret (now Earl Granville), Pelham had to strengthen his position in the Commons, where he did not yet have mastery over the newer members of his coalition. When the tory opposition in February 1745 demanded an inquiry into a failed naval operation, they were joined by some of the new allies Pelham had managed to place on the Admiralty board, who wanted to expose their predecessors as incompetent. Despite Pelham's efforts to keep the inquiry non-partisan, members chose for political reasons to support one or the other of the two admirals involved, Thomas Mathews and Richard Lestock. In order not to offend the king further, Pelham was forced to speak in support of Mathews, who was being attacked by his young allies. 
Pelham had little time to conciliate the king before the outbreak, on 25 July 1745, of the Jacobite rising. Although the secretaries of state had direction of policy in Scotland, the first lord of the Treasury controlled the subordinate revenue boards there and thus had considerable influence through patronage. Walpole had worked through the Scottish magnate Archibald Campbell, Lord Ilay, who became third duke of Argyll in 1743. Argyll's rival John Hay, fourth marquess of Tweeddale, a supporter of Granville, was appointed secretary of state for Scotland following Walpole's fall in 1742. After the cabinet had taken protective measures when rumours of invasion first circulated in 1743, Pelham in 1744 suggested arming Scottish loyalists and raising additional Highland regiments, but nothing was done by Tweeddale. Little more was heard until the regency board received warning of a possible French invasion in July 1745. Even after the landing of the Pretender became known, the public and Tweeddale dismissed the danger. Pelham said: 'I am not so apprehensive of the strength or zeal of the enemy, as I am fearful of the inability or languidness, of our friends... you would scarce, in common conversation, meet with one man who thinks there is any danger from, scarce truth in an invasion, at this time. (Coxe, 1.258)' With most of the British forces engaged on the continent, Pelham in alarm asked George II to return from Hanover but, because of on-going cool relations between king and first minister, gained no support. 'The conduct of a certain person is worse than ever. To speak of personal treatment is idle at this time, but we are not permitted either to give our advice or to act in consequence of any advice that is given', Pelham told a friend in September (Owen, 280). Granville and his allies told George II that the rebels could be crushed easily by the forces to hand and that Britain should maintain her European commitment. Despite the opposition of Tweeddale, the Pelhams finally convinced the king to recall his son, the duke of Cumberland, and ten battalions from the continent. The rebel success at Prestonpans on 21 September proved Tweeddale's incompetence, and he resigned in January 1746. Even before, Newcastle had begun organizing internal defences and naval operations to contain the rising. Pelham's correspondence makes clear how closely he studied the progress of the invasion and highland uprising. By the end of the year Cumberland's forces had regained the initiative and they finally destroyed the rebel army at the battle of Culloden on 16 April 1746. Scotland had specific rights under the 'Act of Union' and could not be crushed, as Cumberland advocated. Pelham wanted to pacify Scotland and ensure its loyalty to the crown, but by moderate measures that would preserve the stability of his administration. Lord Hardwicke drafted bills that reflected public opinion and worked out final forms with Pelham and Newcastle. The act of attainder signed in June 1746 listed men declared guilty of treason, whose property could be confiscated, but only three peers were executed. The 'Disarming Act' signed in August, which imposed fines for carrying or concealing arms, was difficult to enforce, and a ban on traditional highland dress was evaded or ignored. To ensure passage of such bills, Pelham had to negotiate Argyll's assistance while reaching out to his rival Scottish lords. To Pelham, the most important measure was the 'Heritable Jurisdictions Act' of 1747, which extended uniform royal jurisdiction throughout Scotland and so strengthened control by central government. Scottish lords who by tradition had inherited regalities were bought out, and their jurisdictions were returned to the crown. Pelham in consequence could influence the appointment of the most important officials in Scottish local government, the sheriff-deputes. By accepting recommendations for these posts from a number of Scottish lords, Pelham gained greater support for his pacification bills while preserving good relations with Argyll. 
Hard pressed to finance and conduct war on so many fronts, Pelham learned early in 1746 that George II wanted a new ministry headed by Granville, who still influenced the king's thinking on foreign policy. In consequence, Pelham, together with most of his administration, resigned on 11 February. Faced with a minority in parliament and the withdrawal of promised financial support for the government, George II was forced to recall Pelham and his colleagues within three days. Pelham could now turn to placating the king and strengthening his political position. Determined not to repeat Walpole's error of creating opposition by exclusion, Pelham had, after Granville's resignation, brought into his administration dissident whigs who had criticized the conduct of the war, such as the Bedford and Cobham factions, and thus gained some good speakers to support his proposals in the Commons. As a result some excellent political writers attached to these factions, Henry Fielding in particular, began to support the administration. When Pelham returned to office after his own resignation he brought in more new men -- even the king's 'bete noire', William Pitt -- to create a truly broad-bottom administration. 
The only remaining serious opposition was the Leicester House faction headed by Frederick, prince of Wales. As early as 1737 Frederick had begun to gather a party loyal to him which was based on appointments to his household. These men, some of them peers, had votes in parliament and formed a shadow administration waiting to take office at what many thought to be the king's imminent death. Frederick allied himself with the Cobham and Bedford factions opposing Walpole but gave general support to the new administration after 1742. Late in 1746 he went back into opposition and began to create more salaried positions at his court in order to expand his party. The prince's substantial personal income made him the Pelhams' most dangerous opponent. Moreover, Frederick reached out to the tory country gentlemen in the Commons, men who had been marginalized by George II's distrust of them. Frederick and his friends challenged Pelham's control over elections by supporting their own candidates. To catch them off guard, Pelham called a snap general election on 20 June 1747 which brought him an increased majority. The resulting political calm and smooth passage of legislation contributed heavily to the recovery of royal favour. Pelham left little to chance in the Commons, working out in advance the order in which legislation would be introduced in each session and selecting the speakers to support particular measures, always working to eliminate opportunities for opposition. 
Under the departmental form of government then used, formulation of foreign policy was the province of the secretaries of state. The monarch was arbiter of policy, and George II kept a close control over the army and relations with European states. When the king insisted on going to Hanover in 1743, a regency board made up of his ministers ran the government in London. Pelham became a member when he was appointed head of the Treasury and in consequence read most documents concerning foreign affairs. When Granville presented the treaty of Worms to the regency board, Pelham objected to the subsidies included and, with his allies, was able to reject it. While Granville had the king's ear over what part Britain should play in the War of the Austrian Succession, Pelham's influence was limited to supporting Newcastle's views and to the passage in the Commons of bills to pay troops and provide subsidies for allies. Defending measures over which he had no control was, as he told Newcastle, especially difficult in regard to the large subsidies: 'The Allys will take it [every sum of money we advance], and then act, as suits their own convenience and security best' (Owen, 227). Once Granville was finally ousted and Pelham had begun to win the king's confidence, he was able to exert more influence on foreign policy, but still primarily through his control of the Commons and government finance. His office determined his viewpoint. Each year he had to find the resources to pay for war, noting that 'when I came into the Treasury I found a vast arrear and the expenses have increased, and the revenue diminished ever since' (Wilkes, 105). Pelham corresponded with British diplomats and was well informed on the status of relations with other governments. When George II visited Hanover in 1748, 1750, and 1752, Pelham led the regency board and sent advice to Newcastle, who accompanied the king. When Pelham was out of London, Newcastle often sent him copies of diplomatic papers, although Pelham admitted difficulty with documents in French, 'which language I understand very imperfectly' (Coxe, 2.491). Since he also said 'I don't speak French', his ability to converse with foreign ambassadors must have been limited, although he did report meeting with several while Newcastle was at Hanover in 1750 (ibid., 1.168). As leader of the Commons, Pelham knew by 1746 that the public wanted an end to an expensive and unprofitable war. As head of the Treasury he was equally keen to end the financial drain on the country. As chief minister he wanted 'a good Peace', honourable and on terms acceptable to parliament: 'For God sake don't let us neglect the first opportunity that offers itself for that purpose' (Pelham to Hardwicke, 22 April 1748, BL, Add. MS 35423, fol. 28). Newcastle's rapid conversion to the king's strategy of deferring peace until more bargaining chips could be won put him at odds with Pelham, who believed further warfare would yield no better peace terms. When France's desire for secret negotiations was rumoured in 1746, Pelham urged Newcastle to make contact, although it proved futile. From that time Pelham also supported measures to induce Frederick II to press France to negotiate, even though he knew George II distrusted his Prussian nephew. Pelham was outspoken, telling the Commons on 9 February 1748: 'it is my opinion that we ought to make peace but I have reason to believe that certain influences will prevail against my opinion' (copy of speech in Le Man to Huescar, 13 Feb 1748, BL, Add. MS 32811, fol. 155). Newcastle was certain a final blow could be launched against France with Dutch aid. Pelham believed the British envoy Lord Sandwich had misled Newcastle into thinking 'that Holland would bring such an Army into the field as would turn the ballance in our favor when he must know, if he knew anything at all, that they were no government, that they were a bankrupt people and could not pay the very small sums they owe to us for our advanced payments to them. (Pelham to Hardwicke, 25 Sept 1748, BL, Add. MS 35423, fol. 64)' Dutch promises went unfulfilled, and Newcastle agreed to peace negotiations that led to the signing of a preliminary treaty in April 1748. Pelham told him: 'Peace is what I want, both for the sake of my king, my country, and myself. Peace will be had. I heartily wish it may be no worse, than what is represented in your paper. If so, I am sure it is to be defended; but if not so, it must be defended, and shall be, by me at least, if I have the honour to serve the king, at the time of trial. (Coxe, 1.415)' The final terms, as Pelham predicted, proved no better than what might have been obtained in 1746. 
Britain was finally freed from the burden of war by the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, signed on 18 October 1748, but relations between the Pelham brothers had soured while Newcastle, now northern secretary, spent the summer with the king in Hanover. Newcastle had from the beginning been uncomfortable about his brother's power and, as early as 1743, had told Hardwicke: 'I do apprehend that my brother does think that his superior interest in the Closet, and situation in the House of Commons, gives him great advantage over everybody else. They are indeed great advantages, but may be counter-balanced, especially if it is considered over 'whom' those advantages are given. (Owen, 319)' After more disagreements in January 1745, Newcastle suggested a method of power-sharing: 'that every thing, as far as possible, should be first talked over by you and me, before it is either flung out in the closet, or communicated to 'any' of our brethren; I always except the chancellor, who, I know, is a third brother; that we shall have no reserve, either 'public' or 'private' with each other; and, that in our transactions with the other ministers, and other persons, who may be negotiated with, we should always let it be understood, that we speak in the name of both, or in the name of neither. This conduct, once established, will grow easy and natural, and effectually prevent any jealousies, on one side, or disagreeable warmth, occasioned by them, on the other. In order to make this practicable, I will call every morning, as regularly at your house, as I once did at Sir Robert's. There the scheme of the day shall be settled, to be handed out to others afterwards, as shall be necessary; and a frequent intercourse with ease, at each other's houses, and at all hours and times, will also make this very easy to us. (Coxe, 1.206)' Pelham willingly agreed. Yet, far away from London in 1748, the duke fell prey to his streak of jealousy and paranoia, in his letters accusing Pelham of imagined slights, a problem that would recur during later trips to Hanover. Ill and irritated by his brother's petulance, Pelham told Hardwicke: 'I must declare to your Lordship with all the coolness imaginable, it is not in my will, it is not in my power to undertake another sessions of Parliament upon the foot of expence we are now going into, and that only to preserve a bigotted notion of Old Systems and the House of Austria. (21 Aug 1748, BL, Add. MS 35423, fol. 54)' Newcastle was shaken and subdued upon learning that Pelham, whom he sincerely loved, had suffered a painful and debilitating attack of shingles in late August. The brothers' other occasional quarrels were over money, one cause being Newcastle's dismal personal finances. A settlement, made in 1741 after some acrimony, protected the rights of Pelham and his family as Newcastle's heirs. When the marriage in 1744 of Pelham's daughter Katherine to the earl of Lincoln necessitated new arrangements, Newcastle became enraged at the restrictions his brother demanded. Aside from his concerns for his daughters' rights, Pelham worried about how Newcastle's great debts might damage his public reputation and political credit. He warned his brother what a blow his loss of office would be because Newcastle's salary was an important part of his income. Because of their differences, the brothers did, on a few occasions, stop speaking to each other until Hardwicke interceded to heal the rift. Pelham usually made the first overture, perhaps because he was emotionally the stronger, and told his brother: 'We cannot change our natures nor add to our understanding; we must therefore be satisfied with each other and convinc'd that if we do differ, it is what we can't avoid, and endeavour that those differences shall have as little effect upon the Publick and be as little known as possible. (Pelham to Newcastle, 7 Sept 1750, BL, Add. MS 35411, fol. 122)' In national finance, Pelham intended to reduce government spending after the war, which would please the tax-paying landowners who made up his majority in the Commons and induce them to support his plan to reduce the interest on the national debt. Consequently, Pelham objected to Newcastle's promotion of subsidies in peacetime to cement foreign alliances for Britain, but could be persuaded to agree when he saw definite benefits would result. Hardwicke had his own view: 'When a Subsidiary Measure has been proposed which he has not been inclin'd to, & resolv'd not to yield to at first, or without difficulty, I have more than once known him to take up another Subsidiary Measure of much greater Extent & Expence, which has been talk'd of before, in order to shew the small importence & value of the one, & the preferableness of the other, tho' 'that other' may not have been practicable. (Hardwicke to Newcastle, 28 July 1751, BL, Add. MS 32724, fol. 490)' Pelham reluctantly agreed to support Newcastle's plan to elect an heir to the throne of the Holy Roman empire, which involved paying large subsidies to German electors. Pelham presented the Bavarian subsidy to the committee of supply on 22 February 1751, saying that the election scheme was essential to hold France in check and to preserve the balance of power in Europe. At the time Pelham promised that no more subsidies were needed, and he quarrelled with his brother when Newcastle soon afterwards requested one for the elector of Saxony. Pelham was so angry that colleagues had to persuade him that a public rupture with his brother would destroy their party. Pelham finally agreed and presented the subsidy on 22 January 1752. Opposition was strong, but Pelham answered these objections 'finely, seriously, and pathetically; a manner in which he particularly shone' (Walpole, 1.167). 
Pelham was also troubled by Newcastle's desire to monopolize the handling of foreign relations. In a letter to Pelham the duke claimed that the southern secretary, John Russell, fourth duke of Bedford, 'has just parts & understanding enough to confound you & business, and not to comprehend enough to forward either, tho he was never so well disposed to it' (Newcastle to Pelham, 2/13 Sept 1750, BL, Add. MS 35411, fol. 105). Pelham reminded him that: 'I have promised the king, and I will keep my word, that I would never enter into any cabal again, to prevent his Majesty from either removing, or bringing into his service, any person he had either a prejudice to, or a predilection for (Coxe, 2.389)' Even though Pelham was convinced Bedford neglected his duties, he did not want him replaced by someone completely subservient to Newcastle or by a member of parliament who might challenge Pelham's authority there. Moreover, Pelham did not want to lose the support of Bedford's friends in the Commons. Nevertheless, in June 1751 Pelham did finally assist Newcastle in gaining the king's consent to their manoeuvring Bedford into resignation. George II himself concluded that Bedford's slack work habits were not giving him value for his money and decided that he could also do without the services of his first lord of the Admiralty, Bedford's friend John Montagu, fourth earl of Sandwich, whom the king had always disliked. George II expected hard work and a suitable degree of deference from his ministers and never forgot which men, Bedford and Sandwich included, had denigrated the Hanoverian connection. Sandwich's dismissal forced Bedford to resign to protest. At the king's suggestion Robert Darcy, fourth earl of Holdernesse, an unambitious diplomat, replaced Bedford. Hardwicke's son-in-law George, Baron Anson, an admiral and member of the Admiralty board, was promoted to first lord. To please the king further, Granville was appointed president of the privy council, even though Pelham still distrusted the earl and doubted Newcastle's assurances that Granville was a changed man. 
With the war ended, Pelham could implement some long-considered financial plans. In 1749 he approved designs for the rebuilding of the Horse Guards, Whitehall, which would also provide accommodation for the secretary at war and other officials. On 20 December 1749 parliament enacted his plan to consolidate the national debt and reduce the rate of interest from 4 to 3 per cent by 1755. Pelham needed all his skills of persuasion to overcome the opposition of the great financial corporations to this plan. New Bank of England annuities at 3 per cent interest were offered for sale, while the rate on old debts was gradually reduced from 4 to 3 per cent and debts held by the East India and South Sea companies were transferred to the bank. The goal of the scheme was to convert all of the public debt into the new or consolidated bank annuities. The most threatening focus of political opposition to the administration was removed by the death of the king's unloved son Frederick, prince of Wales, on 20 March 1751. Just the year before, when the king fell seriously ill, Pelham had worried about the strength of this Leicester House organization and told Newcastle that the Commons 'is a great unwieldy body, and requires great Art and some Cordials to keep it loyal... [the Prince] has as much to give in present as we have and more in Reversion. This makes my task an hard one' (Newman, 75). The death of Frederick dispersed his party and eased Pelham's task immeasurably. Soon after, Pelham had 'an opportunity of talking thoroughly to the King, which I have done without reserve; he now knows upon what terms I can be his servant, and of 'use' to him. Time must shew whether that is practicable or not... I am glad to be certain of the ground I stand upon. (Pelham to Henry Fox, 3 April 1751, BL, Add. MS 51379, fol. 93)' Pelham enhanced his position by reducing the king's spending on patronage and accomplishing another goal which: 'I have for some time despaired of, bringing his civil list finances into any order' (Pelham to Newcastle, 22 June 1750, BL, Add. MS 32721, fol. 144). 
Soon after Frederick's death a message from the king to both houses of parliament proposed that his widow, Princess Augusta, be made regent if the king died before her eldest son came of age. This proposal, drawn up by the Pelhams and Hardwicke, angered the duke of Cumberland and his supporters because they felt he should be regent. When the Commons went into committee on the bill on 16 May, Pelham took the chair, a role he rarely filled because it barred him from taking part in the debate. He may have hoped thus to avoid further offending Cumberland or the new Leicester House faction, or he simply did not expect the heated opposition the bill provoked. Pelham's able lieutenants William Murray and Henry Fox spoke for the administration in the unexpectedly long and contentious debate, although Fox put some of his effort into defending Cumberland. Speaking for approval of the final bill, Pelham said that 'he was persuaded nobody would suspect him of any prospect of power for himself from this bill, as he should be too great a wretch to build views of grandeur on what he must regard as the greatest misfortune' (Walpole, 1.102). 
Political stability was Pelham's goal in all his policies, yet one of his highland pacification bills came under fierce attack in March 1752 by the two disgruntled dukes -- Bedford, who hated the Pelhams, and Cumberland, who hated the Scots. A bill to annex to the crown some of the highland estates forfeited for treason had been produced after years of negotiation between Pelham, Hardwicke, Argyll, and other Scottish lords. Cumberland and Bedford claimed the bill rewarded the Scots for rebellion but could not stop its passage. Cumberland then accused Argyll of protecting Jacobites holding government office in Scotland, a charge Bedford repeated in the Lords while calling for an inquiry. The king was persuaded by his son to demand that Pelham investigate. Within a few months Pelham was able to gather sufficient evidence to exonerate Argyll and, by association, himself. In his report to the king Pelham said: 'Who can be responsible that no Jacobite shall ever, by any means, creep into the numberous employments of the revenue? As there are many rival connections in Scotland, all equally contending for power, interest and solicitations, may upon particular occasions, draw in a loyal subject to recommend a person whose character is not well known or misrepresented to him. (Jewell, 21)' At this same time, by chance, a genuine Jacobite plan, the Elibank plot, was being formed to seize George II and smuggle him out of the country. The Pelhams kept watch on the conspirators but also kept the plot a secret, probably because of the Argyll inquiry and possibly to prevent panic in the stock market, which would damage Pelham's reorganization of public finance. 
Despite the competition for power at the highest level of politics, the peace and prosperity of the period allowed the Commons led by Pelham to give more time and thought to bills promoting public welfare, such as reform of poor laws, suppression of crime, construction of roads, and regulation of trade, all of which would contribute to social and hence political stability. Here Pelham's ability to gain co-operation from diverse groups was an important factor. While he and his lieutenants provided leadership and speeches to get bills through the Commons, much of the committee work on proposed legislation, the gathering of data, and the drafting of bills was done by back-bench members who held no office, and who included tories and independents as well as whigs. These men were more attuned to their constituents than to the court and could bring to Pelham's attention the needs and desires of the public. The felonies committee in 1751 investigated complaints that excessive consumption of gin was making workers idle and encouraging crime and as a remedy quickly produced the 'Gin Act' regulating sale. When an epidemic of cattle distemper affected the whole country in the 1740s, the Commons supported privy council measures to contain the disease, even though they infringed property rights. After examining procedures for quarantining ships the Commons asked the king's ministers to find better means of keeping infectious disease out of the country and received a bill, enacted in 1753, that incorporated the members' suggestions. An adequate and wholesome supply of bread being essential to public order, the Commons in June 1749 passed a bill revising standards for the size and quality of bakers' loaves. A far more contentious aspect of the grain trade aroused debate and petitions to parliament after a nephew of Pelham, Charles Townshend, third Viscount Townshend, in 1751 published a pamphlet in which he urged abolition of the government bounty paid on grain exports. While popular with producers, the bounty was indeed a drain on the Treasury because exports had been exceptionally large since 1748. The issue caused so much worry and unrest among growers that Pelham, his health already failing, was forced to promise his Sussex constituents that the bounty would be retained. At a meeting held on 29 August 1753 to endorse his candidacy, Pelham said: 'as trade and particularly the corn trade is the chiefe concern of the County of Sussex, it shall be my constant care to encourage and support the same by encouraging our farmers in their agriculture and extending our commerce abroad[;] we have no reason to fear being what we ever have been, a rich and powerful people. (Connors, 275)' George II valued tranquillity in his subjects and any minister who could maintain it. 'Quiet', wrote Pelham, 'is what he loves better than all of us put together' (Coxe, 2.366). Three acts of parliament supported by Pelham did disturb both the public and the politicians, even though they effected necessary reforms. The 'Calendar Reform Act' of 1752, which switched Britain to the Gregorian calendar used on the continent, caused some confusion and consternation. Hardwicke's 'Marriage Act' of 1753, which prohibited clandestine and runaway marriages, divided the ministry and produced a vigorous pamphlet war between supporters and critics, who feared the elevation of the civil legislature over canon law and the granting of parental powers of veto for unattractive marriage proposals. The 'Jewish Naturalization Act' of 1753 allowed Jews to take the oaths of supremacy and allegiance without using the word Christian. Pelham secured passage of the act because he thought it just and fair, but it may also have been in response to the Jewish community's help with the restructuring of the national debt. Replying on 7 May 1753 to expressions of the antisemitism common at that time, Pelham said, 'Surely, Sir, I am not to look upon every man as my enemy who differs from me in opinion upon any point of religion. This would be a most unchristian way of thinking' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 14.1414). Soon fierce public opposition was whipped up by propaganda misrepresenting the terms of the act, and by autumn Pelham began to fear that the controversy would affect the general election scheduled for April 1754. He therefore arranged repeal of the bill in December. 
Hampered by his failing health and distracted by the uproar over the 'Naturalization Act', Pelham had to make time to deal with a gesture towards independence by the nominally subservient Irish parliament. The balance of domestic Irish politics had been disrupted by the intervention of the Anglican archbishop George Stone, whose faction was opposed by that of the speaker of the Irish Commons, Henry Boyle. The ensuing disruptions in the parliament caused Newcastle, who was responsible for the political administration of Ireland, to doubt the ability of the lord lieutenant, Lionel Sackville, first duke of Dorset, to govern. After more than a year of conflict over how surplus money should be used, the Irish parliament in June 1753 petitioned the king to restore its right to dispose of that money as it wished. This was rejected as a threat to English supremacy, a move that provoked more turmoil in Dublin. When the Irish Commons in late December 1753 again presented its case, Pelham set the cabinet policy of completely rejecting Irish demands. He spent the next few months, the last of his life, preparing for the election. 
Pelham died at his London house at about 6 a.m. on 6 March 1754. The previous July he had drunk the waters at Scarborough to treat a skin disorder. He fell ill about 15 December with fever, nausea, and skin eruptions that spread down his torso. His doctor drained a swelling then and another that developed in February. The few surviving descriptions of his symptoms are inadequate to suggest a diagnosis. Pelham returned to work on 7 January, telling Newcastle 'I am now, thank God, as well as ever I was in my life' (Coxe, 2.495), but he collapsed again with fever and skin eruptions on 3 March. He was buried in the family vault at Laughton, Sussex. After his death his brother was so overcome by grief that he secluded himself for several days. A contemporary said of Pelham: 'His abilities, integrity and candour gave him such confidence and trust as to enable him, by a proper and dexterous management of these qualities, to keep persons together and to give more Public quiet than I fear we shall see again for some time (J. Fowle to Henry Etough, 16 March 1754, BL, Add. MS 9201, fol. 103)' The tory Tobias Smollett wrote that Pelham's death was regretted by the nation 'to whose affection he had powerfully recommended himself by the candour and humanity of his conduct and character' (Wilkes, 214). 
Pelham never used his offices for personal enrichment and never spared time to improve his estates, which brought in about $3000 a year at the time of his death. He owned his town house and country estate unencumbered. His total annual salary from both his offices was $11,600. He did try to put his affairs in order by drawing up a new will that took account of the marriage of his daughter Grace in 1752. On 25 November 1753 he wrote William Murray, Lord Mansfield, a letter containing the provisions, but he died before the final copy was ready, leaving a will dated 1748 with a codicil dated 1751. His executors found just under $10,500 in his account at Hoare's Bank, which was used to pay off a mortgage. The $10,000 marriage portion Pelham had agreed to in 1752 remained unpaid at his death. His personal estate was estimated at slightly over $15,000 and his debts and legacies at about $22,745, which forced his executors to sell land. Pelham profited from his long service to the crown little more than did his brother. 
Portraits of Pelham in his chancellor's gown painted by William Hoare and John Shackleton about 1750 reveal his double chin and ample waistline but little of his character in the rather bland face shown. A more close-up portrait in plain dress, possibly by John Giles Eccardt, suggests strength and shrewdness, with a knowing look to the grey-blue eyes. When foreign relations were the predominant study of historians, Pelham seemed overshadowed by his brother Newcastle. His reputation as a statesman has risen, however, as economic historians have made clear that Britain's international power was built on the national system of finance. His restructuring of the national debt was Pelham's legacy to Britain and crucial to victory in the Seven Years' War. The stable government he provided during the brief mid-century peace inspired the renewed confidence the country needed after the uncertainties of the 1740s. 


@@@@@


doc= 21790


Henry Pelham (1749-1806), surveyor and artist, was born in Lindall Street, Boston, Massachusetts, on 14 February 1749, the son of Peter Pelham and his third wife, Mary. In 1770 he designed 'The Fruits of Arbitrary Power, or, The Bloody Massacre'. His print was copied and hurriedly published by Paul Revere, an act of piracy that perhaps helped to push Pelham into the loyalist camp. Pelham left Boston for London in 1776, taking with him a fine 'Plan of Boston in New England' that he published in 1777. He exhibited miniatures at the Royal Academy in 1777 and 1778 before settling in Ireland where he acted as agent to the Irish estates of the first marquess of Lansdowne. He also painted, engraved, and made maps including a twelve-sheet survey of co. Clare (1779). He married Caroline, daughter of William Butler of Castlecrine, possibly in 1778. He was drowned in 1806 while crossing the Kenmare River, co. Kerry. 


@@@@@


doc= 21791


Pelham, Henry Thomas, third earl of Chichester (1804-1886), ecclesiastical commissioner, the second, but eldest surviving, son of Thomas Pelham, second earl (1756-1826), and Lady Mary Henrietta Juliana Osborne (1776-1862), daughter of the fifth duke of Leeds, was born in Stratton Street, Piccadilly, London, on 25 August 1804, and was educated at Westminster School and Trinity College, Cambridge, which he entered as a nobleman in April 1822, taking no degree. On 24 April 1824 he entered the army as a cornet in the 6th dragoons, but, by the influence of the duke of Wellington, was able on 14 October of the same year to exchange into the Royal Horse Guards. He became lieutenant in 1827, captain (unattached) in January 1828, and major in the army in 1841. In 1844 he resigned his commission. He was afterwards an active supporter of the volunteer movement. In 1825 the duke of Newcastle invited him, without making any stipulation regarding Pelham's political principles, to accept his nomination for the parliamentary representation of the duke's borough of Newark, but Pelham succeeded to the earldom on 4 July 1826, before the election. 
Chichester held whig opinions, but was not an ardent partisan. He was a strong evangelical who expressed his views temperately. He was deeply interested in religious, social, and educational questions. On 22 February 1841, just before the fall of the whig government, he was appointed an ecclesiastical commissioner, and on 30 January 1847 became a commissioner to report on the question of equalizing the pecuniary value of episcopal sees. When the church estates' committee was appointed in 1850 Chichester was made head of the board, with the title of first church estates' commissioner. He retained the position until October 1878, with a very heavy burden of work, and after his retirement from it continued to be an ecclesiastical commissioner. He was largely responsible for the important reforms carried out in the management and distribution of church revenues, and was the chief lay influence in the material reform and administration of the Church of England from the 1840s to the 1870s. Chichester was also for half a century president of the Church Missionary Society, and was connected with the Evangelical Alliance, the British and Foreign Bible Society, and the Church of England Temperance Society. He was president of the Royal Agricultural Society in 1849. He was also interested in the management of prisons, becoming in 1843 a commissioner of Pentonville prison, and editing in 1863 Sir Joshua Jebb's 'Reports and Observations on the Discipline and Management of Convict Prisons'. In spite of his evangelical views, he spoke on 16 July 1845 in support of the grant to endow the Roman Catholic college of Maynooth in Ireland. He was a regular attendant, and not infrequent speaker, in the House of Lords. 
Chichester was appointed lord lieutenant of Sussex on 21 November 1860, where he was very popular. He had married, on 18 August 1828, Lady Mary Brudenell, fifth daughter of the sixth earl of Cardigan, and his wife, Penelope Anne, 'nee' Cooke. She died on 22 May 1867, leaving four sons and three daughters. Chichester died at his seat, Stanmer Park, Sussex, on 15 March 1886. His eldest son, Walter John Pelham (1838-1902), MP for Lewes from 1865 to 1874, succeeded to the title. 


@@@@@


doc= 21792


Pelham, Herbert (c.1600-1674), colonist in America, was the son of Herbert Pelham (died in or after 1629) of Boston, Lincolnshire, and his first wife, Penelope, daughter of Thomas West, second Baron De La Warr. Nothing is known of his early years or education but in 1626 he married, by licence dated 13 October, Jemima (died 'c'.1639), daughter of Thomas Waldegrave of Bures-ad-montem, Essex. The couple had seven children, including a daughter, Penelope, who married Josiah Winslow, governor of Plymouth Colony; Pelham's sister Penelope married Richard Bellingham, governor of Massachusetts Bay. 
Along with his father and other members of his family Pelham became deeply involved in the work of the Massachusetts Bay Company in 1629, and was one of those engaged to 'frame the form of the oath for the Governor... also for his Deputy, & for the Counsell' (Shurtleff, 1.39). He had been preceded to New England by his younger brother William, who established himself at the new town of Sudbury and obtained grants of land there for his brother. When Herbert Pelham finally arrived in New England in late 1639 or early 1640, his first wife had recently died, and he married by 1640 Elizabeth Harlakenden, 'nee' Bosville (died in or before 1659), widow of Roger Harlakenden of Cambridge, Massachusetts. The couple settled in Cambridge and had seven children; Pelham probably never resided on his lands in Sudbury. 
During his residence in New England Pelham held a number of important offices. He was elected an assistant in 1645 and 1646, and also in 1646 was appointed commissioner from Massachusetts Bay to the United Colonies of New England. He was also appointed treasurer of Harvard College in 1643. Late in 1646 he returned to England, but was clearly expected for some time to go back to New England, as he was elected, 'in absentia', assistant in 1647, 1648, and 1649. By 1648 he had settled in Bures, Essex, at the manor of Ferrers, which had come to him through his first wife. In 1654 he sat in parliament for Essex. He resided at Bures for the remainder of his life, and was buried there on 1 July 1674. 


@@@@@


doc= 21793


Pelham, Sir John (d. 1429), landowner and administrator, was the son of Thomas Pelham of Warbleton, Sussex, and of Agnes, daughter of Robert Gensing and coheir of the manor of Gensing, Sussex. Probably of age by 1376, in September 1387 Pelham allegedly mounted a full-scale night assault in Cambridgeshire (a county in which he also had some family interests) on Sir John Shardlow's house at Fulbourn in order to abduct -- and then marry -- Margaret (1363-1390), widow of Shardlow's son, and heir in her own right of Sir Roger Grey of Cavendish, Suffolk. Margaret died in 1390; possibly in 1399 but certainly by May 1400 Pelham had married Joan (died 1439), widow of Sir Hugh Zouche and daughter of John Bramshott. She brought to Pelham her first husband's lands in Cambridgeshire and Sussex. But Pelham's sole surviving child was apparently an illegitimate son, John, who was knighted in France in 1415, and to whom he left much of his property. 
Pelham's administrative career began in the service of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, on whose 1386 Spanish campaign he probably served and who in 1393 made him constable of Pevensey Castle for life. Posts in the archbishop of Canterbury's Sussex estates soon followed. He later served on royal commissions, including one seizing the goods of Richard (III) Fitzalan, earl of Arundel, after the earl's execution in 1397. Pelham's disappearance later that year makes it likely he followed Henry Bolingbroke into exile. On the latter's return Pelham regained control of Pevensey Castle and was besieged there by forces loyal to Richard II in July 1399, creating an important diversion from Bolingbroke's landing in Yorkshire. 
The new Lancastrian regime soon displayed its confidence in one of its most dedicated southern partisans. Pelham was knighted on 13 October 1399 before Henry IV's coronation, then made royal sword-bearer and a knight of the household. His Pevensey constableship was confirmed, and buttressed with nearby lands. He represented Sussex in parliament continuously from 1399 to 1407, except in 1401-2 when he was sheriff of Sussex with Surrey instead. Henry IV found it increasingly convenient to employ him in neighbouring counties. He became a commissioner of array -- and, more briefly, a justice of the peace -- for Surrey and Hampshire as well as Sussex. After the death of William Wykeham in 1404 he was joint keeper of the bishopric of Winchester's temporalities for six months, and then took over keepership of the New forest, as well as becoming chief steward of the duchy of Lancaster estates south of the Trent. In 1409 Henry granted to him for life the duchy estates in Sussex, worth up to $270 a year -- making him possibly the greatest landowner in Sussex, ahead of Thomas Fitzalan, earl of Arundel. 
Pelham also had employments of more national significance. Entrusted with the removal of the deposed Richard II to Leeds Castle from the Tower of London late in October 1399, in 1405 he had Edward, duke of York (died 1415), committed to his custody at Pevensey as suspected of treason, and from 1406 to 1409 Edmund and Roger Mortimer. He was a member of the royal council from 1404 until the restriction in membership in 1406, a period that coincided with his treasurership for war (11 November 1404 - 19 June 1406), jointly with Thomas Neville, Lord Furnival -- a function that both incumbents sought to resign and finally induced parliament to support them in doing so. 
Pelham was friendly with Prince Thomas (later duke of Clarence) -- who named him as an executor in 1417 -- and with Archbishop Thomas Arundel (died 1414), rather than with Prince Henry. When the latter took advantage of the king's illness in 1409, therefore, Pelham ceased to receive his usual commissions (even local ones) and patronage. The removal of the prince of Wales's friends in 1411 offered compensation: Pelham became treasurer (20 December 1411-20 March 1413) and was granted new Sussex lands which ultimately brought his landed income to over $870 a year, giving him a dominant position in the county after the death of the earl of Arundel in 1415. 
Pelham's last service to Henry IV was to act as an executor of his will -- a troublesome and protracted exercise in deficit finance. On Henry V's accession Pelham lost both the post of treasurer (to his local rival Arundel) and his Lancaster stewardship. Nevertheless, the new king was willing to employ Pelham on local commissions, and also on a powerful embassy to France (10 July-3 October 1414). Further important prisoners were sent to him at Pevensey, including James I of Scotland (for whose release he was one of the negotiators in 1423-4), and the dowager queen and alleged sorceress, Joan of Navarre (died 1439). 
Pelham returned to the royal council between Henry V's departure for France in July 1417 and the king's death in August 1422; he was a friend of Thomas Langley (died 1437), chancellor from July 1417 to July 1424. He also again represented Sussex in the Commons in 1422 and 1427, perhaps largely in an attempt to facilitate the conclusion of Henry IV's troubled testamentary affairs. Pelham died on 12 February 1429, and was buried in the Cistercian abbey of Robertsbridge, Sussex. His monastic interests also involved the rebuilding of the collapsed Augustinian priory of Holy Trinity, Hastings, on his patrimony at Warbleton. Pelham's second wife, Joan, outlived him by ten years. 


@@@@@


doc= 21794


Pelham, John Thomas (1811-1894), bishop of Norwich, was born on 21 June 1811, the third son of Thomas Pelham, the second earl of Chichester (1756-1826), and Lady Mary Henrietta Juliana Osborne (1776-1862), daughter of the fifth duke of Leeds. He attended Westminster School and proceeded to Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1829. He graduated BA in 1832, and received his MA and DD in 1857. He was made deacon by Bishop Blomfield of London in 1834 and priested in 1835. 
Pelham's first charge was the parish of Eastergate in the diocese of Chichester, where he entered into what became a lifelong friendship with Henry Manning. In May 1837 the earl of Abergavenny presented him to the rectory of Bergh Apton, a small village near Norwich. He married, on 6 November 1845, Henrietta (died 1893), second daughter of Thomas William Tatton of Wythenshawe Hall, Cheshire. In 1847 he was made honorary canon of Norwich Cathedral and became chaplain-in-ordinary to the queen. In 1852 he moved to the north of London to become perpetual curate of Christ Church, Hampstead, whose patron was Sir Thomas Maryon Wilson. After only three years he received the important crown living of St Marylebone on the recommendation of Lord Palmerston, who had just become prime minister. His ministry here was destined to be short, as in 1857 Palmerston nominated him to the see of Norwich, which was vacant by the resignation of Samuel Hinds. Lord Shaftesbury had originally suggested that Pelham should be considered for London ('a fitter man could not be found in England') and that Tait should have Norwich, but other counsels prevailed. Palmerston accepted the advice that a forthright evangelical bishop of London would antagonize the Tractarians. Pelham was consecrated on 30 April 1857 by Archbishop J. B. Sumner and bishops A. C. Tait and C. R. Sumner. Pelham was bishop of Norwich for thirty-six years, which was longer than any of his predecessors except for Bishop Le Spencer, who held the see from 1370 to 1406. 
As a bishop Pelham proved himself an able administrator and, though he rarely spoke in the House of Lords, unrivalled in the chairing of public meetings. He was a thoroughgoing pastoral bishop. In his first years of office he made rural deans the means of meeting with his clergy. In later times he visited them in a more systematic way. His custom was to spend a long weekend in each parish passing time with the clergyman's family, participating in the church services, and inspecting the Sunday and day schools. His constant activity even succeeded in stirring up the dormant energies of his senior clergy. Although of decidedly evangelical convictions he was conciliatory in his attitude to the high-church movement. In his diocesan charge of 1865 he dwelt on the current romanizing tendencies, but also referred to those of his clergy who undervalued the sacraments. He urged that holy communion services be held once a month and at festivals. Like other evangelicals of the period Pelham also advocated that baptism be held during public services. He pressed for the reform of convocation by consolidating the provinces of Canterbury and York and by extending the franchise to all licensed clergy in priests' orders. He urged the division of large dioceses, including his own, into smaller, more manageable units. 
Pelham welcomed the 1870 'Elementary Education Act', which he felt could bring great benefits to the church as a whole. Through a diocesan church association he provided the means for building and restoring churches, parsonages, and schools throughout the diocese. He also initiated a scheme to raise the stipend of the smaller benefices at the expense of part of his own income. Pelham was not given to the habit of writing and published little beyond his charges to the diocese. The text of a sermon he preached before the Church Missionary Society in May 1852 was printed in the same year. He also edited a small collection entitled 'Hymns for Public Worship' in 1855. 
Pelham resigned the see early in 1893. His wife died on 31 December 1893; he died at Thorpe, a suburb of Norwich, on 1 May 1894. He was a pastor of pronounced evangelical views which were coupled, according to the 'Christian Remembrancer', with 'some ability, entire earnestness, and the manners and feelings of a gentleman'. He left three sons and a daughter. The eldest son, Henry Francis Pelham, became professor of ancient history at Oxford, and a fourth son, Herbert Pelham (1855-1881), died after a climbing accident in the Alps. 


@@@@@


doc= 21795


Pelham, Sir Nicholas (d. 1560), landowner and member of parliament, was the eldest son of Sir William Pelham (died 1538/9) of Laughton, Sussex, and his first wife, Mary, daughter of Sir Richard Carew of Beddington. His maternal uncle Sir Nicholas Carew, after whom he was presumably named, was master of the horse to Henry VIII. Carew's attainder for treason in March 1539, accused of implication in the Courtenay conspiracy, cast a shadow over Pelham's succession as head of the family, though the damage done to his immediate prospects may have been offset by his links through his stepmother, Mary Sandys, to her father, the first Baron Sandys, who was lord chamberlain until December 1540. An illicit hunting party in the spring of 1541 at his recently enlarged family home at Laughton involved the killing of one of his gamekeepers by a servant of his near-contemporary and neighbour from Herstmonceux, Thomas Fiennes, ninth Lord Dacre of the South, for which Dacre was executed in June 1541. Pelham's marriage, by 1537, to Anne Sackville, the daughter of a rising Sussex gentleman, strengthened his family's ancient links with the Howard dukes of Norfolk and the Fitzalan earls of Arundel: with Anne he had eight surviving children. He pushed ahead with his father's scheme to drain Laughton marsh, and like his father invested in sheep. He also consolidated his estates in and around his home. Perhaps by inclination he eschewed attendance at court, answering only occasional summonses to major state occasions, for instance the reception of the admiral of France in 1546. 
Named to the Sussex bench in 1544, Pelham became active in county administration, and he also distinguished himself in the region's defence against the French, in 1545 organizing the militia to repulse a landing between Newhaven and Brighton. He was twice returned to parliament, in 1547 for the borough of Arundel and in 1558 for the shire. Following the arrest of the duke of Somerset in the autumn of 1549 he was pricked sheriff of Surrey and Sussex, and on 17 November he was made a knight. The timing of these honours suggests that he had not rallied to Somerset against the earl of Warwick during the recent 'coup d'etat'. His political allegiance may not have been fixed, however, for two years later he was briefly imprisoned with Somerset and Arundel for plotting against Warwick, by now duke of Northumberland. While captive in the Tower, and evidently despairing of his life, he made a brief will in his own hand. Of his part in the succession crisis in 1553 nothing is known beyond his receipt of a letter dated 14 July from leading figures in Kent denouncing Lady Jane Grey's claim to the throne. Under Mary, Pelham's career continued apace, although his protestantism presumably made him an increasingly uncomfortable supporter of the regime. Early in 1554 his brother William supported Sir Thomas Wyatt in his rising against Queen Mary's plans to marry Philip of Spain, and his eldest son, John, fled abroad in 1556, travelling to Padua and Geneva. Pelham's refusal to provide men for the army in 1558 may have been a protest against the new regulations for musters, since after a spell in the Fleet prison he agreed to supply warhorses instead. 
Pelham lived for almost two years after the accession of Elizabeth. On 6 February 1560 he made his second will, in which he expressed his confidence that he would be 'received amonge his [Christ's] electe' -- a phrase which suggests Calvinist leanings (Manning, 264). He survived another eight months before he died on 15 September; he was buried in St Michael's Church, Lewes, where his funerary monument immortalizes his military prowess in 1545. His half-brother Sir Edmund Pelham (d. 1606) was a lawyer who became chief baron of the Irish exchequer. Pelham's descendants remained a power in Sussex until in the eighteenth century their influence in the county became paramount under Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle. 


@@@@@


doc= 21796


Pelham, Peter (1695?-1751), mezzotint engraver and painter in America, may have been the Peter Pelham born in 1695 in London, the son of Peter Pelham, gentleman, who died in Chichester, in 1756. He was apprenticed in 1713 to the mezzotint engraver John Simon and afterwards scraped good mezzotints for various printsellers, but chiefly Edward Cooper. He married Martha Guy on 29 February 1719 and three sons, George, Peter, and Charles, were baptized at St Paul's, Covent Garden, in 1720, 1721, and 1722 when the family was living in Long Acre. Pelham's portrait of Samuel Shute, governor of Massachusetts, was painted in London in 1724, and in 1727 the family emigrated to America. Later correspondence suggests that Pelham had quarrelled with his father and they remained estranged until 1739. The Pelham family settled first in Summer Street and then in Cornhill, Boston. Pelham launched his career in America with a memorial mezzotint of the Revd Cotton Mather, the celebrated witch-hunter. A subscription for this print was proposed in the Boston newspapers in February 1728. Its price at 5 shillings was three times that of an equivalent print published in London. Pelham also opened a school at which he taught dancing and arithmetic. A son, William, was born at Boston in 1729 and his first wife died soon after. On 15 October 1734 he married Margaret Lowrey and moved to Newport, Rhode Island. He was back in Boston by 1737 where he taught 'Dancing, Writing, Reading, painting upon Glass, and all kinds of needle work' ('Boston Gazette', 6 Feb 1738). At this point Pelham contacted and was reconciled with his father and sisters in England, though his father was uneasy that Pelham had married a second woman with no fortune. On 22 May 1748, however, Pelham was married a third time, to the apparently slightly wealthier Mary Singleton, widow of Richard Copley, a tobacconist. Pelham moved in to her house in Lindall Street and added her tobacco shop to his other interests. He probably taught her son John Singleton Copley the rudiments of art before he himself died intestate in December 1751. Pelham was buried in Trinity Church, Boston, on 14 December 1751. 




@@@@@


doc= 21797


Pelham, Thomas, first Baron Pelham (c.1653-1712), politician, was born at Halland Place, Laughton, Sussex, the eldest son of Sir John Pelham, third baronet ('c'.1623-1703), politician, and his wife, Lady Lucy (died 1685), second daughter of Robert Sidney, second earl of Leicester. He was educated at Tonbridge grammar school (1663-5) and by 1670 had entered Christ Church, Oxford, where he was one of the pupils of George Hooper, later bishop of Bath and Wells. 
Pelham was returned to parliament for East Grinstead, Sussex, on 25 October 1678, and retained the seat until August 1679. In the election of October 1679 he was returned for Lewes -- 6 miles from Laughton -- and continued to represent Lewes until July 1702, when, having been returned for Lewes and Sussex, he chose to sit for Sussex. In politics Pelham followed the family line and was a moderate whig. In 1679 the earl of Shaftesbury twice described him as 'worthy', although he made little mark on the parliaments of 1679-81 and abstained from voting on the first bill to exclude the duke of York from the throne. On 21 March 1680 Pelham married Elizabeth ('c'.1664-1681), daughter of the whig politician Sir William Jones of Ramsbury, Wiltshire. Jones was said to have encouraged Pelham to remain a firm whig. The marriage licence of 26 November 1679 described Pelham as about twenty-six and Elizabeth as about fifteen. They had two daughters, one of whom was Elizabeth (died 1711), who married Charles Townshend, second Viscount Townshend. Elizabeth was buried at Laughton on 13 October 1681 and Pelham married, by a licence of 21 May 1686, Lady Grace (1668/9-1700), daughter of Gilbert Holles, third earl of Clare. They had two sons, Thomas Pelham Holles, duke of Newcastle upon Tyne and Newcastle under Lyme, and Henry Pelham, and six daughters. Pelham's whiggish inclinations were presumably the reason he, along with his father and uncle, was dismissed as a JP for Sussex in 1687, following James II's remodelling of the commission of the peace. 
After the revolution Pelham was appointed a commissioner of customs, from 20 April 1689 to 24 March 1691. He was also reappointed as a JP and was three times a lord commissioner of the Treasury (March 1690-March 1692; May 1697-June 1699; and March 1701-May 1702). Despite his periods in office, throughout the 1690s Pelham was a 'country' whig. He signed the Association promising to defend William III's life promptly in 1696 but he often took an independent line from the government, including opposing the impeachment of the Jacobite conspirator Sir John Fenwick in 1696 and the standing army in 1698. 
After the accession of Anne in 1702, Pelham was once again out of office and remained true to his country whig principles. In 1704 he co-operated with secretary of state Robert Harley in opposing the 'tack', an attempt by high tories to tack a bill against occasional conformity to a supply bill. He was appointed vice-admiral of the coast of Sussex on 21 May 1705. Having succeeded his father as fourth baronet in January 1703, in 1705 Pelham made his desire for a peerage known to the queen through his brother-in-law the duke of Newcastle and Robert Harley. He had to wait over a year but on 16 December 1706 he was created Baron Pelham of Laughton, and took his place in the House of Lords on 30 December. He died of apoplexy at Halland Place, Sussex, on 23 February 1712 and was buried in the chancel of Laughton parish church on 8 March. His friend the third earl of Shaftesbury remembered him as one of the 'honestest of men and most true to the interests of the public' ('Life', ed. Rand, 487). 


@@@@@


doc= 21798


Pelham, Thomas, first earl of Chichester (1728-1805), politician, born in Westminster, London, on 28 February 1728, was the only son of the two children of Thomas Pelham ('c'.1705-1737), of Stanmer, Sussex, and his wife, Annetta (died 1733), the daughter of Thomas Bridges of Constantinople. His father was a first cousin of Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle, and after having been a merchant in Constantinople served as MP for Lewes from 1727 to 1737. He was educated at Westminster School and entered Clare College, Cambridge, in 1745 but left after a few months to embark on the grand tour. Between 1746 and 1750 he travelled with John Milbanke through France, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Italy, and Germany. In Florence he was entertained by Sir Horace Mann and also began a relationship with the Countess Acciajuoli, which delayed his return from Italy until August 1750. On 15 June 1754 he married, at Mortlake, Anne (1734/5-1813), the daughter and heir of Frederick Meinhart Frankland and his first wife, Elizabeth Cardonnel. They had four sons and four daughters. 
While abroad, Pelham had been returned, on 13 December 1749 by the duke of Newcastle, as MP for Rye. Following Henry Pelham's death in 1754, he succeeded as knight of the shire, and he represented the county of Sussex from May 1754 until November 1768. In April 1754 Newcastle secured his appointment to the Board of Trade. Pelham was one of the leaders of Newcastle's 'young friends', and he co-ordinated the activities of Newcastle's Sussex supporters. In 1761 he was named a lord of the Admiralty. A year later, when Newcastle obtained for himself the barony of Pelham of Stanmer, its reversion was secured by the patent to Pelham. This attached Pelham firmly to Newcastle. After voting against the peace preliminaries on 10 December 1762 he was dismissed in the 'massacre of Pelhamite innocents'. 
On the formation of the first Rockingham ministry in July 1765, Pelham became comptroller of the household and was sworn of the privy council. When Newcastle followed Rockingham out of office a year later, Pelham remained in government. Newcastle had called on his supporters to desert Chatham, but Pelham claimed that the welfare of his children had to take precedence over political loyalty. In government, however, he continued to be influenced by Newcastle. He voted for the reduction of the land tax on 22 February 1767, but the constraints of office persuaded him to vote with the government on the 'Nullum Tempus Bill'. On the death, in November 1768, of Newcastle, with whom he was in confidential correspondence until the last, Pelham became Baron Pelham of Stanmer and head of the family. He did not inherit Newcastle's political following, however. The boroughs of Rye and Seaford reverted to the Treasury, leaving Pelham with control over the solitary seat of Lewes. In 1773 he obtained the lucrative sinecure of the surveyor-generalship of the customs of London. From 1774 to 1775 he also held the nominal office of chief justice in eyre north of the Trent, which he gave up on his appointment as master of the great wardrobe. This office was abolished in 1782, and Pelham was its last holder. 
In the Lords Pelham supported North until the fall of his ministry. He voted for Fox's 'East India Bill', and in 1788 his name was attached to the two protests drawn up against Pitt's provision for the expected regency. In spite of his consistent opposition to Pitt, which lasted until the French Revolution, Walpole ranked him among the 'court ciphers'. He was certainly intimate with Princess Amelia, and when she died in 1786 he acted as one of her executors. On 23 June 1801 he was created earl of Chichester. He died on 8 January 1805 at his country house of Stanmer, Sussex, and was buried at Laughton in the same county. His widow survived him, and died suddenly at Malling, Sussex, on 5 March 1813, aged seventy-eight. Only three of their children outlived their parents: the eldest son, Thomas Pelham, second earl of Chichester (1756-1826), politician; George Pelham (1766-1827), bishop of Lincoln; and Amelia, who died in 1847. 


@@@@@


doc= 21799


Pelham, Thomas, second earl of Chichester (1756-1826), politician, was born in Spring Gardens, London, on 28 April 1756, the eldest of the three sons of Thomas Pelham, first earl of Chichester (1728-1805), politician, and his wife, Anne Frankland (1734/5-1813), daughter of Frederick Meinhart Frankland. He was educated at Westminster School and at Clare College, Cambridge, and between 1775 and 1778 visited Spain (where he stayed with the ambassador, Lord Grantham), France, Italy, Germany, and Austria. 
At the general election of 1780 Pelham was returned unopposed to parliament for Sussex on his family's interest. He sat undisturbed there for the duration of his Commons career. He had joined Brooks's Club four months before his return and became a member of the Whig Club in 1786. Accordingly he voted with the Rockingham whig opposition on economic reform on 26 February 1781, and against the American War of Independence on 12 December 1781, 22 and 27 February 1782, but, conscious of his father's financial dependence on his sinecure and household offices, he sided with the North ministry against the censure motions of 8 and 15 March 1782. On the formation of Lord Rockingham's administration the following month he was appointed surveyor-general of the ordnance under his Sussex neighbour and friend the third duke of Richmond. He remained in office when Lord Shelburne became prime minister after Rockingham's death and was privately critical of Fox for precipitately resigning. In August 1782 he declined the offer of a diplomatic post from Lord Grantham, Fox's successor as foreign secretary. On the formation of the Fox-North coalition in April 1783 he resigned. Four months later he somewhat reluctantly agreed to the request of the duke of Portland, the premier, that he become Irish secretary in the room of the ailing William Windham, who had recommended him as 'a man of engaging gentlemanlike manners and pleasant temper' (BL, Add. MS 33100, fol. 219). He sat for Carrick-on-Shannon in the Irish parliament. On the fall of the coalition in December 1783 he declined Pitt's offer to retain him in his office and resigned in January 1784, although he personally would have preferred a union of parties. 
Pelham was an active member of the Foxite opposition to Pitt in the 1784 parliament. His personal charm and even temper won him the friendship of the leaders and his reputation for acuteness and reliability made him a significant figure in the second rank. He was, however, a nervous and lacklustre speaker, even though he moved the Furrukhabad charge against Hastings on 2 March 1787, and played a part in his trial; he was appointed a manager of the impeachment on 14 February 1791. 
In June 1791 Pelham visited Paris, but he prudently destroyed the letters to Barnarve and Lafayette requesting guarantees for the safety of the French royal family with which Fox had entrusted him. He was at this point favourably disposed towards the new regime in France and was described by Burke as 'a runner to the French revolution', who was 'endeavouring everywhere by various rumours and idle speculations to reconcile the minds of people to it' ('Correspondence of Edmund Burke', 7.30). The formation of the Association of the Friends of the People perturbed him, but he absolved Fox from blame for their excesses and, still deeply suspicious of Pitt and anxious to preserve the unity of the opposition, did not become an alarmist. From July 1792 to August 1793 he travelled in Europe, wintering in Italy with Elizabeth, Lady Webster, later Lady Holland, with whom he had an affair. Although he resisted pressure to go back to England at the turn of the year, when he was tentatively included in a list of Portland whigs, his political views had changed decisively. Dismayed by the violent progress of the revolution, he believed that Fox was taking a dangerous and misguided line, yet remained reluctant to break with him. On his return home he became one of the trustees of Fox's subscription fund, but he was now in political agreement with the Portland whigs, believing that for the moment it was better to support the war against France without taking office. He accordingly declined an offer of a diplomatic mission to Florence in December 1793 and, with Tom Grenville and William Windham, acted as one of the self-styled 'virtuous triumvirate' who refused to join the administration. He parted regretfully but amicably from Fox on 20 January 1794 and during the ensuing session worked with Windham to cultivate and encourage emigre leaders. He made little mark in the Commons, being undermined by illness and bouts of depression and self-loathing, partly on account of Lady Webster's continued absence in Italy. He confided to her in the spring of 1794 that while he approved the formal junction of the Portland whigs with the government he was unwilling to take any direct personal part in it. He turned down a ministerial proposal that he should take charge of affairs in the West Indies and resolved not to accept the Irish secretaryship, after having heard rumours that he would be appointed. In September 1794 he went with Windham, who was now the secretary at war, on a brief mission to the duke of York at army headquarters on the continent, but four months later he declined the duke's request to act as his parliamentary spokesman if he became commander-in-chief. Pelham hinted that he contemplated retiring from public life at the next dissolution. 
On the recall of the Irish lord lieutenant Lord Fitzwilliam in early 1795, Pelham, however, allowed himself to be bullied by Portland, the home secretary, who made it clear that refusal of office would blight his future prospects, into going to Ireland as chief secretary to Lord Camden. He was duly returned to the Irish parliament for Clogher and spoke against Catholic relief on 4 May 1795, but his health was again poor and he returned to England in the summer of 1795. He was keen to step down and irritated by the government's distribution of revenue patronage to opponents of his family's electoral interest at Seaford. In September 1795 he refused the offer of a diplomatic mission to Vienna. Portland's persistent arm-twisting broke his resistance once again and in February 1796 he returned reluctantly to Dublin. Although he spent long periods in England, he dealt capably with the routine business of Irish administration and remained in Ireland during the difficult year of 1797. He got on well with Camden and became a popular secretary, even with the Irish opposition, but he was never in Pitt's confidence, had little influence on the general direction of Irish policy, and grew increasingly resentful of Portland's condescending and disdainful attitude towards him. When Abercromby, the commander-in-chief, publicly condemned the Irish military in February 1798, Pelham defended them in the Irish Commons, where he now represented Armagh. Soon afterwards he fell seriously and almost mortally ill. On his partial recovery he drafted, but never sent, a reproachful letter to Portland, in which he protested against the British cabinet's disowning of Abercromby's remarks and complained that he had been duped into resuming his office in 1796. He convalesced in England in the summer of 1798, intending to return to Ireland under Lord Cornwallis, but he eventually opted for retirement and was formally replaced by his locum, Lord Castlereagh, in November. 
Pelham declined a diplomatic posting to Vienna in May 1799. A year later he was astonished by a report that Pitt believed that he did not want office and enraged by another report that Portland had suggested that he had given up his own pretensions for the sake of his relatives' claims. He made it clear to Pitt that he was still a contender for an office that would be financially beneficial. He mentioned the reversion of Lord Liverpool's Irish sinecure of clerk of the pells, but nothing came of this. When Addington replaced Pitt as prime minister early in 1801 Pelham, not wishing to be estranged from his closest associates, who were about to go out, refused two offers of a cabinet place, the second of which was coupled with a scheme to have him called to the Lords to take the lead there. Informed that the king, who had always had a soft spot for him, wanted him to join the new ministry, he acceded to another approach and anticipated becoming war secretary with the lead in the upper house. Yet Portland allowed Lord Hobart to be appointed instead and tried to persuade Pelham to become president of the Board of Control (of which he was a commissioner from May 1801 until July 1802). He refused this and asked Addington to postpone his elevation. It was eventually arranged that he should replace Portland as home secretary, and in the interim he chaired the secret committee on Irish disaffection, presented its report to the Commons on 13 April and 15 May, and introduced the 'Habeas Corpus Suspension Bill' on 14 April. Determined to have the Home Office, he rejected Addington's offer of the Russian embassy. On 29 June 1801, six days after his father was created earl of Chichester, Pelham was called to the Lords in his barony of Pelham of Stanmer. He replaced Portland in July 1801 and on 16 July married Lady Mary Henrietta Juliana Osborne (1776-1862), daughter of Francis Osborne, fifth duke of Leeds (1751-1799), and his first wife, Lady Amelia D'Arcy. They had four sons, the eldest of whom died in childhood, and four daughters. 
Pelham's relations with Addington, with whom he clashed over foreign policy, Irish affairs, and patronage, were always strained. He became increasingly isolated in the cabinet and had little personal influence. In March 1802 he registered a protest against signing the definitive treaty of peace, which he was expected to defend in the Lords, in the same terms as the preliminaries, but he did not resign, to avoid upsetting the ministry. By 1803 Addington was eager to remove him from the Home Office, where he was said to be appallingly negligent, and in March Pelham played into his hands by expressing willingness to retire in order to facilitate a junction with Pitt. This did not take place, but in August Addington unscrupulously replaced him with Charles Yorke, and offered the consolation of the chancellorship of the duchy of Lancaster and the presidency of the Board of Trade, with a seat in the cabinet, together with 'some patent office in reversion'. Pelham, who was seriously ill at this time, initially declined active cabinet office and wrote directly to the king asking to be restored to the head of the Sussex militia. Justifiably bitter towards Addington, he detailed his grievances in a further letter to the king on 13 September 1803. Later that month he applied for the duchy of Lancaster for life, to mark the king's approval of his conduct as home secretary and as insurance against dismissal if, as he thought likely, he found himself at odds with his colleagues on Irish policy. The king vetoed this, but it was indicated to Pelham that an alternative provision would be made for him when available, and in November 1803 he took the duchy, outside the cabinet, and 'subject... to the contingencies to which other ofices held during pleasure are liable' ('Later Correspondence of George III', 4.134n). Pitt discarded him on his return to power in May 1804, encouraging him to take a diplomatic post, which he declined, or the place of captain of the yeomen of the guard, which he also turned down after hesitating for two days. When he surrendered his seals the king, who was possibly unhinged, and without having consulted Pitt, physically forced the official stick of the captain of the yeomen on him. A distraught Pelham, believing that Pitt had tricked him into what he regarded as a degradation, resigned it almost immediately and in so doing angered the king, who to Pitt condemned his 'frequent political tergiversation' (ibid., 4.204). 
On his father's death on 8 January 1805, Pelham succeeded as second earl of Chichester and to the family's Stanmer estate between Brighton and Lewes, where he initiated agricultural improvements. He refused an offer of the government of the Cape from the Grenville ministry in March 1806, but on the formation of Portland's second administration in the following year became joint postmaster-general, at $2500 a year. He retained the office in the ministries of Perceval and Liverpool and was sole postmaster from November 1823 until his death at his London house in Stratton Street on 4 July 1826. Lord Holland described him as 'somewhat timeserving', but 'a good-natured and prudent man' (Holland, 1.112). He was succeeded in the peerage by his eldest surviving son, Henry Thomas Pelham (1804-1886), the future ecclesiastical commissioner. His other sons were John Thomas Pelham (1811-1894), bishop of Norwich, and Frederick Thomas Pelham (1808-1861), a naval officer. 


@@@@@


doc= 21800


Pelham, Sir William (d. 1587), lord justice of Ireland, was the third son of Sir William Pelham (died 1538), a landowner of Laughton, Sussex, and his second wife, Mary, daughter of William Sandys, Lord Sandys. The younger William Pelham married twice. With his first wife, Lady Eleanor (died 1574), daughter of Henry Neville, fifth earl of Westmorland ['see under 'Neville, Ralph], he had two sons, William and Peregrine, and a daughter, Ann. His heir, yet another Sir William Pelham, married Ann, eldest daughter of Charles, Lord Willoughby of Parham. Perhaps by 1576 the second Sir William had remarried. Lady Dorothy Pelham (d. 1613) was the daughter of Anthony Catesby of Whiston, Northamptonshire, and widow of Sir William Dormer; this second marriage was childless. 
His father died in 1538, and the second William Pelham was probably thirty years old when appointed captain of the pioneers at the siege of Leith in 1560 where he was specially commended for valour. According to Humphrey Barwick's 'Brief Discourse' ('c'.1594) it was Pelham's faulty engineering which was responsible for the wound inflicted on Arthur Grey, fourteenth Lord Grey of Wilton. Pelham commanded the pioneers at Le Havre under the earl of Warwick in November 1562, and in February 1563 he helped Admiral Coligny in the capture of Caen. In March he returned to Le Havre but in July he was wounded in a skirmish with the forces of the Rhinegrave. He then assisted in negotiations for the surrender of Le Havre, and became a pledge or hostage for the fulfilment of the surrender terms at the treaty of Troyes in April 1564. 
On his return to England, Pelham was employed by Portinari and Concio in improving the fortifications at Berwick. The privy council was so impressed with his competency and good judgement that he was promoted lieutenant-general of the ordnance, and in that capacity was occupied for several years in strengthening the defences of the realm. In the summer of 1578 he accompanied William, Lord Cobham, and the chief secretary, Sir Francis Walsingham, on a diplomatic mission to the Netherlands. The following summer Pelham was sent to Ireland to organize the defences of the pale when the rebellion of James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald (died 1579) threatened to spread from Munster; meanwhile, many of the sub-septs of the northern families united against the territorial ambitions of Turlough Luineach O'Neill. Pelham was knighted by Sir William Drury on 14 September 1579 and, on the latter's death on 3 October, was elected lord justice of Ireland. 
In the aftermath of fitz Maurice's rebellion in Munster and the subsequent threats from Gerald Fitzgerald, fifteenth earl of Desmond, and his brothers Sir James and Sir John of Desmond, the disturbed state of the province drove Pelham to action. When his efforts at conciliation and those of the countess of Desmond proved futile he caused the earl of Desmond to be proclaimed a traitor on 2 November 1579. He wrote to the queen on 4 November: 'Ormond [Thomas Butler, tenth earl] has already drawn blood and kindled fire in the midst of Desmond's country. I have left the prosecution of the war to him' (Brewer and Bullen, 164). Pelham did not have sufficient cannon to attack Askeaton, the chief seat of the Desmonds on the Shannon, so he went with the governor of Connaught, Sir Nicholas Malby, on a tour of his province and thence back to Dublin. The queen, reluctant to engage in yet another costly campaign, was much displeased with Pelham's and Malby's harsh proceedings, and it became common knowledge by the end of November 1579 that she wanted Lord Grey of Wilton to be her lord deputy of Ireland. Pelham, smarting under the queen's displeasure, pleaded that the proclamation against Desmond was an absolute necessity, and 'because of your several causes of your disliking with me since I entered into this service', as he wrote to the queen on 15 December, he once again petitioned 'to be speedily discharged from this government' (ibid., 183). 
When it became apparent that Ormond's resources were unequal to the task of quelling Desmond the queen ameliorated her severity towards Pelham and encouraged him to repair into Munster, where he signed a patent to permit Sir Warham St Leger the exercise of martial law (11 January 1580). Rumours of a further Spanish invasion drove him to entrust the coastal counties of Cork and Waterford to Sir William Morgan (died 1584). Accompanied by the earl of Ormond's forces, he then marched towards the Dingle peninsula, 'to make as bare a country as ever Spaniard put his foot in, if he intend to make that his landing place', as he wrote to the privy council. In the same letter he expressed his admiration for his soldiers: 'if I have any judgment, all the soldiers of Christendom must give place to that of the soldier of Ireland' (Brewer and Bullen, 219-20). According to Irish reports, particularly that of the four masters, Pelham's Munster campaign was ruthless in 'killing blind and feeble men, women, boys and girls, sick persons, idiots and old people' ('AFM'). On 27 March 1580 he assaulted Carrigafoyle Castle, sparing neither man, woman, nor child. Desmond's main fortress of Askeaton then surrendered without resistance, and Newcastle, Rathkeale, Ballyduff, and Ballilogher fell into Pelham's hands at the same time. 
During the campaign Sir Nicholas Malby had fallen out with Pelham, as had Pelham with the earl of Ormond. Pelham's aim of confining the war to co. Kerry meant containing Desmond by well-planted garrisons and co-operating with Admiral Winter's fleet to starve out Desmond's rebel support. He encountered many difficulties in getting victuals for his soldiers from the neighbouring gentry, and even among the better disposed Pelham found such a settled hatred of English government and lack of local co-operation that it became clear that only full-scale warfare would save Ireland for the crown. After delays both Pelham and Ormond entered co. Kerry together. At Castleisland they narrowly missed capturing Desmond and Nicholas Sander on 15 June 1580. Then they scoured the valley of the Maine and the Dingle peninsula and, with Admiral Winter's help, ransacked every cove and creek between there and Cork. Meanwhile Ormond harried the interior of co. Kerry, where he received the submission of many of Desmond's western chiefs before retiring in triumph to his own lands in Kilkenny. Pelham held a general meeting at Cork of all the lords and chiefs on 4 July 1580, receiving all to mercy except Lord Barrymore, and on the advice of Sir Warham St Leger took them all to his headquarters at Limerick. 
To Desmond, now a fugitive in the Kerry mountains, unconditional surrender alone was offered. Although the war against Desmond was drawing to a close, Pelham was aware of the serious consequences of a Spanish invasion, particularly as the uprising of James Eustace, Viscount Baltinglass, in Leinster in July 1580 threw the general peace of Ireland into uncertainty. On 27 July he once again tendered his resignation to the queen: 'to be disburthened of this place is the greatest happiness that could light unto me' (Brewer and Bullen, 282). Pelham was preparing a fresh expedition into co. Kerry when he had news that Arthur, Lord Grey of Wilton had landed on 12 August 1580 as the new lord deputy, together with his secretary, Edmund Spenser. Sir Henry Wallop was to present the sword of state to Lord Grey. Pelham took offence at the lack of deference shown him by Secretary Spenser, and determined to go himself to Dublin. Nevertheless, he had expressed willingness to serve under Grey. He was delayed at Athlone by bad weather and it was not until 7 September 1580 that Pelham formally resigned the sword of state to the new deputy in St Patrick's, Dublin. There was a rumour that Pelham would be made president of Munster. He accompanied Grey to Drogheda to inspect the fortifications there; but being taken dangerously ill, he went back to Dublin and sought permission to return to England. He left Ireland early in October. 
On 16 January 1581 Pelham was joined in commission with George Talbot, earl of Shrewsbury, and Sir Henry Neville to escort Mary, queen of Scots, from Sheffield to Ashby in Leicestershire. Though he was still lieutenant-general of the ordnance, by 1585 his expenses exceeded the profits of that office by $8000; and at the same time his personal debts were in excess of $5000. The queen refused to remit or even postpone that portion of his debts for which he was found personally responsible and made the payments of arrears an essential condition before allowing Pelham to serve under Leicester in the Netherlands. Pelham pleaded in vain: 'If you will not ease me of my debts, pray take my poor living into your possession, and give order for their payment, and imprest me some convenient sum to set me forward' ('DNB'). Both Lord Burghley and Leicester pressed the queen to relent; she went so far as to accept a mortgage on Pelham's properties, an arrangement which permitted him to accompany Leicester to the Netherlands in July 1586. 
To the chagrin of the Norris brothers, Sir John and Sir Edward of Rycote, Oxfordshire, a prominent military family in Ireland and the Netherlands, Leicester made Pelham marshal of the army. At a drunken brawl in Count Hohenlohe's quarters at Gertruydenberg on 6 August 1586, Pelham nearly cost Sir Edward Norris his life, but Leicester put the blame on Norris. A few days later, inspecting the defences before Doesburg in Leicester's company, Pelham took a shot in the stomach while shielding his commander-in-chief. Thinking his wound to be fatal Pelham made 'comfortable and resolute speeches' and deemed himself fortunate to have saved Leicester. However, he was fated 'to carry a bullet in his belly', for he lived to participate in the celebrated siege of Zutphen in September 1586 where Sir Philip Sidney was mortally wounded. According to Fulke Greville, it was imitation of Pelham's chivalry that cost Sidney his life under the walls of Zutphen. When the garrison of Deventer under Sir William Stanley of Hooton in the Wirral betrayed the fortress and town to the Spaniards, Pelham had the task of quelling the mutiny, which he accomplished in summary and resolute fashion. In April 1587 Pelham returned to England with Leicester and took the waters at Bath to recover from his ailments. By autumn he was fit enough to go back to the Netherlands with reinforcements, but he died on 24 November 1587, shortly after landing at Flushing. In his will, which was puritan in tone, he had requested burial at the discretion of his executors should he die in England. In the event his place of burial went unrecorded. 
Pelham's letter-book, which contains both a diary and his extensive official correspondence when lord justice of Ireland, is preserved among the Carew manuscripts in Lambeth Palace Library. The original compilation by Morgan Colman, Pelham's secretary, has an elaborately decorated title page, and consists of 455 folios. Pelham composed commendatory verses and these are prefixed to Sir George Peckham's 'A True Reporte of the Late Discoveries... of the Newfound Landes' of 1583. He also wrote a tract entitled 'A form or maner howe to have the exersyse of the harquebuse thorowe England for the better defence of the same' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/44/60). He collaborated in 1580 with Sir Henry Wallop and Sir Edward Waterhouse in writing a scheme for the government of Munster; although Pelham's contribution was mainly military, his plan also included ideas on taxation. The oil portrait of him in the earl of Yarborough's collection is attributed to Cornelius Ketel and seems to have been painted about 1580. Another portrait of Sir William Pelham, by an unknown artist, last appeared at Christies on 31 January 1968. 


@@@@@


doc= 21801


Holles, Thomas Pelham-, duke of Newcastle upon Tyne and first duke of Newcastle under Lyme (1693-1768), prime minister, was born in Sussex on 21 July 1693, the eldest son of Thomas Pelham (c.1653-1712) and his second wife, Lady Grace Holles (died 1700). Thomas Pelham had two daughters by his first marriage; his subsequent union with Lady Grace produced, in addition, one son, Henry Pelham, a later prime minister, and six daughters. 
After attending Westminster School, young Thomas matriculated in 1709 at Clare College, Cambridge. Although he left the university before taking a degree, he retained throughout his life happy memories of his experiences at both Westminster and Cambridge and in later years assumed a measure of responsibility for governance at both institutions. 
Pelham quickly became a wealthy man through two inheritances. The first came in July 1711, when his mother's brother, John Holles, duke of Newcastle upon Tyne, died, bequeathing Thomas a vast estate. The heir's only obligation was to append 'Holles' to his name, a duty Thomas fulfilled for the rest of his life. The astonished dowager duchess immediately launched a legal campaign to overturn the settlement. Although every judicial decision handed down on the case supported Thomas Pelham's right to the inheritance, he was inclined to be generous and proposed a compromise. By its terms he yielded a few choice properties to Lord Oxford, the dowager duchess's son-in-law. The second inheritance came in February 1712, on the death of Thomas's father. Thomas succeeded both to the title of Baron Pelham of Laughton, which his father had received in 1706, and to the Pelham estates in Sussex. As a consequence of these two inheritances the young Lord Pelham held lands in eleven counties and enjoyed an annual income of almost $32,000. He also either controlled or significantly influenced the selection of over a dozen members of parliament elected from Sussex, Yorkshire, and Nottinghamshire. 
To his political influence Pelham added a fiery commitment to the whig cause. In the final years of Queen Anne's reign he joined the party's two leading social organizations, the Kit-Cat Club and the Hanover Club. In late 1714 the newly arrived George I appointed him to the lord lieutenancies of Middlesex and Nottinghamshire and raised him in the peerage with the titles of Viscount Houghton and earl of Clare, both formerly borne by his uncle. He promptly bought the land in Surrey upon which he would erect Claremont, his largest and favourite home. A year later, as a reward for Lord Clare's electoral support for the whigs in the general election of 1715, the king bestowed on him two additional titles that had belonged to John Holles: marquess of Clare and duke of Newcastle upon Tyne. On the outbreak of the Jacobite rising later in the year, Newcastle raised a voluntary defence force and led roving crowds in demonstrations on behalf of the king. When the whigs began to fissure in 1716, Newcastle, after some hesitation, threw his lot in with the victorious Sunderland-Stanhope camp. One facet of this decision was his marriage on 2 April 1717 to a woman with Sunderland ties, Lady Henrietta Godolphin (died 1776). Less than two weeks after the wedding, on 13 April 1717, Newcastle received a political reward for his loyalty, taking the oath of office to become lord chamberlain. His public career was launched. 
In his new office Newcastle superintended the household 'above stairs', the largest section of the royal establishment. Frequent contact with George I allowed a friendship between the two men to emerge, and in March 1718 the duke was installed knight of the Garter. Meanwhile, in the House of Lords the duke gave vigorous support to the work of the government. He worried for his future when the government's defeat in the Commons on the 'Peerage Bill' obliged the ministry to readmit Robert Walpole and Charles, Viscount Townshend. But the South Sea Bubble and the deaths of Stanhope and Sunderland so thoroughly recast the political world that, when the dust settled in 1722, Newcastle stood as the third most influential minister in the kingdom, overshadowed only by Walpole at the Treasury and Townshend as 'de facto' foreign secretary. Many observers were surprised at this ascent. But, in addition to his good fortune, his rise was testimony to his affability, his diligence, his power as an electoral magnate, and his readiness to follow a leader. In 1724 Walpole completed the ratification of Newcastle's success by ousting the independent-minded Lord Carteret from office and installing the duke in the lucrative post of secretary of state for the southern department. Barely thirty, Newcastle now bore co-ordinate responsibility (with Townshend in the northern department) for the conduct of British foreign policy. 
Even though Newcastle had never set foot on the European continent, he was not uninterested in foreign affairs. Townshend had adopted Stanhope's commitment to the maintenance of the friendship of France, and Newcastle followed the lead of his colleague. Where they parted ways was in trying to sort out the implications of that commitment for relations with other European states. The tension between the secretaries first arose when the unexpected juncture of Spain and Austria in the treaty of Vienna in 1725 raised the question: which country represented the greater threat to Britain? For Townshend, Vienna, with its new commercial interests in the East Indies, posed the greater challenge. For Newcastle, concerned to protect Gibraltar and British interests in American waters, Madrid deserved priority. The duke was also moved by the consideration that Britain and Austria had been allies against the France of Louis XIV, and he dreamed of restoring what he often styled the 'old system' -- the alliance of London and Vienna against Versailles. When Walpole began to focus attention on this issue, he found himself more in sympathy with Newcastle's inclinations. Then when Spain adopted the belligerent course of interning a British ship and besieging Gibraltar, Newcastle's view received additional confirmation. 
This incipient division in the ministry was abruptly eclipsed in June 1727, however, when George I died while in Hanover. The new monarch George II had, as prince of Wales, often quarrelled with his father, and a decade of strained relations in the royal family had given him ample occasion to hone a dislike of Walpole, Townshend, and Newcastle. His quarrel with the duke dated back to a public altercation between the two men at the baptism of the prince of Wales's son in 1717. In order now to protect their hold on office, the three ministers set aside their differences and, guided by Walpole's skilful efforts to prove his indispensability, sought to persuade the new king to retain his inherited servants. They were successful. Talk of saddling Newcastle with the purgatorial lord lieutenancy of Ireland quickly faded, and before the year was out the duke was expressing confidence that he had surmounted the danger. 
The receding of the fear that he would be dislodged from office allowed Newcastle to return to his foreign policy disagreement with Townshend. He used his position as the secretary with responsibility for Spain to insist that London be unbending in negotiations with Madrid. In 1729 his hardline policy succeeded when, after the Vienna alliance fell apart, Spain abandoned its military harassment of Gibraltar and in the treaty of Seville, concluded in November, accepted a British construction of almost all of the points in dispute. This validation of Newcastle's policy left Townshend isolated within the ministry, and, when in May 1730 Walpole chose Newcastle's advice in negotiations with Austria as well, Townshend resigned the seals. Newcastle then crowned his triumph by filling the empty northern office with Lord Harrington, a man whom he believed could be trusted to be subservient to a senior secretarial colleague. With this latest ministerial reshuffle, Newcastle was the second most powerful politician in the kingdom. 
No longer burdened with an unsympathetic secretarial colleague, Newcastle pressed ahead in his effort to restore the old system. The treaty of Vienna of March 1731 was a major triumph as Austria, in return for Britain's recognition of the so-called pragmatic sanction, abandoned its effort to use the Austrian Netherlands to try to challenge Britain's commercial dominance in Asian waters. Newcastle had thus overseen a reorientation of British foreign policy. In complimenting George II on having 'given peace to all Europe' (Coxe, 'Robert Walpole', 3.12), Newcastle was in fact hoping to praise himself. 
But two years later the duke's commitment to Austria served as the basis for his first important foreign policy quarrel with Walpole. When the Bourbon states and Austria went to war in Italy, Newcastle believed that London should aid Vienna. But Walpole, with greater respect for the durability of the Habsburg state, and with an eye on an imminent general election, concluded that Britain's interests would be best served if the kingdom remained neutral, and, as chief minister, he prevailed. Newcastle, however, though acceding to Walpole's policy, was unconvinced of its wisdom: he feared that France and Spain would assume that Britain was ineffectual and that Austria would conclude that Britain was unreliable. Whatever good the treaties of Seville and Vienna had wrought was, he feared, being undone by Britain's neutrality in the War of the Polish Succession. 
But if foreign affairs were tending to drive a wedge between Walpole and Newcastle after 1733, domestic affairs were solidifying their co-operation. At the opening of the decade, with Townshend's departure from office, Newcastle assumed responsibility for serving as the government's chief spokesman in the House of Lords. He was a ready and energetic, if not always coherent, speaker. When Walpole engineered a ministerial reshuffle after the excise tax crisis in 1733, the group that remained in office -- especially the duke's close friend Lord Hardwicke and his brother Henry Pelham -- comprised the nucleus of what Newcastle would later call the 'old corps' ['see also 'Old corps]. Over the course of the next quarter of a century this group would have the fairest claim of all political factions to be the true repository, especially in domestic matters, of Walpolean whiggery, while during the same years Hardwicke became Newcastle's most trusted political adviser. Meanwhile, under the umbrella of this close domestic collegiality with Walpole, Newcastle steadily expanded the range of his influence and authority. He collected various offices in many of the counties with which he was associated. As early as 1725 the duke assumed nominal responsibility for Scottish affairs. After 1730 he slowly took control of appointments in the American colonies. After 1736 he extended his influence into the affairs of the Church of England. Having little interest in America, he used his colonial appointment powers largely to solve British (rather than American) political problems; deeply interested in the church, he exercised his powers of ecclesiastical appointment to advance the careers of churchmen of orthodox theological views and whiggish political sensibilities. Meanwhile, through his friendship with Princess Emily, he had access to court gossip and thinking. Thus, as the end of the decade approached, Newcastle sat at the centre of several extensive networks of patronage and information and enjoyed as full a measure of confidence as Walpole was ever likely to bestow on any governmental colleague. 
In the final years of the decade another dispute with Spain, involving competing claims to various rights in America, tested the friendship. Two circumstances made it oddly intractable: the belief in Madrid that Britain would ultimately yield rather than go to war over disputes in distant America, and the intervention of the South Sea Company into what Walpole and Newcastle would have preferred to treat as an exclusively diplomatic matter. Neither minister wanted war. Newcastle's bona fides is evidenced by his willingness in 1738 to acknowledge Spain's right to search British ships in some circumstances and by his recall in the early months of 1739 of Nicholas Haddock's fleet from the Mediterranean. When negotiators finally completed the convention of Pardo in January 1739, Newcastle believed that war had been averted. But a severe public outcry, orchestrated by the South Sea Company, overwhelmed both Walpole and Newcastle: Pardo, all came to agree, was inadequate. The duke revealed his true feelings when, by way of explanation, he stated that 'we must yeild ['sic'] to the times' (BL, Add. MS 35406, fol. 111). The first formal intimations of war issued from Spain late in the spring of 1739. Soon thereafter Newcastle informed London's diplomat in Madrid of Britain's decision to 'pursue hostile measures' (BL, Add. MS 32801, fol. 67). The formal British declaration of war on 19 November transformed Newcastle from 'de facto' foreign minister to 'de facto' minister of defence. 
Over the course of the next nine years Newcastle, more than any other person, defined the contours of Britain's war policy. The conflict with Spain, conventionally called the War of Jenkins's Ear, became a sideshow in 1741 when, in reaction to the outbreak of continental hostilities between Austria on the one hand and France and Prussia on the other, Britain came to Austria's defence. For several years Britain remained technically an auxiliary to the Habsburg state, but in 1744 formal war with France was declared, and the focus of the War of the Austrian Succession thereafter shifted from Germany towards the Atlantic. Throughout the belligerence Newcastle's chief foreign-policy goal was to conclude the war with the old system -- which Newcastle later styled 'my doctrine and system' (BL, Add. MS 35412, fol. 16) -- intact. In that aim, despite a number of stumbles along the way, he was finally successful. 
That Britain went to Austria's assistance at all in 1741 was testimony to Newcastle's influence in the government; Walpole would have preferred to follow the non-involvement of 1733. But 1741 also delivered three blows to the ministry. First, the general election in May reduced the government's majority in the House of Commons to precarious levels. Then came word that the combined naval and military expedition against Cartagena in the New World had foundered with heavy loss of life. Finally, George II announced his decision, as elector of Hanover, to seek protection for his electorate by declaring its neutrality in the expanding war. 
The climax of these set-backs came in February 1742, when Walpole, held responsible for military failures and diplomatic reverses, resigned his post at the Treasury. In the ensuing restructuring of the government, Newcastle, Pelham, and Hardwicke were obliged to admit some opposition politicians, including Lord Carteret, who accepted the seals for the northern department and pledged to inject a new vigour into Britain's war effort. Pleased at last to have a ministry of one mind about the need to push the war, Newcastle did not initially contest Carteret's control over the policy pursued. The new secretary even persuaded the king to restore Hanover's diplomatic co-operation with Britain, a step that Newcastle later called 'the best thing he ever did' (BL, Add. MS 32701, fol. 190). When Prussia left the war shortly after Carteret took office, his policy appeared to be succeeding. Meanwhile, Newcastle dealt in the House of Lords with the ceaseless complaining about what the opposition understood to be British coddling of Hanover. Against many expectations, Newcastle showed he could co-exist with Carteret. 
By 1744, however, Newcastle was beginning to distance himself from his secretarial colleague. Carteret had set out to unite Europe against the Bourbon powers. His policy reached its apogee in September 1743, when the treaty of Worms effected an uneasy alliance between Austria and Piedmont-Sardinia. But Newcastle was suspicious of Carteret's grand design, predicting within months of Worms that 'our active secretary, will at last find out, that dexterity with princes, to seem to promise all, and intend nothing, will as little do, as with private persons' (BL, Add. MS 35407, fol. 280). Sure enough, in the first eight months of 1744, apparently as a reply to Worms, France redoubled its commitment to Spain and launched a fleet against Britain while Prussia rejoined the fray on the Bourbon side, forcing Austria to pull its army back from the Low Countries. The collapse of Carteret's foreign policy left the northern secretary politically vulnerable, and in December 1744, under duress, he resigned the seals. With Carteret's departure, the old corps triumvirate of Henry Pelham, Lord Hardwicke, and Newcastle established themselves as the unchallenged directors of national politics, with command over foreign policy being the duke's particular province. 
It was useful for Newcastle that four events of 1745 clarified the nature of the war. First, the battle of Fontenoy established France as the dominant power in the Low Countries. Second, Britain's capture of Louisbourg in North America gave London a valuable trophy for negotiating a peace with Versailles. Third, the failure of the French-supported Jacobite invasion of Britain confirmed that France could not reasonably hope to drive Britain from the war. Fourth, Prussia's final withdrawal from the war in December, by removing the ambiguity that Berlin's participation had imposed upon the belligerence, suggested that at the core of the conflict lay the old Habsburg-Bourbon rivalry for dominance on the continent. 
The clarifications implicit in these events removed grounds for ministerial infighting about strategic matters, and the resultant united front emboldened the ministers to decide to teach a lesson to a monarch who had been quarrelsome and recalcitrant. In February 1746 Newcastle engineered a mass resignation of ministers which, by showing the political indispensability of the old corps, forced a stubborn George II to invite them back into office on their own terms. For the rest of the war the monarch forswore hampering the work of his ministers, and, as a result of this visible union of royal and ministerial wills, the government won a sweeping victory in the general election of 1747. 
Meanwhile, with France establishing itself as unbeatable on land and Britain proving itself invincible at sea, the logic of a compromise peace settlement slowly emerged: London would hand Louisbourg back to Versailles, which in turn would return the Southern Netherlands to Vienna. In that way, the old system would be preserved. After much hesitation, the various combatants sent representatives to Aix-la-Chapelle in early 1748 to hammer out a treaty. Though Newcastle did not attend the negotiations, he so worried about losing influence if the monarch were left without his guidance that in the summer of 1748, having taken the reins in the northern department and given the southern department to the duke of Bedford, he endured the misery of seasickness to make his first visit to the continent in order to accompany the king to Hanover. The treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle was signed (by most powers) on 18 October. For Britain the principle underlying the settlement was 'status quo ante bellum'. Such a dismal outcome left little room for anyone to claim that Britain had emerged triumphant, but at least the kingdom had not lost, and Newcastle, taking pride in this modest achievement, confided to his brother that 'I feel the joy of an honest man' (Coxe, 'Pelham', 2.325). Since the struggle had resolved none of the outstanding Anglo-French issues in America, however, its resumption in the coming years was widely predicted. 
To prepare Britain for that conflict Newcastle turned his post-war energies to strengthening the old system through collective security, thereby isolating France. He enjoyed a modest success in winning Spanish complaisance through the conclusion of a commercial treaty with Spain in 1750. But he had virtually no success at persuading Frederick II of the advantages of aligning Prussia with an anti-French coalition. Still, even if Prussia chose to stand aside, there were other German states whose support might be secured. Newcastle's problem was that these states were unlikely to commit themselves without a financial inducement to do so, and Henry Pelham at the Treasury was suspicious of the idea that subsidies paid in time of peace were a sound way to create a coalition that would operate in time of war. What Newcastle needed therefore was a reason to provide subsidies to German states which, without being bribes, nevertheless placed the recipients in the anti-French camp. From that dilemma emerged the strangest diplomatic initiative of his career -- the plan to have Maria Theresa's son elected king of the Romans, and hence successor to his father Francis I when the reigning Holy Roman emperor should die. 
Between 1749 and 1753 Newcastle directed a campaign to line up six of the nine imperial electors -- a so-called eminent majority -- to vote for young Joseph. Subsidies were paid to Bavaria and Saxony; a further subsidy was promised to the electoral Palatine. When Henry Pelham baulked at approving what he saw as reckless expenditure, Newcastle won his brother over by proclaiming the election plan 'the only means I can think of, of establishing any real, solid system for the preservation of peace and the maintenance of the liberties of Europe' (BL, Add. MS 32822, fol. 239). If money had been all that was needed, Newcastle would have realized his goal. But the basic problem with the scheme was that Austria, the presumed beneficiary of British largess, was averse to it. Maria Theresa would have been happy to have had her son chosen as her husband's successor if the cost were reasonable. But the Austrian ministry feared that the project would needlessly antagonize France at a time when Austria needed the chance to recuperate and restructure its administration. Because Austria did not want to anger its British ally, it did not declare its opposition to the initiative openly, preferring to block its implementation through a variety of apparently minor obstructions. As a result, efforts to realize the election plan were protracted, dribbling away into inconsequentiality only in 1753. But Austria, which already nourished doubts about whether London's interests truly coincided with Vienna's, now had reason to ponder London's wisdom as well. 
Still, if foreign politics were proving sticky, domestic politics in the years after 1748 were smooth and easy. When Newcastle eased the duke of Bedford out of the southern department office in 1751, replacing him with the thoroughly compliant Lord Holdernesse, he not only secured total control of foreign policy for himself but also removed from office the only whig grandee who sometimes charted a course at variance with the Pelhams. Fearful of reviving 'old Disputes & Distinctions, which are at present, quiet' (BL, Add. MS 32721, fol. 158), especially with a general election looming in 1754, he resisted any governmental action likely to unsettle some segment of the tranquil public. Only when the government secured passage of the 'Jewish Naturalization Act' in the spring of 1753 did the tranquillity lapse, and the startled Pelhams moved quickly to reclaim the initiative late in the year by engineering the repeal of the very measure they had urged on the kingdom less than twelve months earlier. Sailing into 1754, all seemed serene. But then, on 6 March 1754, after a short illness, Henry Pelham died. 
Newcastle was quickly persuaded to protect old corps' interests by taking charge of affairs himself. But over the course of the next two and a half years he proved himself a disastrous prime minister, committing three fundamental errors. First, in order to retain for himself the fullest possible array of patronage power, he failed to give adequate support to his government's leader in the House of Commons. Second, in order to court an already reluctant Austria, he pursued a European policy that must finally be labelled fatuous. Finally, in order to spare himself the full weight of the blame for the misfortunes that befell his government, he sought to divert criticism by redefining his government into a set of autonomous departments and by recasting himself as little more than -- perhaps even less than -- 'primus inter pares'. Together, the errors doomed his ministry. 
Pelham's death necessitated several changes. Since Newcastle was unwilling to leave Treasury patronage to potentially critical colleagues, he assumed the office of first lord of the Treasury himself, calculating correctly that the expertise of the men who had served his brother would protect him from any gross financial errors. His difficulty lay in dealing with the House of Commons. As a peer, the duke could not personally assume his late brother's responsibility as leader of that house. Anxious lest he provide a political beachhead to a rival of talent, he bypassed such men as William Pitt, Henry Fox, and William Murray, persuading instead Thomas Robinson, whose experience lay in diplomacy rather than domestic politics, to become leader. The duke's deeper strategy was to govern the House of Commons indirectly, from the Lords. Because no ambition could have been more inimical to the self-definition of MPs, it was a fatally flawed strategy. But well before this deeper implication became clear, the general election was held in May, and the new government won a grand victory, allowing the duke to launch his prime ministership with a massive majority in the Commons. 
The first sign of trouble came in July, when word arrived that a Virginian effort to dislodge the French from Fort Duquesne had failed. The engagement portended a wider Anglo-French conflict in America, and so Newcastle brought the king's son the duke of Cumberland, an experienced commander, into the government and began to pay more heed to the advice of Henry Fox, the secretary at war. After much hesitation and confusion, the ministry resolved to send Major-General Edward Braddock and Vice-Admiral Edward Boscawen to America to deal with the French challenge. But in the summer of 1755 word arrived that Boscawen, though initiating hostilities by attacking a French fleet, had failed to prevent the landing of French troops at Louisbourg, while Braddock had been killed in an unsuccessful action in America. With this news Newcastle and his colleagues were compelled to acknowledge that an American crisis was at hand. 
Meanwhile, the ministry's efforts to meet France's challenge in Europe were well under way. Although when he first learned of the clashes in the American wilderness Newcastle had hoped that the conflict might be confined to the New World, he had soon bowed to the logic of geopolitical reality: if border skirmishes should turn into war along the Appalachians, France would want to seize a trophy that might induce Britain to hand back any American winnings, and the most obvious candidate for trophy status was the king's German domain of Hanover. Therefore, by 1755 Newcastle was devoting attention to securing a commitment from Vienna that Austria would support Britain (and hence deter France) in any Anglo-French war. Austria, however, preferred to remain disengaged: its interest lay in recovering land lost to Prussia, and, if Britain was not willing to use troops to aid Vienna in recovering Silesia, Austria preferred not to commit itself to British ends. So Newcastle turned to a more circuitous strategy, and late in the summer of 1755 agreed to a treaty with Russia that committed St Petersburg, in return for a British subsidy of $100,000 in peacetime, to station troops on the east Prussian frontier and to launch them against Frederick II if Prussia attacked Britain or Hanover. If this move did not specifically deter France from attacking Hanover, it at least gave Prussia grounds for pause. 
At this point the indirection of Newcastle's European policy began to cause the entire system to unravel spectacularly. The treaty of St Petersburg so alarmed Frederick II that Prussia suddenly warmed to the long-standing feelers from Britain. As a consequence, London and Berlin concluded the convention of Westminster in January 1756, with each state pledging itself to neutrality in Germany if a European war broke out. With this stroke Newcastle believed that he had secured Hanover against attack. But in fact the convention was a strategic disaster. First, it alienated Russia, which had understood its late-summer agreement with Britain to be the prelude to an attack on east Prussia. Now realizing that Britain was bent upon forestalling, not promoting, a war in Germany, Russia needed to look elsewhere for friends. Second, the British convention with Prussia finally convinced Austria that Britain was a useless ally. Vienna and Versailles soon began conversations that led, in May 1756, to an alliance between the two ancient enemies. Shortly thereafter Russia aligned itself with Austria and France. Newcastle's direction of British European policy had been so ill-conceived that he had contrived to provoke, in the so-called diplomatic revolution, what had once seemed impossible: the end of the Habsburg-Bourbon rivalry. The old system was gone. 
Well before this unhappy denouement, William Pitt and others had been complaining about the ministry's foreign policy. In the summer of 1755, in an effort to blunt these criticisms, Newcastle laboured to bring Pitt into the government without too dramatically compromising his own ability to direct affairs. When these negotiations faltered, the duke in desperation turned back to Henry Fox, winning a promise of his support for the work of the government in the Commons in return for Newcastle's commitment to name him southern secretary within a few months. For a while this solution succeeded: Fox secured easy passage of subsidy treaties and was soon given the seals. On 18 May 1756, with the situation in America deteriorating, Britain even declared war on France. But in June word arrived in London that Minorca had been lost to a French invasion and that Admiral John Byng had failed to use his squadron in defence of the island. Once again the wrath of the political nation boiled over, and while much of the anger was directed at Byng, who was arrested and brought home to face court martial, the real target of the national rage was Newcastle, whose policy since 1754 had shattered old alliances, left British possessions in America and the Mediterranean undefended, and led the kingdom into war. Then in August 1756 Prussia, deciding to move pre-emptively against the new Austro-French alliance, invaded Saxony; with this stroke the long-feared European war began. 
Conversations with political allies quickly persuaded Newcastle that he could no longer remain in command of the government; parliament would not suffer such incompetence in the conduct of national affairs in an hour of national crisis. Moreover, given the failure of the duke's efforts to guide the House of Commons by indirect means, and the general belief that Fox, who resigned in October, was contaminated by his association with the floundering ministry, only William Pitt among possible candidates for leadership was understood to have the respect, standing, and independence for which the emergency called. Acknowledging that Pitt's claim to direct affairs could not be denied, Newcastle resigned the Treasury on 11 November 1756. A career that had extended over almost forty years seemed at an end. 
This, however, was not the final outcome. Pitt was not an old corps whig and, without the duke's support to provide ballast for his ministry in the Commons, he risked parliamentary disapprobation virtually every time he brought a wartime measure forward. War under a Pitt ministry promised to be costly, for he proposed to win the battle for America, forestall France on the seas, and support Prussia in Europe. Newcastle meanwhile quickly recovered his love of office. He waited until various embarrassing matters had been resolved -- the execution of Byng in March 1757, the ending of a parliamentary inquiry into his ministry in May -- and then authorized close conversations with Pitt's followers. Lord Hardwicke found a formula that each party could agree to, and on 29 June 1757 Newcastle returned to the Treasury. Describing the arrangement, Lord Temple dubbed Pitt 'minister of measures' and Newcastle 'minister of numbers' ('Grenville Papers', 1.405). The purpose of the coalition was to supply, through Newcastle's influence with the old corps majority in the Commons, the parliamentary support necessary for winning the war. The duke's return in 1757 was his last great demonstration of political power. 
For the next three years Newcastle was a fairly loyal supporter of Pitt's ministry and therefore the key enabler of its work. The Treasury over which he presided provided the funds that allowed Britain to send troops to America and Germany, fleets into the Atlantic, and subsidies to Prussia. Newcastle was pleased that Pitt, having built his popularity on hostility to Hanover, adopted a view closer to the duke's by seeing the electorate as the base for anti-French activity in Europe. Meanwhile, Newcastle handled patronage matters with his wonted enthusiasm. He did not always agree with Pitt, but in general he behaved like a subordinate and did not try to cripple Pitt's work. Thus the coalition ministry jogged along, happily accepting plaudits for the grand achievements of the army in America and the navy in the Atlantic. Then on 25 October 1760 George II, aged seventy-six but not in poor health, suddenly died. The duke's remark -- that he had lost 'the best king, the best master, & the best friend, that ever subject had' (BL, Add. MS 32913, fol. 399) -- was hyperbolic but not ill-cast, for the death of the second Hanoverian king implied the end of Newcastle's political 'raison d'etre'. 
George III was the first Hanoverian monarch unconditioned by the party strife of the early decades of the eighteenth century. He tended, moreover, to take his cues from his former tutor, the earl of Bute, a politically inexperienced Scots peer. If Bute's influence was to rise in the new reign, it could do so only at the expense of the power of Newcastle and Pitt. That calculation suggested that Newcastle should have held firm to his new friendship with Pitt, which was the course that the duchess recommended. But a growing disagreement over the war was driving a wedge between the two men even as they needed to present a common front. Cheered by military and naval successes, Pitt wanted to redouble the kingdom's effort to crush France. Worried by the mounting cost of the belligerence, Newcastle wanted to use the triumphs already secured as a basis for negotiating an advantageous peace treaty that would release the kingdom from the financial burden of protracted warfare. Because the new reign triggered a general election, Newcastle had a quick opportunity to show his value, and the ministerial machine performed splendidly, bringing in another large majority for the government. But thereafter a three-cornered contest emerged, as the new king advanced Bute to the post of southern secretary while Newcastle and Pitt moved apart on strategic matters. The duke decided that his career was best served by aligning himself with Bute, who at least shared his view that the war was unbearably expensive. But he hopelessly compromised the clarity of his financial position by arguing that Britain ought not to desert Prussia. In doing so, he was trying, as he had (with Austria) in 1748, to assure that Britain did not find itself without a friend in a post-war world. But his position struck most observers as simply confused. 
The first contender to fall in the three-way struggle was Pitt. In September 1761 he wanted Britain to declare war on Spain, on the grounds that the new Franco-Spanish alliance portended eventual Spanish involvement: better, he argued, to wage the war by Britain's timetable, not Spain's. When he was unable to convince his ministerial colleagues of the wisdom of his proposal, he resigned. Pitt's October departure meant that Newcastle's continuation in the ministry was now a matter entirely at the discretion of Bute. When Newcastle opposed the royal favourite's proposal to end the massive subsidy to Prussia early in 1762, Bute decided to find a way to dislodge the duke, and, when an official in Newcastle's own Treasury supplied Bute with information suggesting that the Treasury had inflated its estimate of the level needed in the next vote of credit, Newcastle found himself not only badly outnumbered in the ministry but also beset by renegades in his own office. In a tearful meeting with the king, on 26 May 1762, he reluctantly resigned his leadership of the Treasury, declined the offer of a pension, and left an office of high responsibility for the last time. 
Totally unhabituated to life out of office, Newcastle entered into opposition in full hope of returning yet again to government. In recognition of his age -- almost seventy when he resigned the Treasury -- he no longer aspired to a post that would require energy, aiming instead at an honorific position. Incredibly, he believed that he could command the loyalty of almost 40 per cent of the House of Commons, and he planned to use this political army to re-establish his command. The first indication of the feebleness of his new position came in the autumn of 1762 when, in protest against Bute's dismissal of the duke of Devonshire, he called upon persons committed to him to resign. It was embarrassing that only a few obeyed. But worse followed. The ministry, angry that Newcastle asked his followers to oppose the peace preliminaries, decided to dismiss almost all the Pelhamite loyalists still in office and then, visiting a final indignity on 23 December, stripped the duke of his lord lieutenancies and various other offices. 
This 'massacre of the Pelhamite innocents', a purge unrivalled since 1714, compelled the old corps to give concentrated thought to how a party which had upheld the court should behave when out of office. Meanwhile, a younger generation of politicians was coming forward, ready to provide new leadership to the party. Newcastle often hosted the informal discussions among influential men who opposed Bute. But he was in no way regarded as the leader of the group. Though these men quickly concluded that they would need allies if they were to have any chance of regaining office, the alliance created when Pitt and Newcastle publicly resolved their differences in May 1763 foundered on the rocks of Pitt's touchiness and Newcastle's indecisiveness. Thus the government, directed after Bute's unexpected resignation by George Grenville, proved invulnerable to assaults. On 6 March 1764, with the party still out of office, Lord Hardwicke died. With the death of his closest friend the duke remained as the sole survivor of the old corps triumvirate that had directed British affairs in the decade after 1744. 
The party's fortunes turned in 1765 when George III, reacting to Grenville's haughtiness, deputed the duke of Cumberland to find an alternative ministry. When Pitt proved unacceptably prickly, Cumberland turned to the whigs. At a meeting at Claremont on 30 June 1765, with Newcastle urging acceptance of the king's invitation, the party voted to form a government. The leader of the new ministry was the marquess of Rockingham; Newcastle happily became lord privy seal, with special responsibility for ecclesiastical affairs. But accident dealt unkindly with the new ministry. First, Cumberland, the important link with the king, died in October. Then American resistance to the 'Stamp Act' forced the government to deal with an unforeseen colonial crisis. In a difficult compromise it decided to conjoin to its repeal of the offending measure a 'Declaratory Act' that reaffirmed Britain's right to tax America. Newcastle energetically defended these decisions in the House of Lords; he also took the lead in convincing a doubtful George III that the ministry's course of conciliation was the right one. Ultimately, both measures passed. But the price that the party paid was high: royal distrust, renewed hostility from Pitt, and internal disagreement. These disabilities proved fatal, and in July 1766 the king invited Pitt (who soon became earl of Chatham) to form a government. On 30 July, again proudly spurning a proffered pension, Newcastle resigned his last major office under the crown. 
Having just turned seventy-three, Newcastle was widely expected to retire from public life. Instead he plunged back into politics, and, adhering to the logic that only a coalition could marshal the power to oust a ministry that enjoyed royal support, he cast about for an ally, fixing his attention on the duke of Bedford. Inasmuch as the Bedfordites disagreed with the Rockinghams about America, inter-party negotiations were required, and Newcastle hosted several negotiating sessions in 1767 between the two faction leaders. Meanwhile, he led attacks against the government in the House of Lords. In many ways he did not understand the world into which he had survived, imposing on the unstable political landscape of the 1760s a dichotomous view of politics more suitable to the starker whig-tory distinctions of the earliest years of his public career and espying in the retired Bute an 'eminence grise' behind the throne. Late in 1767 all of his energetic flailing came to naught when Bedford chose to align himself with the government. Newcastle had already learned that his initiative towards Bedford had failed when, in December, he suffered a stroke. 
The most important person in Newcastle's life was his wife. Henrietta suffered from poor health and, perhaps happily for her, was not fond of politics. But, because this disinterest gave her a measure of distance from the political scene, she was a counsellor to whom he often resorted. When he was away from her -- and such occasions were frequent since she preferred Sussex to London -- he wrote to her daily. Their marriage was a genuinely happy one. With his younger brother Henry, however, the duke had a far less placid relationship. The fraternal tie was grounded in sincere affection, but, as Henry rose to independent political stature, the two proud men often found themselves at odds. Because Newcastle's marriage produced no children, he chose to lavish much affection on his five surviving sisters and their large tribe of children. He found parliamentary seats for some of his nephews and he applauded the marriages of his nieces. Sometimes this devotion was ill-paid, as for example when he had to endure denunciation from his nephew and principal heir, Lord Lincoln, for, in effect, living too long. This savaging was especially humiliating because, in 1756, Newcastle had secured an additional title -- duke of Newcastle under Lyme -- precisely to permit the 'Newcastle' dignity to be remaindered to Lincoln. Still, not all of the younger generation turned against him, and in his final years the duke rejoiced in the kind attentions of Tommy Pelham, a first cousin once removed to whom the specially delimited barony of Pelham of Stanmer would devolve. 
In appearance Newcastle was a tall man. With his outsized head, erect posture, and amiable garrulousness, he was a pompous and dominating conversationalist, often taking hold of his auditor's lapels to drive home a point. He enjoyed staging vast entertainments, both at Claremont and at Newcastle House, his London home in Lincoln's Inn Fields. He was more than conventionally pious and more than conventionally eager to beautify his estates. He despised venality and prided himself on his honesty. Despite a reputation as a man who found pleasure only in politics, he patronized music and collected a useful and diverse library. His contemporaries snickered at some of his foibles -- an aversion to beds not previously slept in, an abhorrence of drafts, a propensity to weep. Likewise they mocked the jealousy that drove him to dispense with so many of his secretarial colleagues over the years. Like many hypochondriacs, he was in fact quite healthy, able to enjoy outdoor activity until the last year of his life. Finally, in the conduct of public business he was remarkably orderly and hard-working, keeping memoranda of meetings and so tirelessly corresponding with friends and political colleagues that the so-called Newcastle papers comprise a treasure trove for historians. 
Unhappily for Newcastle himself and many of his relatives, however, his management of his private financial affairs was a story of dramatic disorder. Newcastle saw his territorial holdings, and consequently his income from them, shrink through most of his life. In 1715 his estates brought in $32,000; by 1726 they were earning him only $24,000; by 1756 they were providing only about $12,000; and by 1762 his income was scarcely $9000. As the years passed he sold many of his lands, sometimes retaining the right to be a life tenant. In other instances he mortgaged properties. His indebtedness reached staggering levels. Advisers and relatives, appalled at his profligacy, sought to staunch the bleeding; some of Newcastle's bitterest quarrels with his brother turned on his fecklessness. Various trust devices were created to confine the duke, but none altered his habits of careless personal spending. Although much of the expenditure cannot now be accounted for, such categories as entertaining at his many homes, electioneering in his many constituencies, and the landscaping of his many grounds loom large. Munificence also played a role, as Newcastle was eager to bestow gifts on friends and relatives. What strikes the latter-day observer, however, is the monumental recklessness of the duke's cast of mind, for the very people he loved most -- his wife, his nieces, his nephews -- were the people whose long-term welfare was most damaged by this evisceration of his estate. 
Impaired in memory and speech, lame of foot, and subject to episodes of fatigue after his stroke, Newcastle nevertheless recovered his appetite for politics. He returned to London early in November 1768 to prepare for the coming session. Soon thereafter, however, he collapsed, and on 17 November at Newcastle House, shortly after receiving the sacrament from Bishop John Hume, he died. With his death all his titles except the special remainders for Lord Lincoln and Tommy Pelham became extinct. His remains were interred in the family vault at Laughton, Sussex, on 27 November. Since the Nottinghamshire lands had already been assigned to Lord Lincoln, they were not part of the settlement after the duke's death. Most of what remained of the Sussex property went to Tommy Pelham; the rest passed to the dowager duchess. But the estate was encumbered by a debt that exceeded $300,000, and so it was liquidated through land sales to meet those obligations. Lord Clive, already one of the duke's major creditors, bought Claremont. The duchess lived on at Twickenham Park until her death on 17 July 1776. She protected the integrity of the duke's vast assemblage of papers, and late in the nineteenth century the earl of Chichester, a descendant of Lord Pelham of Stanmer, donated the collection intact to the British Library. It has served generations of scholars for over a century. 
Because Newcastle and his eccentricities were frequent targets for ridicule, the duke's reputation languished for almost a century and a half in a historiographical world largely defined by the judgements of two celebrated contemporary memoirists, Lord Hervey and Horace Walpole. For many historians he was the classic example of incompetence elevated to power by virtue of wealth alone. A reappraisal began in earnest with the writings of Sir Lewis Namier, and by the 1970s many historians were contending, by way of extenuation, that no one could have continued to hold high office for four decades without ability. Drawing on a distinction suggested by another contemporary, Lord Waldegrave, they often added that, while the duke lacked the judgement and self-confidence to be a commander (hence his unsuccessful term as prime minister), he was well equipped by virtue of his diligence, his command of his details, and his skill with people to be a lieutenant. It is perhaps time to recede somewhat from that cautiously favourable view -- not to return to the portrait of the ridiculous statesman but to reaffirm the more important truth that Newcastle all too often defended bad ideas. He was simply wrong when -- to cite four examples -- he urged that Britain go to war in 1733, refused opportunities to make peace in 1747, promoted the imperial election plan in 1750, and raised the stakes on the Prussian subsidy in 1762. Newcastle was not always guilty of poor judgement. But, leaving longevity aside, it is hard in surveying the entirety of his career to find substantive arguments for regarding it as anything other than an exercise in political mediocrity. 


@@@@@


doc= 21802


Pell, John (1611-1685), mathematician, was born on 1 March 1611 at Southwick, Sussex, the second of two sons of John Pell (died 1616), of Southwick, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Holland (died 1617), of Halden, Kent. Pell's father, reported by Aubrey to have been 'a kind of Non-conformist' ('Brief Lives', 121) came of ancient Lincolnshire stock. Pell, to whom his father had left an excellent library, was educated at the newly founded free school at Steyning, Sussex, where he progressed rapidly. At the age of thirteen in 1624 he was sent to Trinity College, Cambridge. Though eminently skilled in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, he never offered himself as candidate at the election of scholars or fellows at his college. He graduated BA in 1628 and MA in 1630, and in 1631 was incorporated in the University of Oxford. A few years later he was familiar with Arabic, Italian, Spanish, French, and Low and High 'Dutch' (German). He was celebrated for his immense knowledge and his unceasing industry. At the age of seventeen he corresponded with Henry Briggs about logarithms, but details of his study of mathematics (as well as of theology) do not seem to be known. From 1630 to 1638 he was assistant master at Collyer's School in Horsham and teacher at Samuel Hartlib's short-lived Chichester Academy in Sussex. 
Pell was a striking figure, remarkably handsome, with strong, excellent posture, dark hair and eyes, and a good voice. His temperament was sanguine and melancholic. On 3 July 1632 he married Ithumaria Reginolles, the second daughter of Henry Reginolles (died 1661) of London. They had four sons and four daughters. Pell's wife died on 11 September 1661, and he remarried before 1669. 
In 1638 the group surrounding John Comenius, of which Pell was a leading member (in particular he had become a close friend of Theodore Haak), arranged his move to London, where apparently he taught mathematics. In worldly affairs he was very inexperienced; throughout his life he had need of friends to push him forward and recommend him to men of influence, but as a mathematician he soon won such a reputation, that -- supported by a recommendation from Sir William Boswell, the English resident with the states general -- in December 1643 he was chosen as successor to Martin Hortensius, the professor of mathematics at the 'Gymnasium Illustre' in Amsterdam. 
In June 1646 Pell was invited by the prince of Orange to become professor of philosophy and mathematics at Breda in the newly founded college (academy) with an annual salary of 1000 guilders. His duties were, however, restricted to those of a professor of mathematics. When the First English-Dutch War seemed imminent in 1652 Pell returned to London. From Cromwell's government he received an annual salary of $200 as 'Professor of Mathematics', but there is no evidence of any teaching. In 1654, on Haak's recommendation, Cromwell dispatched him to Switzerland on a diplomatic mission at an increased salary of $600, the object being to detach the protestant cantons from France, and to draw them into a continental protestant league headed by England. Interminable negotiations ensued. He returned to England only a few weeks before the Protector's death, and did not have the opportunity of an audience. During all the years of Pell's absence, Haak had taken care of his financial and family affairs. 
After the Restoration, Pell accepted holy orders, being ordained deacon, and priest in 1661 when he was instituted to the rectory of Fobbing in Essex. In addition, in 1663 he was presented with the vicarage of Laindon and Basildon in Essex by Dr Gilbert Sheldon, bishop of London; he held both preferments until his death. Having been nominated domestic chaplain to Sheldon on his elevation to the see of Canterbury, Pell took the degree of DD in 1663, yet Anthony Wood noted in his diary: 'he was a shiftless man as to worldly affairs, and his tenants and relations dealt so unkindly to him, that they cozened him of the profits of his parsonage, and kept him so indigent, that he wanted necessaries, even ink and paper, to his dying day. (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1, cols. 461-4)' In fact he became so insolvent that twice he was thrown into the king's bench prison. 
Pell was among the first elected fellows of the Royal Society, on 20 May 1663; on the same day, he was dispensed of the weekly payments ['see 'Founder members of the Royal Society]. When the society formed several committees in 1664, Pell became a member of those in charge of mechanical and optical inventions as well as that responsible for reporting and conducting experiments on natural phenomena; later he was added to the committee on agriculture. In 1675 he was elected to the council, in the following year as one of its vice-presidents. In 1681 he reported at a meeting that he had translated most of Lazarus Ercker's famous book on minerals, 'Beschreibung allerfurnemsten mineralischen Ertzt' (1574), into English. 
Pell's first mathematical publication was 'An Idea of Mathematics'. To simplify the study of mathematics, Pell suggested in a few pages that all theorems and methods be collected in a kind of encyclopaedia of mathematics; it should make the study of all mathematical books published so far superfluous. This visionary plan (published in Latin of which a copy has recently been discovered in Hamburg, and English in 1638) was republished in English as an appendix to Durie's 'Reformed Librarie-Keeper' (1650). In 1679 Hooke included the Latin version, together with comments from Mersenne and Descartes, in his 'Philosophical Collections' (no. 5, 127). 
Pell's fame was enhanced by his second mathematical publication, a refutation of Longomontanus's quadrature of the circle, initially published as a single sheet in 1644, reprinted in 'A Refutation of Longomontanus's Pretended Quadrature of the Circle' (1646; Latin edn, 1647). In 1672 he published in London 'Tabula numerorum quadratorum decies millium, or, A Table of Ten Thousand Square Numbers'. A table of antilogarithms (100,000 entries to eleven decimals) -- the first of its kind -- was computed by him and Walter Warner between 1630 and 1640 but has been lost or destroyed. 
Pell was engaged for decades in preparing for the press editions or concise versions of several classical mathematical texts, though none appeared. He is reported to have 'done the second book of Euclid in one side of a large sheet of paper most clearly and ingeniously' ('Brief Lives', 126), and Archimedes' 'Sand-Reckoner' in a similar way. He also worked on Euclid, Book Ten of the 'Elements', and on Apollonius, Pappus, and Diophantus, without producing a result. 
While in Zurich, Pell had privately instructed Johann Heinrich Rahn or Rhonius (1622-1676) in mathematics. Much of this instruction appeared in Rahn's 'Teutsche Algebra, oder, Algebraische Rechenkunst' (1659). For an English translation prepared by Thomas Brancker or Branker (1633-1676), Pell's alterations and additions doubled the number of pages. It appeared as 'An Introduction to Algebra, Translated out of the High-Dutch... much Altered and Augmented by D. P.' (1668); 'D. P.', or 'D. I. P.' in the preface, stood for Doctor (Iohn) Pell, as was generally known at the time of publication, indicating Pell's strong involvement. The book (in both the German and the English versions) contains some innovations in symbolism, and, as a novel feature, the addition of two parallel columns alongside the computations that amount to a programmed instruction for the single steps to be carried out -- a novelty which Rahn expressly attributed to a high and very learned person who did not want his name to be made known. In spite of earlier doubts, this must be a reference to Pell's authorship; hence at least he deserves to be remembered in the history of programming. 
It is often stated that the expression 'Pell's (or Pellian) equation', created by Leonhard Euler for an indeterminate equation of the second degree, is due to a confusion of Pell with Lord Brouncker. A special case of this type of equation appears in the Rahn-Pell 'Algebra' but Pell contributed nothing to the methods of solution. 
For some time Pell had boarded at John Collins's house, but in the summer of 1665 the plague forced him to leave London. For a number of years he lived at Brereton Hall in Cheshire as the guest of William Brereton, third Baron Brereton of Leighlin, who had been his pupil in the Netherlands. In 1671 Pell's children were living in the same neighbourhood. From Aubrey's remark, 'Never was there greater love between master and scholar then between Dr. Pell and this scholar of his, whose death March 17, 1679/80 hath deprived this worthy doctor of an ingeniose companion and a useful friend', it may be inferred that Pell stayed with Brereton until 1680. Shortly afterwards, according to Aubrey, Pell lived 'in an obscure lodging, three stories high, in Jermyn Street, next to the sign of the Ship, wanting not only bookes but his proper MSS' ('Brief Lives', 232). 
After Pell's imprisonment, Dr Daniel Whistler provided the now totally impoverished mathematician an asylum in the College of Physicians in March 1682. Ill health, however, forced him to move to the house of one of his grandchildren in St Margaret's churchyard, Westminster, in June 1683. From there he was transferred to the lodging in Dyot Street, Westminster, of a Mr Cothorne, who was reader in the church of St Giles-in-the-Fields. Pell died in Dyot Street on 12 December 1685 and was buried in the rector's vault under that church. 
Pell's reputation as a mathematician was mostly based on his impressive knowledge of mathematical literature and on his promise and did not outlast his lifetime. In his own peculiar way he was devoted to algebra (the solution of equations, in his days a much discussed subject), and the study of Diophantus, but he did not influence the future development of mathematics. 


@@@@@


doc= 21803


Pell, Sir Watkin Owen (1788-1869), naval officer, was son of Samuel Pell of Sywell Hall, Wellingborough, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Owen Owen of Denbighshire. He entered the navy in April 1799 on board the 'Loire', and on 6 February 1800 lost his left leg in the capture of the French frigate 'Pallas', supported by a gun battery on one of the Seven Islands. He was consequently discharged, and remained on shore for the next two years, at the end of which time he rejoined the 'Loire'. After serving in various ships on the home and West Indian stations, he was promoted, on 11 November 1806, lieutenant of the frigate 'Mercury', then on the Newfoundland station, and afterwards in the Mediterranean. Here, as first lieutenant in command of the 'Mercury''s boats, he repeatedly distinguished himself in capturing gunboats or small armed vessels on the coast of Spain or Italy, and on one occasion, on 1 April 1809, he was severely wounded in the right arm. 
In August 1809 Pell was presented by the Patriotic Society with $80 for the purchase of a sword, and on 29 March 1810 he was promoted commander. In the following October he was appointed to the bomb-vessel 'Thunder', and was, during the next two years, mainly employed in the defence of Cadiz. On 9 October 1813, as he was returning to England to be paid off, he fell in with and, after a sharp engagement, captured the privateer 'Neptune', of much superior force, for which, and other good service, he was advanced to post rank, on 1 November 1813. From 1814 to 1817 he commanded the frigate 'Menai' on the coast of North America. In May 1833 he commissioned the 'Forte', and in her acted as senior officer on the Jamaica station until March 1837. On his return to England he was knighted by the queen, and, in accordance with the intention of William IV, was nominated a KCH by the king of Hanover. In 1839 he was offered a seat at the Board of Admiralty, if he was prepared to stand the cost of an election, $100-$1500, by the political manager of the Admiralty, Admiral Sir J. W. D. Dundas. He declined. In 1840 he was appointed to the 'Howe', and in August 1841 to be superintendent of Deptford victualling yard, from which he was shortly afterwards moved to be superintendent of Sheerness Dockyard, and in December to be superintendent of Pembroke dockyard, where he remained until February 1845. In 1846 he was appointed a commissioner of the Royal Naval Hospital at Greenwich. In 1847 he married Sarah Dorothea, daughter of Edward Owen, of Maesmynan; she survived her husband. 
Pell became a rear-admiral on 5 September 1848, and was offered, but did not accept, an active command in 1849 by Admiral Dundas. He became vice-admiral on 28 December 1855, and admiral on 11 February 1861. He died at his residence, the Queen's House, Greenwich, London, on 29 December 1869. A brave and resourceful junior officer who earned his promotions, and a favourite of William IV, Pell was independently wealthy and was patronized by his Northamptonshire neighbours, the Spencer family, to whom he was devoted. They secured his appointment to Deptford and Greenwich, the latter through Lord John Russell. He proved a competent administrator. 


@@@@@


doc= 21804


Pell, William (bap. 1634, d. 1698), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Sheffield and baptized there on 1 February 1634, the son of William Pell. After attending the grammar school at Rotherham, Yorkshire, Pell was admitted as a sizar on 29 March 1651 at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where his tutor was Joseph Hill. He was elected scholar on 2 June 1654 and fellow 3 November 1656, having graduated BA in 1655. By a patent dated 15 May 1656 he was appointed as a tutor in the new college at Durham founded by Oliver Cromwell, and he was awarded his Cambridge MA in 1658. He was ordained by Ralph Brownrigg, bishop of Exeter, probably at Sonning, Berkshire, and on 13 April 1659 he was admitted to the sequestered rectory of Easington, Durham. At the Restoration the Durham college collapsed and Gabriel Clark, the sequestered rector of Easington, was restored. 
On 11 February 1660 at Bishopwearmouth, Durham, Pell married Elizabeth ('bap'. 1638, died 1707/8), daughter of George Lilburne of Sunderland and first cousin of John Lilburne; their daughter Elizabeth was born at Great Stainton, Durham, on 30 July 1662. Two years earlier, on 20 July 1660, Pell had been presented to the rectory of that parish, but he was ejected within a month of his daughter's birth under the 'Act of Uniformity'. He and his family remained in the county and his friends urged him to use his considerable scholarly talents, particularly as an orientalist, in a new and unofficial attempt to begin again the introduction of university learning in the north-east. But Pell refused, in the belief that he was bound by the terms of his Cambridge graduation oath, and it was Richard Frankland who shouldered the task of founding a northern academy. On 1 May 1672 Pell was granted a licence as a presbyterian teacher at his house in Durham or any other licensed place. Almost immediately Dr Isaac Basire, a prebendary of the cathedral and JP of the county, wrote to London complaining that Pell had preached at a conventicle at the house of a Mr Orton on 12 and 19 May, but had failed either to show his licence or to attend the justices for examination. Pell's continuing activities within sight of the cathedral spire provoked the fury of Archdeacon Denis Granville, who wrote from Durham on 5 July 1674 complaining against 'one Pell, a preacher in the times of rebellion, who hath the confidence to set up a congregation at our gates, and though excommunicated, dares to christen children, and ventures on other sacred offices'. Such practices, being 'extremely unusual in this place, are thereby extremely scandalous'; and Granville asked for official confirmation that he and other justices of the peace could 'proceed against schismatics according the last Act of Parliament' ('Ambrose Barnes', 141). 
It may have been soon after the archdeacon's request that Pell 'was imprisoned at Durham for his nonconformity: and removed himself to London by an Habeas Corpus; and was set at liberty by Judge Hales. He then lived in the northern parts of Yorkshire and practised physic' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.289). Later he was reported to be preaching at Tattershall, Lincolnshire; perhaps this was after he gained employment as a domestic steward to Edward Clinton, fifth earl of Lincoln, which would have afforded some protection against arrest. Under King James's declaration of indulgence in 1687 Pell became minister to the nonconformists at Boston, Lincolnshire, where in 1690 there were reported to have been '2 or 300 auditors in the afternoone; they raise him about $60 per annum, but begin to be weary of soe much, since the death of some of the better sort' (Gordon, 70). In early 1691 Pell was canvassed to be minister of a congregation at Darlington, but did not take it up. In 1694, however, he did return to the north-east, becoming assistant to Richard Gilpin at Newcastle upon Tyne. There he died on 2 December 1698 and was buried on 6 December at St Nicholas's Church. His wife survived him by nearly ten years and was buried on 30 January 1708. 


@@@@@


doc= 21805


Pellatt, Apsley (1791-1863), glass manufacturer, was the eldest son of Apsley Pellatt (died 1826) and Mary, daughter of Stephen Maberly of Reading. He was born on 27 November 1791, probably at 80 High Holborn, London, where his father kept a glass warehouse. Pellatt was educated by Dr Wanostrocht at Camberwell, and joined his father in business. He was twice married: first, in 1814, to Sophronia, daughter of George Kemp of Reading (she died in February 1815); second, in 1816, to Margaret Elizabeth, daughter of George Evans of Balham. 
In 1819 Pellatt took out a patent for a process learned from a foreign source, 'crystallo-ceramie or glass incrustation', which consisted in enclosing medallions or ornaments of pottery ware, metal, or refractory material in glass, by which very beautiful ornamental effects were produced. The new process was described by the inventor with illustrations in his 'Memoir on the Origin, Progress, and Improvement of Glass Manufactures' (1821). He took out a patent in 1831 for improvements in the manufacture of pressed glass articles, and another in 1845, with his brother, Frederick, for improvements in the composition of glass, and in the methods of blowing, pressing, and casting glass articles. In 1851 he discovered the Venetian secret art of making 'crackle-glass'. Under his care the products of the family's Falcon glassworks in Southwark attained a high reputation both for quality and artistic design. He devoted much time to the investigation of the principles of glass making both in ancient and modern times, and he became a high authority upon the subject. His book 'Curiosities of Glass Making' (1849) comprised the text of his earlier memoir, his lectures on the manufacture of flint glass, delivered to the Royal Institution, and the fruits of his various researches. He was a commissioner for the Great Exhibition of 1851 and a juror for the 1862 exhibition, for which he wrote the report on the glass manufactures displayed. He travelled widely on business, visiting glassworks at Venice, Nievelt in Bohemia, Liege, and Baccarat, where he was welcomed by colleagues whom he had previously invited to tour his own factory. His knowledge of chemistry and art led to his serving on the council of the School of Design for seven years and he regularly attended its meetings. 
Pellatt was elected an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1838, and in 1840 he became a member of the council. He contributed in 1838 and 1840 papers on the manufacture of glass, which were printed in volume 1 of the 'Proceedings' (1838, 39; and 1840, 37-41), and he was a frequent speaker at meetings of the institution. 
Besides his work as a glass maker, Pellatt took a great interest in public affairs. He was for several years a member of common council for the City of London, during which time he successfully campaigned for Jews to be admitted freemen of the City, which would entitle them to keep shops and enjoy other privileges from which they alone were excluded. His views were published in 1829 as 'A Brief Memoir of the Jews in Relation to their Civil and Municipal Disabilities'. When he moved to Southwark, he was concerned with the improvement of drains and sewers in that district. He was actively involved in restricting Sunday trading, and gave evidence in favour of this to the House of Commons select committee on Sunday observance in 1832. His concern for social welfare manifested itself in his service and benefactions to the British Orphan School, the London Female Penitentiary, and many other institutions. 
Pellatt represented Southwark in parliament as a Liberal from July 1852 until the general election in March 1857, but was unsuccessful in the elections of 1857 and 1859. He was a frequent speaker in the Commons, and he introduced a bill for facilitating dissenters' marriages in 1854, 1855, and 1856. In 1856 he brought in a bill to define the law as to crossed cheques, which was passed (19 & 20 Vict. 25). He was a prominent member of the Congregational body. 
From 1843 Pellatt lived at Staines, where he established a model farm. He died of paralysis, on 17 April 1863, after little more than a week's illness, at the house of his brother-in-law at Balham. His wife and three daughters survived him, his only son having died about 1839. 


@@@@@


doc= 21806


Pellegrini, Carlo (1839-1889), caricaturist, was born in March 1839 in Capua, Campania, Italy, a scion of the Sedili Capuani, an aristocratic landowning family. His mother was said to be a descendant of the Medici. He was educated at the Collegio Barnibiti, and then at Sant' Antonio in Maddaloni, near Naples. Barely 5 feet 2 inches tall, with an unusually large head and ridiculously tiny feet, his winning personality attracted a variety of friends and patrons. By his twentieth year he was a 'pet' of fashionable Neapolitan society and he developed 'an extravagant taste for the pleasures of the high life' (E. Harris, 53). In return he humorously caricatured his friends, inspired no doubt by reproductions of Melchiorre Delfico's 'portraits charges' of Verdi and other prominent Neapolitan personalities. He apparently had no formal artistic training. 
In the autumn of 1860 he joined Garibaldi's forces and fought in the last battles against the Bourbons at the Volturno and at Capua. He then returned to Neapolitan society. On 9 November 1862 he celebrated the coming-of-age of the visiting prince of Wales -- an encounter which seems crucial to his career (E. Harris, 53-4). Less than two years later he unexpectedly left Italy, propelled, he asserted, by an unrequited love and the death of a sister. After travelling across Europe he arrived in London in November 1864. Poverty, he claimed, forced him to sleep on doorsteps in Piccadilly and Whitehall, and even in a hansom cab (Ward, 97). Nevertheless he swiftly became an ornament in bohemian society, and a court jester in the prince of Wales's set. 
Pellegrini produced amusing caricatures of his royal companions; some are now in the Royal Library, Windsor. These came to the attention of the politician and newspaper proprietor Thomas Gibson Bowles, who commissioned him, as Singe, to produce coloured 'portraits charges' of Disraeli and Gladstone in January and February 1869 for 'Vanity Fair', Bowles's new society magazine. Reproduced as full-page illustrations by Vincent Brooks, then London's premier lithographer, they were an immediate success. Drawings by Ape (the 'nom de crayon' Pellegrini used at 'Vanity Fair') shaped modern English caricature. They were styled after Delfico, Honore Daumier, and the French school, which had itself been influenced in the 1830s by the Georgian caricaturists. 'Thus Pellegrini's coming to England and his subsequent triumphs in London closed the circle of European caricaturing' (Matthews and Mellini, 29). He inspired a raft of caricaturists: Spy (Sir Leslie Ward) was his grudging disciple, and Max Beerbohm idolized him, collected his work, and imitated him. Pellegrini was, Beerbohm wrote, 'by far the best caricaturist who lived within our time' (Beerbohm, 261). David Low called him: 'a genius in his specialty.... Ape's caricatures were maximum likenesses, that is to say they represented not only what he saw but also what he knew. Most of them today look as though they were probably more like the persons they depict than were these persons themselves. (Low, 33)' Pelican, as Pellegrini was known to his bohemian friends, fell under Whistler's spell in the 1870s, with farcical results. He left 'Vanity Fair' in 1871-2 and again in 1876 to caricature his society friends and to try to be a portraitist. His lithographs of twenty members of the Marlborough Club are now in the entrance hall to the royal enclosure at Ascot. His talent for portraiture did not equal his genius for caricature. His contemporaries agreed, as have more recent critics, that 'Being a good portrait painter is more than catching a likeness; and everyone would agree with Mrs. Jopling, 'this essential 'more' Pellegrini did not possess'' (E. Harris, 57). Ape returned to 'Vanity Fair' in early 1877. Until his death he shared the caricaturing with Spy and several other artists. Between 1869 and his death he caricatured 332 prominent Victorians for 'Vanity Fair'; a number of his original drawings, most in gouache, are in the National Portrait Gallery, London; and the Royal Library, Windsor, also has a collection of his working drawings. His original drawings are highly prized by collectors because they reveal his incisive, affectionately witty eye. 
Short and stout, Pellegrini was extremely fastidious, wore immaculate white spats and highly polished boots, and cultivated long Mandarin-like fingernails. He never walked when he could ride. He was kind, generous, and had a seemingly unending fund of charming tales and eccentricities. His fractured English, his flaunted homosexuality, his various whims which included bringing macaroni dishes to elegant dinner parties, his refusal of invitations to country houses for fear of strange beds, his habit of keeping a cigar in his mouth as he slept, his improvidence -- all were tolerated (and sometimes relished) because he was such entertaining company. 'Whatever he did and wherever he went, he was the life and soul of the party' (E. Harris, 57). His dinners with the composer Paolo Tosti in the back parlour of Pagani's in Great Portland Street became a celebrated bohemian rendezvous in Victorian London. His caricatures, sketches, and the bars of music and other graffiti on the walls of Pagani's 'artist's room' survived the blitz and are now preserved by the BBC. 
Generous to a fault, Pellegrini never lacked for friends. When debilitated by tuberculosis his fashionable friends raised the money for his care in a private hospital, settled all his debts, and provided the luxuries to which he was accustomed until he died at his home, 53 Mortimer Street, Cavendish Square, London, on 22 January 1889. The Fine Arts Society sold a proof from a destroyed plate of his much admired caricature of Whistler, with Whistler's signature, to pay for his gravestone in Kensal Green Roman Catholic cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 21807


Pellett, Thomas (c.1671-1744), physician, was born at Lewes, Sussex. He was a colleger at Eton College from 1687 to 1688, and was admitted at Queens' College, Cambridge, on 8 June 1689. He graduated MB in 1694, and in 1695 went to Italy with Richard Mead and studied at the University of Padua. In 1705 Pellett was created MD at Cambridge, and on 22 December 1707 was admitted a candidate at the Royal College of Physicians, London, where he began practice, and resided in Henrietta Street, Covent Garden. In 1712 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. On 9 April 1716 he became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, was censor in 1717, 1720, and 1727, and president in 1735-9. Pellett's only publication was the Harveian oration which he delivered on 19 October 1719. It is the only published Harveian oration which is partly in verse, and the only one in which a knight of the Garter (John, second duke of Montagu, a doctor of medicine of Cambridge) is congratulated on having become a fellow. The works of Thomas Linacre, Francis Glisson, Thomas Wharton, and William Harvey are described. Pellett edited Isaac Newton's 'Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms' with Martin Folkes in 1728. 
Pellett found it difficult to cope with private practice, and was inclined to give his time mainly to medical study and to general learning. He is listed as a subscriber to a number of books. He died in London on 4 July 1744, and was buried on 11 July at St Paul's, Covent Garden. A memorial inscription on a brass plate was erected in St Bride's Church, Fleet Street. He left at his death a widow, Ann, and a daughter, Jane. His will was proved on 17 August 1744, and his widow and daughter were the main beneficiaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 21808


Pellew, Edward, first Viscount Exmouth (1757-1833), naval officer, was born on 19 April 1757 at Dover, the second of the six children of Samuel Pellew (1713-1765), commander of a Dover Post Office packet, and his wife, Constance (died 1812), daughter of Edward Langford of Penzance and his wife, Catherine. His younger brother Israel Pellew ['see 'Pellew, Sir Isaac Israel] also achieved prominence in the navy. 
Following her husband's death Constance moved her family to Penzance, where Edward received an early education at the Revd James Parkins's school before attending Truro grammar school. In 1770 he ran away to sea to escape a flogging, securing a position aboard the 'Juno' (Captain John Stott). Although the Pellew family had no great wealth they did have a distinguished Cornish pedigree and enjoyed the patronage and support of Lord Falmouth and the Boscawen family, the most powerful aristocrats in the area. Thanks to this influence Stott, Admiral Edward Boscawen's former boatswain, accepted the young Pellew as a captain's servant, a status frequently given to youngsters embarking on a career as a naval officer. Pellew joined the 'Juno' in December 1770, sailing to the Falkland Islands and remaining aboard until she was paid off in January 1772. In the following August he rejoined Stott, now commanding the 'Alarm', and served in her in the Mediterranean until 1775. In that year, however, a disagreement with Stott resulted in Pellew and another midshipman being put ashore at Marseilles, whence the pair got a passage home in a merchant ship. 
Pellew was fortunate that this escapade did no harm to his career, Boscawen influence not only securing him an immediate new position aboard the 'Blonde', but also the leadership and example of her captain, Philemon Pownoll, one of the most outstanding officers of the day. Pellew joined the 'Blonde' in January 1776, she escorting a troop convoy to North America in the spring. After her arrival in the St Lawrence, Pellew joined a party of seamen sent to build and man a flotilla intended to wrest control of Lake Champlain from the American rebels. His boundless energy made Pellew a valued subordinate in the construction process, which was completed by October. In an action on the 11th he ended up commanding the schooner 'Carleton' when both his senior officers were wounded, his gallantry helping to ensure that she was not captured at a moment of danger. Two days later the Americans were engaged again and their flotilla was destroyed. For his courage under fire Pellew was promised promotion to lieutenant, but this was to be delayed as he remained on Lake Champlain during the winter and was thereafter the commander of a group of sailors attached to General John Burgoyne's army. As such he endured the hardships of a campaign that ended with the surrender at Saratoga in October 1777, though not before he had again displayed his courage when recapturing a barge loaded with vital provisions on the Hudson River. After the capitulation Burgoyne sent him home with his dispatches, Pellew finally receiving the promised promotion in January 1778. 
As part of the Saratoga surrender Pellew was unable to serve in any active capacity until exchanged, this causing him much frustration as he had to spend much of 1778 serving on the 'Princess Amelia', a Spithead guardship. Not until October did he escape to become second lieutenant aboard the frigate 'Licorne', cruising first in the channel and then taking a convoy to Newfoundland in May 1779. She returned home with another convoy in November and in the following April his career took an important step forward when Captain Pownoll invited him to join his frigate, the 'Apollo', as first lieutenant. Pellew jumped at the chance and was aboard her on 15 June 1780 when she engaged a French frigate off Ostend. Pownoll was killed in the action and the command fell to Pellew, the enemy vessel suffering much the worse and fleeing into Ostend, then a neutral port. Although the engagement cost him an important service patron Pellew had the compensation of being promoted commander into the sloop 'Hazard' for his endeavours. He served in the 'Hazard' off the north-east coast until her paying off in January 1781, not receiving another vessel until March 1782, when he commissioned the sloop 'Pelican' at Plymouth. In May 1782, having enjoyed some successes against French privateers, Pellew received the most important advance in a naval officer's career when he was promoted to post captain. With the whigs in power, though, his tory patron, Lord Falmouth, could not secure him a permanent command. Consequently he enjoyed only the temporary captaincy of the frigate 'Artois' before the war came to an end. 
Soon after this, on 28 May 1783, Pellew married Susan (1756-1837), daughter of James Frowde of Knowle, Wiltshire; the couple had two daughters and four sons including Fleetwood Broughton Reynolds Pellew, naval officer, and George Pellew, later dean of Norwich. Initially, with Pellew unemployed, the family lived in Truro, where he was a burgess supporting the interests of Lord Falmouth, moving shortly afterwards to Flushing, near Falmouth, when Pellew's elder brother Samuel became collector of the customs. He next went to sea in April 1786 when appointed to the frigate 'Winchelsea' destined for the Newfoundland station, remaining in her until she was paid off in January 1789. He then moved to the 'Salisbury', continuing to serve off Newfoundland as she was the flagship of the station's commander, Vice-Admiral Milbank. After the 'Salisbury' was paid off in December 1791 Pellew was again unemployed, trying his hand at agriculture by running a small family farm at Treverry, near Falmouth. In this venture he was singularly unsuccessful. 
In early 1793 Pellew was rescued from the toils of agriculture by the coming war with revolutionary France. Indeed, Lord Falmouth's influence was such as to secure him command of the frigate 'Nymphe' in mid-January before war had even been declared. For the next few months the 'Nymphe' cruised the channel as well as taking a convoy to Cuxhaven, during which time Pellew was able to complete and train his crew, some of whom were former Cornish tin miners. This preparation was just as well, for on 18 June off Start Point the 'Nymphe' fell in with the French frigate 'Cleopatre', capturing her after a brief but bloody action that cost fifty British casualties out of 240 men present, the French losing sixty-three out of 320. This made Pellew's name, he not only having gallantly taken an enemy warship of equal force, but also having had the good fortune to score the first such success of the war. In the celebrations that followed he was knighted on 29 June. 
Thereafter Pellew remained in the 'Nymphe' before being transferred to the more powerful 'Arethusa' in December 1793. The following year this vessel was part of the western squadron of frigates based at Falmouth under Sir John Borlase Warren, a force newly formed to counter the activities of several such enemy squadrons. On 23 April they engaged one of these to the south-west of Guernsey, the stronger British force quickly overpowering their opponents in an action where Pellew's 'Arethusa' played the primary role in fighting the 'Pomone', at the time the largest frigate in service. After an engagement lasting under half an hour, during which she suffered between eighty and a hundred casualties, the 'Pomone' surrendered, the 'Arethusa' suffering only three dead and five wounded. Successful cruises continued for Pellew during the remainder of 1794 and in 1795, squadrons in which he either served or led destroying one frigate, capturing another, driving two corvettes ashore (at least one of which was later refloated after Pellew refused to burn them as they contained wounded men), and making many captures from French coastal convoys. 
One event, however, underlined Pellew's reputation for heroism. On 26 January 1796 the 'Dutton', an East Indiaman hired by the government to transport troops to the West Indies, was driven into Plymouth by a gale. Losing her rudder on a shoal, the ship became unmanageable, went aground on some rocks under the citadel and lay broadside on to the waves, her rolling throwing all the masts overboard. She was, however, linked to the shore by a rope by which means all of her officers and some of her crew escaped, leaving about 500 men, women, and children still aboard to their fate. While a crowd milled around aimlessly on shore Pellew suddenly appeared. Having vainly offered financial inducements to get someone to go to their aid, he opted to do it himself, getting dragged aboard by a rope and receiving an injury to his back from one of the floating masts in the process. Once on the 'Dutton', sword in hand, he restored order amid the panic and oversaw the running of additional hawsers to the shore from which cradles were hung and some people pulled to safety. Others were placed in boats that had, with equal bravery, been brought alongside. By such means everyone was saved, Pellew being the last to leave. For his actions he was raised to the rank of baronet, also being given the freedom of the city of Plymouth and a service of plate from the Liverpool merchant community. 
Service successes continued as well. Now in the powerful frigate 'Indefatigable', a 64-gun ship that had been cut down, Pellew commanded a squadron that in April 1796 captured the French frigates 'Unite' and 'Virginie', the latter after a fifteen-hour chase extending over 168 miles. 'Indefatigable' then became part of the force blockading Brest, Pellew spending freezing hours at the masthead observing the enemy's preparations for what turned out to be an abortive invasion of Ireland. When the French expedition finally sailed, on 16 November 1796, it was at nightfall in the hope of avoiding the British blockaders. The attempt, though, caused confusion among the poorly trained crews and Pellew gleefully added to the mayhem by closing with the 'Indefatigable' and making a series of false signals by means of gunshots, rockets, and lights. After this the luckless French were buffeted by severe winter gales that scattered their vessels and ultimately wrecked the whole project. The British naval response, however, was slow and badly managed, being largely unable to take any advantage from the enemy's misfortune: Pellew was to provide the one exception. 
On 13 January 1797 'Indefatigable', with the frigate 'Amazon' in company, spotted a sail some 150 miles south-west of Ushant. This proved to be the French 74-gun ship of the line 'Droits de l'homme', a class of vessel whose heavier armament normally made it impossible for a frigate to engage safely. However, in the rough seas pertaining at the time the larger warship could not open her lower gunports for fear of flooding, a weakness Pellew perceived and set about exploiting. The action began at 5.45 p.m. and continued, with brief pauses while the British repaired their rigging, for about eleven hours. The frigates hung on to the quarters of their larger opponent, constantly pouring fire into her and causing damage that made her more difficult to control. In the dark and stormy night all three vessels ended up in Audierne Bay on the coast of Brittany, the sudden sight of distant breakers just giving 'Indefatigable', with her masts damaged and 4 feet of water in her hold, time to alter course and escape -- a difficult manoeuvre under the circumstances and one which was a great testimony to the crew Pellew had trained. The other ships were less fortunate. 'Amazon' ran ashore, though the discipline of her crew meant that most were saved. The fate of the 'Droits de l'homme' was infinitely worse. Grounding on a sandbank, dismasted, and lashed for days by a gale which prevented aid from reaching her, perhaps a thousand men from the soldiers and sailors packed aboard lost their lives. For Pellew the action was a triumph, Lord Spencer at the Admiralty acknowledging that for two frigates to destroy a ship of the line was 'an exploit which has not I believe ever before graced our naval Annals' (Parkinson, 181). 
During the remainder of 1797 and through 1798 Pellew continued in command of a squadron watching Brest and operating against enemy cruisers, some fifteen of them being captured during the latter year. 
A more difficult period in Pellew's career opened in March 1799 when he was transferred to the 'Impetueux', a 74-gun ship of the line. Although in theory a promotion it was a step he vigorously resisted: commanding such a vessel virtually precluded the chances of large-scale captures (that is, of prize money), and also meant serving directly under the command of Lord Bridport, the commander of the Channel Fleet and a man for whom Pellew felt complete contempt. Worst of all it meant moving into a vessel whose crew was known to be mutinous. This discontent finally broke out at the end of May when the fleet put in to Bantry Bay after a cruise. Once again he proved equal to the occasion. When a large group of the crew surged on to the quarter-deck Pellew, who was a tall, athletic, and probably quite intimidating man, faced them down and, supported by his officers, brusquely seized the ringleaders. At that point the rebellion collapsed, three of the mutineers eventually being court martialled and hanged. Although the 'Impetueux' would never be a happy ship, her crew had at least been brought to a state of obedience. 
After a brief period in the Mediterranean in the summer of 1799 'Impetueux' served in the channel, and in May 1800 Pellew was made the commander of a squadron convoying troops and arms to support a French royalist revolt in the region around Quiberon Bay. However, the proposed uprising fizzled out and little was achieved. Similarly fruitless was a strike at Ferrol in August, 'Impetueux' being one of the warships assigned to provide naval support for a venture that turned into a fiasco. Thereafter Pellew returned to the channel, being regarded by Lord St Vincent as one of the few officers he could rely on to perform the exhausting duty of blockading the French naval bases efficiently. 

'Impetueux' was finally paid off in April 1802, the brief period of peace that followed seeing Pellew reinforce his political influence by becoming MP for Barnstaple in July. With the probability of hostilities resuming he was appointed to the 80-gun 'Tonnant' in March 1803, and was sent in June with two other ships of the line to pursue a Dutch squadron said to be at Ferrol. In the event the Dutch evaded him, but Pellew ended up blockading the port as a French squadron returning from the Caribbean had sought shelter there. In the tedious months that followed Pellew's squadron was reinforced to six and then eight ships of the line. 
On 15 March 1804 Pellew made his only significant foray into politics when he returned home to speak in support of Addington's ministry, then under severe pressure from Pitt and the opposition via attacks on St Vincent's efforts at naval reform. Pellew's speech made a considerable impact and certainly helped prop up the failing government. Pitt, it was said, never forgave him. The following month Pellew received his reward, being promoted to rear-admiral of the white and given the East Indies command, though his future prospects remained uncertain as Addington's administration finally collapsed in May, allowing Pitt back into office. Pellew was able initially to resist any urge the new ministers may have had to remove him from his new command by agreeing to resign his parliamentary seat in favour of a Pittite candidate, a step he took when, and not before, he boarded his flagship for the voyage to India in July 1804. 
Such a bargain did not prevent the new first lord of the Admiralty, Lord Melville, from taking a more subtle revenge by dividing the East India station. Early in 1805 Rear-Admiral Thomas Troubridge was appointed to take command of the eastern, and more lucrative, half, while Pellew was left with the western section. Politically this was very clever, punishing one admiral who had opposed Pitt by appointing another, who was also a supporter of St Vincent, to a situation where conflict between the two was inevitable. Militarily, though, it was crass stupidity, not merely because a divided station denied the western commander access to the east Indian ports when the south-west monsoon made the western coast unsafe during the summer, but also because a divided command could easily lead to paralysis in the face of any enemy assault on British interests. 
The two admirals finally met in August 1805 and, given that each was renowned for a fiery temper, the furious outcome was predictable, particularly when, on a technicality, Pellew refused to accept Troubridge's instructions. Pellew offered a compromise whereby Troubridge, as the junior admiral, would command the eastern region under Pellew's orders, but this was flatly refused. Within a week of the encounter the pair were not on speaking terms and were writing letters of protest to London. The whole mess was not resolved until January 1807 when news arrived that a new government in London had ruled in Pellew's favour, transferring Troubridge to the Cape. 
Pellew retained the Indian command until February 1809, little of strategic significance occurring during the period. Pellew's naval attacks directed on Batavia Roads (November 1806) and Griessie (December 1807) destroyed the moribund remains of Dutch naval power in the region, but financial stringency in India effectively prevented any occupation of those colonies or, more importantly, of the French islands of Mauritius and Bourbon. These remained the sources of constant attacks on British trade, a persistent worry for Pellew which embroiled him in a protracted feud with the merchant community of Calcutta. Their complaints respecting losses prompted an icy Admiralty demand for him to explain his seeming failure, though Pellew was able to counter that much of the trouble came not from any faulty employment of his warships, but from merchants who ignored convoys and rushed their vessels for markets. Certainly he enjoyed better relations with the Bombay business community who passed a vote of thanks for his efforts and pointed out that shipping insurance rates were lower in 1805-8 than they had been in 1798-1805. 
In personal terms Pellew's time in India was more satisfactory. Two of his sons, Pownoll and Fleetwood, were naval officers and Pellew shamelessly took the opportunity to forward their careers, making both of them post captains and providing them with potentially lucrative cruising grounds. Pellew himself certainly increased his fortune: the capture of a Spanish treasure ship by one of his captains alone netted him $26,000 and doubled his personal wealth. Such riches enabled him, after he returned to Britain in July 1809, to purchase the estate of Canonteign near Teignmouth in Devon, as well as a large house, West Cliff, in Teignmouth itself. 
Pellew, who had become a vice-admiral on 28 April 1808, was not re-employed until July 1810, when he became commander in the North Sea, his chief duty being to blockade the Scheldt. In April 1811 he was transferred to take command of the Mediterranean Fleet, a great compliment as, comprising some seventy to eighty warships, it was the largest naval force outside home waters and involved considerable responsibilities. These included the blockade of Toulon, by then the most important French naval arsenal; close co-operation with the various forces resisting Napoleon in eastern Spain; guarding the extensive British commerce in the region; patrolling the coasts of Napoleon's southern empire in Italy and the Adriatic; ensuring no further French adventures in Egypt; and maintaining the delicate diplomatic relations with the Ottoman empire and the Barbary powers. Pellew retained the command until Napoleon's abdication in 1814, being made Baron Exmouth on 14 May and promoted to admiral on 4 June. He returned the following year during the 'hundred days' when he provided naval support to forces assisting the royalists in southern France. On 2 January 1815 he had been made a KCB and shortly afterwards a GCB. 
After Napoleon's second abdication Exmouth was directed to conclude treaties with the Barbary states for the abolition of Christian slavery, negotiations that took up the spring of 1816 and seemed to have been concluded successfully. On his return home, however, he discovered that troops of the dey of Algiers had massacred some 200 Christian fishermen, an act prompting fury in Britain and the desire for swift retribution. Exmouth was to be the instrument for this, for which purpose he immediately set about organizing and manning a squadron. This finally sailed in July 1816, reaching Gibraltar early in August, where it was joined by a squadron of Dutch frigates, the united force consisting of five ships of the line, one vessel of 50 guns, nine frigates, and various smaller warships, including four bomb ketches. Algiers was a formidable stronghold defended by approximately 450 cannon in well-protected batteries, but the attack which followed illustrated Exmouth's attention to detail. On the voyage out the British crews were subject to rigorous gunnery drills and had taken in massive stocks of ammunition. He had also ordered a reconnaissance of Algiers prior to the operation and when the ships finally reached the city on 27 August all the captains had been told what to do. At a little before 3 p.m. the action commenced and an intense bombardment was then sustained for over seven hours until the allies withdrew. By that time enormous damage had been inflicted on the defending batteries and most of their guns had been silenced. Furthermore the Algerine fleet of frigates and smaller warships in the harbour had been completely destroyed. On the next day the Algerines surrendered, agreeing to Exmouth's terms respecting their future behaviour and releasing more than 1200 Christian slaves. The battle had cost the allies 141 dead and 742 wounded, a higher proportion of those engaged than in any of Nelson's victories and indicative of its severity. 
In the wake of the victory Exmouth was feted as a hero: at home, in 1816, he was created Viscount Exmouth of Canonteign and received the thanks of parliament; decorations were also forthcoming from Spain, Naples, Sardinia, and the Netherlands. In 1817 he was given the position of port admiral at Plymouth and retained it until February 1821, then finally retiring from active service. He was made vice-admiral of the United Kingdom on 15 February 1832, but died at West Cliff House, Teignmouth, on 23 January 1833 and was buried on 6 February at Christow church. He was survived by his wife, who died on 29 October 1837. 
In summing up Edward Pellew's career he may certainly be considered one of the foremost frigate captains of the age, combining qualities of seamanship, determination, and imagination that made him ideal for the sorts of responsibility that came with such a command. In action he was a fearless inspiration and was an officer who, even as an admiral, led by example. His real-life exploits were sufficiently dramatic for him to feature as Midshipman Hornblower's captain in C. S. Forester's famous novel. Yet Pellew was a short-tempered martinet who demanded the highest standards from both officers and men -- in short, the type of leader who was respected rather than loved. Equally, his insistence after taking up the Indian command that all his captains submit regular monthly punishment reports to curb excesses indicate that he was no savage. His popular reputation lacks only the winning of a major naval engagement, but his leadership of the Mediterranean Fleet showed someone more than capable of shouldering the arduous burdens of an extremely important station, and was concluded by the reduction of a powerful fortress in an operation where the planning and execution were very much his own. In a time that produced a plethora of highly talented naval officers Pellew was one of the most outstanding. 


@@@@@


doc= 21809


Pellew, Sir Fleetwood Broughton Reynolds (1789-1861), naval officer, second son of Edward Pellew, first Viscount Exmouth (1757-1833), and his wife, Susan, 'nee' Frowde (1756-1837), was born on 13 December 1789. George Pellew, Church of England priest, was his brother. In March 1799 he was entered on board the 'Impetueux', then commanded by his father, with whom he was afterwards in the 'Tonnant', and in 1805 in the 'Culloden' on the East India station. On 8 September 1805 he was promoted lieutenant of the 'Sceptre', but, returning shortly afterwards to the 'Culloden', was successively appointed by his father to the command of the sloop 'Rattlesnake', and the frigates 'Terpsichore' and 'Psyche', in which he was repeatedly engaged with Dutch vessels and Malay pirates. On 12 October 1807 he was confirmed in the rank of commander, but was meanwhile appointed by his father acting captain of the 'Powerful' (74 guns) and, in the following year, of the 'Cornwallis' (50 guns), and then of the 'Phaeton' (38 guns). His commission as captain was confirmed on 14 October 1808, and, continuing in the 'Phaeton', he took part in the capture of Mauritius in 1810 and of Java in 1811. In August 1812 the 'Phaeton' returned to England with a large convoy of Indiamen. Pellew received the thanks of the East India Company and a present of five hundred guineas. 
Pellew then went out to the Mediterranean in the 'Iphigenia' (36 guns), and from her was moved, in January 1813, to the 'Resistance' (46 guns). In October she was part of a strong squadron which silenced the batteries at Port d'Anzo and captured a convoy of twenty-nine vessels that had taken refuge there. In February 1814 the 'Resistance' was ordered home and paid off, apparently because of a mutiny, for which several men were condemned to death, and several to be flogged. The sentence was, however, quashed, on account of a technical error in the proceedings; and, though it did not appear officially, it was said that the men had been goaded to mutiny by Pellew's harshness. In June 1814 he was nominated a CB. In 1816 he married Harriet (died 1849), only daughter of Sir Godfrey Webster, bt, and they had one daughter. From August 1818 to June 1822 he had command of the 'Revolutionnaire' (46 guns), after which he was on half pay for thirty years. 
In January 1836 the king made Pellew a KCH, and knighted him. On 9 November 1846 he was promoted rear-admiral. In 1851 he married Cecile (died 1914), daughter of Edward Drummond, count of Melfort, but was divorced from her in 1859. In December 1852 he was appointed commander-in-chief on the East Indies and China station, not without a strong expression of public opinion on the misguidedness of sending out a man of his age to conduct what might be a troublesome war in the pestilent climate of Burma. In April 1853 he hoisted his flag on board the 'Winchester', which returned to Hong Kong in the following September, when the men applied for leave. The question of leave there was then difficult, because of the heat, the poisonous spirits sold, and the filthy condition of the town. Pellew decided that the men should not have leave, at least until the weather was cooler; but he did not inform them of the reason. There was a mutinous expression of feeling; Pellew ordered the drum to beat to quarters, and as the men did not obey, the officers, with drawn swords, were sent to force them up. Some three or four were wounded, and the mutiny was quelled. On the news reaching England, 'The Times', in strong leading articles, pointed out the coincidence of mutinies on the 'Winchester' and the 'Resistance' within a short time of Pellew's assuming the command, and demanded his immediate recall. Even without this pressure, the Admiralty had decided that he had shown a lamentable want of judgement, and summarily recalled him. He had attained the rank of vice-admiral on 22 April 1853, and became admiral on 13 February 1858, but had no further service, and died at Marseilles on 28 July 1861. He was buried in the protestant cemetery, Florence which was also the burial place of his first wife. 
Pellew's career was made by his father, who exploited death vacancies and the impracticability of communicating with the Admiralty to promote him captain when he was only nineteen. This seems to have warped his character. Pellew was, like his father, a brave and resourceful seaman, but a harsh, overbearing, and insensitive disciplinarian. The two mutinies that defined his career were the result of his zeal, and his failure to take the men into his confidence. His selection for a command in 1852 reflected the scarcity of senior officers of suitable political persuasion, and was always regarded as doubtful, even by those who made it. A favourite of William IV, who shared many of his values, Pellew married for money, and possessed the independent means to survive his long years ashore in some style. 


@@@@@


doc= 21810


Pellew, George (1793-1866), dean of Norwich, third son of Edward Pellew, first Viscount Exmouth (1757-1833), and his wife, Susan, 'nee' Frowde (1756-1837), was born at Flushing, Cornwall, on 3 April 1793. Sir Fleetwood Broughton Reynolds Pellew was his brother. He was educated at Eton College from 1808 to 1811, and admitted as gentleman commoner at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, on 20 March 1812, graduating BA in 1815, MA in 1818, and BD and DD in November 1828. In 1817 he was ordained in the Church of England, in which his family's connections made his preferment straightforward. In February 1819 he became, by the gift of the lord chancellor, vicar of Nazeing, Essex. In November 1820 he was advanced by the same patron to the vicarage of Sutton on the Forest, Yorkshire. He subsequently was appointed seventh canon in Canterbury Cathedral (14 November 1822 to 1828), rector of St George the Martyr, Canterbury (1827-8), prebendary of Osbaldwick at York (15 February 1824 to September 1828), prebendary of Wistow in the same cathedral (18 September 1828 to 1852), rector of St Dionis Backchurch, London (October 1828 to 1852), dean of Norwich 1828, and rector of Great Chart, Kent, 1852; he held the last two preferments until his death. Pellew was one of the last in the Church of England to accumulate pluralities on such a scale. As dean of Norwich he had a seat in convocation, where he took a very active part in the debates, which show him to have been a moderate churchman. He married, on 20 June 1820, Frances, second daughter of Henry Addington, prime minister and first Viscount Sidmouth, and his first wife, Ursula Mary, 'nee' Hammond; they had one son and five daughters. 
Pellew published many sermons and tracts, the most important of which was a 'Letter to Sir Robert Peel on the Means of Rendering Cathedral Churches Most Conducive to the Efficiency of the Established Church' (1837). Many of his sermons were included in 'Sermons on many of the Leading Doctrines and Duties Taught by the Church of England' (2 vols., 1848); they show him a strong defender of the Reformation. In 1847 he published 'The Life and Correspondence of Addington, First Viscount Sidmouth'; this biography of his father-in-law is still of use as a documentary source. 
Pellew died at the rectory, Great Chart, on 13 October 1866, and the east window of the church was filled with stained glass in his memory. His widow died at Speen Hill House, Newbury, Berkshire, on 27 February 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 21811


Pellew, Sir Isaac Israel (1758-1832), naval officer, was born on 25 August 1758 either at Flushing, near Falmouth, or at Dover, the third of the six children of Samuel Pellew (1713-1765), commander of a Dover Post Office packet, and his wife, Constance (died 1812), daughter of Edward Langford of Penzance and his wife, Catherine. His elder brother was Edward Pellew (later Viscount Exmouth). First going to sea in the sloop 'Falcon' in 1771, he served for three years in the West Indies. After a short time on the 'Albion' in 1775 he went to the North American station on the frigate 'Flora' a year later. When she was scuttled to prevent her capture in 1778 he briefly served ashore and was commended for his conduct. On his return home Pellew was made lieutenant into the 'Royal George' in April 1779 and then served on the frigates 'Danae' and 'Apollo'. He was placed in command of the armed cutter 'Resolution' in the North Sea in 1782, distinguishing himself on 20 January 1783 when she captured a Dutch privateer, and he retained command of her on the Irish station until 1787. In March 1789 he joined the 'Salisbury', and he was promoted commander on 22 November 1790, not being employed again during the peace. 
In 1792 Pellew married Mary Helen Gilmore (1758-1844), and for a while they lived in Larne, co. Antrim, near her family: they had one son, Edward, an officer in the Life Guards who was killed in a duel in 1819. On the outbreak of war in 1793 Pellew served as a volunteer in his brother's frigate the 'Nymphe', being in charge of her aft guns when she captured the 'Cleopatre' on 18 June. For this he was presented to George III and made post captain into the 'Squirrel', being praised for his command of her off the Dutch coast. In April 1795 he was made captain of a larger frigate, the 'Amphion', commanding her off Newfoundland and in the North Sea. In September 1796, sailing to join his brother's squadron in the channel, Pellew took 'Amphion' into Plymouth for repairs. At 4.30 p.m. on 22 September she suddenly exploded. The ship was packed with people, about 300 of whom were killed. Pellew, stunned and badly cut about the face -- lacerations that scarred him for life -- survived by throwing himself through an open stern gallery window on to the deck of an adjacent sheer hulk. An inquiry blamed the disaster on the 'Amphion''s gunner, who was suspected of stealing gunpowder and carelessly leaving a trail that caught fire and led back to the fore magazine. However, it may also be significant that Pellew had already complained that the magazine was poorly constructed and unsafe. 
In February 1797 Pellew was appointed to the 'Greyhound' but, having been put ashore when her crew mutinied, and under pressure from his commander-in-chief, he resigned the command, being moved in July to the 'Cleopatra'. He commanded her first in the channel, until November 1798, and then on the Halifax and Jamaica stations. He suffered a defeat in 1800 when sending boats from the 'Cleopatra' and the 'Andromache' to seize some Spanish vessels in Levita Bay, Cuba. The assault was anticipated and, though they captured a small galley, the attackers were driven off, suffering twelve dead and seventeen wounded. Later on Pellew also had the embarrassment of the 'Cleopatra''s running aground on Abaco, one of the Bahamas. She was stuck for three days and only escaped when her guns and part of her ballast had been thrown overboard. The 'Cleopatra' returned to Britain in December 1801 and was paid off. 
Pellew next went to sea in April 1804, commanding the ship of the line 'Conqueror' in the channel before going to the Mediterranean in September. She fought at Trafalgar, being fourth ship in the van or weather column, and it was to her that the 'Bucentaure', Villeneuve's flagship, surrendered. She also engaged the 'Santisima Trinidad' and attempted to block the escape of Dumanoir's squadron. Although 'Conqueror''s sails and rigging suffered considerable damage, she lost only three dead and nine wounded. One prize, however, was denied Pellew. He sent a marine captain and five men to secure the 'Bucentaure', that officer refusing to accept Villeneuve's sword and that of the commandant of her soldiers with the remark that the swords should go to Captain Pellew. In the heat of the action, though, they never reached him, ending up with Vice-Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood who, much to Pellew's disgust, kept them. 
After Trafalgar the 'Conqueror' helped blockade Cadiz and then, in 1807, was in the squadron sent to secure the Portuguese fleet and royal family. She remained off the Portuguese coast during much of 1808, eventually returning home after the surrender of Siniavin's Russian squadron in the Tagus. Pellew then left her and was appointed to superintend the payment of ships in the Medway. 
On 31 July 1810 Pellew was promoted to the rank of rear-admiral and in the following year his brother, on receiving the command in the Mediterranean, made him captain of the fleet, a sort of naval chief of staff. He retained this position until 1816, taking a prominent part in the negotiations with the Barbary powers that year. This marked the end of his active service. Pellew, who had been made a KCB on 2 January 1815, advanced to the rank of vice-admiral on 12 August 1819 and admiral on 22 July 1830. He had moved to Plymouth and died there, after a long and painful illness, on 19 July 1832; he is buried at the town's Charles Church. He was survived by his wife, who died on 2 November 1844. 


@@@@@


doc= 21812


Pellow, Thomas (b. 1703/4), writer of an account of Morocco, was born to parents of modest means but who were related to a family with numerous branches in Devon and Cornwall and which included Edward Pellew, first Viscount Exmouth of Canonteign. Pellow attended Penryn School for some years and, though still only eleven years old, on the death of his father in 1715 he went to sea with his uncle John Pellew. He embarked at Falmouth in the spring of 1715 in the merchant ship 'Francis', but before the ship reached Genoa he had come to regret his decision to go to sea. Unfortunately on its return journey the 'Francis' was captured off Cape Finisterre by a couple of Sale rovers, pirates operating from Sale on the Moroccan coast. The rovers were in turn surprised off the bar of Sale by an English cruiser commanded by Captain Delgarnoe, but the Moroccans saved themselves by running ashore. After getting to land as best they could the prisoners, consisting of twenty-five Englishmen and seventeen Frenchmen, were taken to a prison, and thence, after a brief delay, to Mesquinez or Meknes where the palace of the sultan, Mawlay Isma'il (1646-1727) ('r'. 1672-1727), was situated. 
Being only a boy at the time Pellow was at first sent to clean arms in the armoury and was then given as a slave to the emperor's son, Mawlay Spha. His influence -- reinforced by torture, according to Pellow's own account -- caused Pellow to become a Muslim. Again according to Pellow's own testimony, however, he remained in his heart a Christian. Torture was commonly applied to Christian captives to induce them to renounce their faith, but it seems to have been especially severe in Pellow's case and he recounts how he was starved, beaten, and tortured by fire before he agreed to become a Muslim. Though the story rings true it would have been impossible for Pellow to say anything else in an account written for a British audience. As a Muslim, Pellow was excluded from the treaty negotiated by Commodore Charles Stewart in 1720, under which 296 Britons, mostly sailors, were released from slavery and allowed home. Pellow was thus left in Morocco a renegade, an object of suspicion to Muslim and Christian alike. 
When he reached adulthood Pellow was given military training and about 1725 was put in command of a Moorish castle at Tannorah; he was subsequently employed by the sultan to put down an insurrection at Guzlan. Mawlay Isma'il died in 1727 and was succeeded by Mawlay Ahmad IV, during whose brief reign Pellow made an unsuccessful attempt to escape to Gibraltar, but was recaptured and narrowly escaped execution. He subsequently took part in the siege of Fez. In 1728 his wife, whom he had married under Mawlay Isma'il's order, and their daughter died. In his account he professed himself little upset by their deaths, but this was perhaps influenced by his need to support his claims that he had remained a true Christian at heart. With the death of Ahmad IV and the succession of Mawlay Abdullah V (1728-1757) his master changed, but his duties and way of life continued unaltered. During the next few years he was employed as a captain of horse helping to put down the frequent insurrections which characterized this unstable period of Moroccan history. Pellow's own fortunes waxed and waned as did those of his master. He was also, according to his own account, entrusted with a large caravan to Timbuktu looking for slaves and other merchandise. Pellow may be identified with Pilleau in Braithwaite's 'History of the Revolutions in the Empire of Morocco' (1729), which corroborates some of Pellow's claims in his own work. Pellow was occasionally employed as an interpreter at the embassy, but his staple employment -- like that of a large number of renegades -- was as a soldier, in which capacity he had to gain a precarious livelihood by plunder. Though he shared the prosperity of many renegades it was probably the strain of this hazardous way of life that decided him to plot his escape. It was not, however, until the beginning of 1738 that he was able to put his plan into action. The difficulty was to find a ship's captain bound for England who would take on board a Moroccan subject and conceal him until safe out of the sultan's dominions. To achieve this, after leaving Meknes he wandered the country for several months in disguise. After travelling with a party of conjurors, and as an itinerant quack, and after being several times attacked by brigands who robbed him of all his goods he arrived at Santa Cruz. There he lived for a long time in a cave in company with other outcasts, but failing to find a ship which would carry him he set out for El Waladia where he kept himself alive by stealing carrots. Finally he reached Sale where he managed without the knowledge of the Moroccan authorities to get a passage to Gibraltar in a small trading vessel, commanded by a Captain Toobin of Dublin. From Gibraltar, where a subscription was raised on his behalf, he sailed for London in the 'Euphrates' (Captain Peacock) and, after a few days in London where the account of his long captivity drew some attention, he returned to Penryn on 15 October 1738. 
The story of Pellow's experiences was published in 1739 under the title 'The History of the Long Captivity and Adventures of Thomas Pellow in South Barbary; Giving an Account of his being Taken by Two Sallee Rovers and Carry'd a Slave to Mequinez at Eleven Years of Age'. A second edition appeared in 1740 and a third as 'Adventures of Thomas Pellow of Penryn, Mariner' was edited by Dr Robert Brown for the 'Adventure Series' (1890). Pellow's narrative, corroborated as it is by Braithwaite's book and the accounts of other captives in Morocco, appears to be based on personal experience accurately recorded but it was evidently edited rather liberally. As well as Pellow's own account it contains long extracts from John Windus's 'Journey to Mequinez' (1725) and there is much stereotypical comment on the plight of Christians enslaved in Morocco. The most original and also the most graphic part is the account of Pellow's escape, which gives a picture of the turbulent state of the country under Mawlay Abdullah. 
Nothing more is known of Pellow. 


@@@@@


doc= 21813


Pelham, Edward (fl. 1630-1631), sailor, was a gunner's mate on board the 'Salutation' of London in the service of the company of Muscovy merchants. On 1 May 1630 the 'Salutation', with two other vessels, under the command of Captain William Goodler, sailed for the north-west coast of Greenland on a whaling trip. On reaching the Foreland the 'Salutation' was appointed to station there. When within four leagues of Black Point, Pelham and seven of her crew (William Fakeley, John Wise, Robert Goodfellow, Thomas Ayers, Henry Bett, John Dawes, and Richard Kellet) were dispatched in a shallop to Green harbour to meet the second ship. Missing both points, the shallop was given up as lost, and the Muscovy fleet returned home. 
The eight men passed the winter in dire privation at Bell Sound. Having stocked up as best they could with meat, the men retreated to a 'tent', in fact a tiled, timber house used in season by coopers on whaling voyages, within which they erected another 'tent' and gathered wood for firing from the debris left by whalers. Pelham wrote: 'our greatest and chiefest feeding was the whale Frittars, and those mouldie too, the loathsomest meat in the world... 'twas a measuring cast which should be eaten first, Wee or the Beares, when we first saw one another... they had as good hopes to devoure us as wee, to kill them. (Pelham, 254-5)' Making good use of the materials left by the whalers and the knowledge of the region by at least two of the men, the party managed to stay in reasonable physical and mental health. On 25 May 1631 two ships from Hull came into the sound, followed on the 28th by the Muscovy fleet, again under the command of Captain William Goodler. The eight men were at once taken on board, and on 20 August departed for the Thames. 
Pelham wrote an account of his privations in 'Gods power and providence shewed in the marvellous preservation and deliverance of eight Englishmen, left by mischance in Greenland, anno 1630, nine moneths and twelve dayes, with a true relation of all their miseries, their shifts, and hardship... with a map of Green-land' (1631), which was later reprinted in 1855 for the Hakluyt Society by Adam White in volume 4 of the 'Collection of Voyages and Travels' (1732, 1744, 1752) of A. Churchill and J. Churchill and in Edward Arber's 'English Garner', volume 8 (1896). The book is dedicated to Alderman Sir Hugh Hammersley, governor of the Muscovy Company, and to the company's assistants and adventurers. The work promises a description of the chief places and rarities of Greenland, but it is largely an account of the ingenious ways in which Pelham and the abandoned crew made shift to over-winter. This in no way detracts from their feat, but makes the book more of a curiosity than an influential geography or travel book. 


@@@@@


doc= 21814


Pelling, Edward (bap. 1640, d. 1718), Church of England clergyman, was the son of Thomas Pelling ('b'. 1599/1600) and his wife, Margaret Lovell. Edward was baptized on 21 June 1640 at Trowbridge, Wiltshire, where his father had been rector since 1621. Thomas Pelling refused to swear to the solemn league and covenant in 1643, but he managed to stay on as rector: as he and his family were quitting their house, a sympathetic parliamentary colonel gave him a copy and told him to put it in his pocket, and then proceeded to assure the authorities that upon his own knowledge Pelling had taken the covenant (Walker, 336). In 1655 the elder Pelling was still in place, though regarded as 'both ungodly & insufficient' ('Walker rev.', 379). The younger Pelling may have been one of John Walker's correspondents for his account of the sufferings of the clergy. 
Edward Pelling was a king's scholar at Westminster School and then was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1658. His coming of age and early education, therefore, took place in the turbulent and confusing interregnum years, which undoubtedly influenced his outlook later in life. He was elected minor fellow of Trinity College in September 1664 and major fellow the following April. He graduated BA in 1662 and proceeded MA in 1665 and DD on the occasion of the visit of the new king, William III, in October 1689. He was vicar of St Helen, Bishopsgate, in London from May 1674, until he was collated to the rectory of St Martin Ludgate in October 1678. He became a prebendary of Westminster in 1683, but resigned both this and his living at St Martin Ludgate when he was presented to the rectory of Petworth, Sussex, in 1691 by Charles Seymour, duke of Somerset, whose chaplain he was. Pelling remained at Petworth until his death in March 1718. He also became chaplain in ordinary to William and Mary, then to Queen Anne, and was elected as the diocese of Chichester's proctor to convocation in 1710. He and his family were well connected to the clerical establishment in Sussex: his son, Thomas, became vicar of Rottingdean, and his two daughters married other clergymen in the county. It appears that the family made a particularly close alliance with the Bettesworth family, which was something of a high-church clerical dynasty in the county. His first wife's name is not recorded, but she is the one who bore his children. She must have died in or before 1710, because that is the year he married on 28 October Margaret Hill, a widow, who died less than four years later. 
Pelling could be characterized as a high-churchman, though he was not a nonjuror. He entered the fray of political and religious debate in the late 1670s and early 1680s, first by preaching 30 January sermons that emphasized divine-right monarchy and absolute obedience. In 1680 he published his 'magnum opus', 'The Good Old Way', which argued that the Church of England's polity, doctrine, and rites (including high-church practices such as signing the cross and kneeling at communion) were apostolic and approved by God, and that dissenters were simply 'Seditious and Brain-sick People' (p. 7). In 1682 he defended divine-right monarchy, indefeasible hereditary right, and passive obedience. He wrote strongly in favour of Sir Robert Filmer (whose book 'Patriarcha', published in 1680, furnished tories with arguments for a generation) and George Hickes, the nonjuror, and maintained that republicanism was a 'Jesuitical Principal' (Pelling, 'The Apostate Protestant', 58). He was clearly frustrated by whig arguments for exclusion, and felt that 'true loyalty has been... reproached for a 'Crime', and esteemed a kind of 'Treason' against the 'People' to be Dutiful to the 'king'' (Pelling, 'Sermon Preached at St. Mary Le Bow', 4). In 1685 he preached a thanksgiving sermon for James's victory over Monmouth, in which he likened James to the biblical King David. He had argued as early as 1679, however, that God sometimes allowed kings to be removed by violence and conquest (Pelling, 'Sermon Preached on the Thirtieth of January 1678/9', 20-24), and this enabled him to acknowledge William and Mary as his sovereigns. Whatever his feelings about the succession, by the early 1690s he was chaplain to their majesties. It is interesting to note that his sermons before the king and queen were markedly different in tone from most of his other printed works. There were none of the combative, defensive apologetics so common in his other works; these sermons were filled rather with platitudes on 'vertue', 'felicity', and 'happiness', and an emphasis on 'obedience to Divine Law' and a 'life of perfect Love and Peace' (Pelling, 'Sermon Preach'd at White-Hall before the Queen'). It appears from this that he felt it necessary to moderate his rhetoric when preaching before the new king, and one wonders if he was entirely comfortable in this role. It is clear, however, that he had not lost all of his pre-revolution zeal: he continued in other contexts to preach in favour of a high view of episcopacy and against dissent and schism, and he voted for tory candidates for parliament in every election until his death. 
Pelling died in March 1718 and was buried at Petworth. He was survived by his children: Thomas, vicar of Rottingdean; Martha, wife of Charles Bettesworth, rector of Kingston and Terwick (to whom Pelling gave $848 14's'. 9died worth of South Sea stock in the settling of his estate, which, one hopes, they sold off quickly); and Mary, wife of John Dunstall, rector of Newtimber and South Stoke. 


@@@@@


doc= 21815


Pelly, Sir John Henry, first baronet (1777-1852), merchant, born on 31 March 1777, was the eldest son of Henry Hinde Pelly (1744/5-1818) of Upton House, Essex, a captain in the service of the East India Company, and Sally Hitchen, the daughter of John Blake. His grandfather John Pelly was also a captain in the company's service, and his grandmother was Elizabeth, the daughter and heir of Henry Hinde of Upton. John is said to have been in his youth in the navy. If so, he quitted it without obtaining a commission. It is more probable that he was with his father in the company's service; that he had nautical experience of some sort appears certain. Having settled in business in London, he became in 1806 a director of the Hudson's Bay Company, of which he was afterwards successively deputy governor and governor. On 13 July 1807 he married Emma (died 1856), the sixth daughter of Henry Boulton of Thorncroft, Surrey, the governor of the Corporation of Working Mines and Metals in Scotland and a director of the Sun Fire Office. They had eight sons and two daughters who survived infancy. In 1823 Pelly was elected elder brother of Trinity House, and, some years later, deputy master. In 1840 he was a director of the Bank of England, and in 1841 governor. 
As governor of the Hudson's Bay Company in 1835 Pelly is remembered for having sent out the exploring parties which, under Peter Warren Dease and Thomas Simpson (1808-1840), two of the company's agents, did so much for the discovery of the north-west passage and of the coastline of North America. His share in this work is commemorated by Cape Pelly which marks the eastern extremity of Dease and Simpson Strait. In August 1838 he and Simpson travelled to St Petersburg to negotiate with Baron von Wrangel of the Russian American Company. These talks led in 1839 to the Hudson's Bay Company's leasing the Alaskan peninsula from the Russians. On 6 July 1840 Pelly was created a baronet, on the recommendation of Lord Melbourne. The duke of Wellington was on friendly terms with him. He died at Upton House on 13 August 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 21816


Pelly, Sir Lewis (1825-1892), army and political officer in India, was born at Hyde House, Minchinhampton, Stroud, Gloucestershire, on 14 November 1825, the youngest son of John Hinde Pelly (1786-1852) of Bristol and the Bombay civil service, and his wife, Elizabeth Lewis (1781/2-1852) of Brinscombe, Gloucestershire. His five brothers all had careers in India; he also had four sisters. He was educated at Rugby School, and in 1841 joined the East India Company's Bombay army as an ensign. He became lieutenant (1843), captain (1856), major (1861), lieutenant-colonel (1863), colonel (1871), major-general (1882), and lieutenant-general (1887). Early in his career he was seconded to the foreign department, and served in what came to be known as the Indian political service and was the machinery of British indirect rule over the princely states. 
In 1851-2 Pelly was assistant to the British resident at the princely court of Baroda, and prosecuted the corruption ('khutpat') inquiries before James Outram's commission. From 1852 to 1856 he was employed in a civil capacity in Sind, and in 1857 acted as aide-de-camp to General John Jacob, who was commanding the cavalry division of the Indian army in the Persian War (1856-7). In the following year he returned to Sind, where he joined Jacob again as brigade major of the irregular horse Sind frontier force. Pelly collected and published 'Views and Opinions of General Jacob' on the reorganization of the Indian army, which reached a second edition in 1858. 
In 1859 Pelly was appointed secretary of legation and subsequently charge d'affaires at Tehran. He was inexperienced in the politics of the Persian Gulf and compromised the British government in discussions over the Persian claim to Bahrain, but was not reprimanded. He also came into conflict with J. Felix Jones, the British resident in the Persian Gulf. He returned to India in 1861, making the journey of 800 miles from Herat to Kandahar on horseback and without an escort. He spent a few months in Calcutta with Lord Canning, the viceroy, before joining a roving commission in east Africa; he was shipwrecked on the Comores archipelago in September 1861. At the end of that year he became political agent and consul at Zanzibar, where he confirmed earlier treaties with the sultan. In 1862 he replaced Jones as resident in the Persian Gulf, through the patronage of Sir Bartle Frere, by then governor of Bombay, and the official to whom the resident was answerable. A historian of the Persian Gulf observed that 'While Frere remained Governor of Bombay little that Pelly did was permitted to be criticized... However foolish Pelly's actions might be, Frere never failed to shield him from censure and rebuke' (Kelly, 575). 
The nine years of Pelly's residency were marked 'not only by indecorous quarrels with other political officers, but also by ill-judged or inept acts of policy' (Kelly, 575), with long-term consequences for British involvement in the region. For example, when he was asked to mediate between the Wahabis under the leadership of the amir, Faisal, and Thuwaini, sultan of Muscat (through whose territory an important telegraph cable was to run), Pelly initially declined to become involved, but changed his mind and travelled to the interior to visit Faisal at Riyadh in February 1865. (He published both an official account and an article in the 'Journal of the Royal Geographical Society' describing his experiences there.) He was persuaded by his reception that Thuwaini should be supported against the threats of Faisal, particularly as Faisal appeared to be resisting British views on the slave trade in the gulf. His intervention served only to make the relationship between Faisal and Thuwaini worse, and the British sent gunboats to bombard Faisal into submission. When the bombardment failed (and despite news of Faisal's own, unrelated, death), Pelly bombarded the Wahabi adherents at Sur, in an alternative demonstration of British strength; in the meantime, Thuwaini was murdered by his son. Rash and even incompetent as Pelly's actions had been, he was sheltered by the support of Frere against the wrath of the viceroy of India, Lord Lawrence, who advised that Britain interfere henceforth as little as possible with the Arabs, whether on the coast or inland. He further entangled the British government in the affairs of Oman and Muscat during negotiations over the telegraph and attempts to suppress slavery in the gulf, and his vigorous but ill-informed support for various Arab leaders ultimately committed Britain to the financial and political support of particular rulers in the region. Excessively influenced in his advice to government by personal feelings towards his informants, whether British or Arabs, he was patently unsuited to the sensitivities of British interests in the gulf. He was nevertheless appointed CSI in 1868 and remained in post until 1873, when he joined Frere's anti-slavery mission to Zanzibar. 
Later in 1873 Pelly returned to India, where he was appointed agent and chief commissioner to the states of Rajputana. He was appointed KCSI in May 1874, and later that year he was sent as special commissioner to Baroda, where the British resident, Colonel Robert Phayre, had apparently been poisoned. It was suggested that the Maharaja Gaikwar of Baroda himself had been responsible for the offence, owing to political differences with the resident. Pelly arrived in Baroda in November 1874, and in January 1875 arrested the Gaikwar, Malhar Rao, and had him tried by a special commission. Although the Gaikwar's guilt was not proved, the British government deposed him none the less, on grounds of incapacity to rule, and appointed a successor. Pelly's last important appointment in India was as envoy-extraordinary and plenipotentiary for Afghan affairs at Peshawar in 1877, where he held inconclusive talks with an Afghan representative, before being recalled in March; the Second Afghan War broke out the following year. In August 1877 he retired, was created KCB, and returned to England. 
On 1 August 1878 Pelly married Amy Henrietta, only surviving daughter of the Revd John Lowder, British chaplain at Shanghai, and stepdaughter of Sir Rutherford Alcock; they had no children. He was offered, and declined, charge of the Congo Free State by the king of the Belgians in 1883, and spent the early years of his retirement assisting the Royal Geographic and Asiatic societies. He published 'The Miracle Play of Hasan and Husain: Collected from Oral Tradition' in two volumes in 1879. In 1885 he was elected Conservative MP for North Hackney, was re-elected the following year, and continued to represent that constituency until his death. He rarely spoke in the House of Commons, confining himself largely to Indian affairs. He died at Rosemullion, Falmouth, Cornwall, on 22 April 1892; he was promoted full general the same day. A short, well-built man, he had his portrait painted by Louise Starr Canziani, and a portrait of Lady Pelly by the same artist was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1884. 
Pelly's elder brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 21817


Saville Marriott Pelly (1818-1895), was born on 28 March 1818 and educated at Winchester College and Guy's Hospital, London, before joining the Indian Medical Service. He accompanied the Sind irregular horse during Sir Charles Napier's campaigns (1844-7), and subsequently on the Sind frontier under General John Jacob (with whom his brother was also serving). He served with the second regiment of light cavalry in Rajputana during the mutiny campaigns of 1857-8. He was principal medical officer of the Indian medical department throughout the Abyssinian campaign of 1867-8 under Lord Napier of Magdala, was appointed CB, and retired as inspector-general of hospitals in the Bombay presidency in 1870. He died at Woodstock Villa, Burnt Ash Hill, Lee, Kent, on 3 April 1895, leaving a widow, Jane Billing, 'nee' Morris, whom he had married in 1850, and two sons and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 21818


Pember, Robert (d. 1560), classical scholar, went to Cambridge from the diocese of Hereford to take up a scholarship at St John's College, where he graduated BA in 1523. Following his election to a fellowship at St John's on 26 July 1524, he proceeded MA in 1527. In 1542 Pember was elected fellow of the King's Hall and on 19 December 1546 was appointed by the crown one of the founding fellows of Trinity College, Cambridge. At Trinity, founded by Henry VIII to be a centre of academic excellence, Pember worked as a tutor and reader in Greek. 
A classical humanist trilingual scholar, Pember was proficient in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. A later contemporary described him as 'a man of the most admirable competence in Greek' (Grant, 'Oratio'). He taught Greek to Roger Ascham, who later became tutor to Queen Elizabeth I. He not only valued Ascham's pedagogic ideas greatly, but also became a close personal friend of his former student, advising him 'frequently to read Greek with the students; for it is more useful that you read them a fable by Aesop than to listen to the entire 'Iliad'... expounded by a professor' (ibid.). Their friendship lasted beyond Ascham's time at Trinity. During his stay in Germany, for instance, Ascham sent coins to add to his former tutor's collection. In his will Pember left his extensive Greek library to Ascham. 
Pember was respected throughout the university as a poet, but only left two Latin poems. Although he was asked to compose a funeral elegy on the death of the regius professor of divinity, Martin Bucer, in 1551, he was almost certainly no evangelical himself. While Pember maintained close ties with other evangelicals, such as Andrew Perne, master of Peterhouse, he also displayed a sharp sense for irony when he bequeathed him a copy of St John of Damascus's anti-iconoclastic tract 'Of Images' in his will. His other Cambridge friends, Thomas Sedgwick, a later recusant priest, and George Bullock, the Marian master of St John's College, were both confirmed Catholics. Pember's subscription to the Catholic articles in 1555, therefore, was not only a shrewd move to retain his post but probably reflected his personal convictions as well. Pember died in Cambridge in 1560. 


@@@@@


doc= 21819


Pemberton, Charles Reece (1790-1840), actor and public lecturer, was born at Pontypool, Monmouthshire, Wales, on 23 January 1790, and registered as Thomas Reece Pemberton. His father was from Warwickshire, his mother was Welsh, and he was the second of three children. When he was about four years old his parents moved to Birmingham, and he was sent to a Unitarian charity school under Daniel Wright. He was then apprenticed to his uncle, a brass-founder in Birmingham, but ran away in 1807 to Liverpool, where he was seized by a press-gang and sent to sea. He served for seven years, and saw some active service off Cadiz, Gibraltar, and Madeira. After the war he became an actor, and led a wandering life; he is said to have managed several theatres in the West Indies with some success. He made an unhappy marriage with a lady named Fanny Pritchard, and they soon separated. 
By 1827 Pemberton was in England again, acting, lecturing, and reciting. On 19 February 1828 he played Macbeth at Bath. Genest reported: 'he acted tolerably, but nothing farther; he had an indifferent figure, and a bad face, with no expression in it; he had studied the part with great attention, and understood it thoroughly'. On 21 February he appeared as Shylock. During the same year he was acting at Hereford at the assizes; Serjeant (afterwards Sir Thomas) Talfourd was greatly impressed with his performances, and praised him highly in the 'New Monthly Magazine' for September 1828, especially his rendering of Shylock and Virginius. Pemberton also played Hotspur, Sir Peter Teazle, and other characters, but was not successful in comic parts. On Talfourd's recommendation he was engaged at Covent Garden by Charles Kemble. He made his first appearance there in March 1829 as Virginius, and later played Shylock. There was much divergence among critics as to his merits, but Talfourd still eulogized him as a tragedian. Pemberton did not, however, reappear at Covent Garden, and, following an engagement at the Royal Theatre, Birmingham, he devoted himself to lecturing and reciting, principally at mechanics' institutes. His favourite subjects were the tragic characters of Shakespeare. 
In 1833 Pemberton began writing for the 'Monthly Repository', then edited by William Johnson Fox, 'The Autobiography of Pel. Verjuice', in which he gave an account of his own experiences. He also wrote some songs and a few plays, notably two tragedies, 'The Podesta' and 'The Banner', and the comedy 'Two Catherines', together with some pieces in prose and verse. In 1836 he played Macbeth and Shylock at Birmingham, and at the end of the year he visited the Mediterranean on account of his health. He recommenced lecturing in the summer of 1838 at the Sheffield Mechanics' Institute, but his powers were failing, and a subscription was taken up to enable him to spend the winter in Egypt. This visit brought about no improvement, and he died, not long after his return, on 3 March 1840, at the house of his younger brother, William Dobson Pemberton, on Ludgate Hill, Birmingham. He was buried in the Key Hill cemetery, and the Birmingham Mechanics' Institute, of which G. J. Holyoake was secretary, placed a memorial, with an epitaph by Fox, over his grave. Ebenezer Elliott, the corn-law rhymer, wrote some verses on him entitled 'Poor Charles'. 


@@@@@


doc= 21820


Pemberton, Christopher Robert (1765-1822), physician, was born at Trumpington, Cambridgeshire, the fifth son of the Revd Jeremiah Pemberton (1714-1800) and his wife, Anne, daughter of Charles Barron. His grandfather was Sir Francis Pemberton (bap. 1624, d. 1697), lord chief justice. After education at Bury St Edmunds he entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1784, where he graduated MB in 1789 and MD in 1794. In 1796 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and, on 25 June, of the Royal College of Physicians, where he was Goulstonian lecturer in 1797 and censor in 1796, 1804, and 1811, and delivered the Harveian oration in 1806. He was in that year physician-extraordinary to the prince of Wales and to the duke of Cumberland, and he afterwards became physician-extraordinary to the king. He was physician to St George's Hospital, London, from 25 April 1800 until 1808. 
In 1806 Pemberton published 'A Practical Treatise on Various Diseases of the Abdominal Viscera'. It consists of eleven chapters, which discuss the treatment of the peritoneum, the liver, the gall bladder, the pancreas, the spleen, the kidneys, the stomach, the intestines, and enteritis. His most original observations are that the disease known as waterbrash was a result rather of an imperfect diet than of excess alcohol consumption (p. 101); that cancer of some parts of the bowel may exist for a long time without grave constitutional symptoms (p. 186); and that the over-exertion of muscles may lead to a condition indistinguishable from palsy (p. 157). This last observation is one of the first contributions in English medical writings to the knowledge of the large group of diseases which became known as 'trade palsies'. Pemberton recommends the use of a splint supporting the hand in cases of bad palsy of the muscles of the back of the forearm. The book shows Pemberton to have been an excellent clinical observer, who had paid close attention to morbid anatomy. 
Pemberton was married twice: first to Sarah, and second, from August 1794, to Eleanor (died 1847), daughter of James Hamilton of Woodbrook, co. Tyrone. He suffered from intense facial neuralgia or tic douloureux, and the division of several branches of the trigeminal nerve by Sir Astley Cooper failed to give him any relief. He was obliged by his disease to give up practice and to leave London. Pemberton died of apoplexy at the home of his brother-in-law John Plumptre, at Fredville, Kent, on 31 July 1822. 


@@@@@


doc= 21821


Pemberton, Sir Francis (bap. 1624, d. 1697), judge, was baptized at St Albans on 18 July 1624, son of Ralph Pemberton, mayor of St Albans in 1627-8, and of Frances, daughter of Francis Kempe. Pemberton studied at St Albans grammar school before entering Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in August 1640; he graduated BA in 1644 and in November of that year moved to the Inner Temple. His father and brother supported parliament in the civil war and served on county committees in Cambridgeshire and Hertfordshire, but Francis continued his studies, although he also spent some of this period in gaol for debt. Roger North suggested that incarceration was just what the young man needed to focus his mind on learning the law and that his fellow inmates provided him with his first opportunities to give legal counsel. 
On 7 November 1654 Pemberton received his call to the bar. Little is known of his life in the decade following, though his practice grew sufficiently to permit his marriage on 12 October 1667 to Anne Whichcott (died 1731), a London widow. Her father, Sir Jeremy Whichcott, settled the manor of Milton, Cambridgeshire, upon the couple. In the years following Pemberton bought Trumpington and other lands and manors in the area; in 1692 he extended this estate by buying up properties there from his recently bankrupted brother-in-law. 
By the late 1660s Pemberton had earned a high professional reputation. In 1668 he assisted in the prosecution of the Bawdy House rioters for treason. Pepys described him as 'an able lawyer' in his handling of a prize case, and noted the 'heaps of money' on his table, though he later complained of Pemberton's sloppy work (Pepys, 9.61, 63). But Pemberton prospered: he was chosen a bencher of the Inner Temple in 1671 and Lent reader of his inn in 1674; he became a serjeant-at-law on 21 April 1675. 
In May and June 1675 an angry House of Commons attacked Pemberton for a breach of privilege because he had appeared as counsel in the House of Lords in property litigation involving Thomas Dalmahoy, a member of the Commons. Sir Nicholas Crisp had asked Pemberton to serve as his counsel before the Lords; aware that Dalmahoy was an MP, Pemberton initially declined the request, but the Lords then ordered him to represent Crispe. When he did so, the Commons responded by voting by 154 to 146 to commit Pemberton and his co-counsel for a breach of the lower house's privilege. But the confinement order apparently meant little, for a few days later the speaker of the House of Commons encountered Pemberton in Westminster Hall where he neglected to doff his hat to the speaker. When Pemberton and his fellow counsel were imprisoned again, the Lords issued a writ of habeas corpus for their release. Pemberton, caught in a feud between the two houses, was trapped between contending claims about whose writs of habeas corpus or orders of commitment should be obeyed. Only parliament's prorogation on 9 June brought his release, though not a resolution to the question of precedence raised by the dispute. Later that year Pemberton nearly found himself in a similar contest between Lords and Commons when asked to provide counsel in the Lords for Dr Thomas Shirley against Sir John Fagg, another MP, though this time Pemberton appears to have avoided serving. 
The remainder of 1675 looked brighter: on 12 August Pemberton became king's serjeant, and on 6 October he was knighted. On 1 May 1679, upon a general reformation of the bench in Westminster Hall, Pemberton was made a justice of king's bench. He thus was one of those presiding in the early Popish Plot trials, including that of Sir George Wakeman. In the libel trial of the bookseller Benjamin Harris, only Pemberton's insistence prevented Chief Justice Sir William Scroggs from imposing a whipping as well as a heavy fine. By October 1679 rumours were already about that he would resign or be removed. On 16 February 1680 Pemberton was indeed removed for being 'too much opposite to the court interest' (Luttrell, 1.36), perhaps because he told the king there were limits to his power to continue collecting the excise. 
In later years Gilbert Burnet suggested that Scroggs's dislike of Pemberton led to his removal from the bench. If so, Pemberton must have been delighted when Scroggs himself was removed and Pemberton replaced him as chief justice of king's bench on 11 April 1681. Despite the change, at least one observer thought that 'Pemberton is as great a rogue as his predecessor' ('CSP dom.', '1680-81', 270). His first important task, in May, was to preside in the trial of Edward Fitzharris, which some believed Pemberton had been specially appointed to handle. Declaring Fitzharris's libel 'a piece of the art of the Jesuits' ('State trials', 8.386) Pemberton sent him off to his execution. 
At the same time Pemberton was called upon to release the earl of Danby from imprisonment according to a royal pardon. But Pemberton answered the earl's request by noting that as Danby had been committed on a charge in one court -- parliament -- the chief justice of another court -- king's bench -- could not take notice of a pardon delivered to him. When the attorney-general, Sir Robert Sawyer, again pleaded Danby's pardon, Pemberton answered that the king had declared he would rule according to law, and thus he would make the law his rule in this matter as in all others. Pemberton remanded the earl. After his return from the assize circuits, where he had energetically pursued alleged Catholics, Pemberton proved just as tough on the earl of Shaftesbury during his arraignment for treason. That autumn Pemberton provided a damning summation of the evidence against Lord Grey of Warke for his liaison with Lady Henrietta Berkeley, for which Grey was convicted, though the judgment against him was never entered. 
Pemberton's star was rising at court, where he was reportedly a favourite of the queen. Some talked of his being made lord chancellor in the spring of 1682. Though this came to nothing, Pemberton took the oath of a privy councillor in December of that year and was made chief justice of common pleas the month following. While a more lucrative office, it is not clear that this move was a promotion. Having heard the initial pleadings in the 'quo warranto' against London in king's bench, many thought Pemberton had been translated to common pleas for fear that he would rule against the crown after full arguments had been heard. As Roger North later opined, Pemberton 'never showed so much regard to the law as to his will' ('Lives', 2.40), and thus was not trusted in so important a matter. None the less, Pemberton did preside over the trial of Lord Russell for treason, and though his summation of the evidence could not have helped Russell in the jurors' eyes, Pemberton was not thought vigorous enough against Russell. Pemberton was again removed from the bench in September 1683; his exit from the privy council soon followed. There was little left for him but to return to his lucrative practice. 
Pemberton continued his involvement in the leading legal actions of the day though he, like others, refused to serve as counsel to Arthur Godden when he sued Sir Edward Hales in a case testing the king's claim to have a power to dispense with statutory requirements meant to bar Catholics from office. Pemberton offered his strong opinion against the legality of the grant of a university degree to a Benedictine monk, Alban Francis, without the requisite oaths. And in June 1688 Pemberton declaimed against the dispensing power when he served as one of the counsel defending the seven bishops on the charge that they had libelled the king. 
After the revolution of 1688 Pemberton found himself once again the target of parliamentary ire for a judgment he had given years earlier that allegedly breached the privileges of the house. He suffered another brief spell as the Commons' prisoner. But Pemberton soon continued his successful legal practice, arguing important matters in the House of Lords and elsewhere until June 1697, when, while attending hearings in Westminster Hall, he contracted a cold. Pemberton died on 10 June 1697 at his house in Highgate, survived by his wife and seven of their eleven children. He was buried at Highgate Chapel, from which his monument was removed to Trumpington when the chapel was demolished in 1833. In his typically priggish manner, Roger North declared Pemberton's morals 'debauched' ('Lives', 2.38). But John Evelyn reports that at the time of his departure from the bench in 1683 Pemberton was considered 'the very learnedst of the judges and an honest man' (Evelyn, 3.342). Twice imprisoned by a zealous Commons and twice appointed to and removed from the judiciary in a period in which the bench was regularly broken up, Pemberton proved himself an able lawyer and a prudent judge, rarely pleasing and often offending people of all political persuasions. 


@@@@@


doc= 21822


Pemberton, Henry (1694-1771), physician and mathematician, was born in London, the third son of Edward Pemberton and his wife, Elizabeth. Henry's father, a wealthy fruiterer, intended his son to become a physician; it was mathematics, though, which became his serious avocation. He also made contributions to the appreciation of contemporary poetry, and cultivated a degree of musical appreciation. 
Pemberton's delicate health caused him to be sent to a country grammar school in Guildford, Surrey, where he first felt an attraction to mathematics. Having returned to London, he read classics with John Ward (later professor of rhetoric at Gresham College), but also devoted much time to the study of Apollonius of Perga's 'Conics'. Despite these inclinations to antique studies, he was set to study medicine, and followed a common route of the day to Leiden, where he came under the influence of Herman Boerhaave. Pemberton next went to Paris to improve his knowledge of anatomy. James Wilson, Pemberton's contemporary biographer, maintained that Pemberton's mechanical dexterity helped him to become competent in dissection and surgery. While in Paris, Pemberton formed several scientific friendships, some of which led to his acquiring, at a sale there, a portion of the library of the mathematician Abbe Galois. After returning to London Pemberton attended St Thomas's Hospital to learn 'London physic', but never practised medicine regularly. In 1719 he again visited Leiden and graduated MD; by now he was a friend of Boerhaave, at whose house he lodged. In the same year Pemberton published 'Dissertatio de facultate oculi' and 'On the Power whence the Eye may Discern Objects Distinctly at Distances'; the latter was a work showing how certain results of Roger Cotes, hitherto found using ratios and logarithms, could be obtained using a circle and parabola. Pemberton became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1720. 
About the same time Pemberton showed to John Keill certain new mathematical solutions he had obtained. Keill brought them to Sir Isaac Newton's attention, but the latter declined to take notice of them, believing that Pemberton was then connected with the circulation of untruths about him. However, Pemberton came to be on intimate terms with Richard Mead, Newton's physician; he helped Mead to write the eighth edition of his treatise on the plague, and, in 1724, to edit W. Cowper's 'Myotomia reformata' (on muscles). At this time an Italian, M. Poleni, produced a paper about the force generated by a moving body on impact, which Pemberton refuted as erroneous. Pemberton's treatment of the problem was passed to Newton and this, together with Newton's own refutation of Poleni's thesis, was published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1772. Intercourse between Newton and Pemberton thus became established and Pemberton was invited to superintend the editing of the third edition of the 'Principia mathematica', which appeared in 1726. Pemberton was then about thirty years old and was rightly flattered to get the opportunity to work so closely with the great eighty-year-old Newton. However, Newton often ignored Pemberton's editorial suggestions. Pemberton wrote 'A View of Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophy' (1728), which he had partly read to the dying Newton. It made no great mark but could at least be recommended as being propaedeutic. 
In 1728 Pemberton was elected Gresham professor of physic, and his 'Scheme for a Course of Chymistry to be Performed at Gresham College' appeared in 1731. A set of lectures based on his course was published in 1771 and a second set on physiology in 1779; in both cases the editor was James Wilson. 
Pemberton was said to have spent seven years (1739-46) preparing the fifth 'London Pharmacopoeia' for the Royal College of Physicians, which edition proved he was well acquainted with pharmacy. It appeared in 1746 as 'Translation and Improvement of the London Dispensary', for which he was rewarded by 100 guineas and the gift of the volume's copyright. 
Pemberton also encouraged a number of younger scholars. These included the young scientist-engineer Benjamin Robins, who was introduced to Pemberton on leaving school. Both Pemberton and Robins were also close friends of James Wilson. The poet Richard Glover also came under Pemberton's wing on leaving school. In 1738 he wrote 'Leonidas', an epic on which Pemberton made some acclaimed observations. Pemberton also wrote an 'Account of the Ancient Ode' which prefaced Gilbert West's 'Translations of Pindar' (1748). 
Wilson's preface to Pemberton's 'Course on Chemistry' (1771) is a substantial, detailed biography of Pemberton by one who knew him extremely well, describing in it his character as delicate, pleasant, and cultured. 
Pemberton died in Cannon Street, London, on 9 March 1771, seemingly after a second attack of jaundice, and was buried in Bunhill Fields, London. He left a considerable fortune to Henry Mills, his niece's husband. 
Many articles written by Pemberton remained unpublished at his death, notably 'A short history of trigonometry'. 


@@@@@


doc= 21823


Leigh, Thomas Pemberton, Baron Kingsdown (1793-1867), lawyer, was born in London on 11 February 1793, the eldest son of Robert Pemberton (died 1804), chancery barrister, and his wife, Margaret, eldest daughter and coheir of Edward Leigh of Bispham Hall, Lancashire. His father, a member of a family settled near Warrington in Lancashire, and a descendant of Sir Francis Pemberton, chief justice of the common pleas, died in 1804. Though he had earned a good income, he had been unable to save money, and his widow was left poorly off, considering the size of his family -- three sons and two daughters. Accordingly Thomas Pemberton, who had been for four years at Dr Horne's school at Chiswick to be prepared for Westminster and Oxford, was obliged to give up all hope of a university career, and, leaving Dr Horne's school at the age of sixteen, went into the office of a solicitor, Mr Farrer, for twelve months, and then became a pupil in the chambers of his uncle, Edward Cooke, a barrister in good chancery practice. He had been a studious and diligent boy, left school a fair scholar, and was throughout his life fond of classical studies. He earned $100 to $150 a year before being called to the bar by drawing equity pleadings, according to the practice of the day, for solicitors. He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1816. His youth had been, as he called it, 'gloomy and joyless', but he had read diligently, and success came rapidly. He made the hitherto unprecedented sum of $600 in his first year. Though he joined the northern circuit and occasionally appeared before parliamentary committees on election petitions, his practice was almost exclusively in equity. Before he was thirty his income was $3000 a year. In 1829 he became a king's counsel, and divided with Bickersteth the practice of the rolls court, which, when Bickersteth became Lord Langdale, he entirely dominated. In April 1831 he entered parliament for Rye as a staunch Conservative, after an election at which great violence was displayed; he spoke with great effect against the 'Reform Bill', and afterwards published his speech. He lost the seat in 1832, began and abandoned a candidature for Taunton, and was elected in January 1835 for Ripon, a seat which he retained as long as he remained in parliament. He declined in December 1835 Sir Robert Peel's offer of the solicitor-generalship in his first administration, as well as Lord Lyndhurst's offer of a puisne judgeship. With characteristic diffidence he distrusted his judicial fitness, and preferred to remain undisputed leader of the chancery bar. Until 1838 he spoke little in the Commons, when he joined with Sugden, his colleague in the representation of Ripon, in resisting the privilege claim of the House of Commons in the case of 'Stockdale v. 'Hansard'', his best-known speech, supported by his pamphlet-letter to Lord Langdale (1837). He afterwards took a large share in the arrangements made for settling the matter by act of parliament. In 1841 the vice-chancellorship was offered him and refused, but he accepted from Sir Robert Peel in 1841 the post of attorney-general for the duchy of Cornwall. 
In January 1843 Pemberton came into a life income of upwards of $14,000 a year on the death of Sir Robert Holt Leigh, a distant relative and large Lancashire landowner, whose admiration he had won by successfully conducting a case for him in 1831. He then assumed the name of Leigh in addition to his father's surname, Pemberton, and took a step unusual among lawyers by deciding to retire in mid-career to his country seat, Torry Hill, near Sittingbourne, Kent, and to the country sports he loved. Sir Robert Peel made him thereon chancellor of the duchy of Cornwall and a privy councillor, and it was arranged that when he left the bar he should become one of the members of the judicial committee of the privy council. He resigned his seat for Ripon in the spring of 1843, and his practice at the bar at the end of that year. 
In February 1844 Pemberton Leigh began attendances at the judicial committee of the privy council, which continued for twenty years. He also devoted considerable time to the affairs of the duchy of Cornwall, and thus became a close friend and admirer of Prince Albert. During his tenure of the chancellorship he succeeded in rehabilitating the finances of the duchy, and in accumulating a considerable fund during the minority of the prince of Wales. Honours were repeatedly offered to him and refused. It was expected that he would have been lord chancellor in 1849. Four successive governments, beginning with Lord John Russell's in 1853, offered him a peerage. Lord Derby pressed the lord chancellorship on him in vain, though it is said that he promised to take it if the interests of the Conservative Party, of which he remained a staunch supporter, imperatively demanded it. 
Pemberton Leigh also spent much time on the judicial committee, which had been reorganized in 1833 but had not yet settled to its new role. He was an important influence in shaping that role. He was especially influential in imperial cases, becoming an authority on Indian land tenure on which subject he delivered many important judgments, as he also did on allied subjects such as succession rights and mortgages (Simpson, 411). Following the decision in 'Bremer v. Freeman' (1857), he promoted what became known as 'Lord Kingsdown's Act', which dealt with the wills of British subjects living abroad. He was a member of the committee when it pronounced on the Gorham case and the 'Essays and Reviews' case, 'revealing himself to be against persecution and proscription within the Church of England' (ibid.). In 1854 Lord Aberdeen requested him to take especial charge of appeals in prize cases, and he uniformly interpreted the law of blockade, capture, and prize with a liberal bent towards freedom of trade. When created Baron Kingsdown in 1858 by the Conservative government he also became a member of the appellate tribunal of the House of Lords, and, though he never really approved of it as the ultimate court of appeal, was a much needed source of judicial strength there. In his later years indolence and distaste for judicial activity somewhat grew on him, and at length, after a lingering illness, he died at Torry Hill on 7 October 1867. He was unmarried, and his title became extinct. He was buried at Frinsted church, near Sittingbourne. 
Kingsdown was much admired by his legal colleagues for his fastidious and elegantly drafted judgments. He was known as a pious member of the Church of England. His reputation survives in his speech in 'Ramsden v. Dryson' (1866) on the concept which became known as proprietary estoppel, his dissenting judgment still being of relevance. 


@@@@@


doc= 21824


Pemble, William (1591/2-1623), theologian and author, was born in Kent, possibly at Egerton. The son of a poor clergyman, he studied with John Barker at Mayfield, Sussex, before matriculating at Magdalen College, Oxford, on 18 June 1610, aged eighteen. A student of Richard Capel, who also taught some of John Dod's former pupils, he graduated BA on 3 March 1614 and proceeded MA on 9 June 1618. After receiving his bachelor's degree he became reader and tutor at Magdalen Hall, and, after his ordination, divinity reader. Although he criticized Henry Ainsworth for excessive reliance on the 'Talmud', he played an important role in encouraging Hebrew studies. Among the Hebraists he tutored were John Tombes and Edward Leigh, and possibly William Pincke and Thomas Coleman. 
All of Pemble's works were published posthumously, mostly through the efforts of Capel. In 'Vindiciae fidei' (1625), a series of lectures delivered at Magdalen Hall, he expounded the doctrine of justification by Christ's imputed righteousness through the infusion of grace into the souls of the elect. In another series of lectures, 'Vindiciae gratiae' (1627), he warned against excessive reliance on humane texts in the study of sacred subjects, espoused a supralapsarian view of predestination, contended that justification precedes faith, and averred that sanctifying grace operates without any assistance from its recipients because of their corrupt nature. Capel and George Walker published this book as a refutation of Arminianism. In 'Tractatus de providentia Dei' (1631) Pemble explained providence as God's action in preserving, governing, and disposing everything, including their intermediate as well as ultimate ends. He called for the frequent observance of the Lord's supper in 'An Introduction to the Worthy Receiving the Sacrament' (1628), yet warned that participation by the unreformed, the ignorant, and the superstitious was sinful. 
Pemble's expository works included 'Salomons Recantation and Repentance' (1627), a commentary on 'Ecclesiastes'; 'A Short and Sweet Exposition upon the First Nine Chapters of Zachary' (1629); and 'The Period of the Persian Monarchie' (1631), an explanation of enigmatic passages in 'Ezra', 'Nehemiah', and 'Daniel', much of it derived from John Rainolds. He also borrowed extensively from William Gouge for his exposition of 'John' 5 (1631). With an epistle by John Tombes, a collection of Pemble's pulpit oratory was published in 1628 as 'Five Godly, and Profitable Sermons' on the subject of the slavery of sin ('John' 8: 34), the mischief of ignorance ('Hosea' 4: 6), the root of apostasy ('Hebrews' 3: 12-13), the benefit of serving God ('Exodus' 34: 23-4), and Christian love ('Song of Solomon' 2: 16). In 'A Fruitfull Sermon' on '1 Corinthians' 15: 19-20 (1629) he exhorted his audience to suffer for Christ, even to the point of martyrdom if necessary. 
Among Pemble's philosophical works is 'De formarum origine' (1629), which explored the origin of life and the soul, and reflected his interest in Aristotle and knowledge of Hebrew and Greek. He dedicated this work to the Calvinist Accepted Frewen, the future vice-chancellor of Oxford and archbishop of York. As his treatise 'De sensibus internis' (1629) evinces, his reading extended from classical writings by Aristotle, Plutarch, and Aulus Gellius to the sixteenth-century Italian Aristotelian Jacobus Zabarella. In 'A Summe of Morall Philosophy' (1630) he examined a wide variety of topics, ranging from ethics, passion, and pleasure to despair, fortitude, and the heroic spirit. 
Pemble's 'A Briefe Introduction to Geography' (1630) was a popular short textbook, which reached a fifth edition in 1675. He relied heavily on Ptolemy and was probably influenced by Bartholomew Keckerman's 'System of Geography' (1611) or 'Compendious System of All Mathematics' (1617). Pemble distinguished between topography, which described a small amount of land; chorography, which was concerned with a county or province; and geography, which was global or universal in scope, and which he explained through such traditional means as circles, horizons, and zones. He found the views of Copernicus improbable and irrational, not because they contradicted scriptural teachings but because they were contrary to experience, and in this limited respect he shared some affinity with the new scientists, yet he contributed nothing substantive to the study of geography or philosophy. However, his favourite student, Tombes, tutored John Wilkins, a prominent advocate of the new science. 
As his health began to fail, Pemble retired to the house of Capel, who was now rector of Eastington, Gloucestershire. Here he died of a fever -- according to Anthony Wood on 14 April 1623, although his will is marked 26 April in the probate register. He was buried in Eastington church's graveyard. Most of his estate went to his siblings Abel, Henry, and Mary Pemble; Abel, of Egerton, Kent, was granted probate on 12 June. Pemble's work attracted attention long after his death, helping to influence Richard Baxter against Arminianism and shape the high-Calvinist tenets of the eighteenth-century Baptists John Gill and John Brine. Baxter and Thomas Blake each cited Pemble in their dispute over the covenants and the role of scripture as an instrument of the Spirit. The Swiss minister Johann Zollikofer (1633-1692) published some of Pemble's work, and Humphrey Chambers thought Pemble and William Ames should not be criticized by name in print. In 'The Divine Purity Defended' (1657) Thomas Pierce accused Pemble of antinomianism, but John Tombes cited him approvingly in his 'Animadversions' (1676) against George Bull, and Thomas Danson, in 'De causa Dei' (1678), accused John Howe of deviating from the true theological tenets of Pemble, Theodore Beza, and William Perkins. 


@@@@@


doc= 21825


Pembridge, John (fl. 1347), chronicler, is probably to be identified with the John Pembridge, who, according to English exchequer records of the period, was the head of the Dominican order in Ireland between 1331 and 1343; no other evidence exists for a Pembridge in Ireland at that period and the strong Dominican slant in the chronicle supports this theory. 
A mid-fifteenth-century manuscript copy of the 'Annales Hiberniae ab anno Christi 1162 usque ad annum 1370', preserved at Trinity College, Dublin, has at the conclusion of 1347 a note, with rubric, which states 'Hic finitur cronica Pembrig'. These annals were printed in William Camden's 'Britannia' in 1607, and in the 'Chartularies of St Mary's Abbey, Dublin' published by the 'Rolls Series' in 1884; both editions used the fifteenth-century Bodleian MS Laud 526, which carries no identification of author. Sir James Ware used the Dublin manuscript later in the seventeenth century to correct Camden's edition. The general acceptance of the name Christopher appears to originate in Walter Harris's edition of Ware's 'De scriptoribus Hiberniae' (1746), which names Pembridge as Christopher; however Ware himself, in the first edition of 'De scriptoribus', published in 1639, only names the annalist as Pembridge. A letter from James Ussher to Richard Stanihurst states that he could never get sight of the chronicle by Christopher Pembridge. It may be that a note by Ware, 'C. [indicating 'cronica'] Pembridge', was misinterpreted by Ussher and Harris as indicating that the chronicler's forename was Christopher. 
As his initial source, Pembridge used the Cistercian annals of St Mary's, Dublin. The Cistercian interest is replaced by Dominican interest from the beginning of the fourteenth century; an entry in 1304 relates that Eustace le Poer laid the first stone of the choir of Friars Preachers on the feast of St Agatha (5 February). Further Dominican notices record donations to the building of St Saviour's in Dublin, and burials both there and in other Dominican priories. Pembridge covers the affairs of Dublin, religious and secular, recounting the foundation of Dublin University in 1320, and giving a graphic description of cooking on fires built on the frozen River Liffey in 1338. He records the panic in Dublin in 1317 occasioned by the Scottish invasion, and gives considerable detail of many other events of the period. The execution of Sir William Bermingham in 1332 elicits a personal lament, while the deaths of the justiciar of Ireland, Sir Ralph Ufford, and his wife in 1346 are greeted with joy. 
Pembridge's annals are most informative on matters concerning the administration of Ireland, and contain material not found elsewhere; he evidently had access to firsthand information. His contribution to the annals ceases in 1347, before the black death, of which there is no mention. After the conclusion of the Pembridge chronicle in 1347 the entries indicate a continuing Dominican interest. 


@@@@@


doc= 21826


Pembridge, Sir Richard (c.1320-1375), soldier and administrator, was descended from one of the collateral branches of the Pembridge family, whose main line had been established in Herefordshire from the reign of Stephen. He rose from relative obscurity to become a Garter knight of Edward III. His success illustrates the social mobility associated with a career in arms during Edward III's French wars, while the serious reverse he encountered at the end of his life reflects the degree to which sustained success depended on the favour of the king. 
Pembridge's father was Sir Richard Pembridge of Clehonger, who represented Herefordshire in the parliaments of September 1337 and February 1338 and died in 1345/6. His tomb, together with that of his wife, Petronilla, survives in the chantry chapel which he endowed at Clehonger church in April 1342. Like many young men of his class the young Richard found himself on the wrong side of the law, when in August 1345 he was included in a group of men whose arrest was ordered as a result of misdemeanours in the Forest of Dean. This boisterous disposition may have helped to secure him a prominent place in Edward III's French wars, a record of which is provided by frequent references in the chronicles of Froissart. He was present at the battle of Crecy in 1346 and also at Poitiers on 19 September 1356. By then he was high in royal favour. He was granted a pension of $30 a year from the exchequer in 1352, raised to $40 and assigned on the priory of Ware in September of that year. By 1353 he had been knighted and joined the royal household. From 1360 he was a member of Edward III's small group of chamber knights, a distinction which he retained until his fall from favour in 1372. 
Pembridge's rising prestige is reflected in appointments to receive Pierre de Lusignan, king of Cyprus, in November 1363 and Jean, king of France, on 4 January 1364. He also accumulated substantial wealth. Some time after 1360 he made a profitable marriage to Elizabeth, formerly the wife of Lord St John and Gerard Lisle, who held the manors of Kingston Lisle in Berkshire and Chilton Foliat in Wiltshire. During the break in hostilities following the treaty of Bretigny in 1360 Pembridge was active in the land market, presumably investing the profits from his service in the war. In 1362-3 he bought the Berkshire manors of Wadley and Wicklesham from Stanley Abbey, and in 1362 the reversion to the manor of Orwell, Cambridgeshire, from Thomas Scalers, who had no heirs. To these he added a string of the lucrative royal grants habitually reserved to chamber knights. In 1361 the king made him lifetime grants of the custodianships of Southampton Castle, the park of Lyndhurst and the New Forest, and the hundred of Redbridge. In 1364 he received the manor of Burgate by Southampton, which had passed to the crown by right of escheat. On 15 August 1367 Pembridge was appointed keeper of Bamburgh Castle and entitled to retain all the profits for his own use including a farm of 26 marks provided he bore the costs of maintaining the fortifications. Since a commission of 20 October 1367 was appointed to survey the dilapidations to the castle during the keepership of Ralph Neville, and the crown later attempted to enforce compensation from Neville's executors, Pembridge may have faced costs well in excess of the expected profit. In 1368 his service and his increasing landed wealth were recognized by his election to the Order of the Garter, occupying the fourth stall on the prince's side, an advancement which may have been associated with Edward's plan for renewing the war. In 1370 Pembridge purchased the constableship of Dover Castle and the wardenship of the Cinque Ports from Ralph Spigurnell, paying in return an immediate lump sum of 400 marks and thereafter an annual pension of $100. This office carried an annual fee of $300 and gave him an important role in the organization of ordnance and supply which offered the chance of further profit. On 6 July 1370 he supervised the embarkation of Sir Robert Knolles's expedition and in the same year received $116 9's'. 7died for his expenses towards the war. In addition to his administrative responsibilities he continued active service and was present at the naval battle of Bourgneuf near Brittany in August 1371. 
Pembridge's fall from favour was sudden and may have been related to the dismissal from the chancellorship of his associate William Wykeham, bishop of Winchester, in March 1371. Early in 1372 the king instructed Pembridge to take up office as lieutenant of Ireland. This was an awkward appointment and Pembridge refused it. The preceding years had been characterized by a shrinkage of the English crown's legal and territorial control there, and William Windsor's attempt to increase the Irish tax yield during his lieutenancy (1369-71) provoked such protest that Edward was forced to recall him. While Pembridge's recalcitrance is therefore understandable, the personal cost to him was high. He was deprived of his offices and ordered to leave the court. On 12 July 1372 a new commission was appointed to investigate the dilapidations at Bamburgh. But now special attention was paid to the peculation and maladministration of the deputies who had acted for Pembridge during his keepership. He died, still in disgrace, on 26 July 1375. His will is dated at London 31 May 1368, suggesting that it was prepared with the possible resumption of the war in mind. As well as making minor financial bequests to servants and associates Pembridge instructed that his body should be buried either in Hereford Cathedral or 'in situ' if he died overseas. In either case a monument, enclosed with an iron railing and modelled on that of his fellow Garter knight William Beauchamp in St Paul's, was to be erected in Hereford Cathedral 'before the image of the blessed Mary on the south side' (Sharpe, 188-9). The monument, in alabaster and probably of London manufacture, was sited in accordance with his will. Before his wife, Elizabeth, died on 16 September 1362 she gave birth to one son, Henry. He died, still a minor, on 5 October, passing the inheritance to the children of Richard's sisters, Amice and Hawise. 


@@@@@


doc= 21827


Pembrooke, Thomas (1658x62-c.1690), history and portrait painter, was possibly born near Canterbury, Kent. Of his parents, nothing is known. He was a pupil of Marcellus Laroon (whether the elder or the younger is uncertain) and executed several works for Charles Granville, earl of Bath, who became his patron. A picture by Pembrooke, 'Hagar and Ishmael', was engraved in mezzotint by John Raphael Smith. Pembrooke died young 'c'.1690. 


@@@@@


doc= 21828


Pencester, Sir Stephen of (d. 1298), administrator, is of obscure origins -- surprisingly so, in the light of his prominence later. Evidence even for the names of his parents or his date of birth is lacking. Edward Hasted, the late-eighteenth-century historian of Kent, claimed that Pencester's family took their name from Penshurst soon after the time of William I, but this is conjectural. His manor of Penshurst was held at his death in portions from four different lords, so it is uncertain what he inherited there. Most of his other possessions were acquired in his own lifetime. He referred in a charter of 1282 to his uncle John Belemeyns, a canon of St Paul's, London, from at least 1216 to about 1252, who had endowed a chapel at Leigh near Penshurst. 
Pencester first appears in royal records in June 1263, when, probably already a knight, he was made captain to repress disorder in Sussex and Kent. He must already have acquired administrative experience, perhaps in the service of the Clare lords of Tonbridge, 5 miles from Penshurst. If so, he changed his allegiance, once civil war began to divide local society, to the Lord Edward, who was henceforth his patron. He was certainly unsuccessful as captain: his powers were given to Roger of Leybourne in December 1263. Once royal authority was restored in 1265, however, Pencester's career revived. Keeper of Hastings, Winchelsea, and Rye from November 1265, he became constable of Dover Castle, initially as Edward's deputy, in December 1267, and sheriff of Kent from 1268 to 1271. In August 1271 he was first referred to as warden of the Cinque Ports; Leybourne's death in that year probably offers a partial explanation for his rise to local prominence. Thereafter Pencester served as both warden and constable until his own death. Deputies were often appointed, but royal mandates imply, and sometimes specify, that he exercised close personal control over his offices. 
On Edward I's return to England in 1274, Pencester's appointments were confirmed, with an allowance of $274 13's'. 4died later raised to $300, to maintain Dover Castle and his staff. As warden, he enforced royal orders to regulate cross-channel travel and trade, such as the embargo on exports of wool to Flanders of 1270-74. He also supervised the government of the ports, exacting the services that they owed to the crown and intervening in their disputes, whether local, like those over rights in Minster and Fordwich, or with other towns, notably Yarmouth in Norfolk. These powers spilled over into more general peacekeeping in the south-east, orders to arrest malefactors in Kent and Sussex being accompanied by a stream of more specific oyer and terminer commissions, often joining Pencester with established royal judges. Some, like the inquiries into former rebels in Canterbury in 1275, or into royal rights usurped by Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester, in 1279, reflected the inheritance of disputes from the civil wars of the 1260s. Responsibility for collecting revenues in the ports also led Pencester into a wider involvement with royal fiscal policy, joining a commission to prosecute coin-clippers, mostly Jews, and to regulate the workings of the royal exchanges in 1279. From 1281 he took a leading role in implementing Edward I's project to build the new town of Winchelsea. But Pencester's one diplomatic mission to Gascony, with Otto de Grandson in 1276, does not seem to have been repeated, though he was in Wales for part of 1277. 
It seems therefore that the pattern of Pencester's regional responsibilities set in the 1270s lasted to the end of his life, though in the 1290s he had to cope with the additional demands of the French war: first the attempts to resolve maritime disputes in 1291-4, and then the war effort itself, culminating in the king's Flemish expedition of 1297. His career set important precedents in linking together responsibilities for the government of south-east England and its coastline under the wardenship of the Cinque Ports based at Dover. He showed an ability to work with other royal officials and with the leaders of local society, even in some measure to reconcile their interests; though the evidence for this is largely negative, in the relative paucity of complaints against him in Edwardian records. The chronicle of Dover Priory, championing the cause of Prior Richard de Wenchepe, who was faced with a revolt of his own monks in 1270-73, accused Pencester of hostility to the prior, and dramatized several conversations between them. But the events suggest rather that Pencester sought to avoid involvement in the dispute, until forced into action by royal command. 
While the focus of his authority was in Dover, Pencester accumulated property near his original holdings in west Kent. A grant of free warren in his demesne lands at Penshurst, Tonbridge, Hever, and Chiddingstone in 1263 was augmented by another in 1280, for demesnes he now held at Allington, Boxley, and Aylesford. Licence to crenellate his house at Hever in 1271 was followed by another in 1281 for Allington, where he also held a market and fair. The flow of royal favours normal for an official in good standing was accompanied by occasional substantial grants, the largest that of $600 'for his long and praiseworthy service' in 1277 ('CClR, 1272-1279', 379). Nevertheless, given the scale of that service over thirty years, his fortunes bear out the view that Edward I rewarded his agents sparingly. 
Pencester married first Rose de Baseville, before 1268, then by 1281 Margaret, a member of the de Burgh family, though her exact parentage is unclear. On her death in 1308 her heir was John Orreby, her son from a previous marriage, while her dower lands reverted to Pencester's two daughters from his marriage to Rose: Joan 'aged forty and more' and Alice 'aged thirty and more'. Pencester himself died between 14 February and 14 April 1298, not 1299 as misreported in a later entry on the close roll for 1313. His failure to leave a male heir meant that his estates were broken up, and this has contributed to the obscurity of his family history. He is commemorated by the upper half of a Purbeck marble effigy in Penshurst church, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 21829


Penda (d. 655), king of the Mercians, was the son of Pybba and (at least according to later genealogies) a scion of the Mercian royal dynasty which traced its origin back to Woden. The date at which Penda became king is far from certain. The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' puts his accession in 626 and notes that his reign lasted thirty years (this last detail is roughly consistent, for he died in 655); it also says that he was fifty years of age when he became king, which seems unlikely and is perhaps a mistake for his age at death. The chronicle goes on to mention a battle which took place at Cirencester in 628 between Penda on the one hand and the West Saxon rulers Cynegils and Cwichelm on the other, after which the combatants 'came to terms'; there is reason to think that these terms may have included an acknowledgement of Penda's overlordship over the southern part of the kingdom of the Hwicce (modern Gloucestershire), an area which would appear to have been under West Saxon control since 577. This picture of a flourishing start to Penda's reign is rather dashed by Bede's information about events in 633, when Penda allied with a (Christian) Welsh king, Cadwallon of Gwynedd, for a campaign against Northumbria. At the battle of Hatfield Chase on 12 October the Northumbrian army was routed and King Eadwine was killed, along with one of his sons; another son, Eadfrith, 'was compelled to desert to Penda' and later met his death at Penda's hands. It is a problem that Bede appears to date the beginning of Penda's reign to the year of this successful campaign: he states that he was 'a most vigorous man from the royal stock of the Mercians, who from that time ruled his people for twenty-two years with varying success' ('Hist. eccl.', 2.20). To add to the complication, there is a third source that gives Penda a reign length of only ten years, starting apparently from 642, and which implies that his brother Eowa had been king of the Mercians before this point; this is the 'Historia Brittonum', which is a far less authoritative source than Bede and the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'. It has been sensibly suggested that the key to these seemingly contradictory details about Penda's accession and reign length may be Bede's observation that he ruled 'with varying success'; perhaps his reign was interrupted by reverses at various times, so that he had to re-establish his authority. There is also some possibility that Penda may have ruled jointly for some time with his brother Eowa, a situation which could have affected calculations of the length of his reign. 
Nine years after dispatching King Eadwine, Penda returned to Northumbria and killed King Oswald at the battle of 'Maserfelth' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 3.9); it would seem that it was during this battle that Eowa met his death. Again the Mercian forces appear to have had Welsh support; a Welsh poem which may be as early as the ninth century claims that a king of Powys fought in the battle on Penda's side. These military alliances with the British kingdoms to the west of Mercia may provide some explanation for Penda's extraordinarily successful invasions of other Anglo-Saxon kingdoms. He seems to have made several incursions deep into Northumbria: on one occasion (perhaps in the aftermath of his victory at 'Maserfelth') his forces reached as far north as the Northumbrian citadel at Bamburgh, and were only prevented from capturing it by a fortunate miracle (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 3.10); and at a later date, some time between 651 and 655, the Mercian army destroyed a church not far from Bamburgh where Aedan had died (ibid., 3.17). Yet Penda's relations with Northumbria were not always on a bellicose level. There is a possibility that he helped Oswald's son AEthelwald gain the throne of Deira; certainly AEthelwald was ranged on Penda's side against Oswiu of Northumbria during the Mercian king's final campaign against Northumbria in 655 (his last-minute withdrawal may have contributed to Penda's catastrophic defeat). At some point before 653 Penda married his daughter Cyneburh to Oswiu's son, Alchfrith, and in 653 he allowed his eldest son, Peada, to make a reciprocal match with Oswiu's daughter. In Bede's carefully wrought narrative Penda fulfils the role of an implacable pagan warrior-king, who makes apocalyptic descents on vulnerable Christian kingdoms to wreak God's mysterious will and provide opportunities for martyrdom and miracles. But these dramatic episodes were only a facet of his reign; it is clear that he also interacted with neighbouring dynasties and kingdoms in other ways. 
Bede's brief notices of Penda's onslaughts on East Anglia give an impression of motiveless aggression. His armies invaded; the East Anglians feared that they would be defeated and so sought to enlist divine support by dragging their saintly former king Sigeberht from his monastery; but both Sigeberht and the current king, Ecgric, were killed. Later Penda also killed the succeeding East Anglian king, Anna. The chronology of East Anglian history in the seventh century is very difficult to establish, but there is reason to think that Anna died in 654. It has been suggested that there could be a connection between this (perhaps second) invasion of East Anglia and Penda's establishment of his son Peada as ruler of the Middle Angles in the early 650s. 'Middle Anglia' was a conglomeration of tribes and minor kingdoms located in the east midlands between Mercia proper and East Anglia. Overlordship of this region seems to have been contested between the Mercian and East Anglian rulers, so the appointment of Peada as king may mark Penda's final subjugation of Middle Anglia; certainly after this time the region remained firmly under Mercian control. It seems very likely that Penda's wars with the East Angles were prompted by strategic considerations. 
There are some brief details about Penda's relations with the West Saxon rulers to the south. He married his sister to Cenwalh, who ruled Wessex between 641 and 672; this alliance may perhaps have been arranged about 628, after Penda had fought against Cenwalh's father and brother at Cirencester, and may indeed have formed part of the 'terms' agreed by the antagonists. Shortly after Cenwalh's accession he repudiated his wife, prompting an angry Penda to invade and drive him from his kingdom, to take refuge with Anna of the East Angles; after three years' exile Cenwalh returned, apparently without opposition from the Mercian ruler (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 3.7). It seems very likely that both the initial repudiation and the insouciant return took place at times when Penda's power was on the wane, eclipsed by a Northumbrian resurgence or by internal difficulties within Mercia. Indeed, Penda's reign may have been punctuated by periods of domination over Southumbria alternating with periods when his influence was limited. 
The last episode in Penda's career took place when his star was very much in the ascendant. Backed by a huge army he threatened Oswiu of Northumbria, who was forced to negotiate; at the time Oswiu's son Ecgfrith was a hostage at Penda's court. According to Bede, Oswiu offered the invader vast quantities of treasure if he agreed to return home and stop devastating Northumbria, but Penda refused, supposedly because he was determined to exterminate the whole Northumbrian people. The two forces met on the banks of the River 'Winwaed' (a tributary of the Humber), almost certainly on 15 November 655. Oswiu's army was (allegedly) tiny. Penda, on the other hand, commanded a force which is supposed to have consisted of thirty 'legions', each commanded by a 'royal ealdorman'. One of these allies was AEthelhere, king of the East Angles, and another was AEthelwald, sub-king of Deira: it seems that Penda's army included detachments from kingdoms which recognized his authority, and that the 'royal ealdormen' leading them would in some instances have been recognized as kings in their own right. Penda's ability to raise such forces under his command is a measure of his dominant position in 655; the clash with Oswiu can probably be understood as a campaign to challenge Northumbrian overlordship over Southumbria (hence Penda's refusal to compromise and his avowed intention of decisively defeating the Northumbrian people). But it was the Mercian king who was defeated and killed at the 'Winwaed', along with most of his followers. Oswiu occupied Mercia for three years, until a Mercian revolt established Penda's son Wulfhere as king. 
Of Penda's domestic policies in Mercia very little is known, although Bede provides an intriguing insight into his attitude to Christianity. He himself remained a committed pagan, but he allowed Christian missionaries to preach in Mercia, 'if anyone wished to listen' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 3.21): it seems unlikely that the priests had much success with the Mercians in the face of their ruler's disapproval, and it was not until after Penda's death that an episcopal structure was established in the midlands. According to Bede, Penda reserved his contempt, not for Christians as such, but for those who had accepted the Christian faith but did not live according to its precepts. It is impossible to discover whether this was indeed Penda's own view, or whether it was Bede's decision to attribute this didactic sentiment to the most celebrated of Anglo-Saxon pagans. 
Penda's queen at the time of his death was Cynewise, whose antecedents are unknown. Perhaps with her, or perhaps from an earlier alliance, Penda had at least three sons: Peada, who was ruler of the Middle Angles from 653 until 655, and then very briefly king of the South Mercians under Oswiu's authority; Wulfhere, king of the Mercians from 658 until 675; and AEthelred (d. after 704), who succeeded Wulfhere. Later tradition also identifies Penda as the father of Merewalh, ruler of the Magonsaete (who lived in the area of modern Shropshire and Herefordshire). Opinions are divided on the validity of this suggestion; if correct, then it may be the case that Penda established Merewalh as sub-king of the western part of the Mercian confederation in the same way that he had made Peada his sub-king in Middle Anglia. One of Penda's daughters, Cyneburh, was married to Alchfrith, son of Oswiu and a Christian. She is supposed to have retired after her husband's death to a minster at Castor in Northamptonshire, where she was buried with her sister Cyneswith; their bodies are said to have been translated to the monastery at Peterborough in 963. A late hagiographical source states that Cyneswith had been married to Offa, king of the East Angles. Two further daughters of Penda are mentioned in hagiographical material connected with St Osgyth of Aylesbury: Wilburh (St Osgyth's mother) and Eadburh (probably the woman of that name associated with a minster at Bicester). 
Penda was the last great pagan ruler of Anglo-Saxon England. He is remembered as a military leader of extraordinary effectiveness and a scourge of Christian kingdoms, responsible for the deaths in battle of two successive kings of Northumbria (Eadwine and Oswald), and of three East Anglian rulers (Ecgric, Anna, and the former king Sigeberht); but his greatest achievement seems to have been the establishment of a long-standing Mercian overlordship over the diverse tribes and kingdoms of the west midlands and Middle Anglia. 


@@@@@


doc= 21830


Pendarves, John (1622/3-1656), Particular Baptist minister, was born at Crowan, Cornwall, son of John Pendarves. The Pendarves were county gentry but this branch seems not to have been prosperous, and at the age of fifteen John and an older brother, Ralph, entered Exeter College, Oxford, in 1638 as servitors. He graduated BA in 1642. Exeter College under John Prideaux was a stronghold of puritanism opposing the prevailing Laudian orientation of the university. According to Wood, Pendarves ran through the various forms of radical religion on offer before embracing Baptism in the later 1640s. In May 1644, when parliamentary forces took Abingdon (then in Berkshire) from the royalists, he became vicar of St Helen's, the larger, and traditionally the more radical, of the two churches in that town. He was also by 1649 minister of the nearby town of Wantage, but resigned both livings in or soon after 1650 and took on the formal leadership of the Particular (Calvinistic) Baptist congregation in Abingdon. In the rest of his short career, he became increasingly active and prominent in both local and national Baptist affairs. 
By 1649 Pendarves was in contact with William Kiffin, the London Baptist leader, and was probably already engaged in preaching and organizing in the villages within reach of Abingdon and Wantage. Baptist churches were in being both in Abingdon and in Wantage before 1650, and drew their membership from a wide radius. Pendarves's slowness to resign from his parish cures even after he had become a convinced separatist, and his readiness to take the engagement in 1649, may have been a function of his financial needs. The incumbency of St Helen's was worth only $20 per annum but the committee for plundered ministers allocated him an additional $50 per annum, although the earlier payments fell heavily into arrears. Only after 1648 did a personal lectureship in Marcham and Abingdon guarantee him an independent income of $30 per annum. It was presumably in order to have central congregations of adequate size to support Pendarves and the Wantage minister, Robert Keate, with their voluntary contributions that no further Baptist churches were set up in the Vale of White Horse during Pendarves's lifetime, in spite of a general principle that such churches should be local. Soon after his death his congregation split, with ninety-nine members leaving to found new churches at Longworth and Faringdon to the west of Abingdon. Since the Abingdon church remained more significant than these, it probably numbered some hundreds of members at its peak. 
Pendarves proved a talented organizer. To maintain co-ordination among Baptist congregations within a region which included, at its greatest extent, parts of Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, and Hampshire as well as Berkshire, he and Benjamin Cox had, in 1652, established the Abingdon Association, a forum at which 'messengers' would meet, usually three times a year for up to three days, at Tetsworth, Oxfordshire. This followed normal Baptist practice at this time. By the time of Pendarves's death, the number of individual churches represented was twelve. Discussion was limited to issues of local importance; questions of dogma and political strategy were referred up to the Baptist assembly at Petty France in London. 
In spite of his sectarian position, Pendarves remained a figure of high local respectability. As late as 1653 he could still preach before the mayor of Abingdon and civic notables in St Helen's Church. He was not named to the Berkshire commission -- the ejectors -- which was dominated by Presbyterians, and declined to co-operate with them in 1654 in their prosecution of the Behmenist John Pordage of Bradfield; but one of the accusations made in the same year before the ejectors against the orientalist Edward Pococke, who had been banished from Oxford to his living at Childrey, was that he had refused Pendarves permission to preach from his pulpit. 
Pendarves was known as a controversialist, always ready to engage in set-piece preaching contests with opponents. One such occasion was at Ilsley, Berkshire, in 1649, when Pordage's contribution led to his later heresy trial before the ejectors. Another was against the moderate Jasper Mayne at Watlington church in 1652, which seems to have been somewhat disturbed by Pendarves's rowdy followers. Mayne suggested that the standard appellations applied by radicals to the traditional Anglican church -- 'whore of Babylon', 'habitation of devils', and the like -- were unnecessary and inappropriate. Pendarves was unimpressed, and in a major pamphlet, 'Arrowes Against Babylon', published in 1656, emphasized the radical view that the church, now dominated by presbyterians, was simply the same whore in attractive new clothes. He upheld the principle of the separation of the godly from the reprobate, and attacked the established clergy for allowing the latter into their churches. This provoked replies from John Tickell ('Church-Rules', 1656) and William Ley ('Ueperaspistis', 1656), Pendarves's successors at St Helen's and Wantage respectively, both of whom accused him of arrogance and authoritarianism. 
Because of his west country origins, Pendarves was in close contact with the Baptist Western Association, and attended several of its meetings in the last years of his life. This association, under the influence of Thomas Collier and a group of Fifth Monarchist clergy, maintained a certain independence of the politically cautious line of the Particular Baptist leadership in London, and by 1655 was disillusioned with the protectorate and disappointed at the continued delay in the arrival of the millennium. Pendarves joined with the western millenarians in a pamphlet, 'Sighs for Sion' (1656), warning the faithful against despair and enjoining them to increased spiritual effort by way of prayer and fasting. In the period of tension that followed the dissolution of the first protectorate parliament in early 1655, when Thomas Harrison and several other millenarians were effectively on trial before Cromwell and his council, Pendarves was one of a group brought in at their request to help them argue their case. Some of Pendarves's publications, perhaps most notably 'Sighs', can be read as subversive, but there is no evidence that he was ever personally involved in Fifth Monarchy plots. 
Nevertheless, a proportion of Pendarves's historical importance is posthumous. As recounted by Wood and William Hughes, following his death in London from dysentery in early September 1656, his body was returned to Abingdon and his funeral, on 30 September and the two days immediately following, was the occasion for a millenarian demonstration of force, with inflammatory preaching and provocation of the protectorate authorities. The proceedings were brought to an end, amid mutual recriminations, by cavalry units brought in from Wallingford under the command of Major-General Bridge. It was under cover of this gathering that plans were laid for Venner's first Fifth Monarchist rising, which duly took place in the following April and was speedily crushed. The prophetess Anna Trapnel celebrated Pendarves as a saint who had died so as to plead directly with God for the second coming of Christ. 
Pendarves's writings also showed mainstream puritan preoccupations. He wrote against luxury in dress and personal adornments ('Endeavours for the Reformation in Saints Apparel', 1656), which was a particularly strong concern of the Western Association. A tract against the Quakers ('Some Queries', 1656) brought a turgid denunciation from James Nayler ('An Answer', 1656) and an elliptical attack from Denys Hollister ('The Skirts of the Whore Discovered', 1656), who claimed that it was a plagiarism. In spite of rigorism on believers' baptism, Pendarves was on friendly terms with the moderate Baptist and millenarian Henry Jessey and took an interest in his schemes for calendar reform. 
Pendarves married before 1647 Thomasine Newcomen [
Pendarves and his wife had six known children, of whom at least three died in infancy. Thomasine Pendarves was resident in Abingdon until at least 1671, paying occasional fines for attending conventicles, but then disappears from the record. 


@@@@@


doc= 21831


Pender, Sir John (1816-1896), textile merchant and telegraph entrepreneur, was born on 10 September 1816, at Bonhill, Dunbartonshire, Scotland, the second child of James Pender, textile merchant of the Vale of Leven, Dunbartonshire, and his wife, Marion, 'nee' Mason. Pender had a sister, Margaret, born in 1814. He was educated at the village school, then at Glasgow high school, where he received a gold medal for design. He followed his father's trade, and by the age of twenty-one was the manager of a Glasgow textile firm, before embarking as a textile trader on his own account. He established himself in Glasgow, and then in Manchester, soon developing an extensive trade in fabrics to China, India, and the East, which brought him considerable wealth. In 1840 he married Marion (died 1841), daughter of James Cairns of Glasgow. They had a son, James. In 1851 he married Emma (died 1890), daughter of Henry Denison of Daybrook, Arnold, Nottinghamshire; they had two sons, Henry and John, and two daughters. 
When a transatlantic cable was proposed, Pender was among those who invested in the new Atlantic Telegraph Company, formed on 20 October 1856. After various failures, a cable was successfully laid in the summer of 1858 but, although messages were passed, the link soon deteriorated. It failed after a few months, and never carried commercial traffic. Work continued, however, to improve both the cables and the associated telegraph apparatus, and Pender retained his interest in the affair. On 7 April 1864 he brought together the firms of Glass, Elliot, cable manufacturers, and the Gutta Percha Company, makers of insulated cable core, to found the Telegraph Construction and Maintenance Company (TCM), under his chairmanship. Pender and his co-director Daniel Gooch, who was also a director of the Great Western Railway Company and of the company that owned the ship 'Great Eastern', raised funds, and made an offer to the Atlantic Telegraph Company to make and lay a new transatlantic cable, chartering the 'Great Eastern' as the only vessel large enough to carry the 2500 nautical miles of cable needed to span the ocean between Ireland and Newfoundland. Laying commenced in the summer of 1865, but was brought to a stop when the cable was lost in deep water. At this critical point, Pender offered his personal guarantee of $250,000, a new cable was manufactured, and in 1866 it was successfully laid. Much of the lost cable was recovered, and a second crossing completed. 
In 1868 Gooch took over the chairmanship of TCM, leaving Pender to form the group of companies which were to link England with much of the rest of the world. Pender reorganized the four companies involved in the link to India: the British-Indian Submarine Telegraph Company, the Falmouth, Gibraltar, and Malta Telegraph Company, the Marseilles, Algiers, and Malta Telegraph Company, and the Anglo-Mediterranean Telegraph Company. When the line was completed, a grand celebration was held on 23 June 1870 at Pender's house, 18 Arlington Street, off Piccadilly, in London. The first messages were simply 'How are you?', to which came the reply 'All well'. The astonishing fact that this exchange took less than five minutes, when communication with India had previously taken several months, was truly a cause for celebration. Some 700 guests thronged Pender's house and the pavilion erected in his courtyard, ranging in status from the royalty of England and India through assorted European nobility and diplomats, naval officers, and other important persons. They were entertained by Cromwell Varley and Apps who performed various spectacular electrical and telegraphic demonstrations. Many messages were then passed to India; the 'Liverpool Courier' reporting in awe, 'Sitting in the house of a commoner, the Prince of Wales sent a message to the Viceroy in India' ('Souvenir of the Inaugural Fete', 53). This link with a distant colony was to change for ever the relationship of governor and governed. 
Pender went on to form in 1872 the Eastern Telegraph Company, which absorbed numerous smaller companies and played an important role in the defence and prosperity of the United Kingdom. He came to preside over companies capitalized to nearly $15 million and operating over 73,000 nautical miles of cable. Eastern ultimately became the largest submarine telegraph company in the world. 
In his later years Pender, as chairman of the Metropolitan Electric Supply Company, the largest undertaking of its kind, concerned himself with the electric lighting of London. He sat in parliament as Liberal member for Totnes in 1862-6, but was unseated on petition. In 1868 he unsuccessfully contested Linlithgowshire, but was returned for the Wick burghs, as a Liberal from 1872 to 1885 and as a Liberal Unionist from 1892 to 1896, when he resigned. He unsuccessfully contested the Wick burghs in 1885, the Stirling burghs and Wick burghs in 1886, and Govan in 1889. On the occasion of his being made a KCMG in 1888 the earl of Derby presided at a grand banquet in his honour, held in the Hotel Metropole, and presented to Lady Pender a portrait of Sir John by Hubert Herkomer RA. In 1892 he was promoted to GCMG. He held many foreign orders, among them the Legion d'honneur and the grand cordon of the Mejidiye. He was also a fellow of the Imperial Institute, of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, of the Royal Geographical Society, and of the Scottish Society of Antiquaries. 
At one of his company meetings, Pender confessed to his shareholders that he had few outside interests, apart from yachting; nevertheless he held a very fine collection of porcelain, pictures, and fine art, which after his death took some eight days to pass under the hammer at Christies. A lavish privately published catalogue of 1894 detailed the oils, watercolours, drawings, and sculpture at Arlington Street and at Foots Cray Place, his country seat in Kent. Pender died at Foots Cray on 7 July 1896. He was buried in the parish churchyard. His son James sat as MP for Mid-Northamptonshire from 1895 to 1900, and was created a baronet in 1897; Henry died in 1881; and the youngest son, John Cuthbert Denison-Pender, followed in his father's footsteps, becoming manager, director, or chairman of numerous telegraph and cable companies. The younger daughter, Marion Denison, married Sir George William des Voeux, a colonial governor. 


@@@@@


doc= 21832


Penderel, Richard (d. 1672), royalist sympathizer, was the third son of William Penderel (died in or before 1651) and his wife, Jane (died after 1662), of Hobbal Grange in Tong, Shropshire, where Richard was born. The family were Catholic and rented a 'little farm' (Broadley, 118) from another Catholic, Basil Fitzherbert of nearby Boscobel House. Richard was described by Thomas Blount as 'of honest parentage, but mean degree' (Blount, 40), while Father John Huddleston referred to him as a humble woodcutter and 'labouring' man (Matthews, 113). In an interview with Charles II in early June 1660 Richard allegedly called himself a 'raw and undisciplined rustic' ('Antiquarian Repertory', 1780, 2.59). But, although illiterate, he was in fact of yeoman status, as appears by a letter of attorney which he authorized on 24 June 1663. By the time of Charles II's escape after the battle of Worcester in 1651 he had succeeded his father to the life tenancy of the Hobbal Grange property and it was from there that he was summoned to attend the king when the latter arrived at nearby White Ladies Priory in the small hours of 4 September 1651. The hapless monarch was placed under his care and protection. Penderel's first task was to disguise the king as 'William Jones', 'a la mode the woodman' (Fea, 'Flight', 1897, 204); this he did by cutting the king's hair 'with a pair of shears' and dressing him in a suit of his own clothes comprising 'a doe-skin leather doublet' and a pair of breeches made of 'green course cloth' (Matthews, 88). Fortunately for the king, Richard was a tall man like himself and thus his modest attire was a perfect fit. Richard next hid the king in an adjacent wood called Spring coppice and attended to his physical comforts as best he could, in the pouring rain, for the rest of the day, while maintaining a vigilant watch for the enemy. In the evening Penderel took the king to the family farm where his wife, Mary (died in or after 1689), prepared supper while Charles held the couple's daughter, Nan, on his knee. From here the king and Penderel set out on foot for Wales. They had an unpleasant encounter at Evelith Mill when the angry occupant accosted them and gave chase as they fled down a muddy country lane, Charles being forced to listen to 'the rusling of Penderel's leathern Breeches' (Broadley, 122) to retain his sense of direction. By dawn the two men had reached Madeley and the king was not 'a little troubled' when Richard 'very indiscreetly and without any leave' aroused the household of Francis Wolfe and sought his protection (Matthews, 46). The king need not have feared, since Penderel knew Wolfe to be 'an honest man' (ibid., 44) from his previous acquaintance with him as a fellow Catholic. After hiding with the king in Wolfe's barn all next day, and discovering that the passage over the River Severn was blocked by Cromwell's troops, Penderel and his royal companion returned to Hobbal Grange early in the morning of Saturday 5 September, Charles at one point helping him over a stream because he could not swim. Charles immediately went on to Boscobel and the following Sunday Penderel served as one of Charles's bodyguard during the famous nocturnal journey from Boscobel House to Moseley Hall, near Wolverhampton. 
Though much threatened by 'a peevish neighbour' (Blount, 42), who suspected his complicity in Charles's getaway, Penderel escaped detection until the Restoration, when he came into his own. 'Friend Richard' was warmly welcomed at court in June 1660 when the king urged all about him to 'respect this good man for my sake' (F. Grose, 'Antiquarian Repertory', 2.59). On 12 April 1662 Charles awarded Penderel $200 'to enable him to live in the quality of a farmer' ('CSP dom.', '1661-2', 338), as well as subsequently settling upon him and his heirs forever an annual pension of $100. Penderel continued to live at Hobbal Grange but made regular visits to London to see the king and it was there, on 7 February 1672, while staying in the house of Henry Arundel in the Great Turnstile in Lincoln's Inn Fields that he died of a fever. In his will, dated the same day, he proudly refers to himself as a 'gentleman' and was now clearly a man of substance, bequeathing his eldest son, Thomas, a newly built house at Statherton in Shropshire, an annuity to another son, Simon, and a tenement in Russell Street, Walsall, to a third, William. He was buried on 11 February in the churchyard of St Giles-in-the-Fields where his grave was marked by a special tomb-chest, reputedly commissioned by the king, which praised him as 'Unparalled Penderel' ('N&Q', 1st ser., 11, 1855, 410). A portrait by Zoust depicts him as stockily built, with chubby cheeks, prominent nose, and long, flowing hair. He looks every inch 'an honest man' (Broadley, 60), and his likeness more than explains why his contemporaries dubbed him Trusty Dick (Matthews, 114). 
Richard Penderel's four brothers were also instrumental in Charles II's escape. The eldest brother, 
During the first day of the king's stay at Boscobel William and his wife furnished the wood ladder to enable Charles to climb into the boughs of the royal oak as well as providing two pillows for him to rest on, to say nothing of their diversionary tactic of 'peaking up and down' (Matthews, 92) in the adjoining wood to deflect the attention of the parliamentary cavalry, who were then combing the entire area. That evening and the following day the couple were equally solicitous about the king's welfare, plying him with food as well as ministering to his blistered feet and bleeding nose, hospitality which put Charles in a 'good humour' and prompted him to address William's spouse as 'My Dame Joan' (Blount, 39). After the king's departure husband and wife suffered considerable molestation, William being twice interrogated at Shrewsbury while Joan was 'much affrighted' (ibid., 39) by the frequent searches of Boscobel House. 
Both William and his wife lived to see the Restoration. Joan died in 1669 and was interred in the graveyard of White Ladies Priory, while William continued to live at Boscobel. He was an extremely enterprising man, turning Boscobel into a tourist attraction and converting part of the house into an inn named, appropriately enough, the Royal Oak. He was also a recipient of the royal bounty, having a regular pension of $100 a year and other gifts of money. In his later years he was persecuted for his Catholicism, particularly during the Popish Plot, though he did receive the royal protection in January 1679. Like his brother Richard, William was a tall man; an engraving of him at the age of eighty-four suggests that he had an elongated face with a moustache and goatee beard. He died at Boscobel in August 1700. 
According to Father Huddleston, the second eldest brother, 


At the Restoration Penderel was rewarded with a pension, though his annuity of $66 13's'. 4died was less than the $100 assigned to his brothers. In May 1668 he was living at Little Bloxwich in Staffordshire and had now become a yeoman. He and his wife, Eleanor, had at least four children, which proved such a 'great charge' ('CSP dom.', '1672-3', 496-7) that he was obliged to appeal to the king for a gift of $200 to satisfy his creditors. Charles not only furnished the money but secured Humphrey's son Edmund the position of footman to his wife, Queen Catherine. Humphrey died in 1687 or 1688 with a reputation for being a man of 'solid honesty' and 'resolved loyalty' (Broadley, 63). 




@@@@@


doc= 21833


Pendlebury, Henry (1626-1695), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Jowkin, Bury parish, Lancashire, on 6 May 1626. His father, Henry Pendlebury, a member of a family long established in West Houghton, Deane parish, Lancashire, may have been the vicar of Deane recorded as contributing towards a collection for the recovery of the palatinate in 1622, and may be the Henry Pendlebury who was interred in Bury in 1666. The name of his mother is uncertain, but she may be one of two wives of Henry Pendlebury recorded as buried in the parish: an unnamed woman in 1639 or Margaret in 1654. From Bury grammar school the younger Henry passed to Christ's College, Cambridge, where he was admitted sizar on 1 May 1645, graduating BA on 26 April 1648. 
Pendlebury returned to Bury and came under the authority of the Bury presbyterian classis. In December 1648 he was preaching at Ashworth chapel, Middleton parish, to the east of Bury, but by 1650 the Commonwealth church survey noted that he was 'lately minister at Ashworth, but hath ceased to officiate for want of maintenance' (Fishwick, 'Lancashire and Cheshire Church Surveys', 1.26). For an individual who was to become one of the patriarchs of Lancashire dissent, his path to ordination was not smooth. On 11 July 1650 he appeared before the Bury classis to present his thesis and be examined; it was happy to proceed with his ordination upon the production of his university accreditation, a certificate of his having led an honest life at his last charge, and evidence that he had taken the covenant. He duly produced these at the meeting on 15 August, but by then he had fallen under the censure of the classis: 'in this interime Mr. Livesey had consumated a marriage betwixt the said Mr. Pendlebury and one Sarah Smith clandestinely irregularly' (Shaw, 'Minutes of the Bury Presbyterian Classis', 1.115). The irregularity seems to have lain in the lack of consent of either set of parents and that James Livesey was not at that point ordained. The two young men managed to placate the classis: parental consent was obtained and Pendlebury and Livesey were both ordained at Turton chapel, Bolton parish, on 23 October 1650. 
If the classis minutes are literally true, then Pendlebury married Sarah Smith (died 1714) in July or August 1650. But some confusion is caused by the record in Bury parish register of the marriage of a Henry Pendlebury to Sara Woolsenholm on 26 April 1648, who may or may not be the present subject (the marriage took place on the day recorded for his graduation from Cambridge). Possibly Sarah Smith was a second wife, or possibly Woolsenholm was an alias and the classis was misled as to when the marriage had actually taken place. 
Pendlebury became minister of Horwich chapel in the parish of Deane. The classis minutes record repeated attempts to get him to proceed with the election of elders and have them approved by the classis. He had apparently not done so by the time he appeared before the classis on 9 February 1652 to explain why he had left the Horwich congregation and moved to Holcombe Chapel in Tottington township in the parish of Bury the preceding October. The remote townships served by Holcombe Chapel were to be made into a new parish in January 1659, but this augmentation was forced into abeyance by the Restoration. Pendlebury was removed from the chapel by sequestration. Though the 'Five Mile Act' forced him for a while to live in Bolton with the father of the future presbyterian minister William Tong, he spent the rest of his life ministering to nonconformist communities in and around Bury and the Irwell valley. The Restoration and the Clarendon code provided only intermittent interruptions to this ministry. His biographer John Chorlton noted how: 'Before his exclusion from his Work in public, besides his constant Preaching Lord's-Day at Holcombe among his people, he preached much to other Congregations, both far and near, in the country, which had their monthly exercises; and after he was silenced, he continued as laborious in preaching as before. (Chorlton, xxxix)' During the Restoration period the chapelries of Manchester deanery were frequently host to nonconformist ministers, and in March 1670 Pendlebury was reported to the privy council for disturbing the reading of the service at Gorton chapel and proceeding to preach to the congregation. Under the declaration of indulgence he was licensed as a presbyterian preacher (when he is described as of Tottington) and he took out a licence for the court house at Holcombe as a meeting-house. Some time after 1672 a residence was built for him a mile or two away, at Bass House, Walmersley, also in Bury parish. After the 'Toleration Act' Bass House was certified as a meeting-house, and at the quarter sessions held at Manchester in July 1691 Edmund Bury registered 'Some new building erected situate in Walmsley adjoining to Mr. Pendlebury's house rec. for a meeting pl. for an Assbly of Prot. Diss.' (Lancs. RO, QDV4) It is clear from Pendlebury's will of 1695, which describes this meeting-house as lately erected, that it was in the courtyard adjoining the house. He preached to the dissenting congregations at Rochdale and Holcombe on alternate Sundays, leaving money in his will to the poor of Rochdale and the poor of his congregation at Walmersley. Tottington, Holcombe, and Walmersley all lay within a few miles of each other on either side of the Irwell: though the exact location of Pendlebury's meetings changed over time, the congregation is likely to have been much the same. 
The impression given of Pendlebury's ministry is of immense moral authority. He ventured into print in the controversies over popery in the 1680s (in the only work of his published in his lifetime, 'A Plain Representation of Transubstantiation' in 1687), yet the sketch left of him by John Chorlton is of a man largely indifferent to politics but alive to the numinous and 'the sense of unseen things' (Chorlton, xliii). 'A man of great learning & strict godliness', as Matthew Henry described him, his other works were published posthumously (Chetham's Library, Manchester, Raines MSS, 1.291): sermons and other practical works, as well as an attack on the mass first published as late as 1768. Pendlebury was a spiritual father to many in the protestant dissenting ministry and, despite inducements to more lucrative ministries, he remained to minister in the semi-remote moorland townships of his youth. He avoided being dragged into the controversy around the alleged possession of the 'Surey Demoniack' Richard Dugdale and lived to participate in the founding of the Lancashire Provincial Assembly. This assembly of presbyterian and Independent ministers was established between 1691 and 1693; Pendlebury attended the general meeting in Manchester on 4 September 1694. 
Pendlebury died at Bass House on 18 June 1695 and was buried two days later in Bury churchyard; his funeral sermon was preached at Holcombe Chapel by Robert Seddon. His remains were removed to a common receptacle when the new parish church was built in 1865. His widow, Sarah, died on 6 February 1714 and was also buried in Bury churchyard. Their marriage left no children: William Pendlebury, the protestant dissenting minister of Kendal (1701-6) and Leeds (1706-29), was a kinsman of Henry but not his son. He was the son of James and Ann Pendlebury of Turton, Bolton parish. 


@@@@@


doc= 21834


Pendlebury, James (d. 1731), army officer and master gunner, first appears in the employment of the Ordnance office in 1695. It is probable that he served during the remainder of King William's war in Flanders until the treaty of Ryswick in 1697, for he was appointed comptroller (at a salary of $45 per annum) of the first train of artillery in time of peace, established in May 1698. This regimental train was composed mainly of those who had served William faithfully in the Nine Years' War. The 'peace train' was disbanded in January 1699, to be replaced by a streamlined train (royal warrant, 14 February 1699), in which Pendlebury appears as a captain of fireworkers and petardiers (at a salary of $40) in January 1700. 
In 1702 Pendlebury was made comptroller and lieutenant-colonel of the artillery train sent to the Netherlands, and he served continuously throughout Marlborough's campaigns, including Blenheim in 1704, for which he received a bounty of $60. He was appointed chief fire master (at a salary of $150) by the Board of Ordnance in May 1706 and was promoted 2nd colonel of artillery in the Netherlands in March 1708. He retained this rank and that of comptroller during the campaigns of 1709-11. His appointments as deputy governor of the Tower of London in June 1709 and master gunner of Great Britain in November 1710 (at a salary of $190) were assisted by the personal recommendation of the duke of Marlborough, in recognition of his long service with the train. He was placed on half pay in 1715. 
Pendlebury's office as master gunner of Great Britain was made redundant by the creation of a new regimental establishment of four companies of gunners in 1716 (the origins of the Royal Regiment of Artillery). He continued to receive quarterly pay of $47 10's'. until March 1731. Two final payments were made to his wife, Penelope Pendlebury; after 31 December 1731 all payments ceased. The presumption is that he was ill towards the end of his life and died in the second half of 1731: probate of his will was granted to his widow and executrix on 27 September 1731. Pendlebury was the last officer to bear the title master gunner of Great Britain and England, a line unbroken from 1485. 


@@@@@


doc= 21835


Pendleton, Frederick Henry Snow (1818-1888), divine, born on 13 September 1818, was educated at the University of Ghent and at St Aidan's College, Birkenhead. After being ordained in the diocese of Winchester, he served as curate of St Martin's, Guernsey, from December 1849 to June 1851, and as senior curate of St Helier, Jersey, from August 1851 to July 1853. He was consular chaplain to the British residents at Montevideo in Uruguay from 6 May 1854 to 31 December 1858. During his residence there 150 natives of the Vaudois, driven by unemployment in Piedmont in northern Italy, left their native country and landed in Montevideo. They were followed in 1858 by about a hundred more, when the whole party settled at Florida, about 60 miles from the city. Jesuit opposition having arisen, the Vaudois settlers, under Pendleton's personal direction, removed to another locality known as the Rosario Oriental, where his influence obtained for them a church and a schoolroom. In 1857 yellow fever swept Montevideo, and Pendleton's services during the crisis were acknowledged by the French government, which granted him a gold medal. A similar recognition followed him from the Italian government. From 1863 to 31 December 1868 he was chaplain to the British residents at Florence. In 1862 and again in 1867 he revisited the Waldensian colony at Rosario Oriental. He resided at the Casa Fumi, Porta Romana, Florence, until 1876, when he moved to Sydenham, Kent. There he served as curate of St Bartholomew's Church until 1879. He was then curate of Ampthill, Bedfordshire, for two years, and finally he became rector of St Sampson's, Guernsey, in 1882. He died at St Sampson's rectory, Guernsey, on 13 September 1888. Pendleton wrote 'Lettres pastorales' in 1851, and published various sermons in English and French between 1852 and 1868. 


@@@@@


doc= 21836


Pendleton, Henry (d. 1557), theologian, came from a Lancashire family. He entered Brasenose College, Oxford, about 1538, graduating BA on 16 November 1542, MA on 18 October 1544, BTh in 1552, and DTh on 18 July 1552. He was fellow of Brasenose from 1542 to 1554, vice-principal 1551-2, and senior bursar 1553-4. During Henry VIII's reign he preached against Lutheranism, but during Edward VI's reign he held protestant views, being one of the first itinerant preachers appointed by the earl of Derby to preach in the provinces. In 1552 he was appointed rector of Blymhill, Staffordshire, though the title was successfully disputed. Foxe records how, after the accession of Mary, Pendleton encouraged Laurence Saunders to stand firm in his protestant opinions, and boasted of his own steadfastness, declaring 'I will see the uttermost drop of this grease of mine molten away, and the last gobbet of this pampered flesh consumed to ashes, before I will forsake God and his truth' ('Acts and Monuments', 6.629). Yet he soon converted, being rewarded with several preferments in 1554: he was made prebendary of Reculverland, canon of St Paul's (11 April), vicar of Todenham in Gloucestershire, and canon of Lichfield (15 June). He was also made prebendary of Ufton 'ex parte decani'. 
In 1555-6 Pendleton was made vicar of St Martin Outwich, London, which he resigned on 1 April 1556, being admitted to the living of St Stephen Walbrook. About this time he became chaplain to Bishop Bonner, and some of his disputations with those imprisoned for heresy were recorded by Foxe, including an encounter with John Bradford, in which Foxe portrayed him as somewhat confounded by Bradford's appeal to his former reformed convictions. Pendleton was famous as a preacher. A Spital sermon he preached on Easter Monday 1557, attended by mayor, alderman, and judges, had an audience allegedly 20,000 strong. During a Paul's Cross sermon on 10 June 1554 someone fired a gun at him, although Strype remarks that it was not clear 'whether it were done by some out of detestation of Pendleton's doctrine, or his person' (Strype, 'Ecclesiastical Memorials', 3.1.213). The shot missed. 
Pendleton was one of the 'chapleynes, and frendes' with whom Bishop Bonner compiled the 'Book of Homilies' in 1555. Pendleton's contributions were 'An homelye of the churche, what it is, and of the commoditie therof' and 'An homely of the authoritie of the Church declarynge what commoditie and profyt we have thereby'. The first of these emphasized how the true church was universal, visible, and united, 'not lurkynge in any corner, or anye one countrye' (Bonner, sig. H. iv'v'). The second explained that the two chief elements of the church's authority were the ability to identify and understand scripture, and the power to forgive the repentant and correct the obstinate sinner. This homily stressed the comfort which was to be found within the church and dwelt on the disasters that had befallen England since the schism, including the dissolution of abbeys and chantries and an increase in poverty. Pendleton died in September 1557. Foxe claimed he repented his conversion to Catholicism at the last, but references to a work now lost, entitled 'A declaration of Hen. Pendleton DD in his sickness, of his faith in all points, as the Catholic church teachest, against sclanderous reports against him' (London, 1557), suggest that this was a matter of some debate. He was buried in St Stephen Walbrook, London, on 21 September 1557. 


@@@@@


doc= 21837


Pengelly, Sir Thomas (1675-1730), judge, was the son of Thomas Pengelly, of Cheshunt, and his wife, Rachel ('fl'. 'c'.1660-1715), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Jeremy Baines, a parliamentary officer during the civil war. His father was a wealthy merchant trading to the eastern Mediterranean and the Atlantic seaboard, with considerable property in London's East End and in Finchley, as well as in Hertfordshire. The future judge was certainly born at his house in Moorfields on 16 May 1675; but the family seat of Churchgate in Cheshunt subsequently provided a refuge for the former protector Richard Cromwell, who continued to board there with Mrs Pengelly after his host's death, and this association inspired a legend that the younger Pengelly was Richard's illegitimate son. 
As a youth Thomas showed an aptitude for study. In 1691 he became clerk to a London attorney, and a year later, at the age of seventeen, he was admitted to the Inner Temple, where he was called to the bar on 24 November 1700. There is no evidence as to his early practice, but after only ten years at the bar he was created a serjeant-at-law. By 1720 he was certainly among the foremost advocates in Westminster Hall, being an acknowledged expert in the law of corporations, which in this period of party strife brought him much business in king's bench 'quo warranto' proceedings about parliamentary boroughs, as well as a mass of cases for opinion. He does not seem to have appeared much in equity: many decades later a pamphlet alleged that he abandoned practice in chancery because of the partiality shown by the lord chancellor, Parker, towards the young Philip Yorke, afterwards Lord Chancellor Hardwicke. But although the story is plausible (Parker was inclined to favouritism), the author was hostile to Hardwicke, and his account is not corroborated by any contemporary witness. Indeed, Pengelly's counselling work was wide-ranging: his surviving correspondence shows that by 1717 he had become principal legal adviser to the duke of Somerset, and in the 1720s he was also counsel to the duchess of Marlborough, whom he represented in litigation arising out of the Blenheim estate. On 1 May 1719 he was knighted and chosen by Parker to succeed Sir Thomas Powys as the king's prime serjeant, and in that capacity he helped to conduct the trial of the Jacobite Christopher Layer for high treason during January and February 1722. 
Upon Somerset's nomination in 1717 Pengelly was elected member of parliament for Cockermouth in Cumberland, defeating another lawyer and future judge, the former tory and government candidate Sir Robert Raymond. In parliament his activity tended to parallel his profession. He was most prominent in the aftermath of the South Sea crash and in pursuing other issues of corruption associated with commerce and law. He took a strong line against the delinquent South Sea directors, and was active in the subsequent committee of inquiry, while outside the Commons his reputation inspired a steady stream of cases from companies and projectors anxious to avoid the 'Bubble Act' passed to inhibit speculative joint-stock ventures. In 1725, when it became clear that the financial ramifications of the crash had precipitated the failure of several masters in chancery who had invested suitors' money to recoup the high cost of purchasing their places from Lord Chancellor Macclesfield, Pengelly was active in promoting the chancellor's impeachment. He was subsequently one of the principal managers for the Commons at the trial: on the tenth day he replied to the legal points raised by the defence, arguing that sale of the offices violated common law and several statutes, and insisted that Macclesfield had consciously and corruptly used the power and authority of his office to extort money for his own benefit. One of his final acts in parliament, in February and May 1726, was to assist in the expulsion from the Commons of John Ward, a swindling businessman whom he had prosecuted for defrauding the duke of Buckingham. 
As the leading common lawyer of his generation Pengelly had legitimate expectations of promotion to the top of his profession. But although he supported the government in parliament over major issues such as the repeal of the 'Occasional Conformity Act' and the 'Schism Act', and spoke for the abortive 'Peerage Bill', it was difficult to navigate safely through the tortuous politics of the time. And after 1720, when Sir Robert Walpole and his allies began to fill the highest offices of state with their own creatures, his association with the independent Somerset was an impediment to his prospects of gaining the politically sensitive place of chief justice in king's bench. In 1723 he was earmarked for a second-rate judicial post: the duke of Newcastle wrote that if he would accept a vacant puisne judgeship 'he would be cheaply provided for, and the making him a Judge would be right... that he may not do more hurt in another place' (Newcastle to Townsend, 1 Nov 1723, BL, Add. MS 32686, fol. 384). In the event the experience of being passed over for the chief justiceship in king's bench on the death of Sir John Pratt (in 1725) pushed him into association with Sir William Pulteney and the opposition whigs, but on 16 October 1726 he was appointed to succeed Sir Geoffrey Gilbert as lord chief baron of the exchequer -- a post with no political influence. At the time both Somerset and Pulteney encouraged him to hope still for higher promotion, but after less than four years in the exchequer he succumbed to gaol fever, contracted from prisoners in court at the Lent assizes in Taunton. He died at Blandford in Dorset, on 14 April 1730, and was buried in the Temple Church on 29 April. 
At a time when it was fashionable to condemn lawyers for self-serving avarice Pengelly was exceptional for attracting comments from people high and low about his honesty, independence, and altruism. Indeed, although he built himself a new mansion at Cheshunt, he died unmarried and childless, and there are hints of asceticism about his personality. A life published shortly after his death maintained that he sacrificed leisure hours and company to ensure that he was thoroughly prepared to represent his clients, and he certainly appeared gratis for poor suitors, or in deserving causes. The truth of this characterization is also supported by the evidence of his will, which bequeathed $2890 for the discharge of poor prisoners on the western circuit and in London. After setting aside other sums for the duke of Somerset and the duchess of Marlborough he left his estates in Hertfordshire and Hampshire and the remainder of his personal property to his clerk, John Webb. 


@@@@@


doc= 21838


Pengelly, William (1812-1894), geologist and archaeologist, was born on 12 January 1812 at East Looe, Cornwall, the first of ten children of Richard Pengelly (1787-1861), mariner, and his wife, Sarah (1787-1881), daughter of Abraham and Mary Prout of Millbrook, Cornwall. Pengelly attended two schools in East Looe before beginning work on his father's coasting vessel at the age of twelve. He left the ship's crew four years later, on the death of his younger brother, Richard, and devoted much time to reading and self-instruction in mathematics. About 1836, influenced by an aunt and uncle who lived there, he moved to Torquay and opened a school based on the Pestalozzian method, teaching mathematics. In 1846 he gave up the school to become a private tutor in mathematics and the natural sciences, and began a long career of lecturing around the country in subjects including astronomy, geology, palaeontology, and archaeology. Pengelly's desire to make education and learning more accessible led him to found the Torquay Young Men's Society in 1837 (in 1846 renamed the Torquay Mechanics' Institute); the Torquay Natural History Society in 1844; and the Devonshire Association for the Advancement of Literature, Science, and Art in 1862. 
Pengelly married his cousin Mary Ann Mudge on 18 June 1838. The couple had six children, but all except their son Alfred died in infancy or childhood. Mary died in 1851, and on 28 June 1853 Pengelly married Lydia Spriggs, of a Quaker family of Worcester, with whom he had two daughters; the younger, Hester, became his biographer. 
Pengelly's interests centred on the geology and palaeontology of Devon and Cornwall, and human prehistory, on which he published more than a hundred papers. He made significant contributions to the literature on the geology of Devon and Cornwall, and his collecting activities provided important primary material for other workers and students. In 1860 Miss Angela (later Baroness) Burdett-Coutts, a former pupil, provided Pengelly with funds to collect fossil plant material from the Tertiary lignite deposits of Bovey Tracey. Pengelly reviewed the geology of these deposits in an important paper read to the Royal Society in 1862, and in 1863 was elected a fellow of the society. 
Pengelly's most lasting and original contributions to the sciences remain his work on Devon caves and their associated human prehistory. On his arrival in Torquay he took an interest in Kent's Cavern, which had been excavated between 1825 and 1829 by the Revd John MacEnery, who claimed to have recovered flint artefacts together with bones from extinct animals. Pengelly's first excavations began in 1846 with the express purpose of attempting to demonstrate whether or not artefacts were contemporaneous with an extinct fauna, but his excavation controls were in their infancy and there was some disagreement with colleagues in interpreting the results. In 1858, however, an opportunity arose to investigate a newly discovered cave at Brixham, Devon, untouched by previous excavation. The Geological Society of London formed a committee for its investigation, with Pengelly in charge of supervising the excavations using an improved three-dimensional process of excavation and recording. Preliminary findings from Brixham were published in outline in Sir Charles Lyell's 'Geological Evidence on the Antiquity of Man' (1863), and were central in the paradigm shift in accepting that humans had an ancient 'prehistory'. Pengelly returned to excavating Kent's Cavern with the support of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, and between 1865 and 1880 he refined his methods of excavation still further, providing geologists and archaeologists with vast collections of faunal and cultural remains with associated contextual data. 
While Pengelly's motivation and application contributed greatly to his success, he was, in moving to Torquay, also in the right place at the right time. From the mid-nineteenth century Torquay became a highly fashionable resort for the middle and upper classes and thus Pengelly was able to meet influential people, and maintain important personal contacts over and above maintaining a voluminous correspondence. In addition, the geological and archaeological sites in the locality contained deposits in fields which were of central interest in the international scientific community of his time. Pengelly also found, in attending the British Association for the Advancement of Science meetings, an invaluable vehicle for communicating and maintaining contacts. He attended every meeting between 1856 and 1889, except for that in Montreal in 1884. He was president of the association's geological section in 1877, and the anthropological section in 1883. The Geological Society, of which he had been a fellow since 1850, presented him with the Lyell medal in 1886 for his contributions to geological science. 
Pengelly had great energy and mental ability, and was an excellent communicator, especially as a lecturer, and meticulous in all he did. A benevolent man, he was noted by all that knew him for his charm and genial manner, and had a great sense of humour and ready wit -- his habit of punning earned him the nickname of 'Pun-gelly' from friends at British Association meetings. Although baptized and brought up in the Church of England, Pengelly, who was teetotal, had become by the 1840s a convert to the tenets of the Society of Friends, whom he joined by the time of his second marriage. His firmly held nonconformist beliefs effectively disqualified him from applying for certain salaried appointments in which he was interested. Pengelly died at his home, Lamorna, Furze Hill Road, Torquay, on 16 March 1894, and was buried at the Torquay cemetery on 22 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 21839


Edward Penington (1667-1701), Quaker colonist, was born on 3 September 1667 at Amersham. He was tutored at home by Thomas Ellwood and others until 1680, after which he was educated at Edmonton. One of the first purchasers of land in Pennsylvania, he was appointed surveyor-general of the colony on 26 April 1698, and arrived in Philadelphia with Penn on 30 November of that year. On 16 November 1699 he married Sarah ('b'. 1679), daughter of Samuel Jennings, governor of New Jersey, and his wife, Ann ('nee' Olliffe, or Olive); together they had one child, Isaac. The author of tracts defending the Friends against Keith and Thomas Crisp, Edward died, probably of smallpox, in Philadelphia on 11 November 1701. 


@@@@@


doc= 21840


Penington, Isaac (c.1584-1661), local politician and regicide, was born in London, the eldest son of Robert Penington (1550-1627), a London merchant with estates in Norfolk and Suffolk, and Judith Shetterden (1559-1622), daughter of Isaac Shetterden of London. His younger brother Daniel Penington later married the pious laywoman, Elizabeth Risby ['see 'Elizabeth Penington]. Their grandfather William Penington (died 1592), originally from Henham, Essex, had also become a London resident and was buried at St Benet Gracechurch. 
Gaining his freedom by patrimony in his father's company, the Fishmongers, Isaac Penington was admitted to the livery in 1613, joined its governing body in 1622, and was elected third warden in 1634-6; he was to become prime warden in 1640-42. On 7 February 1615 at Hackney he married his first wife, Abigail Allen ('b'. 1588), daughter of John Allen, a London merchant, with whom he had four sons and three daughters; three others died in infancy. His second wife, whom he married by licence dated 5 December 1629, was Mary Wilkinson ('b'. 'c'.1587), widow of Roger Wilkinson of St Dunstan-in-the-West, haberdasher, and daughter of Matthew Young, a London brewer; there were no children from this marriage. 
Penington began his commercial life as a substantial cloth trader in the Levant Company. He also had a moderate investment in the East India Company, which he had sold by the end of 1635, and an interest in the French wine trade. Yet he did not serve on any of the governing bodies of the great trading companies until the transformed circumstances of 1644, when he became governor of the Levant Company. Penington's second marriage extended his commercial interests to include a family partnership in a Whitefriars brewery. In addition, from 1626 he acted as a financial agent for his second cousin, Captain John Penington, who was later knighted and became an admiral of the fleet and gentleman of the privy chamber. However, pursuit of his cousin's affairs brought problems, Penington's 'not having been used to dance attendance on great men's secretaries' ('CSP dom.', '1625-6', 305). Although he succeeded to his father's Norfolk and Suffolk estates in 1627, when he was sufficiently wealthy he chose to purchase a country residence, The Grange, at Chalfont St Peter in Buckinghamshire, some time before 1635. In London he was living in the parish of St Katharine Cree in 1629 but by 1633 had moved to St Stephen, Coleman Street, a parish with a strong puritan reputation. As a member of the general vestry in St Stephen's, he took part in the 1633 election of the future Independent leader, John Goodwin, as vicar. Penington also became a member of the committee for parish business in 1634, and served as collector for the poor in 1636 and an auditor for churchwardens' accounts in 1638, but he never held the office of churchwarden. 
Penington's political and religious views and activities from the mid-1620s onwards bore most of the hallmarks of a puritan agenda. Writing to his cousin John in 1626, he expressed the view that there was 'little hope of any good unless the King and parliament agree' ('CSP dom.', '1625-6', 305). He favoured giving help to embattled protestants in continental Europe and waging war against Spain. Lodgings and a meeting-place in Whitefriars were also provided for puritan divines visiting London by Penington and his equally zealous second wife. In 1636 his attempt to establish a Sunday afternoon lectureship in his country parish of Chalfont St Peter led to a violent clash with the vicar during which Penington was said to have attacked Laud, claiming that 'since this same pragmatical bishop kept his visitation there is a great gap opened for the increase of popery and spreading of Arminianism' ('CSP dom.', '1635-6', 556-7). Penington complained to his cousin in 1637 that it was no longer safe for him to report the latest news from London and that same year his brewery was closed down by the authorities, ostensibly because of smoke pollution, but with a suspicion of vindictiveness. 
Penington's election as a London sheriff in 1638, after several other nominees had refused to serve, was his first experience of senior City office and he had never been returned a common councillor. Although one contemporary claimed that Penington lived 'like a prince' during his shrievalty ('CSP dom.', '1638-9', 59), he himself later complained that the office had caused him considerable hardship. In January 1639 he was chosen alderman for Bridge Without, the only City ward denied the power to elect its own alderman or return common councillors. By 1640, therefore, he had had only recent experience of senior office and, although wealthy enough to be listed in May 1640 among the eight most prosperous citizens in his Coleman Street ward, he fell short of qualifying for membership of the City's mercantile elite. 
Elected a London MP to the Short Parliament in March 1640, Penington combined a leading position among the City's godly citizens with entry into the counsels of the future parliamentarian leadership. He was also to develop close links with the Scottish commissioners sent down to London, with whom he shared a burning ambition to see an end of episcopacy in all three kingdoms. After the parliament's early dissolution Penington was one of seven London aldermen who refused to list inhabitants in their respective wards in preparation for a forced loan, yet seemingly he escaped punishment. Returned again a London MP in the Long Parliament, by the time of Pride's Purge he was to have served on 123 parliamentary committees, especially those concerned with religious reforms. Within the first week of the new parliament Penington joined Matthew Cradock, a fellow City MP, in backing a London petition condemning Laudian innovations and the fortification of the Tower. Shortly afterwards Penington could be seen playing a leading role in the organization and presentation of the first London root and branch petition (11 December 1640) and exactly one year later he was lending his support to the second London petition. His enthusiasm for godly reformation in the early 1640s put him at the forefront of the campaign to purge London pulpits of 'scandalous' and 'malignant' clergy to make way for godly and politically reliable divines, as in the case of Robert Chestlin, the rector of St Matthew's, Friday Street, and his replacement, Henry Burton, the puritan dissident. Penington's reforming zeal was also apparent in his introduction in February 1641 of a bill to abolish 'superstition and idolatry' from churches, including Laudian altars and rails, which finally received Commons sanction in their order of the following September. However, Penington's impatience to see the end of episcopacy and the full implementation of godly reformation sometimes caused problems for the more measured and circumspect parliamentary leadership. 
During the early months of the Long Parliament Penington established himself as a vital intermediary between the Commons and City wealth in the negotiation of loans to pay for the English and Scottish armies, and he attempted to use this financial leverage to exert political pressure on parliament. The threat to withhold City loan money was deployed by Penington in January 1641, in an attempt (albeit an unsuccessful one) to reverse the reprieve of the Jesuit John Goodman, and in the following April to hasten Strafford's execution. Again Penington's militancy in deploying this tactic was probably unwelcome to the parliamentary leadership and may have been counter-productive. Furthermore, his ability to raise City money was not unqualified and he could find himself promising more than he could deliver, as in March 1641. Penington also forged a valuable political alliance with John Venn, a fellow City militant and, after a by-election in June 1641, MP. Both men were adept in drumming up popular support in London for radical causes in the early 1640s and were suspected (with more grounds in Venn's case) of orchestrating mass demonstrations outside parliament to intimidate MPs during the debate on the grand remonstrance. Penington also offered to provide the Commons with a guard of London citizens in November 1641 and the five members who fled the attempted coup in January 1642 may have taken refuge in his City home. 
Penington was elected lord mayor in August 1642, despite his lack of seniority, after the removal of the royalist Mayor Gurney. He had already been appointed colonel of the White regiment of the London trained bands and in September 1642 he joined fellow radicals on the strategically important City militia committee. In the following July he was to be appointed lieutenant of the Tower of London in which capacity he was to accompany Laud to his execution in January 1645. As his grip on the City tightened he was able to deliver its resources for the parliamentarian cause, working closely with Pym and supported by a committed minority of citizens and clergy. Penington was responsible for several financial initiatives to support the war effort, such as the suggestion in June 1642 of weekly voluntary contributions in the City. His vigorous support for the war led him to clash in the initial stages with those Londoners working for an early peace and he made one of his rare appearances in the Commons since his election to the mayoralty to denounce the peace proposals as royalist-inspired. The king responded by condemning the 'pretended lord mayor' Penington as the 'principal author of those calamities' and grouping him with Venn and two other citizens as traitors who would never be pardoned (Rushworth, 5.111). His militancy undiminished, Penington and his equally committed wife rallied citizens to construct fortifications around London. He later became associated with the militant City remonstrance of Easter 1643, with its bold claims for parliamentary supremacy, and with radical initiatives, centred on the Salters' Hall subcommittee and the committee for the general rising, to raise independent military forces in London to intensify the war. 
Penington continued to act as an intermediary between parliament and the City, and to assist in the raising of money and men for the war effort, after his replacement as lord mayor in October 1643 by the much more moderate Sir John Wollaston. The divisions that appeared in godly ranks after the decision to impose presbyterianism on England found Penington largely in the presbyterian camp. Having chosen the presbyterian Thomas Case to be his chaplain during his mayoralty, he took the covenant in November 1643 and was later to serve as an elder. Furthermore, in May 1645 he helped secure the removal of the Independent John Goodwin from St Stephen, Coleman Street, in favour of the presbyterian William Taylor and subsequently joined with other local zealots in assisting Taylor with the vetting of communicants. Yet Penington's preferred religious settlement was probably one which retained the parochial structure (which Goodwin was undermining) yet vested ultimate ecclesiastical authority in parliament and was content to tolerate gathered churches. In 1649 he was to assist in the reinstatement of Goodwin in St Stephen's. 
Despite his moderate presbyterian inclinations Penington, like his ally Venn, became a leading political Independent. During the attempted counter-revolution of 1647 Penington was purged from the London militia committee, only to be restored to it after the army's intervention. Although no supporter of the Leveller party, after the defeat of the mutiny at Ware he expressed concern that parliament should not over-react or forget their record as faithful parliamentarians. After the second civil war he and Venn played a key role in ensuring that royalists and political presbyterians were not returned in the common-council elections of 1648. Penington was appointed to the high court of justice for the king's trial and attended eight of its twenty-two sittings. Although present when sentence was passed, he did not sign the death warrant, but he later assisted Mayor Andrews in proclaiming the abolition of kingship in the City ['see also 'Regicides]. Penington served on the council of state in 1649-51 and 1651-2 and was nominated for one of the London seats in the first protectorate parliament but failed to attend the election. Personal economic difficulties increasingly claimed his attention after 1655. He had been involved in lengthy proceedings before the committee for advance of money since 1645 over a claim that he had retained at least $3000 from the estate of his cousin, the recently deceased Sir John Penington. After 1655, without his protection as an MP, his creditors were able to sue him and he was forced to appeal twice to the protector and his council to prevent his imprisonment and the confiscation of his lands. His financial difficulties were so severe by 1657 that he was forced to resign his aldermanry. Adding to his problems in the 1650s, his eldest son, Isaac Penington junior (1616-1679) became a Quaker, as did two other children, while another son became a Catholic priest. At the Restoration Penington voluntarily surrendered himself, hoping to take advantage of the royal offer of indemnity in view of the fact that he had not signed Charles's death warrant. His remaining lands were seized and he was imprisoned for life in the Tower, where he died during the night of 16 December 1661. Penington's corpse was delivered over to his relatives on 19 December but there is no record of his burial place. His second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 21841


Penington, Isaac (1616-1679), Quaker and writer, was born in London, the eldest son of Isaac Penington (c.1584-1661), alderman, and his first wife, Abigail ('b'. 1588), daughter of the London merchant John Allen. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in November 1634 and called to the bar on 3 November 1639. In the meantime he matriculated from St Catharine's College, Cambridge, on 1 April 1637, though he apparently took no degree. Thomas Ellwood would later reflect that he had 'a sharp and excellent wit... well cultivated and polished with an ingenuous and liberal Education' ('Works of... Isaac Penington', sig. c1'v'). 
Unsettled by the revolution Penington sought spiritual solace, the means to which he explored in 'A Touchstone or Tryall of Faith' (1648). In addition to explaining how to discern genuine faith from that of the devil, ''that great cozouning merchant'' (sig. A2'r'- 'v'), he expounded the practices of the primitive church. Unlike radicals who viewed the overthrow of monarchy with millenarian optimism, he was concerned about pervasive depravity, a theme he developed in 'The Great and Sole Troubler' (1649). In 'A Word for the Common Weale' (1650) he called on the Rump to enact sound laws to establish a salutary relationship between parliament and people. Having left the established church to become an Independent by 1649, he deplored the contentiousness over external forms that prevented England from attaining freedom of conscience. It was essential, he argued in 'A Voyce out of Thick Darkness' (1650), to wait for the spirit's light, and in 'Light or Darknesse' (1650) he recounted how he had been spiritually troubled and longed for 'somewhat more perfect' righteousness (p. 10). The struggle between the principles of light and darkness is also explored in 'Certain Scripture Prophecies' (1650), which reflects a knowledge of typology. 
Apparently referring to reputed Ranters as well as apostates in general, in 'Severall Fresh Inward Openings' (July 1650) and 'An Eccho from the Great Deep' (1650) Penington addressed 'the Mad Folks' who had forsaken Christian beliefs and lived wickedly. Disillusioned, he resolved to 'retire into my secret corner, to lament and bewail that Misery and Desolation, which is seizing upon all things' (Penington, 'Openings', sig. A4'r'). Unless he was speaking figuratively, he embraced the unorthodox doctrine of the soul's sleep between death and resurrection. 
During the spring of 1651 Penington addressed England's political problems. In 'The Fundamental Right, Safety and Liberty of the People' (1651), directed to parliament and the people of 'this Sick Nation', he argued that parliament, like the Stuart monarchy, had exceeded its limits (sig. B1'r'). Proclaiming that people have the right to choose their polity and governors, he insisted they could alter them when the government becomes 'burdensome or inconvenient'. To keep parliamentary power from becoming arbitrary, elections must be free and frequent, MPs should not administer the laws, and parliaments should not engage in spiritual affairs. He was prepared to accept the return of monarchy if the prerogative were limited, people's rights were protected, and parliament had power to redress grievances. After the Rump's dissolution he wrote 'A Considerable Question' (1653), averring that limited government, though less efficient, was preferable to absolute dominion. Rule by the saints -- if they truly were -- would be in the world's best interest, but otherwise not. 
Penington continued to be dismayed by the emphasis on externals in religion at the expense of the inward substantial part -- the divine seed implanted by the spirit as opposed to Satan's fleshly seed. Embodied in much of his writing, this concern received expression in 'The Life of a Christian' (1653) and 'Divine Essays' (1654). In pursuing the life of the spirit he found a kindred companion in Mary Springett ('bap'. 1623, died 1682) ['see 'Penington, Mary], daughter and heir of Sir John Proude of Goodnestone Court, Kent, and his second wife, Anne, daughter of Edward Fagge of Ewell, Kent; Mary's first husband, Sir William Springett, had died in 1644, and their daughter, Gulielma Maria, would later marry William Penn. On 13 May 1654, at St Margaret's, Westminster, Penington wed Mary, whose 'love was drawn towards him, because... he saw the deceit of all nations' ('Experiences... of Mary Penington', 38). They had five children: John Penington (1655-1710); Isaac (died 1670); Mary (1657-1726), who married the London woollen draper Daniel Wharley in 1686; William (1665-1703), who became a druggist; and Edward ['see below']. The Peningtons lived in London before moving in 1658 to the Grange, near Chalfont St Giles, Buckinghamshire, a wedding present from Penington's father. They also had estates at Causham (Caversham) Lodge near Reading, at Datchet, Buckinghamshire, at various places in eastern Kent, including Westbere, and, according to Ellwood, in Sussex. 
Some time in the early 1650s Penington, feeling spiritually 'shattered' and 'broken', left the Independents in search of inner peace, a quest he shared with his wife. Typically described as Seekers, they belonged to no group. The Muggletonian John Reeve wrote to Penington about this time. In 1656 Penington published his lengthy 'Expositions with Observations on Several Scriptures'. 
After reproving the Peningtons for their fashionable attire in 1657, an unidentified Quaker sent Thomas Curtis and William Simpson to visit them. Alexander Parker saw Penington at a Quaker meeting in Reading in February 1657, but not until May 1658 did Penington join the Friends after hearing George Fox speak at John Crook's home in Bedfordshire. The Grange soon became a hub of Quaker activity, and Fox held a meeting there in 1658. Reacting harshly to his son's convincement, the elder Penington threatened to disinherit him. 
In his first Quaker publication, 'The Way of Life and Death' (1658), Penington outlined his view of church history, according to which ''the true state of Christianity'' was lost after the apostolic period, though God preserved a remnant of the faithful; Penington looked forward to the overthrow of the anti-Christian Babylon and the recovery of the true faith through life in the Spirit (p. 10). Anna Maria, Countess van Hoorn, translated the book into Dutch by 1661. Amplifying this theme in 'Babylon the Great' (1659) he denounced Babylon, the spiritual fabric of evil and city of darkness, for its blasphemy, idolatry, spirit of witchcraft, and religious persecution. God, he proclaimed, is engaged in a controversy with England because of its adherence to Babylon. Where, he wondered in 'The Scattered Sheep' (1659), were the praying people over whom a heathen spirit had descended? Distinguishing between human and divine faith in 'The Axe Laid to the Root' (1659), he insisted that one must be guided by the light in one's soul, love simplicity, and live humbly to experience true religion. Those who ignore the inner light are like the ancient Jews, he contended in 'The Jew Outward' (1659), for they commit the same errors, reject the doctrine of the new birth, and oppose Friends as the Jews rejected Christ. 
Following the collapse of Richard Cromwell's government and the Rump's recall, on 18 May 1659 Penington wrote 'To the Parliament, the Army, and All the Well-Affected', accusing them of apostasy from the 'Good Old Cause' because they committed blasphemy, overthrew God's work, and failed to relieve the poor. Parliament, he argued, had one final opportunity to undertake God's work. In 'To the Army' [1659] he reflected that God had accomplished great things by and for the military, yet it had betrayed his cause and brought global reproach on his name. After Monck's army had marched into England, Penington announced in a broadside dated 19 January 1660, 'Some Considerations Proposed', that the time of reformation had arrived, and he exhorted people to 'run not out into parties' but seek God. He published 'A Question Propounded to the Rulers, Teachers, and People' on 14 February, asking how believers could belong to a church that still embodied the spirit of popery. In 'Some Few Queries and Considerations Proposed to the Cavaliers' [1660] he pointedly enquired if their sufferings had been unjust in light of their previous persecution of the godly, their arbitrary rule, and the superfluity and evil ways of the court and gentry. Was not the cause of their opponents initially just? 
Of the fourteen works he wrote in 1660, two -- 'Some Queries Concerning the Work of God' and 'A Warning of Love' -- were prophetic in tone, admonishing England for its adherence to false worship and religious persecution. Other publications were apologetic or controversial in nature. 'A Brief Account of Some Reasons' explained the Friends' tenets to parliament, and 'Where is the Wise?' explicated why the learned often opposed religious truth. Replying to Edmund Elys's defence of the 'Book of Common Prayer', Penington averred in 'The Consideration of a Position' that genuine prayer comes only from the Spirit's 'breathings'. In 'The New-Covenant' and 'An Epistle to All such as Observe the Seventh Day' he rejected the sabbatarian claims of William Saller and others on the grounds that Jesus had dispensed with the old covenant. Keenly interested in the conversion of the Jews, he hoped they would once again become God's people, a point he made in 'Some Considerations Propounded to the Jewes'. In 'The Root of Popery' he contrasted the churches of Christ and Antichrist, repudiated Catholic claims to infallibility, and associated protestant governments that engaged in religious persecution with Catholicism. When the government in Boston, New England, threatened Quakers with banishment or death, Penington came to their defence in 'An Examination of the Grounds', insisting Friends did not teach destructive tenets or foment disturbances, and affirming their belief in the Trinity, though depicting Christ as the eternal light who assumed a bodily 'garment'. In 'An Answer to that Common Objection' he offered to embrace all 'who suffered for the Testimony of a pure Conscience towards God', including John Hus and Martin Luther, but he insisted that God offers additional truth to each generation (p. 1). 
By February 1661 Penington was in the Aylesbury gaol, having been arrested at a meeting in his house. His confinement lasted seventeen weeks, during which he refused to take an oath, a position he defended in 'The Great Question' (1661). While in prison he was visited by Ellwood, whom he and his wife had convinced two years earlier. Ellwood reported that more than sixty Friends were incarcerated with Penington, who was ill with distemper. From his cell he issued 'Somewhat Spoken to a Weighty Question' (1661), espousing religious freedom and pacifism, though recognizing that magistrates can legitimately use force to protect people. While visiting Friends in the same prison on 17 September he wrote to Charles II, warning him not to provoke God. He was referring in part to religious oppression, which he denounced in 'Concerning Persecution' [1661] as contrary to righteous government. Undeterred by the state's repression of dissent, he continued to write, expounding on the 'breathings' of the spirit in 'Some Directions to the Panting Soul' (1661) and 'Concerning the Worship of the Living God' [1661], and using his experience to explain in 'To All such as Complain' (1661) that divine power often manifests itself gradually in individuals. His continuing interest in the conversion of the Jews was evinced in 'Some Questions and Answers' (1661). 
Among Penington's works of 1662, 'Three Queries Propounded to the King and Parliament' reminded readers that in the mid-century upheavals God had overturned the government and empowered men of low estate, and warned that he could do so again. No one, Penington insisted in 'Some Observations' on 'Romans' 14: 20, has the right to destroy God's work. Each person must fear God and obey his commandments, he explained in 'Some Questions and Answers Showing Man his Duty', by responding to the divinely implanted 'principle of life' from which love, power, wisdom, and goodness spring. Nearly everything Penington wrote related to the spirit's workings and reflected his spiritual experience. 'I have had a very hard travel, and have felt [God's] power and cruelty beyond measure', he reflected in 'Some of the Mysteries' (1663), 'yet the Lord my God hath helped me' (pp. 27-8). He believed he was the recipient of divine messages, including one recorded in 'Concerning God's Seeking out his Israel' (1663) regarding God's search for the lost sheep who had experienced the spirit's warmth but not entered the new covenant. 
In 'A Weighty Question' (1663), addressed to king and parliament, Penington asked whether they had the right to enforce laws people could not conscientiously obey. Unpersuaded, magistrates imprisoned him at Aylesbury for seventeen or eighteen weeks in 1664 for having attended a conventicle. In prison he wrote 'Some Queries Concerning the Order and Government of the Church', explicating the role of ministers and extolling unity. The topic was timely, for the Friends were experiencing tension over the schismatic John Perrot. Penington had been moved by Perrot's suffering in Rome and had provided hospitality for him in 1662. Perrot's opposition to the removal of hats during prayer had prompted criticism from leading Quakers, and Penington, dismayed by the strife, warned in 'Many Deep Considerations' [1664?] that God might permit church leaders to fall, thereby endangering ordinary believers. Concerned, William Smith and Francis Howgill wrote to Penington, and Richard Farnworth sent him a paper denouncing Perrot's innovations. Penington accepted their counsel, including Howgill's request that he write nothing else critical of Quaker leaders. 
For attending a Quaker funeral Penington was fined and imprisoned for a month at Aylesbury in March 1665. About May he was arrested again, this time at the behest of the earl of Bridgewater, who was offended because Penington had refused to address him as 'My lord'. Released after nine months upon petition to the earl of Ancram, he was apprehended again about three weeks later and held in the Aylesbury gaol for a year and a half; he received his freedom about October 1667 after one of his wife's relatives obtained a writ of habeas corpus and had his case transferred to king's bench. These were difficult years, partly because of what Ellwood, who tutored the Penington children between 1662 and 1669, called 'the Tenderness of his Constitution' (Ellwood, 164). During Penington's nine-month imprisonment in 1665 the crown seized the Grange, forcing Mary and her children to find other lodgings, primarily at Bottrels in Chalfont and then, the following year, at Berrie House in Amersham. 
During his imprisonments Penington's pen remained active, partly with letters to his wife, magistrates, relatives, Quaker meetings, and even Bridgewater explaining why he could not use worldly titles. Someone sent him one of Richard Baxter's writings, which he returned with the comment that Baxter had not directed sinners to the principle of spiritual life and power. In 'One More Tender Visitation' (1666) Penington appealed for an end to the persecution of Quakers, whose core belief in the contrast between the seeds of the spirit and the flesh he expounded in 'Concerning the Sum or Substance of our Religion' [1666]. A companion piece, 'Concerning the Church' (1666), defined the true church as a spiritual body gathered out of the world in contrast to the apostate churches of Catholics and most protestants. Members of the true church have the 'Principle of Life', the 'Seed of the Kingdom', he explained in 'Some Things of Great Weight' (1667). In 'A Question to the Professors of Christianity' (1667) he asserted that only those who feel the spirit have religious certainty. He also addressed internal tensions among Quakers, cautioning them in an epistle, 'To Friends' [1666], to beware of the enemy's efforts to foment prejudice against God's ministers and not to impose spiritual criteria that contradict the spirit's manifestation in others. 
Penington's first post-imprisonment writings included counsel to those seeking spiritual life ('To such as are not Satisfied', [1668]), a fuller exposition of his view of history ('Of the Church', 1668), and advice to the Royal Society on attaining religious certainty by heeding the light in their consciences ('Some Things Relating to Religion', 1668). He engaged in controversy with an unnamed Congregationalist ('Reply to Queries and Animadversions', 1668, published posthumously) and Lodowick Muggleton ('Observations on some Passages', 1668); the latter responded in 'An Answer to Isaac Penington' (1669). Penington apparently wrote nothing in 1669, perhaps because he and his wife, assisted by Ellwood, were planning the extensive renovation of Woodside (1669- 'c'.1672), near Chalfont St Giles, which they acquired after selling the Westbere estate. About this time they sent their children to the Quaker school established by Fox at Waltham Abbey. 
By May 1670 Penington was incarcerated at Reading, where he had gone to visit imprisoned Friends and had refused to take an oath. While in gaol he learned of the death of his son Isaac, lost at sea as he returned from Barbados. 'A Salutation of Love' [1670], warning Buckinghamshire JPs of the imminent day of judgment, may have predated his incarceration, but at least seven works were composed during this twenty-one month confinement, including 'Some Queries Concerning Compulsion in Religion' (1670), which reiterated the case for religious freedom. His account of the Friends was included in 'Some Principles of the Elect People' (1671), to which Fox and others contributed. 'A Treatise Concerning God's Teachings' ('c'.1671) is noteworthy because of its autobiographical section, elements of which are echoed in 'A Few Experiences' (early 1672, published posthumously). Also published posthumously but completed in May 1671, 'Life and Immortality' discusses the covenants, the ability of everyone to respond to the inner light, and other Quaker tenets. 'An Enquiry after Truth' [1672], finished in April, optimistically claimed that spiritual darkness is fading. In 'The Holy Truth' (1672) he replied to Sir Henry Vane, repudiating both the doctrine that God justifies sinners without regarding their moral state and the doctrine of perseverance. 
Following Isaac's release in early 1672 the Peningtons witnessed the marriage of Penn and Gulielma Springett on 4 April. About this year, they moved into Woodside. Penington returned to his favourite theme of the inner light in 'The Ancient Principle' (1672), and in 'The Naked Truth' (1674) he asserted its primacy over scripture. In 'Judas and the Jews' (1673) he expressed remorse for having criticized the Quaker leadership in 1664. With Penn, Ellwood, George Whitehead, and George Keith he engaged in a series of debates with Thomas Hicks and other Baptists between 1672 and 1674, and this led to his refutation of Hicks's 'A Continuation of the Dialogue' (1673) in 'The Flesh & Blood of Christ' (1675). During the 1670s he and other prominent Friends participated in the religious circle of Anne, Viscountess Conway, at Ragley Hall, Warwickshire, with Henry More and Francis van Helmont. When the Quakers were riven by the Story-Wilkinson dispute over the movement's institutionalization, Penington, siding with Fox, wrote to John Story on 21 September 1676, castigating him as stiff, exalted, and selfish, and he attempted, unsuccessfully, to persuade Curtis that something was 'deeply amiss inwardly' when he supported Story (Penington MSS, 4.141). 

'To the Jews Natural, and to the Jews Spiritual' (1677) reiterated Penington's hope for the conversion of the Jewish people and depicted the saints as spiritual Jews. In September, while taking the waters at Astrop, Northamptonshire, he completed 'The Everlasting Gospel' (1678), in which he professed not to dislike Catholics (his brother Arthur was a Catholic priest), Turks, and Jews, though he mourned their 'Mistakes' (p. 6). Two months later, in 'Concerning the Dispensation of the Gospel' (1678), he expounded the completion of the work of redemption, the translation of souls into the eternal kingdom, and their union with God. In July 1679 he explicated the doctrine of spirit-baptism in 'A Reply to an Answer', and at the month's end he reflected on his religious pilgrimage in 'Some Experiences', noting his feeling of certainty and sense of the spirit's infallibility. 'Concerning the Times and Seasons', composed in August at Meresborough, Kent, depicted history in terms of contrasting periods of joy (for example the creation and the promise of the blessed seed) and misery (the fall and the flood). While he and Mary were visiting their tenants in Kent Penington died at Goodnestone Court on 8 October, after a week's illness. He was interred later that month in the Quakers' burial-ground at Jordans, near Chalfont St Giles, with hundreds of Friends and neighbours in attendance. 
In her testimony Mary Penington remarked that no husband surpassed his kindness, tenderness, and love, and Fox recalled that Penington had undergone 'many Exercises, and Tryals, and Temptations, and Snares, both by them that were without, and False brethren' ('Works of... Isaac Penington', sig. a2'v'). Fox was undoubtedly grateful that Penington had retracted his 1664 plea for broader toleration within the movement, and that in later years he had stood with the other leaders in deploring the divisions associated with Story and Curtis. According to Ellwood, Penington spent much of his time visiting Friends, ministering, reading the 'Bible', and waiting on the spirit, a key theme in his publications. He undoubtedly envisioned writing as a major part of his Quaker vocation, though his approximately ninety works (thirteen of them from his pre-Quaker period) are redundant and sometimes disjointed. His mystical approach to religion has led some commentators to suggest that he was influenced by Plotinus and Jacob Boehme, but there is no firm evidence of this. The leading proponent of a contemplative life among the Friends, he stressed the importance of meditation and self-denial. His Christology has sparked debate, for he downplayed the role of Christ's humanity while exalting that of the spirit. He suffered his imprisonments with equanimity, and apparently made no use of his legal training to obtain release. A number of his works were published posthumously for the first time, some of them in the two-volume folio edition of 1681. The most recent edition (1994-7), based on an 1863 American edition, is incomplete. His son John's transcriptions of his correspondence are preserved in the Friends' Library, London. 
Penington's youngest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 21842


Penington, Sir John (bap. 1584?, d. 1646), naval officer, was the son of Robert Penington (died 1612) of Henham in Essex, described as a tanner. It has been suggested that his mother was Margaret, 'nee' Barfoot, and that he was baptized at Henham on 30 January 1568, but the circumstances of Penington's later career make it likely that he was born to Robert's second wife, Elizabeth, and that he was the John Penington who was baptized at Henham on 9 August 1584. 
Penington's early career is shrouded in obscurity. In June 1629 he recalled having captained ships for twenty years, although his naval service did not begin until 1621. He may have been the John Penington of Newhaven, Sussex, 'merchant', who embarked on a voyage to west Africa in 1612, and perhaps also the Captain Penington whose man-of-war was seized by the French off southern Italy in 1616. In 1617-18 he served as vice-admiral in Sir Walter Ralegh's ill-fated expedition to the Orinoco in search of a goldmine. Although Penington took no part in the attack on the Spanish settlement of St Thomas's, his ship, the 'Star' of London (240 tons), was impounded at Kinsale on the way home in 1618 by order of the lord deputy, and in London Penington himself was thrown into prison. He subsequently helped to condemn Ralegh to the scaffold as, with another of the expedition's captains, he revealed that Ralegh had 'proposed the taking of the Mexico fleet if the mine failed' (Harlow, 300). 
Penington claimed to have lost his entire fortune, amounting to $2500, in the Orinoco expedition, and on his release, which occurred some time before 6 October 1618, he sought gainful employment. He now enjoyed an enviable reputation for seamanship, Ralegh having described him in March 1618 as 'one of the sufficientest gentlemen for the sea England hath' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 290, fol. 4'v'). During the latter months of 1618 and through 1619 he repeatedly requested command of the next fleet to be set out by the East India Company. His applications were unsuccessful, but he attracted the attention of the new lord high admiral, George Villiers, marquess (subsequently duke) of Buckingham, who supported his applications to the company and then commissioned him as captain of an armed merchantman in the 1620-21 expedition against Algiers under Sir Robert Mansell. He evidently served with distinction, as on his return to England he was made flag captain to the earl of Oxford, who commanded a small squadron in the channel. However, he came out of pay on 18 May 1622 and received no further naval employment for three years. During this time he kept himself in readiness 'to do my King and country service when they shall call me unto it' (Centre for Kentish Studies, U269/1/OE1007). In August 1624 he obtained from the king a thirty-one-year lease of rents arriving from lands scattered though eleven counties, worth $150 per annum, thereby acquiring a regular income. 
In the spring of 1625 Penington commanded a squadron comprising a king's ship, the 'Vanguard', and seven armed merchantmen. These ships had been promised as loans to the French king, Louis XIII, to help quell the rebellion of the count of Soubise. However, neither Charles I nor Buckingham actually wanted them to be employed to suppress French protestantism. They hoped that by the time Penington's squadron reached France the Huguenots would have made peace with Louis, thereby allowing Penington's ships to be used in a combined Anglo-French military and naval operation against the Spanish satellite state of Genoa. He was accordingly given strict instructions to avoid involvement in France's civil wars. On his arrival at Dieppe in mid-June, however, he was ordered by the admiral of France to transport 1700 French troops to La Rochelle for service against the Huguenots. Penington was horrified, and returned to England, an action approved of by his superiors. He was nevertheless ordered back to Dieppe in mid-July, whereupon he asked to be relieved of his command. Buckingham feigned anger at this request, which he refused, but was secretly delighted by his subordinate's reluctance to co-operate with the French as there was as yet no confirmation of rumours that the Huguenots had agreed peace terms with Louis. Penington continued to give the duke secret cause for satisfaction, for at the end of July he connived at a mutiny by his crew which resulted in him returning to England for a second time. It was not until 5 August, when Buckingham and Charles were misled into thinking that Louis had made peace with the Huguenots, that Penington's ships (bar one) were transferred to French control. 
Soon after he returned to England Penington was ordered to mount a blockade of Dunkirk, but a storm in mid-October scattered his ships and more than twenty Dunkirkers evaded his net. Buckingham did not blame Penington for this failure, and at the beginning of 1626 he ordered him to fit out thirty ships at Plymouth with the aim of assisting Soubise, who had been defeated in a naval engagement in September 1625 and was now regarded as England's ally. Over the next five months Penington strained his own finances to equip this fleet, but he was hampered by acute shortages of men, money, and victuals, and became despondent that he seldom heard from Buckingham, 'for I do not only honour my lord but love him as a young man doth his mistress, and am jealous of his favours, or the contrary' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/23/25). Buckingham was not indifferent to Penington's difficulties, however, but was distracted by parliament, where his enemies accused him, among other things, of contributing to the military problems of the Huguenots by lending warships to Louis XIII. On 6 May 1626 Penington, having played a key role in the loan of the ships, was summoned by Buckingham to Westminster to give evidence, during which absence part of his fleet mutinied for want of pay and clothing. By the time he returned to his station the mutiny had fizzled out. Charles and Buckingham now abandoned their planned assistance of Soubise and resolved instead that Penington's fleet should form the nucleus of a fresh expedition to Spain under Lord Willoughby, with Penington as its rear-admiral. Willoughby's fleet was no better prepared than Penington's had been, however, and by the time the expedition sailed from Falmouth on 7 October, Penington was predicting the overthrow of the voyage, 'the time of the year being so far spent and we being now victualled but for ten weeks' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/37/49). His pessimism proved well founded, for in the Bay of Biscay the fleet encountered storms which sent it hurrying back to England. The outcry which greeted Willoughby's premature return led to the creation of a commission of inquiry, of which Penington was a member, but he attended only one of its meetings (on 22 December) before he was ordered back to sea, this time as admiral of a fleet of twenty ships provided by the city of London. Relations with France were now at a low ebb and he was instructed to intercept several warships built in the Netherlands for the fledgeling French navy reported to be anchored off Havre de Grace. There he was to provoke a quarrel so as to capture or sink the French ships. However, on his arrival in the Downs he found only fifteen ships rather than the twenty he had been promised, and that none were suitable for use as men-of-war. After an unsuccessful attempt to cross the channel on 29 December, he dutifully scoured the French coast. By the time he learned of the whereabouts of the French, on 14 January 1627, the time allotted to his ships for their naval service had nearly expired and he was therefore unable to mount an attack. 
Soon after the city ships were discharged, Penington was appointed (on 19 February) admiral of a squadron with orders to escort several detained French vessels from the western ports to the Thames and to sweep the channel clean of all enemy shipping. He carried out these instructions in spectacular fashion, taking twenty French prizes and bringing home goods and shipping valued at $128,600. Buckingham was delighted with this haul, which enabled him to complete his preparations for an assault on the Ile de Re in support of the Huguenots of La Rochelle. He accordingly ordered Penington to receive $1000 in recognition of his valuable service and bestowed on him the captaincy of Sandown Castle, at an annual salary of $20. 
Shortly after the English landed at Re, Penington, who commanded a squadron in Buckingham's fleet, offered to attempt to free the wine fleet which had been arrested at Bordeaux. However, Buckingham objected that he would first need to secure the nearby island of Oleron, from where it was feared the French king would mount a counter-attack. In the event, Penington was merely detailed to 'guard' Oleron, but he proved powerless to prevent the French from building up their forces there, and as a result Buckingham's army was swept off Re at the end of October. He returned to England ill and short of money, having received neither pay for the past eighteen months nor the promised $1000 reward. He was also thoroughly worn out, having been at sea almost continuously for the past two and a half years. In December he asked Buckingham to appoint him surveyor of the ordnance office, a position sufficiently remunerative to keep him from badgering Buckingham for money while still enabling him to 'be near and ready upon all occasions to attend your grace's commands' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/89/59). Buckingham was not yet ready to dispense with Penington's naval services, but he was willing to allow his subordinate a well-earned rest from sea service. Penington accordingly took no part in the earl of Denbigh's unsuccessful attempt to relieve La Rochelle in the spring of 1628, but instead was commissioned with the shipwright Phineas Pett to oversee the construction of ten small ships which were required both to row and sail. He discharged this role with his customary energy, and the new ships were launched later that year as the 'Lion's Whelps'. Buckingham also ensured that he was paid the $1000 reward he was owed, and helped him to a royal grant of the Buckinghamshire manor of Hanslope, which Penington coveted owing to its proximity to one of the duke's residences. 
By mid-July 1628 a refreshed Penington was back in harness, having been appointed to command a squadron in the fleet which Buckingham himself was preparing to lead to La Rochelle. In the event, he took no part in this expedition, which went ahead despite Buckingham's murder on 23 August. Penington had lionized Buckingham, and the duke's death must therefore have been a shattering blow to him. Buckingham's successors, the admiralty commissioners, enjoyed no such close relationship with Penington, and when in May 1629 they drew up a list of the captains for employment at sea that year they excluded him from it. His name was nevertheless inserted by the king, who placed him in command of a squadron to blockade the Elbe in support of the Danes. However, when news arrived that Denmark had concluded peace with the emperor his commission was revoked. His subsequent dispatches were ignored by the admiralty commissioners, much to his bemusement, as 'I am sure I have given no just cause of distaste to any either by neglecting my employment or otherwise' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/147/2). 
Once again Penington had found himself cast aside by the navy but in May 1631 he was unexpectedly appointed admiral of the narrow seas, the admiralty commissioners being disgruntled with the previous incumbent, Sir Henry Mervyn. Penington settled into his new role with his customary energy, and it was not long before the leading admiralty commissioner, Lord Treasurer Portland, expressed complete satisfaction with his performance. He remained admiral of the channel squadron for the next three years. By April 1632 he was also a gentleman-in-ordinary of the privy chamber, and two years later he was knighted aboard his flagship by the king. 
As rear-admiral in 1635 Penington was disappointed by the failure of the first ship money fleet to confront the French. On learning that the king intended to set out another fleet the following year, Penington hoped that it would achieve more than the first, 'or the money were as well saved as spent' ('CSP dom.', '1635', 316). He served as admiral of the winter guard in 1635-6 and as vice-admiral of the second ship money fleet in 1636, when he also subscribed a series of criticisms of the navy's ships and provisions drawn up by the fleet's young commander, the earl of Northumberland. He retained the rank of vice-admiral in 1637 and again in 1638, when Northumberland's ill health caused Penington to be the senior officer at sea. 
By 1638 Penington was in his mid-fifties and Northumberland, who was appointed lord high admiral in March, expected him to retire soon from sea service to make way for a younger man. When the surveyorship of the navy fell vacant in August, Northumberland therefore offered it to Penington, but the office was unprofitable and Penington apparently turned it down. Thereafter his relationship with the new lord admiral quickly deteriorated. In December, for instance, he was upbraided for taking his orders from one of the secretaries of state rather than from Northumberland, an offence he had committed in the previous year. Penington resented this admonition and privately complained to the former admiralty secretary Edward Nicholas that he could expect no better treatment 'so long as some are at the helm' ('CSP dom.', '1638-9', 188). His fears were justified, as Northumberland's response to the news that he had complained to the marquess of Hamilton about defects in some of his vessels in 1639 indicates. Penington, as admiral of a much reduced ship money fleet, had been ordered to transport Hamilton's army to Scotland to oppose the covenanters. Northumberland advised Hamilton 'not to give too much credit to what he tells you of this nature', being 'well acquainted with Sir John Penington's aptness to take up reports upon very slight information (which when they come to be examined never prove true)' (NA Scot., GD 406/1/1082). 
Although held in low regard by Northumberland, Penington was an able and experienced seaman with a long record of loyal service, even if he was also a born grouser. His abilities were amply demonstrated in the following month when he reported that he had blocked up the Scottish forces in Leith harbour so 'that they cannot stir in or out with a boat but we snap them up, which does infinitely perplex and trouble them more than all the King's army' ('CSP dom.', '1639', 210). The simmering feud between Penington and Northumberland was exacerbated in the autumn of 1639, however, after a large Spanish fleet was chased into Dover Road by the Dutch navy. For some years England had attempted to exercise sovereignty over its adjoining seas by policing them with large fleets. English claims to sovereignty would be exposed as hollow if the Spanish and Dutch came to blows in sight of the English fleet, yet there was nothing that Penington could do to prevent this as his force was too small. This was appreciated by Northumberland's admiralty secretary, Thomas Smith, who advised Penington to make a pretence of protecting the Spanish while not actually exposing his ships to any hazard. 
Early on the morning of 11 October Penington consulted his captains after the Dutch admiral signalled to the rest of his fleet to engage the Spanish. They resolved to get to the windward of the Dutch, who, anticipating this manoeuvre, detached a portion of their fleet to maintain a watchful eye on the English. As the fight developed a Dutch captain remonstrated that the Spanish had fired first, but Penington retorted that the Dutch had provoked the battle by approaching so close with their fireships. In the ensuing confusion the English captured two Dutch vessels, but Penington, perhaps heeding Smith's sound advice, recommended to his captains that they should be released as 'they were no considerable satisfaction for his majesty for the affront done unto him' (P. White, 'A Memorable Sea-Fight', 1649, 46) and would merely provoke the Dutch, whose fleet was five times stronger than theirs. His captains took little persuading of the wisdom of this advice, and the two vessels were accordingly released. Penington was widely censured for this decision after the battle, and also for failing to ride close to the Dutch ships to prevent them from attacking the Spanish. Indeed, though roundly defended in public by Northumberland, privately the earl complained that 'Penington hath behaved himself basely' (BL, microfilm M285, fol. 235'v'), and soon after the battle tensions between the two men resurfaced, this time over the gathering-up of valuable wreckage to which Northumberland laid claim as lord admiral. On 30 October Penington was rebuked for making 'so much ado about a business wherein you had such punctual instructions' ('CSP dom.', '1639-40', 62). 
Penington was admiral of the last of the ship money fleets in 1640, and reverted to his former title as admiral of the narrow seas in 1641. In May 1641 the exchequer was ordered to allow him $3000 in recognition of his services, but a depleted treasury was unable to find the money. By 1642 Penington, finally tired of sea service, asked his friend Edward Nicholas to persuade the king to appoint him treasurer of the navy alongside the gouty and aged Sir William Russell. Penington was by now wealthy enough to serve in that office: in July 1640 he valued his estate for the purposes of his will at more than $13,732 in cash and loans. Much of this fortune had undoubtedly been derived from convoy money -- the payments made by Spain in the later 1630s to the captains of the ship money fleets in return for the safe convoy of their treasure ships into Dunkirk harbour -- but Penington had also profited from moneylending, a business carried on for him while he was at sea by his second cousin, the London alderman Isaac Penington. However, Charles resolved to maintain Russell as sole treasurer for the time being because Penington was more useful to him at sea. Indeed, it was Penington who spirited Lord Digby across the channel for him in January 1642, at which time Penington also secretly pledged to refer all his instructions to the king for his approval. 
The part played by Penington in Digby's escape infuriated Northumberland, whose authority he had again bypassed. On 18 January the lord admiral sent Penington a curt letter requiring him to report to parliament, 'which is all I have to say at present' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/488/70). After consulting the king, Penington gave evidence to the Commons, whose speaker thanked him for an 'ingenuous confession' (Coates, Young, and Snow, 176). However, his explanation that he had been obliged to follow Charles's orders because he was employed by the king under the lord admiral was not well received. On 23 February Charles ordered Penington to accompany the queen to the Netherlands, where he was kept in her service until 23 March. His absence provided further proof that he was taking his orders directly from Charles, and therefore on 10 March the Commons resolved that the king should be asked to employ the earl of Warwick in his stead that summer. Charles refused to countenance their request, however, and later rebuffed a petition to the same effect from both houses. 
Penington came out of pay on 5 April and subsequently joined the king at York. By the end of June the fleet was in Warwick's hands, but Charles was still determined to install Penington. However, Penington only hesitantly agreed to help oust Warwick. According to Clarendon, he feared capture and was in considerable 'perplexity' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 2.225), while the royalist writer David Lloyd considered that he had been 'deluded by the faction' (Lloyd, 646), whose ranks included Isaac Penington. Whatever the reasons for his reluctance, Penington, instead of proceeding to the Downs himself, sent instructions to the aged comptroller of the navy, Sir Henry Palmer, a former seagoing officer who lived close by, to take command of the fleet on his behalf. Meanwhile, a royal courier required Warwick's captains to place themselves under Penington's orders. Clarendon relates that the captains received this message 'with great duty and submission' and stayed only to receive Penington's instructions. However none were forthcoming because Penington would not venture aboard ship until Palmer had signalled that it was safe to do so, and Palmer had not yet arrived, allegedly because he was unwell. Amid this confusion Warwick, who had been feasting ashore, learned of the king's message. Returning hastily to his flagship, the earl summoned his captains to him, and took prisoner those who refused to obey his commands. By the time Palmer arrived the game was up. 
On the outbreak of civil war Penington was appointed an ordnance commissioner by the king. In August 1642 Charles finally agreed to appoint him joint treasurer of the navy, which was now largely in parliament's hands. Following the royalist capture of Bristol in July 1643 he was designated admiral of the fleet, with instructions to keep open the Bristol Channel and communications with south Wales and Ireland. By early August he had readied a force of eighteen ships at Bristol, where he remained until at least April 1645. What became of him after Fairfax stormed the city in September is uncertain. According to Lloyd he died at Bristol in September 1646; he was certainly dead by 28 May 1648, when his will of 1645 was proved. In this he divided up his fortune of more than $13,500 in cash and $1000 in plate among various relatives and friends, having never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 21843


Penington, John (1655-1710), Quaker apologist and controversialist, was born in London or at his mother's estate of Worminghurst, Sussex. His parents were Isaac Penington (1616-1679), the friend of George Fox and William Penn, and his wife, Mary Springett, 'nee' Proude ['see 'Penington, Mary (bap. 1623, d. 1682)], the spiritual autobiographer. John's childhood years must have been turbulent, since his father faced near continual persecution in the early Restoration period. Isaac was in prison for much of the decade of the 1660s, and during this period he lost his estate and suffered significant diminution of his wife's estates in Kent. Nevertheless, John received a good education, first of all as a student of Thomas Ellwood, who was employed as family tutor, then at the Quaker boarding-school at Waltham Abbey. In the early 1670s the family rebuilt Woodside House, near Amersham, Buckinghamshire, and settled there. John seems to have been a favourite of his father, at least after the death at sea of his brother Isaac, for he was often in his company during these years. 
In 1679 Penington's father, who was much beloved by the Quaker community, died. Upon his death John inherited Woodside House as well as Goodnestone Court, his mother's estate in Kent. Isaac's Quaker mantle apparently fell to John, too, who seems to have taken a leadership role in the London community from this time on. He joined with other Quaker leaders (as well as his mother) in writing a tribute to Isaac. John's subsequent writings were largely directed to vindicating his father and other Quaker authors. In 1681 he published 'John Penington's complaint against William Rogers: relating to the abuse and injury done to the memory of his worthy father Isaac', in which he accused Rogers of deliberately misrepresenting Isaac, who claimed that the latter had said that no 'outward Form of Government' was necessary in this life. 
In the 1690s serious attacks were levelled at Quaker writings by the 'apostate' Quaker George Keith. Keith had been a prominent leader of the sect until he had a falling out with the Quakers of Pennsylvania in the early 1690s. In 1693 he returned to London and started writing against his erstwhile colleagues. Keith applied withering criticism to the writings of William Penn, George Whitehead, and Isaac Penington. John responded by pointing out Keith's own inconsistencies -- in his past comments as well as his recent writings -- and claimed to be able to quote 'Keith against Keith' ('Keith Against Keith, or, Some More of George Keith's Contradictions and Absurdities', 1696). All told, Penington wrote five books or tracts against Keith, and debated with him publicly at Turner's Hall in June 1696. His most detailed and systematic attacks are 'Keith Against Keith', mentioned above, and 'The fig-leaf covering discovered, or, George Keith's explications and retractions... proved insincere' (1697). Penington died at Goodnestone Court, Kent, on 8 May 1710 and was buried at the Quaker burial-ground at Jordans, Chalfont St Giles. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 21844


Penketh, Thomas (d. 1487), Augustinian friar and theologian, describes himself in his theological notebook as of the Warrington convent in Lancashire, and evidently studied theology at Oxford before (probably immediately before) 1466; on the basis of his Oxford study he was granted leave to incept at Cambridge in the academic year 1466-7, and took the degree of DTh on 31 May 1468. He must have already had some repute within his order, since he was confirmed as prior provincial of England on 22 October 1469; but he evidently returned to Oxford, where he was permitted by his order to study and teach, until in 1474 he vacated the provincialship to study at Padua. He was appointed lector in metaphysics in the university there, almost certainly being the Master Thomas Anglicus confirmed in that post on 22 September 1475, and very probably holding it already in 1474, when he published in Venice his edition of the quodlibetal questions of John Duns Scotus. By 1477, when he brought out an edition of Scotus's commentary on the 'Sentences' of Peter Lombard, he was holding the post of lector in theology, which he still held in 1479 according to his confrere, Brother Iacopo Filippo da Bergamo. He was re-elected prior provincial in 1480 (confirmed 15 March 1481) and again on 1 April 1485, presumably until death. At Easter 1484 he preached a sermon in praise of Richard III, which, according to Sir Thomas More, was afterwards excoriated, but which brought him an annual pension of $10 from the king. He died in London on 20 May 1487. 
Penketh's principal achievement was to be the first to publish scholarly but usable printed editions of the chief works of Duns Scotus and the Scotist theologian Antonius Andreae. His editorial work was crowded into the five or six years he spent at Padua, where he could be in touch with experienced printers; but it originated in the Scotist teaching of the Oxford and Cambridge theological faculties, as a surviving notebook in his hand shows (Oxford, Corpus Christi College, MS 126). It contains questions on universals by Brother William Russell, probably the Augustinian friar who incepted at Oxford in 1430, some unattributed questions on God and creatures, possibly Penketh's own, and a text of the commentary of Antonius Andreae on Aristotle's 'Metaphysics' which he edited at Padua. All these texts are explicitly Scotist, one of the unascribed questions citing Scotus as 'doctor noster subtilis'; together, they provide evidence of the theology taught at the Oxford Augustinian house from the 1430s to the 1470s, and of the Scotist learning that lay behind Penketh's editions of Scotus and Antonius Andreae. The editions ascribed to him are Scotus's 'Quaestiones quodlibetales', printed by Albert de Stendal (Padua, 1474), with the text emended by Penketh, and printed again from Penketh's text for Johann of Cologne (Venice, 1477) and reissued both in Nuremberg and in Venice in 1481; Scotus's 'Quaestiones super secundum librum sententiarum', printed by Stendal and emended by Penketh (Padua, 1474); Antonius Andreae's 'Quaestiones de tribus principiis rerum naturalium', printed by Laurentius Canozius and emended by Penketh and Laurentius de Lendenaria (Padua, 1475); Scotus's 'Quaestiones super libros sententiarum', edited by Penketh with Bartolomeo Bellati and printed for Johann of Cologne and Nicholas Jenson (Venice, 1477, and reissued there in both folio and quarto editions in 1481); Antonius Andreae's 'Quaestiones super 'Metaphysica'', printed for Nicholas Petri of Haarlem and emended by Penketh (Vicenza, 1477, and reissued in London for William Wilcock in 1480). These editions, especially of Scotus, circulated widely and for some time were the standard texts; they were made more useful by the inclusion of the early 'additamenta' of Scotus's pupils which some editors omitted. 
Bale also ascribed to Penketh 'Annotationes super Augustinum 'De civitate Dei'', without incipit; and an 'Ars sermocinandi' with an incipit which enables it to be identified with a tract surviving in Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 423, and elsewhere. But this tract is found incompletely in Oxford, University College, MS 36, in a hand too early for Penketh's authorship. 


@@@@@


doc= 21845


Penkethman, John (fl. 1623-1668), accountant, lived in the legal quarter of Chancery Lane, London, at one time at the Rolls, afterwards at chambers in Simond's Inn. He earned his living by casting accounts for chancery masters, and others, and by auditing accounts gratis, basing his charges on the number of errors which he uncovered. His earliest works, dating from 1623, were translations from the classical authors, and he advertised that he would undertake prose or verse translations from Latin. He also sold copies of his own commercial tables of subjects, such as interest or currency conversion; his last known book, 'Accompts of Merchandise', was published in 1668. 
Penkethman's principal work was 'Artachthos, or, A New Booke Declaring the Assise or Weight of Bread' (1638). Certificated by the lord mayor and aldermen of the City of London, it listed the prices which bakers could charge for their loaves, by troy or avoirdupois weight, according to the fluctuating price of corn. Penkethman was granted a privilege to print and publish this book for twenty-one years; certain sections were reprinted, probably during his lifetime, and a later edition was published in 1748. 
Nothing is known of Penkethman's origins (the name is associated with Lancashire) or his personal life; the actor John Penkethman (died 1740) may have been related to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 21846


Penley, Aaron Edwin (1806-1870), painter and drawing-master, was born on 20 May 1806 at Rye, Sussex, the fourth son of William Penley (1773-1838), a comedian at the Drury Lane Theatre, London, and his wife, Frances Mary Ann Saulez; his brother William Henry Saulez was also a drawing-master. Penley married Caroline Turner (died 1889) of Sheffield on 10 March 1830, and the couple had eighteen children, of whom a daughter and two sons survived into adulthood: the watercolour painter Charles Penley and Claude, who became a lawyer. Aaron Penley was self-taught and the first recorded event in his career came in 1834 with the award of the Heywood medal from the Manchester Institution for an oil of 'Christ Granting the Petition of the Woman of Canaan'. He made his debut at the Royal Academy a year later with three portraits and exhibited there sporadically until 1869; his exhibits included genre scenes and, latterly, landscapes in watercolour. Penley also showed at the British Institution and the Society of British Artists, but his main allegiance was to the New Society of Painters in Water Colours which he joined in 1838 and where he showed 309 works. He also received royal patronage. He was appointed painter in watercolour to Queen Adelaide, painted a miniature of Queen Victoria (1840; NPG) from an actual sitting, and taught her son Prince Arthur. 
Penley also enjoyed success as a drawing-master. During the 1830s he built up a practice in the Southampton area and, between 1836 and 1842, at Devonport. In 1843 he moved to Bath to take up an appointment at Cheltenham College, and after a move to London in 1849 was appointed assistant professor of civil drawing at the East India Company's college at Addiscombe. Penley was an innovative teacher, introducing instruction in the art of photography, and was promoted to senior professor in 1855. When the college closed in 1861 he moved to the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich. His teaching experience informed a series of publications including 'A System of Water-Colour Painting' (1850), 'The Elements of Perspective' (1851), 'Sketching from Nature in Water Colours' (1869), and, most impressively, 'The English School of Painting in Water-Colours' with colour illustrations in chromolithography (1861). The last was notable for the use of new colours such as viridian and aureolin which Penley introduced into Britain. 
Penley is best known today for the technically competent, but rather conventional, exhibition landscapes which he showed at the New Society of Painters in Water Colours. The 'View of Ullswater from Gowbarrow Park, at Evening' (exh. 1854) typifies a strand of unadventurous mid-Victorian watercolour art which combined a well-known location, conventional composition, and an attractive effect. The artist travelled widely in Britain and his repertory included scenes from Scotland, Yorkshire, the west country, and Wales, as well as south-east England. Although Penley's exhibited works could be overworked, his watercolour sketches retain a more attractive spontaneity. Penley died at his home, 5 Elliott Hill, Lewisham, on 15 January 1870 of heart disease. There are representative collections of his work in the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 21847


Penn, Granville (1761-1844), author, second surviving son of Thomas Penn (1702-1775) and his wife, Lady Juliana Fermor (1729-1801), fourth daughter of Thomas, first earl of Pomfret, was born at 10 New Street, Spring Gardens, London, on 9 December 1761. He matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, on 11 November 1780, but took no degree. Subsequently he became an assistant clerk in the war department, and received a pension on retirement. On 24 June 1791 he married Isabella, eldest daughter of General Gordon Forbes, colonel of the 29th regiment of foot, and settled in London. They had three sons and four daughters. In 1834 he succeeded his brother, John Penn (1760-1834), in the estates of Stoke Park, Buckinghamshire, and Pennsylvania Castle, Portland (later a hotel). He was a member of the Outinian Society, founded by his brother. 
Penn published a number of competent translations from the Greek, and many theological and semi-scientific works. 'A Comparative Estimate of the Mineral and Mosaical Geologies' (1822) was received with some approval in religious circles, but was severely censured elsewhere as an unscientific attempt to treat the book of 'Genesis' as a manual of geology. A second edition, enlarged, and with answers to critics, appeared in two volumes in 1825. 'The book of the new covenant of Our Lord; being a critical revision of the text and translation of the English version of the New Testament, with the aid of most ancient manuscripts' appeared in 1836. His life of his great-grandfather Admiral Sir William Penn was published in 1833. He also produced a number of controversial works on biblical chronology and prophecy, geology, and classical literature. Penn died at Stoke Park on 28 September 1844. 


@@@@@


doc= 21848


Penn, James (bap. 1727, d. 1800), religious writer, son of John Penn, stationer, of St Bride's parish, London, was baptized at St Bride's on 9 June 1727. He was admitted a scholar of Christ's Hospital, London, from the parish of St Dunstan-in-the-West in April 1736, and in 1745, as a 'Grecian', obtained an exhibition at Balliol College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 4 July that year. He proceeded BA in 1749 and MA in 1752. He was elected under grammar master of Christ's Hospital in 1753, and in 1761 published a Latin grammar which was used in the school well into the nineteenth century. In 1756 he was curate of St Andrew Undershaft, Leadenhall Street, and the following year was curate of the united parishes of St Anne and St Agnes and St John Zachary in Aldersgate. In those two years he published the first two of his four volumes of miscellaneous tracts and sermons, some of which show 'far too large a portion of controversial spirit' (Orme, 345), but also considerable humour and satire. 
In 1760 Penn was a candidate for the upper grammar, or headmastership, of Christ's Hospital but lost the election to Peter Whalley by one vote. He was appointed by the governors of the Hospital to the vicarage of Clavering-cum-Langley in Essex, which he held until his death. In 1762 the third volume of his works appeared. Penn continued at the school until 1767, when he was dismissed after a disagreement with the governors, and because 'his eccentricities were not less remarkable than his talents' (Trollope, 301). That year he published 'The Farmer's Daughter of Essex' and, one of his most characteristic works, 'By Way of Prevention: a Sleepy Sermon... for the Dog-Days'. The amusing 'Reasonableness of Repentance', which contains a dedication to the devil as 'Tremendous sir', appeared in 1768; in 1769 seven sermons were published together. 
From about 1769 until 1779 Penn was domestic chaplain to Granville Leveson-Gower, second Earl Gower. In 1779 he published 'The Surrey Cottage', a novel, and in 1781 his 'Remarks' on Martin Madan's 'Thelyphthora'. He married twice and had a son and a daughter, John and Mary, from his first marriage. From March 1781 until his death on 15 August 1800 he lived at Clavering. He was buried in London and was survived by his second wife, Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 21849


Penn, John (1729-1795), colonial governor, was born in London on 14 July 1729, one of four children and the eldest son of Richard Penn (1705/6-1771) and Hannah Lardner, and grandson of William Penn (1644-1718), founder of Pennsylvania. At a secret service in 1747 he married a Miss Cox, daughter of his schoolmaster, James Cox, a union into which other family members believed he had been tricked. Then described as an indolent and corpulent young man, Penn was rescued from the marriage by his uncle Thomas Penn (having been abandoned by his father) and was sent to the University of Geneva (1747-51) before travelling in Italy in October 1751. In the following year he moved to Philadelphia where he enjoyed a comfortable life as a member of the proprietor gentry and dabbled in politics and business. Penn was back in England from 1755 before returning to Pennsylvania as lieutenant-governor in November 1763. 
These were difficult times for Pennsylvania's proprietary leadership, notwithstanding the initial support Penn received from the assembly. Border disputes with Virginia, Connecticut, and Maryland were exacerbated by assaults by Scots-Irish and German border settlers on members of the Conestoga nation, culminating in 1764 with the infamous attack by the Paxton Boys and subsequent American Indian reprisals. Because of this retaliatory action, Penn's early tolerance for the rights of Native Americans gave way to calls for a more aggressive response against the Delaware and Shawnee Indians which prompted the latter to sue for peace in September 1764, signed by the governor in December. During the summer of 1768 Penn organized the proprietor's case for a conference intended to end the territorial disputes between settlers and Native Americans through the Penns' purchase of contested land. The results of the Fort Stanwix treaty were mixed: while relations with American Indians stabilized, the settlement came at a considerable cost to the Penn family who, despite plans to sell on the land to loyal Pennsylvania officers, were unable to resist ongoing encroachments from Connecticut Yankees into the 1770s. 
In October 1771, following his father's death earlier that year, Penn returned to England and was replaced by his younger brother Richard Penn (1733/4-1811) as acting governor. Relations within the family were currently poor, with John held responsible for the high levels of compensation demanded from increasingly impoverished Pennsylvanian settlers. On the death of his father, Penn now became a minor proprietor of the colony with a one-quarter interest, with the remainder being held by his uncle. Through Thomas's influence John returned for a second term as Pennsylvania's governor in the autumn of 1773. Once more he entered a troubled political environment. Distracted by a renewed threat of border skirmishes from Native Americans, Penn was also involved in bitter exchanges with assembly members over Westminster's alleged challenge to colonial liberties in the wake of the 'Tea Act' (1773). Penn adopted a conciliatory role as relations worsened between the colonial assemblies and Lord North's government, his aim being to weaken through compromise and negotiation the first continental congress which met in Philadelphia in September 1774. However, his proposals and work as an intermediary between North and the Pennsylvania assembly came to nothing and, in September 1776, the Penns' royal charter was annulled by constitutional convention. 
In 1777 Philadelphia was occupied by the British under General William Howe, and Penn was arrested and forced into a year's exile in New Jersey. On his return to Pennsylvania he took a loyalty oath to the new revolutionary government and lived in his purpose-built residence, Lansdowne House on the Schuylkill River, with his second wife, Ann (died 1830), daughter of Philadelphia's chief justice William Allan, whom he married on 31 May 1766; the couple had no children. In 1788 he travelled to England with his cousin, also John Penn (1760-1834), to lobby parliament for additional compensation for lands confiscated during the war for which the family had received $130,000 from the new colonial administration and now obtained an annuity of $4000 from the British government. The last political link between the Penn family and the colony founded by his grandfather, John Penn died in Philadelphia on 9 February 1795 and was buried at the city's Anglican Christ Church burial-ground; his body was later removed to England. 


@@@@@


doc= 21850


Penn, John (1760-1834), writer, was born in London on 22 February 1760, and baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 21 March, the eldest surviving son of Thomas Penn (1702-1775), landowner, and his wife, Lady Juliana (1729-1801), daughter of Thomas Fermor, first earl of Pomfret. William Penn (1644-1718), founder of Pennsylvania, was his grandfather. On the death of his father in 1775 John succeeded to his property, which included the moiety of the last proprietorship of the province of Pennsylvania, with hereditary governorship, and Stoke Poges Park in Buckinghamshire, near Windsor, which his father had purchased in 1760. On the outbreak of the American War of Independence in 1775, John apparently accompanied his mother to Geneva. He went to Eton College and then entered Clare College, Cambridge, in 1776 as a nobleman (by virtue of his maternal descent). He matriculated in 1777 and was created MA in 1779 and LLD on 28 June 1811. 
From 1782 to 1789 Penn lived in America, attending to his Pennsylvania property, and built the house called Solitude at Schuylkill. He and his cousin John Penn (1729-1795) received from the assembly in 1786 the grant of $15,000 annually as payment for the estate vested in the commonwealth as by law passed on 18 January 1786. In 1789 he returned to England, and in the following year received his portion of the $4000 annuity granted by parliament in consideration of the losses in Pennsylvania. The house at Stoke Poges having fallen into decay, he commenced, in 1789, the erection of a new one in the centre of the park, from designs by Nasmith, which were completed by James Wyatt. He later published an anonymous 'Historical and Descriptive Account of Stoke Park' (1813). 
Penn drew on his American experiences to produce his drama 'The Battle of Eddington, or, British Liberty' (1792), which was performed several times in the early nineteenth century. His 'Letters on the Drama' (1796) appeared anonymously in London, and his 'A Timely Appeal to the Common Sense of the People of Great Britain' was published there in 1798, followed by 'Further Thoughts on the Present State of Public Opinion' (1800). Penn's primary literary interest was poetry, however, and in addition to a volume of 'Poems' printed on his private press at Stoke Park in 1796, he also produced 'Critical, Poetical and Dramatic Works' (1797), 'Poems, Consisting of Original Works, Imitations, and Translations' (1801, 1802), and 'Observations in Illustration of Virgil's Fourth Eclogue' (1810). 
In 1798 Penn was sheriff of Buckinghamshire. He represented the borough of Helston, Cornwall, in the parliament of 1802 and continued to do so until 1805 when he was appointed governor of Portland Castle, Dorset, an office he held until his death. In 1800, he erected on Portland Island, from designs by Wyatt, a mansion which he styled Pennsylvania Castle. He was lieutenant-colonel of the 1st (Eton) troop of the 1st (South) regiment of the Royal Buckinghamshire yeomanry and commandant of the Royal Portland Legion. 
The publication of an anonymous poem called 'Marriage', in the 'Monthly Magazine' in the summer of 1815 led Penn to organize in 1817 a 'matrimonial society', which had for its object an improvement in the domestic life of married persons. Extending its aims to other schemes of domestic utility, the society changed its name in May to that of the Outinian Society. During the summer of 1818 meetings of the society took place at Penn's house, 10 New Street, Spring Gardens, London, and later at Stoke Park. Penn, who acted as president, edited the works of the society for publication from 1819 to 1823. 
Penn died unmarried at Stoke Poges Park on 21 June 1834, and was succeeded in his estates there and at Portland by his brother Granville Penn. 


@@@@@


doc= 21851


Penn, John (1770-1843), engineer, was born near Taunton, Somerset, and apprenticed as a millwright (the name then given to mechanical engineers) at nearby Bridgwater. After a period working in Bristol he moved about 1793 to London. In 1800 he used his savings to open a workshop in Greenwich, specializing in milling machinery. He rapidly acquired a reputation for excellence of design and workmanship that was to remain a feature of the company he founded until its closure. His early speciality was in flour-milling machinery, where he improved and modernized the basic design, replacing the wooden framing with cast iron. His first major order was for machinery to equip the bakery at the Royal Navy's Deptford victualling yard. His work soon attracted the attention of prominent designers, leading William Cubitt to order his first treadmill from Penn in 1817; later examples were used in the London docks and in prisons. About 1824 Jacob Perkins employed him to build his ambitious and complex steam gun. The increasing use of steam for industrial power, together with his riverside location, led to Penn's becoming interested in marine steam engines. In 1822 the pioneer iron steamer 'Aaron Manby' was assembled at Deptford by the Staffordshire engineer after whom she was named. Penn and his sixteen-year-old son John Penn (1805-1878) took the opportunity to inspect her, and particularly her oscillating engines. Within three years Penn had built his first marine engine, for a coastal steamer on the London-Norwich route. The oscillating design was greatly improved from Manby's patent, and by 1838 he was supplying several prominent Thames shipbuilders, notably Ditchburn and Mare. 
Penn, a friend of William Cobbett, was a political radical, and was a parliamentary candidate at Greenwich in 1832. His other interests included horticulture: he used his engineering abilities to improve the design and construction of greenhouses and conservatories. Having largely turned over the direction of the family business to his son John, he died suddenly at home in Lewisham on 6 June 1843. Penn played a vital part in the heroic age of steam engineering; what he lacked in vision and popularity he more than made up for by the quality of his work. He was one of the people who made the steam engine into the prime mover of British commercial, industrial, and strategic power. 


@@@@@


doc= 21852


Penn, John (1805-1878), marine engineer, the son of the engineer John Penn (1770-1843), was born at Greenwich, Kent, and was apprenticed to his father. At an early age he demonstrated remarkable aptitude for engineering -- in practical workmanship, design, and management -- and he soon joined his father in the management of the family business, later John Penn & Sons. From 1825 to 1840 the work of father and son is almost impossible to disentangle. About 1826 the younger Penn constructed the steam gun invented by Jacob Perkins, which was shown to Wellington and other officers, taken to Paris, and later exhibited at the Adelaide Gallery, London. He was elected an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1826, became a member in 1845, and served on the council from 1853 to 1856. In 1847 he married Ellen English, the daughter of another London engineer, William English of Enfield; they had four sons and two daughters. 
The most lucrative source of marine engine orders in this period was the Royal Navy. It tended to be conservative, and restricted orders to known, approved contractors. In 1843 Penn approached the Admiralty with an unsolicited offer to install high-power oscillating engines in the Admiralty steam yacht 'Black Eagle'. This was accepted, on the recommendation of Sir John Rennie. The success of these engines led to Penn's installing further examples in many of the last paddle-wheel warships down to 1852. A modified version was fitted to the pioneer iron screw steamer the 'Great Britain' in 1852, when she was converted for service on the Australian route; the power and economy of Penn's engines opened this route to steamships. 
For naval screw propeller vessels Penn developed the trunk engine, which combined laid-down (that is, horizontal) cylinders for safety below the waterline with the highest power yet achieved. For two decades they were the engines of choice for new, high-powered British warships. The first of the type, designed to run at what were then considered very high speeds to drive the screw propeller directly, rather than relying on bulky and noisy gearing, was installed in the pioneer screw frigate 'Arrogant' of 1848; the type was enlarged and improved for the first steam battleship the 'Agamemnon' in 1852, the first ironclad, the 'Warrior' of 1861, and the first mastless battleship, the 'Devastation' of 1871. During the Crimean War Penn's works were also employed in erecting 120 small high-pressure engines for use in gunboats. They split this task with their major rivals, Maudslay, Son, and Field of Lambeth, leaving the casting of components to the smaller firms that shared the Thames riverside. These orders were secured by the excellent results that had been given by previous Penn engines, rather than by competitive tender, for it was widely recognized that the Royal Navy travelled first class and Penn's machinery was the best available. Penn engines, large and small, were noted for their high power, great reliability, and astonishing longevity. Those fitted to the early ironclads often served for more than thirty years, while the gunboat engines outlasted the craft in which they were first installed; many were reused in new vessels. Penn's own reputation was such that he was called in to arbitrate the quarrel between Isambard Kingdom Brunel and John Scott Russell over the 'Great Eastern' in 1859. 
Penn's works grew to meet the number and value of naval orders, leavened by a number of premium mercantile and liner contracts. By the time of his death it occupied 7 acres on Blackheath Hill, and there was a separate boiler works at Deptford. It was always considered the best-equipped marine engineering works, capable of meeting any demand. Penn was a model employer, one of the first to recognize the value of skilled employees through pensions, as well as the more typically paternalistic system of awarding Christmas gifts. His works also provided the education for a whole generation of marine engineers, and not a few naval officers, who took time to study there. In 1858-9, and again in 1867-8, Penn served as president of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers; he contributed several papers to their 'Proceedings'. In June 1859 he was elected FRS, and in 1860 he helped to found the Institution of Naval Architects. 
Penn developed, improved, and refined the ideas and engineering of others, and was among the first to employ the precision instruments and tools developed by his friend Joseph Whitworth. His approach was empirical, and he devoted much time and effort to solving fundamental problems. His most important contribution to marine engineering came in collaboration with Francis Pettit Smith: the two men developed the 'lignum vitae' stern bearing, patented in 1854 and finally perfected in 1858. This enabled screw propeller ships to make oceanic voyages without wearing out their stern glands. It was typical of Penn that he should contribute the least obvious, but most important, step in the creation of the modern ship. 
In 1875 Penn, by then very ill, retired from the management of the business, which passed to his two elder sons, who had been partners since 1872. He died at his home, The Cedars, Lee, Kent, on 23 September 1878, survived by his wife, and was buried at St Margaret's Church, Lee, on 29 September. By the time of his death the firm had built engines for 735 ships, ranging from river ferries to battleships. His eldest son, John (1848-1903), educated at Harrow School and Trinity College, Cambridge, managed the firm, but was not an engineer. He was Conservative MP for Lewisham from 1891 to 1903 and 'one of the best-known Parliamentary golfers' (Venn, 'Alum. Cant.', 5/2, 1953, 84). The firm closed in 1914. John Penn was one of the giants of Victorian engineering, and was universally acknowledged as such in his lifetime. He deserves to be better known; his engines helped to maintain Britain's mastery of the seas for more than fifty years. As his friend John Bourne observed, he was an irreparable loss to the world of engineering: 'he produced engines such as no one else was able to equal or excel', while 'his merit was only excelled by his modesty' ('The Engineer', 4 Oct 1878, 242). 


@@@@@


doc= 21853


Penn, Richard (1733/4-1811), colonial official and politician, was the second son of Richard Penn (died 1771), and Hannah, daughter of Richard Lardner. William Penn, the founder of Pennsylvania, was his grandfather, and John Penn, lieutenant-governor of Pennsylvania, was his elder brother. He was educated at Eton College and matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, in October 1752, aged eighteen, and went to the Inner Temple in the same year. In 1771 he was appointed by his uncle, Thomas Penn, and his father, two of the first proprietaries of Pennsylvania, as deputy governor of the province during his brother's absence in England. 
Penn arrived in Philadelphia on 16 October 1771, and occupied the post until John's return in August 1773. His care of the province's commercial interests made him popular with the white colonists. While in America he married Mary Masters on 21 May 1772; the couple had two daughters and two sons, William and Richard ['see below']. He returned to England in 1775, carrying with him a petition from the first American congress to the king. Penn was examined before the House of Lords as to the support for independence in the colonies. In 1787 he and his family were granted considerable compensation from the United States for his loss of property there, and he visited America one last time shortly before his death. 
On 9 April 1784 Penn was elected member of parliament for the borough of Appleby, Westmorland, which he represented until 20 December 1790, when he was returned for Haslemere, Surrey. From 1796 until 1802 he sat for the city of Lancaster, and in the latter year was again chosen for Haslemere. He supported Pitt, but was alone in not going over to the opposition during the regency. He died at his house at Richmond, Surrey, on 27 May 1811; he was survived by his wife. 
Penn's elder son, 
William Penn's younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 21854


Richard Penn (1784-1863), author, was employed at the Colonial Office. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 18 November 1824. A cipher that he arranged for use in dispatches is illustrated in his pamphlet 'On a New Mode of Secret Writing' (1829). He also wrote 'Maxims and Hints for an Angler, and Miseries of Fishing' (1833), illustrated by Sir Francis Chantrey, to which was added 'Maxims and Hints for a Chess Player', with portrait-caricatures of the author and Sir Francis, by the latter. An enlarged edition was published in 1839, and another, containing 'Maxims and Hints on Shooting', appeared in 1855. Richard Penn died, unmarried, at Richmond, Surrey, on 21 April 1863. 


@@@@@


doc= 21855


Penn, Thomas (1702-1775), landowner, was born at Kensington, London, on 8 March 1702, the second son of William Penn (1644-1718), founder of Pennsylvania, and his second wife, Hannah Callowhill (1670-1726). During his childhood the Penn family received little profit from the colony, and Thomas was apprenticed to a London mercer in order to provide an alternative financial security. Upon William's death in 1718 the children of his first wife disputed his will, which left the proprietorship of the colony to Thomas and his two brothers, John and Richard, by William's second wife. In 1727 Hannah won the upholding of her husband's will, which was further secured in 1731 when the descendants of William's first wife released their claims to the colony in exchange for a sum of money. In exchange for two beaver skins delivered annually to Windsor Castle the Penns were given absolute ownership of all lands and mining rights of Pennsylvania, but the proprietorship was still no guarantee of wealth. Rents had to be collected, payment for settled lands secured, and potential lands for settlement protected from French or American Indian attack. 
Thomas Penn took the lead in the family's financial affairs, and in 1732 was the first family member to visit the colony since his father left in 1701. While in America Thomas devised new ways of categorizing the family's lands for rent and sale, as well as various ways to collect rents. He also renewed treaties with various American Indian communities and determined to strengthen his family's interests through strengthening the powers of an appointed governor. His success is perhaps best measured in the change from the warm welcome he received upon his arrival to the general colonial opinion of him as greedy and cold by the time of his departure in 1741. Upon his older brother's death in 1746 Thomas inherited his portion of proprietorship and thus held a three-quarters interest in the colony. On 22 August 1751 Thomas married Lady Juliana Fermor (1729-1801), daughter of the earl of Pomfret. They had four sons, including the writers John Penn (1760-1834) and Granville Penn (1761-1844), and three daughters. Although a Quaker by descent and association, Thomas had long since abandoned many of the denomination's practices, and his marriage in an Anglican church marked the end of his association with the Quaker faith. The Seven Years' War revealed the difficulties of managing the family's substantial American interests from England, and in 1763 John Penn (1729-1795), Thomas's nephew, was appointed governor of Pennsylvania. John maintained a regular correspondence with Thomas and Juliana, who had assumed a role of increasing importance as Thomas's health worsened. He died on 21 March 1775 at his estate at Stoke Poges, Buckinghamshire, and was buried at the church there. He left his interests in Pennsylvania to his only surviving son, John, who was fifteen. Juliana and his son-in-law, William Baker, took the lead of the family's American affairs for the short time until the American War of Independence brought about the dissolution of the Penns' proprietorship in 1779. For their losses of about 24 million acres of land and $118,569 owed in rents, the Penns received $130,000 as compensation from the new government of Pennsylvania. 


@@@@@


doc= 21856


Penn, Sir William (bap. 1621, d. 1670), naval officer, was baptized in St Thomas's Church, Bristol, on 23 April 1621, the son of Giles Penn, a seaman and merchant of the city, and his wife, Joan Gilbert of Somerset. The Penns had long been landowners in Buckinghamshire and Gloucestershire, but William, younger son of a younger son, with no expectation of inheritance, necessarily made his career in the sea and its commerce. About 1638 he began to serve under William Batten, his future colleague. Penn became a muster-master or clerk of the cheque. He is said to have attained his first command at the age of twenty-one, though no specific record survives. On 6 January 1644 he married Margaret (died 1682), daughter of Hans Jasper of Rotterdam and widow of Nicasius van der Schuren, a Dutchman living at Kilconry, co. Clare. Margaret had acquired an estate in Ireland from her first husband, to which Penn became entitled as her second, but it was far from lucrative, and the early years of their marriage were spent in a modest house on Tower Hill. Since the only account of these days is the later recollection of a spiteful neighbour, enthusiastically repeated by Pepys, it may be doubted if Penn was truly 'pitiful' or his wife 'a dirty slattern' (Pepys, 'Diary', 8.226-7). By the same dubious report Penn was at first disposed to drink the king's health, but later converted to the parliamentary cause. 
Penn was certainly regarded as a reliable parliamentarian by 22 May 1644 when he was appointed to captain parliament's ship the 'Fellowship'; on 31 December he was additionally commissioned rear-admiral of the Irish squadron. On 17 June he was designated to take the same ship into Scottish waters, but by early July he was transferred to the larger 'Happy Entrance' with temporary rank of vice-admiral. He was instructed to assist at the siege of Youghal, where he arrived on 8 July. Although the siege was still proceeding when he left on 7 August, he had acquitted himself well and there was discontent among his crew when he was obliged to cede command to Crowther. 
On 23 September Penn was returned to the 'Fellowship'. On 21 February 1646 he was ordered to take charge of an operation in support of Bunratty Castle; this stronghold overlooking the Shannon estuary had been made available to parliament as a base from which to check royalist privateering out of Limerick. Penn arrived there on 20 March, and on 18 April was constituted rear-admiral. It proved impossible to sustain the castle by sea when the enemy were in occupation of the surrounding country, and no blame attached to Penn for the surrender of the garrison on 13 July. Indeed, on 4 August he was promoted to command the newly built 'Assurance', with orders to patrol between Land's End and southern Ireland. He was not enthusiastic for further minor operations on the Irish coast, and his election as freeman of Portsmouth indicates his wish to join the main fleet. But he was on the Irish station throughout 1647. In March 1648 he was ordered to act against the royalist rising in west Wales. Fears that he might have joined what he was sent to suppress prompted his summons to London on 14 April. Three days later the case against him was respited for want of information; on 2 May new operational orders were sent to him, and on 4 May he was informed that his loyalty was no longer in question. Early in 1649 he met Rupert off Castlehaven, but recognizing that he was outgunned, he withdrew without engaging. On 18 April he was reappointed vice-admiral of Ireland, with captaincy of the 'Lion' (as which he was paid from 1 May that year to 25 June 1650). During this time he blockaded Waterford, Limerick, and Galway, and was commended for his 'more than ordinary care' ('CSP dom.', '1650', 209). 
On 26 August 1650 Penn was made captain of the 'Fairfax', at this point still attached to the Irish squadron. On 24 October he was instructed to bring her into Portsmouth to refit. Next day the admiralty committee decided to send him to Lisbon to relieve Blake and pursue Rupert. His instructions were approved by the council on 2 November, and he received them on the 25th. On 30 November he sailed from Spithead in the 'Centurion', as the 'Fairfax' was not ready. On 21 January he was joined by Lawson in the 'Fairfax', to which he transferred; he now had his intended squadron of eight. His instructions were to go first to the Azores and take any homebound Portuguese treasure ships he found, then to follow Rupert and attack him and the French as occasion served. He needed to avoid confrontation with the combined French and royalist forces, but would have superiority over the latter alone. Having found nothing in the Azores, he entered the Mediterranean on 29 March. He proceeded as far as Malta, where on 29 July he had reports of Rupert off Cadiz. He headed back at once, reaching Gibraltar on 9 September. On the 25th Rupert was reported in the Azores. Penn remained at the mouth of the straits, intending to intercept Rupert's return, never supposing that he would head in the opposite direction. Penn had neither instructions nor means to pursue the royalists to the Caribbean, and he returned to England by 18 March 1652. He had taken thirty-six French prizes and had significantly extended the range of English squadronal patrol in the Mediterranean, but he had never been close to Rupert or Maurice. 
On 2 April 1652 in the Downs Penn was reunited with Blake, who on 5 May appointed him captain of the 'Triumph'. On 19 May he was further advanced to be Blake's vice-admiral. He told Cromwell that many officers doubted the moral justification of the Dutch war now beginning, but Penn himself was assured it was God's will. At the first major engagement, Kentish Knock on 28 September, Blake and Penn ran aground while attacking the Dutch van. As the Dutch closed on them Penn was able to get free, and to turn on those who had seen him as easy prey: 'it fell out better... than we could have cast it ourselves' (Penn, 'Memorials', 1.447). His success here was blighted by the accusation that he had hidden in a coil of rope; this canard, apparently first circulated by Nehemiah Bourne, was given new life after Lowestoft in 1665, and would be enshrined in the satirical poem 'Second Advice to a Painter' (lines 87-8). Penn was absent from the defeat at Dungeness (30 November) while engaged in convoying the Newcastle coal fleet. In January 1653 he was appointed captain of the 'Speaker', vice-admiral of the fleet, and admiral of the White squadron. He had to yield place to Monck, and it was as admiral of the blue that he fought at Portland on 18 February. His tacking through the Dutch line (commanded by the Dutch Admiral Evertsen) on this occasion brought praise for his courage and (perhaps inadvertently) innovative tactics. 
In April 1653 Penn expressed his loyalty to the new regime established by Cromwell on his expulsion of the Rump. In this month he again convoyed the colliers. As captain of the 'James' and admiral of the white he gained further honour in the battles of 2-3 June and 29-31 July. On 3 June Monck recommended to the admiralty commissioners that for his 'honesty and ability' Penn be appointed general-at-sea (Penn, 'Memorials', 1.492). On 6 August he was decorated with a gold chain worth $100, to which $30 would be added in January 1655. On 2 December he was formally nominated general and a commissioner of the admiralty, appointments confirmed the following day. Towards the end of the war he was anxious for peace, perhaps not least for time to settle his private affairs. On 1 September 1654 he petitioned the protector and council for recompense of $8636 19's'. 6died said to have been lost to his wife's estate by the 'late horrid rebellion' ('CSP dom.', '1654', 351). He was immediately granted lands forfeited by the earl of Clancarty, with an annual value of $300. 
Penn had already on 18 August been chosen to lead the protector's cherished expedition to the Caribbean, the 'western design' in which Cromwell hoped to find continuing use for his victorious navy by annihilating the Spanish empire in the West Indies. Penn would share command with Robert Venables (general of the land forces) and a body of civilian commissioners intended to supervise colonization once victory had been achieved. Instructions drawn up on 9 December spoke of 'getting ground' without naming any target (Firth, 109). The prime objective, it soon transpired, was Hispaniola, which had been the first European settlement in the Americas. The fleet sailed from Spithead on 25 December, Penn commanding from the 'Swiftsure', with thirty-seven other warships, support vessels, and 2500 to 3000 soldiers. On 29 January they came to Barbados where another 5500 men were engaged and 1200 of the seamen formed into a regiment to serve ashore. Penn seized a number of Dutch ships trading in contravention of parliament's orders and then sailed on 31 March, calling at Antigua and other islands already in English hands. On 13 April they came in sight of St Domingo on Hispaniola. Penn declined to risk a frontal assault, and the troops were landed next day some 25 miles west at Nizao. When they reached the capital they were easily repulsed. Penn offered his artillery in support of a further attempt, and was furious when this was rejected by Venables. There is no doubt that antagonism between Penn and Venables (which Cromwell had foreseen and attempted to defuse) contributed to lack of co-ordination at all levels. Penn was blamed by the military for the change of landing site, for denying them supplies, and for the unavailability of guides. For all these issues Penn advanced cogent operational reasons, and the failure of the assault was, as even Venables acknowledged, chiefly the fault of a 'rascally rabble of raw and unexercised men' and their inadequate provisions (Firth, 100). 
The task force was, however, not crippled, and by 3 May when the troops re-embarked the 'general voice was for Jamaica' (Battick, 14). Penn confirmed this objective to his officers on the following day, and the island was sighted on the 9th. Penn personally led the landing on 10 May aboard the 'Martin' galley, to which he transferred because of its shallow draught. At first the Spanish resisted, but their forts were abandoned before all the troops were ashore and the garrison surrendered next day. By 17 May the whole island was in English hands. 
Penn subsequently sent two of his ships to reconnoitre the Spanish main, but made no further attempt to seize territory or shipping. After a month on Jamaica, increasingly ill, Penn decided to return home to report; he sailed on 25 June and made Spithead on 31 August. On 3 September the fleet was ordered into the Thames, and on the 12th Penn was interviewed in Whitehall. On the 20th he and Venables were sent to the Tower. Their arrest was gleefully reported by the royalists, who expected the commanders to be executed for failing to accomplish the 'design'. Clarendon would allege that both men were all along 'well affected to the King's service' and 'not fond of the enterprise they were to conduct' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 6.5). As it happened the result had been as the royalists wished: Anglo-Spanish hostilities in Europe, which Cromwell had hoped to avoid, were provoked, while the protector was denied the great victory which would have buttressed his regime. But it is inconceivable that Penn and Venables, even had they been so minded, could have engineered just this outcome. Their imprisonment is adequately explained by their return without orders and Cromwell's pique at the frustration of his plans. On 25 October Penn apologized to the protector for his disobedience and begged to be freed for the sake of his family and his 'increasing distemper' ('CSP dom.', '1655', 396). His release was ordered the same day on his relinquishing his commission. He was not to serve the protectorate again, and he declined to assist a long-running inquiry into unused slops. He retired to Ireland, and from his seat at Macroom, co. Cork, attended to his estates. He was not absolutely in disgrace, for in 1658 he received a knighthood from Henry Cromwell, and his wife was able to catch a lift to England aboard one of the state's ships. 
In 1659 Penn went to England, seeking to serve the republic but having already made contacts with royalists. While lodging in the Strand he received a friendly letter (dated 30 June) from Monck, offering to sponsor his return to naval service. In consequence Penn was restored to the admiralty commission on 24 March 1660. Monck was also responsible for securing Penn's election to the Convention Parliament as member for Weymouth. On 12 May Monck instructed him to prepare ships at Portsmouth and in the Thames to bring the king home, for which he would receive a special payment of $100. He sailed with the Restoration fleet, and on 9 June received an authentic knighthood. On 4 July he was nominated to the new Navy Board as an extra commissioner; his patent passed the seal on 17 August. He was a key adviser to the duke of York as lord high admiral, and it is likely that he helped draft the instructions issued in the duke's name, for which he collected a volume of precedents (BL, Sloane MS 3232). 
At the Restoration Penn was also made governor of Kinsale, vice-admiral of Munster, and a member of the province's council. He commanded a company of foot in the Irish army and was 'ex officio' JP for the counties in which the naval dockyards stood. He was re-elected for Weymouth in the Cavalier Parliament of 1661, retaining his seat until he died. He became an elder brother of Trinity House, of which he became master in 1667-8. Following the return of Lord Clancarty's lands under the Restoration settlement, Penn was on 28 October 1661 compensated with 12,000 other Irish acres, with an annual value of $423, but it would take until 1669 to secure his title against other interests. 
Penn came into residence at the Navy Office in Seething Lane on 27 July 1660, thus becoming a neighbour of his junior colleague Pepys, in whose diary the last phases of Penn's career are sharply described. Pepys, although welcoming Penn as 'very sociable... and an able man' (Pepys, 'Diary', 1.241) soon fell out with him over contracts and appointments, and above all because he saw him as enemy to his own patron Sandwich. Penn was ever thereafter 'as false a fellow as ever was born' (ibid., 7.68) and Pepys took every opportunity to denigrate Penn's social address, service career, and administrative probity and competence. Yet he conceded he was the 'only fit man' to succeed the ineffectual Mennes as comptroller (ibid., 7.328). Mennes himself nominated Penn as his deputy when he went to sea in November 1661, but subsequently resisted all attempts to pass his duties to Penn in part or whole. 
At the outset of the Second Anglo-Dutch War Penn served afloat again, initially (from 10 November 1664) aboard the 'Royal James', and after 18 November as chief of staff to the duke of York in the 'Royal Charles', with the unique rank of 'captain great commander'. In this capacity he served at the battle of Lowestoft on 3 June 1665, behaving 'so well that those who were most unsatisfied with him before are full of his commendations' ('CSP dom.', '1664-5', 408). Penn retired exhausted after the day's action, unaware (he would claim) that a member of the duke's household took upon himself to give order to slacken sail, thinking to save his master from risk of another day's battle. There was some suggestion that Penn was involved in a cover-up: Burnet saw in it the origin of James's indulgence towards dissenters (Burnet, 78), but, malice apart, he may have confused Penn with the ship's captain, Harman. Penn's conduct on this occasion would not be significantly in question when he faced impeachment for the other great scandal of the year. On 2 July he had been made vice-admiral to Sandwich and admiral of the white. As such he was party to the breaking bulk of prizes taken at Bergen in September, and it emerged that he was the chief agent of this breach of maritime law (in some contrast to his strictures on the subject during his West Indies voyage). 
Although briefly in command of the fleet in Sandwich's absence in November and December 1665, Penn's employment at sea for the rest of the war was prevented by Monck, who had accused him of recommending 'all these roguish fanatic captains' to the duke (Pepys, 'Diary', 6.291). Penn was, however, 'overwhelmed with a multiplicity of business' ashore in 1666 ('CSP dom.', '1665-6', 445). It was as an armchair strategist that he offered his opinions on the conduct of the Four Days' Battle (1-4 June), stressing the importance of keeping line-ahead, and not allowing ships to withdraw for minor repairs. 
On 16 January Penn was finally given an official responsibility for pursers' and victuallers' accounts, by way of devolving the duties of the comptroller. In July, as master of Trinity House, he had responsibility for the Thames defences in the face of the Dutch attack. Not uncharacteristically he failed to give the king a straight answer when asked about the advisability of clearing the river of blockships. On 21 October he faced the parliamentary inquiry into miscarriages of the war on the question of the failure to pursue the Dutch after Lowestoft; this issue was easily deflected. On 3 December he faced the more difficult accusation about the prize-goods affair. In March 1668 it was proposed that he should have a sea command; Penn was reluctant, but the king and duke insisted. MPs, however, were incensed that a new command should be given to one whom they had yet to examine fully about his last, and the prize-goods issue was subjected to intense scrutiny. Penn was called before the Commons on 14 April; a committee chaired by Sir Robert Howard reported on 21 April and articles of impeachment were read. The house decided to suspend Penn but not eject him. The matter then passed to the Lords, where Penn appeared on 27 April, calling himself a 'very unhappy man' ('JHL', 12.235). He appeared again on the 29th, but there were no further proceedings. Penn had powerful friends, and the main purpose of the exercise -- prevention of his command -- had been achieved. This did not stop him from claiming the full allowance for six months' imaginary service. 
Despite some enthusiasm for his new responsibilities at the Navy Board, Penn decided to resign his commissionership in 1668 on being offered a share in the new naval victualling contract; this was issued on 24 February 1669, and his patent was cancelled on 17 June. By 31 July he had also resigned the governorship of Kinsale to his kinsman Rooth. Penn's health had long been failing, and he died at Walthamstow, where he lived next to Batten, on 16 September 1670, On the 30th he was buried in the church of St Mary Redcliffe, Bristol, where his memorial stands. His wife survived him until 1682. In addition to his celebrated elder son, William Penn (1644-1718), he had a son Richard and a daughter Margaret (who married Anthony Lowther in February 1667). 
Penn was much distressed by his elder son's nonconformity, which led to his expulsion from Oxford and eventual imprisonment. Despite their arguments, mutual affection persisted. The younger William, though abhorring the profession of arms, defended his father's reputation in it and presented the king with a collection of Sir William's naval papers (Magdalene College, Cambridge, Pepys Library, no. 2611). When asked to return another document to the navy, he said he valued 'the smallest relic that may be deemed a badge of my father's trade' ('CSP dom.', '1670', 562) and he named the colony he established in his father's honour. 
Penn is said to have affected the puritan fashion to advance his career, but others have accepted his sincerity. He genuinely attempted to understand his son's beliefs, and was himself rumoured to have become a Quaker. At other times he was said to be an atheist, or hoping to 'live and die' an Anabaptist ('Samuel Pepys and the Second Dutch War', 20). Yet he conformed to the religion and, it seems, the general morals of the Restoration. He has been judged too indecisive for supreme command, and his most important assignment was deemed a failure at the time. It has, however, since been recognized as a decisive moment in British imperial history, with continuing consequences for the present state of Jamaica. 


@@@@@


doc= 21857


Penn, William (1644-1718), Quaker leader and founder of Pennsylvania, was born in the liberty of the Tower of London on 14 October 1644, the son of Sir William Penn (bap. 1621, d. 1670), admiral in the English navy, and Margaret (1610?-1682), the daughter of John Jasper, a Dutch merchant of Rotterdam, and the widow of Nicasius van der Schuren. 
Penn's developmental years took a conventional route. His education was fairly typical of his social class, being schooled at home until the age of eleven. From eleven he began his formal training at Chigwell Academy, near Wanstead in Essex. Established in 1629, the academy comprised two schools within the same building. One school concerned itself with more practical applications such as reading, writing, and mathematics. The other was more classically orientated, teaching Latin and Greek. Given the political environment in which young Penn was being educated, it seems highly likely that he would be given instruction for more practical applications. Only after the fall of the protectorate, and the impending restoration of the monarchy, can we say for certain that Penn's education took a more classical turn. 
Penn entered Christ Church, Oxford, in 1660 as a gentleman commoner. There, under the deanship of John Fell, he improved his knowledge of classical scholarship. Although he was to spend less than two years at Christ Church, he came into contact with men who would become political allies, such as Robert Spencer, later earl of Sunderland. Also at this time there were other men who influenced Penn's thinking in ways which would enhance his religious-political outlook. John Locke was then a lecturer at Christ Church and most probably instructed Penn in Greek. While it could not have been through any acquaintance with Locke that Penn would have developed a radical political philosophy at this time, since Locke was then still conservative in his thinking, nevertheless Penn would have developed a rigorous style of debate that would serve the Quaker later in political and religious disputations. In later decades, however, the ideas of his former tutor may have influenced Penn's concept of colonization. Later in the 1690s Locke's influence would be seen in the development of colonial policy. Also during these early years Penn probably listened to the well-known puritan theologian Dr John Owen. Although this experience is usually seen as a turning point in Penn's religious leanings, it must be remembered that he came from a dissenting background. His father was a presbyterian, albeit one that conformed to the Church of England after 1660, and his mother was a Dutch Calvinist. Therefore, it would not have been unreasonable to be instructed by somebody sympathetic to dissent, in this case Owen, who had not yet been dismissed from the college. 
By the winter of 1661 Penn left Oxford and went to the continent, ostensibly to escape the political controversy that was arising from the stringent enforcement of the 'Act of Uniformity' on the university which even required students to wear surplices. While travelling through Europe with Robert Spencer, he spent time in Italy and visited the city of Turin, which was being rebuilt. The design of the city, along a grid pattern, may have influenced Penn's thoughts when, as proprietor of Pennsylvania, he developed Philadelphia in the same style. After his visit to the French court, where he made a dashing impression, Penn attended the protestant academy of Saumur under the tutelage of Moise Amyraut, one of the leading Calvinist theologians of the day. Although Penn's studentship was short, because Amyraut died in 1664, it was a watershed in his religious and political outlook. Amyraut's philosophy of non-resistance and the illumination of the mind and will, or the inner light, greatly influenced Penn's religious outlook. Amyraut also had entree to the French court and supported the view on the divine right of kings; his position was probably influenced by the hiatus between the siege of La Rochelle, in 1628, and the revocation of the edict of Nantes, in 1685, when a window of toleration was opened. Amyraut's religious philosophy was tempered by political necessities. This philosophy not only helps to explain Penn's later attraction to the Quaker life, it also explains his political position particularly during the reign of James II. His recollection of the Frenchman's teachings might have influenced Penn's support of James II's toleration of Catholics, for which Penn was labelled as a papist. 
A more mature Penn returned to England in 1664, ready to take on his responsibilities as heir. He spent some time in London learning law at Lincoln's Inn, a valuable foundation for anyone embarking on a life involving business, not least in pressing his father's Irish claims. He left there, possibly because of the plague, some time in the spring of 1665. Meanwhile, a second war had broken out between the Dutch and English, and in March Penn was actively involved in the effort, acting as messenger running between court and the flagship the 'Royal Charles'. His position was no doubt due to the influence of his father, who was based at the Navy Office in London. By July Penn was cutting his teeth in the local politics of Buckinghamshire. As one of the commissioners for charitable uses, he determined cases brought on by complaints of abuse of charitable trusts. This position also gave him the experience of how government operated that he later applied so ably in his defence of religious toleration. Moreover, at this time he was establishing his influence in the locality which served him well in national politics during the period between 1679 and 1681. 
In February 1666 Penn went to Ireland, where, as his father's agent, he settled the admiral's titles to the family estates in co. Cork. Subsequently the Irish years became a prelude and a training ground for William. His experiences there gave him the expertise for future business ventures, and it was the political arena in which he honed his disputatiousness. In May 1666 he travelled to northern Ireland, where he became involved in suppressing a mutiny in the English garrison at Carrickfergus in co. Antrim. The place erupted when the men, who had been unpaid for nine months, took over the castle. Penn impressed the duke of Ormond, who was lord lieutenant of Ireland, by assisting him and the earl of Arran in putting down the revolt. The grateful Ormond wrote to Sir William, recommending that his son take command of the garrison at Kinsale. Penn's father refused, not because he thought that his son could not handle the responsibility, but because of Sir William's plans to retire to his Irish estates in the near future and to live off the revenue from them together with the income from his post as commander of the garrison at Kinsale. As for young William, he was given the role of victualler at Kinsale, a position in keeping with his business responsibilities. 
Though Penn made subsequent visits to Ireland in 1669 and 1698, his first marked a major turning point in his religious development. The time of his conversion to Quakerism is imprecise, but it is certain that in 1667 he attended a Quaker meeting in Cork and was subsequently brought before the magistrate for being part of what was termed a 'riotous and tumultuary assembly' (Penn to Orrery, November 1667, 'Papers', 1.51). Most likely, Penn's sympathy towards the Quakers was enhanced by the event. 
Penn was increasingly being seen as the spokesman for a growing economic segment of society, in England as well as Ireland. By 1677 there were at least fourteen substantial Quaker merchants in London alone. These, together with Quaker merchants and tradesmen throughout England and Ireland, represented a sizeable contribution to the economic growth of the country. Therefore, his commercial connections were not limited to Quakers. It was his broader dissenting relationships which increased his political attraction, so much so that Penn was the leading spokesman for toleration when he presented evidence to a committee of the House of Commons debating the use of recusancy laws against Quakers. 
On 4 April 1672 Penn married Gulielma Maria Springett (died 1694), whom he had courted for the last three years. She was the daughter of Sir William Springett (died 1643), of Broyle Place, Ringmer, Sussex, a parliamentary officer who died at the siege of Arundel Castle, and Mary Proude ('bap'. 1623, died 1682), who married in 1654 Isaac Penington (1616-1679), a notable London merchant and Quaker ['see 'Penington, Mary]. The pair had known each other since the 1660s and their marriage seems to have been a love match. One of their earliest known letters shows an affection that went beyond mere friendship. At the same time their relationship was based upon shared interests and background. Both were Quakers and both came from families of good standing -- Gulielma held considerable lands in Kent and Sussex. They had three sons and four daughters; the youngest son, William, lived to adulthood, became a dissolute rake, and died in 1720; their only daughter to survive infancy, Letitia, married William Aubrey. 
Penn's conversion marked a crucial point in the path towards furtherance and consolidation in Quaker principles. Although the time of his conversion to Quakerism is not certain, it roughly coincides with his involvement at the Quaker meeting in Cork in 1667. By the time he returned to England that year, he had taken on the mantle of the Friends, ready to proselytize his beliefs. After a couple of spells in prison, in 1671 Penn embarked on an evangelical tour of Europe, making important contacts with Princess Elizabeth (1618-1680) of the Palatinate. He returned by the end of that year, by which time his father had died, leaving him heir to the family estates. Penn's position in society elevated him in the Quaker ranks as a force for the sect, for as an heir and gentleman of rank he had social clout. Paradoxically, his new status created tension between the unworldly philosophy of some Quakers and his involvement in the political world. Nevertheless, the radical tendencies of his youth were now tempered with his new responsibilities as head of the family. 
By this time Penn had developed a close relationship with George Fox, whom he had met a couple of years earlier. This relationship resulted in a collaboration which created a coherent Quaker philosophy. Its beginnings can be traced to George Fox's decision to lay down the sword of violence and write the 'Peace Testimony' at the time of Venner's rising in 1661. Through this document Fox hoped to show the restored monarchy the non-violent and non-threatening nature of the Friends. It went some way to distinguish a more pacific group from the radical elements in the society, but it also can be seen as the beginning of a move to regularize Quaker thought. Penn's relationship with Fox and his wife, Margaret Fell, can be traced to a mutual belief, not only in Quakerism, but in their similar pragmatic approach exhibited in the 'Peace Testimony'. Whereas Fox's approach was unsystematic, Penn's input was to make it intellectually more rigorous. Penn added to this development in his own work, 'No Cross, No Crown', in 1669, which set out the rules for Quaker behaviour. Rejection of hat honour, titles, the vanity of apparel, and promotion of the use of 'thee' and 'thou' when addressing one another, regardless of title, were the outward hallmarks of a simpler approach to life. Penn listed scriptural reasons for the rejection of outward vanities, observing 'Honour was from the beginning, but hats, and most titles, here of late; therefore there was true Honour before hats or titles, and consequently true honour stands not therein'. Furthermore, he quoted 'James' 2: 1-11, urging people to look further than man's outward appearance, not accepting any man just 'for his gay cloathing, rich attire, or outward appearance' (Barbour, 1.46, 47). As Penn became more involved in the politics of dissent, he found it increasingly difficult to maintain the standard he set in this work. Nevertheless, it was the first coherent guide on Quaker behaviour. Also, as he became more involved in court politics and when confronted with direct responsibility of running a colony marked by its religious tolerance, Penn found himself hard put to sustain these rules, particularly his support for eschewing oaths in favour of affirming. His apparent ambiguity was compared to that of the great courtier in the book of 'Esther' and, as James II said of Penn, 'I suppose you take William Pen[n] for A Quaker, but I can assure you he is no more so than I am' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 4.140). 
Penn was, nevertheless, able to further the Quaker cause through his forceful polemics and by practical applications in parliamentary elections. His writings on dissent from his first exuberant tract, 'Truth Exalted', in 1668, to his final thoughts on life in general in 'More Fruits of Solitude' in 1702, provide a map of his philosophical development. He wrote over forty works, most of which dealt with his ultimate goal of toleration in general. The only exception for toleration which Penn made was in the case of Roman Catholics as stated in his tract 'A Seasonable Caveat Against Popery' (1670), but that is muted later under James II. Penn's first theological tracts, 'Truth Exalted' and 'The Guide Mistaken and Temporizing Rebuked', published in 1668, reflect Amyrauldian influence. While the latter work is the more polemical in its reply to other dissenters, such as Jonathan Clapham, and his rationalization for conforming to the 'Act of Uniformity', both assert the inward light and the possibility for universal salvation. In 'Truth Exalted' the young Penn challenged the doctrines of Catholics and protestants alike for not being based on the 'Bible'. 'What Scripture ever made a Pope', and where do the scriptures 'own such persecutors', were some of the questions which Penn asked in order to illustrate how far professed Christians had moved away from their beginnings (Barbour, 1.29-30, 32). Penn argued that only by looking within one's self, or for the light within, could there be resolution and, ultimately, salvation. 'The Guide Mistaken' furthers Penn's ideas on salvation by defending his stand against conformity, and comes ever closer to the issue of the Trinity, three persons in one God. 'The Scriptures do not warrant that division into, and appellation of three persons', Penn maintained, and queried whether or not we should take this on faith (Barbour, 1.195). Also written in the same year, 'The Sandy Foundation Shaken' logically followed Penn's doubts on the Trinity and tested the grounds for the rejection of the divinity of Christ. If the Trinity was not valid, as he implied, was Christ of divine essence? 'If God, as the Scriptures testifie, hath never been declar'd or believ'd, but as the Holy ONE, then will it follow, that God is not a Holy THREE, nor doth subsist in THREE distinct and separate Holy ONES' (Barbour, 1.217). The immediate reaction to Penn was his being charged with Socinianism, which denied the doctrine of the Trinity. Although he quickly backed off this approach following a spell in the Tower, and published a new tract, 'Innocency with her Open Face', thereby mollifying the authorities by saying that he was misinterpreted over the issue of divinity, the label of deist stuck to him for much of his life. 
Although Penn's earlier writings included defences of the Quaker way, his first foray into political activism on behalf of dissent came with the onset of the new 'Conventicle Act' in 1670. The new law prohibited sects such as Quakers from gathering for worship that was not in accordance with the liturgy and practice of the Anglican church. In response to this, and during another sojourn in Newgate prison, Penn wrote 'The Great Case of Liberty of Conscience', which was directed to the consideration of Charles II. The thrust of the tract was the immorality of persecution, which was against reason and nature. 'For my own part', he boldly proclaimed, 'I publickly confess my self to be a very hearty Dissenter from the establish'd religion of these nations' (Barbour, 2.419). Penn's protest against the 'Conventicle Act' did not spare his being arrested under it for what the authorities claimed was sedition. Charged with addressing a tumultuous assembly at Gracechurch Street, he and a fellow Quaker, William Meade, were imprisoned at Newgate. But unlike his earlier imprisonments, where he modified his views, this time he was determined to defend them in court. Their arguments, based on the rights of Englishmen which were being threatened by the act, established an important precedent in English law. At the conclusion of the trial a verdict of not guilty was delivered, for which the jury was imprisoned by the mayor of London. The order was overturned by the chief justice, thereby establishing the future autonomy of juries. The action by the mayor, however, raised the spectre of arbitrary power that had not been seen since the reign of Charles I, and it heightened political tensions. It also brought Penn widespread respect for his able championing of dissent. From this point Penn was taken seriously by the crown as well as parliament as somebody who could influence the dissenting element in society. 
Penn's networking certainly paid dividends, for he established valuable contacts with several prominent English politicians. One of the most useful of his friends was Robert Spencer, now second earl of Sunderland, with whom he shared a similar viewpoint on religious toleration; Sunderland was in a position of power, as privy councillor and secretary of state. Laurence Hyde, earl of Rochester, was another connection at court, perhaps even more useful to him than Sunderland. Rochester, together with his brother Henry, now second earl of Clarendon, and his father, had accompanied the king into exile, and had spent time in Europe as envoy; by the end of the decade he was first lord of the Treasury and a privy councillor. A third useful contact was Sidney Godolphin, whose career was intricately involved with that of Rochester. Both were employed as diplomats by Charles II in the late 1670s. Godolphin purchased the post of master of the robes from Rochester and served under him as a commissioner of the Treasury. In 1680 these three men, all known to Penn, formed a ministry satirically dubbed the Chits on account of their youth and relative inexperience. It was Penn's relationship with such men, who were able to influence policy and act as brokers between the court and parliament, that gave him access to power. If he wanted a favour, it was accomplished through the mediation of these managers. They were men of broad experience, too broad to be hemmed in by a narrow view of the church. For this reason they were neither whig nor tory but court politicians. They took their lead from the king, not from party leaders. 
Penn's political alignment with opponents of the crown such as the republican Algernon Sidney represented what was still a somewhat idealistic approach to politics. He supported Sidney's attempts to enter parliament at Guildford in the first election held that year, and at Amersham and Bramber in the second, and backed the son of a Cromwellian major-general at Bramber when Sidney withdrew. Penn had sufficient influence in the county of Sussex to support Sir John Fagg, another Cromwellian officer, against the dominant interest of the Pelhams, though Sir John Pelham topped the poll. His victory was commented on by his sister-in-law and mother to the earl of Sunderland; the dowager countess's contemptuous remark that 'Penn did what he could to help Fagg and hinder my brother, Pelham, who had not one gentleman against him' is more than socially revealing (Blencowe, 1.123). That Penn was worthy of mention illustrates the extent of his interest in Sussex, and his electoral activities displayed the natural interest of his gentry family more than the campaigning of a dissenting leader on behalf of whigs. Penn himself was never a whig. The electoral tract he wrote at that juncture, 'England's Great Interest', did not support exclusion. Rather it advocated country measures against the court. His disaffection with courtiers such as the earl of Danby arose from his frustrated efforts to petition for a colonial charter in those years. Where throughout Danby's ministry he had been knocking on a closed door, after the earl's fall the Chits opened it and beckoned him in. Penn's connections at court with managers like Sunderland and Rochester now began to pay off. He dropped his country acquaintances and became a court politician himself. He never looked back, always thereafter identifying his interests with those of the crown's managers. Although the politicians with whom Penn associated himself would change over time, their loyalty to the court rather than to a party would be the common denominator. Finally, in 1681, his tactics paid off in a land grant in the New World. 
Penn claimed that the grant of a charter to colonize the large tract of land west of the Delaware River was in payment of debts owed by the crown to his father. This mundane motive has never been regarded as the main reason for his seeking a proprietary colony. Rather an explanation has been sought in Penn's Quaker commitment. Thus he has been regarded as desiring to obtain for the Friends a refuge where they could seek relief from persecution in England, and at the same time take part in a 'holy experiment' ('Papers', 2.108). Penn's involvement in colonization stems from a 1673 letter to the duke of York in which Penn probably recommended somebody, possibly a relative, to a post in either Carolina or Virginia. The next and more significant involvement was as trustee for West New Jersey. In this capacity he mediated a dispute between two other Quakers involved in the initial sale of the colony. Ultimately the colony's shares were sold to resolve its financial difficulties, and a frame of government was drawn up, presumably by Penn. The West New Jersey concessions and agreements, which guaranteed the right to vote and hold office, as well as freedom of worship, provided a model for the future Pennsylvania government. Pennsylvania would test Penn's commitment to religious toleration and his conviction that it would generate economic growth. While the colony undoubtedly realized these hopes and expectations, such aspirations were not necessarily paramount in Penn's motivation throughout the 1670s while he was soliciting the government. Moreover, the 'Declaration of Indulgence' of 1672, although the king revoked it the following year, did afford relief for dissenters, and particularly Quakers, for the rest of the decade. Whatever Penn's motives, the timing of the grant was dependent not upon him but upon Charles II. The king was persuaded to grant him a charter as part of a political strategy of dividing his opponents. Penn had support among the London merchant community, many of whom were dissenters who sided with the opposition in parliament. Charles was anxious to avoid pushing them into rebellion when his confrontation with the Exclusionists reached a crisis. The Pennsylvania charter, issued simultaneously with the dissolution of the Oxford parliament in March 1681, was one of the tactics employed by the crown to forestall civil war. Following his efforts in obtaining the colonial grant, Penn was nominated as a fellow of the Royal Society. That the grant had commercial as well as ideological appeal was shown when Penn insisted on also obtaining the three lower counties below Pennsylvania, which formed what was to become Delaware and were then part of the duke of York's proprietorship. James reluctantly yielded them, aware as Penn was of their economic value. They provided tobacco, a valuable export. They also were inhabited by Swedes, Finns, Dutch, and English, most of the latter being Anglicans rather than dissenters. Penn was particularly attached to this part of his grant and he was determined to keep it even when he later decided to sell Pennsylvania. 
Having obtained his charter, Penn set out, in the company of fellow emigrants, to the new world. On arrival in October 1682, he received a piece of turf, a twig, and some river water from the Delaware inhabitants to symbolize his authority over the new land. After a brief stay at New Castle, he travelled up to Philadelphia, and for the next two years Penn proceeded to get the new government in working order. 
Overall, Penn's philosophy of government was fashioned from the fires of political crisis in England on the issue of dissent. Pennsylvania would provide the political solution to the problem. The evolution of the colony's constitution from its first draft in 1681 to the final version of 1701 illustrates the priority put on inclusive political participation regardless of religion or ethnic background. Thus the colony's development as a holy experiment can be considered a success where trade, politics, and religion could coexist. Toleration of various religious groups percolated down to inclusive political participation. Oaths were not required for office holding, and there was no provision for an establishment church. Thus the make-up at one quarter sessions consisted of three Anglicans, six 'strong Foxonian Quakers, one Swede, and one sweet singer of Isreall' (Hunt. L., MS BL4, 'A brief narrative of the proceedings of William Penn'). Penn was no democrat and no republican, but he was anxious that there should be a consensus in the new society. Also, while he was not concerned primarily with the style of government, he was determined that it should rest on a firm basis of law. For those reasons, the government was run by elected freemen, yet the core of power rested in the proprietor's deputy lieutenant, who had final approval over elected office holders such as sheriffs, justices, and coroners, and his council, who held the legislative initiative until 1701. All these powers were subject to the proprietor's wishes. Penn's view of government was that, while it was to secure the people from the abuse of power, nevertheless he declared himself to be 'a palatine' and that his power was 'far greater than any kings governor in America' (ibid.). 
Another concern was to try to implement a land policy which would settle the colony in line with his ideal of developing it so that it would be filled with inhabitants spread over the whole, with no empty spaces as had occurred in other colonies. To this end he hoped to allot land on the basis that every 5000 acres should have a minimum of ten families. Unfortunately for Penn such a tidy chequerboard scheme came into contact with economic realities. It would have proved impossible to cope with the tidal wave of settlers that moved into Pennsylvania in the opening years of the 1680s even if they had been content to conform to the proprietor's policy. But they wished to make their own arrangements, and more to the point were prepared to purchase plots from other buyers as well as Penn. In addition to internal squabbles over land, there were boundary disputes with Maryland which, in 1684, resulted in Penn returning to England, where he could lobby the court against Lord Baltimore's claims. The only solution to the land dispute for the time being was to set up a commission of proprietary to administer his policies in his absence. 
Penn's relations with the indigenous people of the colony was, partly, an extension of crown policy, where peaceful coexistence through negotiations and treaties was the preference. Penn's attitude towards the native Americans can be gleaned through the colony's charter. Its instruction was to 'reduce the savage natives by gentle and just manners to the love of civil society and Christian religion'. To that end Penn took the trouble to learn the local language of the Lenne Lenape. He saw them as 'natural sons of Providence', and they returned the respect he paid them with the affectionate name of Miquon, or feather, to represent a quill pen ('Papers', 2.448, 454). However, Penn's negotiations over land with the American Indians revealed a certain ignorance of the complicated ownership which had developed between the nations and settlers. Prior to Penn's grant the colony was under the jurisdiction of New York, whose governor had negotiated with the Iroquois Five Nations the 'covenant chain' in an effort to stabilize the area. The sectioning off of Pennsylvania for Penn did not necessarily invalidate the chain. However, he proceeded to set up another treaty, the 'friendship chain', in an effort to extend trading rights up to the New York border. The result was to threaten Anglo-Indian relations in general. Within his own colony, however, Penn was able to maintain good relations with the Indians through a presumption of fairness and goodwill. 
Between 1685 and 1688, during the reign of James II, Penn realized the highest point in his political career. He was cultivated by the king not only as a dissenter but also as a courtier. Thus he was groomed for high office in the customary way by being sent on an embassy. This was the route which such courtiers as Godolphin, Rochester, and Sunderland had taken when they were fledgeling politicians. Penn was sent as an unofficial envoy to The Hague in May 1686, to sound out the attitude of the prince and princess of Orange towards the repeal of the penal laws and 'Test Act'. Ostensibly travelling through parts of Europe to visit Quakers and to proselytize, Penn was delegated by the king to travel to The Hague in order to find out how William and Mary viewed James's strategy for toleration. Penn had in 1680 gone to Holland to address the prince of Orange on behalf of fellow Quakers in the Netherlands who were being persecuted. This time, however, his hope that he could convince the pair on James's behalf was, alas, based upon sand. 
Prince William assured Penn of his support for toleration, but he could not agree to abandoning the 'Test Act', because it was the only security for protestantism, especially when the king was of a different religion. He agreed with Penn that conscience was a private matter, but it was no good promising toleration without enacting it first into law. Otherwise it could be revoked on the king's whim just as the edict of Nantes had been by Louis XIV in 1685. Anyway, the number of dissenters in Britain was clearly in the minority; therefore, to ignore the primary base of support for the monarchy, the Anglican tories, was political suicide. 
While William's view was more cynical, his wife's opposition came from her firm religious beliefs. As a staunch Anglican, she believed that as future protector of the established church, she would be responsible for the souls of her people. To open the door to what she considered nothing more than schismatic sects would weaken the pillar of religious belief and cause social instability. Only by James having a son would William and Mary's claims be superseded. Paradoxically, the birth of a royal son in 1688 sealed James's fate and ensured their claim. 
Penn also tried to persuade Burnet, who was also at the court in The Hague, to return to England and support James in his policies. In return, Burnet would be rewarded by preferential treatment from the king. James appreciated Burnet's role as an exiled whig confidant of Mary, and must have realized that, if he could persuade him, he would be able to sway his daughter. Burnet's description of Penn's visit was laced with venom. An egotistical man himself, Burnet recognized a like fellow in Penn. He depicted Penn's performance before William and Mary as one brimming with over-confidence with an address which was given in a 'tedious and luscious way', all of which would only succeed in boring the listener. None the less, Burnet declined Penn's invitation on the same grounds as that of the prince and princess, and probably because he had information that James had a contract out for his assassination. According to Burnet, Penn left him with a prediction passed on to himself by a man 'that pretended a commerce with angels'. According to this 'friend', in two years' time, 1688 to be exact, there would be momentous changes that would amaze all the world ('Bishop Burnet's History', 4.139-41). The momentous event was not what Penn had envisioned. On his return from The Hague, Penn apparently satisfied Sunderland with the accomplishment of his mission. Although he was not entirely successful, since the prince and princess of Orange baulked at repealing the 'Test Act', they had expressed their toleration for all including Catholics. One sign of Penn's acceptance at court was his appointment as a deputy lieutenant in Buckinghamshire. This commission in the county militia, while perhaps curious for a Quaker, was quite fitting for a country gentleman. 
A more significant sign of his arrival in power came in the spring of 1687, when Penn became involved with the writing of the declaration of indulgence. The declaration was seen as more than just a repeat of the attempt in 1672 by Charles II to carry through his promise at Breda to ensure the liberty of tender consciences. It was an edict of toleration, granting immunity from prosecution for breaches of the penal laws against religious dissent. In theory, it included not only Catholics and protestant non-Anglicans, but even non-Christians. The motives behind the declaration would fit in with Penn's aspirations. He certainly wanted religious and political liberties for his brethren even if it meant taking a softer line than before on the Roman Catholics. Furthermore, the declaration was preceded by a proclamation of toleration in Scotland, which specified groups such as the Quakers. 
Penn's next step was to sell the declaration and promote the repeal of the penal laws and 'Test Act' by writing tracts in support, organizing addresses thanking the king, and travelling throughout the country speaking for James's policies. However, the reasonableness of Penn's arguments did not convince opposition which existed on both sides of the religious divide. Dissenters as well as Anglicans feared the power of popery if Catholics were allowed political participation. In one embarrassing instance Penn was shouted down and forced to move on with 'the mob knocking the bulks as he passed' ('Westmorland MSS', 376). 
Penn became James's right-hand man, helping the king to regulate corporations, and acting as a commissioner into the regulation of recusancy fines, and as a mediator between the king and Magdalen College, Oxford. He became a general spokesman for James's policies and a door through which men had to pass to receive royal favours. Penn had, at last, the chance to use his unique position to further his aims for toleration. What emerged was the pairing of the king and the dissenter which created a possibility for a broader religious toleration that went beyond either one's expectation and beyond anything that England had experienced. At the same time Penn was fulfilling his father's ambitions for him. Towards the end of James's reign Penn held a position of influence which rivalled that of a minister. In May 1687 rumour had it that he would be named secretary of state, and shortly after he received a letter addressing him as Sir William (Sir Ralph Verney to John Verney, Middle Claydon, 15 May 1687, Claydon House, Verney Papers, microfilm 636, reel 41). 
In summer 1687 the king dissolved parliament and set out to spearhead the campaign to convince people, either through reason or by browbeating them, to select amenable candidates for a new parliament. He had extended wholesale toleration to Catholics and dissenters alike, thus completely alienating the Anglican tories. Penn helped in the effort to fashion a pliable parliament by involving himself at the local level of politics. He was given the power to act as an intermediary regulating the corporations in Buckinghamshire and in Huntingdonshire. Writing from Kensington Palace to a friend and former Quaker, Robert Bridgeman of Huntingdon, Penn directed him to send a distinct account of all the representatives of that corporation and their political attitudes on the matter of the repeal of the penal laws and 'Test Acts'. Penn was thus at the very heart of government in these months, and collaborated with the king over the packing of parliament. He later justified his involvement by saying that it was the only way to achieve his goal of toleration by an act of parliament even if it meant stacking the odds. 'I allwaies endeavoured an impartiall liberty of conscience to be established by law, that the Papists might never be able to null it, and this is all that can be charged upon me, and I count it no crime' (DWL, Morrice MS Q, pp. 353-4). In other words, the end sometimes justified the means and the language of denial by Penn was carefully chosen. 
Penn was also on the road drumming up support for the king by organizing addresses of thanks starting with his own brethren. However, the number of addresses, of which there were only 197 over a period of a year, and the kinds of religious groups involved, qualified the success of the campaign. Indeed, the prospects for a compliant parliament were not auspicious. On the contrary, responses to a crude public opinion poll undertaken by the king were ominous. James asked the leading peers and gentry to answer three questions to ascertain their views on toleration. First, if elected to parliament, would they support the repeal of the penal laws and the 'Test Acts'? Second, would they vote for candidates who supported the repeal? Finally, would they live peaceably with their neighbours no matter what their religious beliefs? By December 1687 the responses were largely negative. Penn, who had advised the king not to conduct the survey, concluded that an election must be postponed until March at the earliest. He was being much more realistic than the king, showing as much awareness of gentry as of dissenting opinion. Early in the new year he told James Johnstone that 'there would be a parliament at the end of May'. Johnstone replied that he 'would wager twenty to one against. He began to laugh, and said I imagined Sunderland had more credit than he actually possessed -- he hadn't the power to prevent it, and he would be ruined if he did not allow it.' Johnstone replied 'that he had no need of power, he would use trickery instead. 'That is what I fear myself', he said' (Kenyon, 187). Sunderland managed to put off the election until September, persuading James that his soundings in the constituencies did not augur well. By September, however, Sunderland and Penn were convinced that 'the Parliament will do what the king will have them' (ibid., 214). Confidence in the regime was such that Penn received the post of commissioner of the hearth and excise. This had a twofold effect in seeing to it that the king's much needed revenue would make him less reliant on parliament while making Penn a profit. Penn's increasing worldliness was also being noted by the Society of Friends, in their comparison of him to the great courtier in the book of 'Esther' (Clarendon State Papers, 89, fols. 175-6, Dublin, September 1688). Unfortunately for Penn, his political career was put on hold when news arrived that William of Orange was preparing to invade. 
Immediately James switched his allegiance back to the Anglicans and began the electoral process for a new parliament. However, upon hearing that William's fleet was blown back by a gale to Dutch harbours, James took it as a sign from above that providence had once again intervened, so the king ordered that the writs for elections be recalled. But, when he learned of William's landing at Torbay on 5 November, the king began backtracking by removing Catholic officials from their posts, and again issued writs for an election. 
Serious doubts about the king's motives must have come surging forth in Penn's mind. He must have felt very insecure in the first instance when James stopped the issuance of writs, but his fears must have heightened on the second occasion when the king undid everything that he and Penn had accomplished in the past year. The only thing that Penn could do was clumsily to issue a tract, 'Advice in the Choice of Parliament Men', in which he once again attacked the Catholic element. He also tried to cobble a draft of confirmation of his authority over the three lower counties on the Delaware River, something which was never clarified, but it was too late. Only a partial draft was completed, dated 10 December 1688, the day before James made his first attempt to escape to France and the very day the little prince of Wales and his mother were shipped off. James was caught at Faversham and brought back to London, but thirteen days later he succeeded in escaping from London and then to France. For the rest of Penn's life he was plagued with doubts over his hold on Delaware, doubts that people in the new regime seized upon. He had more immediate problems in the panic that ensued right after the king's departure. 
In the vacuum between James's departure and the accession of William and Mary uncertainty and fear pervaded the country. Anybody suspected of having been part of James's inner circle was rounded up. Penn was looked upon with suspicion, and one of the first fruits of this suspicion was a hostile encounter, in December 1688, shortly after the king's escape. The council of peers of the realm ordered the safeguarding of the ports and seizure of anyone deemed to be a threat to the government at such a time. Penn had been walking past Scotland Yard in Whitehall when some officers of the guard seized him on suspicion and brought him before the peers at Whitehall. In fact, he had come from Lord Godolphin, who had just spoken to Prince William. Clearly, there was a lack of communication within the government brought about by the chaos, because Penn's abrupt arrival before the peers, many of whom were his personal friends, was somewhat embarrassing for both sides. Ultimately Penn was released on bail amounting to $5000, for which 'two gentlemen of great estates in his neighbourhood were his bayle' (R. Beddard, 'A Kingdom without a King', 1988, 175). The two gentlemen were Lord Philip Wharton and Charles Gerard, Lord Brandon, both whigs and no lovers of papists. Yet Penn was seen as a collaborator with James. In the whig view of the revolution, Penn and other dissenters who collaborated with the Catholic king were regarded as at best turncoats and at worst traitors. While many contemporary whigs and dissenters undoubtedly shared this view, there was a significant number who did not feel that co-operating with the king was a betrayal of their principles. They argued that the end of universal toleration justified the means whereby they sought to attain it through working with the monarch. Penn was one of these people, and his defence of his position was clearly accepted by most of the peers before whom he was brought. 
Evidently the council was split over what to do in the interim between the flight of James and the acceptance of the government by William. At this point nobody had decided that William was to be king. The greater fear was for the safety of the realm against a Catholic insurrection or invasion. For that, Penn was looked upon as a Jesuit in Anglican quarters to the extent that he was referred to as Father Penn by his enemies. His opponents in the council were led by Sir Robert Sawyer, former attorney-general to James and virulent opponent of Catholic toleration, who resigned from office in 1687 over the issue. The combination of papist threats and the manner in which he pursued toleration put Penn squarely as one of the key collaborators with James and his policies. Therefore, Sawyer accused the Quaker as a dangerous invader of English laws and liberties. It was true that Penn took part in the strategy to pack parliament and could therefore be accused of subverting the liberties of Englishmen. He tried to justify his involvement by explaining his desire to secure toleration by means of a statute in law. That could only be accomplished through parliament. The process of selecting MPs was, perhaps, questionable, but Penn defended himself by saying that he had always endeavoured to secure liberty of conscience by law so that no papist could ever take it away. The explanation must have been particularly galling to the likes of Sawyer and incredible to the peers before whom Penn stood. No less than one of the greatest political minds of the period was part of that group: George Savile, marquess of Halifax, who had chastised Penn in print for his methods. At this point there was no hard evidence that Penn had ever subverted the freedoms of the people, so he was set free on bail. He had friends in high places including the council. Nevertheless, he found himself arrested time and again and in greater danger than he had ever been. 
After the revolution Penn fell from favour. James had absconded to France, and the new regime of William and Mary looked upon him as a part of a larger threat to the country's security. He was accused of conspiring against the new regime. For this he was imprisoned and stripped of his right to govern Pennsylvania. The accusation that he was involved in Jacobite conspiracies to restore James II has generally been rejected by those who regard him as an icon and regard it as a stain on his character, but there is evidence of his being closely involved with Jacobite conspirators. Penn had to claw his way back to political influence by showing support for the new regime. His ability to sway dissent in England and his influence over his colonists in Pennsylvania were also factors in his return to power. His ability also to bring about a Quaker settlement with the new regime resulted in another milestone in his efforts to secure toleration for dissent through the enactment of the affirmation law. However, though he regained his colony and reinstated himself in the political environment, he never attained the pinnacle of influence in England that he enjoyed in the past, despite charges from some quarters that he 'hath greater interest at Court now than ever he had in King James's reign' (Hunt. L., Blathwayt MSS, box 4, BL 2). His second and last visit to Pennsylvania in 1699-1701 proved very disappointing for him. He had to make concessions to a strong anti-proprietary party by granting them the charter of privileges, thus annulling the right of the council to sit as a second legislative chamber, effectively making the Pennsylvania legislature unicameral. He also reluctantly conceded to the lower counties the right to secede, a right they exercised in 1704. In the last years of his life, during the reign of Queen Anne, Penn worked to put the 'Affirmation Act' on a permanent basis. But, other than writing a tract against the Anglican effort to penalize occasional conformity at the outset of the reign, he seems to have distanced himself from any overt religious activity. 
On 5 March 1696 Penn married for the second time. His wife was Hannah Callowhill (1670-1726), daughter of Thomas Callowhill, an influential Bristol merchant. They had two daughters, one of whom, Margaret, lived into adulthood and married Thomas Freame of Philadelphia, and four sons, John, Thomas Penn (1702-1775), Richard, and Dennis, all of whom became co-proprietors of Pennsylvania. 
Penn's last years were overshadowed by illness and financial worries. He suffered two strokes in 1712 and left his wife to take care of his business. He died on 30 July 1718 at Ruscombe, Berkshire, and was buried at the Quaker burial-ground at Jordans, near Chalfont St Giles, Buckinghamshire. 
By the time of his death Penn had become an inextricable part of the political life of England, connected with everyone who was anyone in politics and business. Among his contacts had been Godolphin, a central figure in English politics under the later Stuarts, the duke of Marlborough, Lord Somers, the leader of the whig junto, and the earl of Rochester, a prominent high-church tory. After the accession of George I he remained close to the powerful third earl of Sunderland and to the former tory prime minister, Robert Harley, earl of Oxford. Penn chose Harley to be one of the executors of his will. Even after his debilitating stroke in October 1712 Penn's influence was impressive enough to fend off creditors and political enemies. He influenced religious and political thought in an age of experimentation. Although he did not invent the concept of religious toleration, he brought it to its highest point in the governing principles of his colony. Such toleration became the touchstone of religious and ethnic plurality from which the American ethos grew. His political philosophy extended to Europe, where, in his efforts to resolve once and for all a continent in conflict, he showed his awareness of a changing world and an acumen for 'realpolitik'. In his 1693 work 'An Essay toward the Present and Future Peace of Europe', Penn was able to assess astutely the realities of political diplomacy by recognizing Turkey in the great scheme of Europe rather than limiting his vision to a narrow view of Christendom. 


@@@@@


doc= 21858


William Penn (1776-1845), author, was educated at St John's College, Cambridge, but left without taking a degree. Aged seventeen he published, anonymously, 'Vindiciae Britannicae: being Strictures on Gilbert Wakefield's 'Spirit of Christianity'' (1794); an appendix, in answer 'to the Calumnies of the 'Analytical Review'', appeared later in the year. William Penn also wrote verse and prose for the 'Anti-Jacobin Review' and the 'Gentleman's Magazine', in which he published under the pseudonym Rajah of Vaneplysia. Extravagance and conviviality ruined his prospects, and his drinking attracted comment from the prince of Wales. After spending much of his time in the debtors' prison, he died in Nelson Square, Southwark, on 17 September 1845. He was buried at St Mary Redcliffe, Bristol, beside his great-great-grandfather Admiral Sir William Penn. 


@@@@@


doc= 21859


Pennant, Richard, Baron Penrhyn (c.1737-1808), slate manufacturer and politician, was the second son of John Pennant (died 1782), merchant, and his wife, Bonella Hodges (died 1763), who were resident in Jamaica. His father was descended from Thomas Pennant, the fifteenth-century abbot of Basingwerk, and both parents had inherited substantial plantations in Jamaica, including those of Sir Samuel Pennant (died 1750), who became lord mayor of London in 1749. John and Bonella Pennant went to London about 1737 and had a house in Savile Row, Hanover Square. Richard was probably born either there or at sea. He and his elder brother, John Lewis Pennant, attended Newcome's academy, Hackney, and were admitted as fellow commoners at Trinity College, Cambridge, at Easter 1754; John Pennant died later in the year. Richard did not graduate, but on 29 March 1758 he became a member of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce, founded in 1754. 
By his marriage to Anne Susannah Warburton (1745-1816) on 6 December 1765 in Bath Abbey, Pennant acquired the Penrhyn estate in Caernarvonshire. Anne's maternal grandfather was Dr Edward Norris, MP for Liverpool from 1714 to 1722, and her family had influential connections in the borough, which aided her husband's political career. Her paternal grandmother, Anne, was the daughter of Sir Robert Williams (died 1680), the last of the male heirs in line from John Williams, archbishop of York (died 1650); Sir Robert had purchased the Penrhyn estate, which passed to Anne Williams conjointly with her sister, Gwen. Anne married Thomas Warburton of Winnington, Cheshire, and Gwen married Sir Walter Yonge of Escot, Devon. General Hugh Warburton (1695-1771) was the son of Anne and Thomas Warburton, and Anne Susannah was his only child and heir. In 1771, on the death of his father-in-law, General Warburton, Pennant took over Winnington Hall and the moiety of the Penrhyn estate. In 1785 he bought the remainder of the estate from Sir George Yonge, grandson of Gwen and Walter Yonge. The tenants at Cae Braich y Cafn, later the Penrhyn quarry, were paid a lump sum in 1783 in exchange for their right to take slates. 
Richard's political career began in 1761, when as a whig he became MP for Petersfield, Hampshire. In 1767 he became one of the two MPs for Liverpool, the chief port of the slave trade. He was re-elected in 1768 and 1774, aided by his wife, whose talents as a canvasser were renowned. Richard spoke in the Commons to oppose the introduction of taxation in America, on 29 January 1769, and on 19 April 1774 he seconded the motion for the repeal of the tea duty; as the proprietor of extensive plantations in Jamaica he was well aware of the economic damage a war with America would bring. In 1780 he was defeated at Liverpool and in 1782 he became sheriff of Caernarvonshire. In 1783, on the recommendation of Charles Fox, he was created Baron Penrhyn in the peerage of Ireland. On 18 April 1785 he voted for the reform of parliament. In the election of 1784 he had narrowly defeated Colonel Tarleton, but in 1790 he withdrew as a candidate, expressing his unease at the election process. 
In 1787 William Wilberforce promoted the campaign for the abolition of slavery, which Lord Penrhyn opposed. On 9 May 1788 Penrhyn spoke in a debate in the House of Commons in defence of both the slave-traders and the planters, and between 1789 and 1791 committees of inquiry were set up by parliament and by the assembly and council of Jamaica. Lord Penrhyn was an absentee landlord but he kept closely in touch by letter with his plantation attorneys. He failed to appreciate the degradation caused by slavery, but he did express concern about the condition of his slaves. In 1782 he sent out ploughs to ease conditions for the workers, and he frequently remarked that he did not wish 'the negroes and cattle to be overworked'. When the abolition of the slave trade became law in 1807, Lord Penrhyn regarded it as a dangerous experiment which would bring ruin to the Jamaican economy. 
The profits from the Jamaican sugar and rum trade were used to expand the production and export of slates from Lord Penrhyn's quarry in Caernarvonshire. By 1790, having obtained a lease from the bishop of Bangor, Penrhyn had converted the mouth of the River Cegin into a harbour, called Port Penrhyn, from which slates were sent to London, Bristol, Liverpool, and Ireland. Framed writing-slates, manufactured at Port Penrhyn, were included in the ships' cargoes. Benjamin Wyatt (1745-1818), the Staffordshire architect, designed the port, and in 1782 his brother Samuel Wyatt remodelled the medieval Penrhyn Hall. In 1789 a cart road was built from Port Penrhyn to the quarry, and by 1800 this had been extended through Nant Ffrancon to Capel Curig. Such enterprises, together with his promotion of improvements in agriculture, earned Lord Penrhyn much praise as a benefactor to the community from contemporaries such as W. Bingley in 'Excursions in North Wales' (1798) and from historians such as Richard Llwyd, who, in 'The History of Wales' (1832), described the transformation as 'a new creation' of the neighbourhood. 
In 1794 parliament imposed a tax of 20 per cent on all slate carried coastwise, and with falling profits from Jamaica, business survival became difficult. A tax was imposed on horses in 1797, and in 1800 work began on a horse-drawn railroad from Penrhyn quarry to Port Penrhyn, which gave employment to redundant quarrymen. The line was planned by Benjamin Wyatt on the basis of suggestions by Thomas Dadford; it was 61/4 miles long, had a gauge of 241/2 inches, and was officially opened by Lord Penrhyn on 1 July 1801. William Williams (1738-1817) began the excavation of galleries at the quarry, and this work was continued after 1802 by James Greenfield (1774-1825). Having secured a grant from the crown in 1784, which enabled him to make enclosures on Llandygai Common, Lord Penrhyn built the 'model village' of Llandygai nearby. St Tegai's Church in the village contains a monument to Lord and Lady Penrhyn, sculpted by Richard Westmacott, for which Lady Penrhyn left $2000 in her will. 
Lord Penrhyn died on 21 January 1808 at Winnington Hall, Cheshire, but was buried in a vault at St Tegai's Church. He was survived by his wife, but they had no children, and the title became extinct. By Penrhyn's will the estates passed to George Hay Dawkins, the second son of his cousin, Henry Dawkins, who added the surname Pennant to his own. Lord Penrhyn left debts of $150,000, to be paid, according to his will, out of the proceeds of the sale of the Jamaican properties. In 1808, however, these could not be sold for anything like the amount required. Winnington Hall was sold, a mortgage was raised on the Penrhyn estate, and the debts were paid off in October 1808. After the death of George Hay Dawkins-Pennant in 1840, the estates were inherited by his son-in-law, Edward Gordon Douglas (1800-1886), who added the name Pennant to his own in 1841, and was created Baron Penrhyn of Llandygai in 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 21860


Pennant, Thomas (1726-1798), naturalist, traveller, and writer, was born on 14 June 1726 at Downing in the parish of Whitford (sometimes Whiteford), near Holywell, Flintshire, the eldest son of David Pennant (died 1763), landowner, and Arabella (died 1744), third daughter of Richard Mytton of Halston, Shropshire. His parents, notably his father, were from long-standing families: the estate, centred upon the ancient house at Bychton, had been owned by Pennants since the Norman conquest although the first to take that name, from the Welsh 'Pen y Nant', was Daffyd ap Tudor in the fifteenth century. 
Pennant tells us that he was delivered in 'the Yellow Room' by 'a Mrs Clayton of Shrewsbury', midwife, and, as was then customary among Welsh gentry, he was put out to foster parents nearby (Pennant, 'History of the Parishes', 2). At age seven he was sent to the Revd Lewis's Grammar School at Wrexham which, to judge by letters to his father, he enjoyed. At age fourteen Pennant was educated at Fulham under the guidance of Thomas Croft. He was in poor health as a boy, and indeed suffered intermittently from depression for much of his life. When ill as a child he spent recuperative periods at Hadley, near Enfield Chase, at the home of his uncle, the Revd John Pennant, and at the Richmond home of James Mytton, a maternal uncle. On 7 March 1744 Pennant matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, but, as the result of disciplinary matters stemming from a dispute between students and fellows, migrated to Oriel College in May 1748. He did not take a degree, but was made an honorary DCL by the university on 11 May 1771 in recognition of his zoological work. 
Pennant's interest in natural history was first stimulated when he was aged about twelve by the present from his kinsman John Salisbury of a copy of Francis Willoughby's 'Ornithology' (1678): [this] 'first gave me a taste for that study, and incidentally a love for that of natural history in general, which I have since pursued with my constitutional ardor' (Pennant, 'Literary Life', 1). In 1747 he toured Cornwall, where he met the naturalist and historian the Revd Dr William Borlase, who 'gave me a strong passion for minerals and fossils' (ibid.). 
Pennant's first publication, an account of an earthquake felt in Flintshire on 2 April 1750, was published in volume forty-six of the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions'. He published five other articles there: on fossil corals, penguins, tortoises, the turkey, and a piece on 'several earthquakes felt in Wales in 1781' ('PTRS', 71.193). During the early 1750s he participated in fossil-hunting expeditions in Wales, undertook a fifteen-week tour of Ireland in 1754 where he collected mineralogical and natural specimens despite being distracted by 'the conviviality of the country' (Pennant, 'Literary Life', 2), and began a correspondence with scholars such as Benjamin Stillingfleet, John Ellis, Emanuel Mendes da Costa, and, notably, with Carl Linnaeus, through whose influence Pennant was elected a member of the Vetenskapsakademien at Uppsala in 1757. His network of correspondents included members of the Sicilian and Swedish nobility and the bishop of Bergen, with all of whom he exchanged mineralogical specimens: more than 800 of Pennant's specimens survive in the British Museum (Natural History). He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 21 November 1754, although he resigned in 1760, unable to pay the annual subscription fees. 
To judge by a letter of June 1762 to Costa, Pennant had by then begun what he called his 'great Design of a British Natural History' (Warks. CRO, CR2017/TP408, fol. 165). The first volume of his 'British Zoology' as it became was published in 1766. The delay between commencement, probably in 1761, and publication was most likely due to family circumstances. In April 1759 Pennant had married Elizabeth Falconer, daughter of James Falconer of Chester, a lieutenant in the Royal Navy. Their son, Thomas, was born in January 1760 but died in March; two further children, Arabella ('b'. 1761) and David ('b'. 1763), survived. Pennant's father, David, died in January 1763, at which point Pennant assumed the responsibilities of running the family estate (his mother had died of smallpox in April 1744). In June 1764 Elizabeth, his wife, died. 
It has been surmised that Pennant's six-month tour of Europe in 1765 was undertaken to distance himself from these family affairs (Evans). That may be so, but it is clear that his 1765 tour provided Pennant with an important opportunity to meet fellow naturalists and inspect collections. During the tour he travelled through France, Switzerland, Germany, and the Netherlands and met, among others, the French naturalist the comte de Buffon, Voltaire, and the German naturalist Peter Pallas. 
The first folio edition of Pennant's 'British Zoology' was followed by a more successful and smaller second edition, and by additional volumes on reptiles, fish, and marine animals. The work was organized according to the classificatory systems of John Ray, whom Pennant much admired: in a letter of 19 July 1767 Pennant referred to Ray as 'the father of system especially of quadrupeds & birds' and considered that Linnaeus 'owes it all to our countryman tho he has horridly mangled & disjointed his excellent synopses' (NL Scot., MS 968, fol. 124). Five editions of 'British Zoology' were published between 1766 and 1812. Its success prompted his election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1767, the year in which he began that correspondence with Gilbert White, then curate at Farringdon in Hampshire, which, together with White's correspondence with Daines Barrington, formed the basis of White's 'Natural History of Selborne' (1789). 
Pennant's 'British Zoology' was followed in 1769 by his 'Indian Geology', and in 1771 by 'Synopsis of Quadrupeds' which, revised and enlarged, was published in 1781 as 'A History of Quadrupeds'. In 1773 he published 'Genera of Birds', and between 1784 and 1787 the three-volume 'Arctic Zoology'. In the 'Advertisement' for this work Pennant acknowledged the influence of Francis Willoughby: 'Emulous of so illustrious an example, I took up the object of his pursuit'. 'Arctic Zoology' was written as a series of excursions north from Britain and drew upon correspondents with local knowledge such as George Low who contributed information on the birds of Orkney as well as upon the researches of Pallas in Siberia and of Joseph Banks in Newfoundland. It was one of the first major studies of the zoology of the northern hemisphere and was widely acclaimed: French and German editions appeared in 1787 and 1789. Pennant was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society in 1791 for his contribution to American zoology. 
In 1769 Pennant undertook a tour of Scotland, chiefly of the highlands, a region then little known by outsiders yet of interest for its natural history. He again drew upon local specialist knowledge -- men such as the Revd Dr John Walker, who had travelled extensively in the highlands and Hebrides in 1764 and 1766, and, in Aberdeen, the natural historian David Skene, who showed Pennant his cabinet of natural history and advised him on zoological and botanical specimens. Pennant's 'A Tour in Scotland, 1769', was published in 1771. It is of interest for its descriptions and for its method: Pennant circulated 'Queries, addressed to the Gentlemen and Clergy of North-Britain' [Scotland] with standard questions about natural history and the past and present state of the parish in order to allow locals to give 'a fuller and more satisfactory Account of their Country, than it is the Power of a Stranger and transient Visitant to give' (Pennant, 'Tour in Scotland', 287). In that regard Pennant has much in common with the earlier use of circulated queries by natural philosophers such as Robert Boyle and, in Scotland, by the natural historian and geographer Sir Robert Sibbald, and Pennant importantly prefigures the parish-based assessment of Scotland published by Sir John Sinclair in the 1790s. 
Motivated by favourable critical reaction to his 1769 'Tour', by the fact that his first Scottish work made no mention of the Hebrides, and, as he tells us, 'in order to render more complete, my preceding tour: and to allay that species of restlessness that infects many minds, on leaving any attempt unfinished', Pennant undertook a second tour of Scotland in 1772 (Pennant, 'Tour in Scotland and Voyage to the Hebrides', i). His 1772 tour was more meticulously organized than the 1769 tour, which had been a largely impromptu event, though both involved the use of pre-circulated queries and advance notices in the Scottish press of Pennant's intentions. In 1772 he was accompanied by travelling companions, each with particular skills: the Revd John Lightfoot, a botanist, and later author of 'Flora Scotica' (1777), a study on Linnaean principles of Scotland's native flora; the Revd John Stuart, minister of Killin parish and a Gaelic scholar; and Moses Griffith, Pennant's personal draughtsman, whom Pennant referred to as 'My Treasure' and 'a good and faithful servant, and able artist' (Pennant, 'Literary Life', 10). Pennant used Joseph Banks's description of Staffa for his work and dedicated the book to Banks. Stuart, together with other local ministers, assisted Pennant with Gaelic names of plants. Griffith and Pennant remained close: a bequest in Pennant's will provided for Griffith's children and Pennant's son, David, awarded Griffith a pension. 
Pennant's 1772 'Tour in Scotland' (1774-6) was, like his 1769 tour, published by John Monk of Chester. It is best understood as a complement to his earlier Scottish work and the culmination of a longer enterprise designed to describe and understand Scotland. The aim of the Scottish tours was identical with that of geographies of more distant unknown lands such as the south sea islands. 
Public reaction to Pennant's Scottish tours, as to his works of natural history, was generally favourable. The 'Critical Review' considered his 1769 'Tour' 'the best itinerary which has hitherto been written on that country' ('Critical Review', Jan 1772, 28). The first volume of Pennant's 1772 'Tour' influenced Samuel Johnson, then engaged in writing his own 'Journey', just as the 1769 work had been a prompt to Johnson's Hebridean travels with Boswell. Boswell recorded Johnson's defence of Pennant whose account of Alnwick and of the Percy estates in Northumberland was the subject of criticism by Thomas Percy, future bishop of Dromore, who felt slighted that Pennant had called his patron's garden 'trim'. Johnson termed Pennant 'A Whig, Sir; a sad dog', yet at the same moment remarked 'But he's the best traveller I ever read; he observes more things than anyone else does' (Boswell, 'Life', 3.274, 12 April 1778). Boswell thought this too high praise for someone: 'who traversed a wide extent of such currency in such haste, that he could put together only curt frittered fragments of his own... a writer, who at best treats merely of superficial objects, and shews no philosophical investigation of character and manners. (ibid.)' Both Boswell and Horace Walpole thought Pennant's work further diminished by his reliance upon others' information. 
Pennant undertook several other tours: of northern England in 1773, of Northamptonshire and of the Isle of Man in 1774, of Warwickshire in 1776, of Kent in 1776, and of Cornwall in 1787. Several tours throughout Wales in the early 1770s, where his Welsh-speaking friend and companion, the Revd John Lloyd of Caerwys, performed the same function as Stuart had in Gaelic Scotland, were brought together as 'Tours in Wales' in three volumes (1778-83). 
Pennant's second marriage, in Whitford in January 1777, was to Anne (died 1802), elder daughter of Sir Thomas Mostyn, fourth baronet (died 1758), and sister of Sir Roger Mostyn, fifth baronet (1758-1796), a prominent landowner in north Wales and friend to Pennant. Two children were born from this marriage: Sarah (1779-1794) and Thomas (1780-1845), a minister at Weston Turville, Buckinghamshire, who died childless. 
Pennant's many travels to London were published as 'A Journey from Chester to London' in 1782. Other tours were edited by his son David, and published posthumously: 'A Journey from London to the Isle of Wight' (1801); 'A Tour from Downing to Alston Moor' (1801); and 'A Tour from Alston Moor to Harrowgate and Brimham Crags' (1804). Other publications include his 'Of the Patagonians', taken from the testimony of a Jesuit missionary, Falkener, who had spent thirty-eight years in that region and whom Pennant visited in Worcester in 1771, and, in 1790, 'An Account of London', which took the form of a tour around the capital: Boswell rated it highly. 
Two of the three publications written towards the end of Pennant's life exemplify both his energy and the range of his writings. 'The History of the Parishes of Whiteford and Holywell' (1796) offers a detailed local history and genealogical information on the Pennant family. His 'Outlines of the Globe', published in four volumes between 1798 and 1800 with volumes three and four being produced by his son David, was the only published outcome of twenty-two manuscript volumes of imaginary travels throughout the world. The first two volumes focused upon Hindustan and, although works of imagination, drew upon his knowledge of India and the writings of the explorer James Rennell. The title of the third, 'The Literary Life of the Late Thomas Pennant Esq., by himself' (1793), hints at Pennant's sense of humour. It is signed only by dotted lines to indicate the death of the author: it is for that reason that his 'History of the Parishes' is signed 'RESURGAM', with its implication of literary resurrection. 
Pennant's 'Literary Life', which has several of his shorter works collected as appendices, makes clear his immense industry and the fact that his natural history writing and travelling were undertaken while fulfilling other responsibilities: he was high sheriff of Flintshire in 1761; author of pamphlets on road management and the militia laws; chairman in 1792 of the Flintshire Loyalist Association; and from 1763 improver of his own estates. Reflecting 'upon the multiplicity of my publications', he attributed his output to 'the riding exercise of my extensive tours, to my manner of living, and to my temperance' (Pennant, 'Literary Life', 35). He was much saddened by the death of his daughter, Sarah, in May 1794, and on 6 April 1795 he broke his kneecap which confined him to bed for six weeks. After prolonged breathing difficulties, he died at Downing on 16 December 1798. 
Pennant's travels and natural history are distinguished by his personal energy, a keen observational sense, and by methodological organization and attention to facts. In such ways, and in his friendship and widespread correspondence with others of like interests throughout Britain and Europe, he may be said to exemplify those gentleman scholars of nature in the later eighteenth century whose interests in natural knowledge aimed at national improvement through intellectual enquiry. While he is perhaps better remembered for his Scottish tours, his 'British Zoology' and 'Arctic Zoology' in particular were important pioneering works and established him in the eyes of contemporaries as a leading European natural historian. For one modern scholar Pennant should be considered 'the leading British zoologist after Ray and before Darwin' (Beer, vi). 


@@@@@


doc= 21861


Pennecuik, Alexander (1652-1722), physician and poet, was the elder son of Alexander Pennecuik (died 'c'.1693), an army surgeon under General Bannier in the Thirty Years' War and later surgeon-general to the auxiliary Scots army in England, and his wife, Margaret Murray, a descendant of the family of the Murrays of Philiphaugh. The elder Pennecuik, who claimed descent from the Pennecuiks of that ilk, bought in 1646 the estate of Newhall on the north Esk; by his wife's inheritance, he also acquired the estate of Romanno, within a few miles of his own and on the far side of West Linton in Tweeddale. The precise date of his death is not known, but his son's poem, 'Upon the Death of Alexander Pennecuik of New-Hall', which describes him as 'a gentleman by birth, and more by merit', testifies that he had lived to the age of ninety. He is said to have been buried in the churchyard of Newlands. 
The elder son, Alexander Pennecuik, appears to have inherited both his father's estates and his commitment to the medical profession. Passages in his poems imply that, as a young man, he had travelled overseas, a normal practice for young Scotsmen of his time, but little is known of his professional education, beyond the fact that an Alexander Pennecuik graduated with the degree of MA from Edinburgh University on 18 July 1664. His life was peaceful and uneventful. According to A. D. Murray ('Transactions of the Hawick Archaeological Society', August 1863), he practised 'in Edinburgh through the greater part of his life'; but it seems more likely that, though he may have begun there, his life from the age of thirty-three was spent in his native Peeblesshire, caring for his father in his declining years and pursuing his profession as a country doctor, in the course of which he became familiar with every corner of Tweeddale. 
Pennecuik's devotion to the country and to country pursuits is revealed in his 'Answer to his brother J. P.'s many letters, dissuading him from staying longer in the country, and inviting him to come and settle his residence in Edinburgh'; the poem is addressed to his younger brother James, a member of the Faculty of Advocates, who had endeavoured to persuade him to move to Edinburgh. In it he maintains that he will not expose his old father to the dangers and unhealthiness of the city, 'to stifle him with smoke, though he be old', and describes lyrically the pleasures and comforts of the country life. 
It was Pennecuik's devotion to his own neighbourhood and his close familiarity with the topography and botany of the area (he corresponded with James Sutherland, superintendent of the first botanic garden in Edinburgh) that caused Sir Robert Sibbald, who was preparing an account of the counties of Scotland, to invite Pennecuik to prepare a description of Tweeddale. He produced this with the assistance of the advocate John Forbes (who, by an ironic twist of fate, was later to inherit Pennecuik's Newhall estate), but it was not published until 1715, when it appeared in a small quarto volume under the title, 'A geographical, historical description of the shire of Tweeddale, with a miscelany and curious collection of select Scotish poems', dedicated to William Douglas, earl of March (and lacking the promised map of Tweeddale, a circumstance attributed to 'Mr Adair's gout'). 
This volume contained the first published texts of Pennecuik's poems, introduced to the earl in the following words: 'To the following Treatise, My Lord, I have subjoined a few Pleasant and Select Poems, at the importunity of several Ingenious Gentlemen, my Friends; which were never before Published, or at least with my Consent and Knowledge; and if any of them has been Printed, it's owing to Surreptitious and False Coppies.' There is evidence that some of his poems did indeed circulate in broadside form earlier than this, and one of them, 'Lintoun address to his highness the prince of Orange' (1689), was included by James Watson in his 'Choice Collection of Comic and Serious Scots Poems' (1706). 
Pennecuik's total poetical output, which was small and undistinguished, was noticed briefly by Campbell in his 'Introduction to the History of Poetry in Scotland' (1798): 'But of his poetry I am unwilling to say much to its dispraise, as I can in no wise qualify such with any commendation; therefore, I pass on, to notice another'. This judgement is corroborated more simply and briefly by an anonymous manuscript note on the flyleaf of a copy of the 1715 edition, 'Dr Pennecuik of Newhall, Romanno. A good sort of man tho' a very bad poet.' 
It is not known whom Pennecuik married, but he had two daughters, the elder of whom married Mr Oliphant of Lanton, Edinburghshire, in 1702. The estate of Newhall was given to her on her marriage, but her husband, who was financially embarrassed, sold it in 1703 to Sir David Forbes, father of the John Forbes with whom Pennecuik collaborated over his description of Tweeddale, and who was the patron of Allan Ramsay. It was believed by John Pinkerton and later editors that Newhall inspired the setting for Ramsay's 'The Gentle Shepherd', but this theory has been discredited by the editors of the Scottish Text Society edition of Ramsay's 'Works'. The estate of Romanno, where Pennecuik lived until his death, was bequeathed to his younger daughter, who had married Mr Farquharson of Kirktown of Boyne, Aberdeenshire. Pennecuik died there in 1722 and was buried beside his father in Newlands churchyard. 
Dr Pennecuik is often confused with another minor poet, 
To shun the fate of Pennycuik, 

Who starving died in turnpike-neuk; 

(Tho' sweet he sung with wit and sense, 

He like poor Claud, was short of pence). 

' He appears to have been involved in some way in the murder by Nicol Muschet, laird of Boghall, of Muschet's wife in 1721; Muschet's 'Last speech and confession' accuses a certain Alexander Pennycuik 'at present in the Abbey' (the abbey of Holyrood was the refuge of debtors) of having had a part in his criminal designs, a charge which Pennecuik refuted in 'A Gentleman's Letter to the Laird of Boghall, the Day before his Execution' (1721). 
Pennecuik contributed verses (signed by 'Al. P., Mercator Edinburgensis') 'To my honoured friend, Dr. P -- k' which were prefixed to Dr Pennecuik's 'Description of Tweeddale' (1715); these were reprinted in his 'Streams from Helicon, or, Poems on various subjects, in three parts, by Alexander Pennecuik, gent.' (1720). The other publication by which he is best remembered is his prose 'Historical Account of the Blue Blanket, or, Crafts-Mens Banner' by 'Alex. Pennecuik, burgess and guild-brother of Edinburgh' (1722). It is not known of which guild he was a brother. 
Pennecuik's writing, though generally scurrilous, is more accomplished than that of his elder namesake and it frequently mimics the themes of his contemporary Allan Ramsay. All copies of his 'Flowers from Parnassus', which he apparently published in 1726, have disappeared. Numerous anonymous works are attributed to him, the most convincing attributions being 'Groans from the grave, or, Complaints of the dead against the surgeons for raising their bodies out of the dust' (1725, see manuscript note on Maidment's copy in British Library). He died in 1730 and was buried in Greyfriars churchyard, Edinburgh, on 28 November. Collections of his poems published after his death include 'A Collection of Poet Pennicuicke's Satires on Kirkmen' (1744); 'A compleat collection of all the poems wrote by that famous and learned poet, Alexander Pennecuik'; and 'A collection of Scots poems on several occasions, by the late Mr Alexander Pennecuik, gent., and others' (1787). 


@@@@@


doc= 21862


Alexander Pennecuik (d. 1730), often known as Mercator, assumed to be a relative, possibly a nephew. All that is known of him indicates that, though a man of education and some wit, his career was dissipated and impoverished. James Wilson (Claudero), in his 'Farewell to the Muses and Auld Reekie' (J. Wilson, 'Miscellanies in Prose and Verse, on Several Occasions by Claudero', 1766), promises '


@@@@@


doc= 21863


Catherine Pennefather (1817/18-1893), home mission worker, born in Fulham, Middlesex, was active in parochial work throughout her married life. From 1858 she was president of the Association of Female Workers, connected first with Barnet and then with Mildmay. She relaunched her work among orphans in 1872 and, following her husband's death, she presided over the further development of the Mildmay institutions. By her own death at 68 Mildmay Park, Islington, on 12 January 1893 these included twenty missions in London staffed by some eighty deaconesses; a mission to the Jews (started in 1876); a medical mission at Bethnal Green (from 1877); and a cottage hospital (established in 1883). Catherine Pennefather edited the Mildmay monthly journal, 'Service for the King', and published several small volumes of verse and 'Bible' class notes, including 'Follow thou me' (2 vols., 1881). 


@@@@@


doc= 21864


Pennefather, Edward (1773-1847), judge, of Rathsallagh, Dunlavin, co. Wicklow, was born on 22 October 1773, the second son of Major William Pennefather (1732-1819), of Darling-Hill, co. Tipperary, MP for Cashel, and Ellen, eldest daughter of Edward Moore DD, archdeacon of Emly. He was the brother of Richard Pennefather (1772-1859) and was educated with him at Portarlington and Clonmel schools; he graduated at Trinity College, Dublin, as BA in 1794, and MA in 1832. He had entered the Middle Temple, London, in 1792, and was called to the Irish bar three years later. On 6 January 1806 he married Susan (1785-1862), eldest daughter of John Darby of Markly, Sussex, and of Leap Castle in King's county; they had four sons and six daughters. 
The 'two Pennefathers' were leading practitioners at the court of chancery when Francis Blackburne (afterwards lord chancellor of Ireland) began to practise. Edward excelled his elder brother, Richard, as an advocate, and was without a rival as an equity lawyer. 
Pennefather appears as king's counsel in 1816, and in the same year he was counsel for the plaintiff in the celebrated libel case, 'Bruce v. Grady', tried before Serjeant Johnson at the Limerick summer assizes of 1816, when O'Connell led for the defendant ('Authentic report of the interesting trial for a libel contained in the celebrated poem called The Nosegay'). The plaintiff, who claimed $20,000, obtained a verdict for $500. 
Elected a bencher of King's Inns in 1829, Pennefather was appointed third serjeant in April of the following year, second serjeant in January 1831, and first serjeant in February 1832. On 27 January 1835 he became solicitor-general for Ireland in Sir Robert Peel's administration, and he was reappointed (in September 1841) on the return of Sir Robert Peel to power. In November he was appointed chief justice of the queen's bench and a privy councillor. In January and February 1844 he presided at the state trial of the O'Connells, Gavan Duffy, and their associates for conspiracy to effect the repeal of the 'Act of Union'. The trial was the great legal event of the Peel administration, as memorable for its magnitude and longevity as for its political importance. John Mitchel says that 'the chief justice in his charge argued the case like one of the counsel for the prosecution' (J. Mitchel, 'A History of Ireland from the Treaty of Limerick', 1869, 194). Pennefather contended that neither secrecy nor treachery formed a necessary part of the legal definition of conspiracy. His charge was learned, lucid, and fair, although it was clear that in the opinion of the court the indictment had been in the main sustained. Sentence was pronounced on 30 May by Mr Justice Burton. 
Pennefather retired from the bench in January 1846 and died at his house in Fitzwilliam Square, Dublin, after a long illness, on 6 September 1847. He was buried in the churchyard of Delgany church. 
Although in his day Pennefather stood at the head of the Irish bar, he was nevertheless a man of unwavering modesty. A weighty advocate, in stature he was compared by James Whiteside to the great English lawyer, Lord Romilly. 


@@@@@


doc= 21865


Pennefather, Sir John Lysaght (1800-1872), army officer, was the third son of the Revd John Pennefather of New Park, co. Tipperary, and cousin of Richard Pennefather, baron of the exchequer in Ireland. His mother was a daughter of Major Percival. He entered the army on 14 January 1818 as cornet in the 7th dragoon guards, becoming a lieutenant on 20 February 1823 and a captain on half pay on 5 November 1825. On 8 April 1826 he was appointed to the 22nd (the Cheshire regiment), in which he became major on 22 March 1831 and lieutenant-colonel on 18 October 1839. In 1834 he married Margaret, eldest daughter of John Carr of Mountrath, Queen's county; she survived him. 
Pennefather had seen no active service, but in 1843 his was the one European regiment in the force with which Sir Charles Napier won the battle of Meanee (17 February), and it bore the brunt of that action, in which Napier defeated the more numerous army of Sher Mahomed. The battalion was about 500 strong, many Irishmen, like their commander. 'The noble soldier', as Napier described Pennefather, fell wounded -- mortally, it was thought -- on the top of the bank which bordered the river-bed and formed the crest of the Baluchis' position. He was made a CB (July 1843), and received the thanks of parliament. From June 1846 to June 1854 he was an aide-de-camp to the queen. In 1848 he gave up the command of the 22nd regiment, and was placed on half pay; in the following year he was appointed assistant quartermaster-general in the Cork district. In 1854 he was given command of the 1st brigade of the 2nd (Sir De Lacy Evans's) division in the army sent to the Crimea, and on 20 June he was made major-general. His brigade consisted of the 30th, 55th, and 95th regiments. He commanded with great credit at the battle of the Alma, and in the action of 26 October, when a sortie in force was made from Sevastopol against the heights held by the 2nd division on the extreme right of the allied position. Pennefather also distinguished himself at the battle of Inkerman on 5 November when, owing to Evans's illness, he was in command of the division. He had fewer than 3000 men under command, while more than 30,000 Russian infantry were converging upon him. On 26 October Evans had drawn up his force on the ridge immediately in front of the camp of the division, and allowed his pickets to be driven in rather than leave his chosen ground. Pennefather adopted a different course, and disputed every inch, kept only a few men in reserve on the ridge, but pushed forward all the men he could to support his pickets in resisting the massed assaults. The thickness of the weather favoured these tactics, and the result justified them. As reinforcements, English and French, came up, they were similarly pushed forward as soon as available. Lord Raglan arrived, and Sir De Lacy Evans came up from Balaklava during the course of the morning, but Pennefather was left to direct the fight, so far as any one person could direct it, and he encouraged and inspired his men. The battle lasted about six hours -- from daybreak to 1 p.m. -- when the Russians began their retreat, having lost very heavily. 
Pennefather's 'admirable behaviour' was mentioned in Raglan's dispatch. A fortnight afterwards he was appointed to the colonelcy of the 46th regiment, and he succeeded to the command of the 2nd division when Evans returned to England in the latter part of November. He was invalided home from the Crimea in July 1855, and from 25 September 1855 until 1860 he commanded the troops in Malta, with the local rank of lieutenant-general. After brief service in the northern district he commanded at Aldershot from 1860 to 1865. He exchanged the colonelcy of the 46th for that of his former regiment, the 22nd, on 13 February 1860. On 12 November of that year he became lieutenant-general on the establishment, and on 9 May 1868 he became general. He had been made a KCB on 5 July 1855, and received the GCB on 13 May 1867. He was a commander of the Sardinian order of St Maurice and St Lazarus, a grand officer of the Legion d'honneur, and was awarded the order of the Mejidiye (second class). On 27 August 1870 he was appointed governor of Chelsea Hospital. A staunch, combative and respected soldier, he died at Chelsea Hospital on 9 May 1872, and was buried in Brompton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 21866


Pennefather, Richard (1806-1849), civil servant, born at Dublin on 3 September 1806, was the eldest son of Richard Pennefather (1772-1859), judge, and his wife, Jane Bennett; William Pennefather was his brother. Educated at Eton College, he matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, in 1824, and graduated BA in 1828. In 1826 he was admitted at Lincoln's Inn. He married, on 26 July 1836, Lady Emily Arabel Butler, daughter of Richard, first earl of Glengall, who appointed him lieutenant-colonel of the Tipperary militia. On 21 August 1845 he was appointed under-secretary to the lord lieutenant of Ireland in Sir Robert Peel's administration. His promotion had been supported by Edward Eliot, chief secretary for Ireland, despite urgings that a Roman Catholic be placed in the position. Seated at Darling-Hill, co. Tipperary, he was high sheriff of the county in 1848, and in that capacity arranged for the state trials of William Smith O'Brien and other prisoners at Clonmel. Pennefather died of cholera on 26 July 1849, at Newtown-Anner, co. Tipperary, the seat of Ralph Bernal Osborne MP. In 1852 his widow married Colonel H. A. Hankey. He left a son and a daughter; the latter married Arthur, sixth Earl Stanhope. His younger brother, John Pennefather (1815-1855), also a graduate of Balliol College, became QC and a bencher of King's Inns, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 21867


Pennefather, Richard (1772-1859), judge, was born into a well-known Irish protestant family at Knockevan, co. Tipperary, on 25 August 1772. He was the eldest son of Major William Pennefather (1732-1819), of Darling-Hill, co. Tipperary, MP for Cashel, and Ellen, eldest daughter of Edward Moore DD, archdeacon of Emly. Like his younger brother, Edward Pennefather, he was educated at Portarlington and Clonmel schools, and he graduated BA at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1794, after a distinguished career there. He had entered the Middle Temple in London in 1792, and was called to the Irish bar in 1795. 
About ten years later Pennefather enjoyed a reputation both on the Munster circuit and as a junior in the court of chancery. He appears as king's counsel in 1816, but was seldom employed as leading counsel, being overshadowed by William Plunket and William Saurin. In 1798 he married Jane, daughter of Mr Justice John Bennett of Dublin. They had eight children (of whom at least two predeceased their father); the civil servant Richard Pennefather was one of the sons. 
On 1 February 1821 Pennefather was appointed a baron of the Irish exchequer court, and he sat on the bench for thirty-eight years. He was a sound, able, and honourable judge, skilled in the digestion and elucidation of evidence, courteous in his bearing, and in criminal cases lenient. In his final years Pennefather lost his sight and this, coupled with his age (he being at the time over eighty) led to suggestions in the Commons that he be removed from the bench. Such suggestions were not favourably received, and the house united in paying tribute to the man: the Conservatives likened him to Lord Lyndhurst, and the Liberals admitted unreservedly his exceptional judicial gifts and undiminished popularity. So it was of his own accord that Pennefather retired, some three years later, in 1859. He died suddenly at his residence in Kiltegan, near Clonmel, co. Tipperary, on 7 August 1859, and was buried at Caher, co. Tipperary. 


